FORTY FIVE SERMONS UPON THE Cxxx PSALM; Preached at IRWIN, By that Eminent
Servant of Jesus Christ, Mr. George Hutcheson, Minister of the Gospel.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to their most
Excellent Majesty's, Anno DOM. 1691.

To the Right Honorable and truly Noble Lady, La: MARGARET LESLIE, Countess of
ROTHES, etc.
SUCH, I know, was the Author's respect to your Ladyships Noble Family, and to
your Self (though young at his death) upon what all saw so promising, even
then, in your Ladyship, that I doubt little, but if he had lived till now, to
Publish these very useful Sermons, he might probably have brought them to
public view, under your Ladyships Name: And Providence having put them into my
hand, I judging them (with others of far deeper reach) very serviceable to all,
who seriously mind their Souls concerns, was easily induced (that they might
not be buried in Oblivion, as I fear, many other things of his, very worthy of
the light, may be) to give them to the world in Print, Dedicat to your
Ladyship, in doing whereof, I might (and others in the like case probably
would) here commend your Ladyship, for your examplary Piety; your love to
Religion, evidenced by your laying out your self to the outmost, for the
advancement thereof, in your present Capacity; your Care and Vigilance in the
Education of your Noble and Hopeful Children (whom the Lord bless) by means
whereof, they may prove eminent Instruments, in due time, of promoting the good
of their Country, both in Church and State; the indefatigable pains you have
been, and still are at, to advance their Estates, that they may be in the
better case to appear to purpose for these; and your modest, discreet, sober,
and prudent deportment in all: every one of which, might be insisted on at
length, without the least shadow of flattery, or encroachment on truth. But as
this (I know) would not be acceptable to your Ladyship; so besides that, I
being no Orator, am nothing fitted for it, it is so contrary to my humor, that
all I shall further add, is, that being sufficiently aware, of my Obligations
to your Ladyship, and to your Noble Family, I have presumed, as a Testimony of
my sense of these, to prefix your Name to this Piece, which I entreat, may be
taken in good part, off the hand of,

MADAM, Your Ladyships most humble and devoted Servant, G. L.

TO THE READER.
I Shall speak nothing of the Author of this Work, he was far above my
Commendation, he exercised his Ministry, first, at Camanell, afterward, at
Edinburgh, and lastly, at Irwin, where he Preached these Sermons, and finished
his Course; in all which places, for his Piety, Parts, and particularly his
eminent Gift in Preaching, his Memory is very savoury, and will be to all who
will seriously read these Discourses of his: Which, had he lived to Publish
himself, they had certainly appeared in a far more advantageous Dress; But you
have them here, as they were received from his Mouth, when Preached, by the Pen
of an Hearer: And if at any time, you meet with any thing less clear in them,
it is hopt, you will attribute it, to this, or to some Inadvertency at the
Press, and not to the Author, who was known to be no-ways involved or obscure,
but most accurate, most exact and distinct, in all that he did; and to add
this, in the by, (which is remarked of him, by one most pertinently) in all his
Observations and Purposes, ye will find him, though always Native, yet
frequently very surprising. But the serious perusal of them will say more, both
for their Vindication and Commendation, than I possibly can, which, if you set
about, as you ought, they will prove, through the Lord's Blessing, as they were
at first, and now are intended, for thy Spiritual Benefit, which is the sincere
desire of

G. L.

SERMON I.
Psalm 130. Verse. 1. Out of the depths have I cried unto thee, O LORD.

2. Lord, hear my voice: let thine ears be attentive to the voice of my
supplications.


HAving a purpose (if the Lord will) to go through this Psalm, I shall speak
somewhat in a brief word to the Title of it. It Is called A Song of Degrees, a
Title that is common to fifteen Psalms in this Book, from the 120 to the 134
inclusive, and the importance of this Title is not easily condescended upon.
Popish Writers would from this make up fifteen Degrees of Virtues, each of them
still above another, whereby a Sinner breathes for Redemption by Christ, from a
stare of Sin and Misery, and ascends to Heaven; but this necessitates them to
strain their Wits, and to put these Psalms on a Rack, to find out the
distinction of these Virtues, and therefore we shall leave it. The Hebrew word
rendered Degrees, leads us to somewhat more certain, yet not demonstrative: That
these Psalms may be called Songs of Degrees, 1. Upon the account of the way of
singing them, the Voice in singing them being raised to an high Key, as 2 Chronicles. 20. where it is said, the Levites stood up to praise the Lord God of
Israel, with a loud voice on high. It Is the same word used here for Degrees. 2.
There is a reason why these Psalms were to be sung with a loud Voice, a Song of
Degrees may signify a most excellent Song, or a Song which in excellency
surmounts other Songs, and so the word is rendered when it is applied to a man
of excellency, 1 Chronicles. 17.17. Thou have regarded me according to a man of high
degree, or a man of excellency, O Lord; and so these Psalms may be called Songs
of Degrees, because they are most excellent, for the sweet, grave, and pithy
Sentences they contain. 3. They may be called Songs of Degrees, upon the
account of the place where these excellent Songs were to be sung with an high
voice. The Chaldee Paraphrast says, upon the Degrees, or Stairs, whereby they
went up to the Temple, or rather, whereby they went up to Mount Sion, the City
of David; one of which fifteen Psalms were to be sung on every step of these
Stairs. And others will have them to be sung in the several Mansions of the
People that came from the Babylonish Captivity, for so we find the word rendered
Ezra 7.9. These things I only name, and pass them; and I might add one
Conjecture more, when I consider the affinity that is betwixt the word Degrees
rendered, and the Original that signifies Burnt-offering or Sacrifice. I incline
to think, that these Songs were sung by the Priests and Levites about the
Altar, while they offered these Burnt-offerings, or Sacrifices.

Having thus briefly spoken to the Title, there are other general Notes common
to this with other Psalms that might be insisted on, which I also pass.

For the Penman of the Psalm, he is not designed, nor is it needful to enquire
who he was, since the Psalm has its authority from the Spirit of God, and not
from Man. It is most like to be a Psalm of David, or that David was the
Penman, for these doubled Expressions, verse. 2. of this Psalm, are used by
him, Psalms 54, 55, and 61. and many others.

For the particular difficulty, to which this Psalm relates, it is not needful
to determine what it was. It may suffice us for taking up the scope of the
Psalm in general, that the Psalmist is in a Distress, and being in a Distress,
ye will find him first Wrestling, and then secondly, Victorious.

For the first, His Wrestling; ye shall take it up in three Branches, 1. Ye
will find him wrestling with plunging Difficulties and Perplexities, and these
he expresses under the name of Depths, and the way he takes to win out of
them, is wrestling by Prayer, verse. 1, 2.

2. Ye will find him wrestling with the Sense, and Conscience of Guilt, putting
back his Prayer, and Offering to crush his Hopes; and this he wrestleth with by
claiming to Pardon, verse. 3, 4.

3. Ye will find him wrestling with Delays to his Answer of Prayers, or Delays
of the Outgate prayed for; and this he wrestles with by Patience and Hope,
verse. 5, 6.

Again, in the last two Verses, ye have him Victorious; for having gotten an
Issue, he hoords it not up, he does not conceal it, but, he brings it forth and
improves it for the use of the People of God, whom he encourages to hope in
God, upon the account of Mercy, and Pardon, and plenteous Redemption; and on
the account of his redeeming Israel from all his Iniquities.

So much for the Scope and Partition of the Psalm.

To return to the first two Verses, upon which I may be the more brief, that I
had occasion to speak to you before of the Troubles and Trials of Gods People,
of Prayer, and Gods Answering Prayer; yet we shall not pass this part, but we
shall endeavor to gather some things useful from it.

In this his Wrestling then, take notice of these four things.

1. Ye have that that the Psalmist is put to wrestle with, which is expressed
under the name of Depths. 2. The way of his wrestling therewith, out of the
depths he cried, Out of the depths have I cried. 3. Ye have him reflecting on
this his Practice, he takes a back-look of it, and he avows it before God, Out
of the depths have I cried unto thee, O Lord. 4. Ye have the prosecution of
this his Wrestling, or his pleading for Audience in a new and doubled Suit,
verse. 2. Lord, hear my voice: let thine ears be attentive to the voice of my
supplications.
For the first of these, the Depths out of which he cried: I cannot accord to
understand it thus, that he prayed from the depths, or bottom of his Heart. So
the Commentators I spoke of before, understand it of that degree of Virtue
which is profound Prayer, from the inward parts or bottom of the Heart. There
is a truth in that I confess, that Prayer should come from the bottom of the
Heart, and in Prayer we should write our Hearts on our Tongues; but I find it
not a Scripture Phrase, that People are said to pray from the Heart, when they
cry out of the Depths. Neither can I understand it of the Conscience of Sin
only, that (as some would understand it) he is under a deep of Despair, upon
the account of Guilt that he speaks of, verse. 3, 4. and has a promise of
Redemption from verse. 8. The word is Depths in the Plural Number, and therefore
it is safest to understand it, more generally of plunging and sinking
Difficulties, both outward Trouble and inward Perplexity resulting thereon, and
of the Conscience of Guilt wakened up in Trouble that may come in under these
Depths; and this interpretation agrees best with the current of Scripture,
where we find the horrible Pit, the Miry Clay, Depths, Deep Waters, Water
Floods, made use of to hold out great Troubles, as Psalm. 40.2. Psalm. 42.7.
Psalm. 69.2, 14, 15.

I shall here touch upon one Observation, That not only the visible Church, but
even the truly Godly, may be brought under plunging Difficulties and
Perplexities, both inward and outward, to their great sinking, or at least
their apparent sinking. They may be, and are very often in the Depths, and put
to their Prayers in the Depths, so it was with the Psalmist here, and in these
Psalms formerly cited. And in prosecution of this point, 1. I shall first speak
a little to the Metaphor of Deep or Depths. 2. How it comes to pass that the
Lords People are brought to these Depths. 3. To a word of Use.


First, For the Metaphor of Deep or Depths, I shall shortly offer what I
conceive is the Import thereof in these four.

1. That which is a deep is a thing very dark, dig a Pit, and make it deep, the
light of the day cannot penetrate into it; Thus the unintelligible mysteries of
Seducers are called Depths, as Rev. 2.24. the depths of Satan spoken of. Thus
also the wise counsel of God that men cannot indagate, are called Depths, Psalm.
92.5. Thy thoughts are very deep, and 1 Cor. 2.10. The Spirit searches all
things, yea the deep things of God: and thus also Ezekiel. 3.6. a people of a
strange speech, and of a hard language, whose whose words the people could not
understand, are spoken of; in the Original it is a people of a deep Lip.
Deepness then imports Darkness, Unintelligibleness, that which is Mysterious.
And that this Notion is not strained even in this case of Trouble, is clear
from Hemans lament, Psalm. 88.6. Thou have laid me (says he) in the lowest pit,
in darkness, in the deeps; where to be in Darkness, and in the Deeps, are
expressed as Synonymous, or one and the same: And truly, this is ordinarily
incident to the People of God, their deep Trials are in themselves so dark, and
in their effects so astonishing, that they are often at a stand, either to know
what God says to them by them, and hence are these Wherefores, and Whys, as to
this or that which is come upon them; as also in reference to their Duty, as
Jehoshaphat expresses his Distress, 2 Chr. 20.12. Lord, we know not what to do.

But 2ly. This Metaphor of a Deep or Depths, as it imports that which is Dark
and Unintelligible, so it imports that, out of which it is not easy to get up;
cast a Man upon the Ground he may easily get up, but cast him in a deep Pit he
can hardly get up out of it without help. Some Emblem we have of this in
Jeremiah, chap. 38. where he is put into the Dungeon, where there was no Water,
but Mire, and he sunk in the Mire; Ebedmelech had a hard task to get him up:
and the People of God their Troubles may be Depths upon that account, Refuge
may fail them, no man caring for their Soul, Psalm. 142.4. All hope that they
shall be saved taken away, (as it is said by Paul in that Voyage, Acts 27.20.)
all their expectations of an outgate may be crushed, as Jer. 14.19. Why have
thou smitten us, and there is no healing for us? we looked for peace, and there
is no good; and for the time of healing, and behold, trouble; yea, all their
endeavors to extricate themselves out of Trouble may be frustrate, Jer. 8.18.
When I would comfort my self against sorrow, my heart is faint in me: and Job
9.27, 28. If I say, I will forget my complaint, I will leave off my heaviness,
and comfort my self: I am afraid of all my sorrows.

But 3ly. This Metaphor of a Deep or Depths, Imports not only that which is
dark and hard to get out of, but that which appears ruining; put a man into a
deep Pit, if he get none to help him out of it, he must Starve and Ruin, as
Ebedmelech said to the King, they have put Jeremiah in the Dungeon, and he will
die for hunger in the place where he is, Jer. 38.9. Put a man in a Pit where
there is deep Water, he will drown, if he be not taken out. So the People of
God, their Trouble may be such, as not only all ground of hope of Out-gate may
be taken away, but all hope of Issue may be accompanied with apparent present
Ruin. David is put to a humbling posture, when he is put to that, Psalm. 69.15.
Let not the water flood overflow me, neither let the deep swallow me up, and
let not the pit shut her mouth upon me.

But 4ly. The Metaphor of Depths in the Plural number, imports a plurality of
them, a multitude of these depths, dark, hard, hopeless, ruining pressures,
trysting all together on a Child of God, that his sad lot may be like that of
the Church, Lam. 2.22. Thou have called as in a solemn day, my terrors round
about; There is a Convocation of them, one trouble seldom comes it alone upon
the People of God; as one Wave uses not to come its alone to beat upon the
Shore, but Trial upon Trial, Wave upon Wave, one Depth calling upon another
Depth, till their Trial be perfected.

More particularly, the plurality of these Depths, may be taken up in these
steps, 1. Their outward Trouble may be attended with other visible
disadvantages; for when a man is under trouble, then ordinarily he is in
contempt, Job 12.5. He that is ready to slip with his feet, is as a lamp
despised, as a dying out snuff in the thought of him that is at ease: Hence,
Heb. 12.2. It is said, Christ endured the cross, despising the shame; The Cross
and Shame, the Cross and Ignominy go hand in hand. It is not enough to be in
Affliction, but thou must be content to be reproached, and counted a fool: yea,
not only does outward trouble and contempt go ordinarily together, but outward
affliction and slighting from nearest relations, which is a load above a
burden, Psalm. 31.11. My lovers and friends stood aloof from my sore, and my
kinsmen stood afar off. Psalm. 88.8, and 18. Lover and friend have thou put far
from me, and my acquaintance into darkness.

2ly. It comes to the Depths with the people of God upon this account. That
great outward trouble readily w^akens the Conscience of Guilt, as we see of
Joseph's Brethren, when they were put into prison, Genesis 42.41. They said one to
another, we are verily guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the
anguish of his soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear. Therefore is
this distress come upon us. Yea, outward trouble, and Conscience of guilt under
it wakened, may break the peace of the mind, and that adds to these depths. The
spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity, but a wounded spirit who can bear?
That is deep upon deep, trouble and guilt, trouble and broken mind turns to be
the greatest burden.

And 3ly. It may come to Depths with the people of God on this account, that
when once the mind is broken, there is no need of many real Crosses; The
imagination can no sooner hatch an apprehension, but the broken Mind will make
it a Cross; and then so many apprehensions, so many depths are created. And
thus ye have some sort of account of the Importance of this Metaphor, a Depth,
or Depths.

I proceed to the second thing, being to name a few Considerations for clearing
how it comes to be thus with the people of God, That they are brought into
these Depths, I shall name but a few, having been long in breaking in upon this
purpose, which will save me a labor afterward.

And 1. Take this Consideration in general, The folly of the people of God puts
them to this posture, That is one, Psalm. 38.3. There is no soundness in my
flesh, because of thine anger; neither is there any rest in my bones, because
of my sin. And v. 5. My wounds stink and are corrupt, because of my
foolishness. Whatsoever there may be of a Trial of Faith in their Trouble, Sin
is the door at which their troubles, particularly their overwhelming Troubles,
enter in.

But 2ly. Because the people of God may sometime through Mercy, be kept from
gross outbreakings; therefore consider that even the ordinary and habitual
Faults of the people of God, will provoke him to put them in these Depths; I
shall instance but in these two Faults. 1. The ordinary Fault of negligence in
doing Duty, I do not say of neglecting Duty, custom and Conscience may keep
them at Duty, but ordinary negligence in doing Duty has need of a rousing Douk
in a Depth, to set them to their feet: If the Psalmist cried out of the Depths,
and the poor speaks Supplications as he does, v. 2. It intimats there is little
crying, little humiliation in ordinary diligence, therefore he sends to the
Depths to put an edge upon folks diligence, and to teach them to say their
Prayers in earnest.

A 2d. Fault in ordinar is, the neglect of ordinar needy dependence upon God in
all things; the neglect of going through the Wilderness leaning on the beloved,
a small fault as ye would think, but sad in a Christian life, to live in this
neglect. Hence the Apostle, 2 Cor. 1.8, 9. Says, We were pressed out of
measure above strength, insomuch that we despaired even of life, we had the
sentence of death in our selves. And for what end? To learn us dependence that
we should not trust in our selves, but in God, who raises the dead.

And 3. Whereas it might be thought that such faults as these and grosser, are
passed in many others, I shall add, that the Lords near relation with his
People, will not let them win away with their faults, win away who will, Amos
3.2. You only have I known of all the Families of the earth, therefore I will
punish you for all your iniquities: Or as it is in the Original, I will visit
upon you your sins. His people will not want the Rod when their faults call for
it, want who will.

4. Consider there is this to be looked upon, as a cause of his putting his
people in the Depths, to wit, his purposes of love to his people, and his
allowances upon his people are so rich, that there is need of preparations by
Trial, and Afflictions to make them capable of them; for were they not put into
the Depths, they could not be capable of them. Hence it is Paul's remark in the
forecited place, 1 Cor. 1.4, 5. God comforts us in all our Tribulation, that we
may be able to comfort them, who are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith
we our selves are comforted of God; For as the sufferings of Christ abound in
us, so our consolation also abounds by Christ; we might not want these depths
of tribulation, because without them, we could not be capable of the
consolations we receive from Christ.

And 5. To add no more, we may take notice of somewhat in the Saints tenderness
above others, that occasions these Depths: many folks may be under as great
outward trouble, that are not so plunged and perplexed with it as they are:
Many a man has been tossed as David was by Saul, who have not so expressed their
resentments as he did; How is this? The tender spiritednesse that is in the
people of God, occasions their trouble of mind, they see God in their
afflictions, and they would fain see more of him, and of his mind, as to their
duty, and this makes affliction take a deeper stamp, and impression on them,
and to draw Blood of them more than it does on an unsubdued Spirit, who has no
mind of God, or Providence, but has only the outward trouble to graple with.
Thus we see how it comes to pass, that the people of God are put in the Depths.

For the 3d. thing I proposed to be spoken to, That is, the Use of the
Doctrine, the whole Observations to be gathered from the two following Verses,
are Instructions how to improve such a lot, and consequently Uses of the Point
in hand. Therefore I shall content my self to hint briefly at three general
words here.

And 1. From what has been said, ye would learn to be more jealous of a
crosselesse life, of a life without trouble and exercise; Why? It speaks little
of a soul thriving in the life of God: Take notice of that word, Psalm. 55.19.
Spoken of the wicked, because they have no changes, therefore they fear not
God: And that spoken of Moab, Jer. 48.11. Moab has been at ease from his
youth, and has settled on his lees, and has not been emptied from vessel to
vessel, neither has he gone into captivity, therefore his taste remained in
him, and his sent is not changed, and he rots on his lees. And as a crossess
life speaks little thriving in the life of Grace, so it speaks to very many,
little of Gods love and care: There is a sort of indignation kythed against
sinners, that they little notice, and wherein there is a snare, when they get
leave to go on in sin, and meet not with a Cross, when a person will not deinze
one that is going wrong with a reproof, it speaks hatred: so that is a sad word
from God, Ezekiel. 3.26. Thou shall not be a reprover to them, for they are a
rebellious house: and that word* Hos. 4.17. Ephraim is joined to idols, let him
alone: That is a sad dispensation; a douk to the hazard of drowning in the
Depths is better company.

And 2. From this ye would be Cautioned not to mistake the sad exercises of the
people of God, whose lot in ordinar is outward troubles; they get ordinarily the
stakes to keep, (and to mark it in the by) I wonder what a mistake is befallen
us, or rather a distraction is come upon us, that we should stumble at the
people of God their want of prosperity; look to the frame of the people of God,
they are in ordinary broken folk. Others can bear their afflictions with a sort
of gallantry, they can drink them down, rant them down. But they are broken
with their affliction, as if they had no spirit at all to bear them; but I say,
ye would not mistake, for it is a token of Gods love and care who donks them in
the Depths, to put them out of the Depths to cry unto him; and it is a more
blessed posture to be put out of the Depths to cry, than to be in a Palace with
neglect of Prayer: and therefore I can call it no better than a distraction to
stumble at their want of prosperity, they are the folk that faint, and have no
might, and yet they will lay by the young men, and the youths for all their
ranting, because they wait upon the Lord, they shall renew their strength,
Isai. 40.29. This I speak, not to foster discouragement in any, but to caution
them that are ready to stumble at the people of God their being in trouble, and
broken in that condition.

And a 3d. word of Use shall be, that every one that is in the Depths would try
how they improve that lot, and this Use is the Key to open the Door to the
following purpose, which I shall not now break in upon, only remember, The Lord
does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men, to crush under his
feet all the prisoners of the earth. Therefore there must be something that in
affliction, when we are in the Depths, he is calling us to, and which we would
ply to in earnest; and therefore we would take heed that the Bellows be not
burnt, that the Founder do not melt in vain, and that we provoke not God to
call us reprobat silver, whom he has rejected, Jer. 6.29, 30.

SERMON II.
Psalm 130. Verse. 1. Out of the depths have I cried unto thee, O LORD.

2 Lord, hear my voice; let thine ears be attentive to the voice of my
supplications.


BEing so long detained in the morning in breaking in upon this Purpose, I
shall now the more briefly come to that where I left.

Ye have heard that in these two first Verses, the distressed Psalmist was
wrestling with the difficulties, and sinking perplexities in his condition,
wherein we have an account of what he had to wrestle with, The depths; the way
of his wrestling with these Depths, to wit, by Prayer, his reflecting on that
exercise, and telling God, That he cried unto him out of the depths, and his
Prosecution of it, or insisting and pleading with God in a new doubled suit,
verse. 2.

For the first of these, the Depths wherewith he wrestled, somewhat was spoken
both for Explication, and to a more general Application of that purpose, which
I shall not now repeat.

That which lies before me in the second place, is, the way of his wrestling
with these Depths, or Difficulties. Others had they been in the like exercise,
might fret and repine, or they might labor to rant them out, or drink them
down, so far as they were able to rid themselves of them, or they might crush
under them; but he drives another Trade, his being in the Depths puts him to
Prayer, and to fervency in Prayer, he not only intimats that out of the Depths
he Prayed, but out of the Depths he cried to God in Prayer, with that
earnestness, and fervor, that a drowning man, presently going to sink, cries
for relief, if any relief may be had. The general Observation which I take from
this, is, That the kindly result of sinking and surchanging exercise in the
Saints, is when it puts them to Prayer, and to fervency in Prayer, when being
in the Depths, Out of the depths they cry unto God. This is the general
Doctrine of trouble, Psalm. 50. Call upon me in the day of trouble, I will
deliver thee, etc.

And that I may so far as is necessary lay the Point in broad-band before you,
before I come to a word of Use, I shall deduce the Importance of it in a few
particulars.

And 1. The Psalmist's practice, who is content to be at exercise, does import,
That sleeping and idleness is a very unsuitable posture, when the people of God
are in the Depths, to be at any time without exercise is very dangerous; for as
the Animal Life is still in motion, so the Spiritual Life of a Christian must
still be in exercise, so in particular, to be without exercise in a distress,
and particularly to be without Prayer, is yet more dreadful; an idle man in a
difficult lot, I can compare him to nothing, but to that drunken man, Prove.
23.34. That is as one that lies down in the midst of the sea, or as he that
lies upon the top of a mast; he is a desperate man, drunk with some Distemper
that is not at exercise in the Depths. May I add, the idle man in the Depths,
is readily the Guilty man that draws on the Storm and the Tempest; Hence we
have a sad Narration, Jonah 1.5. where Jonah, a Godly man, fleeing from the
presence of the Lord, in the Storm, is down in the sides of the Ship sleeping,
and one might think in the case he was in, he might have an unsound Sleep
there, but the Text tells he was fast asleep; and shall I add, that is a sad
Posture, verse 6. when a Pagan Ship-master reproves a Prophet Jonah, what
meanest thou, O sleeper? says he, arise, and call upon thy God. That then is
the first thing imported, that it is a dangerous thing to be sleeping and idle
in the Depths.

2. That the Psalmist when he is in the Depths cries out unto God, it imports,
That kindly Saints, whenever they come in any Distress, have no refuge but God.
It Is with God and his Saints as it is with a Parent and a Child, in a Crowd, as
long as nothing ails the Child he will go beside any body, but when he comes in
a difficulty he will leave the rest and single out his Parent to protect him;
so I say it is with the Saints when any thing ails them, they have no refuge, no
shift, no gate to go, but God. Would ye know the Character of a Child of God in
Distress, ye have it in that forecited place, 2 Chronicles. 20.12. we have no might
against this great company that comes against us, neither know we what to do,
but our eyes are upon thee. This is the Scope of the most part of all the
Psalms. A Saint is no sooner put to it, but he puts at God: a Cross is no
sooner laid at his door, but he tells, it is the wrong Door, and he goes and
lays it at God's Door: the reason of this is double, partly the difficulties
of the Children of God may be so great, that they are left allenarly upon God.
It is with them as it was with that hypocritical king, when he said to the
Harlot, if the Lord do not help thee, whence shall I help thee? out of the
Barn-floor, or out of the Wine Press. What will become of the Saints in many
difficulties and hard cases, if God step not in; David looked to all Airts, and
could find no relief, Psalm. 142.4, 5. I looked on my right hand, and beheld,
but there was no man that would know me, refuge failed me, no man cared for my
soul, what follows? I cried unto thee, O Lord, I said, thou art my refuge:
Kindly Saints must therefore look unto God in every Distress, partly because
whatever right means they have to make use of, they must either begin at God,
or they will find they have followed a wrong method. Saul pretended to this, 1 Samuel 13.12. The Philistines will come down upon me, and I have not made
supplication unto the Lord, I must begin at God, says he, and as Saul
pretended to it, David really practiced it, 1 Samuel 30.7. whatever mind he had
to pursue the Amalekites that had burnt Z^klag, and taken his Wives captive, he
will do nothing till he consult with God. That then is the second thing
imported, that as the Saints are not asleep, are not idle in the Depths of
trouble, so they have no refuge but God.

A third thing imported in this, that the Psalmist out of the Depths cried unto
God, is this, that there is no case of the Saints so desperate, wherein Prayer
is useless, ye know what was that wicked Kings Determination, 2 Kings 6.33.
This evil is of the Lord, what should I wait for the Lord any longer? and how
many in Heart and Practice, in difficult Cases say so? it is to little purpose
to wait on God, to look to God. The Psalmist here was of another temper, out of
the Depths have I cried unto thee, Lord, says he, he finds it to good purpose
to cry unto God. So Jonah 2.4. I said, I am cast out of thy sight; and he had
as much to say for his being so as any other, the Waters compassed him about,
and went into his Soul. The Weeds were wrapped about his Head he went down to
the bottoms of the Mountains. The Earth with her Bars were about him, yet even
then he sees not Prayer to be an useless Trade, wherefore he adds, yet will I
look again to thy holy Temple. Prayer is to good purpose for all that, and no
wonder, for there is no condition of the Saints so low, no Pit so deep, wherein
they can be caught, but an humble Supplicant will from thence reach the Throne.
A David buried quick in a Cave, a Daniel in the Lions Den, find that Prayer can
win up to God, and find audience; for the high and lofty One, who has the
Heaven for his Throne, and the Earth for his Footstool, has an Eye also to
them who are of a poor and of a Contrite Spirit, and trembles at his Word,
Isa. 66.1, 2. and he who humbles himself to behold the things that are in
Heaven and in the Earth, he raises the poor out of the Dust, and the needy out
of the Dunghill, and therefore no desperate case of the people of God renders
Prayer useless.

But 4ly. That the Psalmist out of the Depths cries unto God, it imports, That
as there is no case so desperate as it renders Prayer useless, so it imports,
that it is the property of the Saints, when they are right, that be Prayer
hopeless, or not hopeless, they will not quite it, they will not give it over,
put them in the Depths: It Is a great encouragement to them, that they know it
is to good purpose to Pray; but be it to purpose, or no purpose, they must be
about it, they will not quite it, that place cited in Jonah proves it, let God
cast him out of his sight, yet will he look to his holy Temple and Pray; shut
him out at the Door, he will be in at the Door by Prayer. Tell him his
difficulty is so great (as Temptation will be ready to say) that crying to God
will do him no good, it is all a matter, to Prayer he must, he will rather sink
Praying, than be saved without it. Psalm. 61.2. From the ends of the earth will
I cry unto thee, when my heart is overwhelmed. That Is a notable word from a man
in a deep Distress. What could a man imagine to be discouraging that he wanted?
for his Case, he is as far from God as the ends of the earth; for his Heart, he
is under Perplexity, his Heart is overwhelmed; and yet in that condition he
will cry unto God, if so be he will lead him to the Rock that is higher than
he, come of it what will he will Pray. And Heman is another notable instance,
Psalm. 88.13, and verse. 14. he says, Lord, why castest thou off my soul? why
hidest thou thy face from me? and verse. 15. I am afflicted, and ready to die
from my youth up, while I suffer thy terrors, I am distracted. I am put out of
my Wits, my Wit gets a rack with thy terrors, and yet verse. 13. Unto thee have
I cried, O Lord. No hopelesness of my undertaking, no hardship I meet with
could put me from crying to thee, and in the morning shall my prayer prevent
thee; I will continue Praying, and, (to speak after the manner of men) Thou
shall be soon up, but my Prayer shall be at thy Door to prevent thee; That then
is the 4th thing imported here, not to be put from Prayer were our Case never
so desperate, nay not by the apprehension of drowning in the Depths, though at
the next Bout we should sink to the bottom.

But 5ly. That he says, Out of the depths have I cried unto thee, it imports,
that not only a Saint will not be put from Prayer, through the greatness of his
Distress, but his Distress will put an edge upon Prayer, when he is most
fervent, and made to cry out when he is in the Depths. And this word Crying,
expressing Prayer in the Text suffer me to Explicate more particularly what it
imports. I intend not to Speak of it as it is generally used in Scripture, but
as it expresses Prayer. And I shall here offer four or five Things to be
looked to by them that would continue Praying in the Depths, or out of the
Depths.

1. It imports a Man's being Affected with that which is his Case. The crying
Man knows what ails him, when a Man Scricks or Cries out, it is an evidence
that he feels somewhat that Affects him much. Thus Crying is used upon the
account of Grief, Ezekiel. 5.4. The marked Persons are such as sigh and cry for
all the abominations done in the midst of the city. They cry out of sad
oppression from Grief. And I find Crying in Prayer made us of, to signify the
fears of the Supplicant, Heb. 5.7. Our blessed Lord is said to offer up prayers
and supplica-with strong crying and tears, and he was heard in that he feared;
Grief and fear importing the sense of our Case, the source and fountain of our
Cries; a stupid Man that wots not how it is with himself, or the people of God,
(who is like Pharaoh that knew not that Egypt was destroyed) will not be a
crying Man.

2. This Crying imports, not only a sense of ones Case, but an earnest
affection after that, which our cries are employed about, it is not for Triffles
that a Man cries either to obtain or avoid them (at least they are not Triffles
in his opinion), it is given as an estimation of Wisdom, Prove. 2.3. when a man
cries and lifts up his voice for it. And David cries about that which he is
affected with, Ps. 84.2. my soul longs, yea even faints for the courts of
the Lord, my heart and my flesh cries out for the living God. It Is a token of
raised Affections either to be rid of some imminent ill or hazard, or to attain
some excellent good, that puts folk to Crying. A slighting of Trouble, (when a
Man is like Ephraim, Hos. 7 9. gray hairs are here and there upon him, and he
knows it not) and a slighting of desyrable Mercies, will not produce Crying for
the one, or to avoid the other.

But 3ly. This Crying imports, with sense of need and earnestness of Affection
to be at the thing cried for, a sense of a distance. We use to cry to folk
that are far off, and not within ordinar speaking or rounding; and this follows
well upon the former. When folks are put to Pray from the Depths, they will
discern God at a distance from them, and themselves at a distance from God; it
is another thing when a man is in the Depths to be within speaking terms with
God as when he is at ease. The children of God while they are at ease are like
Sampson, who thinks he has no more ado, but go out and shake himself, and have
God at his command; but the Man in the depths will not find such an easy
matter to come near God. He will not only be sensible of his natural distance,
but of that distance he is under upon the account of his Provocations, and so
this Crying will take in sense of Guilt to be confessed and mourned for before
God. But this I shall leave, because it will fall in upon the third and fourth
Verses following.

A 4th Thing imported in this Crying is, That notwithstanding of all that has
been said a Saint should cry out of the Depths, with Confidence in God, and of
Relief from him, hence the Spirit of Adoption, Romans 8.15. Gal. 4.6. It does not
prompt a Man to muter, or peep, or whisper his Prayer to God; but to cry out
with Confidence, Abba, Father. And whatever sense we have of our need, or of
our distance from God, or of the Guilt has drawn it on, Confidence is needful
to usher in Prayer, Heb. 4.16. Having such an high priest, let us come boldy.
The word in the Greek ((...)) signifies, let us come with an all-saying, with
an open mouth, unto the Throne of Grace, with Confidence, that we may obtain
mercy, and find grace, to help in time of need.

5ly and lastly, This Crying out of the depths it imports, as the result of all
that I have been speaking to from it, a fervency of Affection; when folks are
not only sensible of that they need, have an estimation of it, see their
distance, come with some measure of Confidence, but an edge is put on their
Affection, and they are fervent, and raised in Prayer for it; I do not mean
that Prayer with the loudest Voice is ay the most fervent Prayer, when I think
upon these Tones and Voices used by some in Prayer, I often mind that word,
Eccles. 9.17. the words of wise men, are heard in quiet, more than the cry of
him that rules among fools. It Is not the Tone (though we ow the Voice to God)
that makes fervent Prayer to him. Moses Exodus 14.15. prayed fervently, he cried
to God when he spoke not a Word, and Lam. 2.18. Their heart cried unto the
Lord, O wall of the daughter of Zion. But my meaning is, that frequencie,
fervency, and instancy in Prayer from the Heart is required in them that talk
and cry out of the Depths; ye talk of your saying of your Prayers, and among
the Prayers in the world many of them are but said Prayers, but when it comes
to crying out of the Depths, your said Prayers will not do the turn our blessed
Lord was never superficial in Prayer, yet Luke 22.44. it is said, being in an
agony he prayed more earnestly, there is a pattern of Prayer out of the Depths,
and I wish I saw a practical Commentar of that among you, which ye find Ps.
107.12, 13. He brought down their heart with labor, they fell down, and there
was none to help, (that is a posture that would put many to Pray, and how far ye
are from it, if ye were awake ye would discern) then they they cried unto the
Lord in their trouble, and he saved them out of their distresses.

So ye have heard the import of this crying out of the depths unto God. As for
the use of this, whereof it affords diverse, though all along the point is
practical and applys it self; I know not if I dare break in farther upon it, I
suppose to ordinar hearers, all is poison that is spoken after the Glass; but
ye shall take a few words from it, if this be the kindly result of blessed
trouble, to be put to crying to God out of the depths, then ye may see what a
dreadful plague it is, that when people are cast in the Depths, and the Spirit
of Prayer is away, and there is no crying out of them to God, Shall I hold up
to you a Glass to let you see your own foul Face in this matter. Read Ezekiel.
24.23. And I pray you forget Judah and Israel, and call this Scotland, and your
selves Professors in Scotland that are spoken to, Ye shall not mourn, nor weep,
but ye shall pine away for your iniquities. O that is the Cop-stone of a
peoples calamity, when it is said to them, Ye shall pine away in your
iniquities, and mourn, and roar one toward another. And will ye not get many
such up and down the Land, folks that are like wild beasts in a net, struggling
with their Calamity, tatlers and talkers of their troubles, he blaming him, and
he him, roaring for the sad case themselves and the Land are in, but where is
their crying out of the depths to God? Who have added to the weight and measure
of their Prayers for all that is come over them? Where will ye get a Daniel in
all Scotland, that for three full weeks gave himself to Fasting and Prayer?
Will ye have another Glass to see your foul spots in? Read Dan. 9.13. As it is
written in the Law of Moses, all this evil is come upon us, yet made we not
our prayer to the Lord our God, that we should turn from our iniquities and
understand thy truth; We feel well-enough all the evil that is on us, and that
it is come as it is written in the Law, yet there is no Prayer to purpose. Will
ye yet take another Glass? Then read Amos 4.6. etc. Where the Lord tells what
strokes he had inflicted upon his people, every one of them heavier than
another. I have done this, and this to you, says the Lord, and still the
over-word is, yet ye have not returned unto me. Many folks are blyth when
things rise to an height, and then they think God will be seen on the Mount,
but they forget that continuing them in the Depths, is to set them to Prayer;
it is the sin of the Generation, that they look more to their Privileges, than
their Provocations, or so to their Privileges, as they forget their
Provocations; and lean so much weight on the righteousness of their cause, as
they forget that for which God has put them in difficulties: I may say on this
account, that fearers of God are self-destroyers, O tell it not in Gath,
publish it not in the streets of Ashkelon, that God has taken such pains to
put us to pray and repent, and yet we will do any thing, but Pray and Repent we
will not. I see no issue in this, but to put off our Ornaments, and see what
the Lord will do with us. And will ye yet take another word that may give folk
a sight of their foul Face? Even that Charge unjustly laid by Eliphaz against
Job, chap: 15. verse. 4. Which I doubt if we can lay so well from our door as he
might, Thou castest off fear (says he) and restrainest prayer before God.
There is a threefold restraint of Prayer before God in Difficulties. And I wish
that one or all of them take not in the generality of the Generation we live
in. 1. When folk that wont to Pray give it over. And what thousands are there
of this stamp in Scotland? and not a few in the West Country. How many are
there among us, that sometimes have worshipped God in secret, and now do not
bow a knee to God? How many have worshipped God in their Families, who now have
left it off? And among you there are not a few such, as we find by your
shifting answers, when you are asked therea^ent, a thing that rather might be
expected in the barbarous parts of the Land than among you, and is not Religion
and Religious Duties much clipped where it had much place. A Prognostic of
little good, when so few Families will be found having their posts sprinkled
with the blood of sprinkling. Now what shall I say of them that never Prayed,
when so many have quit Prayer that once used it. O! I say it again, publish it
not in Gath, etc. That Apostasy has so far prevailed, that it has driven
many from the very form of Godliness.

A 2d. Restraint of Prayer is in them who have kept up a Form, but alas they
put me in mind of that word spoken of Pharaoh's Chariot Wheels, They drive
heavily; There was a time when Religion was in request, and then folks got
borrowed Wings that they Flew with, or Stilts in Religious Duties; but when a
man comes in the Depths, he must have Divine Approbation, or these will not do
his turn, or if he hold him by his Prayers, he will be looked down upon and
lightly esteemed, and that he that was wont to soar in Prayer, will do much if
he can creep on the Ground; but that clipping of Prayer, is a restraint of
Prayer before God.

I shall add 3ly. That many restrains Prayer, that neither quites nor clips
Prayer, of whom if ye judge by their frequent continuance, and the edge they
have in Prayer, ye will find no difference betwixt what they are now, and what
they were formerly, and ye will not easily know their restraining Prayer, and
yet they restrain it; for in stead of humble Supplications, their Prayers are
made up of murmuring and quarrelling. And this way of Praying is much the way
of them who are of the best stamp, that take out of their Prayers their
quarrellings, complaints, glooms and frowns, ye will get little of the poor
man's Supplications in their Prayers. Look to these things as Glasses, wherein
ye may see your short-comings and guilt, and I entreat the Lord to bless them
to you for that end, and for your exciting to more fervency to Prayer. And
remember when I press upon you crying out of the depths, that I press a
peremptor Duty on you, and that every neglect of Prayer while ye are in the
Depths, disposes you to Apostasy, and is a step to your ruin.

SERMON III.
Psalm 130. Verse. 1. Out of the depths have I cried unto thee, O LORD.

2. Lord, hear my voice; let thine ears be attentive to the voice of my
supplications.


THE Psalmist (as ye have heard) being in distress, is put to wrestle in the
first six Verses of this Psalm, partly with the Difficulties and plunging
perplexities in his case, verse. 1, 2. Partly, with the sense of guilt, that
might hinder his access, or hope of audience: verse. 3, 4, And partly, with Gods
delaying to answer him, and give him an issue, verse. 5, 6.

For the first contained in the first and second verse. Ye may remember that I
took it up in these four. 1. That which he wrestles with, which he expresses
under the name of Depths. 2. His way of wrestling with these Depths, viz. by
Prayer, He cried out of the depths. 3. He reflects on this his exercise, and
avows it before God, Out of the depths have I cried unto thee, O Lord. And
lastly, He prosecutes his Exercise of Prayer, presses for audience in a new
suite, verse. 2. Lord, hear my voice, let, etc.

For the first of these, what he wrestled with, the depths, I spoke to it, and
insisted to Explain that Metaphor of depth, or depths, and show what affinity
there may be betwixt that and the Distresses and Perplexities of the People of
God, and spoke somewhat to the use of it. For the Second, of his Crying out of
the Depths, I have spoken also to that, and deduced the point a little, and
show you how Distresses and Perplexities puts the Saints to Prayer, and what is
imported by Crying in Prayer; ye may remember that I was cut off by Time at a
word of Use, which was a sad regrate, that Distresses should be upon the People
of God, and yet Prayer restrained, that there should be so much Trouble, and so
little Crying. Several Scriptures I laid before you, wherein the People of God,
as in a glass may read their foul spots in this matter.

I Proceed to some more Uses. The second in order shall be this, if it be sad to
see the People of God in Distress and yet not Praying, it must be yet more sad
to see them in Distress, and in stead of Praying, taking sinful shifts to
extricate themselves out of the Depths, wherein they are. That the Trouble
which is sent to call them to God, should be so improved as if it had a
Commission to drive them from God. That if there be a sinful shift to be had
they will try that before they think on Prayer, before they stoop to think on
calling on God. It Is a sad Complaint of a wicked Generation that ye have, Jer.
2.30. In vain have I smitten your children, it is to no purpose that I have
taken pains upon them, for they received not correction, they will not stoop to
it, they will not improve it as a Correction from God for Sin; and would ye
know how ye shall ponder these Scriptures, which will lay before you what I
would say further on this Use. One is, Hos. 5.13. When that People saw their
wound, what did they with it? they went to the Assyrian, and sent to king
Jareb. They were so far from calling on God, that they took a sinful shift, to
bring them out of the present Trouble. Another is Is. 1.5. Why should ye be
stricken any more, it is to no purpose, for smite you as I will, ye will revolt
more and more, to smite you, that is the high gate, if ye were ill before, to
make you worse. If you was far from God, to drive you further from him. A third
Scripture is that spoken of Ahaz, 2 Chr. 28.22. Who in the time of his
Distress, in stead of turning to God, did trespass yet more and more against
the Lord, this is that king Ahaz. who in his Distress would not Pray, but would
worship the gods of the Syrians, who he pretended had helped them against him:
I shall say no more to this Use, but look to it; it is a dreadful thing when
Trouble makes folk worse, than they were before Trouble came on them; and I
shall add, that a People taken pains upon by Trouble, and not Crying out of the
Depths unto God, they are in the nearest capacity of any, to increase their
Trespass under it; a Prayerless Trouble will be a singularly plagued Trouble,
to them that are under it.

But a third word of Use, shall be by way of Prevention of a Cavillation or
Objection. It may be said, there may be a great deal of din made of Crying and
Turning to God in Trouble, but are there not many who never own God in their
Trouble, and who if they can have a sinful shift take them to it, and yet these
come through when Praying folk stick in the Mire. To prevent this Cavlllation
or Objection, I say, take this word of Use, that if it be a duty to cry out of
the Depths to God, then it is a plague for folks to be brought out of Trouble,
and not sent to God by Prayer, when they are brought through their Trouble, and
never sent to God to make earnest of their turning to him. Job. 36.13. When
Elihu is pressing upon folk, the right improving of Affliction, he adds, but
the hypocrites in heart heap up wrath, they cry not when he binds them; they
heap up wrath, why? they cry not when he binds them. If we will believe the
Spirit of God speaking in Scripture, a person not Crying to God, when God binds
him, he heaps up wrath against himself. And I shall desire such as swatter
through their Trouble miskenning God, to consider these three things. 1. That
it must be God that gives them any Delivery, though they do not acknowledge him
in it, nor for it, and consequently it is not given in Love, but in Wrath:
there may be much Wrath in Delivery from Trouble in a sad way, as well as in
sending Wrath upon a wicked person by Trouble. 2. Consider, that any Delivery
thou meets with, who art not Crying to God in thy Trouble, it is but a snare to
thee; thou loves not Prayer in order to an issue, and God in his holy
Providence lets that outgate out of Trouble come as a snare in thy way, that
thou see not the necessity of Prayer unto him; and it is the sadest of Snares
to be put off Prayers in mister. To be like these spoken of, Job. 21.15. Who
are brought in, saying, what is the Almighty, that we should serve him? and
what profit should we have, if we should pray unto him? we get our turn done
without him, and therefore we need not Pray. 3. Such as in Trouble restrain
Prayer, would consider that all that is owing them is but fristed, it is not
forgiven, thou gets a proof of Gods Riches, Forbearance, and Long-suffering,
and that should lead thee to Repentance, but it does it not, and thou considers
not, that after thy hardness and impenitent heart, thou treasurest up wrath
against the day of wrath, and revelation of his righteous judgment, Romans 2.4,
5. I can give it no better nor apposite term than what ye have, 2 Kings 13.23.
The Lord was gracious to them, and had compassion on them, and had respect to
them, because of his covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and would not
destroy them, nor cast them out of his presence. As yet, there was a reserve in
that Mercy, the Judgment was to come upon them, but not yet; look to it then ye
who in your Trouble, get your turn done without God, that what is fristed is
not forgiven.

But the fourth and last word of Use I shall give you from this Note, shall be
this. Ye that are put to Pray in Trouble, I entreat you look that ye be at
Crying with it. I shall not resume what I said upon this the last day, as that
ye would be Affected with your Case, that ye would be in earnest, that ye would
have a sense of your distance, get confidence to come speed, and withal a
raised fervency of affection, after that you cry for to God, only let your
Prayers look like your need of God, and the greatness of your Distress; Ponder
that word, Isa. 29.13. A word which I have often cited to you, This people
draws near me with their mouth, and with their lips do honor me, but they have
removed their heart far from me. Mark the Phrase, he does not say, they draw
near me with their Mouth, while their Heart is far from me, but they have
removed their heart far from me, which imports, that there is no more effectual
mean of estranging a Soul from God, than a Trade of Formal Worship, it is an
active removing of the Heart from God. I shall only add this word, that as I
have spoken to them that in trouble neglect the Duty of Prayer, that their
Out-gates speak no good to them, but Wrath, and a Snare; so I would have Folks
cautious in judging of their liveliness, or seriousness in Prayer by their
Out-gates out of Trouble. Ponder that place, Ps. 78.34, etc. There ye will find
a Praying People and seemingly serious, they seek God and return, and enquire
early after him, they remember he is their Rock and Redeemeer, Nevertheless
they did flatter him with their mouth, and lied unto him with their tongues,
for their heart was not right with him, neither were they steadfast in his
Covenant; but he being full of compassion, forgave their iniquity, and
destroyed them not. There is a People spared and delivered when they Cried to
God, when the Lord approves not of their Prayer. We must therefore get another
Testimony, to prove our not being Formal in Prayer, than Out-gate or Delivery
out of Trouble. A proof of Love and Compassion in Delivery may be Gods call to
us to mourn over our Formality, in Prayer, and for our other Sins, which he
came over to do us good.

But I proceed to a third Head in this first part of the Words, and that is his
reflecting on his Exercise, and his avowing it before God, O Lord (says he) I
have cried unto thee, he looks back and considers what he has been doing in
Distress, and finding he has been Wrestling, he lays it out and avows it
before God. The general which I mark from it shall be this, That reflection on
our selves, and on our way what we have done, or are doing is very necessar in
all them that would approve themselves to God. Such was the Psalmists practice
here, he looks back and finds the Depths put him to Crying, and is able to give
an account of it. There is a twofold Reflection that God calls for from the
children of Men. One is a Reflection upon their Case what it is, that they be
not stupid and senseless without Consideration what their lot is. Ye have that
quarreled, Isa 52.25. He poured out upon him the fury of his anger, and the
strength of battle; and it has set him on fire round about, yet he knew not;
and it burned him, yet he laid it not to heart; and Hos. 7.9. Strangers have
devoured his strength, and he knows it not; yea, gray hairs are here and
there upon him, yet he knows it not. That argues dreadful Stupidity and
Senslesness, when Folks are in a low condition, and do not consider, and do not
mind it, do not lay it to Heart. But there is another Reflection beside that of
our Case called for, and that is a Reflection on our Carriage under our Case;
when we have considered our Case, we would Reflect what we are doing in such a
case, or under such Lots as Providence makes our Portion. This is it the
Psalmist expresses, Psalm. 4.4. Commune with your own heart upon your bed; and
it is that the Lord presses upon his People, Hag. 1 5. Now therefore consider
your ways, set your Heart on your ways. This Reflection Self-searching or
Examination is most necessary in ordinar; a Man wors not where he is, nor what
he is doing in Religion, if he neglect this part of it; if he be a Stranger to
Self-Examination, he is a Stranger to his Progress or Decay in Religion, his
Convictions and Challenges are Confused, and without Fruit. His Prayers cannot
be but Confused, if he Pray any, it must be at Random. Only the Man that is
distinct in Examination can distinctly lay out his Case before God; and this
Examination, as it is necessar in ordinar, so specially in Trouble. If a Man in
Distress neglect Examination, he may be carried headlong in Stupidity, in
Passion, Quarreling, Fretting, or other Sinful Improvements of his Trouble, and
as it is, Eccles. 5.1. He may do all this, and not consider that he is doing
evil he is quite out, and knows not of it; and ye have an Idea of that Man that
is not in Reflection on his Case and Carriage under it in Trouble, Jer. 8.9. I
hearkened and heard, but they spoke not aright; no man repented him of his
wickedness, saying, what have I done? every one turns to his course, as the
horse rusheth into battle. He goes Hand over Head, like a wild Horse in his
Course, why? he Reflects not upon his Carriage under Trouble.

Not to dip on this, let me in short from it recommend Self-Examination to you,
especially in Trouble, if ye would haunt it in ordinary, it would be more easy
to you in a Distress; if ye be in ordinar reflecting upon your Weaknesses, and
examining your Wants, upon your Predominants, your Temptations, what are your
Suits that are most binding on you? and your Success? ye will the more readily
(as we use to speak) hit the Nail upon the Head, when ye come to Pray. And
these your Prayers that come from Self-Examination, though they be less busked,
they will be to better purpose, than when a Man with all the Oratory he can
reach, vents his Gift in in Prayer; and particularly look what ye are doing as
to this Duty, when ye come in any Distress, I gave you before some Scriptures
that speaks to them that neglect Prayer in Trouble. Now let me mind you of some
words, whereby to try your Self Examination in Trouble, one is Lev. 26.41. if
then their uncircumcised hearts be humbled, and they then accept of the
punishment of their iniquity; that were a blessed reflection that did produce
this effect; but on the contrary, look that your reflection be not like that,
Jer. 44.10. They are not humbled even unto this day. And like that Dan 9.9. All
this evil is come upon us, yet made we not our prayer unto the Lord our God,
that we might turn from our iniquities, and understand thy truth, and Ezekiel.
24.13. Because I would have purged thee, and thou was not purged, thou shall
not not be purged from thy filthiness any more, until I have caused my fury to
rest upon thee. Ye would make use of these, and the like Scriptures, in your
Reflection upon your way, and what ye are doing when ye are in the Depths. And
further when ye are Reflecting upon your Carriage under Trouble, ye had need of
tenderness of Conscience, Passion will give you a blind guess of your selves,
or of your Case or Carriage under it, when the Lord says to Jonah. 4.5. Does
thou well to be angry, Jonah? the passionate Man says, I do well to be angry,
even unto death; they that would Reflect on their Case and Carriage under
Trouble, would seek a composed frame of Spirit, and tender Conscience from God.

But to come a little nearer unto this Reflection, taking the words in the by
past time, Lord, I have cried unto thee. They will import, that God had kept
him long at that Trade, and to this purpose we have a word, Ps. 69.3. After
that he has complained in the two first Verses, that the waters are come in
into his soul, that he sinks in deep mire, where there is no standing, that he
was come into deep waters, where the floods did overflow him; he adds v. 3. I
am weary of my crying, my throat is dried, mine eyes fail while I wait for my
God, and Ps. 119.82. mine eyes fail for thy word, when will thou comfort me?
but this I may pass, because it will occurr v. 2.5. and 6. and because the
Hebrews expressed things present in the by past time, because their Verbs have
not a present time. That which I shall speak to from the words considered as a
Reflecting on his bygone wrestling, I reduce to these two.

1. That he owns it as a thing that has been, and is his Practice, to be
crying to God out of the Depths.

2. Because Folks may be ready to say, what is he the better of that? he has
not got an answer of his Prayers. I shall add this, that his Supplication out
of the Depths affords him a Testimony.

For the first, ye may take up the Note thus, that no distress, no dispensation
of providence warrands the Saints to cast all that they have been doing as
unsound: though he be put to the deeps, he owns it that he is a crier out of
the deeps unto God. Out of the deeps have I cried unto thee, O Lord. Thus the
Church owns her integrity, Psalm. 44.17. All this is come upon us, yet have we
not forgotten thee, neither have we dealt falsely in thy Covenant; Our heart is
not turned back, neither have our steps declined from thy way, though thou have
sore broken us in the place of dragons, etc. Smite us as thou will, we avow it
that we are in thy way. And Job 13.5. Though he should slay me, yet will I
trust in him, I will maintain mine own ways before him, that is, my integrity.
And Chap. 27, 5. I will not remove mine integrity from me: And so Heman, Psalm.
88, 15. Unto thee have I cried, O Lord, and in the morning shall my prayer
prevent thee; do what thou will with me, I avow it that I have been at Prayer,
and I will continue in it. It is true, men would be humble in this matter of
avowing their integrity, they would mainly be studying their wants, and
short-comings, and the iniquity of their holy things; and it is true also, that
when they are in the deeps of distress, and these trysts them with Gods seeming
not to notice them, but rather his anger smoaks against their Prayers, Psalm.
80.4. It should humble them yet more, and make them search their imperfections
in their best things; and it is also true, that the people of God in reflecting
on their Diligence and Prayers, should be far from that quarrelsome humor in
hypocrites, Isai, 58.3. Wherefore have we fasted, say they, and thou see not?
etc. As read^y the greatest Hypocrites are the greatest quarreders, when they
want success, yet all this notwithstanding, it is our duty to stick by what is
right in our way, while we are in the deeps: Men must not be baffled out of
their integrity, because they are under the Cross, and have the wind in their
teeth, they must not cast their Prayers, because God holds them in the deeps;
it is no small part of the Saints service to stick by, and to avow their
integrity, that white Robes are allowed them, though their Prayers be not
answered, Rev. 6.10, 11. And therefore they have silly spirits, who when they
meet with a torrent of Cross providence, are baffled from avowing their
integrity, and ly by, and dare not face the storm upon that account.

But I proceed to the 2d Observation, It may be said, what the matter of folks
owning their integrity, and crying out of the deeps, when they are not heard,
but ly in the deeps for all that? I Answer in the second Note. That what ever
be the seeming success of the Saints in the deeps, their supplications out of
the deeps affords them a testimony. It Is good news that the Psalmist dare own
this, Lord, thou have cast me in the deeps, but I have cried to thee out of the
deeps; It Is a good Cordial to Heman, while he is in the deeps, Psalm. 88.13. But
unto thee have I cried, O Lord, and in the morning shall my prayer prevent
thee, Lord, why casts thou off my soul? etc. And if ye ask what riches can be
in this testimony, that we have cried, and continue crying out of the deeps? I
shall pass it with the time in three words; 1. It Is a token of a blessed and
sanctified trouble, when folks are led to God by trouble, that is better than
many out-gates, they are blessed whom when God chastens, he teaches out of his
Law, Psalm. 94.12. And the first Lesson God teaches them, when he puts them in
trouble, is to go to himself with the trouble. It is a remarkable word that
Sampson's Mother had. Judge. 13.23. If the Lord were pleased to kill us, he
would not have received a burnt-offering; so many such folk say, if God had a
mind to destroy them, he would not turn them in to himself in their trouble.
There is more of the love of God inclining thy heart to cry to him out of the
deeps, than in many outgates, there is a rich blessing in it, 2. This testimony
is rich, because it warrands a man having done his duty, to cast his burden on
God and in nothing to be anxious. It Is no wonder a man be crushed with his
trouble before he go to God with i^, but when he goes to him, he has a warrant
to cast all his cares and fears on him, he has Hannah's allowance, 1 Samuel
1.18. Who being a woman of a sorrowful spirit, went and poured out her heart
before the Lord in his bosom, and left her anxiety on God, and came away with
her countenance no more sad. This is a practice that few of us attain unto, we
seem to carry our cares to God in Prayer, but we bring them back with
discouragement, rather augmented than diminished. 3. This testimony is rich,
because it assures the Supplicant, whatever be his present success, (whereof if
the Lord will, we may speak a word in the Afternoon) that he shall come speed,
crying out of the deeps, shall be heard; for Psalm. 9.18. The needy shall not
always be forgotten, the expectation of the poor shall not perish for ever.
Israel might think God had forgotten them, when they were so long in the deeps
in Egypt, and sighed and cried to him, by reason of their bondage, but at
length God heard their groaning, and remembered his Covenant with Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob, Exodus 2.24. And ye know that word, Isai. 45.19. I have not said to
the seed of Jacob, seek ye me in vain. He never said it in any age, and he will
not begin at us.

Take this word of Use from it, labor to have this Testimony, to be crying out
of the deeps, so as ye may avow and own it; and to be improving it, labor to
read love and a blessing in it, to cast all your burdens on God by so doing,
and confidently to expect ye shall see the end of the Lord. In a word, labor
to find that by grace, in so doing, that trouble cannot take from you, to find
a delivery in trouble, rather than a delivery out of it, to find that which is
of more worth, than many deliveries, and infinitely of more worth than any
delivery can be without it.

SERMON IV.
Psalm 130. Verse. 2. Lord, hear my voice; let thine ears be attentive to the
voice of my supplications.

3. If thou, LORD, should mark iniquities: O LORD, who shall stand?

4. But there is forgivenness with thee: that thou may be feared.


FROM the first Branch of the Psalmist's wrestling and exercise, I have spoken
to these these three, 1. To the deeps, wherewith he was put to wrestle. 2. To
his cries whereby he wrestles with these deeps. 3. To his reflecting upon this
his practice, and avowing it before God, as that which afforded him a
testimony, that out of the deeps he had cried unto God.

Now there remains the prosecution of this wrestling, and his pleading for
audience, in a new and doubled suit, verse. 2. Lord, hear my voice, etc. While
he pleads for the hearing of his voice; the meaning is not, that the voice is
all that should be given to God; I confess we should give him the voice when we
can give him no more, and lament that we have no more to give him but the
voice; but the voice that the Psalmist would have heard here, is the voice of
his crying out of the deeps, the voice of his most fervent and earnest
supplication, ye see the expressions here are doubled (as frequently in the
Book of Psalms) to evidence, how earnest he was in this suit, that he is not
complementing with God, when he is seeking access and audience to his Prayers.
The expressions also are Metaphorical, and borrowed from the carriage of a
Parent to a Child, and upon the matter his suit is this, Lord, notice me when I
pray, as the Parent will notice the distressed Child's cry when he is like to
ruin, and let thine ears be attentive to the voice of my supplications, that
goes a little further; that as a Parent knowing a Child to be in hazard, he
will listen and hearken attentively if he can hear him cry and notice and
ponder that cry, and what he cries for; so he pleads with God, that he would be
waiting on and attentive, to see and hear if a cry should come from him, and
that he would affectionatly ponder and notice it when he hears it: For this
hearing of Prayer, it has so frequently occurred before, that I shall pass it,
and the whole Verse in three words, that I may come to other things in the
Psalm, which I mainly designed to speak unto, when I broke in upon it.

The first thing that ye shall mark here is, that Sanctified affliction not
only puts the Saints to Prayer, but also that they cannot rest upon the work
wrought of Prayer, but they must have an answer to their Prayer; I have cried
out of the deeps unto thee, O Lord, Lord, hear my voice; he must be heard. The
sensible man, when God blesses the distress he is in, to put him to Prayer, he
does not rest there, but presses for a hearing, for an answer to his Prayer;
and two things evidence the truth of this, one is, a sensible man in trouble
will find it hard to be out of speaking terms with God, hard to have any thing
of Readiness case in his lot, that when he sought God in his distress, he would
not answer him, neither by dreams, nor by Vrim, nor by Prophets, 1 Samuel 28.6.
When folk come into trouble, if they have any sense or feeling of their
condition, they will know of what worth an intercourse with Heaven is, and what
it is to have a door open to them from thence, when all doors are shut upon
them from earth, and therefore they cannot rest on Prayer, but will press for
audience. Another is, That as it will be hard with sensible Saints to be denied
audience, so they need and prize the thing they seek: It Is not for a fashion,
or for a complement, or for a trifle, that they cry out of the deeps; but their
life (if I may so word it) is lying in pledge of what they would be at; there
is nothing betwixt them and ruin, but the answer of their Prayers, and
therefore they cannot rest without it.

For Use, It leaves a sad conviction on them, who if they come the length to
worship God, and pray to him, their task is done, they have prayed, and that is
enough; I confess, by Prayer and Supplications, folks may cast many events over
upon God, but yet they would bide at Prayer, till they get an account of that
which they are seeking, Psalm. 5.3. My voice shall thou hear in the morning, O
Lord, (says David) in the morning will I direct my prayer unto thee, and will
look up. It Is an evidence that folks have little pressed upon their hearts the
necessity of that they are seeking, when they look not up for an answer. And
hence also they have evidence, that (as it is 2 Timothy 2.19.) Though they name
the name of Christ, it is not their care to depart from their iniquity, that
they may not bring a reproach upon Prayer, nor obstruct the success of their
Prayer with God; this is the great fault of formal Professors, they will keep
up a form or fashion of Prayer, but they little know, or labor to know what it
is to Trafficque with Heaven by their Prayer.

But a second word shall be this, that Supplicants in distress may be exercised
with delaying of the answers of their Prayers; I have cried out of the deeps
unto thee, O Lord, but he dare not say, that God has heard him. Therefore he
is put to pray over again, Lord, hear my voice, The sense of non-acceptation
may haunt a Supplicant, and he may find the thing that he is seeking is not
granted; yea, Supplicants may not only be exercised with delays, and seeming
denyals, as Job was, Chap. 30.20. I cry unto thee, and thou do not hear me, I
stand up, and thou regardest me not. And Lam. 3.44. The Church complains, Thou
have covered thy self with a cloud, that our prayers should not pass through.
Not only I say, may Supplicants be exercised with delays and seeming denyals,
but with very sad dispensations on the back of their Prayers, Psalm. 80.4. O
Lord God of Hosts, how long will thou be angry? or will thou smoke against the
Prayers of thy people? They may have smoking wrath meeting their prayers, and
that for a long time, in stead of a comfortable answer, which is sad at all
times, but especially in trouble. For clearing what folk should make of this, I
shall only name some things that I spoke more largely to at another occasion.
1. Though the Psalmist has a testimony that he is crying indeed to God, when
yet he is not heard, we should look when we are not heard, that there be
nothing wrong in the supplication, Mat. 20.22. Christ says to some, Ye know
not what ye ask: And Mat. 17. when Peter roved upon the Mount, it was so with
him. There may be a defect in the matter, manner, or end of the supplication.
James (4.3.) says, Ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask amiss, to consume it
upon your lusts. 2. When our supplications are not answered, we would look that
there be not something wrong in the Supplicant; folks may be praying when there
is standing unrepented of guilt, that meets them in a strait, (as I may hint on
the following Verse) there may be some controversy, that God has with the
person, which till it be done away, he will not hear needy and pressing suits;
and though the controversy may be done away, as to standing guilt, there may
be an habitual ill frame, which the Lord would rectify by keeping the
Supplicant at his Bar. They may in ordinary be formal and carnal, and have an
edge in trouble, and he will not let them stick there, and therefore will keep
them at the back of the door, till they learn to walk with God in ordinary. And
3ly. when the Supplication is right, and Supplicants in a right frame, there
would be the exercise of Faith, that God will not deny every suit that he does
not answer, or delays to answer. The exercise of Faith, that he is but trying
us, if we will go to another door, when he delays to answer; yea, this is the
exercise of Faith, to believe that many suits are not unanswered, which we
think are not answered: God answers the suits of Supplicants, when he accepts
and approves of them, Psalm. 10.17. Though he grant not the thing they seek, he
answers, when He strengthens the Supplicant with strength in his soul, Psalm.
138.3. And there are answers of Faith, which should be read from the Word, and
made use of. I have the more briefly passed from this, that this purpose
occurred before on another Text, and from it take two brief words, and I shall
leave it. One is, That Supplicants crying to God in distress, and not coming
speed, they would be invited to the reflection that I spoke to in the forenoon,
to see how all is, that there be nothing wrong in the Supplication, nor in the
Supplicant, that there be no action of guilt, no controversy that must be
removed, before a comfortable answer come; that should be a searching Lot, when
the Bill of the needy Supplicant is lying at the Footstool, without an answer.
And another is, if even Supplicants may be humbled and exercised with delays,
ere they get an answer to their Prayers, what will become of them that pray
none at all? If this be done in the green tree, what will become of the dry?
(as Christ says, speaking of his sufferings, compared with the calamity that
was to come upon the Jews.)

But I proceed to a third word, and that is to clear what it is that God
requires of needy and honest Supplicants, when they are put to cry, and cry
again in Prayer, for an answer, and it is not given. Beside what I spoke before
of reflection, I shall shortly from the Text point at three things to be done,
or that God calls for. And 1. In this case, the Lord is calling folk to pray
on, I have called to thee, O Lord, there is Prayer, Lord, hear my voice, there
is a new Prayer; Let thine ears be attentive to my supplications, there is a
third suit: Although thy belly should cleave to the earth while thou lies in
the dust, thou must continue in supplication, although thine eyes should fail
in waiting for God, and his salvation, yet pray on, there is nothing formidable
in a Supplicants condition, so long as he is not driven from Gods Footstool,
but he prays on. 2. Another direction is, that repulses or delays should
promove humility in Supplications, and Supplicants. It Is here supplications
that he puts up, when he pleads for audience: Now the poor uses supplications,
supplications are the Beggars, are the Dyvours Language; many Supplicants when
they have cried long, and are not heard, may be in peril to fret, to quarrel,
to repine, to bark; but that is a wrong method to come speed with God in Prayer,
thou ought to be the more humble, the longer thou art delayed, thou ought to
creep the nearer the dust, and come in among the poor that speak supplications.
And a third direction shall be from the Phrase and Metaphor in the Text, as I
explained it in the entry, that is, that there be a believing, that the Lord
has an affectionat ear to listen unto, and hear the cry of humble Supplicants.
This is imported in the very terms of the Prayer put up to God, as an
affectionat Parent, ready to notice the cry of his Child, when he is in hazard,
and cries for help; and this is a needful direction, when the Supplicant is held
at the door, that beside diligence and humility, he entertain Faith, that bods
well of God; Faith, that when God was seeming to destroy Job, made him say,
These things have thou hid in thine heart, I know that this is with thee, Job
10.13. I know thou have a kindness for Job, though thou appear terrible to me;
so must Faith reckon, when answers to Prayer are delayed. I know he will do me
good, though I seem not to be noticed.

Now I come to the third and fourth Verses, wherein we have the second Branch
of the Psalmist's wrestling, and that is a wrestling with guilt, that might
hinder audience, and to give you a general view of these two Verses, ye shall
take this Branch of his wrestling in these three: 1. Ye have a very sensible
and humble acknowledgment of the desert of sin, in the most godly, verse. 3. If
thou, Lord, should mark iniquity, O Lord, who should stand? That is, iniquities
are so heinous a thing, that if thou will mark them as a severe Judge, and
according to the Covenant of Works proceed with men, none would be justified.

2. Ye have the Psalmist's relief being thus humbled, in Gods pardoning mercy,
on which he lays hold, in the beginning of the 4. verse. But there is
forgivenness with thee, --

3. This pardoning mercy in God, is amplified from the end he has before him
in letting it forth, That thou may be feared, that is, not only in general,
because thou art a merciful and pardoning God in Christ, men have access to
worship and serve thee, who otherwise art a consuming fire; but in particular,
thy pardoning mercy will excite men to fear and worship, so good a God that
freely pardons iniquity, under the weight and burden of which they could not
stand.

For the first of these, his sensible and humble acknowledgment of the desert
of sin in the most godly, I may touch it the more cursorily now, because it
will fall in, when afterward I come to speak of the right way of applying
pardoning mercy, where I shall take a view of this Verse, as it points out the
right method of obtaining pardon, and the qualification of the pardoned sinner,
calling upon God in trouble; what I would say now upon it, ye shall take up in
these three.

1. Ye have the sense of sin and guilt, joined with the sense of trouble. 2. Ye
have the sense of guilt meeting a godly man in the teeth, when he is sent to
God by Prayer in trouble. 3. Ye have guilt meeting him with a terrible Aspect,
that if God marked it, he nor none is able to stand.
For the first, I shall give it to you in this brief Observation, That in right
exercise, the sense of sin and guilt should go along with the sense of distress
and trouble; the Psalmist rests not on his being sensible, that he was in the
deeps, but he is also lying under the sense of sin and guilt; a man that has
the mere sense of trouble without the sense of sin, he is no more than a beast
that will feel a smart, and so it is a brutish thing to be houling under the
sense of trouble, without the sense of sin, Hos. 7.14. They have not cried unto
me with their heart, when they houled upon their beds. They houled for their
trouble, but they called not sincerely unto me. And verse. 16. They return, but
not to the most high, they are like a deceitful bow: And hence Micah (6.9.)
The Lords voice calls unto the City, hear ye the rod, and who has appointed
it: There must be a hearing of the Appointer of the Rod, as well as the Rod it
self. To evince the truth of this point, I shall shortly hint at some
consequences that readily follows the sense of trouble, without the sense of
sin: Not to stand upon this that readily they choice a new sin to an outgate,
Job 26.1. This have thou chosen rather than affliction. I shall name these
three: 1. Where the sense of trouble is without the sense of sin, folks expects
to win soon out of it; There are readily a world of conceity folk, that think
they will win soon and easily out of their trouble; Judah found the weight of
trouble, but not the weight of sin, and when they were going to captivity, they
were filled with dreams of outgate, Jer. 12.4. They said, he shall not see our
last end. And Jer. 2.25. They said, because I am innocent, surely his anger
shall turn from me. And when they were brought very low, that delusion did not
leave them, Ezekiel. 11.15. They say, Get ye far from the Lord, unto us is the
land given in possession. And Ezekiel. 33.24. These of them that did inhabit the
wastes, said, Abraham was one, and he inherited the land, but we are many, the
land is given us for inheritance. Whence it is clear, that deluded confidence,
is one of the woeful fruits of the sense of trouble, without sense of sin.

A 2d is, woeful bitterness, and carnal distempers of Spirit, if not when the
trouble comes on, because they trust to be soon delivered from it, yet when it
continues long, How find ye that people? Jer. 5.19. and the parallel places,
who are brought in, saying, Wherefore has the Lord our God done all these
things unto us? What Is our iniquity? And what is our sin? And Isa. 51, 20. Ye
may take up the temper of such a people, Thy sons have fainted, they ly at the
head of all the streets, as a wild bull in a net; they are full of the fury of
the Lord, the rebuke of thy God. Ye will not tame a wild Beast, by putting him
in a Net, but mad him the more; and so are they who continue long under the
sense of trouble, without the sense of sin.

And a 3d Consequence is, a woeful issue, when ever delivery out of trouble
comes to folk in such a posture; and I find in this issue these two to concur,
one is, their hungry starved lusts, meeting with mercies, do surfeit upon them;
as the peilled Jews, when they came from the Captivity, and had not quit their
covetousness, they no sooner came back, but they eat up one another: And
another is, when such folk are delivered out of the strait wherein they were,
their delivery ordinarily has the plague of God with it, Psalm. 78.29, etc.
When that people cried for flesh, He rained flesh upon them as dust, and
feathered fowl as the sand of the sea; they were filled, he gave them their
desire; but while the meat was yet in their mouths, the wrath of God came upon
them, and slew the fattest of them, and smote down the chosen men of Israel.
This in short would put folk to it in shoring times, to see what they are most
affected with, whether with trouble, or with sin? If ye be going with your
hands on your loins, what ails you? What affects you most? Sin or trouble?
Provocation, or trouble, the fruit of your provocation? Mark it, there is much
exercise in sad times, when it is not about sin, and the fruit of that exercise
will be found wind, Isa. 26.18. We have been with child, we have been in pain,
we have as it were brought forth wind. Sense of sin over-weighing sense of
trouble, were a blessed mean to cure our trouble, Isa. 27.9. By this therefore
shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit to take away
his sin; when he makes all the stones of the Altar as Chalk stones, that are
beaten asunder, the Groves and Images shall not stand up.

But the 2d Note I proposed to be spoken to was, That sense of guilt meets him
in the teeth, when he comes to God; The Observation is, that guilt will readily
meet the people of God, in their approaches to him under trouble: when he is
crying to God out of the deeps, and is earnest for audience, God's marking of
iniquity stares him in the face, to put some stop and demurr to his access and
audience, and the issue he would have been at.

If time would suffer, I would deduce this point in these four. 1. A tender
soul is known by many heart-smitings for sin, which David was well acquaint
with in the Wilderness, when he cut off the lap of Saul's garment, 1 Samuel 24.5.
A very innocent thing to vindicat his own integrity, yet his heart smote him; a
heart-smiting for sin was no dainty to him then; I confess, when men are at
ease, and are not in a tender frame, they may give way to gross sins, and their
heart not smite them. What a temper is David in, when he is at ease and secure?
What a wide throat has he to swallow down Adultery, and Murder, and to betray
a part of his Army? 2 Samuel 11. The sword devours one as well as another, (says
he,) it is the fortune (as we call it) and the chance of War, let it not trouble
thee. That was not like David when he was tender; but however the general holds
true, that heart-smiting from sense of sin is a most infallible sign and
evidence of tenderness and nearness to God. O but the skin of a Conscience near
God is thin! A little thing will draw blood of it: And as upon the one hand, ye
would try your nearness to God by this, so upon the other hand, ye would look
upon it as poor gallantry to digest sin, without a heart smiting you for it.
There is a generation of men, who are called strong spirits, gallant men, and
wherein does their strength of spirit, and gallantry ly? In contemning the Law
of God, in treading upon his Authority, in defying God, they can commit all
wickedness, and sleep in a sound skin, and never be troubled with it; these are
our Gallants, but the day will come, when that will be found poor gallantry,
and that he is the brave spirit, that knows what heart-smiting for sin is, and
has tenderness in his walk.

There is in the 2d place this in particular, that when Saints go to God, then
their guilt readily meets them, although they have little sense of guilt in
ordinary, yet when they approach to God in earnest, their sin will muster up
before them.

3. Although in ordinary Addresses, they may be little sensible of sin, yet
when a strait comes, and they are sent to God, then their sin will find them
out, though they can walk in ordinary, and be little troubled with guilt, yet
in a distress it cross-necks them.

And 4ly, Although wicked men do not readily meet with guilt, because they are
plagued with stupidity, yet their guilt will meet with them, and they shall
find it marked by God, as if when they came to God in ordinary, they came to
proclaim their iniquity.

These are the Branches of the Point, which now I cannot insist on, to deduce
at large, only if ye have to do with God, and be in earnest, beware of
unrepented guilt, the longer it be in meeting with you, it will be the sadder
when you and it meet, and the longer it be that ye lay it not to heart to
repent of it, and turn from it, it will be the more sad. God bless what ye have
heard.

SERMON V.
Psalm 130. Verse. 3. If thou, LORD, should mark iniquities: O LORD, who
shall stand?


YOU have heard that the Psalmist being wrestling by Prayer, with the
difficulties and plunging perplexities that were in his case, verse. 1, 2. Does
here come to wrestle more particularly with guilt, which might stop his
audience and success; and (as ye heard) he does 1. make a sensible confession
of the misdeserving of sin, that if God should mark it as a severe Judge, none
should be justified; none should be able to stand. 2. Ye have his relief and
refuge, being thus humbled in the pardoning mercy of God, upon which he lays
hold in the beginning of the 4. Verse; But there is forgivenness with thee. And
3ly. (as ye heard) in the end of verse. 4. This pardoning mercy of God is
amplified from his end and design, in letting it forth, That thou may be
feared. There is forgivenness with him, that sinners may draw near him, who in
himself is a consuming fire, and that pardoned sinners may be excited to fear
and worship so good a God, that freely pardons sin.

From the first of these, I spoke to a general Note, That the sense of trouble,
and the exercise about it, should be attended with the sense of sin, and
exercise about sin; for the Psalmist here is exercised and taken up with both;
while he is crying out of the deeps, he is lying under the sense of sin. I
confirmed this, and marked some sad consequences that followed sense of
trouble, without sense of sin. I hinted also at a second general Observation
but was cut short by the time, in speaking to it, that is, That godly men will
very readily find guilt meeting them, when they are sent to God in trouble; for
when the Psalmist here is made to cry to God out of the deeps, iniquities
interpose and stare him in the face: This Point I did deduce in these four,
three of which I could only name, and therefore shall now briefly resume that
purpose.

1. That it is the duty of godly persons, and their Character, to be acquainted
with heart-smitings for sin; what ever David was while at ease, and in
prosperity, in digesting Adultery and Murder, yet when he is in trouble, and in
the Wilderness, and cut off the lap of Readiness Garment, his heart smote him.
Frequent heart-smitings for sin, is a great evidence of nearness to God, and
it is a pitiful and woeful Gallantry, to go on in sin, and digest sin without
resentment.

2. The second Branch of the Note was this, That whatever tenderness and
smiting of heart for sin, the Saints have in ordinary, yet readily it will meet
them, when they come to Ordinances and Duties of Worship, especially to be
serious with God in Prayer; for here when the Psalmist is at Prayer, guilt
steps in, sin Musters, and God's marking of iniquity signified much to him; a
tender heart when it is in the view of God, and has its eye upon him, should,
and will be most observant of its failings. David dare not think of coming to
God, till he see what account he gets of doing away his guilt. Psalm. 16.6, 7. I
will wash my hands in innocence, so will I compass thine Altar, O Lord, etc.
Because guilt will offer to obstruct audience and success, in what the
Supplicant would be at. 1 Samuel 14.36, etc. When Saul would consult God about
going down after the Philistines, there is a fault found committed, Jonathan
had tasted of the Honey, and the guilt meets him, he was not answered: And to
say no more of this, I shall only mark two words from it, and proceed. One is,
That it should and will be a motive to a tender walker to walk tenderly,
circumspectly, and accuratly, when he considers, that he has God to go unto,
he will think with himself, how circumspectly ought I to walk through the day,
that have God to go to at night? How can I, or dare I loose Reins to this or
that, and offer to bow a knee to God? Will not my untenderness in this or that
step of my way, stare me in the face, when I look God in the face? If folks
knew what it were to have Communion with God, and what influence sin has to
obstruct it, they behoved either to quite their Prayers, or study a more tender
and holy walk. Another word shall be this, if there be any of a loose and
untender walk, slipping Buckles through the day, and they hear no news of it;
at their Prayers, their guilt does not interpose, and raise a Cloud betwixt God
and them; such persons would look to it, that there be not a lie in their right
hand, that they be not under a delusion, and feeding upon ashes; if they were
tender, they would no sooner go to God, but they would say, I remember my
faults this day, I have sinned, and now my guilt stares me in the face.

But the 3d Branch of the Doctrine is, That what ever be Saints tenderness in
ordinary, or whatever ills they may digest in ease, a great distress or
trouble, will readily bring guilt to mind, and obstruct their access, when they
are sent to God, when they are made to cry out of the deeps, God's marking of
iniquity will say something to them. For distress take notice of that place,
Genesis 42.21, etc. where ye have the History of Joseph's Brethren, taking with
their guilt; it was upwards of twenty years since they sold him, but when they
come in distress, it is as recent as if it had been just now committed: They
said one to another, we are verily guilty concerning our brother, in that we
saw the anguish of his soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear,
therefore is this distress come upon us. Folks would have thought that upwards
of 20 years guilt, might have been buried; and no doubt the men in that time
had prayed often, but in a distress it is recent. And for going to God in
trouble, we have an instance of guilt meeting folk, Judge. 10.10. where the
people in trouble come and cry unto God, and take with their sin; But what
answer get they? I delivered you (says the Lord) from such and such enemies,
when ye cried unto me, but ye have forsaken me, and served other gods,
wherefore I will deliver you no more, go and cry unto the gods which ye have
chosen, let them deliver you in the time of your trouble. Mark also that word
of Moses speaking to the two Tribes and the half Tribe, Numb. 32.33. when he
feared they might cheat their brethren, and desert them, he tells them, If they
should do so, they should sin against the Lord. There is news (might some stout
stomachs among them say) but he adds, and be sure your sin will find you out. A
man may use many ways to shift guilt, but it will not do with him, his sin will
find him out. Ponder that word, Psalm. 49.5. Wherefore should I fear in the days
of evil, when the iniquity of my heels shall compass me about. Iniquity is like
a Sloth Hound, that rambles here and there, following the scent of the Prey,
and an ignorant spectator wonders what he means, but he follows the Prey, and
will not give over till he find it; sin unrepented of will sooner or later
meet, and the longer they be of meeting, it will be to the sinners greater
disadvantage. May I add further, when sin meets the sinner in trouble, an
infirmity will pass for an iniquity, (as here the Psalmist calls sin) and will
not seem so small, as when it was committed, or before the trouble came on; yea
further, pardoned guilt that seemed to be buried, and done away, these green
Graves may open, and that guilt may waken upon new emergents. Hence Job 13.26.
says, Thou writest bitter things against me, and make me to possess the
iniquities of my youth. And Psalm. 25.7. David prays, Remember not the sins of
my youth, nor my transgressions. Therefore ye that meet not with sin in
ordinary, see what ye can do to hold off trouble, and sins meeting you in
trouble; ye now can go on in sin, and have your diversions to put away the
thoughts of it, and live strangers to your selves, and your own condition; but
trouble will cross-neck you, and ye will find (as the word is Genesis 4.7.) That
sin is lying at the door, and will meet you.

But I shall add a fourth Branch of the Doctrine, and then come to the main
Doctrine which lies before my hand. I have spoken of guilts meeting with the
godly; Now what shall be said of guilts meeting with wicked men? I shall say
two words to this, and leave the Note. One is, let a wicked man live never so
long without minding his guilt, let him have Ordinances, and keep up a form of
Worship; This is to be adverted to, that the wicked man never comes into God's
presence to worship or pray to him, but his iniquity is marked, as if he had
made a Proclamation of his sin. Ponder that Process, Isa. 1.15. and the
foregoing Verses, Bring no more vain oblations (says the Lord) incense is an
abomination to me, the new Moons and Sabbaths, and calling of assemblies, I
cannot away with, it is iniquity, even the solemn meeting; your new Moons, and
your appointed feasts, my soul hates: and when ye spread forth your hands, I
will hide mine eyes from you; yea, when ye make many prayers, I will not hear;
your hands are full of blood. Thou that dare come before God, without the sense
of thy guilt, God may look upon thee as proclaiming thy guilt. And another word
to the wicked shall be this, that, when ever a day of distress and trouble
meets them, though all of them will not be honored with repentance, and
pardoning mercy, they shall find, that they have made a very sad bargain. Take
it in that word, Jer. 2.19. Thy own wickedness shall correct thee, and thy
backslidings shall reprove thee; know therefore and see, that it is an evil
thing and bitter, that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God, and that my fear is
not in thee.

But I leave this Note, and come to the third Observation, that is, that when
Guilt and Conscience meets, sin will be otherways looked upon, than men
ordinarily do; or if ye will have it more distinctly, take it thus; That the
right sense of sin, will lead the sensible man to see that in sin, that none,
even the most Godly can stand before God, if God deal with them in strict
Justice, according to the Covenant of Works. That is the very marrow of this
Verse, If thou, Lord, should mark iniquity, O Lord, who should stand? No man,
no not a godly man, nor any other can stand. And although I may (if the Lord
will) have this purpose to resume when I come to speak of pardon, and the
application of pardon from the next Verse following; yet this being an
important truth, a verity of great weight, ye will bear with me, though I dip a
little more in it than is my ordinary: What I would say on it, I shall from the
Text deduce to you in six particulars, which I hope shall give a hint of what
at the first view is more material in the words.

And 1. Take notice of something supposed here, that is, God's marking of
iniquity, If thou, Lord, should mark iniquity, where he makes a supposition
of God's marking iniquity; not that any Question or doubt is to be made of Gods
Omniscience, that he sees and knows all things, and particularly men's sins, he
has an exact knowledge of them all, as when one marks things most narrowly;
Neither is there any supposition or question to be made of Gods seeing of sin
in the godly, so as to be displeased at it. Antinomians would be at this, they
would have no sin seen in them, but the scope of this Psalm evinces the
contrary: God notices the godly man's sin as well as others, till he flee to
pardoning mercy through a Mediator; And David, though a godly man, acknowledges
this, Psalm. 51.4. Against thee, thee only, have I sinned, and done this evil in
thy sight. But the meaning of this, the Lord's marking of iniquity, may be
taken from the parallel place, Psalm. 143.2. where it is thus expressed, Enter
not into Judgment with thy servant; That Is the marking of iniquity spoken of,
or supponed in the Text; and in short, the importance of the Phrase is, Gods
marking of sin according to the Covenant of Works, and in the rules of strict
Justice, and without looking on the sinner as in a Surety. In this respect,
Gods marking of iniquity being accompanied with absolute holiness, perfect
purity, and justice, he cannot away with it, nor with the sinner because of it,
as Psalm. 5.4, 5. Thou art not a God that have pleasure in wickedness, neither
shall evil dwell with thee. The foolish shall not stand in thy sight, thou
hate all workers of iniquity. And Hab. 1.13. Thou art of purer eyes than to
behold evil, and can not look on iniquity. God thus marking iniquity
according to the rules of strict Justice, and without looking on the sinner as
in a Cautioner, cannot away with it, and consequently will punish it, Job
11.11. He sees wickedness, also will he not consider it? In order to
punishment, for so that Phrase is Expounded, Psalm. 10.14. Thou have seen it,
for thou beholdest mischief and spite, to requite it with thine hand. And it is
Jehu's remark of Ahab, 2 King. 9.26. Surely I have seen yesterday the blood of
Naboth, and the blood of his sons, (says the Lord) and I will requite thee in
this plat, says the Lord. The marking of iniquity this way, is to men
dreadful, and ye will find in Scripture, that it is a dreadful sight of trouble
that some gets, when it represents God thus as marking sin, to pursue and
punish it, as in that poor widow, 1 King. 17.18. O thou man of God (says she
to the Prophet) art thou come unto me to call my sin to remembrance, and to
slay my Son? That was a sad sight of trouble, and of sin in trouble; and Moses
in that tragical business in the Wilderness, when calamities are falling thick
upon that people, it is a sad sight of them that he gets, when they speak, Gods
marking of sin, Psalm. 90 8. Thou have set our iniquities before thee, our
secret sins in the light of thy countenance. Thy inflicting of calamity tells
us, that thou art marking iniquity. So much for the first thing supposed here,
God's marking iniquity.

2. Consider, here somewhat proposed. That if God mark iniquity as a severe
Judge, according to the strict rules of Justice, to punish it, and accordingly
do punish it, the guilty man cannot stand before him. This Phrase is equivalent
to that Phrase in the parallel place, Psalm. 143.2. If God enter into judgment
with men, no man living can be justified in his sight. And a sinners inability
to stand before God, is a Phrase frequently made use of, to point out the
dreadful desert of sin, as Psalm. 5.5. The foolish shall not stand in thy sight.
Ezra 9.15. We are before thee in our trespasses, for we cannot stand before
thee, because of this. Psalm. 1.5. The ungodly shall not stand in the judgment,
nor sinners in the congregation of the righteous. And Psalm. 76.7. Thou even
thou art to be feared, and who may stand in thy sight, when once thou art
angry. Rev. 6.16, 17. The great day of the Lambs wrath is come, and who is able
to stand? And to this also that Phrase may allude, which the men of Bethshemesh
have, when so many are stricken dead, for their curious looking into the Ark, 1 Samuel 6.20. Who is able to stand before this holy Lord God?

But that I may explain this a little more distinctly, I shall take it up with
an eye to humane Judgments, or Courts among men in these four.

1. Whereas a man when he is to compear before a Court, he may stand in
Judgment, and be rectus in curia, (as we use to speak) Why? He is able to plead
innocent, and he may come off being found so: but here, a man in whom is
iniquity, cannot stand. The sinner cannot plead sinless, as it is, Job 9.2, 3.
I know it is so of a truth, but how should man be just with God? If he will
contend with him, he cannot answer him one of a thousand. There is no pleading
sinless before his Bar. And in particular, this is to be applied to secret
sins; there is no concealing of the most secret sins, when God marks them. Pro.
30.20. The way of the adulterous woman is such, that she eats, and wipeth her
mouth, and says, I have done no wickedness; but God noticeth it. Gehazi abuses
his Masters name, and goes to Fish from Naaman Silver and Raiment, and comes
and stands before his Master, and says, He went no whither; but says Elisha,
Went not my heart with thee, when the man turned again from his Chariot to meet
thee? 2 King. 5.22, etc. Men may convey their sins very closely, and hide their
contrivances from men, but they consider not they have an Omniscient God for
their Party, whose Spirit is infinitely above the spirit of Elisha, to follow
them in all their secret pranks. And that is it, that Moses lays to heart, Psalm.
90.8. Thou have set our sins before thee, our secret sins in the light of thy
countenance.

2. In humane Courts, when a man is made present, though he cannot stand to
plead himself innocent, or free of the Debt he is charged with, yet he may
stand, because he is able to pay the Debt, though the Sentence pass against
him; but so cannot a man stand before God, when he shall mark iniquity, for he
has nothing to satisfy Justice for his fault, and hence the man sensible of
sin, will not look upon the debt of sin as a trifling matter, as a matter to be
dallied with. Those Questions Act. 16.30. What must I do to be saved? Act.
2.37. What shall we do? Job 7.20. I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee, O
thou preserver of men? They import, that the confession of guilt will not be a
sufficient exoneration in the sensible man's account. They import also, that it
is a concerning Case or Question, how to be rid of guilt? And further they
import, a submitting to any terms that can be exacted, if they be in the
sinners power to perform; And here I confess, Hypocrites when they are told of
their fault, will offer to make a mends, Mic. 6.6, 7. Wherewith shall I come
before the Lord, and how my self before the high God? Shall I come before him
with burnt-offerings? with calves of a year old? Will the Lord be pleased with
thousands of rams? or ten thousand rivers of oil? (more than he could have
offered, though it had been accepted) Shall I give my firstborn for my
transgression? the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul? O! but the sensible
man will find, that he can make no mends. That there is no Fend against guilt,
but Pardon, Job 7.20. I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee, O thou
preserver of men? And why do thou not pardon my transgression, and take away
mine iniquity.

3. In humane Courts, when a man is made present, though he be Sentenced for a
Debt he is unable to pay, or judged guilty of a Crime, he can undergo the
punishment resolutely, and in that respect he may stand in Judgment; but here
the sinner cannot stand before God marking iniquity, that is, under the burden
of the desert of sin, or the deserved punishment thereof, without succumbing; a
man may undergo any punishment inflicted by an humane Court, and his natural
courage may support him under all that man can inflict, but who can stand under
everlasting wrath? Who can stand before a sin-revenging God, and not succumb?
Who can endure the everlasting torments of Hell, and not be everlastingly
broken? So there is no standing for the guilty sinner before God, but he must
succumb and break.

But 4. as amongst men, any ingenuous person called for Debt, and not being
able to pay, or being looked upon as a monstrous Criminal by the Judge, it
will make him blush, that he cannot stand before the Judge with confidence: So
here, (which should be the result of the former) when sinners are sensible of
sin, and are convinced they cannot stand before God, considered as out of a
Cautioner, it may be matter of blushing and horror to them, and should be so,
when they find they cannot stand before God marking iniquity. This was the
posture of the poor Publican, who Luke 18.13. standing a far off, would not so
much as lift up his eyes to Heaven, but smote upon his breast, saying, God be
merciful to me a sinner; he had not the confidence to stand before God, but he
cried out for pardon. And this was the practice of Ezra, when he went to God in
behalf of the people, that had corrupted themselves, after Gods kindness
toward them, and correcting of them for their sins, Ezra 9.6. O my God (says
he) I am ashamed, and blush, to lift up my face to thee, O my God, for our
iniquities are increased over our head, and our trespasses are grown up to the
heaven. This, I say, should be the result of all the rest, and would be a token
for good, that God would find out the way how the sinner might stand before him
in Judgment: If a sinner being convinced he is guilty, and that he cannot
undergo the punishment, without crushing, would blush and be ashamed, if we
were delivered from our brazen Brow, and Whores Forehead, that we could not
look up to God without shame and blushing, there were hope of pardon through a
Surety.

Thus I have done with the first two, of the six particulars, I proposed to be
spoken to, for finding out what is said in the Text: There are three or four
more to be battered out, with the application of the whole, which I leave till
the Afternoon. The Lord bless what ye have been hearing.

SERMON VI.
Psalm 130. Verse. 3. If thou, LORD, should mark iniquities, O LORD, who
shall stand?


I Am (as ye may remember) from this Verse, making out a very weighty and sad
point o^ truth, that there is no standing before God, marking iniquities in
strict Justice, according to the Covenant of Works; and for finding out what is
said in this Text, for bottoming and clearing of this point, I proposed to
remark six particulars from the Text, two of which I have spoken to in the
Forenoon, to wit, that which is supponed here, that God is a marker of
iniquity, and what it imports: And secondly, that which is proposed on this
supposition, That if God should mark iniquity, as was explained, men, even the
most godly men, could not stand, where somewhat was said to the importance of
that Phrase.

Now I proceed in Explication of the Point from the Text, (for to that I
confine my self) in other four particulars; The first, and third in order shall
be this: That this assertion, that men cannot stand before God marking
iniquity, is of infallible verity, a most certain and infallible truth, it is
not a Bugbear to afright Children, but the infallible truth of God. This is
hinted at in the Text, partly in the Psalmist his proposing the matter to God,
If thou, Lord, should mark iniquity, O Lord, who shall stand? He proposes it
to God, who knows this matter better than any other, and who is Supreme Judge
in the matter, without whose determination, a Decree in our own favors will
signify nothing at all; it imports, O Lord, let men dream what they will of
their standing, thou know, that none can stand, if thou shall mark iniquity,
to punish it; and particularly, the infallible verity of this assertion, may be
gathered from the way of proposing it, and that is, by way of Question, Who
shall stand? Which Question, is a very peremptory denial of the thing
questioned, for so the like Question is resolved, Job 14.4. Who can bring a
clean thing out of an unclean? Not one. Yea, the proposing of it by way of
Question, Who shall stand? Does import a defyance to any to attempt it, or to
succeed in their attempt, and indignation at the presumption of any, that
should dream of standing before God, marking iniquity.

But in the fourth place, as this assertion is of infallible verity, so it is
of universal verity. This is held out in the Question, for the Question is, Who
shall stand? That is as the parallel Question is answered, Job 14.4. None at
all, good or bad, If thou, Lord, should mark iniquity, none should stand; for
the Psalmist here, a godly man, is taking in himself with others, as a man that
could not stand himself, without pardon. And so the Phrase is, Psalm. 143.2.
Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no man living
be justified. The best of men that are come of Adam by ordinary generation,
shall not be justified, if thou mark iniquity. Hence in Scripture it is clear,
that Saintship consists not in sinlessness, but in sincerity, for, for Original
guilt in that, Job 14.4. Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? Not
one; and for a man's endeavors after he is brought in to God, and is wrestling
with corruptions to have these purged out, says Solomon, Prove. 20.9. Who can
say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? Eccles. 7.20. There is
not a just man upon earth, that does good and sins not; but as it is, Jam.
3.2 In many things we offend all. Thus ye see that Saintship does not consist
in sinlessness, but in sincerity; neither does Saintship consist, in the Saints
their sins not deserving condemnation, or in their being able to stand, though
they have sinned, but in their sins being pardoned; hence ye will find them
sadly exercised in wrestling under the burden of guilt, upon their gross
out-breakings, as David, Psalm. 51. ye have them praying for the pardon of great
iniquity, Psalm. 25.11. For thy Names sake pardon mine iniquity, for it is
great. Ye have them pleading for mercy upon the account of innumerable evils
compassing them, and their iniquities take hold of them, and being more than
the hairs of their head, Psalm. 40.11, 12. And when they are delivered from
gross out-breakings, ye have them with Paul, Romans 7. groaning under a body of
sin and death, till they attain to a song of thanksgiving through Jesus; so that
not only does the Text hold out the infallible verity of this truth, but the
universal verity of it, that if God mark iniquity, none can stand.

The 5th thing I gather from the Text is, that the infallible and universal
verity of this assertion, that if God mark iniquity none can stand, might be
gathered and closed with, if men were eying God much; this I gather from the
Text, where the Psalmist repeats the Name of God twice, If thou, Lord, should
mark iniquity: And then again, O Lord, who, etc. Wherefore is this twice
repeated in this assertion? Certainly not by way of idle repetition, condemned
Mat. 7.21. in many that say Lord, Lord; nor merely, because the Psalmist is
affected with that which he is speaking of, for so the expression of
affections, or men's being affected with a thing, is expressed by a doubled
Exclamation, which may come in in the own place, when I speak of the pardon of
sin; but here, it is to make this truth out, that serious and frequent repeated
thoughts of God, is a mean to give folk a right sense of the desert of sin: And
to make out this, consider, partly that when we seriously think of God, we know
that he is Omniscient, to find out that which is hid from the world;
Omniscient, to find them guilty that are innocent to others; Omniscient, to
know more of us, than we know of our selves; A consideration that John would
have us marking, 1 John 3.20. If our heart condemn us, God is greater than our
heart, and knows all things. If we know so much naughtiness of our selves, by
our selves, what must God know, who knows all things? And Paul makes use of
this consideration, 1 Cor. 4.4. I know nothing by my self, (to wit in the
administration of his Office) yet I am not hereby justified, but he that
judges me is the Lord. Partly, if we will consider what is imported in the
Names of God, here made use of by the Psalmist. We will find it further clear;
the first Name JAH, is a diminutive from JEHOVAH, that imports a Supreme
Independent Being. The second name ADONAI, signifies his Dominion and
Lordship: Ponder these well, and what a dreadful sight will it afford of the
unspeakable desert of sin? A sinner in sinning rebels against a Supreme Being,
from whom he has his being. This is made a great aggravation of sin, to
Belteshazzar the greatest Monarch on earth, Dan. 5.23. Thou have lifted up thy
self against the Lord of heaven, the God in whose hands thy breath is; thou
have renounced thy dependence on him, from whom thou have thy being. Sin is
also the casting off of the Yoke of his Dominion and Lordship, it says upon the
matter, that which ye have asserted of wicked men, Psalm. 12.4. They say, with
our tongues we will prevail, our lips are our own, who is Lord over us? That Is
the Language of every sinner in sinning, and not only does the sinner by
sinning cast off the yoke of God's Dominion, but he denis his Power and
Justice, to exercise that Dominion to do him skaith; therefore when the Lord
would move men to fear him, he gives an account of his Dominion over the
Creatures, and instanceth it, in his bounding of the Sea, Jer. 5.22. Fear ye
not me? says the Lord, will ye not tremble at my presence, which have placed
the sand for the bound of the sea, by a perpetual decree, that it cannot pass
it, etc. A consideration that a sinner in sinning, minds not, or he does defy
it. Thus it is not unfitly determined that though sin be not infinitely ill in
its kind, for then no distinction should be among sins, nor an infinite ill in
its being, for then all sins should be one, or equal, and a finite Creature
cannot act that which is infinite, yet safely it may be said, that in respect
of the person against whom it is committed, it has an infinite ill in it
objectively, as being against an infinite Majesty, in Being and Dignity, and
consequently there is no standing if he mark it.

But 6ly, for further proof of this assertion, and for proof that the Saints do
so see God, as to give them a right sense and sight of the desert of sin, I
shall add this in the Text, that when the Saints are in a right frame, they are
great Students of the exceeding sinfulness and hainousness of their sin;
therefore a Saint sees that none can stand before God, marking iniquity,
because when a Saint sees God to be his Party, and is in a right frame, he
passes no sin, as insignificant or little, but he is an aggravater of his sin;
and this I gather from the name that the Psalmist gives sin in the Text, If
thou, Lord, should mark iniquities, he calls them not only many iniquities in
the Plural Number, (of which I shall not now speak) but iniquities gross in
their nature, and if thou, Lord, says he, should mark sins, as such, who could
stand? If I thought that I would not be cut short by the time, I would here
observe, that the name of Iniquity and Transgression, is frequently given to
sins of a grosser nature, not ordinary, that are contradistinguished to the
ordinary infirmities of the Saints. To these sins Deuteronomy. 32.5. of which it may
be said, They are not the spots of his children; To these sins, of which David
says, Psalm. 18.21, 23. I have not wickedly departed from my God, and I have
kept my self from mine iniquity: And of these sins which Daniel (9.5)
confesses, We have sinned, and committed iniquity, and done wickedly, and have
rebelled, even by departing from thy precepts, and from thy judgments. But yet
I find the Saints, even in speaking of their ordinary infirmities, not sparing
to give them the name of Iniquities and Transgressions, as Psalm. 65.3.
Iniquities prevail against me, O Lord, as for our transgressions thou will
purge them away: where sins get the name of iniquities, and iniquities
prevailing against Saints, and the name of transgressions, Psalm. 40.12. The
sins that were innumerable, and more than the hairs of David's head, were his
ordinary failings, yet they are said to compass him about, and are called
iniquities that had taken hold of him, so that he was not able to look up. And
if it be enquired upon what account the Saints do look on all their sins as
iniquities, and transgressions? I might observe from that Psalm. 32.5. I said, I
will confess my transgressions to the Lord, and thou forgavest the iniquity of
my sin. That every sin, as well as gross sins, has an iniquity, a perverseness
in it, that must be pardoned; but ye shall particularly take notice of these
three; 1. That the tender and sensible frame of Saints, leads them not to
extenuat, but to aggravat their sin, they dare not minch their sin; their
tender frame leads them to lay it out in all the aggravating circumstances
thereof; and it is a fruit of their tenderness so to do. And 2ly, A fight of
God, (which is here supponed in the Psalmist) is a magnifying Glass, wherein a
Saint will be made to see and look upon sin, even the least sin, as most
heinous. It made Job 42.6. to abhor himself; and Isai. 6.5. to cry out, Woe is
me, for I am undone, because I am a man of unclean lips. A sight of God will
represent a very ordinary infirmity, as very heinous to him that sees God. But
3ly, and lastly, Every sin, even the meanest infirmity in a man, it proves an
iniquity, if he think lightly of it, or thinks he may pass it lightly, without
running to the remedy of pardoning mercy; the least sin he is guilty of, will
on that account be an iniquity.

Now having taken some time to lay open this weighty Point, anent the desert of
sin, before you, That which I have said in Explication of it to you, might
easily be made Practical by you, if ye were attentive, and applying it to your
selves; yet for your help herein, I shall add somewhat for Use.

The general Use is, to entreat you, as ye love the eternal happiness of your
souls, to learn to say over this Text sensibly, with Application to your
selves. If thou, Lord, should mark iniquity, O Lord, I cannot stand. It were
a blessed part of a very lawful Liturgy, for a man once a day, to say this
over, Lord, if thou mark iniquity, I cannot stand. Let me exhort you to mind
this more, to make it your daily study to be sensible of the sinfulness of sin,
and of the dreadful desert of sin, that ye be lost folk in your own eyes; this
is a matter that is but dallied with by the most part, and so is seen on it. Ye
are such strangers to the Law, and Sinai, that the Gospel and Sion have but
little employment among you, it does not relish with you as it ought; There are
none that can say, But forgivenness is with thee, that thou may be feared;
but they that can say, If thou, Lord, should mark iniquity, who can stand?
Pardoning mercy may well get complements, it will be sweet news to none else,
but such as have seen, and are sensible of the dreadful desert of sin; nay none
other have right to the remedy of pardoning mercy.

And to help both good and bad to be more sensible, I would offer a five-fold
consideration, to drive home the truth of this assertion, That if God mark
iniquity, none can stand.

1. Will thou take a look of God, thy Party, in sinning; consider him in his
Supreme Dominion over thee, to impose what duty he pleases, and that his will
is the Law of Righteousness. Consider him in his Omniscience, to know how thou
observes these duties he enjoins, and comes up to that Law which is thy rule,
thou may cheat the world and thy self, but God thou cannot cheat; will thou
consider him further in his Holiness and Purity, abhorring sin in all, and in
thee. O how loathsome and abominable is the pollution of sin to him, a holy
Lord God? Which makes him say, Isai. 1.13. Bring no more vain oblations,
incense is an abomination unto me, the new Moons and Sabbaths, the calling of
assemblies I cannot away with, it is iniquity, even the solemn meeting. And
lastly, consider God in his Power and Justice, that if he put forth his
Dominion, to call thee to account, thou being considered in thy self, what will
the issue be but that Heb. 10.31? It is a dreadful thing to fall into the hands
of the living God, where there is not a Cautioner to interpose betwixt Justice
and thee; consider God thus, if thou would be sensible of the desert of sin.

2. When thou have taken a right look of God thy Party, in his Supreme
Dominion, Omniscience, Holiness, Purity, Power and Justice, cast up the Sum of
thy Debt, which thou art owing to this Party, and thou will be like that man,
Mat. 18.24. that was owing ten thousand Talents. Consider the Law in its
spiritual sense and meaning, and thou will find that Paul found himself guilty
upon the account of his concupiscence, before it came to the consent of the
will, and so art thou. Consider that the Law condemns evil thoughts, unripe and
indeliberat motions, and how many of these art thou guilty of? Again consider
the Gospel, what a Mass of Duties it commands, or recommends, upon the account
of Gospel-encouragements, and what a vast count or reckoning will thou find
over thine head? Sins of commission, and sins of omission; sins in the seed and
root, and sins in the fruit, against the Law, against the Gospel, in thy
particular station, and in thy general Calling. O! what a dreadful count will
there be, if a man cast up the rate of his duty, and in how many things he has
offended? There will be such a Count, that as Job says, Chap. 9.3. That if God
contend with him, he cannot answer one of a thousand. There is not one of a
thousand challenges, that a righteous man can put off, but he must say as
David, Psalm. 40.12. Innumerable evils compass me, mine iniquities have taken
hold upon me, so that I cannot look up, they are more than the hairs of my head.

But 3ly, When thou have considered thy Party, and the Debt which may be
charged upon thee, and the number of thy sins, take another look of the nature
of them, and their aggravations, from the times wherein thou have sinned, as if
they have been times of light, and it may be also thou have been sinning with
Zimri and Cozbi, when the Congregation was weeping, Number 25. When sad affliction
has been lying upon the people of God, it may be thy sin has been against as
clear light, as Absalom's sin was, when he committed incest with his fathers
concubines, upon the top of his fathers house. 2 Samuel 16.22. It may be when
thou was under punishment and judgment, for former sins, to deterr thee from
future. It may be it was when thou was surrounded with mercies, when God was
drawing thee with cords of love, with the bonds of a man, and was to thee as
they that take off the yoke from thy jaws, and laid meat unto thee, Hos. 11.4.
It may be thou have been a person much obliged to God, who have often been
refreshed with pardoning mercy, he has spoken peace to thee, upon condition
thou would not return to folly, and yet thou have returned to it. It may be
thou art one, whose example has had influence to harden many others in sin,
etc. I cannot enumerat the aggravations of sin, that Professors of the Gospel
have been, or are lying under, but when the Account is casten, it will not be
found an Account of Ciphers, or insignificant petty Nothings, but an Account of
iniquities and transgressions, very heinous and dreadful, all circumstances
being considered.

I shall (in the 4th place) when you have considered your Party, the Sum of
your Debt, the number of your sins in their nature, and aggravating
circumstances, exhort you to ponder how just God is? The truth of his
threatenings against sin, and the curse. Think on that place, Gal. 3.10. Cursed
is every one that continues not in all things that are written in the book of
the Law to do them; and it were to good purpose, that these Chapters, Deuteronomy. 28.
and Lev. 16. were more frequently read and thought upon. It were to good
purpose that we heard Moses from Mount Sinai thundering oftener, not to drive us
from Christ, but to him. It Is a woeful trick in our hearts, that leads us to
look over threatenings with a light eye. We would consider that the threatenings
will be accomplished, as well as the promises, and the least farthing of the
sinners debt will be exacted off the sinner, or off his Cautioner. Thou must
either do, or get one to do for thee, and when thou reads the threatenings,
think on the posture wherein thou stands.

And 5ly, That ye may sensibly say over this assertion, If thou, Lord, mark
iniquity, who shall stand? I recommend to you to consider the sufferings of our
blessed Lord. Consider if such things were done to the green tree, what will be
done to the dry? And there a man that has any sense of sin, will read the
dreadful desert of sin, when he considers that wrath for sin made him cry out,
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? And how his Holy Nature abhorred
that Cup, and put him to pray, that it might pass from him; and how it made him
in his agony sweat drops like blood, when thou judges of the desert of sin by
that, thou will stand then, and more sensibly think, that, thou will not be
able to stand before God marking iniquity, for if such things were done to the
green tree, when his Holy Humane Nature suffered so much, being supported by
his Divine Nature, what will be done to thee, who art a dry Tree out of him. If
God would speak home these things to your hearts, ye would Subscribe to that
Verdict Solomon has, Prove. 14.9. that they are fools that make a mock at sin,
nay that they are distracted, that are lying under the guilt of sin, and can
take rest in themselves, till they see if a remedy can be had, till they come
to that which follows in the Text, But there is forgivenness with thee, that
thou may be feared. There are some particular inferences that I intended to
have spoken to from this point, but the time being past, I quite them. Only
remember that which I have been upon, what has been spoken to you of the
dreadful desert of sin, a Doctrine that is very necessary, but little laid to
heart by many of you. Ye have got the Gospel-knack among you, and have learned
to talk of sin, and of making Christ a refuge against it. But I dare not
account all Gold that glisters, nor look upon all them as real Converts, that
can talk in a Gospel-Dialect in Irwine. I would drive none of you from Christ,
if any of you find your need of a Savior, come away, he waits to receive you,
but lay a solid foundation, acquaint your selves more with the sinfulness of
sin, with the desert of sin, and with the impossibility of standing before God
marking sin, in strict Justice, that ye may close with Christ in earnest. God
bless what ye have heard for Christ's sake.

SERMON VII.
Psalm. 130. Verse. 3. If thou, LORD, should mark iniquities, O LORD, who
shall stand?

4. But there is forgivenness with thee: that thou may be feared.


YE have heard how the Psalmist in the 1st and 2d Verses, being wrestling with
plunging perplexities, expressed here under the name of deeps, gets guilt
stopping his audience and success to wrestle with, in the 3d and 4th Verses,
wherein as ye have heard, we have 1. A sensible confession concerning the
desert of sin, Verse 3. Next we have his refuge, when he is humbled with the
sense of that, and it is pardoning mercy, forgivenness with God, to which he
claims in the beginning of the 4th Verse. And lastly, ye have the end for which
God lets out and bestows pardoning mercy on sinners, that he may be feared.

For the first of these, in the 3d Verse, I am near a close of what I purpose
to say upon it, for beside the conjunction ye have heard ought to be betwixt
the sense of sin, and the sense of trouble, without which the sense of trouble
is but brutish; and beside that ye have heard, that guilt will readily meet
the people of God in straits, when they are made to cry out of the deeps unto
God: Beside these (I say) I insisted the last day on that great Point, that
iniquity marked by God, according to the Covenant of Works, and the Rules of
strict Justice, is that which no man is able to stand under; and ye may
remember, how at great length, I both Explained, and continued this truth, by
several Deductions from the Text, which I shall not now repeat. I shut up the
Point with a general word of Exhortation, that sinners that look for
everlasting happiness, would learn to say over this Text with application to
themselves, If thou, Lord, should mark iniquity, I cannot stand, and to do it
sensibly; for the fixing of which, and bearing of it home, ye may remember,
what Considerations were laid before you, as Considerations concerning God your
Party, Considerations concerning the number of your sins and guilt; It Is called
iniquities in the Plural Number, Considerations concerning the nature and
aggravations of your guilt, upon which account also, it is called Iniquities;
Considerations also of the just threatenings of God, and of the infallible
execution of them upon the sinner, or his Surety; Considerations concerning the
sufferings of Jesus Christ, a Glass wherein the desert of sin must be seen.

Now before I come to the next Verse, I shall mark three or four particular
inferences. And,

1. Ye have here a clear discovery, that there is no Justification by Works,
that a man by his Works cannot think of standing before God; Justification by
Works, is that only, which we know by the Light of Nature, and that first
Covenant made with mankind in Adam, and therefore every man has a natural
propension to do his own turn that way; The Jews being ignorant of the
righteousness of God, and going about to establish their own righteousness, did
not submit unto the righteousness of God, Romans 10.3. Ignorant persons think to
please God with their Repentance, and the mending of their faults, and doing
better: Papists plead with an open mouth for Justification by Works; some
Mungrel Protestants would mumble out somewhat that way; but ye are to consider,
that the Covenant requires that which is now impossible, even perfect holiness,
and that Covenant being once broken, is everlastingly broken; and for any
Evangelical Paction the Text leads us to, there is no Medium betwixt God's
marking iniqiuity, and forgiving iniquity, a man must either stand to his
hazard of God's sitting down on his Tribunal, and marking his iniquities, to
punish them; or he must lay aside all thoughts of complementing with God in
this matter, or of patching up a business of Grace and good Works in his
Justification before him, they that study the first part of the Text well, that
if God mark iniquity none can stand, they will easily be put from that conceit
of Justification by Works, and plead forgivenness.

And therefore 2, I would have sinners considering, that there is no standing
under guilt, except Christ be fled unto for refuge; if ye have not taken
Sanctuary in Atheism, that ye look upon all that is said in this Preached
Gospel as cunningly devised Fables, will you but look to it, and think with
your selves, what will you do in the day of Visitation, and in the day of
Wrath? when the just threatenings of God shall be execute against sin, and all
sinners that are out of Christ; when many will be ready to cry out for Hills
and Mountains to fall upon them, and hide them from the wrath of the Lamb. O!
consider it, if ye can be persuaded to be in earnest about your souls, what ye
think to do in the day of Gods wrath for sin. In that day wherein the senseless
sinners that made a sport of sin, will be made to sing that doleful Note, Lam.
5.16. The Crown is fallen from our head, woe unto us, for we have sinned. Then
ye will find it desperate folly and madness that ye went on in sin, and fled
not in time from the wrath to come. Ponder that Parable Luke 16.24. (which is
not to be stretched beyond the principal scope, as if there were charity for
others in Hell,) and ye will find what a dreadful Bargain sin is, when a drop
of cold Water to cool the Tongue, would be an ease to the Drunkard in torment,
and he cannot have it, when his warning of others is a witness against himself,
that he was a desperate man, that run such a hazard, that is now past remedy:
Think I say, on these things, if ye look not on this Word as Fables.

But 3. If none can stand before God's marking iniquity, then the sense of
guilt should make us justify God in all the troubles that come upon his
People, when we consider, that the Lord may for sin, not only, as in a solemn
day, call our terrors round about, as the word is, Lament. 2.22. But may
everlastingly condemn us in hell; how dare a sinner murmur under lesser
calamities or troubles? The language of a man sensible of the desert of sin,
is, that which ye have, Ezra 9, 13. [Thou our God have punished us less than
our iniquities deserve;] and that, Lam. 3.22. [It is of the Lords mercies that
we are not consumed, because his compassions fail not.] A man that is sensible
of sin and of the desert of it, ye will not find him a murmurer against any
cross inflicted, but a wonderer at the moderation, that shines in the sharpest
trials. Therefore, (as I said upon the first head) the sense of trouble,
without the sense of sin, is ill company, and will breed many distempers, which
the sense of sin, joined with the sense of trouble, will bear down and prevent.

And, 4. If even the most godly man, be thus liable to punishment, (for who can
stand, if God mark iniquity,) and even for his ordinary failings, consider,
what is the godly man's case, when he falls in grosser out-breakings. If when
thou looks upon thy daily escapes through ignorance, rashness, precipitancy,
shortcoming in duty, thou art made to lament, and say, (Lord, I cannot stand
before thee, if thou, Lord, mark iniquity;) how may the lamentation be
hightned, when thou falls in gross sins and spots, and by them causes the
enemy to blasphem; and the truth is, were folk more frequent in laying to heart
their ordinary escapes and infirmities, it would be a mean to caution them
against out-breakings in grosser debordings, but when these are not laid to
heart, and mourned for, it provokes God to write it with some vile blemish; and
I shall add, if the Lord mark iniquity, and a godly man cannot stand, what shall
become of a wicked man, who has no interest in Christ? if a David (suppose he
has been the penman of this Psalm) be trembling and sinking under the Burden
of iniquities, what a posture should monsters for prophanity, who declare their
sin as Sodom be in? I confess they are not troubled with sin, because they
forget that they have immortal Souls, but their trouble is coming. They see
godly men plunged and perplexed, under apprehensions of wrath, when they are
free of gross out-breakings; and they are not affected with all their
impieties, but O! what a witness is that against them, who walk as monsters
among men, and are never troubled? ponder that word, 1 Pet. 4.17.18. [The time
is come, that judgment must begin at the house of God; and if it begin at us,
what shall become of them, that obey not the Gospel of God? and if the
righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the sinner and ungodly appear?] If
godly men dare not think of standing before God, marking iniquity, how can
these monsters for prophanity, and ungodliness, think to look God in the face,
marking their iniquities?

But now, I proceed to the second General in the Text, and that is the refuge
to which the Psalmist betakes himself, when he is thus humbled, and abased
under the sense of the dreadful deserts of sin, [But there is forgiveness with
thee. That is, thou have declared thy self to be a pardoner of sin on
gospel-terms, and this forgivenness is with thee, that is, it is thy peculiar
right, in opposition to all pretenders. None have a right to pardon but thou,
and it is thy right, when the Law, and our own Consciences do condemn us, to
stepin and forgive; and therefore though upon account of the Covenant of Works,
I cannot think of standing before thee. I betake my self to the refuge, that
forgiveness is with thee.

There is a General Word that I might here mark, that is, That there is a
remedy in God for all difficulties. under which the Saints are humbled, and
abased as insuperable, for when in the 3. verse, he has said, [If thou, Lord,
should mark iniquities, who can stand? There is a But, a reserve, an exception
added, Forgivenness is with thee, There is indeed a hopeless case, but here is
a remedy for it in God; so that there is no case (how hopeless soever it be)
that is desperate, if folks go to God with it.

But this I leave, and pitch upon the main point in the Text, That there is
pardoning mercy in God for sin, and this is the only refuge to a sensible
sinner oppressed with sin and guilt. It Is here the Psalmist's only refuge and
ease, when he cannot think of standing before God marking iniquity. It Is Job's
only refuge, Chap. 7.20, 21. [ I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee? O thou
preserver of men! Thou may set me as a mark against thee, and make me a burden
to my self, but all that will not make thee reparation. Why do thou not
pardon my transgression, and take away mine iniquity? and it is the happiness of
fallen Man, not that he is sinless, or able to satisfy Justice for his sin,
but that he is a pardoned man, Psalm. 32.1.2. etc. [Blessed is the man whose
transgression is forgiven, whose sin is pardoned, blessed is the man to whom
the Lord imputes not iniquity.] This we would not need to insist on, to prove
it, if souls were in the Psalmists posture here, if souls knew what it were to
be under the burden of the debt of Sin, there would be no happiness to that, to
have sin pardoned, God would be to them a matchless God upon this account, Mic.
7.18. [Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and passes by the
transgression of the remnant of his heritage?] he would be a matchless God upon
the account of his pardoning iniquity, whatever other proof of Love he should
give, or withhold.

Now because this is a most important, and weighty Gospel point of Truth, The
pardoning of Sin, and I know not, when I may fall upon it in a Catechetical
way, I purpose to quite my ordinary way, and to insist upon this head, The
pardon of ^in, which would give me occasion to speak to several things, for
information of judgment, and to set you to your duty, I shall reduce what I
intend to say on it, to these Heads.

1. What is Pardoned? 2. Who they are that are Pardoned? 3. What the nature of
this Pardon is? 4. When Pardon passes in favors of the Sinner whether it be
irrevocable? 5. What is the right method of the Application of Pardoning Mercy?
which will lead me to the last thing in the Text, That forgiveness is with God,
that He may be feared.
These and the like, through the determination of the Scriptures, may be of
special use to you.

1. What is it that God does pardon? it is sin or iniquity, so the former
verse, and this collated holds forth. It Is the iniquities under which he is
groaning in the former verse, for which there is forgiveness with God in this
verse, so in that forcited place, Mic. 7, 18. He pardons iniquity, and passes
by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage, and Psalm. 52.1, 2. It Is
sin, iniquity, transgression, that is pardoned, covered, not imputed, to
intimat that sin, under whatever name it be expressed, is that which God
pardons.

Now to prosecute this, I shall not fall upon many descriptions of sin, and its
nature, it shall suffice us to know, that sin is the transgression of the Law,
and that of the Law of God, neither the crossing of folks humors, will make a
man a sinner, James 4.11, 12. (There are a number of rigid Censurers, that
would make their Will a Law to all, or have all to walk by their rash Judgment,
whereas there is but one Lawgiver, who is able to save and destroy) neither
will the Commands of men, oblidging them in Law, conclude men to be sinners,
unless there be a superior Command of God, oblidging them to give obedience to
these Commands of men, but waving that, to the end I may resume, and follow
forth something to your Edification, I shall briefly speak to these four, 1.
That all men have sin to be pardoned? 2. That sin is a Crime, and a Debt, that
needs a pardon, a burden that a man will not willingly ly under, if he look
right on it, nor be at rest till he get it off. 3. That Sin being a Debt that
needs pardon, and a burden too heavy for any, the unpardoned man looks upon
himself, (if in his right wits) in a doleful plight, till he be pardoned. And
4. That it is the chiefest of good news, to a Man sensible of the Debt of Sin,
that God is a pardoner of Sin.


For the first of these, all have sinned, or done that which needs a pardon, I
shall not need to repeat what I spoke the last day upon this, when I cleared the
universality of that assertion, That if God mark iniquity, none can stand
before him v. 3. I shall only add two Scripturall Confirmations this day. One
is, that, 1 John 1.8. Where the Apostle writing to the godly, says, as to
Original Sin, [if we say we have not sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth
is not in us;] and another Confirmation, when as to actual sin, he says, [ v.
10. If we say, that we have not sinned, we make God a liar, and his word is not
in us. And another Confirmation ye shall take from the Pattern of Prayer, Mat.
6.12. Where these who are allowed to call God Father, even the godly are
required to pray daily, (forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors; or as
Luke 11.4. has it. [Forgive us our sins.]

I shall say no more of this, but briefly mind you of these four. 1. It serves
to refute the perfectists, that pretend to sinlesness. It was the damnable
error of the Pelagians, that they affirmed, that as we have no guilt by Adam's
sin, so Men might live without sin, not only sine crimine, without any gross
scandalous out-breakings, (as we confess some sins, or some way of committing
sin, are not incident to the People of God, 1 John 3.9.) But they assert, that
men may live sine peccato, without any sin at all; And when they are urged with
that Petition enjoined in the Lords Prayer, where we are bidden pray for the
daily forgivenness of sin; They Answer. That men should say that Petition
humiliter, but not veraciter, humbly, but not truly, and in sincerity; which is
both an imputation on the Majesty of God, and a refutation of their error. An
imputation on the Majesty of God, as if he did require, that men should lie
under pretense of humility, and a refutation of their own error: for if they
should lie and pray hypocritically, and not sincerely, they prove themselves,
to be sinners, and not perfect, as they pretend.

2. We might here put Papists to mind, what they say, when they plead for the
sinlesness of the blessed Virgin Mary, though in this they do not agree among
themselves: The Franciscans and Jesuits, they assert, that she was conceived
Immaculat: others, as the Dominicans, assert, that she was conceived in sin,
but she was immediately cleansed from it; but both of them agree, that she lived
without actual sin. We are for to declare her blessed above all Women, and
highly favored of the Lord, but we dare not contradict Scripture, which
concludes all under sin, Romans 3.23. Nor her own confession, Luke 1.47. Where
she owns God as her Savior, which imports her acknowledging that she was a
sinner; nor yet contradict our blessed Lord, his taxing of her as Culpable,
John 2.4. When she would enjoin him by her Motherly Authority, to work a
miracle, Woman (says he) what have I to do with thee? mine hour is not yet
come, he owns her as a Woman, not as his Mother, in the Acts of his Mediatory
Office; and reflects upon her as one culpable, that would require of him to
work a miracle.

But 3. I would from this recommend to all of you to grow in acquaintance with
your pollutions, sinfulness, infirmities, and manifold daily failings. And for
this, alas! we need not light Candles, there is not need of any secret search,
as the Word is, Jer. 2, 34. The skirts of our Garments tell what we are, to us
may be applied that Word, Isaiah 3.9. The show of their countenance does
witness against them, and they declare their sin as Sodom, they hide it not, woe
unto their souls, for they have rewarded evil unto themselves. But were we as
spotless as Paul, it is our duty to be exercised with the root of sin, with the
Body of Sin and Death, with that Law which is in our Members, rebelling against
the Law of the mind, with that will that is present with us, when we delight to
do good, after the Inner-man, Romans 7. Ye would drive this trade, and mourn for
your secret sins, lest God be provoked to give you up to scandalous
out-breakings, which the world will read, when ye are not exercised with secret
sins, ye provoked God to give you other work a do, little to your advantage.
Learn to be at that work, which the people are at, Isaiah 59.12. Our
transgressions (say they) are multiplied before thee, and our sins testify
against us, for our transgressions are with us, and as for our iniquities we
know them; And at that trade, David was at, Psalm. 40.12. While he says,
Innumerable evils have compassed me about, mine iniquities have taken hold upon
me, so that I am not able to look up, They are mo than the hairs of my head,
therefore my heart fails me. Estrangement from our sinfulness is an
impediment to our humility, all the crosses in the world will not humble, or
bring a man so low, as acquaintance with his own pollutions, and sinfulness of
his nature; Estrangement from sinfulness, is a great obstruction to repentance,
he cannot be a penitent, that is not a daily student of his own failings, and
infirmities, and estrangement of our sinfulness is an impediment to pardon; for
sin must be taken with, and confessed, before we can expect pardon, and that
cannot be while we live estranged from it: Thus you see the losses that follows
the neglect of acquainting our selves with the sinfulness of sin, our daily
pollutions and infirmities.

But the 4. and last Word I shall give you from this, (and I shall go no
further for the time) shall be this, that the consideration of the universal
sinfulness of all mankind, should excite folk much to commend God; it commends
God, as upon many accounts, so particularly upon these two, one is, that he
spares the World daily, though there be so much sin both of Saints and others
abounding in it, who would fit with so many wrongs as God gets every day, and
yet he destroys us not, how often might he say, as he said to Moses of Israel,
Exodus 32.10. Let me alone, that my wrath may wax bot against them, and that I
may consume them, that I may sweep them away from off the earth; and yet he
does it not, how often might he do with us in this World, as he did with Sodom,
and the old World, and yet he bears with us. How often might he make the
visible Church a terror to it self, and all the World? and how often might he
make the Saints a burden to themselves, and yet great is his goodness, that he
spares a sinful World, and sinners in it. And upon another account it commends
God, and that is, that he lets not the sinfulness of his People make void their
interest in him, but notwithstanding their sinfulness, allows them to call him
Father; That though they be daily, by their repeated provocations, iniquities
and transgressions, drawing Rods forth from his hand, yet that does not make
void the Covenant. Psalm. 89.32, 33. [That he will visit their transgressions
with the rod, and their iniquities with stripes, nevertheless his loving
kindness will he not utterly take from them, nor suffer his faithfulness to
fail.] O! but the study of our sinfulness would make daily a new wonder to us,
it would not be common news, [but a faithful saying, and worthy of all
acceptance, That Christ came into the world to save sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15. And
as we grow in the study of our sinfulness, the sweeter should these Truths that
holds out the remedy of sin grow and continue.

SERMON VIII.
Psalm 130. Verse 4. But there is forgivenness with thee, that thou may be
feared.
AFter that I had spoken to this godly man his humbling sense, and fight of the
desert of Sin, in the third verse. I have begun to speak to this remedy of
pardoning mercy with God, upon which he lays hold; and I took up the words in
that General Note, That there is pardoning mercy in God for Sin, and that is
the only refuge for sinners, sensible of the burden of sin, and of the desert
of sin; and told you, that I have a purpose, (if the Lord will) to prosecute
this Point, in the resolution of several Questions, which yet may be reduced to
a few General Heads, Which were hinted at. That which now I am upon is, the
consideration of that that is pardoned, Sin, Iniquity, or Transgression, where
I spoke to one particular; that all Mankind have sinned, and done that which
will need a pardon. They have iniquities, even the most godly which makes them,
when they are sensible of them, to look upon it as good news to hear of pardon,
That which I further proposed to be spoken to, was, 1. That, as all have
sinned, so sin is a crime, a debt, a burden, that men stand in need to rid
their hands of. 2. That sin is a debt that man cannot satisfy, but must have
it done away by Remission, it must consequently follow, That the unpardoned Man
is in a woeful plight. And 3. That if this be a Debt, that can only be done away
by Pardon, then to a sensible man, this will be the chiefest of good news, That
there is forgivenness with God.

As to the First of these, and the Second in Order, proposed to be spoken to on
this Branch, when it is granted, that all have sinned, the stupid and carless
will look lightly upon it, wherefore it is to be considered in the next place,
what sin is to the right discerner, it is a crime, which, since he cannot
expiat, has need of pardon; It Is a debt, which, since he cannot satisfy, has
need of forgivenness. This imports, that to be lying under the burden of sin,
is no light matter, to a man that knows his case through sin. I shall take
notice of the Notion, under which sin is expressed, Luke 11.4. with Matthew.
6.12. Where sin is called our Debt, I shall no insist here to clear, that every
man's sin is his own Debt, contracted by himself, in his own Person, or in the
common Root Adam; and that he has not others to blame for it, Though as Adam
did lay over his sin on the Woman, which God gave him, so is every one ready to
do, yet when God and the Sinner reckons, he will find, that he must reckon for
his Sin, by himself, or by a Surety; but waving that, that sin is called a
Debt, it is not to be understood, that Man is oblidged to sin, for Obedience is
that which is required, and which we are oblidged to pay to God, but what is
imported in this metaphor, I shall lay open before you in these four.

1. A man that is adebted, and not fulfilling his Bond, is liable to the Law,
so the Law of God is an hand-writting against sinful man, oblidging him, either
to do his Duty, or to satisfy Justice for his Fault, or if he cannot do that,
and there be no other remedy, to undergo everlasting punishment in hell.

2. The Debt is heightened by this, that all the means offered to Man, of
directions, threatenings, promises, opportunities, power, and ability, to do
good in the time, and station, he lives in, Gifts, and qualifications for that
end, and Talents, for the not improvement of which, he becomes Debtor to God,
and his sin is hightned thereby.

3. As sin resembles a Debt, so it is a Debt above all other debts, a man
under the debt of Sin, is in a more dreadful plight, than any under other debt;
he may be able to pay it, and though he be broken, he may come up again; But a
man under the debt of sin, can never pay; again a man under debt, if he cannot
pay, he can shift his Creditor; But for a man under the debt of sin, there is
no shifting of God his Creditor, Psalm. 139. Whither shall he go from his
spirit? Or whither shall he flee from his presence! Again, though a man be
under debt, and not able to shift his Creditor, yet his Creditor is not always
in a readiness to attach him, though he be in his view, because he is not in a
legal capacity to reach him; But we are in God's reverence every moment. Again,
other Debt reaches the Body only, this Debt of Sin reaches the Soul also. And
to add no more, other Debt may reach a man with inconveniences in his Life, but
when he is dead his Debt is paid. But the punishment of this Debt reaches a
man chiefly after this Life: all these clear, that Sin is a Debt above all
other Debts.

And I shall add 4. That Sin may well be compared to a Debt on this account,
that Sinners while they fall upon a right method of seeking pardon, they much
resemble an ill Debtor; an ill debtor desires not to hear of his accounts, far
less to sit down and cast them up; so it is with these ill Debtors, they put
the ill day far away. They cannot hear of a day of count and reckoning, nor to
sit down and examine what they are owing, and what is it that engadges a Man,
either to essay to be an Athiest, (I say essay to be one, for he will never be
one in earnest) or turn Voluptuous, and drown himself in sensual pleasures, but
to hold down the eye of his Conscience, that would call him to count and
reckon. Again, when an ill Debtor is brought to think upon his accounts; how
ashamed and afraid may he be, not knowing when he shall be seized upon, turned
out of all he has, and put in Prison. And though impenitent sinners will not
let it light, that they have any fears, yet their Consciences can bear them
Witness to many over-castings of heart, upon apprehension of what may be the
close of their Course. Again ill Debtors are full of dilators, shifts, and
delays, they will promise fair, but will not perform; and so it is with
sinners, that are not thinking on Repentance, in order to Pardon. They will
take fair in hand, many have that much good Nature, Civility, or Policy to take
with a reproof, and say, they will mend, and repent, they will cast off the
course they are in, and do better, but all these are dilators, to give the
Creditor fair weather, without satisfaction. And further, to add no more, an
ill Debtor loves not his Creditor, yea often hates him; and though impenitent
sinners dare not say, they do not love God, yet what spightful and hateful
thoughts do often rise up in their hearts against God? Why? they cannot get
this done, and that done, but they must be accounted sinners, and cited to
appear before the Judgment Seat of God, to undergo a sentence of punishment,
and is that good thus to repay him so, because he craveth this Debt? All these
Resemblances, contribute to make it out, that man is a Debtor, and sin is a
debt, that he cannot satisfy. Are they not fools then, that make a sport at
Sin? (as Solomon says, Prove. 14.9.) Fools make a mock at sin; but they would
sport at leisure, if they considered what a debt this debt of sin is. Men in
their right wits, have so smarted under it, and the consequences of it, that
their hearts have been smitten, and withered as grass, and they have forgotten
to eat their bread. Psalm. 102.4. They have had no soundness in their flesh,
because of Gods anger, nor rest in their bones, because of their sins. Their
iniquities have been a burden too heavy for them, their wounds have stinked,
and been corrupt because of their foolishness. Psalm. 38.3, etc. And where art
thou that art lying under that Debt, and never thinks of putting it off?
Certainly thou must be under a distraction.

And this leads me to the third Thing in Order, that I proposed to be spoken
to, that is, That sin being a great Debt, and a debt we cannot satisfy, a man
lying under it, if he be sensible of it, will look upon it, as the sadest
posture and plight he can be in. Sin will be a most heavy burden to a sensible
man; and I shall in short make it out, in a five-fold respect, what a woeful
plight an un-pardoned criminal and debtor is in.

1. An un-pardoned Man is a dead Man, a gone man, as the Lord tells Abimilech,
Genesis 20.3. Behold, thou art but a deadman, for the woman which thou have taken,
for she is another man's wife. Every unpardoned man is a dead man, he is like a
condemned Malefactor, the sentence is pronounced upon him, the day of his death
is appointed, though he eat, and drink, and sleep, he is reckoned a dead man.

2. An unpardoned man is capable of no good thing, Isai. 59, 1.2. Behold, the
Lords hand is not shortened, that it cannot save, neither is his ear heavy, that
it cannot hear; but your iniquities have separated betwixt you and your God,
and your sins have hid his face from you, that he will not hear. And Jer. 5.25.
Your iniquities have turned away these things, and your sins have withholden
good things from you. They have turned away the good things ye had, and have
withholden other good things from coming to you; so that the unpardoned man is
capable of no good, and all the good that he gets, is but a snare to him. The
good things he has, are feeding, and fatting him to destruction.

3. An unpardoned man is in a woeful plight, because, all that he does, till his
person be reconciled, and taken into favor with God, how good soever it be in
it self, is sin, and an abomination to God; He may do many good turns, that are
good upon the matter, but would ye have the Scriptures verdict of them, as they
come from him: read Prove. 15.18. Prove. 21.4. and 28.9. The sacrifice of the
wicked is an abomination, the plow^ng of the wicked is sin; He that turns away
his ear from hearing of the Law, even his prayer shall be abomination; Whence
it is clear, all the good that an unpardoned man does is sin.

4. An unpardoned man is in a pitiful plight, because to him there is no
comfortable bearing of trouble, but where the pardon of sin is, it sustains a
man under trouble, and makes him bear it cheerfully; Men that never trouble
themselves to repent, and seek pardon, they had need of much fair weather, for
unpardoned guilt will have a dreadful Echo in a storm to them. Of the pardoned
man it is said, Isai. 33.34. The inhabitant shall not say, I am sick, for the
people that dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquities. A man's being
forgiven his iniquity, will make him forget that he is sick, and will make him
bear trouble comfortably, which an unpardoned man cannot get done.

And 5 an unpardoned man is in a woeful plight, because death will have a
terrible aspect upon him; To the pardoned man, death is a friend, a Messenger
sent to call him home, a Chariot sent to carry him to heaven; but to the
unpardoned man, death is the King of Terrors, the wages and cursed fruit of
sin; O! the sweet sight of Christ, and of pardon, that meets the pardoned man
at Death, and Judgment, somewhat whereof is hinted in these Words, Acts
3.19.26. Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted
out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord, and
he shall send Jesus Christ, who before was preached unto you. But O! what a
dreadful lying down, and rising out of the Grave, will the unpardoned man have;
So ye have heard, that as all have sinned, so sin is a Debt, that has need of
pardon, the non-forgiveness whereof, puts, and keeps a man in a most woeful
condition, and being so,

I proceed to the 4th, and last thing, I proposed to be spoken to here, that
is, that sin being a debt, and such a debt, as can only be taken away by pardon
and forgivenness, then it might be good news, the chiefest of good news to the
man sensible of sin, that iniquity will be forgiven; That there is forgivenness
with God, and this is it in the Text, for verse 3. he says, If thou, Lord,
should mark iniquity, Who can stand. But verse 4. Forgivenness is with thee.
That is it ye have, Mat. 9.2. Son be of good cheer, thy sins be forgiven thee.
Now for this Pardon, the nature of it, and the terms upon which it is attained,
it will come in, in the own proper place to be spoken to. Here, I am upon
consideration of the thing remitted, and that that I shall pitch upon is, That
there is a remission of sin attainable by sinners in the due order. It Is a
blessed Article of our Creed, the remission of sins. When I spoke of the
remission of sin, I spoke of the remission of all sins, great and small, in
their nature and number. There is forgivenness with God, for iniquities. I
confess there is an exception made, Math. 12.31, 32. All manner of sin and
blasphemy, shall be forgiven unto men, but the blasphemy against the holy
Ghost, shall not be forgiven, Heb. 10.26. They that sin afer they have received
the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sin. And 1
John. 5.1. There is a sin unto death; But the sin against the holy Ghost, needs
not trouble the sensible sinner, that would fain have pardon. It is true, it
should warn all to beware of malicious sinning against light, and having
sinned, to beware of running away from God, but the sensible sinner, that is
seeking peace, and pardon, needs not to be afraid of it. That sin is therefore
irremissible, because the sinner comes not to seek pardon, but if thou have the
sense of sin, and if it be thy desire, and endeavor to repent, and to have
pardon, it is an evidence, that thy sin is not that unpardonable sin.

But that I may make something of this, I shall deduce it in two or three
Branches. The first whereof shall be, 1. That small sins need Pardon. 2. That
gross sins are Pardonable. 3. A word to the consideration of the persons whose
sins are pardonable.


1. The smallest of sins needs a pardon, we are not (as Papists would charge
us) Stoics, who affect a parity and equality of all sins; we grant there are
different degrees of sins, and different degrees of punishment, A beating with
many stripes, and a beating with few stripes, Luke. 12.47, 48. But yet when we
assert this difference, we dare not with them assert venial sins, that deserves
not everlasting Wrath without repentance, and fleeing to Christ for refuge,
sure the Apostle tells us. Rom, 6.23, The wages of sin is death. What death?
look to the opposition, and it will clear it, but the gift of God is eternal
life; if the Gift of God be eternal life, the wages of sin must be eternal
death, and that he says it of sin indefinitly, it is equivalent to an
universal, the wages of sin is death, so that they must take away the nature of
sin, from these sins they call Venial, or grant the wages thereof is death, and
likewise, Mat. 12.36. Christ tells, that Every idle word that men speak, they
shall give account thereof in the day of Judgment; And an idle word might seem
a small sin; well then, if the smallest sin needs a pardon, look that we do not
practically make a distinction of mortal and venial sins, even gross men, if
they fall into gross out-breakings, it will affect them somewhat, when they do
not heed their ordinary escapes. Godly persons also are culpable here, a
scandalous sin will affect them, and so it should, but how little are they
affected with wanderings of mind in holy duties, idle words and thoughts,
habitual distance from God, and is not that a practical distinguishing of sin:
It is true, none can, in repentance, distinctly overtake all their failings,
for Psalm. 19.12. Who can understand his errors? Yet we ought to do what we can,
to overtake them, and if we cannot overtake them, be at Gods Footstool with
them, mourning over them in the bulk.

But 2. as the smallest of sins needs a pardon, so the ^rossest of sins are
pardonable in the due order, There is forgivenness with him for iniquities, as
in the Text, and Isai. 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the
unrighteous man his thoughts; and let him return unto the Lord, and he will
have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. He will
pardon greatest sins in their nature and kind, and hence David says, Psalm.
25.11. Pardon mine iniquity, for it is great. And Isai. 1.18. The Lord says,
Come now, and let us reason together, though your sins be as scarlet, they
shall be white as snow, though they be red as crimson, they shall be as wool.
And these great sins are pardonable in the due order, whether they be done in
ignorance, as Paul's persecution was, 1 Timothy 1.13. I was a blasphemer, a
persecutor, and injurious, but I obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly,
in unbelief. Or whether they be committed through the power of temptation, even
against light, as Peter's threefold denial of his Master was, yet not being
malicious it is pardoned. Again as great sins for nature and kind, are
pardonable, so great sins for the multitude and number of them, when they are
like a cloud, and a thick cloud, he will blot them out. Isai. 44.22. I have
blotted out as a thick cloud thy transgressions and sins. And that word, Isai.
55.7. He will abundantly pardon, In the original it is, he will multiply to
pardon one and more, a multitude of them, and Psalm. 40.11, 12. David pleads for
mercy for innumerable evils; for iniquities that are more than the hairs of his
head. And as God pardons great sins for kind, and many for number, so frequent
relapsing in these sins, (which I may speak to afterward) Jer. 3.1. She that
has played the harlot with many lovers, is allowed to return. And he that bade
Peter, Mat. 18.22. Forgive his brother, not only seven, but seventy times, will
much more do so, to his penitent People, renewing their repentance: But when I
say he will pardon great sins, I would have it well applied. It is not to
embolden any body to sin, thou that so improves this Doctrine, does turn the
grace of God into wantonness; and thou that ventures on sin, because God is
merciful, to pardon great, and many sins, and thinks thou may take a whelps
fill of sin, and then go and repent, and get mercy, (the woeful shift that many
follow) O! remember that Repentance is not in thine own hand; nay, I will say
more, thou bears a sad evidence of one that will never get the grace to Repent;
but that abuse of this doctrine being laid aside, ye shall (while I am upon the
explication of this great Article of Faith,) take a word or two of Inference,
in the by. And 1. It may be great encouragement to sensible sinners, thou who
art sensible of thy sins, thy Dyvour-bill of great and many sins, if thou come
in the right order, needs not keep thee back, thy desire to come and repent,
and seek pardon, tells that thou art not guilty of that unpardonable sin, and
therefore stand not a back for scarlet and crimson colored sins, nor for
relapsing in these sins, There is forgivenness with God for those iniquities;
and that ye may grip the better to this when it is intimate, that God is such a
pardoner of sin, ye would look to the infinite price of the Son of God, whereby
he purchased pardon, and upon which pardon of sin is founded, and ye would look
to that infinite and superabounding grace in God, inclining him to pardon; and
when these two are laid together, and well considered, all thy doubts about
pardon, will amount to this, whether thy iniquities, or Christ's death, thy
abounding sin, or Gods superabounding Grace, will carry it? And reason will
determine it in favors of Christ's purchase, and the super-aboundant Grace of
God.

2. Let me leave this as a Witness against slighters of this offer of pardon, I
believe there are many engadged as the Jews were, Jer. 2.25. Who said, There is
no hope, no, for we have loved strangers, and after them we will go; The matter
is past redding. There is little appearance that ever we will do well, and
therefore we mind not to do well. But here is a Witness laid at thy door,
whatever thy condition be, God and thou art yet in trysting terms, and thou
have the offer of Pardon upon Repentance, and turning to him, art thou as mad,
as the man that had the legion of Devils, Mark 5.9. will thou employ Christ, he
can cure thee; Though thou were like Mary Magdalen, out of whom Christ cast
seven devils, Luke 8.2. He can cast them out, and set thee down a worshipper of
him at his feet. Thy scarlet and crimson colored sins, he can make white as
the snow or wool. Thy scattered affections, as the wind, he can fix upon the
nail fastened upon the sure place, if thou will come and reason with him, thou
shall find him as good as his Word, and shall not this be a Witness against
slighters of pardoning Grace, that such profligat wretches, runnaways, and
backsliders; are within the reach of pardoning mercy, and there is a Royal
Proclamation made of it, wherein it is offered unto them* and yet they slighted
it. All the wrath of Sinai shall not be so terrible to such, as this will be
one day, that in the Name of Christ, we proclaimed pardon to you, providing ye
seek it in the right order, and look how ye will answer the Lamb sitting down
on his tribunal of Majesty.

I thought to have spoken to the persons, who they are that are pardoned, and
that they may call God Father, who seek pardon, and how that it secluds not the
vilest of sinners upon repentance, and how it makes against the Novatian error,
that thrusts repentance out of the Church; And to that case of godly men their
relapsing in sins, they have repented of, and whether such be pardonable, but
the time having cut me short, I shall forbear to break in upon these for the
time. The Lord bless for Christ's sake, what ye have been hearing.

SERMON IX.
Psalm 130. Verse 4. But there is forgivenness with thee, that thou may be
feared.
I Have now broken in a little upon this great Article of of our Creed, the
remission of sins, The great Gospel-news, the glad tidings of the Gospel of
peace to them that are in the Psalmist's posture, in the third verse, that
there is no standing before God, marking iniquity in strict justice, according
to the Covenant of Works. I am as yet detained on the first head, that I
proposed to be spoken to on this Subject, that is, the consideration of that
which is pardoned, it is iniquity, as in the preceding verse, sin or
transgression, let it be called by whatsoever name it will, and as to this, I
spoke to these things. 1. That all have sin. 2. That sin is a Debt and Burden,
which they who take a right look of, will see great cause, will desire to be
rid of it. That sin being such a debt or burden, the unpardoned man, if he get
a right look of his own condition, he will find himself in a woeful plight, and
4. That sin being such a debt, as can only be done a way by pardon, and such a
burden as puts the unpardoned man in a woeful plight? It follows, that it is
good news, the best of all news, to a sensible sinner, That there is pardon for
iniquity in God, When a man has said. verse 3. If thou, Lord, should mark
iniquity, who can stand, that he may add. verse 4. But there is forgivenness
with thee: And here ye may remember, that it was cleared, how the least sins
needed a pardon; As also how the greatest sins for nature, number, or other
circumstances, are pardonable and that sensible sinners needed not be troubled
with that sin against the holy Ghost, seeing their very flying to the remedy of
sin in Christ, is a sufficient evidence, that it was not in them. I was the
last day cutshort by time, from speaking a word to these persons, whose sins
are pardonable. And this I would now speak to, before I go to the other Heads, I
proposed to be spoken to; And the ground of that which I would say of them,
whose sins are pardonable, I shall take it from that pattern of Prayer, Mat.
6.9. -- 12, Father, forgive us our debts. They are Children who may come to God
for pardon of sin; and to open this a little, I shall speak to these three from
it. 1. It would be remembered, that these who are not Children, must come and
become children in the due order, that they may attain to the privilege of
pardon; when Children only are allowed to beg pardon of sin, it secludes none
who are unpardoned, from coming to God, through the elder brother Jesus Christ,
that they may be put among the Children by Adoption, for, Isai. 55.7. Let the
wicked man forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him
return unto Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will
abundantly pardon, or multiply to pardon; and Ezekiel. 33.15.16. When the wicked
man restores the pledge, gives again that which he had robbed, does walk in the
statutes of life, without committing iniquity, he shall surely live, he shall
not die, none of the sins he has committed, shall be mentioned unto him; There
shall be no more word of them; which (as I said the last day, when I spoke from
these words) leaves a sad check and ground of dittay, at the doors of Rebels,
to whom the Fountain for Sin and Uncleanness is kept open, and they have
pardon in their offer, but will not follow the right method of obtaining mercy
and pardon. They will not come and be children, but continue rebels still; And
it leaves also a caution and a check to many, who, if any thing be hinted at of
their faults, will claim to pardon, and yet they will not give up themselves to
be Children, they would live Rebels, and yet be pardoned. But ye would come to
be made Children, who in Faith would pray, Forgive us our sins.

A 2d. Word which I would say from this, is, That as Children are daily falling
in sin, so their daily sins are pardonable; There were many dangerous and
damnable errors in the ancient Church, concerning the sins of Church Members,
that come here to be reproved. Some who looked upon the sins of Church Members,
as the old Gnostics, the Progenitors of the Libertines did, they held that
sins in godly persons consisted only in opinion, that regenerat men do what
they would, if they should commit the most vile and abominable Acts, they were
not sins in them. This is nothing but corrupt principled monstrous prophani^y,
or monstrous prophanity rooted in a corrupt principle; and those that would
hold themselves out of that fearful gulf, they would beware of the Antinomian
principles, as that God sees no sin in Believers, that his Law is not to be the
Rule of their walk, that they need not repent, etc. For Libertinisme is but a
new Edition of Antinomianism in Folio. Others again acknowledged sin to be in
the godly, but they slighted repentance, and therefore, when scandals fell out
in the church, they did not require any acknowledgment of their Offense, who
had fallen in these scandals, but while they were reiking in these
abominations, they entertained Church Communion and fellowship with them. This
was a turning of the Grace of God into lasciviousness, and it is the result in
part of that Antinomian principle of the remission of sins, from all Eternity;
so that according to their opinion, Repentance was not required inorder to
pardon of sin, but for intimation of pardon. And there were a 3d. sort, such as
the Novatians, who looked so on gross sins after Baptism, as though they would
seclude them from pardon on repentance, nor would they seclude such sinners
from making profession of their Repentance, yet they would not absolve them,
nor admit them to Church Communion, and fellowship, particularly in the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, but left them to God, to make of them what he
pleased. Now in opposition to all these, is the truth I am upon, we confess
sins after the receipt of Great mercies, are very heinous, Ezra 9.14. Should we
again break thy commands, and join in affinity with the people of these
abominations? would thou not be angry with us, till thou had consumed us?
Judges 10.13. Ye have forsaken me, and served other gods, therefore I will
deliver you no more. And sin in particular after regeneration, is so much the
more heinous, that God has been gracious; therefore the Apostle having spoken
of the abounding grace of God, where sin had abounded, Romans 5. At the close, he
begins the next Chapter, with these words, What shall we say then? shall we
continue in sin, that grace may abound? God forbid. How shall we that are dead
to sin, live any longer therein? He abominats that after regeneration, there
should be a relapsing in sin, yet the Text here intimats, thereis forgivenness
with God, for the iniquities of Godly men; and the Pattern of Prayer Mat. 6.
Tells the Children, that they may go to God, and seek the forgivenness of sins,
which says, they would be daily sinning, and God would allow daily pardon on
them in the due order; and consequently, it was horrid cruelty in the
Novatians, to seclude such as fall in sins after Baptism, from Absolution and
Church Fellowship, and they would not pardon, where God did pardon, which made
Constantine at the Council of Nice, to say to Aclesus their Bishop. I see no
other of it, but ye would make a Ladder to go to Heaven your alone, and would
have one with you. I confess the godly are not to be hugged under their
failings, but their failings are rather to be aggredged, yet upright Walkers,
as they are most tender in their Conversation, so are they most charitable in
passing Judgment upon others, though they have their failings.

But there is a 3d. word I would say from this, and that is to clear, whether
all sorts of sins in the godly, are pardonable? This is a case that has
troubled the Learned, and may trouble tender Consciences, whether, when a man
has repented a sin, and found the bitterness of it, and has found God's
favor and pardon intimat upon his repentance, he may again fall into that sin,
and get it pardoned over again. A case, I say, that some who are tender, may be
troubled with, when they have fallen in sin, and thereafter have found it
bitter, and have been at God, confessed it, and believed pardon, and yet they
have been over-hailed in the same sin over again. This I confess, before I say
any thing to it, is a sad case, it is sad to see folks, after regeneration, and
tasting of the Grace of God, falling in the same Sins again; and it is yet
sadder to see a person, after he has been smarting for it, running back to
that very folly; particularly if it be an out-breaking Sin, and the Learned
could hardly find an instance in Scripture of that relapsing in Sin in the
Godly; it is true, Peter did thrice deny his Master, and Lot was twice drunken,
and twice fell in Incest, but none of these were after Repentance, and
intimation of Pardon; for Peter was kept in the hurry of the Temptation, till
his Sin was thrice out with him; and so it was with Lo^, yet I shall give two
words for clearing the case. 1. That (...) regeneration makes not the Saints
perfect, so neither do I see a ground, that a Saint his repenting for a
particular fault should keep him from a relapsing in that fault, and needing of
pardon. It is true, Psalm. 85.8. God's speaking of peace to his people, is with
a caution, That they turn not ogain to folly; But to say, if Repentance be
true, a man will not fall in that folly he has repented, it is not Scriptural:
Regeneration is our initial Repentance, and if that do not prevent falling in
Sin, it is no wonder, that a particular Act of renewed Repentance do it not,
all the Repentance grief or sorrow that a person has attained to for Sin, is
but a creature, that except God concur, cannot keep him from falling in sin;
and God has not made an absolute promise, so to concur with a penitent, that
he shall not again fall in the same Sin. How often does a penitent, when he
has repented to day of his passion pride, wandering of mind in duty, etc. fall
in the same Sins to morrow; and if he may notwithstanding of Repentance, fall
into lesser faults, why may he not after Repentance fall in grosser; we find
also godly men after their repenting for their failings, falling in grosser
out-breakings. David after he had repented his falling in trouble, and his
using sinful shifts to be out of it, fell in these gross and scandalous sins,
of Adultery and Murder; and he that fell in these sins after repentance, for
other escapes, why might he not after repentance have fallen in these same sins
over again? if the grace of God had not prevented it; for though Repentance for
particular faults, leave behind it an impression of the bitterness of these
sins, and make them to be loathed, which will make it more improbable, they
will be relapsed in, yet it is not impossible, otherwise true Repentance being
for all sin, it should prevent relapsing in any Sin.

A 2d. word which I shall say for clearing the case shall be this, that as true
repentance is not to be measured, by relapsing in sin, so it is contrary to
Scripture to determine, that relapsing in sin after Repentance is unpardonable,
It Is not the sin against the holy Ghost, and therefore pardonable. Isai. 55.7.
Our God will multiply to pardon; Even as often as the sinner repents, and comes
aga^n to him, to seek pardon, were it till seventy times seven times, as he
bids us forgive others, when they sin against us, Matthew. 18, 22. and Hos. 14.4.
He has promised to heal backslidings. Now these are after Repentance, when his
people fall back in the same sins, out of which they have been recovered by
Repentance; and for instances of this, ye shall only ponder these two. One is,
2 Chronicles, 18. Jehosaphat his joining in affinity with Achab, for which he is
reproved by a Prophet, Chapter 19.2. And his Repentance is apparent in the
reformation he fell about. And yet Chap. 20.35. He falls in the same Sin, in
joining with Achaziah, to make Ships to go to Tarshish in Eziongeber, which
were broken, for which he was also reproved, repented, and was pardoned.
Another instance is that of Jonah, A man that fled from the presence of the
Lord, when sent to Niniveh, and is brought to Repentance for that sin in the
belly of the Fish. Chap. 2, Yet he falls in the same sin. Chapter 4.2. Not in
fleeing away from God, but in repining at his mercy, and in his opinion,
declaring it was needless to go to Niniveh, and justifying his former fleeing
away: These are two clear instances of relapsing in sin after Repentance and
Pardon for it. This I would not have abused. I may have occasion hereafter to
speak to what prejudice relapsing in sin brings with it; as that it will bring
former pardon in question, and under debate, and though a penitent may be
pardoned, yet it is dangerous to bourd with sin, after God has spoken peace to
return to folly, and to proclaim, that all the bitterness folk have found in
sin is nothing; only I cannot conceal the truth of God, from any that may be
under a Temptation; that having repented such and such sins, they have relapsed
in them, and therefore, as they question their Repentance; so they think they
are to expect no more pardon: ye have it cleared from Scripture, that these are
but Temptations, That God would multiply to pardon upon repentance, Isai. 55.7
And though folks have played the harlot with many lovers, and among hands have
rewed their wanderings, they may return again unto the Lord, Jer. 3.1. Now I
have done with the first general head of this Doctrine, concerning the
remission of sin, To wit, the consideration of that which is pardoned.

I proceed to the second general Question, and that is, anent the Author of
pardon, or who it is that pardons iniquity, even God, There is forgivenness
with thee, says the Text, That is, (as I exponed in the entry) it is thy
property, in opposition to all pretenders, it is thy Property and Prerogative,
when both the Law and the Conscience have condemned, to pardon and forgive Sin.
This is a truth that was held fast in the Jewish Church, when it was most
corrupt; Therefore Mark 2.7. When Christ pardoned the man sick of the Palsy,
The Scribes say. Why does this man speak blasphemies? Who can forgive sins, but
God only? And it is one of God's Titles, [ Exodus 34.6, 7. That he forgives
iniquity, transgression and sin:] and he takes it to himself, as his
Prerogative, [ Isai. 43.25. I, even I am he, that blotteth out thy
transgressions;] and Matthew, 9.2, etc. Christ, in curing the Palsy man,
paralels the pardoning of his sins with the healing of his disease, as proofs
of his Deity: showing, that both were alike difficult, and proved him to be
God. I must here clear a seeming difficulty, that is, That pardon of sin is
attribut to others, both Ministers and private persons; It Is attribute to
Ministers, as John 20. -- 23. As the Father has sent me, even so send I you,
receive ye the holy Ghost, whosoever sins ye retain, they are retained; and
whosoever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; But certainly it is God
only can loose a man from everlasting wrath due to him for sin, and it is the
Word of God only can declare whom God will pardon. Only (as Ambrose says well)
Ministers are Judges in the matter of pardon; but without any absolute
Authority in that matter. And for clearing of this, ye would distinguish
betwixt the external Court in the Church, and the internal Court in the
Conscience. In the external Court in the Church, Ministers have a power from
Christ to remit scandals to scandalous persons, upon their serious profession
of Repentance, to take in a man that has fallen in a scandalous sin, upon the
profession of Repentance, and to remit the scandal. In the ^nternal Court of
the Conscience, Ministers have a Ministerial power upon scandalous sinners
their repentance, Ministerially to declare, they are pardoned upon their
Repentance, and they walking according to their Commission, [Whose sins they
bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever they shall loose on
earth, shall be loosed in heaven,] Mat. 16.19. and 18.18. But Ministers, ex
pleni^udine potestatis (as the Pope speaks) have not an absolute and illimited
power to pardon whom, and when, and as they will. They are but Delegats, and
must walk according to their Commission, in pardoning of sin, or rather
pronouncing pardon of sin, neither have they power of pardong sin upon
conditions of their own devising, such as Pennances, Pilgrimages, visiting of
Rome in the year of Jubilee, etc. where (to mark it in the by) the Papists
method in this is preposterous; They first pardon, and then enjoin penance,
and such things as Christ has not prescribed; Neither must they take Money,
and dispense with Repentance, a fruit of Faith, upon which pardon is promised.
This is but a cheat, to hold their Ki^chen reeking. Caesar Borgia, the Son of
Alexander the sixth, when he had lost an hundred thousand Crowns at the Dice,
he passed it in a sport, saying, Those are the sins of the Germans, that is,
they had been purchased for the remission of their sins. Again it is attributed
to private persons; and for private Persons their pardoning of sin, the
Scriptures speaks clearly to it, as in that pattern of prayer, [ Mat. 6.12.
Forgive us our debts, as we also forgive our debtors] so Ephesians. 4.32. [Forgiving
one another, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you,] and Col. 3.13.
(Forgive one another, if any man have a quarrel against any, even as Christ
forgave you, so also do ye. But private persons forgiving of sins, is the
forgiving the injuries done by men's sinning to them; rules anent which I may
meet with ere I have done with this Theme. But though a private person is bound
to forgive injuries done against them; It is still with a reservation of God's
interest, and the sinner must count to God; notwithstanding from all which (to
resume) it is clear, whatsoever hand man has in forgiving sin, God is the
principal Creditor, whose Law is violat, whose Majesty is offended, whose
Justice must be satisfied, and therefore it is his property and prerogative to
forgive sins, and louse from the obligation to wrath that sin deserves.

In making use of this, I shall not digress to deal with Papists, who in
receiving pardons from their Priests, use not a judgment of discretion, whether
the persons pardoning them, be acting according to their Instructions, and
according to their own principles; for if they did, they might be easily
nonplus'd. They put the power to give indulgences entirely in their Pope, and
assert that their Priests are Commission at by him to dispense them, but they
can only have a humane Faith concerning that Commission; For beside that the
Popes Power to do so, is upon many accounts questionable; They ask, how we know
the Scripture* to be the word of God? we might ask them, how they know the Pope
(who must give these Indulgences to be the Pope?) That he is a Christian, and
has gotten Baptism? For according to their own principles the Pope is no Pope
except he be Baptized? Now they cannot certainly know their Pope is baptized,
that being one of their grounds, that Baptism is not administered, except the
intention of the Priest go along. Now they cannot be certain that the Priest,
who baptized the present Pope, has had an intention to baptize him while he
went about that Action, therefore they cannot be certain of any pardon this
present Pope shall give them, nor can they have any thing but a humane Faith,
as to the pardon of their sins. But the Judgment of God is visible upon them
for not receiving the truth inlove, God has been provoked to give them up to
strong delusions to believe lies, and (shall I add further?) It Is a plague, and
a snare to profane men, that walk in the imagination of their own heart,
adding drunkenness to thirst, that they have this woeful shift, get them a a
Priest, and let them have an Absolution, and then they are as ready to take in
a new swack of sin, as ever they were; this is the woeful cheat that follows
theit way, if folk walked like a principle of Conscience, they were to be
pitied, but when profligat men run that way, they drive their carnal interest,
or have a sleeping God to their Conscience, under all their abominations: But
passing this, and leaving particular Inferences till the afternoon. I shall
give you these three words. 1. If God be the only pardoner of sin, they make a
very blind block, that pardon themselves for all their faults, that is, who can
commit all sorts of iniquities, and cast them over their thumb when they have
done; Thou that does so, shall know that God only is the pardoner of sin ere
long, and that thy pardon will not stand. 2. It leaves a sad check on all them,
that satisfy themselves with the plaudites of the world, Why? they are good
folk, cried up and commended of their neighbors; if they have done wrong, they
will confess it, make reparation, or restitution, but what is all that, if God
pardon thee not? though thou should get never so many to hugg thee, or assoil
thee, so long as God the only pardoner of iniquity does not assoil thee. And 3.
It leaves a sad check also on them that care not to displease God, to please
Men; and O! what snares to men are these, that give themselves to be pleasures
of men, with displeasing of God. They make no bonds of any sins, if they can
please them they are obliged to. But thou that do so, will find thou have
made an ill bargain, when the reckoning comes; for they cannot forgive thy sin,
when thou stands before God; neither will thou get men for thy Intercessors,
God only is the pardoner of iniquity, and therefore they make a very foolish
bargain, who to please any, stand not to displease God.

SERMON X.
Psalm 130. Verse 4. But there is forgivenness with thee, --
IN handling of this great Point, the Remission of sins, (which is in effect
the great Article of the New Covenant; Jer. 31.34. I will forgive their
iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more:) After that I had spoken in
the first place to that which is pardoned, or pardonable, sin; I entered in the
morning, to speak to the Author of pardon, that forgivenness is with God,
whatever hand Ministers or private persons may have in pardoning; the one in
carrying the word of Reconciliation and pardon, the other in forgiving sins, so
far as they are injuries done to themselves, yet God is still the principal
Creditor, and pardon from him, is still to be looked after, from which (as I
told you) not only Papists, who ly down, and sleep on the pillow of men's pardon
without considering, whether they act according to their Commission, come to be
reproved, but these Self-absolvers, and these who rest on the applause of
others, and these who to please men, stand not to displease God, are found to
be culpable.

Now before I leave this Head, I would draw somewhat from it, for encouragement
of these who are in earnest about the pardon of sin, and here that there is
forgivenness with God, it should, and will affect sensible sinners as a wonder;
he will not only be a matchless God to them, but upon the account that he
passes by iniquity, and pardons transgression, Mic. 7.18. But it will be a
wonder to them, that there should be a pardon for iniquity, that pardoning
mercy should be with him, whose holy justice is so great, who is of purer eyes
than that he can behold iniquity, who has no pleasure in wickedness, and who
hates all the workers of iniquity, that such a holy and just God should pardon
sin, that his Holiness and Justice should combine so sweetly with mercy to the
sinner, is a wonder of wonders; yea, further, this may heighten the wonder,
that pardoning mercy gives access to them who are secluded by the Covenant of
works, that when, (as it is verse 3.) (If he should mark iniquity, none could
stand,) yet as verse 4. [there should be forgivenness with him,] That as it is
deduced, Romans 3.20. -- 22. [When by the deeds of the law, no flesh can be
justified in his sight, for by the law is the knowledge of sin, now the
righteousness of God without the Law is manifested, being witnessed by the Law,
and by the Prophets, even the righteousness of God, which is by the faith of
Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon all them that believe] without difference.
That there should be a righteousness by the faith of Christ, closing with him
for pardon, O! what a wonder is that, and how good news should that be to
sinners? how should it quicken up, and revive any that are ready to sink under
the burden of the sense of sin? That when they look upon a holy and just God,
that hates sin with a perfect hatred, they may also look upon him as one who
will pardon: That when they look to the Law and Covenant of Works, their
expectations are to be limited thereby, because there is a Righteousness
without the Law manifested to be had by Faith in Christ.

3. But because sensible souls may readily think, how can this be? And may be
afraid to lean their weight on a Pardon, they have so much Guilt, and the
Conscience i^ alarmed with it, and pardoning mercy is an Act of free Grace,
whereupon they know not that they may venture; Therefore to enforce this, that
God is a pardoner of Iniquity, I shall not anticipat, what may come to be
spoken to this afterward, but the sensible Sinner would consider, 1. That the
pardon of Sin is an Act of Royal Prerogative in free Grace. It Is an act of
Princes Royal Prerogative to pardon Criminals in many cases, and shall we deny
that to God, which we give to Creatures? Seeing He is above all Law, who can
hinder him to have Mercy on whom he will have mercy? to do with his own what he
will, and pardon whom he will, Salvation belongs to him, as his Prerogative
Royal. 2. Sensible sinners would consider, that satisfaction is paid to
Justice, for their Sins, though he freely pardons, (which will come in
afterward) only here, such would remember, that thoughts of the Holiness and
Justice of God needs not afright the sensible Sinner, why? Justice is fully
satisfied. That fire that brunt continually on the Altar, and was not quenched
by these Sacrifices under the Law, is now quenched, the burning fire of the
Justice of God is now satisfied; and hence God in pardoning sins, is not only
Merciful, but Just; therefore, Romans 3.26. Upon Christ the Redeemer his being
set forth as the propitiation, through Faith in his Blood, it follows to
declare his Righteousness, [that he might be just, and the justifier of him
that believes in Jesus] without reflection upon his Justice, and hence the
Apostle, (1 John 1.9.) says, [If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just
to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness] not only
upon the account of his fidelity, that he will keep his promise, but upon the
account of the Paction past betwixt him, and the Mediator, and upon the account
of the Satisfaction, and Price paid by the Mediator, upon that account, he is
faithful and just to pardon sin. And hence 3ly Things being thus, when sensible
sinners come to Christ, or to God through him for pardon, and yet are filled
with doubts and fears, they would conclude, that there hesitation results not
on the uncertainty of their pardon; for the holy and just God will not break
bargain with his Son, but partly it results on our ignorance of that
Righteousness, which is by the Covenant of Grace, we know no Righteousness by
the Covenant of Works, but that which is inherent, and the Ignorance of that
Righteousness, which is by the Covenant of Grace, is the gro^^^d of our
hesitation, and of many doubts and fears; partly it results on a proud
competition, whether thy abounding sin, or his superabounding grace should
carry it, Romans 5.20, [Where sin abounded, grace did much more super-abound] and
therefore thou that comes to Christ for pardon, and yet will not settle upon
it, thou would say upon the matter, that thy abounding sin should carry it, and
not his Super-abounding Grace. So much for the second head proposed to be
spoken to, concerning the Author of Pardon:

The 3d. Thing I proposed to be spoken to, was anent the nature of the pardon
of Sin, what this pardon of Sin Imports, or Is? And this when I have spoken to
it at this time, will give the rise to several other Questions, which will come
in in their own place; and may be useful for you. I shall not detain you upon
the signification, and importance of these Words and Phrases, that expresses
pardon in Scripture, that may come in afterward, that word, Mat. 6.12. Forgive
us our Debts, signifies the dismissing of one accused, and a loosing of one
bound for Debt, both concur here, as sins are a Debt, they are forgiven; and
they are a Bond tying the Conscience to answer at the Tribunal of God, they are
remitted and loosed; and considering sins, as accusations, as they that are in
a Court accused, a pardon remitts and assollzies them. So the pardoned man may
say, as Rom 8.33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect, it is
God that Justifies, etc. The word rendered pardon, or forgivenness ( Col. 2.13.
Having forgiven you all trespasses) hints at the freedom of the grace of God in
pardoning of Sin; It Is the Publicans Word. Luke 18.13. God (God be merciful to
me a sinner;) the word in the Original expresses pardon, with an eye to the
propitiation; Paul's word also, [I obtained mercy,] (1 Timothy 1.13.) which also is
a word made use of in the new Testament, or Covenant, Heb 8.12.) Intimats the
yearning of the bowels of God, relative to the miserable state of the pardoned
sinner, expressed in pardoning. That word, Psalm. 32.2. Romans 4.8. [not imputing
of sin or iniquity,] is borrowed from Merchants, that in casting up accounts,
pass some Debts. And that word, [ Psalm. 32.1. Of covering sin,] imports, that
as sin is a loathsome thing, so the pardoning of Sin, takes sin out of the
sight of Gods vindictive Justice. Now all these expressions put together, might
give some general hint, what pardon of sin is, when God out of his free grace,
out of the yearning bowels of his mercy and compassion, accepts of the
propitiation made by Jesus Christ, and upon that account remitts the sinners
obligation to wrath, by pardoning sin, dismisses him from the accusation laid
against him; looses him of his Bonds, puts his Debts out of his Books, and
covers the loathsomness of his Sin.

But to follow out this a little more distinctly, what this pardon is; I shall
take up both negatively, what it is not? and then positively, what it is? For
an error here is an error in the first digestion, or concoction, that will not
be gotten well helped in the second.

For the first of these, negatively, what the pardon of sin is not, and for
clearing of this, what I would say upon it, ye shall take in these five, 1.
Pardon with God, is not to be confounded with our forgetting Sin, slighting of
Sin, or taking a pardon of it to our selves, Gods pardon of Sin is one thing,
and men's taking of pardon to themselves is another; There are many folk that
think God sees no Sin in them, and why? they have no leisure to look after sin
in themselves, they think God has forgotten Sin, Why? They themselves through
length of time, or other diversions, have forgotten them. This is all that many
have for that great Article of their Creed, [I believe the Remission of Sins.]
But do not cheat your selves, as I cleared before to you, from Joseph's Brethren
Genesis 42.21. Sin long ago committed, even upwards of twenty or two and twenty
years, if it be not pardoned, will be as g^een when the Conscience is wakened,
as the first hour it was committed; Therefore look to it ye who forgive your
sins by forgetting them, and take not your forgetting of Sin, for God'^
pardoning of it.

2 In taking up the nature of pardon, we must not look so lightly on Sin, as if
there were no more ado, but we to Sin, and God to forgive; it is indeed
pardoned, as to any satisfaction to Justice, that is exacted of thee, but
Justice behoved to be satisfied, that God might pardon freely. There is a
Question agitat amongst Orthodox Divines, whether God, out of his Royal
Prerogative might not pardon Sin without a satisfaction? a Question that they
determine variously, either as they grapple with Arminians, who say, the
satisfaction of Christ was only to loose God from any Bond lying upon him,
resulting upon a necessity to punish Sin, or as they grapple with the
Socinians, who deny there was any satisfaction for Sin, paid by Christ. But
were I worthy to umpire in such a thing, there is so much hazard in Debates
started anent the Nature of God, when it is inquired, what he might do? and
what he may not do? That I would judge it safer to forbear it. This is
sufficient for us, that in the case in hand, he has declared what he will do,
or not do, particularly that he will not pardon sin without a Satisfaction. So
Romans 3.24. [Being justified freely by his grace, through the Redemption that is
in Jesus Christ, whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through Faith in
his Blood,] he would have his Righteousness declared for the remission of Sins;
And that [as it is, Heb. 9.22. Without shedding of blood there is no
remission.] Thus the pardon of our Sin cost Christ dear, and yet it runs freely
to us, because God freely laid the burden on Christ, and Christ freely
undertook it, and God freely accepts of his satisfaction in our Name; and so we
come to be freely pardoned, but remember sin is with God no triffle, no light
thing, that he would easily pass, no, he would have his Justice satisfied, that
he might freely pardon, and the consideration of this will not only comm^nd the
love of God, and the love of Christ, in finding out such a way, whereby pardon
might come to sinners, without prejudice of Justice. But further the freedom of
pardon will not hide from the sinner that is pardoned the odiousness of sin,
but make it so much the more loathsome and vile, when he sees his pardon sealed
with the Blood of Christ, and all his exinanition that went before, O! the
pardoned sinner looking to Christ crucified, and considering that he has
pierced him by his Sins, it will make him mourn most bitterly, as one that
mourns for his only Son, and like that of Hadadrimmon in the valley of
Megiddon, Zech. 12.10. -- So when thou looks upon pardoning mercy, thou takes
not a right look of it, except thou look also on the satisfaction made to
Justice by Christ, that a free pardon might come out to thee.

3. In taking up the nature of Pardon, beware that ye do not confound the
pardon of Sin with Gods forbearing, or not inflicting punishment on sinners; if
ye confound these, ye will embrace a shadow, and get a lie in your right hand
in stead of pardon. Ye know what the Apostle says, Romans 2.4. There is a riches
of Gods goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffering. How long did God forbear
the old World, for an hundred and twenty years, Genesis 6.3. How suffered he his
peoples manners for about 40 years. Now this forbearance of God, as it is often
a temptation to godly men, so it is a snare to the wicked, or they make it a
snare to themselves. It Is often a temptation to godly men, as Psalm. 73.1. O!
what a temptation was it to the Psalmist, his feet were almost gone his steps
were well near slipped, he was envious at the foolish when he saw the prosperity
of the wicked, how they had no bonds in their death, and their strength was
firm, they were not in tr^^ble as other men, etc. O! he thought if he had been
on the Throne, he would have made these Children know themselves sooner nor God
did, and Hab. 1.13. Thou art of purer eyes than to behold evil, and can not
look on iniquity, wherefore looks thou on them that deal treacherously, and
hold thy tongue when the wicked devoureth the man that is more righteous
than he. There ye see the forbearance of God is a temptation to the godly.
Wicked men also make a snare of it to themselves. O! the wicked Doctrines, that
wicked men build on Gods forbearance, One is, wrong thoughts of God, Psalm.
50.21. [These things thou have done, and I kept silence, thou thought that I
was altogether such a one as thy self. There is a Doctrine that wicked men
found on Gods forbearance, they think God is like themselves; another is that
thereby they are emboldened to go on in sin, Eccles. 8.11. Because Sentence
against an evil work is not execute speedily, therefore the heart of the
children of men is fully set in them to do evil, so Romans 24. They harden
themselves by God's forbearance. The riches of Gods goodness, forbearance, and
long-suffering, should lead them to repentance, but they abuse it to produce
hardness, and impenitent hearts, and further, they bless themselves in
prospering in wickedness, Hos. 12, 7. [Ephraim is a Canaanite, a Merchant, the
balance of deceit are in his hand, he loves to oppress, and he says, yet I
am become rich, I have found me out substance. Let the Bible say of me what it
will, the Sun of prosperity shines on my tabernacle, as well as on your
tenderest folk; I am as far from any mischance, as the most upright in their
coversation. But still remember, forbearance in God is no pardon, that which is
frested is not forgiven; It Is no sign of Divine approbation, when thou art
forborne, and prospers in a sinful way; to these ends ye shall remember these 3.
Scriptures, and they will help you not to confound forbearance with pardon. One
is Eccles. 12. -- Though a sinner do evil an hundred times, and his days be
prolonged, yet surely I know that it shall be well with them that fear God.
How will ye prove that? because he fears before him, but it shall not be well
with the wicked, neither shall he prolong his days, which are as a shadow,
because he fears not before God. No approbation lies in the bosom of
forbearance. Another Scripture that gives a dreadful refutation to them that
take forbearance for pardon, is that Psalm. 50.21. [These things thou have done,
and I kept silence, thou thought that I was altogether such a one as thy self,
but I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thine eyes; Now consider
this, all ye that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces, and there be none to
deliver.] There is a refutation of all the wicked man's dreams anent God, and
his forbearance. And if ye would have a third Scripture, take the forecited
place, [ Romans 2.4, 5. Thou despisest the riches of his goodness, forbearance
and long suffering, not knowing that it leads thee to Repentance, but after
thy hardness and impenitent heart, treasurest up to thy self, wrath against the
day of wrath: Thou may treasure up other things as thou will for thy advantage,
but thou shall find, thou treasurest up wrath to thy ruin, thou may think,
because thou prospers in Sin, God approves of thee (as the saying is, prosperum
and faelix scelus, virtus vocatur, Wickedness is called a virtue, because it
thrives) yet remember, that forbearance is no Pardon.

4. In taking up the nature of pardon negatively, Consider, That God's
pardoning of particular Sinners, whereby he restores them in favor, is not to
be confounded with National Pardons, which God gives to Nations. This pardon is
many times spoken of in Scripture, though by analogy, we may draw them to a
particular pardon. So the scope of that place, Number. 14.19. -- runs another way
than to particular Persons, and respects a National Pardon, [Pardon I beseech
thee the iniquity of this people, (says Moses) according to the greatness of
thy mercy, as thou have forgiven this people from Egypt, even until now. [I
have pardoned according to thy word (says the Lord) but truly, as I live, all
the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the Lord.] I have pardoned, but
yet I will punish, and vindicat mine honor. So that passage, Psalm. 78.38. But
he being full of compassion, forgave their iniquity, and destroyed them not,
when they deserved, That was a pardon of the Nation, or a National Pardon; Now
a National Pardon amounts only to this, when the Lord forbears to root out a
Nation, as the Lord threaten ^o Moses, that he would root out Israel in that
forecited place, Number. 14.12. That he would Dis-inherit them, and make of him a
greater Nation, and a Mightier than they, when he keeps them in their own Land,
as he did Israel, and does not root them out, or when he continues with them
the privilege of a Church, though he plague them, and weed out a godless
generation from among them, as he did out of Israel, that in the space of 38
years time, there was not a man of them left that were 20 years old and
upwards, when they came out of Egypt, save Caleh and Joshua. So the Lord may
pardon a Nation, and yet punish them, he may by his Judgments weed out the
generality of a Generation, and send them to the Pit, which may consist with a
National pardon, when he does not cut off the Nation, or suffers them to enjoy
the privileges of a Church. But the pardon of a particular Sinner, is, when he
sits down at God's Footstool, and Judges himself, and closes with Christ for
righteousness, and that is another thing.

And 5. In taking up the nature of pardon Negatively. We must beware of
confounding the pardon of Sin with the removal of Sin; the prosecution whereof,
would lead me to speak Positively; wherein pardon of Sin consists, to the guilt
and pollution of Sin, and the different acts of God about both; but because
that will give the rise to other Questions, I shall remit it to another
occasion, only here ye shall distinguish these three. The filth of Sin, the
power of Sin, and the guilt of Sin. The filth of Sin, is the foul stain that
Sin leaves behind it. The guilt of Sin is the Offense done to God, and the
Obligation to punishment, resulting thereupon; the power of Sin, is the Tyrrany
that Sin exercises over the Sinner. Now when I say, we are not to confound the
pardon of Sin, with the removal of Sin, ye would understand it aright, I grant
that God strikes at the guilt of Sin, and the power of Sin, both at once, which
is this in plain languege, that a pardoned sin, must not be a reigning sin;
where the virtue of the blood is applied for pardon, the power of the blood
will also be applied for the subjugating of sin, and putting it from the
Throne; and therefore in the by, ye may take it as a noble evidence of pardon,
when sin is subdued, or if it be not subdued, yet ye are engadged against your
own sinful disposition, that it prevails not with your consent; but for the
filthiness of sin, though it be stricken at as soon as any of the former,
Regeneration lays the Ax to the Root of that Tree, yet it remains in the
Saints till death make the separation. Paul Romans 7. Has a Law in his members,
rebelling against the Law in his his mind till Death, but the pardon of sin is
attainable before death, and given in Justification, and afterward, upon the
justified persons Repentance, for particular faults, and therefore consequently
it is not to be confounded with the removal of sin, sin may be pardoned, and
pardon of sin is consistent with the sight of the filthiness of sin, for which
the soul is abased before God daily after Regeneration, though sin does not
reign, and that is it wherein the pardon of sin consists, even in the taking
away of the guilt of sin, and the souls obligation to wrath, though the filth
of sin remain.

SERMON XI.
Psalm 130. Verse 4. But there is forgivenness with thee, --
I Am now insisting upon the refuge to which the man abased with the conscience
of sin betaketh himself: who, when he has reflected upon Gods proceedings in
strict Justice, according to the tenor of the Covenant of Works with sinners,
and who, when he has found, that, if God should thus mark iniquity, none, even
the most godly should be able to stand, he subjoyns this, as a blessed aftergain
in man's deplorable case. But forgivenness is with thee; In prosecution of this
great truth, that there is pardoning-mercy with God, to be a relief for
Self-condemned sinners, I have spoken to two of the five heads that I proposed
to be spoken to upon it. 1. I have spoken to the Consideration of that which is
pardoned, that is Iniquity, Sin or Transgression, or call it by what name ye
will. 2. I have spoken to the Consideration of the Author of Pardon, who it is
that pardons sin, and whatever hand Ministers have in this, or what ever hand
private persons have in it, in remitting injuries done to them, yet the Text
determins God still to be the principal Creditor; it is with thee, (says he)
It Is with thee alone that forgivenness is. I entered upon the 3d thing, I
proposed to be spoken to, which is the main thing in thing purpose, that is to
inquire after the nature of this pardon, what this forgivenness of sin, which
is with God imports, and after a brief touch upon some passages of Scripture,
whereby pardon of sin is expressed, I proceeded negatively, to tell you what it
is not, where I show that pardon of sin is not to be confounded with men's
forgetting of sin, and taking a pardon to themselves; as also, that sin is not
to be lightly looked on, as a thing that God lightly passes by, when he pardons
it, for he pardons none but upon satisfaction made to his Justice, by sinners
surety; likewise, that pardon of sin is not to be confounded with Gods
forbearing, or not inflicting punishment for it for a time, for they may be
long forborne, who yet may be unpardoned, and whose forbearance is no sign of
Divine Approbation. Further it was cleared, that the pardoning of particular
sinners, and their restoring in favor, is not to be confounded with a National
pardon, conferred on a Nation, whom he may pardon, and yet punish. And lastly,
it was cautioned and cleared, that we should not confound the pardon of sin,
with the removal of sin, in the pollution of it; for though God strike at the
guilt and power of sin, both together, yet whereas pardon of sin is attained
before Death, some filthiness of Sin will remain in the pardoned Sinner, as
long as he is in this life, and pardon of Sin may consist with the sight of the
filthiness of Sin, for which the Sinner is abased before God daily.

And this leads me positively to point out what pardon of Sin imports: all that
I shall say to it in general, before I break in to tell you more particularly
what it is, shall be this ye shall distinguish in Sin these two. There is in
Sin a blot or pollution of the Soul and a defaceing of God's Image thereby And
there is in Sin a guilt, that is, an offense done to God, by the violating of
his Law, whereby the Sinner becomes obnoxious to the punishment that He has
threatened in his Law. These two are clearly distinguishable among men, a child
running in a puddle, pollute^ himself, and by so doing, he becomes guilty of
transgressing his Parents command, and is liable to their correction, or
punishment. Now as to these two, the guilt and the blot of Sin, there are
diverse and distinct Operations of God conversant about them; for as the blot
of Sin begins to be stricken at, in Regeneration, so that work is carried on by
Piecemeal in Sanctification, till Sanctification be perfected, and end in
Glorification. Regeneration and Sanctification are the Acts of God, conversant
about the Blot and Filthiness of Sin, but pardon of Sin takes not away the
being, nor the Filthiness of Sin, as Antinomians say, but it takes away the
guilt of Sin, and the guilt of Sin being pardoned, the Sinner is delivered from
the Punishment that his guilt deserves, and this is also distinguishable among
Men; for a person having committed an enormous crime, that crime continues
still a filthy thing, and evidences a naughty disposition, yet when that crime
is pardoned, the man that committed it loses not their favor, against whom it
was committed, and is freed from the punishment that it deserves. So a Child
that has puddled himself in a mire, suppose the Parents forgive the offense,
the filth that he has got in the mire sticks to him still, till it be washed
away another way. So I say, pardon of sin takes not away the filthiness of sin,
but the guilt of sin. And this I mention not merely for speculation, and
information of the Judgment, but it says something for their Advantage and
Encouragement, who in the sense of sin are flying to Christ for pardon, that
they be not scarred by the pollution of sin, from relying on him, for the
pardon of guilt. A tender Soul, so long as it finds the blot of sin, it will
readily doubt if the guilt of sin be taken away* but if we take up pardon
Scripturally, the guilt of sin is done away by pardon, though the blot of sin
remain: I confess the blot of sin, must not remain unmourned for, it must not
remain unsubdued, or without an endeavor to subdue it, yet it may remain, when
the guilt and violation of the Law of God by Sin, is pardoned, and past, that
sin may be near thy sight in the blot and pollution, which pardon has put far
off, as to the guilt of it. Jer. 50.20. [In those days and in that time (says
the Lord) the iniquity of Israel shall be sought, and there shall be none, and
the sin of Judah, and they shall not be found, Why? For I Will pardon them whom I
reserve,] only let me add that, that thou who grips to the pardon of guilt,
when yet thou finds the blot of sin remaining, and art mourning for it,
remember that pardon must not be only a simple exemption from punishment, but
that it is only a Restitution into his Favor, whom thou have offended. Thy
pardon must not be an Absalom's pardon, that brought him back to Jerusalem, but
he saw not the King's face. Thou must not satisfy thy self with that, but thou
must be accepted, and come into favor, that was David's prayer, Psalm. 51.8.
[Make me to hear joy and gladness, that the bones which thou have broken may
rejoice, and verse 12. Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thine
holy Spirit from me, restore to me the joy of thy salvation, and uphold me by
thy free Spirit.] But of this I will have occasion to speak in the progress,
therefore I leave it.

And having given you this general Notion of Pardon, I shall proceed to batter
it out a little, for the clearing of four Questions 1. How the guilt of sin can
be separated from the blot of sin, and the sinner pardoned. 2. Whether in
pardon the obligation to punishment be so taken off, as the pardoned man
falls under no Chastisement for sin. 3. Whether the real passing of Pardon be
one in the Court of Heaven, with that which is in the Court of Conscience, or
if the truth of pardon depends on the intimation of it to our hearts. 4.
Whether, what the Lord pardons, He pardons Irrevocably, or whether upon the
Contracting of new guilt, the former pardon be made void to the pardoned man;
These four Questions I shall touch upon as briefly as I can, and sure I am,
these of you, whose plight anchor pardon of sin is, ye will not weary to hear
them spoken unto.

For the First, Having said, that the pardon of sin takes away the guilt of
sin, while the blot of sin remains; It Is a Question how that can be, seeing
these two are inseparable, it is (as we say) propitum quarto modo, an essential
property of sin, that it draws under guilt, and makes the sinner liable to
punishment, and it is as absurd to say, that sin can be without guilt, as to
say, fire can be without heat, or the Sun without Light, guilt being as
inseparable a property of sin, as heat is to fire, or Light to the Sun: But for
Answer, this distinction will clear it, distinguish betwixt guilt it self, and
the result of that guilt on the person sinning, as also betwixt Gods offense,
and displeasure at sin, and his offense and displeasure at the sinner; hence,
if we consider guilt in it self, it is inseparable from sin, there is no pardon
that God gives unto the sinner, that takes away the desert that sin has in it
self of the wrath of God. But if we consider guilt, as it results upon the
person sinning, and brings him under the lash of God's displeasure, in that
respect, guilt may be separat from sin. Sin cannot be sin, if it bring no guilt
with it, yet the pardoning of sin brings freedom from the actual obligation of
the sinner to punishment. Sin has that evil with it, that it deserves wrath,
but a free pardon Suspends that ill deserving, that it does not take effect
against a sinner that is fled to Jesus Christ: I may illustrat it by a
similitude of a massy Hammer that is lift up, and falls down by an Engine, and
crushes that which is under it, and a strong hand holding it up, and keeping it
up, that it never falls down, it is as inseparable from sin, to deserve
everlasting Wrath, as it is inseparable from a ponderous weight falling down to
crush that which it falls on, but pardon keeps up that weight of deserved
Wrath, that it falls not down to crush them that are fled to Christ; and this
also serves not only for Information of the Judgment, but to meet with another
case incident to the People of God, who, when they are fled to Christ for
refuge, they not only meet with the Pollution and Blot of sin, but with the
guilt and ill-deserving of sin, which troubles them, who being sensible of Sin,
and assaying to close with pardon, when they look to the dreadful Rod of Iron,
that they know their sins deserve, they cannot get pardon of sin closed with.
That Is a strong temptation to a tender walker, to stand a back; but in this
case, we would distinguish betwixt what we deserve, and the execution of it, a
pardoned Sinner would remember, that it commends Gods free Grace in pardoning
Sin, that whatever his ill-deserving be, he will not get that which he
deserves, God will not give him according to his deserving. And though the Man
fled to Jesus Christ, may be daily humbled with the sight of the pollution, and
desert of sin, yet he may be comforted in the free Grace of God, that his
ill-deserving shall never take effect to his prejudice.

Now because this is a great Point, and folk that are in earnest about the
pardon of sin, when they are fled unto Christ for pardon, they may have many a
sad thought about the pollution and desert of Sin. The tender walker will, no
doubt say, I am a vile body, I have that which deserves everlasting wrath, nay
that, that God will pursue to root out, though he does not look on us as an
enemy: Because that may be ground of many doubts about this matter, touching
the pardon of sin, I shall desire you to take notice of some Scriptural
expressions, that are very full and satisfactory for pardon, notwithstanding of
the pollution of sin, and the desert of sin; and in following this, I would
desire you to take a look of these two, one is, how the Scripture declares,
that pardoned sin is looked on by the Creditor (to wit God)? And another is,
how it stands with the pardoned man?

For the First, whatever thou feel who art fled to Christ for pardon, yet O how
fully and satisfactory does the Scripture speak to thy pardon; I dare not fall
on all the Scriptural expressions that hold it forth, but shall briefly touch
on some of them in these four steps. And 1. The Scripture tells, that pardoned
sin is a blotted out sin, Psalm 51.9. Blot out all mine iniquities: and Isai.
44.22. I have blotted out as a thick cloud thy transgressions, and as a cloud
thy sins. It is an allusion to a man that deletes or blots out of his
Compt-book, that which is either paid or forgiven: and hence this phrase
tells, that pardoned sin is a debt, that will never be craved nor called for;
it is a debt, that God the principal Creditor has given over, and will no more
call for, seeing it is blotted out. But 2. Because it might be supponed that a
debt delete in a Compt-book, may be looked on and read, though not to crave the
debt, yet to waken resentments. Therefore the Scripture goes a further length
in the pardon of sin, and tells that pardoned sin is not only blotted out, that
it cannot be gotten read, but it is c^vered and hid out of Gods sight, Psalm.
32.1. Ble^st is the man whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered.
Numb. 23.21. He has not beheld iniquity in Jacob, nor has be seen perverseness
in Israel. It is not only blotted out, but it is covered, and so covered, as is
not seen to be pursued with the punishment it deserves; and here, the Scripture
is very copious to express how sin is covered, as that he casts pardoned sins
behind his back, or over his shoulders (to speak so) that they shall be no more
in his view, Isai. 38.17. Thou have cast all my sins behind thy back, says
Isaiah. And because a man may turn about and see that which is behind his back,
therefore pardoned sin is said to be so covered, that (as it is Mic. 7.19.) it
is said to be cast not in the shallow places, but in the depths of the sea: And
ye use to say of a thing that is lost irrecoverably, it is as tint as it were
in the Sea-bottom. But further, because though a thing be in the depth of the
Sea, it may be dived after, and sought out; therefore it is added in that
forecited place, Jer. 50.20. The iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and
there shall be none; and the sin of Judah, and they shall not be found: So that
the pardon of sin, covers sin, takes it out of Gods sight, and puts it in the
depths of the Sea, that though it be sought for, it shall not be found. But
3ly. If there remain any doubt, how it can be, but the Omniscient God must see
sin, and seeing it, must be angry at it; therefore the Scripture gives a
further account of the fullness of pardon, that it hides God's Face from it; as
David prays, Psalm. 51.9. Hide thy face from my sins; and it is a notable word,
Mic. 7.18. That God passes by, or over-pardons transgressions, Who is a God
like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and passes by the transgression of the
remnant of his heritage; though he be an Omniscient God to see sin, yet when
sin is pardoned, he will, (as we use to say) see, and not see, he will see, and
misken, as he that passes by that which might irritat him, he will not set his
Face in that art; so deals the Lord with pardoned sins in his people. But 4ly,
Whereas ye have a cursed distinction of forgiving, but not forgetting of
injuries, and temptations may be ready to use, and say, that though in the
sense that I have been speaking of, pardoned sins be blotted out, covered, put
out of sight, passed by, or over, that the Lord will not take notice of
pardoned iniquities, to punish them; yet he may remember them by way of grudge
against the pardoned person, the Scripture secures us against the fear of that,
and tells us, that pardoned iniquities are not remembered. Isai 43.25. I even I
am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mi^e own sake and will not
remember thy sins; and Jer. 31.34. with the parallel place, Heb. 8. in the New
Covenant it is said, I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their
sins no more; I will remember it judicially no more, to call them to an account
for the sin I have pardoned. So that sins being pardoned, they shall be as if
they had not been committed, as if they were everlastingly forgotten, no more
to be remembered: so much for these expressions showing how pardoned sin is
looked upon in reference to God, to which many mo might be added, and O what a
full and satisfactory ground do they afford, that pardon of sin is no
complement, but a real security, and firm ground of confidence; when God has
said all this who are they who looking on the pollution, or desert of sin, will
take pardon of sin for a complement, and not look on it as a solid security.

And this will be further clear, if in the second place we consider how it
stands with the pardoned man; for ye may say to me, much has been said for
God, and of the fullness of his pardon, and that it is a real Security to the
pardoned man; but I find it not so with my case: Therefore I shall in a few
words hint, how it stands with thee; Thou who art a pardoned sinner may find
much sin and pressures of guilt at thy door, and lying near thy Conscience, but
the Scripture tells us, that it is otherways with thee than thou apprehends,
Psalm. 103.12. So far as the east is from the west, so far has he removed our
transgressions from us; That which thy fears and doubts apprehends lying at thy
door, and to be as an heavy burden upon thy back sinking thee, a pardon removes
from thee, as far as the East is from the West, as far as one thing can be
removed from another, as the proverbial Speech imports. Thou thinks thy self to
be in a woeful and wretched condition, but the Scripture determines thee to be
bl^st. Psalm. 31.1, 2. Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven etc. Thou
may be crying out, O wretched man, who shall deliver me! But the Scripture
tells thee, thou art happy, and ought to thank God through Christ, Rora. 7.24,
25. Thou may be drooping, notwithstanding thou art fled unto Christ for
pardon; but the Scripture Language of pardon is another thing, Mat. 5.2. Son,
be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee. The power and pollution of sin
may make thee droop, but the pardon of sin may make thee drink and forget thy
misery, and remember thy poverty no more. Thy other sores and difficulties may
stick to thee and press thee down; but if thou read the pardon of sin rightly,
thou may say as Isai. 33.24. The inhabitant shall not say, I am sick, why? the
people that dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity; since I am
pardoned, what can all me, what can dare at me, or trouble me, since I am
forgiven of my sin? In a word, the Scripture declares, That have what thou
will, or want what thou will, though thou should complain, loving kindnesses
are wanting, thou have not these proofs of love thou wont to receive, yet thou
wants not an admirable proof of love that have pardon; hence is that
Exclamation, Mic. 7.18. Who is a God like unto, that pardons iniquity? Others
may say, who is a God like thee in working wonders, when thou brought thy
people out of Egypt? But as for me, I will say, Who is a God like thee in
pardoning sin? Thus if we take the Scripture-verdict of pardon of sin, as well
in reference to the pardoned man, as in respect of God; we will find that
pardon is a sure foundation of confidence, and it is so excellent a Character,
that if we could heed it, believe it, and improve it, to the quickening of us to
run and secure pardon in the right method (whereof we may hear) we should find,
that we have here a Treasure hid in this Field, Christ, a pardoner of iniquity,
lying in the bosom of this mercy. Lord bless what ye have heard.

SERMON XII.
Psalm 130. Verse 4. But there is forgivenness with thee, --
I Am now entered upon the 3d, and great Head of this necessary Doctrine, to
clear wherein it is That the forgiveness of sin does stand; and after a general
Resolution thereof, That the pardon of sin takes away not the filthiness and
pollution, but the guilt of sin: I proceed to name four Questions to be cleared
on this Subject; And the first (to which I spoke) was, how the guilt of sin
could be removed, while the filthiness and pollution of sin remained, guilt
being inseparable from sin; and the Resolution was, that however guilt in it
self, or (as the Learned call it) The potential guilt, the guilt of sin in it
self, be not taken away by pardon; yet guilt as it results on the person, or
the actual ordination of the person guilty to condemnation is suspended
everlastingly, and taken away; and for confirmation thereof, I led you through
several Scriptures, to let you see what a sure character pardon is; whether we
consider pardon as it is to be looked on in respect of God? or how it stands
with the pardoned man? And now without further repetition, I shall go on with
the rest of the Cases, tending to clear the nature of the remission of sin. A
2d. Question in order, is, since pardon frees the pardoned man from obligation
to punishment, Whether is this to be held, that no justified or pardoned person
can fall under any punishment, or chastisement for sin? And here the
Adversaries of Truth, Papists on the one hand, and Antinomians on the other,
run on two extremes; for Papists say, That in pardon of sin, God remits
culpam, but not paenam; That is, he remits the fault or guilt, so as not only
he may chasten (which we grant) but as he reserves a punishment by way of
satisfaction for sin, to be undergone by the pardoned sinner: They distinguish
in this betwixt mortal and venial Sins; for mortal sins, they grant that the
free Grace of God turns eternal punishment into a temporal, which the sinner
must undergo; for venial sins, which they say deserves not eternal punishment,
but temporal, all that temporal punishment they will have the pardoned man to
sustain it. Hence is their Doctrine of Pennances in this life, and of Purgatory
after death; when Pennances are not undergone here, where they will have
pardoned sinners to make satisfaction of sin; for this Doctrine, it would be
but troublesome to you to hear all that might be said against it, though we
should but touch on it, and therefore passing that groundless distinction of
mortal and venial sins, ye shall notice these five anent that their Doctrine:

1. That as the bulk of Popish Religion is nothing but a well contrived Policy,
or Interest of State; so this Doctrine of Penance and Purgatory is nothing
else but a Politic Device to make gain for maintaining their Kitchen, Pomp,
Pride, and Luxury, which (as I told you the last day) Caesar Borgia the Son of
Alexander the sixth, makes to appear, who while he had lost 100000 -- at the
Dice, past it in a sport, saying, These are the sins of the Germans, meaning,
that thereby they had purchased remission of Sins; for here the policy lies.
Once persuade folk, that they must do Pennances to satisfy for sin, or to go
to Purgatory, what will they not do while they are alive, or their Friends for
them when they are dead, to mitigat that satisfaction, that is their Market,
and then pay well, and come to Heaven without either Penance or Purgatory, so
that their Doctrine in this is a perfect cheat.

2. In this their Doctrine they corrupt the Doctrine of the ancient Church,
which was not so very sound; for (...) they have a trick of retaining ancient
Names of things, under which they bring in new Errors; so in this particular of
Pennances and Indulgences, used by the ancient Church, who while they were a
distinct Society, were very strict and severe in requiring public Penance and
Satisfaction for Scandals, some they held many years in making their
Repentance, some they held all their life: but afterward, when the World came
in to the Church, and the Emperors embraced Christianity, and they, with other
great Ones were too thin-skin'd, and would not submit to Discipline, the Church
did degenerat from their strictness, and shortened their Indulgences; but the
ancient Church their Pennances were not to satisfy God for sin, but the
Church, they were not for private and secret sins, but for public and
scandalous offenses. And the Church willing to gratify great persons, did
mitigat these severities to many. But the Papists retaining the Name, they will
have these Pennances a satisfaction to God for sin, and their Indulgences to
assoil folk in the Court of Heaven.

A 3d thing to be considered in that their Doctrine, which is very unhansom for
them to maintain, these Pennances which they call satisfaction, what are they?
They are their Fastings, their Ave Marias, and Pater-nosters, their Pilgrimages
and Peregrinations, their Charity to the poor, or for a Religious use, their
Self-scourgings and Whippings; now I enquire what are these? They are either
Commanded Duties, or not, If they be not Commanded Duties, how can they be
satisfaction for sin? for will God be satisfied with that which he does not
require? Who required these things at your hand? If they be Commanded Duties,
how can they make a punishment of them? that is a dreadful Solecism in their
Religion; that Commanded Duties that should be the joy and rejoicing of folks
hearts, should be turned to Punishments; and except they be punishments they
cannot be satisfaction, so that they have a bad impression of these things,
which they look upon as Duties, while they make Commanded Duties punishments
for sin.

And a 4th Word I say to that their Doctrine, is this, That to admit of
satisfaction for sin, either as to temporal or eternal punishment for it, is a
blasphemous imputation on Christ's Satisfaction, as if any thing needed to be
added to the Ocean of his Merit, who has satisfied the Justice of God, both as
to the Temporal and Eternal Curse, due to his own Elect for their sins.

And a 5th I shall say to their Doctrine, is, That it is contradictory to it
self, for what is the guilt of sin, (as contra-distinct to the stain of sin)
that is removed? It is not the potential guilt, the desert of sin, for that is
inseparable from sin; it is only the actual ordination to punishment. Now to
say, God remits the guilt, and retains the punishment of sin, it is to say,
that he remits and retains, that he pardons and does not pardon, that he takes
away actual ordination to punishment, that he craves the debt which he has
forgiven. This is sufficient to refute the Papists on the one hand, in what
they hold anent the pardon of sin.

Upon the other hand, the Antinomians run on another extreme, and say, that
pardoned, justified persons fall not so much as under chastisement, let be a
proper punishment for sin: And they will have all Afflictions that come upon
the Godly, to be mere trials of their Faith, and no more, and think that it is
a legal Spirit that teaches folk while they are under the Rod, to search out
sin, and to be humbled for it; all that a man is called to do in that case (say
they) is to maintain his Faith in adhering to the Love of God in Christ, for
whatever Affliction come, it is not for sin, and it is no wonder they maintain
the Saints cannot fall under affliction for sin, or chastisement for sin, seeing
they maintain, God sees no sin in them. To clear the mind of God in this
particular. There are some things that must be granted as truths, and there are
some other things to be cautioned against as error. The truths that are to be
granted, may be reduced to these four words.

1. That justified persons never meet with condemnation, what temporal lots
soever they meet with, and though they be not secured against the cross, yet
they are secured from condemnation. 2. That a pardoned and justified child of
God, does never come under the wrath of God, though justified persons may come
under Gods Fatherly displeasure, yet they are never more objects of divine
wrath as others; though they may often meet with Fatherly and Divine
displeasure, as children, they come not under wrath, as enemies. 3. That
pardoned and justified sinners never fall under proper punishments for sin, or
afflictions to satisfy for their faults, though for other ends they may, as to
invite them to repentance, and to be humbled for their sin, to mortify sin, to
caution them against sin for the future. 4. That many trials and afflictions
come on pardoned sinners, wherein God does not pursue them for sin, but is
trying their faith and their graces: Such were Jobs trials, though Elihu tells
him what he was, he had sin, and his sin deserved all was come upon him; yet
betwixt God and Satan all his trials were stated on this, whether he would
prove a godly man, and continue so, notwithstanding of them all; and such were
these trials under which the Apostles and other godly persons did glory: God in
these was not pursuing sin, but taking service and proofs of their faith, love,
zeal, patience etc. under the cross from them; and to this pertains that of
Joh. 9.2.3. When the Disciples asked him, sayng, Master, Who did sin? This man,
or his parents, that he was born blind. Christ answers, Neither has this man
sinned, nor his parents: That is, God was not punishing his nor his parents sin
in that stroke of blindness, but that the works of God might be made manifest
in him.

These truths being conceded, there are other some things to be cautioned
against, as error, and I shall reduce what I would say for Caution, to these
three Heads. 1. It is certain, that sin is the inlet to all affliction, Romans
5.12. By one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death
passed upon all men, for that all have sinned. Death, that is, all calamities,
which are a begun death, and the great death, the separation of the soul from
the body. And hence whatever may be God's design in any affliction he sends on
godly men, it is their wisdom, while they are under the Cross, to search out
and be sensible of sin, and to be humbled for it before God, as we said before,
when we was on the 2, and 3. verses, That sense of trouble should be attended
with the sense of sin: The sense of sin is good company when sense of trouble
is sharpest; and therefore though Job was under a cleanly trial, yet Elihu
tells him he had sin to deserve all that was come upon him, and if he
considered his sin, he would quarrel less when his friends mistook him.
Whatever other exercise affliction calls to, this is one, to search out and be
humbled for sin; and it is a shrewd evidence, that that affliction is not
blessed of God, that is not well Varnished with sense of sin.

But 2ly. Not only is sin the inlet to all afflictions, but even godly persons
pardoned of sin, may be under affliction upon the account of sin; I shall not
speak of those common and absolutely determined afflictions, as that all godly
men must die, and godly women must have pain in childbearing, as well as
others, but godly pardoned persons may come under peculiar afflictions upon the
account of sin, and that either before sin is committed, or after sin is
committed; Before sin be committed, godly men may come under affliction upon
the account of sin. How many afflictions got godly men upon the account of
their corrupt dispositions to prevent sin, to withdraw them from their purpose,
to hide pride from man, to keep back his soul from the pit, and his life from
perishing by the sword? Job 33.17, 18. How many are such hard Rocks, that they
must have hard Wedges to rent them? How many are so prone to wandering, that
were not their way hedged up with thorns, and the cross laid in their way, they
would ruin themselves in following their lovers? How many would be intolerable
to live with, if their nose were not holden on the Grindstone? How many are
made beggars, because they cannot bear wealth? Thus ye see godly men may be put
under the cross with an eye to sin to prevent sin: Again, they may be brought
under peculiar afflictions, upon the account of sin, even when it is committed,
and that either before it be pardoned, or after it is pardoned. Before it be
pardoned, as when a sinner is lying under unrepented guilt, singing himself
asleep in his provocations. If a godly man with David, 2 Samuel 11. drive such a
Trade, to fall into scandalous sins, and ly over in security, the Lord will
send a hurl upon him, not to satisfy his justice, but to shake him out of his
secure posture, and to set him to his feet, to the exercise of repentance and
humiliation, he will send a rod, that he may hear the voice thereof, and who
has appointed it, Hence David, Psalm. 119.67. Before I was afflicted I went
astray; before I got the cross I wandered, and knew not what I was doing, but
now have I kept thy word: That Is affliction upon the account of sin committed,
before it be pardoned, to waken out of security, and put to repent for it:
again afflictions may come on the godly upon the account of sin, even when it
is pardoned, when the pardoned man falls in sin, especially if it be a
scandalous sin, he may not win easily away with that escape, but may be made to
go with a born-down-back after it is pardoned, all his days. 2 Samuel 10.12, 13.
The Lord tells David, that he had pardoned him, yet that the sword should not
depart from his house, for all that. We suppose the Corinthians were godly men,
and pardoned for the abuse of the Lords Supper, yet 1 Cor. 11.30. For this
cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep. For if we would judge
our selves, we should not be judged. But when we are judged we are chastned of
the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the world. Where ye may see
affliction is let out upon the account of sin remitted. And if ye ask, Why does
the Lord so? I answer, not to take a satisfaction to his justice, that is
already completely made by Christ; but he does it, partly to vindicat his own
honor, whatever be betwixt him and his pardoned children, if they fall in sin
that the world observes, he will let the world see that he will not wink at
their miscarriages. The sword's not departing from David's house, was not to
satisfy justice for his sins that were pardoned, but because by his scandalous
out-breaking, he had made the enemies to blaspheme: He will let the world see,
that if his darling David bourd with him, and fall in sin, he has made an ill
bargain. Partly he does this upon the account of sins remitted, that even the
Saints who are pardoned may see yet more the bitterness of their folly and
wandering. The Lord looks not upon it as a sufficient discovery of sin, and
the evil thereof, that a child of God may win to in repentance antecedent to
pardon, but when he is pardoned, he will sharply afflict him, that he may know
the bitterness of sin, and that he made an ill bargain when he gave way to it;
and upon this it will result, that when the Lord afflicts the pardoned, they
are not to forget daily to be humbled for pardoned sin. Though God be good and
gracious in pardoning sin, we should be severe on our selves for provoking him.
Though the pardoned man's Count be cleared, he must ly in the dust, for that he
offended God, and brought so much woe and vexation on himself. And further, this
will follow upon it, that God by afflicting the pardoned sinner, invites him to
mortify sin daily that he may not fall in the like sin again. Yea, and
further, when he afflicts the sinner, with an eye to sin that is pardoned, he
invites the sinner to more and more thankfulness to him for the pardoning of
it, when he considers whatever afflictions or rods be inflicted, yet his
pardon is ensured to him: These are some of the blessed ends, why the Lord with
an eye to pardoned sin, is pleased to let out afflictions and chastisements
upon justified persons; and it is upon this account, that chastisement with
pardon is put in the Covenant, Psalm. 89.32. That however he will not take his
loving kindness from his children, nor suffer his faithfulness to fail, yet he
will visit their transgressions with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes;
therefore we would mind this well. It is no great wonder that Antinomians say,
God chastens not the Saints at all upon the account of sin; for they say, God
sees no sin in them to chasten; but let us not deceive our selves, but when the
rod is laid on, let us hear the voice of the rod, and who has appointed it,
Mic. 6.9. Ye have heard, that all afflictions comes in by the door of sin, and
therefore it is a sweet study under afflictions, to be sensible of sin. Ye have
heard, that God may send afflictions on justified persons, to prevent sin, and
to waken them out of security, and put them to repentance when sin is
committed, to imprint upon their spirits the folly of their wanderings, and the
bitterness that follows sin, to caution them for the future against relapsing
in sin, to stir them up to mortify sin etc. These are better Lessons than the
dreams of Antinomians, that God has no respect to the sins of his children
when he afflicts them.

And yet I shall add a third word more for Caution against their error, that
is, That Gods afflicting of Saints with an eye to sin, does not at all clash
with that which they assert, that the afflictions of the godly are for the
trial of their faith. That they are merely for the trial of their faith, we
deny; that they are for the trial of their faith, we grant. For though
afflictions be for the trial of faith, yet they are also for other ends, as
before they repent to stir up to repentance, in order to pardon, and after
repentance to humble them, and caution against sin, and for producing other
effects, yet they are still trials of faith, whether they will adhere to God;
yea, so much the more trials of faith are they, as we have not only trouble to
graple with, but guilt that brought on the affliction; It is easier for faith
to hold its feet under a cleanly trial, than when affliction is lying on, and
conscience of guilt is staring us in the face: And therefore we shall easily
grant, providing the mind of God in other ends of affliction be not neglected;
That when we have done all, we should look on the trial of faith as a main end
of affliction, and when in affliction we cast away confidence, we miss a main
end, and imped the good that we might get by affliction.

The time having prevented me, and I cannot win to the other two Questions,
whether the truth of pardon depends on the intimation of it to our hearts, and
whether pardon be it revocable, so that guilt makes not former pardon void,
though it needs pardon, and ought to be mourned for. I shall not now break in
upon them. The Lord bless his Word to you.

SERMON XIII.
Psalm 130. Verse 4. But there is forgivenness with thee --
THough I have insisted long, and may insist yet some while upon this great
privilege, the forgivenness of sins, yet ye may know that I am not upon an
unnecessary Subject; I am upon a Subject that will be found absolutely
necessary for you, to make your Testament comfortably with, and with the
cordials thereof ye may digest any bitterness that occurreth in your empty
pilgrimage.

These general Heads on which I am now treating, they want not their ground in
the Text and Context. That which is pardoned (to which I have spoken) the Text
tells, that it is iniquity, there is forgivenness with thee of these
iniquities, which if tho^ mark, who can stand? The Author of this benefit of
pardon, is expressly held out in the Text, There is forgivenness with thee; and
the benefit it self, the nature whereof I am now inquiring after, is held out
in that term of forgivenness, There is forgivenness with thee. Now concerning
this, having cleared negatively, what it is not, I told you particularly, that
pardon takes not away the filth and being of sin, but the guilt of sin. God in
pardoning the sinner, remits the offense done to him, by the violation of his
Law, and restores the pardoned sinner to his favor, and exempts him from the
deserved punishment of sin; and in pursuance of this, I spoke to two of four
Questions, which are needful to be discussed, for clearing the nature of
remission. I cleared to you, that though guilt be inseparable from the filth of
sin, yet the sinner might be pardoned, though the filth of sin remain; and how
that his pardon did not take away the desert of sin, considered in it self, but
that it takes away that desert and guilt, as it results on the person sinning,
so as it never takes effect upon him; so that though the person fled unto
Christ for refuge be troubled, not only with the pollution, but with the guilt
of sin, yet he needs not be afraid, for it takes no effect against him, since
he has betaken himself to the City of Refuge. And to confirm this, I gave you
several Scriptural expressions of pardon, which may quiet the Conscience, and
be ground of peace; that although the filth of sin, and the inherent desert of
sin remain, yet pardon is a real security to the pardoned sinner. 2. Another
case or Question which I spoke unto, was, that seeing pardon frees the pardoned
man from obligation to punishment, whether or not does, or may the Lord pursue
a pardoned justified man with any chastisement or punishment for sin, and
there, not to resume what I spoke unto you the last afternoon, I gave you some
grounds of refutation of the Popish Doctrine, who will have the fault or guilt
remitted when the punishment is retained; which is to say, that sin is
remitted, and it is not remitted: And upon the other hand, I cleared to you
against the Antinomians, how that as all trouble came in by the door of sin,
and that the Lord may and does chasten the pardoned sinner, upon the account of
sin; partly to prevent sin, partly to rouse him up to repentance when he has
sinned, partly to set sinners to their feet, that they may be rightly affected
with sin when it is pardoned, and that they may be excited to make a right use
of pardon.

There remains yet other two Questions or Cases to be cleared, anen^ the nature
of remission of sin, to which I shall now briefly speak, as the Lord will give.

The 3d Case or Question in order to this, whether the truth of pardon depends
upon the intimation thereof to our hearts, yea, or no, so that when a sensible
sinner, fallen down at Gods footstool, in the confession of sin, and crying
for pardon through Christ, yet he finds nothing like a pardon intimate to his
Conscience. In this case the Question is, whether has he ground to doubt, that
neither has he repented of sin, nor gotten a pardon from God for it. The
general Answer to this is, that pardon, and Gods intimation of pardon to the
Conscience, are not to be confounded. The Apostle 1 Cor. 2.12. gives a general
rule concerning all supernatural gifts, that when we have received these things
freely of God, we must receive the spirit which is of God, that we may know the
things that are freely given to us of God. It Is one thing to get these
supernatural gifts gifted to us, another thing to get the spirit which is of
God, to know they are given us; and this has place particularly in the matter
of pardon of sin, for the pardon of sin is a sentence already past in the Word
of God, in favors of all believers and penitents in Christ, so that no sooner
does the penitent sinner flee unto him, and look unto him, as to the brazen
serpent, for pardon and cure, but as soon that pardon becomes his, before he
can subsume and say, I am fled unto Christ for pardon, and am pardoned, his
direct act of faith draws out pardon, before he can reflect and pass a judgment
on that his pardon. And hence, when Nathan has pronounced, that David's sin is
pardoned him, 2 Samuel 12.13. Yet in the 51. Psalm he cries instantly for mercy,
for pardon, and blotting out of his transgression. Why? Though he was pardoned
in the Court of Heaven, yet he was not pardoned in the Court of his own
Conscience. The intimation of pardon was suspended and kept up. And hence is
that which I named before, Mat. 9.2. Son, be of good cheer, thy sins are
forgiven thee. It Is one benefit to him to have his sins forgiven him, and
another benefit to be of good cheer on that account: Therefore, as Christ tells
him, that his sins are forgiven him, so he must bid him be of good cheer. Thus
ye see the truth of a penitents pardon depends not on the intimation thereof to
his conscience.

But this wakens up another Case or Question; the following forth whereof will
deduce this more distinctly, and that is, how it comes, and for what ends it
is, that a child of God cannot get it discerned and closed with, that he is
pardoned. For clearing of this Case, we should look first to our selves, and
then to a wise hand of God, suspending the intimation of pardon. If we look to
our selves when we are pardoned, we cannot discern it because of our weakness,
that cannot discern our happiness; we are blind and discern not our happiness,
discern not our health, we confound the reality of pardon, with the sense and
feeling of pardon, and we will not believe pardon, except we feel the effects
of pardon; and it is also because we are ignorant of getting pardon through the
satisfaction of another: when we are brought to be sensible for sin, and to
look to Christ for pardon, and God has spoken pardon, we are like the Sea,
which being raised by a storm, does tumble a while after the storm is over, and
there is a calm. These are some hints on our part, why the pardoned sinner gets
it not discerned that he is pardoned: But if we look up to God, he may have a
holy hand in keeping up the intimation of pardon upon several accounts. As 1.
The Lord would have us looking more to his Word, wherein pardon in the Gospel
is holden out to us on Gospel-terms, and less to sense, he would breed us to
grip the promise while sense come, and to grip the promise that sense may come;
and they that will suspend all assurance of pardon, while it be sensibly
intimat; the Lord in his holy providence keeps up the intimation of pardon from
them, to teach them to pay more due respect to his Word, and to seek and feed
upon the consolation that depends upon pardon promised and pronounced therein,
that by following his method by faith, they may come to sensible intimation of
pardon. 2. The Lord may keep up the sensible intimation of pardon from the
penitent and pardoned man, that he may learn him to look upon pardon not as a
necessary result and effect of his repentance, but as a free gift of God, which
though the Lord will not bestow without repentance, yet he does not bestow it
for repentance; therefore does he suspend the intimation of pardon from the
penitent man, that he may learn to look less to his Repentance, and more to the
free Grace of God in obtaining of Pardon. 3. The Lord sees it fit to keep
pardoned sinners in suspense, as to the sense of Pardon, or the intimation of
it, that he may let them see, that when he is provoked by their sinning, it is
not so easy to recover themselves, and get into his favor; Therefore though
he have pardoned them, yet he will keep them at the back of the door, as to the
intimation of it; partly, that they may be put to resent how bitter a thing it
is to depart from God, and to raise a Cloud betwixt him and them; and partly,
that they may be affrighted to dally with sin again; he will have them to know,
that though he give them mercy, it is not so easy to bring a Delinquent in
Court and Favor again. And, 4. The Lord keeps up the intimation of pardon from
the penitent and pardoned sinner, for this among other ends, that he may be fit
for sympathy with others, that may come in the like case with himself, he may
cause his reconciled people feel the bitterness of departing from him, and may
suffer them to ly in the sense, and under fears of their un-reconciled
condition, as to the intimation of pardon, that they may bear burden with
others that come to be in their case. 5. The Lord keeps up the intimation of
pardon from them, that he may set them on work to repent more, that they may
search out sin more, and repent more for their sin, and for the sinfulness that
is in their sin, that possibly as yet they have not laid well to heart. These
reasons of suspending the intimation of pardon, even where pardon is really
past, were they well pondered by us, we might get a better account of our
pardon, and the petitions we put up for it.

And particularly to speak a word here to them, who though they are in the use
of the Means, running to the open Fountain, and seriously to know the mind of
God, as to the pardon of their sin, and their being in favor with God, and yet
can find no intimation thereof; Beside what general Directions they may gather
from that which I have spoken, I shall offer three or four words further. Thou
that art a sensible sinner, in the use of the Means, fleeing to the Remedy, yet
can find no warmness or sweetness, through gripping to the Promise of pardon,
thou finds nothing like that, Son, or daughter, be of good cheer, thy sins are
forgiven thee: For such, I say, as thou art, I offer these four words of
Direction: 1. I would have such persons looking upon it as a mercy, that they
are not deluded as to the matter of their pardon, as many are who never doubt
of it: I confess they are in an error on the one hand; but the error of the
other hand, that doubts not of pardon, is the more dangerous; thy continuing
doubting, is dishonorable to God, and thou impedes, and provocks him to
suspend thy comfort: but the other that doubts not of pardon, they are deluded,
they take it for granted, that they are pardoned, or desperately they will take
their venture whether they be pardoned or not; and therefore thou that are
kept in exercise about the intimation of pardon, ought to bless God that thou
art not in the error of these self-deluders. 2. I would recommend to such, that
they would justify God whatever he do; That is David's remark, Psalm. 51.4.
That he might be justified when he speaks, and clear when he judges; if thou
fall a carping and quarrelling, that will not shorten thy distress, it may well
provock God to hide his Face yet more, till thou learn to justify him. 3. I
would recommend to them that are about the Means using for pardon, and yet
cannot win to the intimation of it, that they would look well to their
Repentance, and there are four things to be looked to in Repentance: 1. They
would look well that it be sincere, that it be repentance for sin as sin, and
not a ruing for it, as it is disgraceful to them and prejudicial; many beguile
themselves with a ruing for sin, and never repent sin. 2. They would look if
their repentance be universal for all sin, which is another mark of sincere
repentance, see that thou be not seeming to rue over one sin, while thou art
hugging another in thy bosom. 3. They would labor to have their repentance
deep and through, I mean not to recommend to any a trade of discouragement, but
any who reads in what plight David was, Psalm. 32. Psalm. 38 Psalm. 51. They will
readily find, that the repentance of the generality is not through. And 4. They
would look to it if their repentance be constant. It is marked of Christ, That
when he was in an agony, he prayed more earnestly, Luke 22.44. So such as are
suspended and kept at the door; while they are about the work of repentance,
they would be more fervent, and hold on in the work of repentance. 4 That they
would stick well by Faith. There is a word to this purpose, Isai. 50 10. who is
there among you that fears the Lord, that obeys the voice of his servant,
that walks in darkness and has no light; no intimation of comfort, Let him
trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God: In this case, Faith
closing with the promise of pardon, must be stuck by, and to help you to stick
by Faith in such an exigent, I would have you considering partly, that many a
Pardon is past in Heaven, whereof the sensible sinner wants the comfort. 2.
When Faith is the exercise that thou have no will to make use of, I would have
thee to consider, that it is a notable refutation of temptation, to go and
mourn over thy Atheism and Unbelief, and for that thou has such an aversation
to the way of Faith, whereby only thou can win to the Shore. And 3. Consider
that it is a most cleanly and noble Act of Faith, in despite of Satan's
Temptations, and the Fears of thine own Conscience, over the belly of Unbelief,
to cast thy self in the arms of Christ, and in the bosom of the Promise, and if
thou perish, thou perish: There thou casts thy self, and there thou leaves thy
self.

Now to come to the Fourth, or last Case or Question, I proposed to be spoken
to, Whether pardon of sin be a revocable, or irrevocable sentence? That is,
whether when a pardoned sinner falls in a new sin, his new guilt cancelleth
all former pardon till he repent all over again, and get a renewed pardon for
all. It is to no purpose here to trouble you with the differences betwixt the
Cannonists, and the Schoolmen, betwixt Gratian and his Glossator in this
matter. That which lies in our plain road in clearing this Question, I shall
reduce to five brief Assertions; And 1. It is to be granted, and experience
witnesses it, that in the case of new guilt, Satan by temptation may be ready
to cast all loose, to call in question all former pardons, so to a man's sense,
all former iniquities may come to remembrance; and it may come in question,
whether or not they have been pardoned, which is a proof of the Saints
tenderness, though it be clogged with a mistake, their pardon may fall under
debate, as we may see in David and Job; in David, Psalm. 15.7. Who prays that
God would not remember the sins of his youth: and in Job 13.26. Whose
temptation is, Thou writest bitter things against me, and make me to possess
the sins of my youth. He looks on sins long ago pardoned, as pursued by God. 2.
It is to be granted, that as Satan by temptation, and Saints through their own
weakness, may bring former pardon in question; so the Lord in his Providence
may see it good to concur in something like that, he may, though he do not
recall pardon yet bring pardoned sins to memory, open these un-ripe Graves, and
hold their heads over them, when they fall in the committing of new folly. And
this the Lord does partly that he may affect the sinner the more, when he
reflects on his guilt against God, that has pardoned him so; and partly, that
the sinner may thereby be excited to vomit up by repentance his new contracted
guilt, all terrors for former guilt recurring, he may not dally therewith any
more; and partly he calls former guilt to remembrance, that he may make the
sinner afraid to be adding to that Account. 3. This is a thing to be yielded
to, that is, That however it stand with a man as to the pardon of bygone sin,
yet God allows him no consolation in the pardon of sin, so long as he wallows
in new provocations without repentance; be his pardon revockable or not
revockable, it shall be all a matter to him, if he study not tenderness in his
walk; and any man that is going on in new provocations, and does bless himself
in former pardon, I shall not say that he is blessing himself with a lie, but
sure he is blessing himself with a false comfort in his right hand. 4. This
must be granted, that as the Schoolmen say, That sins that are pardoned do
recur upon the commission of new guilt, not formally considered as in
themselves; but in so far as these former sins that were pardoned, and
virtually contained in the ungratitude that is in that new guilt; that is,
though formerly pardoned sins return not upon the Delinquent, yet there is so
much of ingratitude to God in new contracted guilt, that in some respect the
sinner may be accounted no less guilty, as if all the former guilt were
contained in that one provocation. But when these four must be granted, yet in
the 5th place it is still to be held, That a pardon past by God, is a sentence
irrevocable; it is a sentence not made void, nor cancelled by any new guilt. It
is one of these Gifts of God that are given without Repentance, and this is
clearly intimat to you in these Scriptures that I gave you before, while I show
you how satisfactorily, the Scripture speaks of the pardon of sin, as it is
looked on by God; how it is called a blotting out of sin, a covering of it, a
putting of it out of his sight, a casting of it behind his back, and in the
depth of the sea; and so, as though it be sought for, it shall not be found:
and how speaking of pardoned iniquities, he says, He so blots them out, that he
does not remember them; and he will forgive their iniquities so, as that he
will remember their sin no more. These Scriptures evince, that pardon once
past, is irrevocable. As for these Scriptures the Cannonists and Lutherians
urge, as Ezekiel. 18.24, 26. That when a righteous man turns away from his
righteousness and commits iniquity, and does according to all the abominations
of a wicked man, all his righteousness that he has done shall not be
mentioned, he shall die in his sin. That would seem to make all void, but the
answer is easy, That either the Text speaks of a Temporary Righteousness of a
man that was never pardoned, and from which he may totally and finally fall
away: Or if it speak of true righteousness in the pardoned man, it holds only
by way of supposition, That if the righteous man should fall away, his
righteousness should not be mentioned; and this supposition says nothing to the
possibility of the thing, but is a blessed mean to prevent his falling away.
There is another word, Mat. 18.32. spoken of the wicked servant that had his
debt forgiven him, and had no compassion on his fellow servant, and was
delivered to the tormentors, that the Ancients trouble themselves much about,
and speak of a Baptismal Remission, that is gotten in Baptism; but that Text is
a Parable, and a Parable is not to be strained beyond its scope. Parables are
like pictures wherein are many flourishes, which are not Lineaments of the
thing Portrayed. The scope of that Parable is, to prove that Christ will pardon
the sins of none, but such as forgive others; and such as will not forgive
others, though they seem pardoned folk, they will find their sins retained; and
that this is the scope, is clear from Christ's Explaining it, and no more.

From this that I have been speaking about the irrevocableness of pardon, there
is some Uses that I intended to have spoken to, which I shall name and close;
one is, That as they who have been pardoned, and can reflect how much they have
been humbled for particular sins before they attained to pardon, they would
walk tenderly for fear of wakening old sores, and that guilt that God has
covered with the vail of Pardon, and as they would not have these laid in their
Dish, and be made to look upon these unripe Graves of Abominations. And another
word that I intended to have spoken to, is, That a sensible Child of God,
though he fall in new guilt, is not obliged to look upon former guilt, which
has been pardoned, as un-pardoned, though he ought to be humbled for, and
repent the present guilt; if Satan, and the Conscience, and God in his holy
Providence, call to remembrance sins pardoned, and waken them about his ears;
the sensible man in that case should not question former pardon, though readily
there is some unpardoned sin, where these bygone compts are back-speared, that
should be sought out and mourned for; yet all are not to be looked on as
unpardoned, but as beacons and warnings, to make Conscience of repentance for
unpardoned sin, that we may get that breach semented, and that wound bound up
again. God bless what ye have heard.

SERMON XIV.
Psalm 130. Verse 4. But there is forgivenness with thee, --
I Did in the forenoon put a close to the third and main Head of Doctrine, that
is contained and included in this high and great Privilege of the Remission of
sins, and that is to clear what this forgiveness is, and wherein the nature of
it consists, and what ye heard upon it in the morning, amounts to this, That
Pardon in the Court of Heaven, is a distinct thing from the intimation of that
pardon in the Court of Conscience; and therefore they that are running to the
Fountain, and laying hold upon the Promise of Pardon, they must not conceive
that they are not pardoned, because they cannot feel by any sensible
manifestation that they are pardoned. And the last thing I was upon was, That
however pardon past by God is irrevocable, it is a Deed and Sentence that is
never revocked; once be pardoned of sin, and it is eternally pardoned: And
consequently the Child of God that has been at Christ the Remedy with any sin,
he must not conceive that every sin that troubles him, especially upon his
falling in new guilt, is unpardoned; yet they that know how much they are in
Free Graces Debt for Pardon, would walk tenderly, that they open not these
unripe Graves upon themselves, which will be much bitterness to them,
especially when new guilt is made a prospect, where through to read old guilt,
though it be pardoned.

I proceed to the 4. Head to be spoken to in this purpose, and that is the time
when God pardons sin in his people. The Text has a ground for this also; for
the Psalmist finds it a fit time to strick in for pardoning Mercy, and by Faith
to close with this, There is forgiveness with thee: When he is abased with the
sight and sense of sin, when he finds sin such a Debt, such a Burden, That if
God mark iniquity, none can stand, he finds it then time, I say, to strick in
for pardon. But that I may speak a little more distinctly to this, which when I
have done with, there will remain only the right method of application of
Pardon to be spoken to, that will bring me on in the Text, and to the practical
Use of all this Doctrine; I shall speak briefly to these three Questions on it:

1. Whether sin be pardoned from all eternity, or when Christ paid satisfaction
to Justice on the Cross, as the Antinomians say.

2. Supposing that sin is pardoned not from eternity, but in time; The next
Question will be, Whether all sins be forgiven at once to the justified and
pardoned man, whether in Justification, and upon a man's closing with Christ,
all sins, not only sins past and present, but sins to come are actually
pardoned?

3. If sins be pardoned in time, How is it said, Act. 30 19, 20. To be done at
the day of Judgment? Repent ye therefore and be converted, that your sins may
be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of
the Lord, etc.

For the first of these Questions, the Antinomians make Justification and the
Pardon of sin an imminent Act in God (as they call it) and they will have it
past from all eternity, and they assert, That all the Elect are actually
pardoned from eternity, and the lowest that any of them come is, That they will
have all the Elect pardoned, when Christ upon the Cross finished the
satisfaction to Justice for their sins, and all that a Believer gets, when he
comes to Christ, and closes with Christ for Righteousness and Life, is not an
actual pardon, but the intimation and declaration of his pardon, even as when a
pardoned Rebel who has a pardon in his pocket, is brought in before the King,
and prays for pardon, and the King intimats the pardon, which he has already
got, unto him; To clear it according to Scripture, and so to lead you to
something practical in this, ye shall take up pardon in four steps.

1. We grant, That from all eternity God Decreed to pardon the sins of all the
Elect, and in this respect we shall not decline to say, that all the Elect are
Justified and Pardoned in God's Decree, to whom known are all his works from
the beginning of the world, Act. 15.18. Yet we must add, that that will not
prove actual Pardon to the Elect from eternity, for all the Elect are saved as
well as pardoned in God's Decree; and yet they are not actually saved till they
be glorified. There is only a Decree concerning their Pardon to be in due time
past, on Gospel Terms, and actual Pardon is a transient Act, and changes the
state of the person.

2. As Pardon to the Elect is Decreed from all eternity, so it is purchased by
Christ at his Death, for then, Col. 2.14. He blotted out the handwriting of
Ordinances that was against us, which was contrair to us, and took it out of
the way, nailing it to his Cross: He then blotted out our Libel and Dittay;
how? by paying a price for that pardon, that in due time, and in the use of
means, was to be actually conferred, and in this sense we shall let it pass,
that the Elect were justified in Christ their Head, at his Death, he took up
that Song, Isai. 50.8. He is near that justifies me, who will contend with me,
that we might sing it after him, Romans 8.34. It is God that justifies, who is
he that condemns?

But there is a third step of the pardon of sin, that is, That pardon that is
Decreed by God from eternity, and purchased by Christ at his Death, it is
recorded by way of a past Sentence, and tendered in the word of the Gospel, to
be embraced by sinners in due order, in the use of the means. A sentence of
pardon is past and pronounced in the word of the Gospel, that needs no more to
make it effectual to the sinner, but his closing with Christ, and getting in
his name in the due use of the Means.

But yet we must add a fourth step, when pardon is Decreed, when Christ has
purchased padon, and the Sentence of pardon is past and pronounced in the Word;
yet no man is actually pardoned till he come unto Christ, till he be actually
penitent and a Believer, he is not actually pardoned, and when he is an actual
penitent, and has closed with Christ for pardon of sin, righteousness and Life,
he may then look back with comfort on Gods Decree of Election, on Christ's
purchase of pardon, on his being on Gods Heart, when pardon is holden out in
the Word, but actually pardoned he is not, till he himself come to Christ, and
be a Believer on him.

Many things would fall in to be spoken to for clearing of this; some whereof
will come in when we come to the Resolution of the next Question; I shall here
offer three words for clearing and confirming this Truth:

1 That all the Elect before Conversion are in a state of Wrath even as others,
Ephesians. 2.3. The Elect before they be quickened are Children of Wrath, not in
their own sense only, as the Antinomians say, but really even as others, and
consequently they were not pardoned, nor reconciled before they were quickened
more than the Pagans, Children of wrath.

2. It is clear from the Tenor of the Scriptures, that they are not, nor cannot
be justified and pardoned, till they be in Christ the second Adam, not in a
decree, or judicially as represented by Christ, but actually by Faith, for we
are justified by faith, Romans 5.7. and consequently by Faith we are pardoned,
which is a Branch of Justification; now men are in Christ by Faith, not from
eternity, but in time, and on that account, Romans 16.7. Paul tells of some of
his kinsmen that were in Christ before him, and consequently were not actually
pardoned till they were in him by Faith.

And 3. In the pattern of Prayer, Mat. 6. We are bidden Pray daily, Forgive us
our debts, as we also forgive our debtors; The Antinomians say, when we are
bidden Pray for forgiveness, that it is for the intimation of pardon but that
Gloss may be easily wiped off, if we consider that we are to pray for
forgiveness, as we forgive others. Now we forgive others by a real passing from
the wrong they have done us, and nor by the intimation of pardon only. And
further it may be cleared from that same similitude, that Antinomians bring of
a Rebel or Malefactor, that has gotten a pardon from his Prince; it is true,
after he has gotten his pardon, when he comes before his Prince, he may seek
the intimation of his pardon; but he were a fool if as often as he came in his
Princes presence, he should seek the Intimation of his pardon; and consequently
it is not the intimation of pardon that is to be sought daily in that Petition,
but actual pardon; Thus ye see that sin is not actually pardoned from eternity:
This might warn us in our practice to take a right look of the Decrees of God.
Profane Mockers begin there to cast off all fear of God, and if (say they) it
be decreed in Heaven, they will get it; and if not, they want it; others that
are more tender are ready to question if they be decreed for Life, and if
Christ stood in their room, and if they have interest in his death; but these
are not thy first Questions, but if thou have need of him, if that which thou
misters be held our in the promise, and thou need never speir thy interest,
so long as thou have a necessity to prove it; till thou begin there, a
comfortable look of Gods Decree and purpose about thee thou will never get.

But I proceed to the second Question, whether all sins of the justified be
forgiven at once; The expressions of some orthodox Divines run this way, that
Justification being an indivisible instantaneous act, all the sins of the
justified, past, present, and to come, are pardoned in that first act of
Justification, and all that we get afterward is a renewed sense of our
Justification, and a renewed extract of our Discharge, when by new guilt it is
darkened and subdued, so as we cannot read it. In the clearing of this, a
general truth is to be granted, that when a man is once justified, no sin that
he falls in after Justification shall eventually condemn him; for if we
consider partly the sure decree of God, that he will save his own elect whom he
has decreed to save; partly the purchase of Christ, that he will lose none
that are given to him; and partly the sure state of the justified man, that as
it is Romans 8.30. Whom he justifies, them he also glorifies; we may assert when
once a man is justified, he shall never be condemned, though he fall in new
sins after Justification: But this we say not upon that account, because these
sins are pardoned, but because the elect justified man shall undoubtedly repent
and get pardon, and these are the terms on which we say, that no sin the
justified man falls in, shall eventually condemn him. But more particularly, in
speaking of Justification, and the pardon of sin, ye shall in the taking of it
up, go along with me in these four or five steps.

1. A justified man, closing with Christ by faith, his person is reconciled and
received in favor with God; and that is the first great step or benefit the
justified person has, the man with Abraham becomes a friend of God of an
enemy, and upon this results that distinction that is to be made betwixt a man's
state and his condition. The unrenewed man, both his state and condition are
cursed, but the justified, as to his state is blessed, but his condition may
alter as the Moon upon his hand.

2. In Justification, not only is the justified man's person taken in favor
with God, but all his sins past and present, all the debt wherewith he can be
charged in that day when he closes with Christ, are blotted out and pardoned,
no more to be remembered; and his pardon is this, when he grips by faith to
Christ, and through Christ to the promise of pardon holden forth in the Gospel,
his pardon is a pronounced sentence in the Word, and all his crimes and
transgressions are then done away.

But 3. Because a justified man is not a perfect man, but falling daily in new
escapes, whereby he contracts new guilt and pollution, therefore a justified
man, beside the reconciliation of his person, and the pardon of his sins he is
under for the time, he has a right to that open fountain opened in the house
of David for sin and for uncleanness, Zech. 13.1. He has a right to go to the
fountain, as an open fountain to wash, upon his repentance daily, as he
contracts pollution, and that is another privilege the justified man has, that
he has a fountain to go to upon his repentance, and wash and be clean.

And 4. This is another benefit that results on Justification, that not only
has the justified man a right to the fountain, but a promise of repentance, to
fit and qualify him to go to the open Fountain, and make use of it for
cleansing, Zech. 12.9, 10. That God will pour upon him the spirit of grace and
supplication, and cause him to look unto him whom he has pierced by his sins,
and mourn, he has Christ an exalted Prince and Savior to give him repentance,
and remission of sins, and that is another privilege of the justified man,
that not only is he in favor with God, and has a right to pardon, but a right
to the promise of repentance, that he may have access to the open Fountain for
pardon.

Yet we must add 5thly, That his sins to come are not actually pardoned, till
he actually come to the Fountain and wash: It Is true (as the learned speak)
Justification is an indivisible instantaneous act, without succession (as they
call it) as to the state of the justified man's person, but yet as to the pardon
of daily sins, as it is said in the Confession of Faith, Chap. 11. Sect. 5. God
does continue to forgive the sins of these that are justified; It Is a continued
act, a frequently repeated act, as the justified man falls in new sins, humbles
himself, and confesses, begs pardon, and renews his faith and repentance.

And to clear that it is so, I shall adduce two or three Arguments briefly,
which will also prove that sins are not forgiven from eternity; and passing
that Argument, Mat. 6.12. where, because we are daily sinning, we are bidden
seek daily pardon and forgivenness, as we forgive others, ye shall consider
these three things, to make it out, That sins to come are not actually pardoned
in Justification.

1. Consider, That sin must be committed, and be a crime, before it be
pardoned; common sense says, that before a pardon be, there must be a crime,
and consequently sins to come are not pardoned, they not being as yet crimes.
Hence when the Scripture speaks of pardon of sins, it speaks of these sins as
committed, Ezekiel. 18.22. All his transgressions that he has done shall not be
mentioned: And Jer. 33.8. And I will cleanse them from all their iniquity,
whereby they have sinned against me, and I will pardon all their iniquities,
whereby they have sinned, and whereby they have transgressed against me. Nay,
the very names given to the pardon of sin, as when it is called, the blotting
out of sin, the putting of it out of his sight, the casting of it in the depth
of the Sea, the remembering of it no more, etc. All these, and the like, import
an existence and being of sin, to be antecedent to the pardon of sin. What
need is there of a pardon to that which is not a crime? Is not existent, has
not a being? Nay, there is no Prince, nor Supreme Authority in the world, that
will give pardon at that rate; it is fair enough if the delinquent get pardon
when he has committed a crime, and consequently, God pardons no sins, till
they be committed, to justified persons.

A 2d Argument that inclines me to think, that all sins are not pardoned in
Justification, is this, that there is no pardon of sin, but upon confession of
sin, 1 John 1.9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us
our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. There is no pardon of sin
promised, but upon repentance, Act. 5.31. Him has God exalted with his right
hand to be a Prince and a Savior, for to give first repentance to Israel, and
then remission of sins: Where God gives remission, he gives first repentance.
Now confession of sin, and repentance for a sin, has no place where sin has
not a being; confession of sin, and repentance for sin, presupposes the being
of sin, and the sinners reflecting on it, and repenting of it.

And a 3d Consideration or Argument is, when sins are actually pardoned, a man
may rejoice, exult and boast in God, upon the account of pardon. O how may the
pardoned sinner exceedingly rejoice in God? But who dare say, that a justified
person, while recking in his sin (to speak so) before he has confessed it, and
repented for it, can, or dare rejoice in God? Shall he, while he is wallowing
in his abominations, rejoice in God? That were abominable Doctrine, and yet he
might in that case rejoice, if these Abominations were pardoned before they
were committed; nay more it would confound all distinction to be put betwixt
unrepented and repented guilt; if a man's sins were pardoned before they were
committed, his pardon would be as sure, as if he had repented, by their
Doctrine: Therefore I conclude, that sin cannot be actually pardoned before it
be committed, repented, and Christ fled unto for pardon.

And this has a practical Use, (which I but touch upon, because the great
Practical Use of all is but coming) That justified folk that are at peace with
God, as to the state of their persons, would not think light of their daily
slips into faults; thou art lying under thy daily failings, as a debt, till
thou go to the open Fountain and wash; It is true (as I said before) no sin
thou falls in shall eventually condemn thee, but thou art a guilty person so
long as thou lies under unrepented guilt; Therefore look to it, and let your
Faith of Pardon be seen in your tenderness under new guilt; O that the Gospel
would take you off the Laws hand, and press you to this tenderness, that love
to Christ, and the love of Christ might incite you in your actings, and when ye
fall in sin, to run to the Remedy, in the exercise of Faith and Repentance.

And to encourage you to this, another word results on this, That ye may help
your selves to repent for particular failings, ye would hold a fast grip of
your reconciled state; remember what I said in the morning, that new guilt
makes not void former pardon; so I say now, that new guilt makes not void your
reconciled state; ye may go to God, not as an Enemy to his Prince, but as a
faulty Child to his Father for pardon; access ye have to the open Fountain, ye
coming humbled for sin, and making use of Christ for renewed pardon, and if ye
do not improve this Privilege, it will be a terrible ingredient in your
Dittay, when God comes to deal with your Conscience.

The 3d. Question is, How can any pardon be said to be past within time, seeing
Act. 3.19, 20. It is said, our sins are to be blotted out, when the times of
refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord? There will then be a
blotting out, and Discharge of sins once for all, a Discharge openly declared,
accompanied with all the consequences of the Discharge. Sins pardoned here,
will then be openly declared to be pardoned; I find not only among the
Schoolmen, but our reformed Divines, a Question agitat* Whether our sins will
be ripped up in the Day of Judgment? A question needlessly stated; but what will
not curiosity meddle with? but whether sins will be then ripped up, to let it
be seen what sort of persons he glorifies; or covered, certainly their sins
shall not then put them to shame, who are pardoned, though they should
everlastingly remember them; They shall also sing in the remembrance of pardon;
and though they should be ripped up, yet not to their shame and confusion; The
consolation of pardoning Mercy, and all the effects of it; and the love of
Christ will make them look upon their miseries, as upon the occasion of their
being made everlastingly happy with him; but the time being ended, I shall go
no further. God bless his Word to you, for Christ's sake.

SERMON XV.
Psalm 130. Verse 4. But there is forgivenness with thee --
I Am now drawing toward a close of this great Point concerning the Remission
of Sins; having now spoken at some length to that which is more Doctrinal in
it; (this day I purpose (the Lord assisting) to fall upon that which is more
particular: I have spoken to you, 1. Of the thing pardoned, Sin and iniquity.
2. Of the Author of pardon, God, with whom forgiveness is. 3. Of the nature of
pardon, and what is imported in this forgiveness in the Text, and the last day
in the afternoon, I came in the fourth place to speak of the time when pardon
of sin is conferred, where ye heard, that neither are the sins of the Elect
actually pardoned from eternity, nor when Christ paid satisfaction to Justice
for them on the Cross, as Antinomians assert; neither are the Elect Justified
and pardoned of all their sins past, present and to come at Justification, as
some Orthodox Divines incline to think; but their future sins, or sins to come
after Justification, are not actually pardoned, till they be committed and
repented of, and Christ fled into, and as the Fountain to wash away their sins,
made use of.

I was cut short by time from speaking to another question; That is, How pardon
of sin is conferred in Time, since the Apostle, Acts 3.19, 20, Tells of a
blotting out of sins to penitents, when the times of refreshing shall come from
the presence of the Lord, when Christ shall come again to Judgment; I shall but
touch a little on this, and shall go on; It is certain, that the blotting out
of the sins of the justified at the Day of Judgment, does not contradict their
being pardoned now; nay more, There is no sin blotted out at that great Day, or
openly declared to be blotted out and pardoned, and the Elect assoiled from it;
but these which are pardoned in this life; Only there are four things to be
noticed in the blotting out of sin then, that heightens the advantage of the
blotting out of sin here.

1. If we insist on the words of the Text, there is there at that Great Day, a
blotting out of sin, not only in the guilt of it, but in the filth and
pollution of it. Here (as ye heard) however Sanctification be taking sin to
task in every pardoned man, yet the tender man sensible of sin cannot but be
affected when he finds sin in the pollution of it to remain, though it be not
reigning, though it has not the Throne; but then with the public Declaration
of pardon, there shall no blot of sin, no spot, no wrinkle, nor any such thing
remain, Ephesians. 5.27. There shall no scar be left of these wounds, that sin has
made, which the pardoned sinner may bear about with him while he is here.

2. While the godly are here, though they get frequently pardon of sin, yet
they have still need of new pardon; they must be pardoned over and over again,
and as often as they get their daily bread, they must as often seek the pardon
of their sins daily; but the blotting out of sin in that Day, shall be a
Declaration of the Pardon of sin so fully, that there shall be no need of a
reiterat pardon; they will then sin no more, nor be in hazard of sinning, and
will have no more need of the open Fountain, whereunto the pardoned man while
he is here, must continually resort with his foul feet to get them washen.

3. The pardon of sin here is not only Transacted betwixt God and the sinner,
without the knowledge of the World; but it is oft-times kept up from the
sense and feeling of the man that has gotten it. A man that is pardoned may be
kept in fears, as if he were not pardoned; a man that has his Bonds taken
off him, may be as if he were still bound: But in that Day, the Pardon of Sin
shall be publicly declared in the audience of Men, Angels and Devils; and the
pardoned man's pardon will be proclaimed and perfected, in the sense and feeling
of the pardoned man, the Court of Heaven, and the Court of the Conscience, will
say both one thing, and there will not be a demur in the one, about what is
past in the other, as now often there is.

And 4. Though sin be pardoned, yet the effects and consequences of pardon, are
not at all times let out on the pardoned man here, he may be not only kept
under Desertion, but he may be under Chastisement on several accounts, (as I
cleared to you before) though he may say (as the Apostle John speaks, 1 John
3.2.) Now we are the sons of God, but he must add, it does not yet appear what
we shall be; but in that day, pardon shall not only be proclaimed, and
perfected in the Conscience of the man, but all the effects and consequences of
pardon, shall flow out like a River upon him; Then sighing and sorrow shall
flee away, and everlasting joy shall be upon his head, and in his heart; and
these stripes that here were necessary for the back of fools, shall cease, and
his pardon shall be written in that blessed Sentence, Enter thou into the joy
of thy Lord.

Thus ye see what is imported in that blotting out of sin at the great day; and
from it I shall shortly recommend to you two words in order to practice; one
is, That this may be a strong motive to you, to make pardon of sin here sure,
when ye consider that it has such blessed effects hereafter; the rich fruit
and incomes of thy fleeing to Christ for pardon here, may seem to thee (as we
use to speak) to be far from the Sheaff; but there is a day coming, when the
advantage of it will be made known to Men, Angels and Devils, their Conviction;
what it is to have pardon for sin? Thou that gets a pardon here, may be looked
upon as an uncouth, unknown body but thou carries about with thee a Treasure,
that in that day will be found a Treasure indeed. And therefore 2ly. Ye that
are fled unto Christ for pardon, and have gotten pardon believed, and now and
then ye are feeling some of the fruits of pardon, it should quicken you to long
for that day, wherein the effects, fruits and consequences of that pardon will
be fully displayed, and let out on pardoned sinners. It it no wonder that a
pardoned man long to be home, when he considers what a mercy pardon of sin will
be found to be, when it is laid in broad-band in that day.

But now I come to the 5. general Head I proposed to be spoken to, and that is,
To clear up to you the right method of coming to close with pardon, and for
attaining of pardon; I have insisted to tell you what a rich privilege pardon
of sin is. Now any that are not stupid and senseless, will say, how shall I be
sure of pardon, that I have closed with it, and win at it, and that I am not
deluded in so great a concern? I have occasionally hinted at the chief matter
of these things, that I am to say upon this in the preceding purpose, I shall
now gather them together, and lay them in view before you, that ye may order
your steps aright in closing with pardoning mercy; If I should speak to this in
general, I find many things mentioned in Scripture to the obtaining of pardon,
I find Faith, for we are said to be justified by faith, and consequently we are
pardoned by Faith. Romans 3.25. God has set forth Jesus Christ to be a
propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the
remission of sins. 2. I find Repentance often mentioned in this matter, Mark
1.4. John preached the baptism of Repentance for the remission of sins. The
Apostles Doctrine was to preach repentance and remission of sins in his name.
Luke 24.47. Peter's Doctrine is, Repent ye, and be converted, that your sins may
be blotted out. Act. 3.19. The counsel given to Simon Magus is, Repent of thy
wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the thoughts of thine heart may be
forgiven thee, Act. 8.22. 3. I find also Confession of sin mentioned in order
to pardon of sin. Psalm. 32.5. I said I will confess my transgression unto the
Lord, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin. And, 1 John 1.9. If we confess
our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us
from all unrighteousness. 4. I find confessing and forsaking of sin mentioned
in order to pardon, Prove. 28.13. He that confesses and forsakes his sin shall
find mercy. 5. I find prayer also required in order to pardon of sin, Mat.
6.12. Christ bids the Disciples pray, forgive us our debts, etc.

But that I may speak to this purpose somewhat more distinctly, and so in
effect take a view of this Text, and take in the 3d. thing I proposed to be
spoken to in it; I find that as the Apostle sums up Christianity, Philip. 3.3.
as running upon three things, that like Letters on a Signet are drawn backward,
that ye may stamp them forward in your practice. 1. That a man have no
confidence in the flesh. 2. That from that he be led to rejoice in Jesus
Christ: And 3. That from that he be led to worship God in the spirit. So
answerable to these three, the Scripture points at three sorts of means or
duties to be gone about in order to the obtaining of pardon; and we will find
somewhat of all the three in the Text.

1. Something antecedent for preparation to pardon, answerable to that, verse
3. If thou Lord should mark iniquity who can stand? 2 Something required to
actual closing with Christ for pardon on the back of that antecedent
preparation, held out, verse 4, But there is forgiveness with thee. And, 3.
Somewhat required consequentially as a fruit of pardon, whereby a man comes to
know, and to evidence that he is pardoned, and to improve his pardon answerable
to that which is subjoyned to forgiveness in the Text, that thou raayest be
feared.

For the first of these, that is, That which is required antecedently to
pardon, and as a preparation for it, I shall briefly reduce all that I would
press upon you as to that, to four Heads. And the man that would be in a near
capacity to get pardon on Gospel Terms, would look well to all these four;

1. He would be a diligent watcher to prevent his falling in sin, which he
would not mistake, this would seem rather to be required to prevent the need of
pardon; but it comes in suitably to be adverted unto in order unto the
obtaining of pardon, whoever essays the seeking of pardon, will find that
their stumbling in this step is a great obstruction to pardon, that they have
not been watchful and careful to prevent sin, a man that has that to meet him
in the Teeth, when he comes to seek pardon, that he has sold himself to work
wickedness, That he adds drunkenness to thirst, that he has drunk in iniquity,
as the ox does water; He will have a harder pull for pardon, than a man that
has been watchful to prevent sin, and in falling in sin, has been as the
chaste Virgin forced; that will be the first question the Conscience will put to
him, how came ye in this posture? whether voluntarly like a Ship going in her
course, or like a tempest beaten Ship, through stress of Weather, forced to
take the nearest shore? whether were ye hurried and driven into such a sin by
the violence of tentation, or was ye readier to tempt a tentation, than a
temptation was to tempt you? O but that will be a sad challenge in a man's way,
in order to the obtaining of pardon; if he has been a voluntar yielder unto
sin, and a committer of it with greediness: Nay more, a justified person, that
upon the account of his justification, and being pardoned, does walk more
lously or heedlesly, though he get his soul for a prey, he may lay his count to
go by the gates of Hell to Heaven, that is, to be kept at hard labor, in a
fighting life with enemies, with his back on the City, and his face to his
foes, till he lay down his weapons at the gates thereof; therefore in order to
the obtaining of pardon, I recommend to you careful diligence to prevent
falling in sin, and consequently thou would look well to the sin of thy
inclination, where thou art weakest, and guard against that, as a wise man that
is over a Garrison, will fortify that part of the Wall that is weakest, where
readily the Enemy will make an assault: so it would be thy care to guard
against the sin thou are most inclined to, double thy diligence to mortify
that, to pray against it, to watch against temptations that may cast fire in
that powder: Thou would also look well to the sin of thy Calling and Station,
the sins of men's Callings being such as they fall more readily into than
others; And look well also to the Sins of the Time and Place thou lives in, to
the Sins of the present Generation, wherein many are involved, and set a watch
against these; these sins, I say, ye would mainly watch against, the sins of
your inclination, calling, and time or place ye live in, not neglecting to
watch against all sins.

A 2d. Direction I press upon you, antecedent to the obtaining of pardon, is,
That as ye would carefully watch to avoid and prevent sin, so ye would be no
less careful to examine your selves, and call your selves to account for sins,
into which ye have fallen; a man cannot repent for sin, and cannot look for
pardon of sin, without previous examination, and finding out of the guilt for
which he seeks pardon. It is true, Psalm. 19. No man can understand his errors,
nor is it possible he can overtake all his escapes. Even as David who was no
loose walker, found them more than the hairs of his head, but that must not be
made a pretense to neglect Examination, look to it, if this be your work, are
there none of you who have been upon a back-tract of your way, saying, what
have I been doing? where have I been? how is God pleased with my frame? with my
walk and conversation? I fear there are but few that have had, and have this
for their exercise; and that many follow the counsel of Alcibiades, that he
gave to Pericles, who when he asked him, what he was doing, said, he was
troubled how to make his Accounts to the States, were I said he in thy place, I
would rather be troubled how I might not make my Account. I fear many make it
their account to shun and eschew Self-examination like Bankrupts that shun to
compare their spending with their income and their stock, lest they find
themselves Dyvors, which will have a sad close. But thou that would not provock
God, must not neglect Self-examination, if thou do, and let thy condition run
in confusion, and go out of thy sight, remember that word was sung, Psalm.
50.21. These things thou did, and I kept silence, but I will reprove thee, and
set them in order before thine eyes. He will marshel and rank your sins before
you, and give you a memory of them, to your terror and affrightment.

But a 3d. Direction antecedently required in order to pardon, shall be this,
That having Examined your condition, and found out wherein you are faulty, and
guilty, ye must take a very serious and affecting look of sins desert, till it
leave some impressions upon the heart; it is an easy matter for a man, who
needs not a secret search to find out his sin, the skirts of his garment
declare it, he may shut his Eyes and grope his Abominations. It is easy to
find out these sins, and to seek pardon for them, and there is an end. But O!
deceive not thy self, when thou have found out thine iniquity, thou must be in
the Psalmist's posture here, verse 3 If thou, Lord, mark iniquity who can
stand? Thou must be affected with it, and shall I add, (while I am laying down
a Directory for you to follow, in order to the obtaining of pardon, so as ye
may not cheat your selves) to the end ye may walk sickerly in this matter, I
shall give you the impression that found out guilt after Examination, should
leave upon a man in four steps; 1. He must not only not deny his faults (as too
many do, with whom I do not trouble my self, some being such monsters, that
they care not to deny their vileness and other abominations with perjuries, to
hide them from the world) but he must not deny his sin in the guilt and
ill-deserving of it, he must take with it and all it is aggravations, he must
see it in its sinfulness and dreadful desert. A man that would have pardon from
God, must not only know his Dittay, but he must pass sentence on himself, and
judge himself, if he would not be judged for it. Thou have examined, thou have
found out much sin, but what thinks thou of it? as it is an offense done by a
worm to the Majesty of God. And have thou thought upon the Aggravations of thy
sin, from thy place and station, from the many Means thou art under, from the
many Mercies has been heaped on thee, obliging thee to the contrary? This is it
thou should be about, who would be affected with thy sin, in order to pardon.
But 2. This taking with, and aggravating of sin, must not be an act of the
Judgment only, but it must sink down to the heart, many will dream of sin, and
of the sinfulness of sin, and will talk of sin, and of the desert of sin, but
pass it over with words of that kind; but a sight of sin, and a thought of sin,
that is not heart-affecting, is a proclaiming upon the matter thy contempt of
sin; Thy sight of sin, and speaking of it, must be like that of the Psalmist
here, it makes him in nettle earnest, and to pour out a pathetick confession of
it: It must be a sight and sense of sin, that bides not in the brain, but goes
down to the bottom of thy heart, and affections, and makes thee cry out with
Paul, Romans 7.24. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body
of death! Thou can talk of sin, and the demerit of it distinctly, and
eloquently, but as men do of America, or some new found Land, they know not,
but content not thy self with that. The sight of sin in order to pardon,
requires a heart-pondering and affecting. And I shall add 3. The sight of sin,
and it is sinfulness, must not be a simple affecting only at some times. Some
cheat themselves with that also, Take them at some times, O how are they
affected! how mad will the drunkard call himself, after that throw his
drunkenness he is distempered, and has a sore head and pained stomach? And
what a monster will a profane man sometimes call himself, after a conviction or
challenge of Conscience, but bide till the next bout of a Temptation, and he
and his sin will be as homely as ever, The affecting of many with sin is like a
shower upon the ice in frost, that wets it above, but brings not a ground thaw:
Therefore where there is a right affecting with sin, it must bring the Man with
the Psalmist here, to be restless under that burden, to see that there must be
no standing still till he be relieved of it. The sluggard may have his
convictions of sin, and desires to be rid of it; But the man that sees sin in
it self, and the consequences of it, and is rightly affected with it, he will
see it to be his greatest misery, and consequently that it must be his greatest
haste to be delivered from it: Many of your convictions are false conceptions,
ye are in pain with them, but ye do not follow them forth, but stiffle them,
they never set you to your feet, as is said of Ephraim, Hos. 13.13. He is an
unwise son, he stays long in the place of breaking forth of children; it is a
dreadful token to stick in the birth, and to stiffle Convictions, better thou
had never had them (though that case be most dangerous also) than when thou
have been under them to stiffle them, and set thy foot upon them, before thou
get a true ease: And I shall add in the 4th. place, In this sense of sin, that
is, when Souls are thus affected with sin, as I have been speaking, a pardon
will be very precious, it will not be looked upon as the scor^er does, or as the
Soldiers who said to Christ, Hail, King of the Jews, and then buffeted him. O!
a pardon to a most sensible sinner, will be most glad news, and God on that
account will be a matchless God, Micah 7.18. Who is a God like unto thee, who
pardons iniquity; He will be a blessed man whose sin is pardoned. Psalm. 32.1. a
good Lord that pardons his people, 2 Chapter 30.18. And so in the Text, he is to
the Psalmist, If thou, Lord, should mark iniquity, O Lord, who should stand?
But the Back-note is, There is forgiveness with thee; for to a sensible sinner,
there being no remedy for sin, but pardon, and no pardon of sin, but from a
gracious God; what wonder that pardon of sin be very precious! and God on that
account a matchless God.

But a 4th. Direction antecedent to pardon, is, That we study Repentance for
these sins, the pardon whereof we study and expect, that we may be in capacity
for pardon; I shall not insist now upon this Doctrine, or Direction, only let
me entreat you to make it sure work in this affair; I have laid your duty
somewhat home to you, and I fear there is need, ye will take it all and more,
and yet in the doing of it, my meaning is not, as if ye could produce these
things called for, antecedent to pardon, of your self, or that when ye are not
come this length, ye should bide away from Christ, no, ye must come to him for
these antecedent qualifications, that ye may get pardon. But these are the true
and faithful sayings of God, and whosoever they be that are not in this order
seeking pardon, and yet think they are pardoned, they had need to look to it,
that they have not a lie in their right hand; for this is the Scriptures
method, wherein the Lord leads his own to pardon, and pardons whom he does
pardon. The Lord bless what ye have heard, for Christ's sake.

SERMON XVI.
Psalm 130. Verse 4. But there is forgivenness with thee --
I Am now entered upon that which is the Applicatory part of this Doctrine,
concerning the pardon of sins, and upon a way to hold out Directions to you,
how without abusing this great Privilege, or deceiving your selves, ye may
come to it in the due order, and look like it; I was speaking before noon of
some things, required antecedent by way of preparation for pardon; I spoke
somewhat to a Caution and carefulness to avoid sin, that the sins we come to
God for pardon of, may not be these we have run after impetuously, as the horse
runs into the battle; but such as we are driven in by the power of
Temptation. Likewise that there must be an exact and distinct account taken
daily of our failings, and of these evils, the pardon whereof we expect and
seek. And 3. When upon Examination we have found out our Debt, there must be a
deep sense of the sinfulness and desert of these provocations, such as the
Psalmist had here, when he cries out pathetically, If thou, Lord, should mark
iniquity, O Lord, who shall stand?

I left at a fourth Direction, and that was, That we should study Repentance
for these sins, the pardon whereof we expect and seek; and as the former
Direction tells, that the sense that these in the way of pardon have of sin,
must not ly floating in the brain, so this will press further, That the sense
of sin we have, must not be a crushing and killing sense, but a sense that
resolves in a kindly Repentance for sin, a sense and hatred of sin, and a grief
and sorrow for it, in which posture they that expect pardon must resolve to
come to God. This is so clear in the Scriptures, that I adduced in the morning,
and it is so clear an Evidence of the poured out-Spirit, Zech. 12.10. Which is
a mourning spirit in them that partake of it, that I shall not insist further
to prove it, neither shall I digress to make a common place of Repentance here,
I shall only desire you to take notice of these three concerning Repentance,
and I have done. 1. That there is a legal Repentance, and an evangelical
Repentance; A legal Repentance is that, which flows merely from the sense of
the terrors of the Law, and the curse and wrath due to men for sin: And
evangelical Repentance is that, which has something of Faith, and somewhat of
the Gospel in its bosom: And I may again desire you to consider, that
evangelical Repentance, is either the result of a general apprehension, that
there is pardoning mercy in God, when a sinner confounded with the sense of
guilt, looks in general to this Truth, That there is forgiveness with God, or
more particularly when the sinner closes with that pardoning mercy for his own
behove, and makes application of it to himself, and so is a pardoned man. Now
for the Repentance that is antecedent to pardon, there must be somewhat both of
legal and evangelical Repentance, some Too-look to that great Truth and
Encouragement. Verse 4. There is forgivenness with thee; for the legal
Repentance it may crush, but evangelical Repentance makes the sinner to bow;
legal Repentance is like a hammer that breaks the Rock; evangelical Repentance
is like the fire that melts the metal, only that Repentance that results upon
the Application of Pardon to a sinners self, is not antecedent to, but
consequential of pardon. 2. Ye would consider the room that Repentance has in
this bargain of the Pardon of sin, it comes not in certainly by way of merit,
for all the Salvation we get first and last, is through the merit of Christ;
but Repentance has place in the obtaining of Pardon, partly as it is an
inseparable companion of saving Faith, that apprehends and lays hold on Christ
for Pardon; a man cannot say, he has Faith, if it be not a penitent Faith,
partly it comes in as a condition required in order to God's Pardoning: for God
(as I said before) though he has promised to pardon no man for his Repentance,
yet he has declared, he will pardon none without Repentance; and partly it
comes in as a qualification of the person pardoned, who is thereby fitted to ly
low at Gods Footstool for pardon, Repentance makes folk find sin as bitter, as
ever they found it sweet; Repentance is that which excites them to condemn
themselves, and to justify God; without Repentance it were inconsistent with
the Justice of God to pardon a sinner, lying impenitent in his filth: nor would
it commend the Grace of God, if it were cast a way to the despisers of Grace,
as well as to the penitent, who highly esteem of Grace. And a 3d. Word I would
have you to consider, is, concerning the degree and measure of repentance; I
dare not digress on that much. There is a Word that might give folk ground of
sad thoughts, Acts 2.37. compared with verse 38. where ye will find a people
pricked in heart, and put to a peremptor, they have compunction, and cry out,
What shall we do? Verse 37. and Peter's answer, Verse 38. is Repent. They that
are pricked in heart, and put to a peremptor, may have their Repentance to
begin, not only they that have legal Repentance may have evangelical to begin;
but even those who have made some progress in evangelical Repentance; their
hard and impenitent heart may be so habituated with obduration, that when they
have a gail of the Spirit of Repentance, they may need to employ God to help
them to repent to purpose. I shall say no more on this, but beseech you to look
to your Repentance; it fears me that few be come the length of legal
Repentance, or to examine whether they have sinned or not: But suppone that ye
had examined and found out sin and had some sense of it. I entreat you make
Conscience of Repentance. Thou that has confidence to believe and seek pardon,
give this evidence that thou art in earnest about it, by making Conscience of
Repentance daily. O! how long is it since many of you sat down, and communed
with your own heart, and smote upon your thigh, saying, What have I done? How
long is it since ye was in Ephraim's posture, Jer. 31.19. Ashamed, yea
confounded, because ye have born the reproach of your youth. O think on it in
earnest, neglected Repentance daily, will make an ill revel'd Hesp daily to
you, if ever ye and your Conscience meet; (and as I said before) let never folk
talk of their Faith, that is not dipped in tenderness and repentance daily.
Only take what has been said with this Caution, if ye be convinced of your
need of repentance, and yet ye want it, ye know where to get it. That exalted
Prince for giving pardon, is also exalted to give repentance, Acts 5.31. So
much for these things required antecedent by way of preparation for pardon.

In the 2d. place, I proposed to speak somewhat to that, whereby a soul so
qualified and prepared, closes with Christ for pardon, and that is Faith,
whereby a sinner having his sin discovered, the sense of it wakened up within
him, and having made conscience of Repentance, for it grips unto Jesus Christ
by Faith, for the pardon of it, and that is the thing which the 2d. word in the
Text holds out; after he has said, verse 3. If thou, Lord, should mark
iniquity, who can stand? he adds, verse 4. But there is forgivenness with thee;
there is his Faith, closing with pardoning mercy, to get a good account of that
iniquity and sinfulness whereof he is convinced: So we find David, when making
his Testament, 2 Samuel 23.5. Although my house be not so with God, there is his
abasing of himself in the sense of sin, and shortcoming in duty; Yet he has
made with me an everlasting covenant, ordered in all things and sure; he runs
to the Remedy, held forth in the everlasting Covenant; and that is it which
Paul subjoins to that which I cited in the morning, Philip. 3.3. When a man
has no confidence in the flesh, when all beside Christ is flesh to him; and
consequently that which he dare not have any confidence in. Then the next step
is, not only to close with, but to rejoice in Jesus Christ; That I may make
something of this, I shall speak a short word to wicked men, and insist a
little longer in speaking to convinced sinners.

1. For wicked men, that which I am upon may serve to discover to them a great
mistake, they are afraid to grow acquaint with themselves. O! how dow they
think of casting up their accounts? These black Libels, and dreadful Dittays
that are lying in process against them, that were their ruin, and would undo
them; if they should look thereaway, they would never have a day to do well,
they would turn desperate, and I would willingly know what it will avail them,
not to look over their Accounts; will they resolve never to repent? or will
they get them shifted out of the way? will their forgetting of their faults
mend them? will not the iniquity of a man's heels, soon or syne compass him
about? Will not their sin find them out? as is said, Number. 32.23. But shall I
add, thou art in a great mistake, that thinks the searching out of thy sin will
undo thee; I confess, if thou do it in earnest, thou must not continue in a
course of sin as thou have done; but it is thy advantage to search out sin and
repent; if thou can say, If thou, Lord, mark iniquity, who can stand? Thou
shall have reason to say, But forgiveness is with thee; Will thou consider what
rich advantage is in taking with thy guilt, and being humbled for it; that it
is a man's safety to be thus lost, and it is an argument, whereon he may plead
for mercy, when he finds himself undone without it. It is thy ignorance of the
rich advantage that is on the back of Self-judging, that makes thee voluntarly
continue a stranger to it.

But 2. For these who are convinced of sin, and sensible of it, who can say.
They have no confidence in the flesh, and yet dare not say, They rejoice in
Christ Jesus; I would have such looking upon it as their great mistake that
keeps them from resting on Christ, and rejoicing in him, and it makes all their
other exercise to be but wind; though ye had so much sorrow for sin as to sink
you in the pit, if ye add not, There is forgiveness with thee; if Christ be not
the end of all your Exercises, they will miscarry, and leave you sinking in sin
and misery. And had I many to speak to that are making conscience of Repentance
of sin and yet come not up to close with the Remedy of pardoning mercy in
Christ, I would point out several things that would be adverted to by such as
are in such a frame; and I shall pitch on five or six of them.

1. Thou that art under convictions of sin, and does not close with pardoning
mercy, thou evidence a mistake of that mercy, thou considers not that thy
necessity, and impossibility to stand without it, is a claim unto it; thou
considers not that it is the design of the Gospel to rescue the lost, whose
feet are sinking; thou considers not that then thou begins to be beautiful,
when thou becomes loathsome in thine own eyes, and that thou begins to be saved,
when thou art put to cry, Save, Master, I perish; and so in standing a-loof
from pardoning mercy, thou mistakes the design of the Gospel.

2. In this standing a loof thou discovers thy ignorance of Gods Design in
giving, thee the sense of thy condition, what a posture art thou in? Thou art
one that sees thy self abominable, monst^ously vile, the chief of sinners; But,
may I say, who told thee? who showed thee that thou was so, and made it out to
thee? Has there not been a day when thy condition and frame was as bad, and
thou saw no such thing, which says, that it has been Christ, who by his spirit
convinces the world of sin, that has opened thine eye^, discovered to thee thy
vileness through sin. But thou may think, though he has done it, yet it is to
be the Narrative of a sad sentence against thee, and to send thee to the gate:
But if thou abuse not Mercy, there is another thing in it, if he has opened
thy mouth wide, he will not fill it with an empty spoon, but with good things;
if he has made his Law to have a work upon thee, it is not to drive thee from
him, but that the Law may be a schoolmaster to bring to Christ: So then it is
the ignorance of God's design in giving thee the sense of sin, that makes thee
under convictions stand a loof from Mercy.

3. In this aversion and unwillingness to come unto pardoning Mercy, I would
have you to consider a great reflection upon the Truth and Faithfulness of God,
1 John 5.10. He that believes not God, has made him a liar, because be
believes not the record that God gave of his Son (I wish that I had many to
speak unto, that have to do with these things, but I cannot pass it, being the
Applicatory part of the Doctrine. Have thou any sense of sin? art thou afraid
of wrath because of it? what makes thee afraid? is it not the Authority and
Veracity of God, speaking in his Law? when thy Conscience is wakened, and thou
sees how faulty thou art, and the Law leaves thee under the curse, it afrights
thee, and there is good cause; but how comes it, that when thou have believed
God speaking in his Law unto thee, thou does not believe him speaking in the
Promise, seeing it is the same God that speaks in both? is not this to make God
a liar? and have thou not a witness against thy self, while the Faith of his
threatenings troubles thee? and yet the Faith of his Promises does not encourage
and comfort thee.

But 4. In this unwillingness to close with pardoning Mercy, read corrupt and
ill principles, man by nature is ignorant of a Gospel-righteousness, he knows
nothing of Pardoning Mercy through a Mediator; but if the Covenant of Works be
once broken, it is everlastingly broken; and hence the sensible sinner being
ignorant of the New Covenant of Grace he chooses rather to ly mourning under
the ruins of that first Covenant, than to look up to a better; and this
ignorance of Gods righteousness, is a thing which the Saints ought rather to
mourn for than to foster.

But 5. In this standing a-back of sensible sinners from pardoning Mercy, and
in not closing therewith; ye would look upon pride of Heart, as having a main
hand in it, Romans 10.3. The reason why the Jews did not submit unto the
righteousness of God, they went about to establish their own. A doubting Soul
in its exercise, may seem to be very humble and crucified, it may be, but it is
not humbled; but while it stands a-loof from pardoning Mercy, proclaims its
Pride, for it proclaims it would have a price to bring in its hand to God, and
God is angry at that pride, he will have thee coming to him as a Dyvour, when
thou have tried all thou can do to the yondmost.

And 6. and lastly in this aversion, read another mistake, folk think it
presumption when they are convinced of their vileness, to close with pardoning
Mercy; but it is so far from being presumption, that it is the greatest
evidence of humility to take mercy freely, when thou comes to the Market of
Free Grace with no price in thy hand, and not only so, but it is a high
honoring of God. The man that being sensible of his sinfulness, closes with
pardoning Mercy, does with Abraham, Romans 4.20. Give glory to God, and by his
receiving his testimony, put to his seal that God is true; Joh. 3.33. and
therefore any that are sensible of sin, and have any thing of the conviction of
the dreadful desert of sin, and are in any measure in the exercise of
repentance for sin, they would take notice of these things that I have named,
as stumbling blocks in their way of closing with pardoning Mercy, and labor to
take them out of it, that they may come up to close with it, and say, But there
is forgiveness with thee,

3. But now because folk may readily say, all that I spoke to in the Morning
for preparation to closing with pardoning Mercy, is good, and when they hear it
holden out as the will of God, that a sensible sinner should lay hold on Christ
for pardon; who are they that will not say, they have sense of sin, and may
take a pardon; therefore to prevent the stumbling of such, I shall in the 3d.
place, as I proposed in the entry, speak to some things required
consequentially as a fruit of pardon, whereby a man comes to know, and evidence
that he is pardoned, and to improve his pardon, answerable to that subjoyned to
forgiveness in the Text; and here, in speaking to the evidences of pardon a
posteriori, as we use to speak, or which are consequential to pardon, I might
touch upon many things; but in general, as those that would see the rising of
the Sun in the East, they would look to the West, where they will see by the
shade of his Beams when he rises; so these that would make their pardon sure,
would mind well the consequences of pardon, as the surest evidences of their
pardon, and that they are not deluded in that matter.

And the 1st. that I would recommend to you^ is, Love to the Pardoner; There is
none has gotten pardon, but it will kyth in this, and for proof of it, take
notice of that, Luke 7.47. Where Christ speaking of the woman that washed his
feet with her tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her head, he says, her
sins which are many, are forgiven, for she loved much; The meaning is not, that
her great love to Christ did merit a pardon, for if ye read the Parable before,
from verse 40. It will clear, that that is not the meaning, Christ says to
Simon, Which of the Debitors will love the Creditor most? Simon answers, I
suppose be to whom he forgave most. There Love is the result of pardon, and the
consequent of pardon, not the cause; and it is in that case, that Christ applys
it to the woman, such love to me is an infallible evidence that much is
forgiven her; I would have imbittered folk, and such as are reflecters upon,
and carps at Providential Dispensations, noticing this, That it is no good
evidence of pardon; and thou that has love to him, whatever be his
Dispensations toward thee, it speaks good news of pardon, though thou cannot
discern it.

2. I recommend much Heart-melting and Evangelical Repentance, whereof I spoke
before, as it is required antecedently to pardon; now I press that which is
consequential to pardon, when a sinner has closed with pardoning Mercy, and by
a reflex act, looks back upon what has been forgiven him: O what melting of
heart has it, as in that woman, Luke 7.47 Much is forgiven her, therefore she
loves much, and that melted her heart, and made her weep much; she is a tender
melting woman; and certainly if thou be a Child, the too look to pardon, and
much more the application of pardon will melt the heart, and work more than
many Rods.

And 3. I recommend to you as a Consequence of Pardon, a deep sense of the
hainousness of the sin pardoned, and much compassion toward them who are yet
lying in the same pollution and guilt; a pardoned sinner looking on his sin
through the Glass of pardoning Mercy, it grows much more heinous than it was;
and a pardoned man cannot but with compassion look on others lying in the
puddle of Nature, Titus 3, 2, 7 Speak evil of no man, says he, but be gentle,
showing all meekness to all men, for we our selves were sometime foolish,
disobedient, etc. till the loving kindness of God was manifested; O what
compassion will the pardoned man have toward others wallowing in that
pollution, from which he is delivered.

There are other two Evidences consequential to pardon, one is, Our forgiving
of others, Mat. 6.12. which is no meritorious antecedent cause of pardon; for
it is the sense of Christ, pardoning Mercy to us, that should and does loose
our hearts to pardon others; we are bidden say, Forgive us our debts, as we
forgive our debtors: Another Evidence in the Text, is holy filial fear; but
because the one of these is a Point in the Text, and the other concerns the
pardoning of one another, as an evidence we are pardoned, which will require
more time to deduce, than now we have. I shall fist here for this time. The
Lord bless his Word to you.

SERMON XVII.
Psalm 130. Verse 4. But there is forgivenness with thee, --
YE may remember that I have insisted long upon this excellent Privilege, The
remission, or the forgiveness of sins; I have spoken to the Object of pardon,
or what it is that is pardoned, Iniquity: I have also spoken to the Author of
pardon, GOD: To the Nature of Pardon, and when it is that Pardon is pronounced;
and I entered the last day upon the Applicatory part of this Doctrine, to lead
you in a right way of closing with pardoning Mercy, following the scope of the
Context, I proposed to speak of somewhat required antecedently to pardon; to
somewhat required in closing with pardon, and of something consequential to
pardon, whereby we Evidence that we are pardoned, and do improve our pardon: I
spoke to the first of these, and show, that in order to the obtaining of
pardon, men should be careful not to run headlong and voluntarly on in sin, for
that will make the coming at pardon more difficult, that they should be
frequent in self examination, to find out sin; That they should be serious in
laying to heart the desert of sin, as the Psalmist is, verse 3. And serious in
Repentance for sin: I told you also that these things being premitted, it was
the duty of the penitent sinner, by Faith to close with pardoning Mercy, which
I closed with a check, both to the wicked, who because they see not the
advantage, which is on the back of Conviction of Sin, never look their sin in
the face; and with a check to the godly, who notwithstanding their being
humbled in the sense of sin, stand aback from closing with pardoning Mercy. And
I came in the third place to speak to what was consequentially required to
pardon, as the Psalmist here having said, There is forgiveness with thee; he
adds, as a consequence of it, that thou may be feared: And upon this Head, I
named two or three things, as native Consequences of pardoning Mercy, as that
there must be love to the Pardoner, as that woman, Luke 7. did evince, much was
forgiven her, because she loved much: That there must be a Heart-melting, when
we reflect upon the pardoning of iniquity; and a Compassion^^ looking on them
that are still lying in that pit, that through mercy we have escaped. I told
you there are other two consequential evidences of pardon, that I intended to
insist a little more on: As, 1st. The forgiving of others that have injured us:
And 2ly. The fearing and serving of God; the one of these I find it necessary
to insist upon, because it is put in by Christ, in that pattern of Prayer, Mat.
6.12. And the other because it is recorded in the Text, to be a consequent of
pardon.

For the 1st. of these, concerning the forgiving of others, I shall briefly
speak to these three anent it, as it is spoken of in that Pattern of Prayer: 1.
That the people of God are getting wrongs in the World. 2. That it is the will
of God that we should forgive those that wrong us. 3. That folks forgiving of
others that wrong them, is an evidence of their being pardoned themselves.

1st. The people of God, these that are allowed in the Pattern of Prayer to
call God Father, they are getting wrongs in the World, they are getting debts
in the World, they have their debtors in it; thereby is not meant so much, men
that are under civil obligations to pay the debt they owe to them, (though that
may have its own place, as we may hear,) as chiefly and mainly, wrongs,
injuries, unrighteous dealing, violating the Law of Love in their carriage and
deportment. This is the condition, the woeful condition, that all the Children
of men are in since the fall, Tit. 3.3. They are foolish, disobedient,
deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy,
hateful, and hating one another; and Hab. 1.13, 14. Tells, that men are like
the fishes of the sea, and the creeping things that have no ruler over them,
where the greater are ready to devour the smaller, and the children of God are
large sharers in this matter. And Paul confesses, 1 Timothy 1.13. That before
Conversion, he was a blasphemer, injurious, and a persecuter: and Mat. 5.44.
Christ supposes the godly will have enemies, cursers of them, haters of them,
such as will despitefully use them, and persecute them; and experience in all
ages makes it out, how much work fearers of God have for this sweet disposition
called for in them, to be forgivers of others.

All that I shall say from this, shall be in the first place to invite you to
consider the state of all mankind since the fall, as the Proverb is, Homo
homini lupus, one man is a wolf to another, that men are now more ready to
wrong and injure one another, than the brute beasts are in their own kind; this
is a sad document how far man is fallen from God by sin. 2. From this I would
have the Lords people to take warning what they are to expect in the world;
they will have wrongs to bear, injuries to suffer and endure, debts to forgive;
Cement as we will these two seeds, the seed of the Woman, and the seed of the
Serpent will never be one, one Family and Ark, one Womb will never make them
one: But as it is Gal. 4.29. As he that was born after the flesh, persecuted
him that was born after the spirit, even so is it now. Therefore ye are not to
wonder, when ye meet with trouble and persecution in the world, but rather
wonder at the moderation ye meet with. 3. Let it be a warning to them that
wrong others, that thereby they constitute themselves debitors, injurers,
breakers of the Law of love, if not of justice and righteousness also. They run
themselves under debt, which they must repent of, Luke 17.4. and make
restitution of, with Zacheus, Luke 19.8. They must not stand upon their credit
so to do, neither must they be as many, who if they do an injury, resolve to
crush them utterly to whom they have done it, that they may not be able to
repay it, and beside that, they may remember, that God is the principal
Creditor, who will crave and exact that debt, if it be not repented and
pardoned.

The second thing proposed to be spoken to, is, That it is the will of God,
that these debts men contract, in reference to the people of God, his people
should forgive them; Christ will have them to say, Forgive us our debts, as we
forgive our debtors, Mat. 6.12. It is commanded, Ephesians. 4.32. Forgiving one
another, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you, Col. 3.13. Forbearing
one another, and forgiving one another; if any man have a quarrel against any,
even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye. And our Lord Jesus, Mat. 5. when v.
44. he has bidden his followers love their enemies, bless them that curse
them, do good to them that hate them, and pray for them that despitefully use
and persecute them; he adds, v. 45. That thereby they should evidence their
good condition, they should evidence themselves to be children of their Father
which is in Heaven, that makes his sun to rise on the evil and on the good,
and sends his rain on the just and unjust.

That which I would say anent this forgiving of injuries, shall be briefly in
answer to a few Questions: As

1. If it be inquired what it is that men should forgive? 1. I answer, for
Civil Debts, (whatever the Law of Charity requires in some cases, as to that,
yet) it is, as we hinted before) mainly wrongs, injuries, defraudations,
persecutions, oppressions and the like.

2. If it be asked, How can we forgive these, they being sins against God? Ye
may remember, when I spoke before of the Author of pardon, I spoke of that, a
man that is wronged can only forgive what concerns his own interest, but the
person that wrongs God, is still liable to God for his interest; thy
forgivenness of the wrong done to thee, is not a total absolution, but for what
concerns God, the injurious person is still comptable to God.

3. If it be inquired on what terms should men forgive? I Answer, as to the
matter of envy, malice, desire of revenge, rancour, hatred, a man is bound to
forgive, whatever the temper of him be that does the wrong, Mark 11.24. When ye
stand praying, forgive (says Christ) if ye have ought against any, that your
Father which is in Heaven may forgive you; intimating, that if a man has done
thee an ill turn, thou must not because of that do thy self a worse, by keeping
up a grudge, thou must not let rancour obstruct thy access to God in Prayer;
yea, whether he repent or not, thou art bound to heap coals of fire upon his
head to melt him, Romans 12.20. And therefore Exodus 23.4, 5. When our neighbors
Ox or Ass is going astray, or the Ass of him that hates us is lying under a
burden, we must bring the one to him, and help up the other. And Romans 12.20. If
thine enemy hunger, thou must feed him; if he thirst, thou must give him drink,
and so witness that thou art willing to pardon him; all this thou art bound to,
whatever be the carriage of him that injures thee; but for familiar or intimat
converse, there is repentance in the injurer required, Luke 17.4. If thy
brother trespass against thee seven times in a day, and seven times in a day
turn again unto thee, saying, I repent, thou shall forgive him.

4. If it be inquired, How shall this forgivenness be gone about and expressed?
I answer, that here we must beware of Satan's wiles; there are many that will
forgive, but not forget; ye will find many in forgiving, their carriage is like
Absaloms to his Brother Amnon, 2 Samuel 13.22. He spoke not to his brother good
nor bad, but when he got an opportunity he killed him: This is not
Christian-forgivenness; it is the practice of many to cover their hatred with
lying lips, Prove. 10.18. There are many that speak fair unto their neighbor,
when seven abominations are in the^r hearts, Pro. 26.25 Many whose carriage is
like Joa^s to Amasa, who came, and said, Art thou in health, my brother? And
took him by the beard to kiss him; but smote him under the fifth rib, and slew
him, 2 Samuel 20.9, 10. That Is not Scripture-forgivenness, the Scripture presses
forgivenness from the heart, Mat. 18.35. So shall my heavenly Father do unto
you, if ye from your hearts forgive every one his brother. And Mat. 5.44. We
should love our enemies, bless them that curse us, do good to them that hate
us, pray for them that despitefully use and persecute us, that is forgivenness
acceptable to God.

5. If ye inquire, how often and frequently are folk bound to forgive the debts
of injuries done to them? I can give you no more fuccinct answer than Christ
gives, Mat. 18.21. -- Peter says, How often shall my brother sin against me,
and I forgive him till seven times? Christ answers, I say not to thee, till
seven times, but till seventy times seven; that is, though injuries were never
so often repeated, that (as ye use to speak) it would provoke patience it self,
yet it is the will of our blessed Lord, that there be forgivenness.

6. If ye ask, Shall men then so forgive, that there shall no pursuit be of
injuries done to them? Shall they ly down and take as many wrongs as folks like
to do unto them, and make no more of it, but forgive them? I answer, no doubt
reparations are allowed and required, and the Law and Civil Magistrate may be
made use of for that end, or ^n case the matter be betwixt Magistrates by a
Civil War: But in so far as concerns us in our private stations, I shall give
you a few words for clearing the case: And first, when a man forgives an
injury, he is not always obliged to pass the damnage; he may forgive the wicked
disposition of any oppressor or cheater, when he is not bound to forgo the loss
he has sustained; partly because by the eighth Command he is bound to look to
his own subsistence, and so to recover his own for that end; partly because the
damnage belongs to the Civil Magistrate, to see to, and right or punish, and
therefore private persons cannot forgive these. Yet 2. in some cases, we are not
only bound to forgive the injury, but the damnage also: That is, when a man may
subsist without that which the injurer has taken from him, and the injurious
person cannot without his own ruin make satisfaction or restitution, in that
case the Law of Charity, though not strict Justice, will plead for forgivenness
in the matter of damnage. And 3. Even when a man is to forgive the injury, but
not the damnage, he is not to make reparation at his own hand, he is not to
walk out of Gods way to get the damnage repaired; when he has got a wrong, he
is not to do himself a wrong, and God another wrong to right it. And 4. In
seeking reparation in the matter of damnage, we would take heed that we be not
scandalous. The Apostle taxes a fault in the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 6.1. -- That
they vexed their brethren, in going to Law with them, especially under Infidels
and Heathen Judges. There are many cases which may prove scandalous among
Professors, and this is one, when in petty injuries which they should bury,
they vex one another in Law. And 5. When a man goes to Law, to seek reparation
of a damnage, it should not only be the last refuge, as a Physician, when he
cuts off a leg or an arm, for the preservation of the life of the Patient, but
his seeking reparation must be so managed, that it may bear witness to all,
that he seeks the good of hi^ Party as well as his own.

7 If it be asked, How stands all this that has been spoken of forgivenness,
with that of the Apostle, 2 Timothy 4.14. Alexander the Copper-smith did me much
evil, the Lord reward him according to his works. This, if I might insist upon,
would lead me to speak to these imprecations in Scripture, used against men
that are not only injurious to others in private wrongs, but are enemies and
injurious to the work of the Gospel, and imprecations vented by godly men, led
by an extraordinary spirit against them, are not a pattern to be imitat by us;
only ye would know that a man's forgiving of wrongs does not import, that he is
to call ill good, a knave an honest man, or that he is to assoil him at Gods
Tribunal, whatever pardon he give, the injurer is to answer to God for his
interest.

8 If ye ask, How shall folk win to this sweet condescending humor to forgive
injuries? How shall they get their crap submitting to it? How shall they get
their bitter disposition under their feet, that they may heartily remit wrongs
done unto them? I confess this is a duty that requires more than an ordinary
measure of grace, and grace in exercise, and few attain it. Alas! How few are
who, when they have gotten a wrong, have that testimony, that they mourn more
over their own disposition, than resent the wrong, and pray for the person that
has wronged them: but in short, there are four words I would recommend to you
in order to that me^k and mortified temper.

1. It were a special mean to bring you this pardoning-humour, to be daily
sensible of the wrongs that ye have done, and are doing to God, and who wots
but a wrong done by thee to God is laid in thy dish by a third hand, to make
thee sensible of it? The man that is daily sensible of the wrongs he does to
God, is the only man to be a good neighbor; when he comes out loadned with the
sense of his own provocations, he will be ready to forgive others: He that
finds he has ten thousand talents to be forgiven, will easily be brought to
forgive an hundred pence. It Is our distance with God, and the want of the sense
of the wrongs done to him, that makes us keep up a revengful humor.

2. They that would have this pardoning-disposition, would be sensible of how
much need they have to be forgiven themselves, Eccles. 7.21, 22. Take not heed
unto all words that are spoken, lest thou hear thy servant curse thee; do not
sash thy self with noticing every injury, were it from as mean a person as thy
servant, for oft-times also thine own heart knows, that thou thy self have
cursed others. There is no living in the world, if (as we use to speak) we do
not live and let live, if we forgive not as we would be forgiven; If thou see
a more in thy brothers eye, pull the beam out of thine own, and then thou will
see more clearly to pull the more out of thy brother's eye: This will make thee
of a meek and condescending frame.

3. I recommend to thee that would forgive, to labor to get a sight of the
hand of God in the wrong done to thee: When thou gets a wrong, it may be of a
person far below thee, and one that thou can easily reach, O! How does poor
dust swell with thoughts of revenge? But were the hand of God seen in that
wrong, it would tame thee; when David is fleeing from his son Absalom, and
Shimei comes out and curses him, Ab^shai says, Should a dead dog curse the
King, let me go over and take off his head: O let him alone, says David, God
has said unto him, Curse David, Who then shall say, Wherefore have thou done
so? 2 Samuel 16.9, 10. If the providence of God extend to the hairs of our head,
that they are all numbered, Mat. 10.30. Unquestionably it is not unconcerned in
the affronts and injuries done to us by men, and whatever thou have to say to
the person that has injured thee; yet if thou look up to the hand of God in
it, thou will be silent, and calm.

And 4. Remember, when thou does not pardon, but offers to revenge at thine own
hand, thou usurps Gods place, Romans 12.19. Dearly beloved, revenge not your
selves, but rather give place unto wrath: for it is written, Vengeance is mine,
I will repay, says the Lord: and consequently, when thou offers to revenge,
thou takes his place, and provocks him to leave thee, and let thee stand to thy
self, and not concern himself in any wrong done to thee.

But the third thing I proposed to speak a word to, is, That this forgivenness
of others is absolutely necessary to them that would evidence, that they are
pardoned of God themselves, Mat. 6.12. We are bidden pray, Forgive us our
debts, as we forgive others; I shall briefly explain this, and close. And

1. As I have often hinted before, our forgiving others does nor merit pardon;
for forgiving of others is not an antecedent to pardon, but a consequence of
it; it is the evidence of a pardoned man, and consequently cannot be antecedent
to pardon, far less a meritorious cause of pardon.

2. While Christ bids us pray, Forgive us, as we forgive, there is no
proportion to be understood; there is a vast difference betwixt Gods forgiving
and our forgiving; his forgivenness extends to ten thousand talents, ours only
to an hundred pence, Mat. 18.24, 28. His forgiving requires a satisfaction to
justice, before he give out the sentence of pardon, not so ours; his
forgivenness brings no profit to him as ours does to us, we having thereby
access to pardoning mercy; only in this the parallel holds, that we forgive
frankly and freely, as God forgives us.

3. Consider the connection a little more nearly, partly it is an encouragement
to the sensible sinner, to believe he is pardoned, when he finds a disposition
in himself to forgive others; a poor sensible sinner lying at Gods footstool,
suing for pardon, though he be pardoned, yet he has a hink whether he be so or
not; but this encourages him to believe it, that he finds in himself a loosing
of heart to forgive another, that has wronged him often; he may reason, have I
gotten many wrongs, and yet I can find in my heart to forgive, and put them in
my bosom that have wronged me, upon their repentance? and shall I doubt but
God, who is a God infinite in mercy, has pardoned me? So that thy warmness and
loosing of heart to forgive others, looses and opens a door to thee, to believe
that the infinite God in mercy has pardoned thee; and partly, ye would
remember, that it is a condition of pardon, not antecedent, but subsequent,
whereby a man may reflect and gather whether he be pardoned or not, read Mat.
6.14, 15. he contents not himself to say, Forgive if we would be forgiven, but
he adds, if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also
forgive you. But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your
Father forgive your trespasses. Ye can have no evidence that ye your selves are
pardoned, except ye have a tender disposition and frame of heart to forgive
others; and therefore that servant, who Mat. 18.27. had ten thousand talents
forgiven him, and yet when he got his fellow servants, would not forgive him an
hundred pence, he proclaimed, that though he seemed to be forgiven, he was not
forgiven, but behoved to go to prison.

Now I have been detained in providence upon this Doctrine for this time, a
Doctrine that is not unseasonable to you, if ye be in earnest in seeking the
pardon of your sin; it serves to point out to you the terms on which it is
attainable, and by which ye evidence that ye are pardoned, that ye may not in
this matter cheat your selves, in taking a lie in your right hand in stead of
pardon; and it is not unseasonable, were it but to give a check to the
malicious disposition that haunts too too many in this generation. What shall I
say of it? I shall only say this, that little love is the first step to this
malicious disposition, when love grows cold, and folk lives uncouth and framed
one to another, without intimations of that warmness of affection that should
be, (which is much creept in among the fearers of God) love, I say, growing
cold, then injuries, bitter resentments, back-bitings, reproaches, evil
speakings, etc will thread in with that needle; yea, this is one of the great
in-lets, to that monstrous, damnable, dreadful sin of Witchcraft, into which
some have been led by their lusts, others have been tempted to through poverty,
but more by malice than by both, to give themselves formally over to the Devil,
to renounce Christ, to renounce their Baptism, hope of happiness, and to
sacrifice all to their malicious and revengful temper; therefore look to it,
and upon this as a necessary Doctrine, that presses you to have love one to
another, forbearing and forgiving one another; that love that suffers long, is
not puffed up, behaveth not it self unself unseemly, seeks not her own, is
not easily provoked, thinks no evil, rejoices not in iniquity, but in the
truth: bears all things, hops all things, believes all things, endures
all things, 1 Cor. 13.4. -- It was the most known badge of the primitive
Christians, and no wonder, their Master left it with them, Joh. 13.35. By this
shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another;
love to kindle up kindness, that malice drowns, love that extenuats faults that
passion aggreges, love that pities and compassionats, where malice and revenge
severely punishes; love that will meet an injurer midway and more, when
revenge bids run away. As ye would not be given up to the most dreadful
temptations, study love, and from love to forgive, and harbor not a malicious
and revengful disposition. Lord bless, etc.

SERMON XVIII.
Psalm 130. Verse 4. But there is forgivenness with thee that thou may be
feared.
IN the morning I was detained upon that evidence of a pardoned man, which is
of very common use in our walk, that we have a tenderhearted disposition, and
be in a readiness to forgive others. Now there remains before I leave this
point, another evidence or consequence of pardon, when it is rightly closed
with, held out in that, which ye may remember I made a third branch of this
Text, being an amplification of pardoning mercy, taken from Gods design in
letting it out, even that he may be feared; I shall not here stand on a
general, how needful it is to look to Gods design, and what he drives at by
every thing he does unto us, and about us, as the Psalmist takes notice of Gods
end in pardoning. Though it were needful that we should look to it, that we
abuse no dispensation of God, to serve our own ends, neglecting his ends. The
reason why we speed not in many suits, is, we ask and receive not, because we
ask amiss, that we may consume it upon our lusts, Jam. 4.3. But passing that, I
come to the word in the Text.

The word here, fear of God, it is one of these internal graces that naturally
results upon the acknowledgment of a Deity, and consequently belongs to the
first Command, where knowledge and acknowledgment of God, faith and hope in
God, love to him, and fear of him, and patience under his dispensations, are
all commanded under that of having no other gods; but frequently the fear of
God is taken more largely, for all the service, and fear, and worship of God,
and that because fear and reverence is a necessary ingredient called for in
every part of service and worship we perform, here we need not restrict the
sense of the Word, and so the meaning is, pardoning Mercy is in God, and let
forth by God to the penitent, that the pardoned sinner may stand in awe to
offend God, and may be invited to worship and serve God, who invites him to it
by a free pardon of iniquity, under which he could not stand, if God should
mark it in strict Justice. And hence in that sum of Christianity, Philip. 3.3.
If a man from having no confidence in the flesh come to rejoice in Jesus
Christ, the result of that is to worship God in the Spirit; hence Job 37.23,
24. When God is taken up as one excellent in Power, Judgment, and plenty of
Justice, that will not afflict, it has this consequence resulting upon it, men
do therefore fear him; and 1 Kin. 8.38. -- when his people pray to him, he by
his hearing of Prayer, forgiving of sin, doing and giving to every man
according to his ways, does hereby invite them to fear him, all the days that
they live in the Land which he gave to their Fathers, and Hos. 3.5. It is said
of converted Israel, That they shall fear the Lord, and his goodness, in the
latter days.

Now that I may speak somewhat of this for your edification, I shall take a
word or two from this purpose abstractly considered, and then consider it with
an eye to the scope.

1. Then considering the words abstractly, we may mark, that fear and reverence
is due to God, that God is a suitable Object of humble and reverential fear in
the Creature; the fear of God is a thing frequently spoken of, and pressed in
Scripture, as most due to him. Rev. 15.4. Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and
glorify thy Name, Psalm. 76.7, 11. Thou, even thou art to be feared; bring
presents to him that ought to be feared, Isai. 8.13. Sanctify the Lord of
hosts himself, let him be your fear and your dread: He^^e (not to insist upon
the Derivations that some give of the Greek and Latin Names of God, from the
Greek word (...), signifying Fear) the Scripture sometimes Names God by this,
That he is the fear of his people. Genesis 31.53. when Laban swear by the God of
Abraham, and the God of Nabor, Jacob swear by the fear of his father Isaac,
that is, by the God that was the Object of Isaac's fear: and that word is very
emphatick, which ye have, Psalm. 76.11. in your Translation it is, bring
presents to him that ought to be feared; but in the Original (and as it is
rendered in the margin of your Bibles) it is* bring presents to the fear, that
is, to God, the Object of the reverential fear of his people; It may be said
that the Object of fear being things evil, God who is the Chief Good, seems not
to be the proper Object of fear; but that is easily cleared, affection to God,
as to the chief Good, cannot be without holy solicitude, and reverential fear,
lest either our sin deprive us of him, and of his favor, or he be provoked to
send evil on us, upon the account of our provocations.

Now for the kinds of this fear of God, I shall not insist upon them. There is
a fear of God as a plague and punishment, and that is the fear of Devils, James
2.9. Thou believe there is one God, thou do well, the devils also believe
and tremble. There is a servile and slavish fear, which however it may be in a
Child of God, especially at his first Conversion, while under the spirit of
bondage, yet it is much of the nature of that fear, that is of God as a
punishment of sin; that tormenting fear the Apostle speaks of, 1 John 4.18.
That perfect love casts out; that fear that is not afraid of offending God, but
of punishments only, is that which is in Devils; and that fear that apprehends
punishments, not as they are separat from God the chief Good, but as painful
and grievous to a man's self, is slavish and servile; but right fear is, when
apprehensions of the Majesty, Greatness, and Goodness of God, fills the heart
with holy awe and reverence toward him, and the Faith of his Greatness,
seasoned with the Faith of his Condescendency, makes the soul afraid to offend
him, or lose his favor on any terms.

All that I shall say from this, shall be to exhort and persuade you to get
some stamp of this reverential fear on your heart that ye be not of them, of
whom it is said, Psalm. 36.1. (O dreadful Character) The transgression of the
wicked, says within my heart, there is no fear of God before his eyes; consider
and think upon this, the fear of God is the only Antidote, the only
preservative against an evil course, the fear of God will make a man, that when
it is in the power of his hands to do evil, he dare not do it, Genesis 42.18.
Joseph when his brethren in ward, are afraid of him, says to them, This do and
live* for I fear God; I might soon cut you off, and who would challenge me for
so doing? but I fear God, N^hem 5.15. He would not be burdensome to the people,
as the former Governors had been, they were chargeable to the people, but so
did not I, says he, because of the fear of God; among Heathens, there may be
many Motives to keep men from this and that ill, but all will be like Samsons
cords, if the fear of God be wanting; ponder Genesis 20.11. when Abimelech says to
Abraham, What saw thou that thou have done this thing? Abr^ham answers,
because I thought, surely the fear of God is not in this place, and they will
slay me for my wifes sake; There is no protection for me here, for I see no
fear of God among this people; what will men not be, if a suitable Temptation
come in their way, if they want the fear of God? and how calm will the fear of
God make men that have it? It will make a Lion a Lamb, a Boar a Calf; O how
tractable will it make the wild humors of men, to have a stamp of the fear of
God? and therefore I say it again, seek for it, that it may not be said of you,
such a man's, or such a woman's walk, says within my heart, There is no fear of
God before their eyes.

A 2. Word from the words abstractly considered, is, That as fear is due to
God, so this fear is eminently to be expressed in the service and worship of God;
For that thou may be feared is not to be understood, as that folk should
make a Bog^e of God; but that their fear of him should bring them to worship
and serve him, and that their worship and service should be seasoned with an
holy awe and dread of God. I might touch here on several things, on the one
hand, among other Characters of base and servile fear, this is one, when it
drives from God, and his worship and service, which was the result of Adam's
fear after his fall. Genesis 3.8. When he heard God's voice in the garden he was
afraid and hid himself. This was the Sinai fear at the giving of the Law, Exodus
20.18. When the people saw the thundering and lightning, and heard the noise of
the Trumpet, they removed and stood a-far off; they went further away from God;
that is never right fear that makes a Scar-crow of God; that is only right fear
that chases in to him: But on the other hand, how should service and worship to
God be loaded and balanced with fear of God? when Jacob had some intercourse
with God in a vision, Genesis 28.17. He was afraid, and said, how dreadful is this
place! this is none other but the House of God, and this is the gate of Heaven.
If we speak of the service of God in general, and would serve him acceptably,
it must be with reverential and godly fear, Heb. 12.28. Not with presumption:
yea, the greatest on Earth as they are commanded to kiss the Son lest he be
angry, and they perish from the way; so they are bidden, serve the Lord with
fear* and rejoice with trembling, Ps. 2.11. and that King, Dan. 6.26. could see
that much, though he came not a full length, when he made a decree, That in
every dominion of his kingdom, men should tremble and fear before the God of
Daniel; and for fear in duties of immediate worship (such as ye are now about)
how is it pressed, Psalm. 89.7. God is greatly to be feared in the assembly of
his Saints, and to be had in reverence of all that are about him; and Psalm.
5.7. we will find those to be the two stilts, (so to speak) that David walked
on going to the public Ordinances; As for me, I will go into thy house in the
multitude of thy mercy, and in thy fear will I worship toward thy holy temple;
The faith of Gods Mercy balanced with Fear, that it turn not in presumption;
and fear again under proped with Mercy, that it degenerat not into despondency;
and there are many Considerations to press the seasoning and ballasting of the
service and worship of God with fear, whether partly we consider the Majesty of
God, compared with our baseness; There are few folk that converse with God at
Abraham's rate, Genesis 18.27. Behold now, says he, I have taken upon me to speak
to the Lord, who am but dust and ashes; and Solomon's rule, Eccles. 5.1. -- is,
keep thy foot when thou goes into the house of God, and be more ready to hear,
than to give the sacrifice of fools; be not rash with thy mouth, and let not
thy heart be hasty to utter any thing before God, for God is in Heaven* and
thou upon Earth, therefore let thy words be few; When there is a ladder betwixt
Heaven and Earth such as Jacob had, how dreadful a place should such a
Sanctuary be? Or whether partly we consider the Holiness and Purity of God,
compared with our Impurity, This made Isaiah, Isai. 6.5. to say, Woe is me, I am
undone, because I am a man of unclean lips, and dwell among a people of
polluted lips, for mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of hosts. And
further, the Consideration of the Holiness and Jealousy of God, that he will
not be affronted in the matter of his service and worship, it calls for Fear
and reverence; it is a strong Argument used by the Apostle, to press us to
serve God with Reverence and with Godly Fear, Heb. 12.29. For our God, says he,
is a consuming fire; and that which Moses said to Aaron, when his two Sons were
slain, burnt up with fire, which went out from the Lord, for offering strange
fire before him. This is the thing which the Lord spoke, saying, I will be
sanctified in them that come near me, and before all the people I will be
glorified; I will either be honored by them, or I will be honored upon them
that draw near me, and take my Name in vain. Well then, have ye any thing of
this Fear of God? will ye kythe it by your serving him, Mal. 1.6. A son
honors his father, and a servant his master, if he be a Father, where is his
honor, and if a Master, where is his fear? stand ye in awe of God that do
misken him all your time? do ye fear him, that never take a spare hour to pay
homage to him? that will not bow a knee to him: But I shall add, the service
that ye pay to God, I pray you look how it is ballast with fear, that it turn
not in presumption; and if ye have need of an intimation of Mercy to correct
your fear, that it degener not in despondency: Ye come to God's House to
Worship him, but how few of you when ye come here, have said, How dreadful is
this place; would ye have your Character? take it from Jude verse 12. These are
spots in your feasts of charity, when they feast with you, feeding themselves
without fear; ye come before God, ye join in the public Exercises of Gods
Worship, but without any impression of the fear of God, more than if all we did
while we are together, had no relation to him; O be ashamed that the fear and
awe of God does so little ballast and season your service and worship.

But in the 2. place, we come to take a look of this purpose, with an eye to
the Scope, There is forgiveness with thee that thou may be feared, says the
Psalmist; then, the fear of God, more tender walking, being more frequent and
serious in duty to God, more reverence of his service, it is the kindly product
of a heart that has on right terms closed with Christ in pardoning mercy, a
fear to offend God, a reverential fear in his Worship and service. And hence, I
shall lay these few particulars before you and close

1. Which is the main thing in the Scope, come and try by this, if ye have been
closing a-right with pardoning mercy, see what is the consequence of it, and,
that will tell you. Are ye closing with pardoning Mercy, to make your boast of
it, that ye may sin on, and sleep more securely? That is all the Dream that
some have in their head of God's goodness, and mercy in pardoning sin, to take
in a new Swack, but thou that does so, turns the Grace of God unto
lasciviousness, and offers a contempt to pardoning Mercy, which the Gracious
God will not brook. But, O! here is the blessed Fruit of pardoning Mercy, to be
more tender in thy walk, more afraid of sin, more diligent in Duty, the further
God is pleased to put thee in his bosom, the greater distance thou keeps with
what may provock him, the more freely he forgive thee, the more thou delights
to be active in his service; find many Scriptures that gives an account of the
overcoming goodness of God toward ingenuous Souls, not only that, Psalm. 85.8.
He will speak peace to his people, and to his saints, but let them no^ ^urn
again to folly; but that of Hos. 3.5. The goodness of God the Object of their
Faith makes them fear him and his goodness; and that of David, 2 Samuel 7.27. Who
when he gets a promise of building him a House, the kindness of God sets him on
fire as it were, and puts wings to his Prayer. Thou, O Lord of hosts, God of
Israel, have revealed to thy servant, saying, I will build thee an house,
therefore has thy servant found in his heart to pray this prayer unto thee;
and Hezekiah, Isai. 38 15. When the Lord had spoken of his delivery, he will
not wax wanton, but he will walk softly all the fifteen years added unto his
days in the bitterness of his soul: and when the Lord falls in upon Ephraim
with sweet converting Grace, and turns him, Jer. 31.19. after he is turned he
repents, after he is instructed, he smites on his thigh, he is ashamed, yea,
even confounded, because he has born the reproach of his youth; see to it ye
that grip to pardoning Mercy, and lay claim to it, I am so far from envying
you, that I say, the Lord say so too. But, O! let it be seen in your
tenderness, in your reverential fear and awe of God, in the constraining power
that the love of Christ has on you, if ye believe that he died for you, will
not his love constrain you to l^ve to him? 2 Cor. 5.14. And ye that are tender,
will ye not be afraid that that kindness of God ye lay claim to, is either a
lie in your right hand, that produces not somewhat like this, or that ye are in
a plagued condition, that the goodness and kindness of God works not upon you.

2. If pardoning Mercy be let out, that God may be feared, it puts me in
capacity to answer the Cavillations of the profane, they live in the contempt
of holiness, they have a prejudice at it, they see no form nor beauty in it,
wherefore they should desire it; What shall they get if they turn fearers of
God? They see no advantage by it, but loss: But shall I say to thee, if thou
looked rightly on it, thou would be ashamed to own any such Cavillation, Piety
has no enemy but an ignorant, there is none that ever knew Piety that would
give it the Character thou gives it; if pardoning Mercy work up a love to
holiness in men, and make them to fear him; thou that has a prejudice at
holiness, evidences that thou art not a partaker of it, and why would thou tell
all the World, that thou knows not what this pardoning Mercy means; thy
contempt of holiness proclaims, that all thy iniquities are bound upon thy
back: If ever thou had layen at Gods Foot stool, and been lift up with
pardoning Mercy, saying to thee, Son or daughter be of good cheer, thy sins are
forgiven thee, it would put an edge upon thee, to pursue after holiness; and
therefore let me entreat you who are profane, and entertain a prejudice at
holiness, not to publish your own shame, and by your contempt of the fear of
God, and his service, to declare ye are yet without the pardoning Mercy of God.

But from this ye shall take a 3. word, If closing with pardoning mercy sets
hearts on work to fear God, and to tenderness in the study of holiness, then ye
may see how many of the Children of God do cut the throat of all their
endeavors after holiness, and to walk tenderly through their not closing with
pardoning Mercy: I suppose some have the Conscience, a sad Monitor unto them, a
sad Wan-rest within doors, for want of tenderness, and some would fain be at
serving and worshipping of God, and yet they cannot win at it, but look if thou
leaves not thy encouragement behind thy hand, in not closing with pardoning
Mercy, and by so doing, not only cuts thy self short of the Joy of the Lord,
which is thy strength, but provocks God to blast thy study of holiness, that
thou would put in his room, or in the room of his pardoning Mercy; But thou
that would be kept fresh and green in thy pursuit of holiness, here is thy
method that thou must follow; first, wrap thy self in the bosom of pardoning
Mercy and then try thy work and thou shall find it more delightsome and go
better with thee, than when thou leaves this encouragement behind thee, lay thy
self in his bosom for pardon, and O! but that will make thee fear him much, and
love him much; that woman, Luke 7* that bad much forgiven her, loved much, and
had abundance of tears to wash Christ's feet; her closing with pardon did so
melt her heart, and so would it thine; closing with pardoning Mercy would heal
palsy hands and feet, and make thee work, walk and run, it would kindle that
love that is strong as death, and that jealousy that is cruel as the grave,
the coals whereof are coals of fire, that have a vehement flame, and bring it
to that, that many waters cannot quench, or the floods drown, or contemn all
that would compet with it. I dare not offer to insist the day being shortened;
but as on the one hand they who fall asleep on pardoning Mercy (as the bride of
Christ may some times take a nap, but wakens and sets to her feet again) would
know they make not a right use of pardoning Mercy, but sin grievously, and if
they sleep on, they evidence that they cheat themselves in that matter; and
these that love not holiness proclaim they were never partakers of it; so upon
the other hand, thou that loves holiness, but cannot win at it, close better
with pardoning Mercy, as that which will strenthen and encourage thee; and by
waiting on the Lord in this way, thou shall renew thy strength, mount up with
wings as eagles, run and not be weary, walk and not be faint. Now to our God be
praise and glory through Jesus Christ.

SERMON XIX.
Psalm 130. Verse 5. I wait for the Lord, my soul does wait, and in his word do
I hope.

6 My soul waits for the Lord, more than they that watch for the morning, I
say more than they that watch for the morning.


YE heard when I entered upon this Psalm, that the first six Verses contain the
wrestling and the exercise the Psalmist was under, as the last two Verses
contain his victory and issue, and his improvement of it.

For his wrestling and exercise, it consists (as ye heard) of three branches,
ye have him wrestling with the difficulties and plunging perplexities in his
case; these he expresses under the Metaphor of depths, and his wrestling with
them is, by fervent wrestling and crying to God in Prayer, verses 1, 2. 2. Ye
have him wrestling with the Conscience and sense of guilt, that obstructed his
audience, put back his Prayers, and offered to crush his hopes, and with that
he wrestles in the 3, and 4. Verses, by taking with the dreadful desert of sin,
by laying hold on God's pardoning Mercy, and carrying along with him God's
end in letting out pardoning Mercy to sinners, even that he may be feared: and
of this subject I have been speaking at great length, and I must exhort and
entreat, that though a close be put to Preaching on it, that yet ye may not
give over the minding of that Doctrine, it is that which will be your great
Pasport; pardoning Mercy if ye obtain it, when ye come to grapple with the King
of Terrors, and go through the dark valley of the shadow of death.

Now in the two Verses read, ye have the Psalmist in the third place wrestling
with delays of answers to his Prayers, or the delays of the out-gate prayed
for, and these he wrestles with by confident, patient, affection at waiting on
God, I wait for the Lord, my soul does wait, and in his word do I hope etc. And
this purpose also we have cause to look unto, because it gives an account of a
Christians constant exercise in time; he that would be a Christian indeed, it
is not enough that he pray in difficulties, that he take with the desert of
sin, and look to pardoning Mercy, when Conscience challenges him, but when he
has done all that, he must persevere in so doing, and wrestle with the delays
of answers to his Prayer, he must give a proof of the patience, as well as of
the Faith of the Saints, he must be a follower of these who through Faith and
Patience inherit the Promises.

There is a general Remark which will make way to the purpose contained in the
words, which I shall insist on a little, that is That perseverance and constant
waiting on God in his way, is the great task of Saints, and the Touchstone of
their sincerity in all other exercises and duties. This tryes how well breathed
the Saints are, and what is their integrity in other exercises that they are at
sometimes, even that they be constant, bide by it, wait on God, and persevere
in waiting on him in his way, notwithstanding they meet with delays.

And that I may unfold this General to you, ye shall with me take a threefold
look of this perseverance. 1. Look upon it in general, as it is opposed to
Apostasy, backsliding and giving up with the ways of Religion. 2. (Which will
deduce this General more fully and particularly) ye shall take a look of this
perseverance, as it imports a constant Tenor and course in waiting on God, and
seeking of God, in opposition to folks phrases, fairds and hot fits at some
times, wherein they are but fleeting. And 3. (Which will lead me to the
particular in the Text) look on it as it is opposed to wearying, sitting up, or
falling by from employing God, and waiting on him, if they be delayed,
especially in sad dispensations, and exigences they meet with.

For the first of these, Perseverance in general, as it is opposed to
apostasy, backsliding, and giving up with the ways of God, and godliness; I
shall not dwell much on that Doctrine. The necessity of it appears in the
Promises made unto it, Mat. 24.13. It is he that endures unto the end shall be
saved: and Rev. 2. and 3. Chapters, it is always to the overcomer that the
Promise is made, though I confess the Word, there being in the present time, To
him that overcomes, or is overcoming, it is to assure them, that are in
earnest in the battle and in pursuit of the Victory, that they may grip the
promise for their encouragement; yet it is to the overcomer, to him that
endures to the end, to the complete Victory that the Promise relates. Neither
2. shall I speak to the possibility and impossibility of this apostasy, and
backsliding. I confess if I speak of the Saints that are truly regenerat, it
is impossible that they can totally and finally fall away. There is a seed that
still remains in them, 1 John 3.9. Not that that seed being but a Creature can
preserve it self of it self, but its remaining and stability depends on the
eternal decree of God concerning the Elect ( For whom he forknows and
predestinats to be conform to the image of his Son, them be also glorifies,
Romans 9.30.) upon the paction past betwixt the Father and the Son about the
Elect, that the Father shall bring them to Christ, and that Christ shall lose
none of them. Joh. 6.39. Upon the Promises of the Covenant of Grace, that he
will put his fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from him, Jer.
32.40. And upon the intercession of Christ, that has prayed for them that
their faith fail not, Luke 22.32. Yet though it be certain that none of the
truly Regenerat can totally and finally fall away: it is as certain that
Temporaries, that blossom fair for a time, may totally and finally fall away:
and it is no less certain that Saints may make Apostasy, and fall away from
many degrees of that life and vigor which once they had; They may with David
give over waiting on God, and run away to the Land of the Philistines, 1 Samuel
^7. They may with that Church of Ephesus forsake their first Love, Rev. 2.4.
Nor 3. shall I insist to lay before you the evil of Apostasy, that is, the
prejudice this backsliding has with it, according to the degree and measure
of it, as that there is first this woeful ill in it, in being hindered in that
which is good. Gal. 5.7. Ye run well, who hindered you, that ye should not obey
the truth. And 2. That there is in it a losing of that which folks have gained,
Gal. 3.4. Have ye suffered so many things in vain? Have ye lost all these
sufferings ye endured in the world for Christianity? and 2 John verse 8. Look
to your selves that we lose not these things that have been wrought; The
progress that has been made, the victory that has been obtained over
corruption, a man by Apostasy, backsliding or sitting up in the way of God,
runs the hazard of losing all that. There it also 3. a great hazard in
Backsliding, upon the account of the indignity thereby offered to the Majesty
of God, it is a reflection on him, as if there were some iniquity in him, Jer.
2.5. What iniquity have your fathers found in me that they are gone far from
me, and have walked after vanity, and are become vain? And verse 31. Have I
been a wilderness to Israel? a land of darkness? Werefore say my people, we are
lords, we will come no more to thee; and Micah 6.3. O my people wherein have I
wearied thee? What have I done unto thee? testify against me. From all which
it is clear, that it is a dreadful iniquity offered to the Majesty of God, when
his people back-slide from him. And 4. This course of Apostasy is full of
hazard, upon the account of the stumbling blocks thereby laid in the way of
others; the back-slider does all that he can to deter any to assay that course
and way of Religion and Godliness, that he has forsaken and turned his back
on, when after he has been for a time in Christ's company, he makes desertion
and leaves him, he proclaims to all the World, that there is not that
satisfaction to be had in him, and in his service that he expected, and if all
should take his verdict, never one should engage in that course that he has
relinquished. And 5. Apostasy and backsliding is full of hazard, on the
account of the dreadful consequences that follow on it. I shall not need to
insist upon that, Prove. 14.14. The back-slider in heart shall be filled with
his own ways; but many and dreadful are the plagues that abide such a temper,
that waits on back-sliders; God will make out upon temporary back-sliders, that
which ye have 1 Pet. 2.21. It had been better for them not to have known the
way of righteousness, than after they have known it, to turn from the holy
commandment delivered to them; and for the Saints when they backslide, they lay
a foundation of many sorrows to themselves, when God wakens them up to lay to
heart their backslidings, and to return to their first Husband, when he hedges
up their way with Thorns, and makes a wall that they shall not find their
paths, when they follow after their lovers, and cannot overtake them, seek them
and cannot find them, till they find that iniquity of their backsliding to be
hateful.

Running through these words shortly, I come to draw some words of use from
what has been said: And 1. Folk would look what guilt may be among them, or
upon them, of this kind; if I should speak to many in this time, there needs
not a secret search to find out their guilt, to prove their Apostasy, and
backsliding. How many are there that in their younger days, it may be had
their buds, blossoms, and promises fair enough, and appearances of good, which
when they are grown up, are rotten and withered, blasted and gone. How many
seem to have come far on in Religion, and all the length they came in seeking
God, they have given it over? How many made a mint of seeking God in secret,
and in their Families, and now they no more assay it, than if they were Pagans?
What shall I say of Negatives? many have not only turned off all Religion in
their Practice, but they are turned openly profane, and not only profane, but
mockers, if ever they had any touch of Conscience in themselves, they are ready
to call it Melancholy, silliness, sordid baseness in spirit, and to bless
themselves that they have got their foot on it, and not only are they ready to
mock at this work in themselves, but to hate all others that will not run with
them to the same excess of riot; look to it, it is a fearful and ominous thing
to see the defection that is in this generation, among the generality of the
Professors of the Gospel; and without all peradventure, if Repentance prevent
not, it portends hard things; Backsliding is a sin that Christ will not sit
with unrevenged; and shall I in this trial come nearer to you, ye who have
kept your feet, and are not to be ranked among these that we have been
speaking of, come and try if ye may inlist your selves among the waiters on
God, or if ye be backslidden and sitten up; I confess there may be a temptation
as to this, haunting a tender soul; some may think because they make not such
din and noise of their Religion as sometime they did, that they are
backslidden, but thou may have more life now than thou had in thy former
fraziness and forwardness; thou was before like green wood that has much din,
will crack much, but has less heat and light, but now thou art like the dry
wood that has better light and more heat; and there may be also a mistake on
this account, that because God is leading thee through the abominations of
thine heart, and humbles thee with the naughtiness of thy disposition, which
he discovers to thee; thou may think thy self worse than sometime thou was,
when thou art not worse, but sees better than thou did before; therefore where
there is tenderness we would guard against such mistakes upon that hand, where
tenderness lies. But alas, we have greater cause to guard against a blind upon
the other hand, that is, that because folk keep up the tale of Duty, and are as
frequently about Rel^gious Performances as they wont to be, they think they are
not back-slidden, nor sitten up in the way of God; and yet they are far from
that love to, and delight in God, that once appeared in their Service and
Worship.

And to instruct this a little to you, I would have these that would try if
they be backslidden from that they had, or might have had, or that others have
attained, looking to these four or five things. 1. If they be growing,
according to that, 2 Pet. 3.17. -- Beware lest being led away with the error of
the wicked, ye fall from your own stedfastness, but grow in grace, and in the
knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ; There is no standing still in a Christian
course, the person that is not growing in the fruit, or to the root, that is
not making progress in Sanctification, nor is not growing in Mortification and
Humiliation for his shortcoming, he is certainly a backsliding person.

2. I would have folks looking to this, whether Religion in many be not come
from their hearts to their heads, so that these who wont to be full of sap, are
now sapless; these who had a lively impression on their Souls, of the life and
power of Religion, are now come to that, that all they have is bare tastless
notions and speculations; not only do folks that are sitten up, forget to look
to the frame of the heart, and few cabinet counsels are betwixt God and them;
but O how tasteless, sapless, and lifeless is Religion and Religious Duties to
them, they have a notion of Misery and Mercy, of Sin and a Savior, but it is
like a dream, a thing they can look on with very little or no affecting of
heart.

3. I would have folk that would try their frame* looking to this, what
Conscience is made of sin, when the saints are in a right frame, they walk
tenderly in a continual jealousy of themselves, they have many a reflex look
back, check, and heart-sinking for this and that they find amiss, and this is
not at a start, but it will be their trade and exexcise: But O when it comes to
this, that thou art a stranger to a tender walk with God, to inward checks and
challenges, and thy Throat grows wide, and thou gets over guilt without
reluctance, thou miscarries, and thy light tells thee of it, but thy heart is
not affected with it, that tells thou art sitten up, for a growing frame is
tender in the matter of sin and guilt.

4. I would have folk that would try their frame, looking well to their
diligence, It is the hand of the diligent that makes rich, Prove. 10.4. The soul
of the diligent shall be made fat, Prove. 13.4. And therefore folks that are at
little pains in the Duties of Religion, for the honor of God, and their own
souls advantage, but spend much of their time in laziness, and carnalness, when
they cast up their accounts, they will find they are sitten up, withered and
under a decay.

5. And to add no more, They that would try their frame, would consider, that
though they be free of these things hinted at; yet if they be under a spirit of
discouragement, they cannot be making progress. Look then to your frame, who
are more tender, what discouragement ye find in it. The day was when the Duties
of Religion, and closs following of Christ was thy delight; but now thy
Conscience is turned a Tormenter unto thee; thou drives heavily in any task
thou art called to, thou art like Thomas, Joh. ^1.16. who followed Christ but
discouragedly, Let us go also, says he, that we may die with him; though thou
keep up the tale of Duty thy discouragement evidences thou art fallen from thy
first love, from that love which once thou had, or might have had.

Well then, try your selves by these things, what your growth is, what your
heart-work is, what conscience is made of sin, what diligence in Duty, what
discouragement in stead of delight; and when ye have tried, reflect on that I
said before of your hazard and prejudice, what retardment in good, what loss is
in what ye had gained, what indignity has been offered to God, what reflecting
on him, what stumbling blocks have been laid before others, what sorrows ye
have been brewing to your selves? And I shall only add this Consideration, I
wish that all back slidden and up-sitten Professors, would ponder that place,
Rev. 2^4, 5. Where there is a Church that is very zealous, cannot bear with
them which are evil, has tried them, which said they were Apostles, and found
them liars, had born, and had patience, and for the Name of Christ had
labored, and not fainted; and yet Christ quarrels her, for that she had lost
her first love; and what follows, Remember from whence thou art fallen, Repent,
and do the first works, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove
thy candlestick out of his place: A Church leaving her first Love, her gradual
decay may provock God to un-Church her, except she consider from whence she is
fallen, repent, and do her first works.

But a 2. word of Use, shall be to hint to you a direction, what folk should do
with an up-sitten condition, when they find it and cannot win out of it; I
confess it is not so difficult to find out the Disease, as the Remedy; and here
(to say nothing to them that are so fast a-sleep, that they will not waken to
consider of their up-sitten condition,) I find on the one hand, some that are
sensible of their backsliding, ready to sigh and go backward, they look upon
their case as deplorable, and on themselves as in an evil plight, and yet they
loiter on, and win not to their feet: And I find on the other hand, others, who
if a conviction of this kind be called home upon them, they think they will up
and to their feet, and recover themselves, but their fools haste makes no
speed, while they look not to the causes of their declining, and seek not to
get them healed; and herefore when the burnt of the Conviction is over, they
are where they were, and do not amend; a Physician that would cure a Disease,
seeks first to know and remove the causes thereof; and that is the method I
would recommend to you to follow, to consider what it is that makes the people
of God back-slide, sit up, or decline in the course of Religion and Godliness;
there are some Causes without, which I do not insist on, when there is a
dreadful shower of Spiritual Plagues rained upon a visible Church; it is no
wonder that some drops of it fall upon the godly; to allude to that, Mat.
24.12. Because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold, Though I
know the meaning of the place looks like another way, that because of the
abounding of iniquity, folks shall not know with whom to walk, or intimatly
converse; nor shall I need to put you in mind of that new-fangle humor that is
in many, That when Religion is new to them, make a faird at it, and thereafter
sit up, like Children that are taken up with Toys, and presently lose conceit
of them, and cast them from them; so it is with many in the matters of God and
godliness; but there are several causes of upsitting within, that ye would look
unto; The first I begin at is, Conceit, which not only many time evidences a
man to be nothing, If a man thinks himself something while he is nothing, he
deceives himself, Gal. 6.3. and Rev. 3.17. Thou say I am rich, and increased
with goods, and have need of nothing, and know not, that thou art wretched,
poor, blind, miserable, and naked; But be a man what he will, if he conceit of
it, his conceit of it sets his height upon his head, he cannot make
proficiency, yea, Conceit is the next door to Apostasy; compare for this,
these two parallel places, Hab. 2.4. his soul that is lifted up, is not upright
in him, but the just shall live hy faith, but if any man draw back, my soul
shall have no pleasure in him, says the Apostle, Heb. 10.38. A lifted up Soul,
and a drawing back Soul go together; therefore who would recover from their
backslidden condition, and find out the causes of it, they would look first to
conceit as a main cause. O! how many a fair profession has Conceit blasted?
how many a hypocrite has conceit discovered to be but empty casks without
substance? yea more, how many really godly has conceit lost in the mire of
apostasy, till they considered and laid it to heart better than they did. 2.
(Which has affinity with the former of conceit) Take notice of carnal
confidence as another great cause; when ever a Child of God wears out of a
posture of poor and needy dependence, when all beside Christ is not flesh to
him, a slide abides him. When Job (29.18.) said he should die in his nest, and
multiply his days as the sand, he was near a shake. When David, Psalm. 30.6.
said, in his prosperity he should not be moved; God hid his face and he was
troubled, his carnal confidence was backed with desertion from God; Therefore
beware of pride and carnal confidence, as ye would not decline and backslide:
And ye that would seek out the causes of your decayed condition, and endeavor
a cure, look well to these two, as bringing you in the sad posture wherein ye
are lying. The Lord bless his word to you.

SERMON XX.
Psalm 130. Verse 5. I wait for the Lord, my soul does wait, etc.
THat I may prepare the way for a more distinct handling of this great and
important Duty of waiting on God, and for God I proposed in the morning to
speak somewhat upon perseverance and constancy in Religion, and that partly in
general, in opposition to Apostasy and Backsliding; and partly in particular,
in opposition to that fleiting, frazing humor, that may be in folk at some
tim^ but soon passes over and is gone, and in opposition (...) ^earying to wait
on, if they be delayed, especial^^ (...)d dispensations.

For the general I spoke somewhat to it, and hinted in the first place, at some
Means of Trial, whereby folks may know more distinctly their sitten-up frame,
and I was cut off by the time, from searching into the causes of up-sitting or
declining, that would be heeded by them that would prevent, or recover
themselves out of that temper; several things occur, which though diverse of
them may be one upon the matter, yet I name them distinctly, that under one
notion or another of the same thing, ye may take up your distemper.

I spoke in the first place to Conceit: And, 2. To carnal Confidence, as main
Causes of Apostasy; Now I go on, and in the third place ye shall take notice
with me of this, as a great cause of declining, to wit, idleness, want of
seriousness and sensible errands to Christ daily, when folks, though they go
about the Duties of Religion, in private and public, yet the most they have for
them is to fill the field, to observe a custom, or to quiet the clamours of
Conscience; in this case folk are idle, they have not sensible errands to
Christ, they have not their finger on their sore; and as this evidences a
declined Frame so it is a cause of declining in many, to allude to that, Prove.
19 15. Slothfulness casts into a deep sleep, and an idle soul shall suffer
hunger: And Eccles. 10.18. By much slothfulness the building decays, and
through idleness of the hands, the house droppeth through. So negligence in
performance of Service to God, will soon bring a soul to a very poor posture
and condition. Further in the fourth place, ye shall take notice of this, that
the not observing of gradual Decays, is the great cause of the heightning that
Decay, and coming to a height in backsliding, when folks slide down the bra^
piece and piece, when they steal at leisure from their first Love, and it is
not observed by them, it brings on a sinful frame ere they be awa^^^ ^any
through want of observation, are like Sampson (...) has his Locks cut, and
knows it not till the^ (...) upon him. Or like the blessed Virgin, who
supposing Christ to be in the crowd, missed him not, but afterward had him to
seek with sorrow. Or as Pharaoh's Servants said to him, Knows thou not yet,
that Egypt is destroyed; like Ephraim, gray hairs are here and there upon him,
yet he knows i^ not: As ye say of Hecticks, they are worst to be discerned,
but easily cured in the beginning, but when continued in, they are easily
discerned, and worse to be cured; so fares it with them that observe not their
gradual decays.

And to this I shall add in the 5 place, that folks would look well to Idols,
when they are harbored; it is a great cause of backsliding, and of idleness,
and inadvertance, that brings on decay: If Judas love the bag, he will sooner
or later betray his Master for money: If Sampson will try conclusions, by
sleeping on the knees of a Delilah, though he might once and again escape her
snares, yet Delilah will at last betray him into the hands of the Philistines:
An Idol entertained, without mourning over it, and laboring to mortify it;
though Satan may let thee keep up a rank in good for a time, yet sooner or
later it will turn thee aside.

Then 6. If we would persevere and not decline, we would lay the foundation
very well, see that it be upon the Rock: It was not that which was above ground
that carried the body of naughtiness in the stony ground, but it was the
deepness of earth that was wanting, Mat. 13.5. The house that bides the storm
has the foundation bigged deep, Luke 6.48. Many folk are fair above ground,
but O! How naughty are they under ground? That Is a good foundation that is laid
in mortification, self-denial, and needy dependence on Christ: This has
relation to what I spoke before of idols, and am to speak of unbelief; yet I
give it you distinctly, an ill-rooted Professor cannot persevere, but must
decline, a mortified Professor will be well-rooted, and long-breathed (as we
use to speak) in perseverance.

7. Look upon unbelief and discouragement as a great cause of Apostasy, the joy
of the Lord is the strength of the Saints, Neh. 8.10. But where this evil heart
of unbelief is, there will be a departing from the living God, Heb. 3.12. And
where there are hands hanging down, and feeble knees, that which is lame or
halting will be soon turned out of the way, Heb. 12.13. As many suffer
shipwreck of their pursuit in the bosom of some Idol, so many split upon the
Rock of Diffidence and Discouragement, which being given way to, there is no
remedy, but to fall by, or sit up dangerously.

8. And I shall add no mo, we would look well to stumbling, as a great cause of
Apostasy and declining. When a man stumbleth at the directions of the word,
though alas! There are many of us not so tenty at a Sermon, as to notice them,
or shall take them, not so near them, as to try if they have corruption, to
stumble at them, compare Joh. 6.60, 61. with 66. Many of Christ's Disciples,
when they have heard him speak of the eating of his flesh, and drinking of his
blood, say, This is a hard saying, who can hear it? Christ knowing their
murmuring, says, Does this offend you? And what comes of that? v. 66. From
that time many of his disciples went back, and walked no more with him; they
stumbled at his Doctrine, and therefore drew back: or whether folk stumble at
the dispensations of providence, when they are sad and afflicting, Isai. 33.14.
It is said of the Hypocrites, The sinners in Zion are afraid, fearfulness has
surprised the hypocrites: who among us shall dwell with devouring fire? who
among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings? Alluding to the terrible aspect
of Sennacheribs Army; they looked on these as things that could not be bidden:
ye may think them weak, and hypocrites, that stumble at dispensations, but let
him that stands, take heed lest he fall. Remember when David stumbled at the
prosperity of the wicked, he came to that, How does God know? and is there
knowledge in the most high? Verily I have cleansed my hands in vain, and washen
my hands in innocence. There stumbling at providence turned him foolish and
ignorant, as a beast before God, Psalm. 73 22. --

These things I have shortly named, and if there be any sensible of their
backsliding, and of a decayed frame, and afraid of it; do not think that your
whryning over it will prevent it, or cure it, but look on those things as the
causes of this ill frame, and ye will find ye have them, or are ready to split
on them; and to cure the disease, take away the cause and the effect will cease.

But a 3d word of Use shall be this, if declining and backsliding be so
frequent, and where it is, if it be so dangerous, how much reason have they to
bless God, whose backsliding he prevents, who are kept fresh and flourishing,
and fat and green, and enabled to bring forth fruit in old age, Psalm. 92.12. --
Who in all the times they have come over, have not met with an Idol they
delight to fall asleep in the bosom of, nor with a discouragement that they
have not trod on, nor with a dispensation they stumbled on; they have been
kept serious and diligent, humble and denied. I am now marking a mercy of many,
that it may be they do not mark themselves; some complain, that all their time
they get nothing, they are kept poor and needy, from the hand to the mouth,
they meet with nothing but delays, tossing and restlessness, any get leave to
draw their breath but they, and they think that they are very hardly dealt
with; but have thou this mercy, that thou art kept low, thou has no ground of
carnal confidence, thou gets not leave to be idle, thou art holden going,
diligent, serious in errands to Christ. Thy grievances will tell thee if thou
bide away; thy heart-searchings thou must vent in his bosom, and show before
him thy trouble: Read in that a mercy, that thou art made to persevere, though
in a humbling posture. Many have had sweet hours beside thee, and have fallen
asleep on them, and thou art kept waking; God is keeping thee on thy feet, when
others have fallen, though with dispensations that are not satisfying to thy
flesh.

But now I proceed to the other two looks that I proposed to be taken of this
perseverance, which are comprehended under the former, and serve to obviat two
great sources and causes of Apostasy. The first is this, Perseverance is to be
looked on, as it imports a constant tract of waiting on God, and seeking of
him, in opposition to that brashiness fleettingness, ups and downs that are in
some, who will have some odd fits of godliness, they are now very hot, and ere
ye wot as cold: This may be seen in very godly folks, if they be at Ordinances,
especially solemn Ordinances, how far up the B^a^ will they be, as Saul among
the Prophets? Or when they are in some trouble, how keen, how eager and lively
will they be? But ere ye wot they are as dead, like a Summer Brook, that in a
shower is over the Banks, but within a little is quite out and dry. Ye may take
an instance of this in Israel, when the Law was published at Sinai, with great
Majesty and terror, who but they? Deuteronomy. 9.27. All that the Lord our God will
speak unto thee, we will do it: But the History tells if they were as good as
their word. Another instance ye have in Israel at the red Sea, Psalm. 106.12. --
Then believed they his word, and sang his praise, when the waters overflowed
their enemies; but they soon forgot his works, or made haste to forget them,
they waited not for his counsel, but lusted exceedingly in the wilderness, and
tempted God in the desert. Now in opposition to this, it is the great mercy of
Saints, when not only they hold out as it may be to the end, and get their
souls for a prey, but they endeavor to be solid, fixed, constant, equal, to
draw out (as ye speak) an even thread of a godly walk; not but that they have
their ups and downs of comfort and abasement, but they guard against their
brashy fairds and fits, and against their being at a hight now, and sinking
again as low.

And the grounds why ye would guard against this fleeting unstable disposition
are, 1. A fleeting temper is not to be trusted to; that which light unsolid
hearts are at in a faird, they are not wise that lean to it. God at the first
view tells Israel, their goodness was as a morning cloud, or as the early dew,
Hos. 6.4. promising fair, but passing away: And when they make their great
ran^, Deuteronomy. 5.27. Who but they for obedience? O, says the Lord, v. 29. that
there were such a heart in them; I know them better than themselves do, I know
they want that heart they profess, to be solid and constant in their obedience
to me. 2. This fleeting disposition would be guarded against, because these hot
fits that folk sometimes have in the way of godliness, will be a dreadful
witness against them, when they turn their back upon it. What a sad check is
that Christ gives to the Jews, Joh. 5.35. John was a burning and a shining
light, and ye rejoiced to walk in his light for a season; Who but John for a
time to you? but ye soon tired. And see how the Apostle beats home a reproof
for this, Gal. 4.14. -- My temptation which was in my flesh ye despised not,
nor rejected; but received me as an Angel of God, even as Christ Jesus. Where
is then the blessedness ye spoke of? etc. Where is that heat and edge now? 3.
This fleeting disposition would be looked to, because these unsolid fits have
no present access and acceptance, as they are not lasty, so they are little
noticed for the time: Hos. 6.4. O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? for your
goodness is as a morning cloud, etc. What shall I do with that? What service
can I have of it? What is in it to be noticed? For thou a^t unstable as the
morning cloud, is soon dispelled, and the early dew, soon evanishes. 4. This
fleeting humor would be guarded against, because (besides, it is not acceptance
with God) it keeps folk that they know not the good of godliness: It Is not
fai^ds and brashes that will bring home the real advantage of piety, Hos. 6.3.
Then shall we know, if we follow on to know the Lord, his going forth is
prepared as the morning, and he shall come unto us as the rain, as the former
and latter rain upon the earth. And Joh. 8 31, 32. When there were many that
professed to believe on Christ, he says to them, If ye continue in my word,
then are ye my disciples indeed, and ye shall know the truth, and the truth
shall make you free; if ye hold at that which ye profess, ye shall find the
good of Religion, and be Disciples to me.

From all that I have been speaking on this, folks would learn not to be
cheated with brashes and fairds of this kind; it may be folks please themselves
in an ill course, because now and then their minds have been under dwams, and
they have had their fits and motions (and they should beware of slighting
these, lest folks be given over to their own hearts lusts, to walk in their own
counsels) but such folk should look to it, ye that are brashie, either hot and
frazie, or key cold: There is much of this in a natural temper, that in some
skips from hot to cold, from liveliness to deadness, and holds at nothing. But
that ye may learn to be still the same, in so far as is attainable, in this
state of misery, I would recommend to you partly, that ye would labor to fix
your selves on rational principles; know what ye are doing, and the grounds
whereon ye go, when ye close with Religion; be as Peter, Joh. 6.68 -- When many
went back, Lord, says he, to whom shall we go? for thou have the words of
eternal life. And we believe, and are sure that thou art the Christ, the Son of
the living God. Stuff thine heart solidly with rational and solid grounds to go
upon in Religion, and these put in the hand of God, will be a constant spring
to feed thy diligence. 2. To these rational grounds, add solid resolutions,
that (as Barnabas persuaded the Christians, Acts 11.23.) Thou may with full
purpose of heart cleave unto the Lord; it must not be a surprisal, like one in
a passion, that sets thee on to seek God, but a solid, fixed purpose of heart:
And when thou have laid down rational grounds, and backed them with solid
resolutions, thou must in the 3d place wait on God; it is he that must unite thy
heart to fear his Name, Psalm. 86.11. It Is he that can gather the fleeting
heart, and fix it on the nail that is fastened in a sure place; It Is he in whose
hand thou must put all thy resolutions and purposes, as David, who when he has
resolved well, Psalm. 17.3. -- Thou have tried me, and shall find nothing: I
have purposed that my mouth shall not transgress. Concerning the works of men,
I have by the words of thy lips kept me from the paths of the destroyer. He
adds, v. 6. Hold up my goings in thy paths, that my footsteps slip not. These
are resolutions that are settled and backed with needy dependence on God; else
though thou were never so well fixed in thy resolutions, they may prove like
Sampsons Cords, when thou art assaulted with a new temptation. These few
directions through the blessing of God, may fix you in the way of godliness,
prevent fleeting unconstancy, debording and deviating from it.

But now in the 3d place, to give you a look of perseverance, as it is opposed
to wearying, lying by, sitting up, and it may be, the taking of many sinful
shifts on delays; and when difficulties are met with, that is, when a needy
person goes about the means, frequents the Ordinances, and gets nothing, his
Word is a sealed Book, the Preaching of the Gospel is under a Cloud: when they
go to God in Prayer, they come no speed, they are not heard, and it may be
wrath meets them in the teeth, such may be strongly tempted to give over and
weary; and it is in opposition to this, the Psalmist will wait on God, and in
opposition to such temptations, we are to fix this truth, that no delay we meet
with in Gods way, ought to cut our perseverance short. No delay should make us
say with that wicked King, 2 King. 6.33. This evil is of the Lord, why should I
wait on the Lord any longer? And readily the man that will not wait on God,
has that which he had with it, v. 31. God do so to me, and more also, if the
head of E^^sha the son of Shaphat shall stand on him this day. The godly man
resolves to be like the infirm man at the Pool, Joh. 5.57 There will he ly^
were it never so long, till the water be troubled, and some put him in; or till
Christ by his immediate hand cure him: This was the Psalmists way here, after he
is put to cry out of the deeps, and to wrestle with guilt meeting him in the
teeth, and to cry for pardoning mercy, and no relief appears, he resolves
during the delay, to wait on God. I wait for the Lord, my soul does wait, and
in his word do I hope: My soul waits for the Lord, more, etc. And Psalm 62.
after he has said, Truly my soul waits on God, from him comes my salvation,
v. 1. he presses it over again, v. 5. O my soul, wait thou only upon God, for
my expectation is from him; he will wait, and better wait, and continue in
waiting.

Now the prosecution of this would lead me to the particulars in the Text,
wherein these four or five things are clear. 1. The Psalmists exercise, I wait.
2. The object of his exercise of waiting. I wait for the Lord. 3. His affection
in waiting, My soul does wait. 4. His support in his waiting, My soul does
wait, and in his word do I hope. 5. The great measure of his affection in
waiting, My soul waits for the Lord, more than they that watch for the morning:
I say, more, etc. These are the particulars in the Text, in the prosecution
whereof, we may have sundry things for laying open this exercise of waiting on
God; I shall now speak a few words, and close. I shall not touch on this, that
duty is ours, and event is Gods; a man having done his duty, may, if he could
win up to the use of his allowance, sleep very sound under cross events, but it
is our unhappy temper, that we would still be at the Throne, and have the
guiding of things: we are like the ill Scholar, that is busier at his neighbors
Lesson than his own. But to pass this, consider four short words, and I have
done.

1. Wai^ing on God is a blessed mean appointed of God, in order to an out-gate
out of all difficulties. Isai. 30.18. Blessed are all they that wait on him. A
man by waiting on God, and brooking delays with faith, patience, affection, and
submission, may find an out gate without a delivery.

2. Waiting on God in the case of delays, and persevering in waiting, is
commendable on this account, that we can do no where else so well, as to ly
still at his door; a man that wearies to wait on God, would look what he will
do next, ere he give it over. When Christ asked Peter, Will ye also leave me?
He answers, To whom shall we go? We had need to seek a better Master ere we
quite thee, and that we cannot find, thou have the words of eternal life. What
will a man do next, if he wait not on God? David is fasht with waiting and
dependence, and he will go down to the Land of the Philistines; and the History
tells what befell him there, he is forced to lie, he is likely to be brought in
a snare, by fighting against the people of God and his interest, and in Ziglag,
in hazard of being destroyed by the Amalekites; a man may well get an ill
Conscience by apostasy and declining, he is never a step nearer delivery, so
that go the world as it will, waiting on God is the best of it.

And 3. When we weary of waiting on God, because of outward dispensations, we
bewray too much affection to the things of time, thou art in a difficulty, and
thou wearies because of the calamity that lies on, and thou gets not an
out-gate; but it were better for thee to mourn over thy inordinat affection to
the things of time, that makes thee weary, and that would make way for thy
out-gate, and lighten thy burden:

4. Remember that even a delivery from any difficulty out of Gods way, without
waiting on God, is a plague. When a man comes not under a signal plague till he
come under this, that, as the word is, Mal. 3.15. he tempts God, and is
delivered. And therefore rather abhor such an issue that is a plague, than lust
after it.

SERMON XXI.
Psalm 130. Verse 5. I wait for the Lord, my soul does wait, and, etc.
IN these words (as ye heard the last day) is contained the 3d Branch of the
Psalmists exercise, after that he has wrestled with difficulties, by crying to
God out of the depths, and wrestled with the conscience of guilt, by taking
with it, and fleeing to pardoning mercy on right terms, he is put now to
wrestle with delays of comfort, and an out-gate; and this he wrestles with by
confident, affectionat, meek and patient waiting on God. I spoke to the general
Doctrine of this Verse, The task of perseverance and constancy in the way of
God, and followed it out a little, in opposition to apostasy and backsliding,
and more particularly, to these brashy, hot fits, that folk have at some times,
which are followed with as great cools, and in opposition to delays, or
wearying and sitting up from employing God, when folks meet with delays which
is in the Text, which ye may remember I divided in these five; 1. The Psalmists
exercise, I wait. 2. The object of his exercise of waiting, I wait for the
Lord. 3. His affection in waiting, My soul does wait. 4. His support in his
waiting, My soul does wait, and in his word do I hope. 5. The great measure of
his affection in waiting My soul waits for the Lord, more than they that watch
for the morning, I say, more than they that watch for the morning.

For the first of these, that he is waiting; this, if I should follow forth in
all that might be said of it, I should take in that Confidence and affection
the Psalmist has in waiting, which will occur in their proper places, to be
spoken to, when I proceed in the words of the Text; here I shall pass not only
a general of the Psalmists reflecting on what he has been doing, and his
giving an account of it, which I purpose to take in afterward; but I shall
handle waiting on God here only in these two: 1. Somewhat Supposed, That he is
put to wait. 2. Somewhat proposed, That when he is put to wait, he does wait.


For the first, somewhat supposed, that he is put to wait, which affords us
this Observation, that the Saints even in their serious and sincere seeking of
God in difficulties, may be exercised with delays of comfort, and an out-gate;
when a godly man is here crying out of the Depths; when he has not only been
looking upon his trouble, but sensible of sin, and following a right method for
pardon of sin, on right Terms, carefully and diligently going about his duty,
he is put to this, I wait for the Lord. The Lord indeed has made many rich and
precious Promises, relative to every pressure his people can be under, there is
not a distress or difficulty they can be in, but there is a Promise for it, yet
he has reserved the timing of the accomplishment, and performing of them in
his own hand, Isai. 60. ult. and it is not for us to know the times and the
seasons which the Father has put in his own power; and hence it comes to pass,
that though the Lord in fulfilling his Promises, never misses his own time, yet
seldom does he come at our time; we by reason of our corruption and weakness,
are often put to cry, How long, Lord? how long? Psalm. 6.3. How long will thou
forget me? how long will thou hide thy face? Psalm. 13.1. And as it is. Jer.
8.20. The harvest is past, the Summer is ended, and we are not saved: All which
complaints do not import that God keeps not his time, but that he comes not at
our time in performing his Promises; and yet further, this is to be taken along
with us, during our being exercised with delays; that though God put us to
wait, he does not that merely on the account of his Sovereignty (though he
might do so,) but for the exercise, profit, and advantage of his people: and to
clear and make out this, I shall instance it in four ends the Lord has before
him, in delaying the fulfilling of Promises till his own time; 1. Hereby the
Lord trys whether we will believe the thing he has promised, though it be
delayed; it is not the trial of Faith when we see rich and precious Promises
meeting with sad times and cases, to close with them, providing God will let us
see them presently accomplished when we would; but here is the trial of Faith,
if we will wait till Gods time come, Romans 8.25. After the Apostle has pleaded,
that hope seen is not hope, for what a man sees, why does he yet hope for? he
adds but if we wait for that we see not, then do we with patience wait for it:
If we hope to get the thing promised, though we see it not, then it will kythe
in our patient waiting for it.

2. The Lord by delaying his people, searches them, whether there be any latent
and hidden dross in them, or not. It is not the first heat of the furnace that
will try what is in the Saints, neither is it so much the greatness of the
Trial, as the lengthning of it, that will sift them, and discover what is in
them: When men at first engage in Trial, and have the Promises before them, and
their blood hot, their whole spirit will go along with them; but stay till
their blood cool, till Temptation seek and soak in, till disappointment give
them a dash after dash, and till year after year, and day after day, says the
matter is hopeless, and that will bring out that which folks did not believe
was within; who would have believed the corruption and weakness that kythed in
David? if the lengthning of his trouble had not discovered it; all men are
liars, says he, I shall now one day perish by the hand of Saul; There is
nothing better for me, than that I should speedily escape into the land of the
Philistines, 1 Samuel 27.1.

3. The Lord delays his people, that when they have studied Faith and Patience,
and have resolved upon it as their duty, to give God his own time for
performing his Promises, they may have access to the blessed Fruit that comes
in at that door, Romans 5.3. We glory in tribulation, knowing that tribulation
works patience, patience experience, etc. There are two remarkable things in
that Text, one is, That the blessing of God on cankering, fretting, irritating
Tribulation, can make it a mean in his hand to bring forth Patience. That which
puts folk out of tune, he cannot only make it fit on their back till they stand
unholden; but through his blessing on it, he can work them up to patience by
it. And another is, that till a person study Patience under Tribulation, he
stops the door on all the good he might get by it, or meet with under it; it is
but tint labor till he win to patience, but when Tribulation has wrought
Patience, Patience works Experience.

And 4. (To add no more) The Lord delays his people, that he may wean them from
Time, and these things they are given to dote upon in time. Although in time
they be trysted with many needful encouragements, with Meats in their journey,
in passing through the Wilderness; yet he will have them to know that their
home is not here, that their Rest is not in time; therefore he so trains on his
people in Time, as they find no place for satisfaction in it, but that they
must feed on hunger and thirst, and so go on, seeking for that Rest that abides
them beyond Time; That is one of the great Lessons that God inculcats on his
people by delays, even to wean them more from Time, and to make them fall in
love with Eternity.

Well then, seeing it is so, Take four words of Inference from it, and I shall
leave it.

And 1. The godly that are seeking God sincerely, and seriously, would hence be
Cautioned not to judge of their sincerity and diligence, by their present
success, comfort, or out-gate; here is a man crying to God out of the depths,
verse 1, 2. Taking with guilt, verse 3. gripping to pardoning Mercy on right
terms, verse 4. And yet here he is put to wait, in opposition to delays. It is
a groundless Temptation to measure divine approbation by present success; here
we see folk may be acceptably employed, and yet meet with delays; but this may
occur afterward, and therefore I here pass it.

2. Hence ye shall gather, that if the Lord delay a man in the posture that
this holy man was, in crying, serious in Prayer, in taking with guilt, in
pleading for pardon; what wonder he delay others, who under difficulties are
not so exercised? much more these who are at no such exercise, are not to think
it strange, though they meet with such delays; What wonder the Babylonish
Captivity last for seventy years, when at the close of it, it might be said, as
Dan. 9.12. All this evil is come upon us, yet made we not our prayer before the
Lord our God, that we might turn from our iniquities, and understand thy truth.
The carriage of the visible Church is such, as it justifies God in bringing on
trouble. Ezekiel, 14.22. -- He tells his people, when the remnant should be
brought forth, and they should see their ways and doings, they should be
comforted concerning all the evil that he had brought upon Jerusalem, and
should know that he had not done without cause, all that he had done in it: And
does not the evil improvement of Trouble, and folks security and negligence
under trouble, justify God in the long continuance of trouble? when we are
ready to cry, how long, Lord? how long shall this calamity last? The Lord may
retort it upon us, Why will ye die, O house of Israel? For as it is, Jer.
44.10. The Lord may say, They are not humbled even unto this day, neither have
they feared, nor walked in my Law: A sight of this, that God keeps a sincere
serious godly man so long waiting on, under delays, for comfort and out-gate,
may silence the clamors of them who are not yet begun to think on a suitable
walk under their troubles, and the right improvement of them.

But 3. If the Lord, for the ends beforementioned, may long delay his people,
and keep them waiting in trouble, take heed that Faith, the great support of
Patience, fail not in that exigent, as I told you in the deducing of the
Doctrine: the great thing tried in the people of God under delays, is their
Faith, whether they will believe his word; and therefore when Faith is tried,
look that it be not found drossie; when Faith is weighed, see that it be not
found light; I speak it, because I find the Faith of the Saints has gotten sore
shakes under delays, when they have been put to wait on, Psalm. 116.11. I said
in my haste, all men ( Samuel, Gad, and others that had told me. I should come
to the Crown and Kingdom) are liars; And Jer. 15.18. while speaking to God,
has a dreadful word, when he reflects on the Promises God made to be with him
in his Ministry, says he, Will thou be to me altogether as a liar, and as
waters that fail? When we find so strong Cedars so shaken, we would look well
to it, that our Faith be not brangled; and that Faith be not brangled, we would
beside, be looking well to the Atheism of our hearts, (for there is a seed of
Atheism in every bosom;) that if the Lord put us hardly to it, and make not out
that Promise, Isai. 48.10. I have refined thee, but not with silver, I have
chosen thee in the furnace of affliction; It may put us to tremble, what stuff
may boil up in our hearts; and they are not sicker in the matter of their
Faith, that are not mourning over their heart-atheism: but beside that (I say)
we would guard against wrong conceptions of the Promise, as that wherein the
great stumbling lies, as to this matter, when we conceive more to be in the
Promise than we are allowed, and make a carnal Commentar on a Spiritual Text;
and (as the saying is) The Bell to clink as the fools think: As also, we would
beware of limiting God to our time, but give him his own time to make good his
Promises. These that are not mourning over the Atheism of their heart, that are
not cautious in understanding the Promises a-right, and are not leaving God to
his own time for performing them, may take a snapper in their Faith, when
trials are continued.

But a fourth word of Use shall be this; That ye would learn to read Gods
delays aright; delays make discoveries, and that is the exercise of many folk,
Jer. 8.15. We looked for peace, but no good came, and for a time of healing,
but behold trouble; But if thou would read aright Gods delays; I shall shortly
offer thee these four, and wise confiderers will find them to be the work of
the generation.

1. If thou read delays aright, thou will find that God calls thee to exercise,
and that, the best thing within thee; as in a storm, best Anchors and Ropes,
and the best things of the Ship are brought out; so in a Trial, when he delays,
he calls thee to exercise the best things in thy bosom, and if God call thee to
exercise Grace, bring not out Corruption; though at first thou may cast a scum
of Corruption, Grace is to be brought out afterward; If he call for Affection,
meet not his Call with Bitterness; if he call to Diligence, do not intertain
that Call with Idleness; remember, God by delays, calls for the exercise of
Graces, affections and diligence in his people.

2. If thou read delays aright, Thou will read, That every days delay is a new
Trial; and I may add, every moments delay is a new Trial. When thou art carried
through the day, thou must not take that for surety, that thou will through the
next day without Self-denial, and needy dependence. The day may discover that
which the foregoing day did not discover, and the morrow may discover that
which lies hid this day; and therefore though thou may set up one Ebenezer at
every step of thy way, and say, hither to has the Lord helped; Remember, that
thou art not yet off the stage, and thou must not think, because thou art
hasted with the Trial, thou art better buckled to bear it; but know there is
still a necessity of Self-denial, and needy-dependance, lest the length of
Trial discover that, which the greatness of the Trial did not discover.

3. If thou would read delays aright, read in them a Call, (as I said in the
Explication of the Doctrine) to die to, and to be above Time, and the
Consolations in Time; then men go through Afflictions rightly, when they read
Their light afflictions, which is but for a moment, works for them a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory; while they look not at the things which
are seen, but at the things which are not seen, 2 Cor. 4.17. Then men will be
patient, and stablish their hearts, when they consider that the coming of the
Lord draws near, Jam. 5.8. In a word, when God exercises with delays, that is
an useful Preaching which ye have, 1 Cor. 7.29. This I say, brethren, the time
is short; (he touches the Glass, and lets them see it is near run out) It
remains, that both these that have wives, be as though they had none, they
that weep, as though they weeped not, they that rejoice, as though they
rejoiced not. One serious look of Time and Eternity, will break many a snare
that men's Corruptions expose them to, while under trouble, they meet with
delays.

But 4. If ye would read delays rightly, this is to be read in them, that well
improved delays, are full of rich advantages; Thou art kept under continued
difficulties, and delayed as to comfort, or satisfaction external in thy
personal and private concerns, and as to what relates to the public, and it may
be thou wins not to inward sensible comfort; but if thou were thrifty, thou
may find many things granted in the delay, or denial of that which thou
would be at; as much humility, mortification to Time, and the things of it,
communion and fellowship with God; and though some particulars be delayed, if
these were pursued after, and in any measure attained, times of delay would not
be looked on as idle times. A thrifty person may make much gain and advantage
out of these delays. So much for what is supponed here, that the Saints, even
in their sincere and serious seeking of God, are exercised with delays, as to
comfort, or an out-gate under difficulties.

Follows in the 2. place, that which is proposed, That when he is put to wait,
he does wait: Hence observe, That in the case of delays, whether for comfort or
an out-gate, it is the duty of Saints to wait on; this will take in all that
follows in these two verses, and therefore I shall first Explain the import of
it, and then press the reasonablness, equity, and advantages of it.

For the import of this Duty of Waiting, a waiter on God, when he is delayed,
he must have these three things shortly, 1. He must have somewhat to be the
Basis and Ground of his Waiting, and that is the Faith of the Saints, which
prepares the way for the Patience of the Saints, and so it follows after in the
Text. That a soul that waits on God, hopes in the Word of God. The meaning of
this shortly is, That a waiter on God, when he is delayed, must not judge of
God, by what is present; but having the Word of God, so long as God gives him
not another Bible (and that will never be) whatever be his present case, he
must still look for better: If he have a Cloud, he must look that it will
scatter; if he have a Night, he must look for a Day on the back of that Night,
as Isai. 8.17. I will wait on the Lord, that hides his face from the house of
Jacob; and I will look for him, though he hide his Face at present, I will look
for better things from him; and Mic. 7.7. I will look unto the Lord, I will
wait on the God of my salvation, my God will hear me; and therefore rejoice not
over me, O mine enemy, when I fall, I shall arise, when I sit in darkness, the
Lord shall be a light unto me; They must first look to that, that they cast not
away their Confidence, who would have needful Patience, Heb. 10.35. And, 2 This
waiting of the Saints imports, that they having believed the word of Promise,
they must not make haste, Isai. 28.16. He that believes shall not make baste.
They must not be hasty; And this is properly the Patience of the Saints, taking
it generally, their Patience is the product of Faith. The waiting man must
attend God's leisure; as he must not quarrel, though the Jordan of difficulties
in his way should overflow all its Banks; So he must not mistake, though when
he is in distress in the City, he should be sent out to the field, and when he
is in distress in the field, he should be sent even to Babylon to be delivered,
Mic. 4.10. That is the next step of a Waiter, That when he has believed the
Promise, he makes no haste. But 3. In waiting, it is not enough that folks win
to hang on, because either they have no other shift for help, or their
Conscience will not suffer them to take another shift; but in the mean time, O
how imbittered, broken and crushed in Spirit are they in waiting, that is not
only a sin in them, but a shame to look upon their posture in waiting, they
wait upon God, as if they never had a day to do well in his aught. Therefore in
the 3. place I say, in waiting ye would beware of fretting, quarrelling,
despondency of taking the snuff in your passion; and in waiting, study
patience, meekness and calmness of Spirit, to do it sweetly. This is the
perfect work of Patience, which Christ commands by his own practice, Mat.
11.29. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in
heart, and that shall bring rest to your souls. There is no waiting on without
that, that will bring rest; and that is the waiting in Psalm. 37. throughout,
commended to you in a fretful time which ye may read at your own leisure; and
ye have a rich Promise Zeph. ^.3. For a stormy time, Seek ye the Lord, all ye
meek of the earth, which have wrought his judgments; (the mark of them which
he has a good turn to do to before the decree bring forth, before the day
pass, as the chaff, before the fierce anger of the Lord come upon the rest,)
Seek righteousness, seek meekness, it may be ye shall be hid in the day of the
Lords anger; Whatever be the proper meaning of the place, they speak no
Heresy, who in alluding to it, do recommend to seek the imputed Righteousness
of Christ to their person, and meekness of Spirit, in reference to
Dispensations, who in times of difficulty, would carry rightly under delays.
These are the two notable supports of a Pilgrim, the imputed Righteousness of
Christ evidenced by inherent Righteousness, and meekness and calmness of
Spirit; and therefore the Promise is made to such, It may be ye shall be hid in
in the day of the Lords anger; The meaning whereof is not only, that these who
are students of Righteousness and Meekness (as indeed they who are such will
not be peremptor about events) but it imports further, that they may take their
venture of God, of being hid in the day of God's anger, when the storm breaks
upon others; So ye have had a brief view of what is the import of waiting on
God under delays, there must be Faith as the ground of it, not being hasty of
the result of Faith, and a meek and calm disposition, and giving God the timing
of what he has Promised, or we expect: As for the Arguments pressing the
equity and advantage of it, the time being gone, I shall forbear to enter upon
them.

SERMON XXII.
Psalm 130. Verse 5. I wait for the Lord, my soul does wait, and in his word do
I hope.
I Am now (as ye may remember) laying before you the Psalmists exercise of
waiting on God; and having in the morning spoken to what is supposed in these
Words, That the Saints may be put to wait on Gods delaying to perform his
promises, I came to that which is proposed, that they should wait; the import
whereof I laid open to you in these three; There is the faith of the Saints, as
the ground of their waiting; There is the patience and waiting on of the
Saints, in opposition to their being hasty; And there is the meekness and
calmness of their spirits, in opposition to their fretfulness, though they hing
on when they are delayed.

It remains, that I insist a little to commend these three unto you: As for
Faith, except that I touch it in the passing, it will come better in to be
spoken to afterward, and therefore I shall here speak a word for persuading
you not to be hasty. 2. A word for persuading you to meekness, not to fret. And
3. I shall shut up both, with a general word, to persuade you to this waiting.

For the first, that ye may wait on, and not be hasty under delays, I shall
offer four considerations to persuade you to it.

And the 1. (which relates to what I spoke before of Faith) is, that ye would
remember, that delayed success is not denied success; so long as the Word
speaks good news, That the needy shall not always be forgotten, that the
expectation of the poor shall not perish for ever, Psalm. 9.18. There is no
cause why our hearts should envy sinners, but that our hearts should be in the
fear of the Lord all the day long. For surely there is an end, and our
expectation shall not be cut off, Prove. 23.17. -- So long as the Word speaks
thus, we are to bless our selves in it, that delayed success is not denied
success, and that therefore all that God has promised, were it never so long
betwixt the promise and the performance, will certainly come to pass, as is
marked in the Book of Joshua 23.14. That of all the good things which the Lord
had promised to that people (and many a time there seemed to be an utter
impossibility of the performance of it) not one thing had failed, but all did
come to pass. A man that has good things laid up for him in the Scripture,
though he be put to wait for them, he needs not make a cheap Market of them,
they will be found forthcoming to him. And Isai. 60 22. The Lord will hasten
it in his time, which is always the best time, the Lord will afford mercy and
grace to help, not when we will, but in the time of need, Heb 4. ult. He will
make out his mercies in the time when they will be found double mercies for
their seasonableness, Psalm. 94.18. When I said, My foot slippeth, thy mercy, O
Lord, held me up. And as he will thus in due time make out all that he has
promised, so in the mean time he will not deny support to them that wait on
him: it may be he let temptations, such as are common to men, ly on: But 1 Cor.
10.13. He is faithful, and will not suffer them to be tempted above what they
are able to bear, but will with the temptation make a way to escape, that they
may be able to bear it. It may be, when they are crying for a good account of a
messenger of Satan sent to buffet them, that he remove it not, but he will make
out that, My grace is sufficient for you; my strength is made perfect in
weakness, 2 Cor. 12.9. That then is one Consideration to persuade you to want
on, That delayed success is not denied success.

2. This may press and persuade to on-waiting, that if we be doing our duty, we
may very safely trust the love and wisdom of God with the time of doing us
good. There are three things which I have had occasion sometimes to hint at to
you, that I shall now resume, in reference to this. We may and ought to wait,
1. Because God never comes out of time, look things never so desperat-like, to
make up all that was looked for; men may come out of season, but God never
comes out of season; although it were come to that, that there were nothing but
dry bones in a Valley, he can make these dry bones to live, Ezekiel 37. Although
there were no Witnesses left, (And O but it is sad to see a decay of a faithful
Ministry, and few laying it to heart; many going off the Stage, and few coming
in their room) though they were killed, after three days and an half they shall
rise again, and ascend up to Heaven in a Cloud, and their enemies shall behold
them, Rev. 11.11. When thou have said, thy strength and thy hope is perished
from the Lord, it is as easy for him to make all things well, as when thou
have all probabilities that things shall be well. 2. We may safely remit the
proofs of Gods love to himself, if we consider he never delays so long, but we
may be getting good of delays. It Is true, thou may be ready to tire, fag and
weary, and look on thy continued trial as a lot thou will get no good of, and
thereupon turn idle, or ly down and die; but the longest trial, if improven,
shall yield the peaceable fruit of righteousness, to them that are exercised
thereby, Heb. 12.11. If we were thrifty, we might be getting good of every
moments delay. 3. We may and ought to wait and submit to the wisdom and love of
God, and trust him for good under our delays, on this account, that he never
delays so long, but he is able to give a satisfactory account of his delays.
Thou will say, Why does he delay so long from com^ng to comfort, or give an
out-gate? But he can convince thee with satisfying reasons, that his delays
were needful. When (as it is Hab. 2.3.) sense says, The vision tarries, he can
make thy faith say, Tarry for it, because it will surely come, and not tarry;
he can make thy self say, he does not tarry, even when thy sense says, he does
tarry. This for the second Consideration, for persuading you to wait on God
under delays, and not to be hasty.

3. A third Consideration to persuade to waiting, in opposition to making
haste, is, That they that are sweet to wait, would look if they be busy at
work, and at the work they are called to. This is a needful diversion, which I
would offer to such folk, were they busy in making use of long and feeding
storms, they would make less dinn in waiting for an issue of them, but they
would be ready to say rather, Alas, let him tarry never so long, he will come
ere I be ready for him, ere I have reaped the blessed fruit of the
dispensations of his providence that I am under: And therefore a wearier and a
hasty person, under delays, does proclaim that he is an idle person, not about
his work; for not only (as ye know) work is a mean to take away langour, but in
particular, the thrifty improvement of a hard lot, would make folk wonder that
God should come to them at all.

4. To persuade you to wait, and that ye would not be hasty, if none of the
former Considerations will press you to it, remember the Sovereignty of God,
and that ye are his Creatures: when thou wearies to wait, consider what thou
art, a bit of nothing, a dependent bit of being, to be made or not made,
formed or marred at his pleasure: if he has given thee a back, why may he not
lay on a burden, and continue it on so long as pleases him? Wherefore serves
thy being in the world, but to be at his disposing, and to be what seems good
to him. This Argument prevailed with Job, that was put otherways to it than any
of us, he was stripped in an instant of all that he had, and sitting down on
the dust, he says, Chap. 1.21 Naked came I out of the womb, and naked shall I
return, God gave, and God has taken, blessed be the Name of the Lord. And
Chap. 2.10. he says to his Wife, Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and
shall we not receive evil. O! there is a stooping to Sovereignty in the
greatest straits and shakes that ever befell any, except our Lord Jesus; and
that Argument is made use of by him to his Disciples, in the matter of timing
mercies, Acts 1. Lord, say they, will thou at this time restore the Kingdom to
Israel? He answers, It is not for you to know the times and seasons which the
Father has put in his own power: Proud dust miskens it self, when it dare
offer to prescribe to God; and were Sovereignty more studied, and practically
improven in the lots that befall us, and in their continuance, we would often
find matter of a song, where we make a quarrel.

Now as these Considerations might press waiting, in opposition to hastiness;
so there are some other Considerations that serve to press meekness and
calmness of spirit, in opposition to bitterness and fretfulness; and among
many, I shall only name three.

1. Meekness and sweetness is commendable on this account, that it takes the
poison and sting out of all our lots. The Apostle, Romans 12.21. when he has
been speaking against passion and fretfulness, at our neighbors that angers
us, he has a very speaking word that he closes with, Be not overcome of evil;
as if he said, ye think your self victorious, when ye have gotten your crop and
spleen wracked on crowing over them that have wronged you, but ye are far
mistaken, the soil is yours, ye are overcome of evil, ye are slaves to your own
corruption, in venting your passion and bitterness. So is it here, it is
fretfulness and bitterness that poisons any sad lot we are under, Lam. 3.19. --
When a man remembers the affliction and the misery, and the wormwood and the
gall, and has them still in remembrance, his soul sinketh in him, but when he
gets victory over these, he says, It Is of the Lord's mercy that we are not
consumed, because his compassions fail not. He that had said before, that his
soul was removed far from peace, and he forgot prosperity, he finds prosperity
among his despised and undervalued lots. It Is not your continued crosses, and
long delays that is your affliction, it is your bitterness that is the poison
and sting of them all, and makes them so afflicting: It Is with you as with that
man Solomon speaks of, Prove. 19.3. The foolishness of man perverteth his way,
and his heart fretteth against the Lord: When he has perverted his way, he
would blame God for his own unthrift. There is no outgate of a Cross comparable
to this, the coming off with a meek mind, as that word Psalm. 55.18. holds out,
He has delivered my soul in peace from the battle that was against me. O! look
to the peace of your mind under continued difficulties, let not that break. Ye
know not what affliction means till ye get an imbittered mind, which will make
a Molehill a Mountain, nay, will create a Cross to it self, yea is a Cross in
it self, and can contrive a Cross where there is none, even when a man is
convinced his lot is good: Set him in a Paradise of pleasure, his imbittered
mind will make it a torment to him; therefore look on an imbittered mind as the
greatest sting and poisoner of all that can befall you, and guard against it.

2. It may persuade folks to study meekness and calmness of spirit, when they
consider what an imbittered fretful disposition portends; what does it import
and portend to a man? I shall tell you, it portends mo and sharper rods to tame
that wild and imbittered heart, to humble that fretful disposition: a man who
though he hing on, yet is fretful, cankard, bitter, all that he meets with in
his lot, is the wormood and the gall to him; he is like a feverish man, that
has something in his stomach that must be purged, his taste is marred, which
makes that which is sweet bitter; and though thou belong to God, yet (as it is
said of wicked men) if thou walk contrary unto him, he will walk contrary unto
thee, Levit. 26. And thou may expect seven times more yoke upon yoke, cross
upon cross, till thou be tame, and subject thy self to him. In a word, so long
as a man is in a bitter frame, he evidences that the medicine God has given
him, has never won to the root of his disease, and he may look for a harder
potion.

3. It may persuade to the study of meekness, and to set against bitterness, to
consider that bitterness is unreasonable, Isai. 45.9. Woe to him that strives
with his Maker, let the pot sheards strive with the pot sheards of the earth;
shall the clay say to him that fashioneth it, what make thou? He is the Lord,
to whom, who can say, What do thou? Ponder that word which I have often
occasion to mind you of, Job 18.4. He teareth himself in his anger: (a lively
and pathetick description of a fretful disposition, he would eat himself in his
anger,) but shall the earth be forsaken for thee? and shall the rock be removed
out of his place? Is there no more ado but turn all the wheels of providence
up-side down, when ye take the pett? When such a goodly thing as thou art not
pleased with it, says Bildad to Job, O fretful body, will thou sit down and
ask, who should guide the world? Who should have the Throne? Whether God or
thou? Whether should he guide thee, or thou guide thy self? Whether will thou
yield to God, or have him yield to thee? Shall not God brusk his Throne and
Government, but thou like a Child of Belial envyeth it? Nay further, let me
plead for God, bitter body, what ails thee? what would do thy turn? Thou can
name many things thou wants, and would have, but thou knows not where thy
disease lies, it is within thee that ails thee; let God cut thee short of
favors, or restore them to thee, put thee in trouble, or deliver thee, it will
not cure thee, thou will never want a cross, so long as that base lust of
bitterness abides in thee unsubdued; that which was a lust in the enjoyment of
favors, will turn a lust in the deprivation of them; change thy case every
day, it will not ease thee, thou art like a sick man, that cries for drink, but
it does not slocken him, the cooling of his blood, and purging of his distemper
must do that; therefore look on bitterness and fretfulness in your frame, as a
most absurd irrational thing.

Now as these Consideratious should persuade you to look on the excellency and
advantage of waiting on God, in opposition to making haste, and to fretfulness
severally; So I shall shut up both with a general Word, pressing waiting, from
the advantages that generally results from it, and I can give you no better
thing to command it, than that of our Lord, Isai. 30.18. Blessed are all they
that wait on him; It is beyond all peradventure, that a waiting people on God,
in difficult times, are a blessed people; Their lot may seem accursed; but their
waiting on God proves, that the curse is taken out of it, Blessed is the man and
woman that wearies not, that frets not under difficult lots, Why? because they
are at their duty; Thrice blessed are they (as I may, if the Lord will, handle in
the progress) that love their duty for it self with an eye to Divine
approbation, whatever may be the issue of it. But I shall add three Evidences
of Blessedness, that attends waiting on God.

1. A waiter on God is blessed, because by waiting, he keeps more than trouble
can take from him; ye have a very Emphatick word for this, Luke 21.19. In your
patience possess ye your souls. Sharp Trials long continued may dispossess you
of all other things, liberty, wealth, reputation, or whatever is dear to you;
but, says he, if ye continue patient, ye shall have this blessing, ye shall
possess your selves; an impatient man is a sort of madman, he is not at
himself, he possesses not himself, because that Time, or Instruments in Time,
have done him a prejudice, he will do himself a worse, because they have taken
this or that away from him, he will cast a sweet frame and mind away after it;
and that is to do himself a worse turn than the world can do to him; in so
doing, he casts more away than the World can take from him: So on that account,
the waiter on God is blessed, even on that, because of the sweet frame he is
kept in; Cast the waiter on God where you will, still he will fall on his
feet, and on that account, Blessed are all they that wait on God: But again,

2. Blessed is the waiter on God, upon the account that the through-bearing
that attends waiting on God, will attend him, till he get a good issue: O! to
see the desperate shifts that impatient, fretful thoughts will put folk to in
difficulties, they go like madmen, as the Word is, Isai. 51.20. They are like
wild bulls in a net, full of the fury of the Lord: O! how do they dash
themselves on snares, and run themselves on Rocks to their ruin: The foul
slips of fretful bodies are many; and though they be dear to God, that temper
will bring them halting home: But would ye see the Blessedness of the waiter on
God, read at your leisure, Isai. 40.29. He gives power to the faint, and to
them that have no might, he increases strength; He desires none of your
furniture to serve him with, in a waiting posture; and, (in the by) if ye think
ye have much furniture, he will empty you, and ye must be in a fainting
posture, ere he give power, and be having no might, ere he increase strength;
and then, even the youths (Bahurim selected ones) shall faint and be weary, and
the young men shall utterly fail: but they that wait on the Lord, shall renew
their strength, they shall mount up with wings as eagles, they shall run and
not be weary, they shall walk and not be faint; one would think, yoke youths
with the faint, and them that have no might, it were easy to determine who
would carry the Prize; But here the faint, the feckless waiting on God carry it
when the youths are laid by. How many a great Spirit has Trials broken? When
thou art a weak feeble body, and yet has kept up thine heart and held on the
way; How many a gallant have got a dash? when thou a crasy crauling creature
are kept to the fore, and made to renew thy strength through waiting on God.

And 3. (Reverencing Providence that I have been detained on this Subject,)
They are necessarly blessed who are waiters on God, on the account of the
out-gate: The waiter on God shall have an out-gate from all his difficulties,
Jam. 5.11. Ye have heard of the Patience of Job, and have seen the end of the
Lord, that the Lord is very pitiful and of tender Mercy; I dare assure you,
that Song abides waiters on God, which ye have Isai. 25.9. It shall be said in
that day, Lo, this is our God, and we have waited for him, and he will save us;
This is the Lord, we have waited for him, we will be glad, and rejoice in his
salvation; It is not a God wrapped up in a Promise, it is not a God covered
with a cloud, of whom the World said, Where is their God? Mic. 7.10. But, lo,
there he is whom we waited for; and the additional word is, We will be glad and
rejoice in his salvation; It shall be seen and said then, Blessed are they that
wait for the Lord; Can thou not then wait and watch for one hour? when thou
know not but in the hour that thou gives over, he may come; Therefore wait
on the account of the blessed out-gate, Psalm. 40.1. I waited patiently on the
Lord, and he inclined his ear unto me, and heard my cry; he brought me also out
of a horrible pit, and miry clay, and set my foot on a rock, and established my
goings; and he has put a new song in my mouth, even praise unto our God; A new
Song is the result of waiting on God; Believers and the Church may hing their
harps on the Willows, and they may weep, when they remember Zion, and say, How
can we sing the Lord's song in a strange Land? Psalm. 137. But a new Song in
Gods good time, shall be put in the mouths of all that are waiters on God: And
if I might insist to add a word further, I would lead you to uncipher that
Text, I cited before, Isai. 8.9. Therefore will the Lord wait, that he may be
gracious unto you. I shall not determine the scope of the place; but the time
comes when his waiting shall be seen to be gracious; that waiters on him shall
be convinced, he took the fittest opportunity to manifest himself gracious; and
if such had come sooner, there should no such Grace have been seen in it; Flesh
under difficulties thinks that he waits to be cruel; but look again, and thou
will find, he waits to be gracious; and not only so, but he will be exalted,
that he may have mercy on his on-waiters, he will make it out, that if he be an
exalted God, he will be a merciful God; and so, as his people that wait on him,
shall acknowledge him to be an exalted God in that, and shall sing, Who is a
God like unto thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders;
And whereas thou may think, there is little regard to be had to thy fighting,
pingling life, in waiting on him; he will make it out, that he is a God of
Judgment, pondering their condition he has to do with; as Physicians consider
the condition of their Patients, and weigh their Doses conform, and will not
add a grain more than what is needful; so will he deal with them that wait on
him, he will be seen to be a God of Judgment, and therefore, blessed are they
that wait on him, and blessed shall ye be, if ye believe these things, and if ye
make it your exercise to let your patience be seen in your meek waiting for
him, for there shall be a performance of these things which are told you from
the Lord. I shall insist no further. The Lord bless his word to you for
Christ's sake.

SERMON XXIII.
Psalm 130. Verse 5. I wait for the Lord, my soul does wait, and, etc.
I Am now broken in a little upon this third part of the Psalmist's wrestling
and exercise, how that after his employing of God by Prayer, under trouble, and
taking a right method for purging away of the guilt of Conscience; he is
exercised with delays, and protracting, to his sense, of delivery and comfort,
which he wrestles with, by confident, affectionat, and patient waiting on God:
Having spoken somewhat to the general Doctrine of Perseverance and Constancy,
and broken in the last day upon, and spoken to the first Head of these Words,
the Psalmist's exercise, he was waiting: I spoke to these two first Heads of
Doctrine: 1. That which was supponed here, That the Psalmist was put to wait;
and show that God may, and often does exercise his people, when they are
walking tenderly with delays. And 2. I spoke to that which is proponed, that
when he is put to wait, he does wait; under these delays, waiting for other
things, from God according to his word, than the present Dispensation did
promise; he waited, he proved, he did believe, without making haste, and he
waited without bitterness, fretfulness, passion, etc. These two, I took some
time the last day to press on you, as needful Lessons; that when God exercises
you with delays, and suspends the performance of Promises, ye should wait for
God, believing his Word, not making haste, with meekness and calmness of Spirit.

I proposed a second thing to be spoken to in the Words, to which I proceed,
and that is the Object of his exercise, I wait, for what? for the Lord, says
he, that was the Object of his waiting, whether he was waiting for Comfort
against desertion, or for delivery out of trouble, or for both; he is waiting
for the Lord, and this if we shall batter out a little, will give some mo
things to be taken notice of in a man, that is truly a waiter for God; and what
I would say on it, I shall briefly reduce to these three, which I conceive
imported in it.

1. A waiter on God has his Eyes taken off all other things, and set on God
only, for what he wants, and would have, That is one thing imported in it; not
only is a waiter on God taken off sinful shifts, that will disappoint all that
use them, as it is said, when the Lord should smite Egypt and Ethiopia, the
people of that Isle or Country should be ashamed of Ethiopia their
Expectation, and Egypt their Glory; and they shall say in that day, Behold,
such is our expectation, whither shall we flee for help? to be delivered from
the king of Assyria, and how shall we escape? Isa. 20.5. Now there our
expectation is blown up: And, Jer. 3.23. Truly in vain is salvation looked for
from the hills, and from the multitude of mountains. That is all the poor
shifts they had betaken themselves to, they shall be frustrat as to their
expectation of help from them; But I say, not only are waiters on God taken off
sinful shifts, but have what they will to eye; this is the Character of a
waiting man, that his eyes are taken off all things, and set on God, Psalm.
62.5. My soul, wait thou only on God, for my expectation is from him: And ye
have the posture of them whom God will notice, Zeph. 3.12. I will leave in the
midst of thee, an afflicted and poor people, and they shall trust in the Name
of the Lord: They are a people emptied of all expectation from any other art,
but trusting in God; they are left on him, and betake themselves to him alone.

Now the Saints that are waiters on God, indeed are put to this shift of
waiting on God, on diverse accounts, 1. Because all other shifts may, and often
do misgive upon their hand, not only sinful shifts, but all other,
disappointment on disappointment, from one thing to another, may be the lot of
them that are put to this exercise of waiting on God; it was not enough for
David, that Saul persecute him, that the Ziphits were ready to betray him, and
that near relations, Father and Mother should forsake him, as he hints, Psalm.
27.10. but he must be put to that, Psalm. 142.4. I looked on my right hand, and
beheld but there was no man that would own me; refuge failed me; There was no
man that cared for my soul; when he is shut up in the Cave, all his men that
were about him, slight him, think him an unhappy man, and themselves unhappy in
following him: And Psalm. 124.1. -- If the Lord had not been on our side when
men rose up against us, They had swallowed us up quick, etc. There the people
of God are left on him alone: And Psalm. 94.17. Unless the Lord had been my
help, my soul had almost, or (as it is on the margin) quickly dwelt in
silence; There was nothing betwixt me and utter off-cutting, but God's stepping
in to be my help: From this in the by, ye may take this with you, that the
waiting people of God are never tried enough, till all things fail them but
God, till they be stripped naked of all things they expected help from, and
they left on God alone; and whatever be God's condescendency to their weakness,
in giving them means of help at any time, they would lay their account to be
brought that low, as to have none to look to for help but God only. 2. The
saints have their eyes only on God in their waiting, because when they are
stripped of all other things that promised help; They see there is ground enough
to wait on God for all that; They look not on the blasting of all their
expectations as a nolumus on the back of their Bill; or as inviting them to say
there is no help: They will wait on God, when nothing invites them to it, and
why? I shall offer to you a threefold account, on which saints afflicted,
emptied, and stripped of all things without God, do not give over waiting on
God. 1. This is one, they see God all-sufficient to do their turn, not only
without the help of second Means; but when seemingly they combine to oppose
what they would be at; they wait for Jehovah, and see their delivery or comfort
not to be further off, that there be nothing visible promising it; yea when all
visible means and causes threaten the contrary, why? Their King is Jehovah, who
can command deliverance, Psalm. 44 4. Thou art my King, O God, command
deliverance for Jacob; A word from him can bring deliverance, though there were
no promising evidence of it, but rather the contrary. 2. Another is, saints
when stripped and emptied of all things, do not give over waiting on God, because
he is not only able, if he will, to do their turn, when all refuge fails them,
but his owning his people in difficulties, is a special part of his glory,
which he will not give to any other; little do we understand the intricacies of
Divine Providence, little know we wherefore he blasts probabilities, and
defeats all the expectations of his people; but whatever else be in it, it is
for this chiefly, that Himself may be seen to be their Deliverer, and none
other; Therefore he does with them, as he did with Gideon's army, when he
brought them to three hundred, and with these three hundred, with Trumpets and
lamps in pitchers, defeat the Midianites, Judges 7. That their Delivery might
be seen of him; And if this were well seen, it would give the people of God a
comfortable look of God's laying by all second Causes, stripping them naked of
all helps, making Dispensations threaten ruin; they would say, our Masters
feet are behind these, this is but a dark hour before the dawning. So does
David reason in that forecited Psalm, 142.4, 5. When he looked on the right and
left hand, and there was no man that would know him, refuge failed him, no man
cared for his soul; What follows? I cried unto thee, O Lord; I said, thou art
my refuge, and my portion in the land of the living; And Psalm. 94.18. When I
said my foot slips, thy mercy, O Lord, held me up; When there was nothing
betwixt him and ruin, but Gods Mercy, he found that a present help. But, 3.
The Children of God when stripped of all things but God, have ground to wait on
God, and do wait on him, not only because he is able to deliver them, and
delights to lay by other things, that he may be seen in their delivery, but
whereas guilt is a great impediment, and stares the waiter on God in the face,
that he knows not how to expect good from God, till that be removed, and taken
out of the way; yet he waits on God, on this account, that there is hope in
Israel concerning that thing; that his guilt shall be no impediment to his
delivery, or any good thing he wants, and is needful for him, if he do with it,
as the Psalmist does here, verse 3, 4. If he take with it, be humbled for it,
lay claim to pardoning Mercy in the right method, he may notwithstanding say, I
wait for the Lord: There are two notable grounds of encouragement, which as
they would not be abused, so being rightly improven, are very useful to waiters
on God; One is, that right taking with guilt, and repentance for it, after much
incorrigibleness, is attainable, when we have called our selves, for any thing
we can see in our selves, or expect from means, reprobat silver; yet the Lord
can humble and tame that uncircumcised heart, Jer. 32.19. He can turn Ephraim,
who has resisted many means, and has been as a bullock unaccustomed to the
yoke: Another is that which I am upon, guilt taken with and acknowledged, needs
not hinder a man to wait on God. These places that I cited the last day proves
it, as Isai. 8.17. I will wait upon the Lord, that hides his face from the
house of Jacob, and I will look for him: Though he be a God that is provoked
to withdraw, and hide his face, yet I will wait on him, and look for him: And
Micah 6.7, 8. When the Church is low, yet she will look to the Lord, and will
wait for him, and wait for the God of his salvation; believing, her God will
hear her; and on that ground, bids the enemy boast at leisure; She answers that
Objection concerning guilt, that she will bear the indignation of the Lord,
because she has sinned, she will take with guilt, and stoop to his correcting
hand, till he plead her cause, and execute Judgment for her; she looks over the
mountain of her guilt, when she has taken with it, and waits for the Lord. So
ye see what is first imported in this waiting for God, that the eyes of the
waiting man must be taken off all things, and set on God only; and that these
who would wait on God, would lay their account to be more and more stripped of
all things, till they be left on God, and being so, they have good ground to
wait on God; and the waiter on God taking with guilt, and pleading for mercy,
may in that humble posture wait still for God.

I proceed to the second thing imported in this waiting on God, and that is,
The waiting man left on God, and seeing an all sufficiency in God to do his
turn, in the faith of that, he so waits for God; That is to wait for the Lord,
when the confidence of Gods help, encourages the waiting man, in waiting on
God, to stick closs by the way of God, that he will not have a comfort but in
his way, he will not have a delivery, but that which comes with Divine
approbation; He will not purchase a Delivery of Out-gate with the price of the
least sin, Why? he waits for God in his way: Troubles and delays are a great
temptation to shake off tenderness, the pressure, and continuance of the least
of troubles are ill counselors in a waiting posture, they will bid run to the
leest, row to the best shore, take any course for an out-gate: But he who is a
waiter on God, indeed his tenderness grows, as his trouble grows, and as his
delays are protracted, he studies to be the more tender. I shall not insist on
this; but 1. It is certain, a waiter for God should be, and in so far as he
waits rightly on God, he is, and will be a tender man, as the Word is, Psalm.
37.34. Wait on the Lord, and keep his way; a waiter on God has his Ears nailed
to the Posts of Divine Direction, so that neither to the right nor left hand
dare he move, but as he has a warrant from God; So Heb. 11.35. There were
folks that were tortured, not accepting deliverance, that they might obtain a
better resurrection; mark it, they were not tortured, because deliverance was
not granted, but because deliverance could not be accepted on sinful Terms,
when offered: The greatness of their trouble did not diminish their tenderness,
whatever it did augment it; if at any time they found tenderness necessary,
they found it especially when their trouble was great.

2. Ye shall mark, that as true waiting requires tenderness, so tenderness is
attainable; that is, through Grace it is attainable, That a Saint waiting on
God in his way, in a tender frame, may attain to go through difficulties
without sinning against God; It is true, temptations to sin will go thick and
threefold, when a Saint is put to wait for God in continued troubles, and meets
with temptations, delays, difficulties and pressures, which (as I said before)
are woeful counselors in a sad day, their language is, Master, spare thy self;
But yet notwithstanding, tenderness is attainable, 1 Cor. 10 13. God has laid
his Faithfulness in pawn for it, that he will not suffer the tender walker to
be tempted above what they are able, but will with the temptation make a way to
escape, that they may be able to bear it. There is another word more nearly
relates to what I am upon, Psalm. 125.3. The rod of the wicked shall not always
rest on the lot of the righteous, lest they put forth their hands to iniquity;
That is, God shall neither let it ly so long, nor so sore on his people, as it
may drive them to commit iniquity, if they be willing to keep their feet, and
walk tenderly; Therefore (as I may have occasion afterward to press) let none
plead the impossibility of riding out a storm, let them never plead the
greatness of a temptation and the continuance of trouble, as an excuse for an
untender walk; seeing tenderness is attainable in waiting on God for an
out-gate; God lets not the rod of the wicked last on the lot of the righteous,
so as it may be ground of temptation, rationally to prevail with them.

3. The last Word I shall say on this shall be. That as the right waiter on God
is tender, and tenderness in the greatest difficulties is attainable; so the
want of tenderness in difficulties, when folks loses, or gives up tenderness,
and their feet slides; O what a sad after-game will that make! When David in
his strait had played the fool changed his behavior before the King of Gath, 1 Samuel 21.11. He got such a bitter fill of his folly in that, that he gives his
Counsel, Psalm. 34.11. -- Come ye Children, hearken to me, I will teach you the
fear of the Lord; what man is he that desires life, and loves many days, that
he may see good, keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking guile,
depart from evil, and do good, seek peace, and pursue it. He sets up his
debording as a beacon, and turns a Preacher to all others, that would see the
Lords end, that they walk tenderly: And ye know what a length the holy man did
run, when upon beholding the prosperity of the wicked, he was tempted to cast
out with Godliness, Psalm. 73. and what followed upon it, when he came to
himself, verse 21, 22. My heart was grieved, I was pricked in my reins, so
foolish was I and ignorant, I was as a beast before thee; he looks on himself
as not being a rational man, but as a beast before God.

I may not insist upon this, but there are three sad consequences, that results
on untenderness in difficulties, while we should be waiting on God in his way.
1. It forslows the man's delivery and out-gate, which tenderness would hasten;
folk are ready to think that the taking of a sinful course, is the way to
hasten an out-gate; but an untender walk, the using of any sinful shift, to be
out of trouble is like the Nazarites pollution, he lost all the days that went
before, because his separation was defiled, Number. 6.12. And he was to begin
again: Untenderness may send the people of God from Kadeshbarnea back to the
Red Sea, to wander for thirty eight years in the Wilderness; never think that
untenderness will bring ease, or an happy issue out of trouble; folk thereby
may take an out-gate, or delivery at their hand, but it will prolong a lifetime
of trouble. 2. Another sad Consequence of untenderness, it not only foreslows
the delivery, but it makes the continued trouble very dreadful; trouble and
guilt, trouble and an ill-conscience will make a most sad lot in a sad time. It
is a great deal better for folk to submit to Providence, to study tenderness,
than to ease themselves of a Cross, by wandering our of the way of God. A 3d.
sad consequence of untenderness is, the sad reflection it may give of God, when
he comes to deliver his people, when the tender waiter on God says, as Isai.
25.9. Lo, this is our God, we have waited for him, we will be glad and rejoice
in his salvation; untender walkers must say, we waited not for him, we would
not wait, but took a sinful shift to save our selves, and so is seen on it: So
much for the 2d. thing imported in waiting for God; That it is such a waiting,
as makes the waiter keep the way of God.

I shall add a 3d. thing imported in this waiting for God, I wait for the Lord;
It does not only import, that the waiting man has his eyes taken off all other
things, and set on God, and that he is tender in his walk, and keeps Gods way
in his waiting for God, but that God himself, and the enjoyment of him, is the
great expectation of the man that truly waits for him; a man that rightly waits
for God, has not only his eyes taken off other things, and set on God, but God
himself is the great expectation, that which chiefly he misses, and would have;
not only will he long to have God in his favor and love, with all that he
gets, as Moses says, If thy presence go not with us, carry us not hence, Exodus
33.15. And these things will I do to them, and not forsake them, Isai. 42.16.
But he longs to have God in stead of all he wants, and has the want of all
made up in the enjoyment of him: This is a point that ye would press more upon
your selves, as the blessed Fruit of all sad Dispensations, and long continued
Trials ye have been, are, or may be under, for which ye have abundant warrant
from Scripture; not only when all refuge fails you, would ye make it your study
to walk tenderly, to be always found in God's way, in waiting for him; but this
would be a blessed Fruit of such sad Dispensations, to have your desires
spiritual, centred on God, drawn forth for him, and the shutting of all doors,
looked on as a call to come and rest on him, and take him for all ye want, and
would have. This were a mean to further our expectations as to other things,
and to make up the want of them for the present, so as the want of them should
be no want, Psalm. 39.7. And now, Lord, what wait I for? my hope is in thee:
What Is this I am waiting for, I have a nearer cut to the enjoyment of all
things in the enjoyment of thee. So Psalm. 4.6. There be many that say, who will
show us any good? Lord, lift up the light of thy countenance upon us, and that
etc. And Psalm. 27.4. It is David's One thing. One thing (says he) will I seek
after, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord, etc. Were folk Spiritual, and
finding an up-making in God of all their desires and expectations, it were a
short cut to an ease of all their grievances, and it is a great lengthner of
all the afflictions of the people of God, that they do not forget prosperity,
and learn to have their desires spiritual, and to make up the want of all
things in God; if they were spiritual in their desires, whatever their
difficulties were, it would be all a matter to them, if they got more of God,
if all their difficulties and wants did run in this channel, to pursue for more
of God, to have him not to be their terror, but their hope in an evil day:
Though they should want the Ordinances, he should be a sanctuary to them;
Though men should curse, What then? It is all a matter if he bless; Though they
should be counted the off-scourings of all things, contemned, reproached, no
matter if their names be written in Heaven: O spiritual desires, would not only
further an issue, but be a present issue in all difficulties; but hardly are
the children of men out of one of three snares, either they are mad on their
Idols, while they have them, or they are mad for the loss of them, when they
want them, or when they are restored to them, they surfeit on them, as Israel
did on flesh in the Wilderness; Therefore while their desires are not
spiritual, carried forth on God and heavenly things, to make up the want of
things earthly; It Is no wonder their delivery be foreslowed of these things,
and will be forslovved till they cleanse their desires of what they are so
much vvedded to, and cause lamenting over their buried Idols, knovving it will
be a plague to them to have them restored.

SERMON XXIV.
Psalm 130. Verse 5. I wait for the Lord, my soul does wait, and in his word do
I hope.
AS in handling the former two Verses, I had a great Gospel Truth and
Privilege among my hands; so in the fifth and sixth Verses, there is a lively
description of a great and concerning Gospel-duty, patient, affectionat, and
confident waiting for God; The Duty, that is a great Characteristick of a godly
man, who has a Well within him, that neither Summers heat, nor Winters frost
can dry up; but as it is Zech. 14.8. In summer and winter shall it be there;
and who must prove this by his being well breathed to vvait on God, when his
Promises and Dispensations seem to clash one with another, when his Word
gives one report of him, and his dispensations a quit contrair; When His Word
calls him The hearer of Prayer, and His Dispensations say, That prayer is shut
out, and his anger smoaks against the prayers of his people. When his word
says, he that has promised to come, will come, and will not tarry; and his
dispensations say not only, that he tarrieth, but that he will never come.
Here is the well breathed Grace of Patience, affectionat, and confident
expectation, to believe, to vvait on, and not to make haste, and to be kept
meek in waiting on.

I have spoken to two Heads here from the Psalmist's exercise, he is waiting;
and the Object of his waiting, he is waiting for the Lord; his eyes are taken
off all other things and set on God, for what he would be at; and in the
faith of that he vvaits on God, and keeps his way; and when any thing of that
kind is not accomplished to the satisfaction of sense, he waits for the Lord,
that more enjoyment of him may make up the want of these things. Sad
Dispensations spiritualize his desires; It is not any good that will satisfy
him; but it is one thing, to behold the beauty of the Lord, to have the
communion of God, and to have the light of his Countenance.

Now I proceed to the third thing in the Words, That is, his affection in
waiting; waiting is his exercise, the Object of it is the Lord; The manner of
his waiting is affectionat, my soul does wait; I do vvait affectionatly, and
what the measure of his affection in waiting is, he resumes, verse 6. My soul
writs for the Lord, more than they that watch for the morning: I shall here
speak to two Observations, and for the ground of the first, Mark, That the
Psalmist while he professes to vvait, he declares that he sets himself against
all haste, passion and fretfulness, about what he vvaited; in opposition to
these, he waits for God: But now he finds it necessary to guard against another
extreme; it might be said, ye wait, and are not fretted with delays, and why?
ye are indifferent for what ye wait for, it is indifferent for you whether ye
get or want it; and therefore ye may wait inconcernedly, without wearying: No,
says he, though I do wait, my affection is not asleep in waiting, my soul does
wait; I have affection to that which I want, yet I labor to have it, I have a
waiting affection to it, with a submissive affection in waiting for it.

Hence observe, 1. That as patient waiting for God, is opposite to passion,
fretfulness, bitterness and carnalness on the one hand; so on the other, it is
opposite to dullness, stupidity and carelessness about what we want: Here the
Psalmist professes himself both a waiter, that is not wearied, nor cankered,
and yet he is a soul-waiter, with his affection aloft for what he waits for.
This particular may lead me to take notice of a General to be observed in the
way of God's people; That is, that a mixed condition is their best condition;
for here ye have a frame made up of Patience and Affection, affection running
out for that it would be at, and patience clogging its wings, that it run not
out of breath: We are full of Byasses, and always ready to run on extremes
without this mixture; if a man have affection, it is ready to pick quarrels at
delays, if he have somewhat of patience, that patience is ready to fall asleep,
but these two make up a sweet frame. I might here take notice of these
advantages, or advantageous mixtures, both in the frame of the Saints, and in
their lots; in their lots take them successively, we will find odd mixtures in
them, a rapture to Heaven, and a Messenger of Satan sent to buffet them on the
back of it. It was needful that that eminent servant of God in his exaltation,
should be kept with arms of such a messenger; and beside these successive
mixtures, we will find few lots of the saints, but a mixture may be observed in
them, Psalm. 40.17. I am poor and needy, yet thought upon by God. 1 Cor. 12.10.
When weak, yet strong. Isai. 40.31. When faint, yet made to run and not be
weary, and to walk and not be faint; when laid-by men, yet made-up men; their
foot slipping, yet Gods mercy holding them up. Psalm. 94.18. Troubled on every
side, yet not distressed; perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but not
forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed. 1 Cor. 4.8, 9. As unknown, yet well
known; as dying, yet living; as chastned, and not killed; as sorrowful, yet
always rejoicing; as poor, yet making many rich; as having nothing, yet
possessing all things; 1 Cor. 6.9. These are seasonable mixtures, sweet
reserves, and exceptions in the lots of saints: And as there are mixtures in
their lots, so in their frames, wherein we will find confidence seasoned with
deep humility; as in Abraham, Genesis 18.27. I have taken upon me to speak to the
Lord, who am but dust and ashes. Gloriation seasoned with the sense of being
nothing: 2 Cor. 12.11. In nothing am I behind the very chiefest Apostles,
though I be nothing. Nearness to God seasoned with a sight of their own
pollution. Isai. 6.5. Woe is me, I am undone, because I am a man of unclean
lips, etc. For mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of hosts. Job 42.5. I
have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear, but now mine eye sees thee,
wherefore I abhore my self in dust and ashes. Thus ye see what a sweet mixture,
the frame and way of the saints is made up of, when right; and this in the Text
is to be adverted, That patience in our waiting be seasoned with affection,
lest our waiting turn to indifferency. There are many pretend to be waiters,
but what wait they for? Their heart is not affected with it. Affection must
still be kept on foot, and meek and patient must our waiting for God be?
Therefore look to it. Let not folk deceive themselves, in thinking that they
have this patience and waiting, that I have been speaking of, when they have
nothing but a coldrife indifferency, stupidity, loitering and lying by in that
waiting. What Mercies do folk want, but they pretend to wait for them from God,
and yet their Conscience will bear them witness, their heart was never affected
with the want of them, nor drawn forth after the enjoying of them; they cannot
say, Their soul does wait: As upon the one hand, true patience must temper the
edge of right affection, that it overreach not, or run it self out of breath:
So on the other hand it would be adverted, that while patience is tempering
affection; affection be not feeding on the breasts of security, carelessness,
indifferency, stupidity, that with these Virgins, Mat. 25. While they are
waiting for the coming of the Lord, they do not fall asleep, or slumbering,
that is an abuse of patience in waiting, when it is suffered to degenerat in
stupidity, and indifferency. In a word, that ye may know what is meant by the
Saints soul-waiting for God, I shall give it to you in what is represented in
the people of God in the Captivity; upon the one hand we find a Command is sent
unto them, Jer. 29.5 To build houses in Babylon, and dwell in them, to plant
vineyards, and eat the fruit of them, take wives, and beget sons and daughters,
that they might be increased, and not diminished, and to seek the good of the
place, whither they were carried captives, and pray for the peace thereof; that
is, that they should be as careful as they might without sin, to make their
captivity tolerable, that was to wait for God, when their cankered haste and
fretfulness was done away: And yet on the other hand compare that with Psalm.
137.1. By the rivers of Babel we sat down, yea* we wept when we remembered Sion,
we hanged our harps on the willows in the midst thereof, when they required of
us mirth, we said, how shall we sing the Lords song in a strange land, if I
forget thee, O Jerusalem, etc. A soul-waiting affection is aloft in them,
although they made their distresses as tolerable as they might without sin, and
were warranded so to do; yet they would not suffer their patience to degener in
indifferency; they would not suffer their affection to fall asleep, and forget
that which their Captivity had deprived them of; and therefore the people of
God in difficulties, waiting for God, they would still have something of that
frame, Lam. 1.7. Jerusalem remembered in the day of her affliction, and of her
miseries, all her pleasant things, that she had in the days of old, before the
people fell into the hand of the enemy; Wait for God, there is good reason for
it. Be patient and meek, Why not? But O! in your waiting, let it be seen that
affection is aloft, when thou art ready bitterly to resent God's depriving thee
of mercies, or detaining them from thee, guard against that; let bitterness be
banished; but guard also against stupidity and senselesness, that they come not
in the room of it, but let thy soul be waiting.

But I proceed to a 2d. Observation from this Head, and that is a general,
which I deferred to speak to, when the last day I spoke to this waiting; and it
now comes in seasonably. The Psalmist not only gives an account what he is
doing, but how he is doing; Though he be delayed, and mercies be kept back,
yet he dare avow he is waiting for the Lord; yea, that his waiting for God is
of the right stamp, that his soul is waiting; that in his waiting he keeps off
both the extremes of passion and haste, and of careless stupidity and
indifferency: The Observation then is, that it is not only a commendable thing
in Saints, to be able to give an account of what they are doing, especially in
sad times, but it is comfortable to themselves, when they are able to give an
account of what they are doing, and that they are in the way of their duty, it
is so to the Psalmist here, that he can say, he waits, and his soul waits for
God.

This Point I shall speak to in these four, because it is, and will be your
work if ye be serious.

1. That work is our great business. 2. That work acceptable to God in a low
condition, is attainable. 3. That as it is attainable, so a man may know he
has attained it. 4. That it is comfortable to him, when he knows it, and
dare avow that he is acceptably employed.
A little to these four, as time will permit.

And first, I say, work and duty is our main business, when our lots are
saddest: One would think it had been a more seasonable, and a more near
concerning Question for the Psalmist, to be now looking what God is doing, when
he had been crying out of the deeps, taking ^ith guilt, pleading for pardon,
but he looks to what he himself is doing; we would always, as I hinted before,
fain be at the Throne, and have the guiding of the world, or have God taking
our advice what he should do in it; and how much of folks time and spirit, who
are serious, is taken up in scanning of providence? but O! fix this, that duty
is ours, event is Gods; duty is our task, and we should leave it to God, to
make of us and duty what pleases him: yea more, it is one of the great ends,
why sad times and lots passes over us, that we may give a proof what we think
of duty, when it wants present success; whether we will take duty for a reward
to it self; whether a man will bless God, go the world as it will, that he is
at duty. I shall say no more of it, but thrice happy they, who esteem of duty
abstract from all comfortable events: yea more, it were a good prognostic that
good events would not be long withholden, if folk were diligent at duty, but
who are still poring on events, I may without breach of charity say, that these
are the idlest folk, and foreslow their own mercy.

But 2. As duty is the great business, so duty acceptable to God is attainable
in the worst of times, in the lowest of conditions. I need not stand on the
general, how it is Gods mercy to his people, that they may well be deprived of
comforts, or comfortable issues, but they are not put out of service, they can
never want acceptable work to put their hand unto, and if they be turned idle
from the work of their Calling and Station, their idleness is a work with
submission to God. But that which I am upon is, that the difficulties of the
Lords servants and people, are never so great, but duty acceptable to God is
attainable; My soul waits, (says the Psalmist) he wan at it. I confess, times
and dispensations may soon fall forth to be such, that hypocrites will think
duty to be impossible, Isa. 33.14. The sinners in Zion are afraid, fearfulness
has surprised the hypocrites, they are afraid out of their wits; Who shall
dwell with devouring fire? etc. Who can hold their feet? Who can stick by duty
in such critical dispensations of providence. I confess also, things may come
to that, that Balaam has, speaking of the calamities to come on the world,
Numb. 24.23. Alas, who shall live when God does this? Such a time may come,
that it may be a wonder to consider how folk can stand, how they can fend, when
storms are so boisterous and thick, and temptations and snares so many: And I
shall add further, that which our Lord has, Mat. 24.22. Unless these days
should be shortened, no flesh should be saved; he means, both that none should
be saved from cutting off by judgment, and none but they should be in peril to
be eternally lost by seduction, but for the elects sake these days shall be
shortened; outward trouble, and seducing snares, may be so many and impetuous,
that if God put not some Bridle upon them, no flesh should be saved: But yet
when I have said all this, I must resume the point, that in the worst of times,
duty acceptable to God is attainable through his strength. A sincere man
depending on God, may win to say, I wait for the Lord, my soul does wait. This
I mark to give a check partly to the discouragements of Gods own people, who in
sad times lose heart and hand. I confess, I may say to the discouragement of
this generation, that which Jeremiah has, ( Chap. 12.5.) If thou have run with
footmen, and they have wearied thee, how then can thou contend with horses?
and if in the land of peace wherein thou trustedst, they wearied thee, how then
will thou do in the swellings of Jordan? If any ordinary difficulties scarr
this generation from duty, what would they have done if they had met with the
difficulties that many before the Throne met with? But be as it will, it is thy
great sin, as discouraged to ly down and die, as if there were no work for
thee. The Psalmist here in his practice has witnessed, that in the saddest of
difficulties duty acceptable to God is attainable, if duty be set about in Gods
strength; though humbling it may prove, it shall not be impossible, if thou
believe, all things shall be possible; partly to leave a sad check at their
door, who upon difficulties, and the impetuousness of snares and temptations,
take a dispensation to themselves to go wrong, to leave Gods way, and join in
evil courses. How many are there that in difficult and snaring times, for all
that the Bible has said against such and such sins, and sinful courses, yet
take them by the end, and say there is no hope, and it is for no purpose for men
to essay to keep their integrity, or think to hold off, and not embrace such a
course. The storm blows so hard, but you that take a dispensation to your
selves, so to do in difficulties, know that there will be witnesses found to
testify against you, that in the worst of times duty acceptable to God is
attainable.

But the 3d thing I proposed to be spoken to is, That as duty is attainable, so
a man may know he has attained it, he may win not only to wait for the Lord,
and with his soul to wait, but to know and avow it, that with his soul he does
wait: This, if I might insist on it, would again branch it self out in two or
three things.

1. In order to this knowledge, it is necessary, that folk be at self
examination, asking what they are doing? Ye may take many woeful counsels with
your selves, having sorrow in your heart daily, (it may be) and yet not come
speed; but were ye enquiring, What work am I at? and examining it, that were a
ground of a right walk, to be serious in that. It Is the Lords complaint, Jer.
8.6. No man repented him of his wickedness, saying, What have I done? Every one
turns unto his course, as the horse rusheth into the battle.

And 2. When we set about this Examination, we should know, that we have need
of the spirit of God to go along with us, and assist us in it, we have need of
that spirit which is of God, that we may know the things that are freely given
us of God, 1 Cor. 2.12. We have so much presumption and security on the one
hand, when we are at ease, ready to cheat us, and on the other hand, when we
are in trouble, so much discouragement to amaze and break us, that in both
conditions self-examination would desire a manuduction, a leading by the hand
by the Spirit of God, that they get not a back-set in either.

And 3. Tender walkers examining, and assisted by the Spirit of God, may come
to know they are in duty acceptable to God, and their integrity in it, to say,
their soul waits, I am at my duty, and am acceptable to God in it. It may be
sad, that trouble should discover so much guilt, and so many imperfections in
our best things, yet still no dispensation of providence, or delay, should take
away the testimony of our integrity, and that we are waiting upon him in his
way; whatever providence be an enemy to, it is never an enemy to integrity.
There is a weakness hinted at in that word, Psalm* 69.4. (though few be
obnoxious to it) Then I restored that which I took not away: Some may be ready
to father that on themselves, whereof they are not guilty; but the people of
God Psalm. 44.17. -- hold fast and avow their integrity in a sad time: All this
is come upon us, say they, yet have we not forgotten thee, neither have we
dealt falsely in thy Covenant, etc. And Job 23.10. -- when he cannot get a sight
of God on the right or left hand, yet (says he) He knows the way that I take:
when he trys me, I shall come forth like gold, etc. What I would say from this,
is to leave a check at their door, whom the dispensations of providence dings
from all their confidence; if God delay the Psalmist, he will avow that he
waits; but so silly are we, that there is nothing the storm blows against, but
we are ready to question it; whereas if we see it be fair before the wind, we
question it not at all, so silly spirits are we, and so full of byasses. O!
lament this, and know that duty is knowable and avowable in the saddest of
dispensations, for the Psalmist can say, I wait for the Lord, my soul does wait.

And 4. As duty is attainable and knowable, so it is very comfortable to a man
to know it. It Is good news to this tossed Psalmist, that he dare say, I wait, my
soul does wait; it is good news for the present. Read often, believe and improve
that word, Eccles. 8.12. Though a sinner do evil an hundred times, and his days
be prolonged, yet surely I know that it shall be well with them that fear God,
because he fears before God. The very present reward, the Echo of a good
Conscience is sweet and comfortable, that the people of God can say, Our hearts
are not turned back, nor our steps declined from thy way, though thou have sore
broken us in the place of dragons, and covered us with the shadow of death,
Psalm. 44.18. O! How sweet an Echo has that in a man's bosom? and a man that
in a sad condition will not be made up in the testimony of a good Conscience,
it is righteousness with God to smite him with a rod dipped in his own guilt:
Look to it, and make it your study to have this ground of comfort when others
fail. It Is good when a man can say, I am sore broken, yet my heart is not
turned back, I am in the deeps, yet my soul waits; I cannot win at him, yet my
feet have held his steps, his way have I kept, and not declined; and as this is
sweet and comfortable for the present, so will it be found for the time to
come, when the waiter on God in duty shall be made to say and sing, as it is,
Isa. 25.9. Lo, this is our God, we have waited for him, and he will save us, we
will be glad and rejoice in his salvation. I shall say no more, but when all
costs are reckoned, it shall be found, that a doer of duty, waiting for God,
shall be no loser, but a great gainer; and it shall never be grief of heart to
him, that he made it his work to wait on him in his way, when others declined.
As I closed the last day, with that word, Blessed are all they that wait for
him; so do I this day, whatever he do to them, whatever delays or difficulties
they meet with, they shall find, that it will be found a rich mercy, to be
found waiting for God, and upon God in their duty, keeping his way, and not
declining therefrom. I say no more, but the Lord bless his Word that ye have
been hearing, for Christ's sake.

SERMON XXV.
Psalm 130. Verse 5. -- And in his Word do I hope.
I Told you, that as the two former Verses speak to one of the excellent
Privileges of the godly man, to wit, the remission of sins. So the 5, and 6.
speak to a most necessary, though a most difficult task of the godly man to
wait for God, that godly men give a proof of their subjection to him, and faith
in him, by their waiting for him, notwithstanding they meet with so many delays
and disappointments.

Somewhat has been spoken to three principal Heads of Doctrine in these
Verses, 1. The Psalmists exercise, he is a waiting man, he is put to wait, and
he does wait; where ye heard, that if God delay the Saints, and put them to
wait, it is their duty to wait, not only not to be hasty, but if they hing on,
they would look their waiting be not poisoned with fre^fulness, passion and
bitterness, but seasoned and adorned with meekness and patience. I spoke 2. to
the object of his exercise, I wait for the Lord; where ye heard, that the eyes
of the wai^ing man must be taken off all things, and set on God, not only when
all second causes forsake him, but when these things that seemed to promise
relief seem to be against him, he must notwithstanding wait on God, and keep
his way, and have all his expectation in God, or God himself must be his
expectation, and he will be no loser by this; if God himself be his great
expectation, he will easily make up the want of all other things. In the third
place I spoke to his affection in waiting, my soul does wait; where beside that
general, that we should be able to give an account what we are doing in
difficulties, when we are exercised with delays: Ye heard, that true waiting
lies in the midst, betwixt bitterness, passion, haste, fretfulness on the one
hand, and stupidity and indifferency on the other hand. The right waiter for
God, as he is not fretful and passionat, so neither is he sleeping and
careless; he so waits, as his soul does wait, his affections are aloft, prizing
and looking out for these things he is waiting for.

Now in the 4. place, I proceed to consider his support in waiting; What made
him thus wait affectionatly, confidently, and patiently? He Answers, and in his
word do I hope: He hoped in the word of God, and therefore he waits for God.
It Is not to great purpose to trouble you here with an exact distinction betwixt
Faith and Hope; Faith looks to the promise, and gives a present subsistence to
the thing promised, as the word is, Heb. 11.1. Faith is the substance of things
hoped for, the evidence of things not seen. Hope looks to the performance of
the good things promised; Faith closes with the promise as true, and is
comforted in that which is contained in it. Hope looks out till God come and
make out what Faith sees and closes with in the word of promise. In this place
Faith and Hope may be taken promiscuously or indifferently, in his word do I
hope; that is, I wait till God make out to me that he has promised in his
Word; or take it a little more distinctly, in his word do I hope: It will
import, that having closed by Faith with the good things in the word of
promise, he looks out for the accomplishment of them; so that he has not only
Faith been, believing and closing with the Word, but he has hope looking out
till God make his Word good to him. I might here take notice of this, that
waiting on God, though a man had no other, evidence, is ground of hope, when a
man is in a difficulty, and sore put at, and yet he is born up in waiting on
God for an out-gate, he cannot quite nor give over, he cannot go to another
door for relief, that is a good evidence that there is ground of hope in such a
man's lot; For certainly Psalm. 9.18, the needy shall not always be forgotten,
the expectation of the poor shall not perish for ^ver. And he that never said,
to the seed of Jacob, seek ye me in vain, Isai. 45.29. he never engages a heart
to wait on him in vain. Their very waiting on, and not giving over, is, if they
could but discern it, a sufficient refutation of their temptation to diffidence
and despondency.

But I shall leave this, and look on the words another way; and these two
principal Doctrines are obvious from them to any capacity.

1. That waiting on God needs the support of Faith and Hope. 2. That Faith or
Hope must have the Word of God for its ground.
The first of these is clear, in that he says, I wait, because I hope. The
other is clear from that he says, in his word do I hope.

For the first of these, That waiting on God needs the support of Faith or
Hope; Patience and On-waiting will never be gotten well, cherisht without Hope
or Faith; a man that would keep waiting on God, would keep Faith and Hope on
foot: So does the Psalmist here, while he tells that he waits, because he
hopes. And hence it is, that in Scripture we find a frequent conjunction of
Faith and Patience, as Heb. 6.12. The followers of them, who through faith and
patience have inherited the promises. Rev. 13.10. Here is the faith and the
patience of the Saints, they must go together. Romans 8.25 If we hope for that we
see not, then do we with patience wait for it. It Is hoping for that which is
not seen, that draws along a patient waiting for it. 1 Thessalonians. 1.3. True
patience is called, the patience of hope, that patience which is the product of
hope. And (to add no more) ye have them conjoined, Heb. 10.35, 36. Where in the
first place, the Apostle says to them, Cast not away therefore your confidence,
which has a great recompense of reward; and then he adds to good purpose, Ye
have need of patience, that after ye have done the will of God, ye may receive
the promise: Intimating, it is to no purpose to speak of patience, if folk cast
away their confidence; thus ye see how these two, Faith and Patitience, or
Patience and Hope are linked together in Scripture, to tell, that patient
waiting on God, has need of the support of Faith and Hope: And if we should
follow out this a little more distinctly, we will find that the brangling of
Faith and Hope cuts Patience short; when a man's Faith or Hope fails, he gives
over waiting on God, his Patience is gone, as in that wicked King,, 2 King.
6.33 Who when God by the Prophet had promised delivery, would not believe it,
but says, This evil is of the Lord, what should I wait for the Lord any longer?
Fra^ once he cast off confidence, he gave over waiting on God: And to clear
this further, see Jer. 2.25. and 18 12. In the one place, when the Lord is
persuading his people to keep his way, they say, There is no hope; and what
follows on that? They say, We have loved strangers, and after them will we go.
And in the other place, when they say,, There is no hope, they add, But we will
walk after our own devices, and we will every one do the imagination of his
evil heart. Thus ye see, how on the one hand the brangling of Faith and Hope
cuts the throat of patient waiting for God; and on the other hand, Faith and
Hope entertained, keeps life in patience, to wait still on God, Ye know what is
said of Hezekiah, 2 King. 18.5 He trusted in the Lord God of Israel, so that
after him was none like him among all the Kings of Judah, nor any that was
before him. Trust in God made him singular; and in nothing does the singularity
of a Christian appear more than in this, the drawing forth of his Faith in
patient waiting on God in difficulties, 1 Samuel 27.1. When David gives over
confidence, he gives over patience and waiting, and goes down to the Land of
the Philistines; but look upon him again as a Believer, holding fast
confidence, what says he? Psalm. 27.13. I had fainted, unless I had believed to
see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living. Nothing but Faith kept
me from giving over: But now (as Psalm. 116.10. I believed, therefore have I
spoken) attaining to believing, he dare subjoyn, as v. 14. Wait on the Lord,
and be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thy heart; wait I say on the
Lord.

Thus ye have the point generally cleared, that patient waiting on God, needs
the support of Faith and Hope; To break it a little smaller, and bring it
nearer you, I shall branch it out in these two.

1. That the trials of the people of God may be such, as only Faith can see an
out-gate. And 2. When they are so, Faith will see an out-gate, and enable a man
to wait on God for the out-gate.
For the first, I say, The trials of the people of God may be such, and so
ordered for their greatness, sharpness, darkness, and continuance, that an
out-gate will be the object of Faith only, and not of Sense nor Reason. A man's
trials may be such, that if he will betake him to Sense and carnal Reason, to
see if there will be an end of the Lord, he will give it over if Faith step not
in, and take him off the hand of both: A waiter for God here under difficulties
must be a hoper, else he will not wait on; we are generally called in the whole
course of our life to walk by Faith, 2 Cor. 5.7. We walk by faith, and not by
sight; but especially in great and eminent trialls and difficulties, when they
are of a long continuance, to prove that we are among the just, that live by
faith, Hab. 2.4. with Heb. 10.38 I might instance this, both in the greatness,
and in the long continuance of trials. In the greatness of trials, which may be
such as Faith only can see an issue, 3 Cor. 1.8 -- In the trouble that came to
us in Asia, we were pressed out of measure, above strength, in so much that we
d^spaired even of life, and had the sentence of death in our selves; And why?
That we should not trust in our selves but in God that raises the dead: We
were put to it, to employ Faith in our deadly difficulties, else we had been
gone. So Jonah 2.4. is put to say, I am cast out of sight, till Faith holding a
grip of God, bids him look again toward his holy Temple. S^ Abram, Romans 4.19.
-- has all probabilities, his own dead body, and the deadness of Sarahs womb,
against the thing promised; and what gave the issue? only this, he was not weak
in the faith, he staggered not at the promise through unbelief, but was strong
in faith giving glory to God. And Paul, Romans 8.24. when he had told that we are
saved by faith, adds, but hope that is seen is not hope, for what a man sees,
why does he yet hope for. Hope and Faith are only for things invisible to any
other sense or faculty. And for the continuance of trials, it is clear, that
it is Faith must see the issue; as Hab 2.2. -- with Heb. 10.37. Write the
vision, and make it plain on tables, that he may run that reads it, speak out
my promise; why? For the vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the end it
shall speak, and not lie, though it tarry (to sense) wait for it, etc. And how
shall this be done? The just shall live by faith. If it be enquired, how it
comes to pass, that the Lord puts the mercies of his people so far out of
sight, by the greatness and long continuance of trouble? That it is only Faith
that can discern the issue. I shall briefly clear this to you in four words, 1.
He does it, that he may acquaint his people with the solid truth of his
promises, that he may let them see, and bring them to know experimentally, that
his promise is not a bla^lume; but though all things in the world were against
us, it is a true word, it is a tried word, like silver purified seven times in
the furnace, Psalm. 12.6. and shall have an accomplishment. The longer folk rest
on the Bible, and the more they try it, they will esteem of it the more: It Is
of Divine Authority, (to which I shall speak a word afterward, when I come to
that of the Psalmist, where he calls it his Word.) 2. For this end the Lord
gives this work to the faith of his people, that he may acquaint them more and
more with himself, in whom they believe; that when they are put to the Bible,
to live by faith in his Word, they may study his Divine Attributes, his
Veracity, that cannot lie, his Omnipotency, that in greatest difficulties, can
commad deliverance to his people; his infinite Wisdom, that can by contraries
bring out his Wisdom about their delivery; and by this means they have a great
advantage, when they are brought to know God the Author of the Promises better:
Hence Psalm. 9.10 ^t's said, They that know thy Name, will put their trust in
thee; They that know him, will put their confidence in him: And Paul, 2 Timothy
1.12. said, For the which cause I suffer these things, nevertheless I am not
ashamed. How is that? For I know whom I have believed, and am persuaded that he
is able to keep that which I have committed to him to keep, against that day;
therefore I am not ashamed, therefore my confidence succumbs not. 3. The Lord
by giving Faith, this work brings his people experimentally to know the worth
of Faith, and that is a necessary Lesson; we will not ^y get Sailing near the
Shore, within sight of Land, but must Lanch forth into the deep, that Faith may
be put to it; and in this case, what advantage is it to know the worth of
Faith, Psalm. 27.13. I had fainted, unless I had believed to see the goodness of
the Lord in the land of the living. What had become of me if I had not
believed? And that gave him to know the worth of Faith, which had an excellent
advantage: And Psalm. 28.7. My heart trusted in him, and I was helped; I never
tried Faith, but it brought me some ease and relief, though not a complete
out-gate. And 4. The Lord give faith this work, that he may get much glory of
his people, by their dependence, hoping and believing: Thus Romans 4.20. Abraham
was strong in the faith, giving glory to God. Thou thinks it would honor God
much, if thy mouth were filled with songs for deliveries, sweet comforts,
love-blinks, etc. I grant these are sweet, and speaks his praise; but God is
more honored by believing, when thou wants these, and has only his naked word
to lean to, thou then glorifies God more eminently, though not so
satisfactorily to thy self, when thou sticks by believing in continued
difficulties, when thou art tempted to cast away confidence.

All I say from this Branch, and come to the 2d. shall be to tell you, that
were these things believed, we would not be so ready to stumble, whatever our
difficulties were, when sense and carnal reason were laid by and non-pluss'd,
with want of all appearances and probabilities of an issue. But who are they
who when they are left on a word of God, do not find themselves at a loss, and
as ye use to speak, at the next best; whereas, if we considered that this were
God: way to exercise his people, with such great and continued Trials, that
their Issues and Out-gates from them, may be the Object of Faith, and not of
Sense or carnal Reason; and particularly were this studied, our being holden
long at work, hinging on would not tempt folk to weary, and give over waiting
on God; a thing which many of us have cause to mourn for; and many fear, that
if God refine us with silver, we will discover more than we thought had been in
us. O consider it, that ye stumble not, weary not, fret not, quite not your
confidence; in great continued troubles, it is an evil not so much to be dung
from your confidence, as to take the pet, to cast it away, and give way to
discouragement, and lie down and die.

But to press this, I come to the second Branch in the Point, That as the
Trials of Gods people may be such as only Faith can see an out-gate; so when
they are so, Faith if it be chearfuly employed, will apprehend a promised
delivery in greatest difficulties; it will make a man wait on God in the
saddest exercises without succumbing, and to say this with the Psalmist, I
wait, etc. for I hope in his word: If a man be living by Faith, and so a just
man, Though the Vision tarry to sense, it will make him wait for it, and expect
it, because at the appointed time it will speak and not lie: And for the
grounds on which this truth is founded, amongst others, take these three: 1.
That let Trials be never so great and long continued, they alter not the ground
of Faith, the ground that Faith goes on still continues the same. Whatever
befall the people of God they get not a new Bible, or a new God; all the gloomy
days that past over them, has not blotted out one Promise or Attribute of God;
and these things they see in God, and his Promises in a fair day, they may see
them to be the same in a foul day; now if the ground be the same, if the
Promises be the same, if God be the same, if our Rock have not sold us; Faith
closing with that ground, must wait for a delivery; were the Trial never so
great and long continued. 2. As the ground that Faith goes on, does still
continue the same; so obedience to the Command of Believing is never dispensed
with; There is never a time wherein God says, I will dispense with you to
Believe; he says not, believe when the waters are at the ancles, and I will
dispense with you when they overflow the banks; but go things as they will,
Faith is still a commanded and indispensible duty, ye have this clear, Luke
8.50. and the parallel places, when that Ruler came to Christ about the curing
of his sick daughter, he is encouraged to believe, while she is sick and not
dead, but when she is dead, one comes from his house, and says to him, Thy
daughter is dead, trouble not the Master, thou and we might have believed the
more before she was dead, but now the case is desperate, therefore it is
needless to thee to employ him any more: But does Christ homologat such a
principle? no; but when he heard it, he says to the man, Fear not, believe
only, for she shall be made whole; when she is sick, and when she is dead, he
is bidden, believe only. And, 3. Consider, That not only does the ground of
Faith continue the same, and the command of Believing indispensible; but Trials
eminent, sharp, and of long continuance, are opportunities of eminent work for
Faith. He is not counted a man of courage, that in a Muster, will vapor and
play the gallant; but who in the Chock of the Battle kythes his stoutness and
resolution, as a famous Spartan said, when it was told him the Persians arrows
were so thick, that they would cover the Sun, all the better of that, said he,
for us, we shall fight the better in the cool; so it is with Faith. Eminent
Trials, and difficulties of long continuance, gives to it opportunities of
eminent service and work: What is it to believe, while thou art sailing along
the shore, but when thou lanchest out into the deeps, and meets with a storm,
and neither Sun, Moon, nor Stars for many days appear, when the trial is
hightned and lengthned, and some falls off on that hand the day, and others
fall off on this hand the morrow, and thou art like to be left alone; that is
an opportunity of eminent service and work for Faith: And thou would remember
that there is a favor conferred on thee, when thy Faith is put to it, at such
a time, what will thou do? If thou will cast thy self, and all thou have, over
upon God put all in his reverence, and wait upon him for an issue.

From these things that I have but superficially touched, be exhorted to study
the life of Faith better, that ye may be fixed and strong in the Faith; ye must
not content your selves with putting out some acts of Faith, but ye must learn
to live by it, to make it your food and subsistence; which, if well studied,
many a tentation and snare, in snary times, would be broken, and God would be
waited upon patiently. It is true, when ye are surcharged with bitterness, ye
will get enough of things to father it on; your difficulties are many and
great, your delays are protracted, but ye light not on the root of your
distemper, the weakness of your Faith; O thou of little faith, wherefore did
thou doubt? where is thy faith? for Isai. 28.16. He that believes shall not
make haste; and consequently, he that makes haste, does not believe, or is at a
low pace, as to the exercise of faith, when impatience and bitterness prevails;
and therefore guard against your cankering fretfulness, weariness, fainting. Do
not tempt God to give you a relief by a change of your condition, and being
seen on the mount; but rouse up your faith to exercise, say, how is it that I
am so fearful? how is it I have no Faith? seek the issue of all your pressures,
by rouzing up your Faith; it will discover to you Hagars well at hand, when ye
are casting down your Ishmaels to die for thirst; it will bring noon day at
night; and of weakness it will make you strong; when ye are faint and have no
might, it will bring in power to you, and renew your strength; when ye see no
appearance of an issue, it will bid you look again (as Elijah said, 1 King.
18.43.) Till ye see the cloud that will rain. When that holy man Ezra is laid
by in confessing and mourning over the sins of the people, Chap. 9. There is a
good man, who Chap. 10 2. bids him look again, arise from his heaviness and
fall about a work of Reformation, For there was hope in Israel concerning that
thing: So Jonah, when he said, I am cast out of thy sight,; rouzing up his
Faith, says, Yet will I look again toward thy holy temple: and that man,
Psalm. 77.7. When he begins to question, Whether the Lord will cast off for
ever, and will be favorable no more, if his mercy be clean gone, if his mercy
does fail for ever, if he has forgo^ten to be gracious, and in his anger he
has shut up tender mercies, and is laid by with that work; he rouzes up his
Faith, and looks again: And Verse 10. says, This is my infirmity, I will
remember the years of the right hand of the most high; So would thou do, when
thou looks on the sadness of thy condition, and many pressures, and art tempted
to give over; rouse up thy confidence, and that will give thee a satisfactory
account of that which thou counted desperate and hopeless. The Lord bless his
Word.

SERMON XXVI.
Psalm 130. Verse 5. -- And in his word do I hope.
WAiting on God being a most excellent and necessary Subject and Duty, in
regard that only they that endure to the end, shall be saved; and that it is
these whose Patience has had its perfect work, that shall understand the loving
kindness of the Lord: we had need to study all these things, which may either
set Patience on work, or keep it at work. And here I am upon the great support
of the Waiting Man, He waits for the Lord, because he hope in his word. In the
Forenoon I spoke to the first general Observation, in these words, That
Patience and Waiting cannot be well cherished, without Faith and Hope; Which I
branched out in two, That the Trials of the Saints may be such, and so ordered
for greatness and continuance; that Faith only will be able to discern an issue
of them; and that faith cheerfully employed, will discern this issue.

Now the Lesson I am to fall upon in the 2d. general Observation is, That Faith
enabling to endure hard lots, and to endure without succumbing, must take the
Word of God for its ground; and Faith having the Word for its ground, so long
as God alters not his Sentence in his Word, Faith must believe and hope, expect
the accomplishment of that word, I hope in his word, says the Psalmist; hence
it is (to allude to that of the Apostle. Romans 10 6.) That the man that would
live by Faith, he must not say in his heart. Who shall ascend into heaven, to
bring down Christ, or an issue from above, or who shall descend into the deep,
to bring up a Christ, or an issue from the dead? But the word is near thee,
even in thy mouth, and in thy heart; The Word of Faith, the Word in the Gospel
which we preach.

This Point, because there are several things in it of special concernment for
us, I shall deduce and branch out to you in four Heads.

1. That really needy Saints, who are put to live by Faith, ought to be, and
will be much conversant with the Word, that they may know what is for them, and
suitable to their case there.

2. That as really needy Saints will be much conversant with the Word, so they
will judge of things according to the Verdict of the Word.

3. That to fix them in that Resolution, to judge of things according to the
Word, they must fix this Principle, That the Word is of Divine Authority.

4. That having fixed this, That the Word is of Divine Authority, the Believer
must send out his Faith to believe, and his hope to look for all that he finds
in so Divine and sure a Word.

For the first of these, I say, That really needy Saints, who are put to live
by Faith, ought to be, and will be much conversant in the Word, that they may
know what is for them there, and suitable to their case; This is clearly
imported in the Text, while he says, I hope in thy Word; He must know what is
in the Word, to lean his Faith and Hope upon; for except he know he cannot lean
his Faith and Confidence on it: Hence David, a great liver by Faith, was much
conversant with the Scriptures, they were his meditation, his meat, his
delight; the men of his counsels, his guides, as ye may read at length, what
his esteem of the Scriptures was in that 119 Psalm. And this being so, it will
infer not only, that really needy saints should attend upon the Word preached;
but more especially, that they should, and will be much at the private serious
reading of, meditation on, and perusal of the Scriptures; a duty, that in the
first place, I would prove to be a duty. And 2dly. press it on you.

1. I say, it is needful to prove that it is a duty, that the Scriptures be
read by all, in opposition to that cursed Popish principle, that will not allow
any laick or private person, without a peculiar license, to read the Scriptures,
whereby they turn that in a privilege, and confer on some only, which God has
imposed as a duty on all; yea, further, so Tyrannical are they in this, that
though they permit some to read the vulgar Latin, or Translations according to
it (as they have turned it in English) where Protestants are, lest if they
should hinder them in the use of that, they should read other Translations
without their liberty; yet in other places, as Spain and Italy, they are
sparing of these Licenses. This is a damnable error, not only contrair to the
way of the ancient Church (wherein they glory so much) wherein private persons
were so well acquaint with the Word, that they would make it the subject of
their discourse, while they were about their ordinary callings; but is clearly
repugnant to Scripture, and principles deduced therefrom, both in the Old and
New Testament. I shall not insist on controversial things, but lay down first,
some instances from Scripture, to which I shall add some Scripture arguments
for clearing that Truth.

For Scripture instances, look to the Old Testament, it is marked, Acts 15.21.
That in old time, Moses had in every City them that preached him, being read in
the synagogues every sabbath day; and not the Books of Moses only, but the
Prophets: And therefore our Lord in his solemn Sermon, Luke 4.17. Read out of
the Prophecy of Isaiah, that Book being delivered to him: Beside public
reading of the Scriptures, we find private reading enjoined, Deuteronomy. 17.18. The
King was to have a Copy of the Law in a Book, out of that which was before the
Priests and Levits, to be with him, and he was to read therein, all the days of
his life. Josh. 1.8. The Commander of the people was not to let the book of the
Law depart out of his mouth, but to meditat therein day and night: It was also
to be read by mean persons, for Deuteronomy. 6.6. These words commanded to the Jews,
they were to teach them diligently to their children* to talk of them when they
sat in their houses, when they did walk by the way, when they did ly down, and
when they rose up; and this they could not do in all the ages of their Church,
unless they read the Books of Moses, when Moses was gone. We find that Eunuch
in returning from Jerusalem in his journey, reading the Scripture, Act. 8.30.
We find Timothy from a child instructed in the Scriptures, 2 Timothy 3.15.
drinking it in with his milk; and in a word, Psalm. 1.2. We find the blessed man
in those days, and in all ages of the Church, to be that man, who has his
delight in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law does meditate day and night: If
again we turn to the New Testament, we find that Christ commands the Jews to
search the Scriptures, Joh. 5.39. We find the Bereans commended for comparing
Christ Apostles Sermons with the Scripture, searching the Scriptures whether
these things were so, Act. 17.11. We find it required, That the word of Christ
a well in us richly, in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing one another, Col.
3.16. which necessarily requires frequent reading of the Scriptures; we find
the Apostle supposing the Corinthians read them, 2 Cor. 1.13. We wrote none
other things to you than that you read and acknowledge, and Ephesians. 3.4. Whereby
when ye read ye may understand my knowledge: We find him commanding it, Col.
4.16. When this Epistle is read amongst you, cause also that it be read in the
Church of the Laodiceans, and that ye likewise read the Epistle from Laodicea;
1 These. 4.27. He charges them by the Lord, that that epistle be read unto all
the holy brethren; and if the Apostle John, Rev. 1.3. pronounces them blessed,
who reads the words of that prophecy, which is a dark obstruse Book. It is not
the purpose of the Spirit of God, that other plain Scriptures should be shut up
from people.

But 2. Unto these Scripture instances, we shall add a few Scripture Arguments,
as 1. For what end were the Scriptures plainly and legibly written, and at
first in a known language, if not to be made use of and read; when the Vision
is written and made plain upon Tables, Habakkuk tells the end of that is, That
he may run that reads it. 2. If the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles, did
not spare to preach their Doctrine in the audience of all, it cannot be
rationally thought, but that we may read the Scriptures that contains the sum
of their Doctrine. 3. The Scriptures are not only written to all, but are
recommended to all; therefore they concern all, and are to be read by all, Romans
15.4. Whatsoever things were written afore-time, were written for our learning,
that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures, might have hope* The
Epistles of Paul were directed to all the Saints. John's 2d. Epistle was
written to an elect lady; his 3d. Epistle to Gaius. In his first, he writes to
fathers, young men, and children, and how irrational is it to assert, that that
which is directed to all, should be keep'd up from any concerned. 4. The use
that all have for the Scriptures, do prove, that they should be read by all,
they are the Rule by which we are to walk; and therefore the man that would
walk right, must know the Rule: They are the Charter of our Inheritance, and
that we be not cheated, we would know it. They are our elder Brothers
Testament, and therefore we ought to read it, that we may know our Legacy: All
the Epithets given to the Scripture in relation to our need, tell it is the
will of God we should be conversant with them. And Lastly, There are many
duties required of Christians, that they cannot perform, unless they be
conversant with the Scriptures; they are bidden try the spirits, whither they
be of God, 1 John 4.1. And how shall they try them, but by the Touchstone of
the Scriptures. They are bidden prove all things, 1 These. 5.21. And how shall
they do that, unless they make use of the standard of the Scripture, they are
bidden add to their faith virtue, and to their virtue knowledge, 2 Pet. 1.5.
And how shall they increase in knowledge, if the Scriptures be not conversed
with? nay more, How shall ignorance be proven to be a sin, if the Scripture,
the only Illuminator of the Understanding, be not to be conversed with? But I
shall forbear further debating with Papists, the imitators (in this) of other
Heretics, whom Tertullian calls Lucifugae scripturarum, who while they
prohibit the promiscuous reading of Scripture, proclaim how little kindness
they expect of the Scripture: It is with them as it is with a Tyrrant and his
Subjects, he dares not trust them with armslest they should rise against him;
so they will not let people read the Scriptures, lest thereby they should soon
discover their abominations and cheats; therefore it is that they keep them in
a mass of ignorance, and please them with that, That Ignorance is the Mother of
Devotion.

But 2. To press this Duty upon you (for I would not so much have us Disputants
for this Truth, as Practisers of this Duty) I would not have men having Bibles
in their Houses, and yet as little acquaint with them, as if they had none; if
this be a duty, it would be followed forth in practice. I shall not enter upon
the way of reading Scripture here, but in bearing home the practice of the
duty, I shall say this: 1. Ye that have Children, train them up at Schools, a
thing wherein the heat of persecution made the ancient Church very deficient,
they had no Schools to put their Children to: But how made they up that loss?
by procuring Copies of the Scriptures, they got in some to read to them, whom
they lodged with them, or going far to hear them read, by such as could read
them. And I might here instance Pambo, who came to a Friend, that he might read
a Psalm to him; and he beginning the 39 Psalm, I said, I will take heed to my
way, that I sin not with my tongue; hold there, said he, till I learn that
well; and when he came again, being asked why he tarried so long away; O said
he, I think that one lesson of the Government of the Tongue, shall suffice me
all my life: But this I leave as a digression. But if these who wanted Schools,
were put to such pains and charges to supply that defect; what a great defect
is it in you that have Schools; and yet there are so many of you in the place
and Country about, that can read none at all; Is not this a great neglect of a
special mean of Salvation, and to find it in such a place, where Religion has
had countenance, and where Learning might be had with ease, that so many
persons should be found not able to read the Scriptures; O what a lamentable
defect is it, and I wish it may not be continued in, in this generation. And I
shall add to this, of putting your Children to read, ye would beware of
indulgence to them while they are learning. This sinful indulgence of Children
is an ill symptom for the generation to follow; and more, it is a sad presage,
that these your sinful indulged Children, shall prove your greatest plague,
experience has proven it, and ye would look to it; if the Children ye have
indulged, do skaith to Church or State, readily ye may get the first draught of
the Cup, they will be your greatest cross.

But 2. I would recommend to you, that ye that can read, would make use of that
gift, that is a thing ye may do with little interruption to your lawful
affairs, and a thing ye have liberty to go about without hazard; ye are not
like Incodemites, as many are called in other parts of the world, wherein
Inquisitions are so terrible to people, that if they have a Bible, or any
portion of it, they must hide it for fear of the Inquisition; ye are not in
that hazard; and if ye refuse to make use of the Scripture when it is dadded on
you, and have liberty to be conversant with it; it shall be righteousness with
God to take that liberty from you, and give you up to Inquisitions, as a
punishment for that dreadful neglect. I see Bibles among you, and bless God for
it; but it is not enough to have them, go through them, and seek to be acquaint
with the mind of God held out to you in them.

But to press this duty a little more distinctly, I would briefly point at four
or five things, which I would have you to consider:

1. I would have the excellency of the Scripture considered; ye know men of
Spirits, if they hear of an excellent Book written by a very learned person O
how would they long for it, be at pains to have it, and read it? how greedily
will some seek after, and peruse Histories and Romances, who are little in
reading the Scripture; but I shall come nearer you: If there came News to
Scotland, that there were a Book written by God in Spain, or some other remote
Country, how would it be longed for? how would ye be earnest to seek and
peruse it? and if so, what a sin and a shame is it, when that Book inspired by
the Spirit of God, written by infallible Instruments, is among your hands? and
yet how many are there, that neither in their Families, nor in secret have a
testimony of their reading of it? what a monstrous neglect is it?

2. Consider that it is a mean of God's Converse with us; There is a double
mean of intercourse and converse betwixt God and us; on our part, we converse
with him by Prayer, by sending up our beggar supplications to Him; we traffic
with Heaven by our necessities vented in Prayer to God, upon the one hand; and
upon the other hand, it is by these Scriptures that God corresponds visibly
with us, and sends messages to us: Hence I infer, (and look to it) That
neglecters to converse with the Scripture, not only obstruct God's intercourse,
and provocks him to give up correspondence with them in his Word: nay his
dwelling in them, for Joh. 15.7. Speaking of his abiding in us, and we in him,
he says. If ye abide in me, and my words in you, he in stead of putting in his
abiding, puts in his words abiding in us; because it is by his word he abides
in us: But I say, it is to be feared, that neglecters of converse with the
Scripture, not only obstruct God's correspondence with, and dwelling in them;
but that they also cut short the converse on their side with Heaven, by needy
Prayer. Let them never say, that they are serious in Prayer, that neglect to
read the Scriptures; though a man may read much, that prays not (for these are
not reciprocal) yet he can never be serious in prayer, that reads none; he must
be a delighter in the Scripture, that converses with God by prayer; if then ye
neglect reading, ye not only obstruct Gods intercourse with you, but yours with
him.

And I shall add in the 3d. place, there is not a more infallible mark of Grace
and Regeneration, nor to be much acquaint and conversant with the Scripture,
delighting therein, and feeding thereon. I shall not urge that natural Axiom
iisdem nutrimur ex quibus constamus we are nourished of the same things we are
made of; but I shall give it you in Scripture terms: Compare these two, 1 Pet.
1.23. and 2.2. ^n the one passage, it is said, Ye are born again, not of
corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the word of God, which lives and
abides for ever. In the other passage, as new born babes desire the sincere
milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby: If a man be begotten and born by
the word, he will desire the sincere milk of the Word, that he may grow and be
nourished by it; and in this, I may allude to that of David, Psalm. 119.93. I
will never forget thy precepts, for with them thou have quickened me. A man
that has found the Word powerful, pulling him from Nature to Grace, from the
power of Satan to God, will not forget it, but must be conversant with it.

And I shall add in the fourth place, as the frequent use of the Scripture is a
blessed proof of Regeneration, so it is an evidence of a tender man: The
untender man takes advice from any thing, that may bring him pleasure,
advantage or preferment, and accordingly steers his course; but the tender man
must have directions from the Word, else he will not stir in any thing; he far
transcends these Grecians, who being at their Sacrifice, would not stir from
it, though the enemy approached, and killed some, and wounded others, till they
got some good signs, and then they got up, and went to it: So the tender man in
all his cases and difficulties, will take his directions from the Bible, and
then he goes to it for his encouragements; and hence Psalm. 1.2. The blessed man
is he who delights in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law does meditat day and
night. He must not want his Bible, what ever he want: and that is a tender man
who like David in a distress, must encourage himself in the Lord his God, 1 Samuel 30.6. or else he will not be encouraged.

There is a 5th. thing that presses this duty of conversing with the Scripture,
and it is the thing in hand, the godly man has so many needs, that he must not
want the Bible to make up and supply them, he is put to fend by Faith and Hope,
and Faith and Hope must not want the Scriptures, the ground of both; there is
no pasture for Faith and Hope but the Scripture: Therefore the godly man must
be conversant with it, he must have his all in God, and must study to know the
mind of God that he may please him in all things. The godly man is called to
live by Faith, and must know what Faith has to feed on, and this puts him to
converse with Scripture. As I said before, The Bible is the Charter of his
Inheritance, the Rule that he must walk by, his Elder Brother's Testament, the
Compass he must steer his course by in storms, his Magazine for weapons and
furniture, his Touchstone, that he must try all Duties and Comforts by; in all
these, and many mo, he has need of the Bible: and therefore if his grace be in
exercise, he must be much conversant with it.

I shall not fall on any of the other Heads, but exhort you, while ye have the
light, to walk in the light, and while ye walk in the light, make use of the
Bible; let this Word not be sown in the wind, but let it be as a good and a
nail fastened by the Masters of Assemblies. Acquaint your selves with the Bible
through and through, read it, and depend on God for the blessing, delight in
it, meditat^on it, hereby ye shall evidence your esteem of it, as most
excellent above all other Books. Hereby ye shall evidence your esteem of, and
converse with God, your Regeneration and walk with God, that ye dwell in God,
and have your all in him, and that ye rest on what he has spoken in the
Scriptures, for making up all your wants. God bless his Word to you for Christ's
sake.

SERMON XXVII.
Psalm 130. Verse 5. -- And in his Word do I hope.
WAiting for God being (as ye have heard it) the excellent, yet difficult and
trying task of the Saints, surely they stand in great need to be well
beam-fi^led and stocked, that would engage in such an undertaking, lest they
weary of waiting on God, and row to some other shore; and this is it that the
Psalmist here is from his own experience and practice, directing us in; after
that he has in the first place asserted his waiting, and next his waiting for
the Lord. And 3. That his waiting is not degenerat in a careless indifferency
and stupidity; but however, he did cast out bitterness, haste and fretfulness
out of his waiting; yet it did not cool, his affection was not blunted for his
soul did wait; after that, I say, he proceeds to give an account of his support
in waiting, my soul does wait, and in his word do I hope; he tells that it was
Faith and hope that enabled and supported him to wait for God. Ye may remember,
that the first note I took up here was, That waiting on God will not be gotten
cherisht without faith and hope; I wait for the Lord my soul does wait, because
I hope. The Trials of the people of God for greatness, sharpness and
continuance, may be so ordered, as an out-gate from them, can only be discerned
by faith, and looked after by hope; yet when it is so, that things are most
dark, faith cheerfully employed, will apprehend a promised delivery in the
greatest difficulties; Faith will see an issue worth the waiting for, I wait,
and I hope, says he. The second general Observation that I proposed from these
Words was, that the faith and hope that sends a believer, and carries him
through in waiting for God, that enables him to endure hard lots, without
succumbing, must take the Word for its ground. I wait, because I hope, and I
hope, because I have the Word of God for the ground of my hope. Ye know that I
proceeded to speak to four Heads, in the prosecuting of this Note, That really
needy souls, who are put to live by Faith, ought and will be much conversant
with the Word of God, to know what is for them, and their through-bearing
there. 2. That as they will be conversant with the Word, so they will judge of
things according to the verdict of the Word, that it may ground their Faith,
and beget Hope. 3. That to fix the Saints in this resolution, and to the end
they may lean weight on the Word, they would be fixed in this Principle, that
the Word of God is of Divine Authority, and infallibly certain, In his Word do
I hope. 4. That the waiter having fixed this Principle, that the Word is of
Divine Authority, he must send out his Faith to believe, and his Hope to look
for all he finds in so divine and sure a Word, that he may be sure under foot,
as the Word of God makes him. It Is his duty to put forth Faith and Hope to fend.

For the first of these, that needy Saints, who are put to live by Faith and
Hope, ought to be, and will be much conversant with the Word: I spoke to it the
last day. I both proved it that it was lawful and incumbent on all to read and
be acquaint with the Scriptures, against the tyranny of the man of sin, that
will have no Laick^, ^s they call them, to read the Scripture without his
license; and I insisted to press the duty on you by several arguments, which I
shall nor resume. Only I shall desire that it may be a Preaching daily
practiced, as ye would prove your selves to be among these blessed folk, who
have their delight in the Law of God, and meditate therein day and night, who
have the Word dwelling richly in you, that ye may be acquaint with the Charter
of your inheritance, with your Card and your Compass, your elder Brothers
Testament, the Magazine and Storehouse of your Furniture, and Touchstone
whereby ye try all things. Let me, I say, exhort you, that that Preaching may
be conspicuously seen in your practice daily.

A 2d thing in the point is, that as really needy Saints will be conversant
with the Word, so they must learn to judge of things according to the rule of
the Word; they must learn to be determined by what the Word says, to have the
Scriptures ending all controversies and debates, to have the Scriptures
grounding their Faith and Hope in all things. The Psalmist does so here, he
contents not himself to take a look of the word, but he is so acquaint with,
and so improves it, as he lives by Faith and Hope in it. This Point will lead
me to the 3d, and therefore I shall pass it briefly, by recommending to all
that would be acquaint with the Scripture, and judge things according to it,
that they would avoid two extremes; one is, the practice of wicked men, who
will not be determined by the Word, but live and feed upon their own
presumptuous dreams. Let the Word of God say what it will against the
generality of men, and the way wherein they walk, they will not take the Word
for Gods final answer, but still look out for some other thing from God, I can
compare the generality of Church Members to none better than these, Luke 20.
where Christ tells of the ill usage of the Servants, sent to seek the fruit of
the Vineyard, and of their killing of the Heir, and said, he will come and
destroy these Husbandmen; they perceiving that he meant by them, (as the other
Evangelist has it), v. 16. say, God forbid: They would not take that for Gods
final answer; and so it is with the generality of men, speak of the Scriptures
in general to them, they will acknowledge them; but show unto them, how the
Scripture condemns their way, and what judgments it has denounced against sins
that they are living in, they will not take that for Gods final answer, they
will still look out for some other thing from God. I shall not stand on this,
though it be the general disease of the visible Church; but in opposition to
that extreme of wicked men, I shall desire you to mark that word, Joh. 12.48.
He that rejects me, and receives not my words, has one that judges him:
the word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him at the last day. Thou will not take that word for Gods final sentence, yet it is that which shall
judge thee in the last day, and all self-deceiving, and self deluding souls
shall find, God is, and will be no other thing, than what he has declared
himself in his Word to be. If this were believed and laid to heart, folk would
more labor to live so, as they may have the Word more their friend. But on the
other hand, as men in making use of the Word, would guard against the
presumptuous dreams of wicked men, so they would guard against the faithless
fears of the godly, who see enough in the Word to make them and needy sinners
happy; but their fears, and want of probabilities lays them by from improving
what they find in the Word for their comfort and encouragement in duty, and
lean as little weight on the Word upon the one hand, as wicked men do on the
other. I shall not resume what I said at another occasion, what use ye should
make of reason in the matters of Religion: Sure ye should make use of it for
taking up things revealed in Scripture, in gathering what is expressed therein,
or may be drawn from it by native consequence. But ye would remember, that
Reason must stoop to Divine Revelation; your Reason must stoop and strike Sail
to what God has revealed in his Word, though ye have no probability of the
thing; yea, though ye have probability of the contrary, remembering that Numb.
23.19. God is not as man, that he should lie, nor as the son of man, that he
should repent: Has he said, and shall he not do it? Has he spoken, and shall
he not perform it? And Psalm. 56.4. In God I will praise his word. And Psalm.
60.6, 7. God has spoken in his holiness, I will rejoice, etc. In a word, It Is
to little purpose to the children of God in a waiting posture, to offer to be
acquaint with the Word, and make use of it, except they lean their weight on
it, and be determined by it, otherwise a man may s^arve beside his allowance,
he may see enough in the Bible to make him up, and yet not be the better of it,
because he will not captivat his sense, reason, and carnal imaginations, to
credit and lay weight on it.

But to press and follow this forth, I proceed to the 3d thing I proposed to be
spoken to in this Head of Doctrine, and it is the main thing; to the end we may
lean weight upon the Word, and it may put an end to all controversies that may
arise in our bosoms, we would fix this principle, that the Word of God is of
Divine Authority, and of infallible verity and certainty: That Is a Principle a
man that would live by Faith must fix, that as it is Tit. 1.2. The Scriptures
are the word of him that cannot lie. Here it is, that Faith resolving to wait
on God, must begin his exercise, to fix this well, that the Scriptures, and the
Doctrine contained therein, are the Word of the faithful God, that they are of
infallible verity, and Divine Authority; and therefore when the Apostle, 2 Pet.
1.19. is pressing upon believers, to take heed to the Scriptures, as a more
sure word of prophecy than the voice that came from heaven; He intimats in the
two following Verses, that that will be to no purpose, except they know first,
that no prophecy of the Scripture is of any private interpretation: The meaning
whereof is not, that private spirits must not Expone or give the sense of
Scripture, for the Passage speaks not of the interpretation, or giving of the
sense, but of the authority of the Scripture. In which sense Prophets were
inspired to reveal the Word of God, and his will betwixt him and men, as Aaron
was betwixt Moses and Pharaoh, when Moses was unto him as a God, (as the
Heathen Sybills were called Deorum Interpretes) and so the meaning is, that the
Scriptures are not of any private inspiration by men, but from God, as is
contained in the reason which he gives in the next Verse, For the Prophecy
came not of old time by the will of men, but holy men of God spoke as they were
moved by the Holy Ghost. These sure words of Prophecy (^ould he say) to which I
invite you to take heed, are of Divine Authority, spoken by holy men, as they
were inspired by the Spirit; and his ye must know and believe ere ye can
receive light and comfort from them. Hence Paul dealing with Agrippa, Act.
26.27. presses him to look to the Scriptures Divine Authority, as being a solid
ground of Faith, King Agrippa, believe thou the Prophets? I know that thou
believe; he threaps upon him that he believed. This Principle being necessary
to be fixed, our work in fixing it might soon be at an end, if we were quit of
the wicked and perverse clamours of Papists, who expecting little kindness of
the Scriptures (as I asserted the last day) are in tops with it at every bout,
they will have none to read the Scriptures without their license, and when they
are read, they will not have them a perfect rule for Faith and Manners, without
their traditions, not will they grant that they can be understood without their
interpretations. And in the point I am upon, they will not have the Scriptures
to be of Divine Authority, in respect of us (what ever Authority they have of
themselves) more than the Fables of Aesop, without the testimony of their
Church, so blasphemously speak they against that Scripture, from which they
expect so little friendship. For us, we acknowledge it is a mercy that there is
a Church to hand down the Scriptures to us, and that we have the testimony of
the Church by her Ministry; (...) sure that testimony is not from the Romish
Church only. The Ancients when they speak of Testimonies concerning the
Doctrine of the Scriptures adduce the Testimony of the Romish Church (being
then Orthodox) only among other Churches; and there are many other Churches
beside the Protestants, who acknowledge the authority of the Scripture, and yet
do not acknowledge the authority of the Church of Rome, such as the Grecian,
Ethiopian, Armenian Churches, and others; whatever the Church do in asserting
the Authority of the Scriptures, she is in that like the woman of Samaria, Joh.
4. Who testified to the Samaritans concerning Christ, saying, Come see a man
that told me all that ever I did, is not this the Christ? but when they came to
him on her information, they said, Now we believe, not because of thy
information, and saying, for we have seen and heard him our selves, and know
that this is indeed the Christ, the Savior of the world: They founded not
their faith on her Testimony, though that was inductive to their meeting with
Christ, but ascended to their own persuasion, which was founded on their
hearing of him themselves.

But to batter out this a little, which ye may have to do with ere long, and to
let you see that the Scripture must not subject its authority to the Roman
Church; I shall speak a little to these four: 1. I enquire whether they have
given this Testimony or not? Further, Whether it be arbitrary for them to give
it, or not? if it be arbitrary, and the Word have no Authority but at their
pleasure, they put a cheat upon the World, by asserting the authority of that
which has no antecedent authority in it self: But if it be not arbitrary, but
they are bound to give it, and have given their Testimony already (as Pope
Innocent long ago pronounced his authority in his Decretal concerning the
Scripture) Then they can no more be heard, pleading against the Authority of
the Scriptures, determining in these Controversies that are betwixt them and us.

2. Who gives this Testimony? The Pope? or his Counsel? or both? Again, How
came they to give this Testimony? They are persuaded, or not persuaded; are
they not persuaded, and yet give it? then are they the grandest cheats in the
world. If they are persuaded, how came they to that persuasion? If they go up
to the Church preceding, how was that Church persuaded? and let them ascend as
far as they can ascend, they must still fist at some who were persuaded of the
truth of the Authority of the Scriptures, without any antecedent Testimony of
the Church; as for Revelations witnessing the Divine Authority of the
Scriptures, they will not pretend to them, they call us Enthusiasts (though
falsely) on that account, and if they had that persuasion from the Scriptures
themselves, why may not others having the Spirit of God, discern that Divine
Authority of the Scriptures, without the Testimony of the Church, as well as
they?

But I shall add 3dly. If any should ask who gave them that warrant to
determine concerning the Authority of the Scriptures? If they should say to a
Pagan, that is the Word of God, I say it, and I have authority to declare it;
If the Pagan should say, where is your evidence that ye have that authority? if
they cannot adduce any, may not he justly allege, that they bear Witness of
themselves? All the evidence they afford to any is, that the Church of Rome is
infallible; and when they are put to that, they adduce these passages, Mat.
16.18. Thou art Peter, etc. Luke 22.32. Joh. 21.15. well, say I, have these
Testimonies Divine Authority to persuade men concerning the infallibility of
the Church of Rome? and must men believe that antecedently to their receiving
their testimony concerning the Scriptures? If so, then not only themselves who
testify, but others who are to receive their testimony, must be persuaded of
the Divine Authority of the Scriptures antecedently to that testimony. In a
word, when they would prove their Authority, they run to the Scriptures, and in
proving the Authority of the Scriptures, they recurr to their own testimony,
and so run in a circle.

I might add a 4th. thing to discuss their Authority from their own principles;
for the clearing of which, I shall hint at three words, I hope they will grant,
that they who testify concerning the Divine Authority of the Scriptures, must
be Christians, not Pagans; Church Officers, not Laics; Now by their
principles, how can they satisfy the Christian world, that their Pope is not
an un-baptized Pagan? or a mere private person. I shall not found my doubt upon
Pope Leo the Tenth his Creed, that said, The Fable concerning Christ had been a
gainful Fable; but upon their making the real administration of the Sacraments
to depend upon the real intention of the Priest that administrats them: And so
I reason, it is impossible morally to know that the present Pope is a baptized
Christian, or a Church officer in regard we cannot know, what were the
intentions of him that baptized or ordained ^im; and what a blind is it to
cause the authority of the Scriptures depend upon such an uncertainty. 2.
Consider again their sin of Simony, we find their Histories full (especially in
these dark times, some while before the Reformation) of their Symoniacal Popes,
who by budds and bribes, and one by faigning a Voice from Heaven, to out his
Predecessor, did advance themselves into the Chai^. Now by their own Cannon Law
Symony makes void the Election, and nullifies all the Acts following thereon.
Now suppose a Pope get into the Ch^ir by Symo^y, and ^^eats Cardinals who elect
his successor, their Act, and his Election are null and it is impossible they
can be capable of any Ecclesiastical Act and particularly for testifying
concerning the authority of the Scriptures. 3. I would know how the Christian
world should know the Popes declaring concerning the authority of the
Scriptures (since very few have access to him,) except we take the Testimony of
humane Writings, or some wandering Priest with his Papal Bulls, and Lead affixt
to them: Shall we give credit to these Bulls, carried by his Priests? because
they have the ordinar Characters of Papal Bulls, and shall ^e not for all the
Divine Characters that are found in the Scriptures, cre^^t them to be the Word
of God*

From all which, ye would learn to look upon the Romish Religion, as a Religion
wherein ye have no ground of certain^y to go on, and so that there is no Faith
in the Romish Religion, but that which is ultimatly a humane Faith; for if they
give us Scripture, how know (...) that it is Scripture? They tell us, their
Church says so, (...) know we the certainty of the Churches Testimony? (...)
Pope says so, and for that we have but the testimony of his humane Writings,
and of his Priests Bulls; and suppose we should go to Rome, we should not get
easy access to him; and though we should get access to him, we know not what
he is, whether a baptized Christian, or an unbaptized Pagan, and the Priest
that baptized him had not the due intention; so that ultimatly, all the Faith
in the Romish Religion, result into an humane report; but, if the Lord will, I
shall in the afternoon let you see other evidences of the Divine Authority of
the Scriptures, that we shall not need to go to Rome for their Testimony. Take
the Bible, seek that Spirit that dictated the Bible, look on the Scripture as a
true History, look o^ it with that credit, ye look on Titus Livius, Quintus
Curtius, Buchannan, or any other humane writing, and they will prove their own
Divinity. This, I say (if the Lord will) I shall follow forth more distinctly
in the afternoon; and therefore I leave it, and speak a word to profane
Cavillers at the Scriptures authority. There is a word Christ has in assorting
the Divine Authority of H^. Doctrine, which ye would notice, Job. 7.10. My
doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me, if any man will do his will, be
shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my
self. The meaning whereof is not, that folks must first obey, ere they know the
Divinity of his Doctrine; nor is it, that the Word needs the charity of well
disposed persons; but this is it, that he must be in a good frame, that would
take up the Divine Authority of the Word; I mark it for this end, because there
are so many Atheists, Anti-scripturists, mockers of Scripture, denyers of the
Being of Spirits, immortality of the Soul, and of Rewards and Punishments after
this Life; and it is to little or no purpose to discourse to them of the Divine
Authority of the Scriptures. It is with them, as with that man, who said, non
persuadebis, etiamsi persuaseris, although thou convince me, thou shall not
persuade me; they have done with their part of happiness, if the Scriptures be
of Divine Authority; and therefore they will not be persuaded that it is so:
for these I shall leave them to these two words, one is, Psalm. 9.16. The Lord
is known by the judgment which he executes. They that will not see God in his
Bible, shall see and find him in the execution of his Judgments upon them. The
other word is Zech. 1. when verse 4. he has spoken of their Fathers, who when
they were bidden turn, would not hear, nor hearken; he says, verse 6. But my
words and my statutes, did they not take hold of your fathers? and they
returned, and said, as the Lord of Hosts thought to do unto us according to our
ways, and according to our doings, so has he dealt with us. I leave these
malicious and desperate men, who are hardened in their impiety, to have the
Scripture verified on them; but a man that does the will of God, that walks
humbly and soberly, shall find, that there are as many Characters shining in
the Scripture it self, as may refresh and satisfy him, and all those who have
their all in God. God bless his Word to you for Christ's sake.

SERMON XXVIII.
Psalm 130. Verse 5. -- And in his word do I hope.
A Person without skill will readily mistake the best contrivances, whosoever
without skill should look slightly upon a man building an House, and digging
very deep, to seek a sure foundation for it, whereby a great part of his
expenses and pains, is hid under ground, would they not be ready to go and
count that great cost? but when the foundation is well laid, the superstructure
will stand the better. So may it be with many in reference to the purpose I am
now upon, needy bodies would fain have something presently to fill their mouth,
they are not for frist, but little do they consider, that the Doctrine of this
Text lays the foundations that cannot be destroyed; The foundation of all their
other food that they get from the Scripture: and because this foundation is not
well laid, other things relating to their cases in the superstructure proves
slip^y. I am now upon the great Task of the Psalmist here, waiting for God. I
have showed the necessity of Faith and Hope, for that undertaking; the fastening
of Faith and Hope, in waiting, on its sure ground, the Word of God. And I have
laid before you the necessity of being acquaint with the Scriptures; that it is
your duty to be determined by the Scripture, and to judge of all things
according to the verdict of the Word; and in prosecution of that, I am led upon
this great Truth, That the Scriptures are of Divine Authority, they are the
Word of God; I laid by the pretense of the Romish Church, to assert the
Authority of the Scriptures, whose principles lead men in the matters of
Religion to a labyrinth of unextricable uncertainties. Now it would remain,
that I should hint at some things to clear the Divinity and Divine Authority of
the Scriptures, and the Doctrine therein contained; not to Atheists, to Whom I
spoke a word in the close of the mornings Exercise, but to sober minded folk,
who would fain have their Faith helped in that concern; and as the last day I
recommended your Bibles to you to be made more use of, that ye might have the
word dwelling richly in you: So this day I would recommend to all, to take
another, and a better look of their Bibles, that they may see them, and the
Doctrine held out therein, clearly and distinctly to be Divine. One word I
premit, which would lead me to that I would speak to here, and ye will find it,
Psalm. 119.152. You read it in your Translation, Concerning thy testimony. I
have known of old, that thou have founded them for ever: but the Original reads
it word for word thus. From thy testimonies I have learned of old, that thou
have founded them for ever; wherein ye may take notice of these three, 1. What
he learned concerning the Scriptures, that God had founded them for ever, that
is, That they were, and are an unalterable and everlasting foundation of Faith,
having a Divine Authority stamped upon them. 2. When he learned this, of old,
not only from experience, but he learned it as the first principle he had
drunken in, That was, would he say, the A, B, C. of my Religion, a Peter has
the word in that forecited place, 2 Pet. 1.20. Know this first, etc. 3. Whence
he learned this, From thy testimonies, I learned it, says he, I needed not
another evidence; thy Testimonies, when my eyes were open, discovered to me
their divine authority, and infallible verity. Hence ye may gather, that which
I closed with in the morning. That if ye suppose the Historical verity of the
Scriptures, they will prove their Divinity, to any who have the Spirit of God,
or to any who receive the Scriptures as a true History, the Scriptures
themselves will prove themselves to be Divine Writings.

So here ye have 1. The Historical verity of the Scriptures supposed.

2. Their Divine Authority proposed: and

3. The necessity of the Spirit to discern that:

1. I suppose that men receive the Scriptures as a true History, that is, that
men will give that credit to the Word, that they give to any common History,
handed down to their days, to wit, that there was such a Nation as Israel, that
there was such a man as Moses, that gave them Laws, that was instrumental in
working miracles, in bringing them out of Egypt, and in the Wilderness; that
there was such an one as Jesus Christ, that preached in Palestine, was
crucified at Jerusalem, that he had twelve Apostles that followed him, etc.
This is to be supposed in this inquiry concerning the Authority of the
Scriptures; neither is it irrational to suppose it. Though there be no vestige
of that ancient City of Troy now, yet who doubts but such a City was: And that
Homer wrote not a mere Romance (whatever Poetical enlargements he has) when he
wrote of it. Who doubts of Alexander the Great, though his Empire be now gone;
and that Q: Curtius wrote of him. Who doubts of the Roman Wars and that Titus
Livius wrote of them; when men get these Books in their hands, they look not on
them as fables; and if so, how rationally do we plead, that the like Credit be
given to the Scriptures, and that they may have the like acceptance; if any
account this irrational, he must grant that he will not believe any thing done
before his own time, nay that he will not believe any thing done in his own
time, if he see it not done with his eyes, and thus a man questioning the
Historical verity of things, should nonpluss himself with absurdities, and
declare that he were fitter for a Bedlam than to be Disputed with.

But 2. This being supposed, there is their Divine Authority proposed to be
spoken to, the Scripture it self will prove it self, a true Divine word, they
often do solemnly declare they are of God, that God spoke them to Moses and the
Prophets, and assert that what they spoke are the truths of God, and that they
do not cheat in this assertion, whosoever will go through the Characters of the
words Divinity, they will be convinced of it. But a man falling on that
subject, must say, as Psalm. 106.2. Who can utter the mighty acts of the Lord?
Who can show forth all his praise?

I might here speak of the form and style of Scripture, of the scope and end of
it, leading to God, and Everlasting happiness, but I shall limit my self to the
antiquity of the Scripture, the instruments employed in transmitting it to us,
the matter of the Scripture, the efficacy and success of them, and the adjuncts
of the Scripture.

1. For the antiquity of the Scripture, that is most true, which is most
ancient, and so is the Scripture, for however error may plead antiquity, yet
truth had still the forestart of it, from the beginning it was not so, says
Christ, Mat. 19.8. What Book so ancient as the Book of Moses, out of which the
rest are to be proven. The Hebrew was the most ancient Language; Moses who
wrote in the Hebrew Language, was dead long before the Theban War, and Siege of
Troy, the first thing written by the Heathen; and for the antiquity of the
matter, it is the most ancient, the matter first, whereof it treats, concerning
the Creation of the Heaven and the Earth, the Creation of Man, and his fall,
the effects whereof the Heathen have felt, though they could not ascend to the
cause. The History of the Worlds Creation being first, Man that was made the
sixth day could not have known, unless God had revealed it unto him: Nay Tit.
1.2. It speaks of Promises made by God, that cannot lie before the World began,
and that these are not Impostures of men, their accomplishment in every age
makes out.

2. For the Instruments employed in transmitting the Doctrine of the Scriptures
to us, some of them were learned, as Moses, Daniel, Paul, though all their
Learning could not reach that Doctrine, but generally they were simple
illiterat men; and to convince us further, their Doctrine was of God, they
could not be deceived, they would not deceive, and though they would, they
could not deceive. 1. They could not be deceived, Why? Either they had their
Doctrine from God, and a good Spirit, or from Satan, and an evil Spirit; if
they had it from God and a good Spirit, (as indeed they did have it) they could
not be deceived; and from Satan and an ill Spirit, they could not have it, for
he would not inspire Doctrine in men so destructive to his Kingdom and
interest. 2. As they could not be deceived, so neither would they deceive; when
impostures comes out to cheat others, any with half an eye cannot but see some
design in their cheat; but what design could the instruments employed to carry
this Doctrine have? They walked not in craftiness, they handled not the Word of
God deceitfully; they affected not humane Wisdom, but by manifestation of the
Truth, commended themselves to every man's Conscience, as in the sight of God, 2
Cor. 4.2. The world saw they reaped no advantage by their Doctrine, but a sore
skin; they relinquisht all their own interest, and worldly advantages, in their
faithful discharge of their trust. And 3. As they could not be deceived, and
would not deceive, so though they would, they could not deceive, and that
because these things they preached, and wrote of, were not done in a corner,
but before all; they came not out as the Papists, to tell of miracles in
corners, which none saw but themselves, but of things done in the open view of
the world, so that if they had vented any untruth, there were myriads of men to
witness against them, and give them the lie. Apian confesses many things
concerning the Jews. The Pharisees confess of the Apostles, Acts 4. That a
notable miracle was wrought by them, which was manifest to all that dwelt at
Jerusalem, and none could deny it. The Philosophers and Heathens confessed,
that many things were true of the Christians.

But 3. Let us consider the matter of the Scriptures, and O! what beams of
Divinity will we find shining there? look on it in the bulk, no such systeme of
Doctrine concerning God and his Attributes; the Creation of Man, and
Providence; the Fall of Man, and his Redemption; concerning man's Duty, the
immortality of the Soul, the resurrection of the Body, Eternal Life and
happiness, etc. as this Book holds out. Consult all the Philosophers, all the
Druids and Brachmans, all the Magicians that ever spoke or wrote of Divine
things, and put all their Doctrines together in one, they cannot parralel this
Book and the matter contained in it, it is such a complete Transcript and
System of Doctrine; and this proves it to be of God, Why? Could the mind of man
what way soever, have found out what is in this Book? no certainly, these
wonders of Nature, parts and abilities, would never have left it to some poor
illiterat Fisher Men to discover and that they should bring forth such
transcendent and sublime Truths, demonstrats the Scriptures to be the word of
God, Look upon it in the parts, the Histories contained in it, though written
by so many several men, living in so far distant ages and places of the world,
yet have a wonderful harmony, holding out a true Chronology and supputation of
time, which proves their divine authority, and infallible verity. Here ye have
a true History of what the Heathen involved in Fables, for (if it were fit to
insist on it) I could clear their first Saturn was Adam, and the next Noah,
whose three Sons, Shem, Ham and Japheth were Transformed by them, Ham into
Jupiter, Japheth into Neptune, and Shem (because they hated the blessed race)
into Pluto, and that all their other Fables are but obscure and dark
intimations of the Histories, which in the Bible are clear and plain; here we
have Histories not so much concerning great Kings and Princes, as of poor
Believers, not so much concerning things that occurred, as the Providence of
God in bringing them about: And as Scripture Histories are exact, true and
distinct: So Scripture dogmata, and Doctrines are so clear, many of them, and
so consonant with Natures light, that in some measure, they may be known by it,
as that there is one God, the first cause of all; That it is reasonable he
should be served etc. That reasonable Creatures have immortal souls, and die
not as beasts, which made the Heathen to cry out, as Deuteronomy 4.8. What nation is
there so great, that has statutes and judgments so righteous? and others of
them, though they be not known by natural reason, yet they are not contrary to
principles that are naturally known, concerning the Power, Wisdom and Goodness
of God; and being revealed, will be acknowledged to be very rational: Thus
though man know not the way of Redemption, but by Divine Revelation; yet he may
find himself an object of pity, (which alone can be expected from God) and of
justice, if he find not out some remedy. Again, though some mysteries transcend
the Light of Natural Reason, as the Trinity of Persons, the Incarnation of
Christ, etc. Yet that will not bring the Doctrine in question, partly, because
no Doctrine, even of the Heathens, but it has its own secrets; and partly,
because there are many things in nature which we see are, and yet we cannot
tell why, what, and whence they are. But further, consider the Scriptures, and
as we will find them clear, as to the Histories and Doctrines therein set down;
so as to the Prophesies therein contained, we will find an exact answerableness
of so many future events to their predictions in the Word: The Heathens hold
their am^^guous Oracles so adapted to the events, that they might put their own
Commentars upon them; but as the Scripture is most distinct and clear in its
Predictions, and in the circumstances of things foretold. So there is an exact
answerableness in the event, as in that of Genes. 49.10. The scepter shall not
depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from betwixt his feet, until Shiloh come:
How exactly was it accomplished at the birth of Christ? and these Predictions,
and their exact accomplishments do evince, that these Prophesies could come
from none but the supreme God, who is Omniscient, and has a Dominion over the
Universe, and who, because He purposed these things foretold, and brought them
to pass.

But 4. Take a look of the success and efficacy of Scriptures and Scripture
Doctrine, and that will tell it is of God. I know not well where to begin or
close, in laying open this Consideration; only I shall deduce it shortly in
these four steps:

1. The Doctrine of the Scriptures proves it self to be of God, by its
prevalency in the World among men, and its prevalency when it had nothing
extrinsick to back it, it has come in on men when they read it, and has been
the ministration of death and terror, when all things were going well with
them, and has raised them out of the pit of despair, when all things spoke
sadness to them; It has had a singular power in it, to terrify and humble the
mind of men, and then to give them peace and comfort, that they have been
persuaded (notwithstanding long fix: in contrary persuasions) to relinquish
their former way with great joy, and to embrace the greatest misery in the
world, as their greatest happiness; and that it should make such a conquest on
men, and bring in such fresh sweetness in the greatest bitterness, it proves it
to be Divine.

To this secondly add the universality of this conquest in so short a time.
Paul carried the Doctrine of the Gospel from Jerusalem round about to
Illyricum, Romans 15.19. and within 200 years or thereby, after Christ, it came
the length of Scotland, and with whom did it prevail? not with a few of the
meaner, but with many Learned Philosophers, such as Dionysius the Areopagite,
Justin Martyr, many who used curious Arts, who brought their books together,
and burned them before all men, Acts 19 ^9. with great men, Kings and Princes,
Constantine the Great and his successors, not with moderat persons only, but
with enemies, with Judges, that sat upon Benches and condemned the Saints, it
made them come down from the Benches, and go with the Christians to the Stakes;
was not that a proof that the Doctrine was of God?

And I shall thirdly add, that the Scripture and the Doctrine thereof, was thus
successful, when it had nothing extrin^ck to commend it, but was every where
opposed; Pagan Religion flourishes, but where it has the Authority of Princes
to back it. The Mahumetan Religion also prevailed at first, because it promises
liberty from subjection to Superiors. The satisfaction of men's lusts and
pleasures while they live, and a Paradise of pleasures when they are dead; but
after its first prevailing, it has not spread, but where the sword made way
for it; but Christianity a Sect every where spoken against, Act. 8.22. yet
prevailing does evidence it is of God. Consider again the men that carried this
Doctrine, poor men, insignificant persons, that were more ready to beget
contempt of it, than reception of it; men that set not themselves to seek men's
interests, but pressed them to deny all ungodliness and fleshly lusts. They
held out no worldly encouragement to men, to embrace their Doctrine, but on the
contrary, told them, that upon the reception of their Doctrine, they behoved to
undergo the hardest of lots, and evil usage in the world, whereof themselves
were visible sampla^s, and yet Christianity prevailed, and the Doctrine of the
Gospel had success, which proves it to be of God.

4. This Religion and Doctrine had such an impression, that whosoever embraced
it, there was no parting of them and it; men might take their estates and lives
from them, but could not part them and the Doctrine of the Gospel, and these
were not fools, but men that in other things evidenced themselves to be
intelligent, sober understanding persons; but when it came to the matter of
their Religion, no torments devised by men could move them to relinquish it,
but they did run to the Stakes, and offered themselves willingly to the Fires,
to the beheading Sword and other cruel deaths; and how could they have done
this, if not supported by the efficacy of the Doctrine they had embraced, which
proves it to be of God.

In the 5. and last place, consider the Adjuncts of this Doctrine of the
Scriptures, the great miracles whereby it was confirmed; wonders may be wrought
by the power of second causes, but miracles are only of God, being above, if
not contrary to the course of nature. How clear and convincing were these
miracles wrought by Moses in Egypt? by Christ and his Apostles, so in that
forecited place, Act. 4 16. The Rulers confess, that indeed a notable miracle
had been done by these men, is manifest to all, etc. Their miracles were so
clear, so infallible, and many for kind, that it were blasphemous to think or
say, God would afford them to confirm any Doctrine but his own. And to this I
shall add the providence of God, in preserving the Scriptures, and the Church
cleaving to the Doctrine thereof, against all the malice of Satan and wicked
men bended against both. How long is it since they sought to root out Israel,
and yet she is to the fore? How long since Antiochus made search for all Copies
of the Scripture, destroyed some, and sought to destroy the rest, and yet it is
preserved, and has spread? How long since crowds of Errors and Heretics have
sought to adulterat and corrupt the Scriptures, since the days of Christ and
his Apostles, and yet the providence of God has so vigilantly watched over it,
that it is kept pure and incorrupt, and so transmitted to us at this day in the
primitive language from the Church of Rome, which no doubt would have done with
the Scriptures, as they did with other Writings of the ancient Fathers, had
they known that use would have been made of them against them: And to this I
may add the providence of God against the Enemies of the Scriptures, and the
Church professing them, Antiochus fell without hand, the Babylonian Monarchy no
sooner meddled with the Church of the Jews, but it came to an end; and in all
ages the providence of God has been eminently seen, in the judgments of God
upon these that opposed the Scriptures, and the Professors thereof: These are
some evidences that the Scriptures are of God, and of Divine Authority.

In the 3d place I told you, that beside the Historical verity of the
Scriptures supposed, and the Divine Authority of them proposed, there is need
of the Spirit to discern these things. I shall not trouble you with the quirks
used by the Papists against us, concerning the Spirits testimony; it is not by
way of Enthusiasme, or any new Revelation, but by way of gift from God, opening
our eyes to discern the wonders of his Law; and so it is not required to prove
the Scriptures to be Divine, but to assure us they are Divine; because there be
some to whom the Gospel is hid: not that a saving work of the Spirit is
requisite to take up these evidences of the Divinity of the Scriptures, for a
temporary may taste of the good Word of God, and yet fall away, Heb. 6. But a
common illumination of the Spirit is necessary to take up these evidences the
Scripture gives of its Divinity.

Now I have been long upon this Head which is Doctrinal, and though it be so,
it shall not be in vain, if it be a mean to fix your Faith and Hope in this
Principle, that the Scriptures are the Word of God, and of Divine Authority.
The Scriptures are the Word of Truth, by which we are begotten, Jam. 1.18. His
Law is the truth, Psalm. 119.142. The Scriptures are a more sure word of
prophecy, whereunto ye do well to take heed, as unto a light that shines in a
dark place, 2 Pet. 1.19. When David is comforting himself against the rising of
enemies, like the mighty Waters, and Waves of the Sea, he says, Thy testimonies
are very sure, Psalm. 93.5. And then, they are a tried word. Psalm. 12.6. The
words of the Lord are pure words, as silver tried in a furnace of earth,
purified seven times. Ye would reduce these things to your practice, and seek
to have the Word of God to be found that which it is called in your experience.
But that which I intended to have insisted upon, is to leave a sad check upon
the generality of you that see so little of God in your Bible. Something has
been said to hold forth the Divine Authority of the Scriptures; but I confess
it is but a spilt commendation that has been given this word: yea, it fears me,
more has been said, than even ye that have Bibles discern. O, will ye consider
how men of old have experienced the Divinity of this word, and have found it to
be of God, and have fallen down and confessed, worshipping God, saying, God is
in you of a truth, 1 Cor. 14.25. All the fores that Christianity now has, do
not contribute to make the Word so successful as it has been in times of
persecution, wherefore it is so soon passed from by many in times of trial,
because the Divine Authority thereof is not stamped on hearts, and God is not
made use of and employed to write it upon the heart. Let this be looked upon
partly as the practical use of what ye have heard, partly to excite you to
bless God ye have this Word: Ye are not behind, so long as ye have your Bibles,
though ye were straightened in many other things; and partly to humble you, that
ye may blush and be ashamed, that the Divine virtue and efficacy that wont to
accompany the Scriptures, is so little found in this generation, and upon your
hearts.

SERMON XXIX.
Psalm 130. Verse 5. -- And in his Word do I hope.
WAiting for God being the great and trying task of of the godly man, as ye
have heard, who afterhend his wrestling with the deeps of difficulties, and
with insupportable pressures of guilt, must learn also by patient waiting for
God, to wrestle with delays to the answers of Prayer, or the longed for outgate
prayed for, whether as to issue, or comfort: These that are put to this trying
task, and seriously engaged in it, had need to be well supported, that they may
bide it out till they meet with the end of the Lord. This is it which I am now
upon in these words, wherein the Psalmist, after that he has profes^ he is
waiting, waiting for the Lord, and that his soul does wait; he adds in the next
place an account of his support in waiting, that therefore he waited, because
he hoped in the Word of God, I wait, etc.

I have spoken already to the first general Doctrine in these words, that
patient waiting on God cannot be gotten cherisht without the exercise of Faith
and Hope; no man can say, I wait for the Lord, my soul does wait, but he that
can say, he hopes and trusts in God. I wait, (says he) because I hope. I have
also near put a close to what I would say from the second general Obervation,
to wit, that this Faith and Hope that supports the patient waiter for God, that
sends the believer, and carries him through in waiting for God, till the outgate
come, must take the Word for its ground and measure; I wait, because I hope,
and hope, because I have the Word of God for the ground of my hope. Ye may
remember, that from this I have spoken to these three (which I wish may not
evanish with the Preaching.) 1. That really needy Saints, put to wait for God,
and in waiting for him, put to live by Faith and Hope, will be much conversant
with the Word of God; they must learn to be acquaint with the Scriptures, to
know what is there for their direction, or encouragement, or both. 2. That
these who would wait for God in the way of believing and hoping, must learn to
judge of things according to the Word, and be determined by the Word, that it
may be the ground of Faith, and beget Hope, otherwise it will be to little
purpose for a man to be acquaint with the Scriptures from end to end, if he
improve it not, but starve beside his allowance. And 3. For this end such as
are put to wait for God, and to have their encouragement from the Word; that
they may lean weight upon it, they would be fixed in this Principle, that the
Word of God is of Divine Authority, and infallible certainty; they would
believe and hope in in it as Gods Word, In his Word do I hope. And as the day
before I pressed upon you the use of your Bibles, that ye might be better
acquainted with them, and with the grounds of your Faith and Hope therein
contained; so the last day I insisted long to give you a right impression of
the Bible, that it is the Word of God, and of Divine Authority; the Historical
verity whereof being granted, which cannot rationally be denied, the Scriptures
will prove themselves to be of Divine Authority; and I would now entreat you to
study these two Sermons well, that ye may have the Divine Authority of the
Scriptures fixed upon your hearts, that ye may lay weight on them, feed on them,
and converse with them with more delight: And then what shall I say for the
need of proofs for the Divine Authority of the Scriptures, when the efficacy of
it upon your hearts shall be a proof thereof, as the effects and success of it
of old is a standing Witness, that it is not the word of man, but the Word of
God, that works effectually in them that believe.

I proceed now to a 4 thing which I have yet to add, and that is to put the two
Points together, Faith and Hope, and hoping in his word; That since we have the
Scriptures, and since the Scriptures are of Divine Authority, we would put
forth Faith and Hope to feed upon that which is contained there; Faith to
believe, and Hope to look for all that we find in so divine and sure a word,
and that I may make something out of this (and so have done with this Verse) I
shall hint at some things distinctly required, both to Faith and Hope.

And 1. For Faith, the Apostle tells, Heb. 11.1. That faith is the substance of
things hoped for. The word ((...)) properly signifies, that it is the
subsistence of things hoped for; Things hoped for being held forth in the Word,
Faith gives them a subsistence, before they exist in themselves, which is not
to be understood absolutely, for it is in the Promises of God, revealing the
purposes he has concerning these things, and the Power of God effectuating
them, that gives them an absolute subsistence before they be; Faith gives them
a subsistence instrumentally and relatively, while it leads the believer to
close with the Promises, wherein those things subsists, and while it gives them
a subsistence in the heart of the believing man. Now this subsistence Faith
gives to things promised two ways. 1. More absolutely, while Faith enables the
believing man, to look on whatever God has promised, as no less certain than
if it were in his hand, like these that reckon their riches, not so much by
their present stock, or that which they have in their hands, as by what they
have owing them by Bonds of responsal Debitors. So the Believer reckons God's
Promises as so many Bonds, making the things promised as sure, as if they were
in his hands, and this had need to be looked to by us; for I know not if every
man that has the Promises among his hands puts forth his Faith vigorously to
believe them; a man may have the Promises, and not contradict them, nor doubt
of them, while he lets them ly by him, and does not rouse up his Faith to
actual exercise in closing with them, and resting upon them; and when folks are
not actually doubting, Christ finds it necessary to rouse up and quicken them
actually to believe, as Mark 11.22. Have faith in God, (says he to the
Disciples) look that your Faith be on foot, and in exercise, that ye take not
the Promises lying by you, without contradicting them for Faith, but rouse it
up to improve them: and Joh. 11.25. When Christ is holding out precious
Promise^ to Martha, That he is the resurrection and the life; That he that
believes on him, though he were dead he shall live, he shall never die: He
finds it necessary to put her to it with this question, Believe thou this? I
suppose thou will not doubt of it, Martha; but is thy Faith quickened, and put
forth to exercise, on what I have said to thee, actually to close with it and
rest upon it, as the true and faithful sayings of God?

But 2. Faith gives things a subsistence, not only by way of contemplation in
bringing the Believer to believe they are true, but by way of application to
himself; that is, it so gives a Subsistence to them, as the believing man gets
the substance of them (as the word is Translated in that forecited place, Heb.
11.1.) for his present use, comfort and encouragement, till the performance
come: It gives them a subsistence, when the substance of the things promised is
made out to the believer, as if they were performed: ye use to account them
dyvors and spend christ's that forenail their rent continually; but Faiths
virtue stands in forenailing, yet without diminishing the things promised; the
believer suspends not all the things in the Promises till he get them in his
hand the being of the Promise is a foundation to him, and Faith brings in the
substance of the thing promised, 1 Pet. 1.8. Though he see not Christ, yet
believing, he rejoices with joy unspeakable and full of glory: and it is a
notable word which ye have, Joh. 3.36. He that believes on the Son has
everlasting life. He is not a man only that shall have everlasting life but he
has it already in several respects, in right and tittle and in the first
fruits; his very believing puts him in a begun possession of everlasting life;
this is the unknown Art of the Life of Faith, that it fetches its food from far
to him that has it, it brings the first fruits of the promised Land, to the
wanderer in the wilderness, a cluster of Grapes from the brook Escol, to the
barren desert; it mounts up with wings as Eagles, to bring down life and
quickening to our creeping and wrestling motions here below.

Thus ye have a very brief hint of Faith, of that Faith whereby ye are to live
and feed on what is in the Word of Promise, though it be not accomplished. I
shall only give you one instance of it, which may discover to many, how little
they know of this Act of living by Faith, closing with the Promise, and feeding
on it ere the performance come. The instance is that of the Patriarchs, who
lived before Christ's Exhibition in the flesh, look upon it in Abraham, of whom
it is said, Joh. 8.56. He rejoiced, or (as the word will bear) he skipped for
joy to see Christ's day, and he saw it, and was glad; whether he saw it in the
Promises only, or generally in the Sacrifices also, or particularly in that
Providence of the Ram, put in his hand to offer up in stead of his Son Isaak,
Genesis 22.13. It is all a matter, he got such a sight of Christ in those, and so
closed with the thing Promised that he skipped for joy. And the like instances
we have given of all the Patriarchs in that word, Heb. 11.13. (which may make
many blush when they read it) These all (says the Apostle) died in faith; They
were not content merely to have a life of Faith, but they died in faith, not
having received the promises; or though they received not the things promised.
But what did they? Having seen them a far off (to wit in the Promises, and in
the Types illustrating them) What more? They were persuaded of them (the first
thing I said before of Faiths giving a subsistence to things hoped for; and
what more?) They embraced them, they hugged them, and what more? They confessed
they were pilgrims, or strangers on the earth; They saw as much by Faith in the
Promises, which were not to be accomplished in all their lifetime, as made them
up, and made them to confess that they were pilgrims here; Try your selves by
these measures, and see what ye have won to, like this Faith; believing and
putting forth Faith to exercise, feeding on, and fending by Faith in the word
of Promise.

In the next place, I shall speak somewhat to hoping in his word; The term in
the Text is, In his word do I hope; as Faith gives subsistence to things
promised, and does not suspend all benefit and use of the Promises until they
be performed; So hope looks out for the actual accomplishment and performance
of the Promises. A Saint believing the Word, and feeding on that which Faith
gives a subsistence to in the word, he looks out by hope for the accomplishment
of that which it finds to subsist in the word.

I shall deduce this as briefly as I can, (and leave this Note and the Verse)
in these two, 1. Remember, that true Believers wealth lies in hope, or things
before their hand; They have no existence but in the word of promise; The
first, or at least a very conspicuous mark of an adopted Child of God is, that
he is put to his Hopes; to his Too-looks, and to live that way; he that 1 John
3.2. can say, I am a son of God, and it does not appear what I shall be, but
when he appears, I shall be like him, for I shall see him as he is: Must add in
the 3. verse, He that has this hope in him must purify himself, etc. He that
according to Gods abundant mercy is begotten again, is begotten unto a lively
hope. His Regeneration breaths out Hope, because his happiness is before his
hand, 1 Pet. 1.3. And beside his too-looks to issues here that he holds by
hope, his great too-look is his Hope, which is laid up for him in Heaven, Col.
1.5. and in that forecited place, 1 Pet. 1.3. He that is begotten again unto a
lively hope by the resurrection of Christ from the dead; it is to the hope of
an inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, that fades not away, reserved for
him in Heaven; his great hope is, the hope of eternal life, which God that
cannot lie, promised before the world began, Tit. 1.2. His hope is a hope set
before him, Heb. 6.18. Now a Believers wealth lies in things before his hand,
or the Saints portion lies in their hopes and too-looks, because God is
reserving their happiness for the fittest place and season, he will have them
brought where their happiness is, before he give them the wealth he has
promised; because neither could they be capable of it, nor guide it here: and
while he suspends their Hope, he does them good by holding them waiting,
looking out, and pursuing for these things promised; a pursuers life being the
best life.

2. As the great portion of the Saints is before their hand, so their great
work lies in the exercise of Hope; It is not enough for a saint to be begotten
again to a lively hope of an inheritance, incorruptible, undefiled, and that
fades not away, reserved for him in heaven; but he must be putting out his Hope
to feed upon it, to look and long for it. If ye consider Negatively, what a
saint is without hope, in reference to temporal issues. David will tell you in
that Psalm. 27.13. I had fainted, unless I had believed to see the goodness of
the Lord in the land of the living; if my hope had failed me, I had been
undone, and in reference to Eternity, Paul tells us, 1 Cor. 15.19. If in this
life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men the most miserable; which
may be understood both of things hoped for, and of the Grace of Hope looking
for them; and hence Heb. 6.19. Hope, is called, the anchor of the soul, sure
and steadfast, entering into that within the vail, to assure us, that if hope be
not exercised, storms will drive a tossed soul, and make it run the hazard of
shipwreck; but hope, the souls anchor, cast upon good ground, drives not, and
preserves the soul from ruin. Hence also, Ephesians. 6.17. Hope, is called, the
helmet of salvation, because it is that which keeps off many a deadly stroke
off a saint. The head being the seat of the senses, especially of the judgment
and memory; If a man keep his head, and a bit about his heart well, there is
the less hazard of wounds in other places of his body, that they prove deadly.
Now Hope is an Helmet to keep the head. And as considering Negatively, what a
saint is without hope, we will find great need of the exercise of hope. So look
on it positively; hope exercised and kept at work, brings in many noble
advantages to the soul, as I said of the man that is a Believer, so may I say
of him that is a hoper indeed; O what a made up man is he, he may say, I will
wait, because I hope in his word; he is a great gainer by Tribulation, and may
glory in it, when tribulation works patience, and patience experience, and
experience hope, and hope makes not ashamed, Romans 5.3. -- Ye have it
recommended, Romans 12.12. To rejoice in hope, and that will produce patience in
tribulation, and continuing instant in Prayer; hope exercised, makes patience
and prayer to thrive well, and a man to go on in his way, not heartlesly, but
rejoicing. And Heb. 3.6. We are bidden hold fast our confidence, and the
rejoicing of hope firm unto the end: and what shall I say of them, Heb. 10.34.
who not only sympathised with others in affliction, but took joyfully the
spoiling of their goods; Why? knowing in themselves that they had in heaven a
better and an enduring substance, they had the hope of a better Treasure.

From all that has been said on this, let me exhort you, who have been put,
and may yet more be put to it, To wait for God, to study to be better acquaint
with your Bibles, to believe the divine Authority of the Scriptures, and on
that account, to put forth your Faith and Hope to exercise upon the Scriptures,
that ye may feed on the Promises by Faith, and rejoice in hope of the
accomplishment of them; that will make you patient in tribulation and to
continue instant in prayer: And for a close of all that has been said to you
on this matter; would ye know what ye are doing in this exercise of Hope, in
your waiting for God, or the good things be has promised; or what Characters
ye have of it, I shall only desire you to look to these three;

1. Look to Hopes langour, if ye be waiting for God, and if your waiting be an
affectionat waiting, if your soul be waiting and looking out in hope to that
great and ultimat hope of Believers; try what languor is in thy affection for
the marriage day, What languor thou have to see how the Crown and the Robe will
set thee, to see God as he is, to see God incarnat in thy own nature, to see
the Lamb, and to follow him wherever he goes, and to be made like him. Try what
there is of warmness of affection longing without fretfulness, haste, or
passion upon the one hand, and careless indifferency and stupidity upon the
other, that is a good sign of a lively hope, when thy affection is kept warm
in waiting for the things promised; Art thou saved by hope, then with the whole
Creation thou will be groaning waiting for the Adoption, to wit, the Redemption
of thy body, Romans 8.23. -- Thou will be looking for, and hastening unto the
coming of the day of the Lord, 2 Pet. 3*13.

And 2 Thou that would look to thy Hope, and have it of the right stamp, see
what purging virtue is in it, look if thy languor resolves in thy study of the
increase of Sanctification, that thou may be ripened and fitted for the
issue that thou art looking out for, 1 John 3.3. He that has this hope in him
purifieth himself, even as he is pure. And 2 Pet. 3.11 ^eing all these things
shall he dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy
conversation and godliness, looking for, and basting unto, etc. Tit. 2.13. The
grace of God that brings salvation, teaches us, that denying ungodliness and
wordly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously and godly in this present
world, looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great
God, and our Savior. And Phil. 3.20. Our conversation is in heaven, from
whence also we look for a Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our
vile body, etc. There is a Character of a lively hope, a Touchstone of true
languor, when thy hope bids thee haste to ripen fast for that thou hopest for,
that thou may be like Enoch, walking with God, and who was not, for God took
him; Genesis 5.24. That thy grace may be increased, till grace take needfire in
glory.

And 3. Thou that would look to thy hope, see what mortification is in thy
hope, what thou can submit to want and be weaned from, upon the account of thy
hope; that has been the practice of Saints in reference to out-gates hereaway,
To study mortification, see it in David, while enemies sought his life, and
laid snares for him, spoke mischievous things, and imagined devices all the day
long; he was as a deaf man that heard not, and as a dumb man that opened not
his mouth, to all the injuries done or devised against him. Why? In the Lord
did he hope, and believed that he would hear him, Psalm. 38.12. And in reference
to a man's everlasting happiness, this also would be his study, 1 Pet. 1.
compare the 3, 4, and 5. Verses, with the 6. Ye are begotten again unto a
lively hope, to an inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, that fades not away,
reserved in the heaven for you, who are kept through the power of God to
salvation, through faith, ready to be revealed in the last time; wherein ye
greatly rejoice, though now for a season, if need be ye are in heaviness,
through manifold tentations. In a word, ye that are hopers in God, look well to
these three, what warmness of affection and languor is in your hope, for the
things promised, look what endeavors are to be prepared and fitted for them;
and what mortification to the things in time, upon the account of the great
happiness ye expect when time is gone, and your hopes shall be fulfilled, and
made out to you.

SERMON XXX.
Psalm 130.6. My soul waits for the Lord, more than they that watch for the
morning, I say, more than they that watch for the morning.
I Have now (as ye have heard) gone through several Heads upon this Branch of
the Psalmists wrestling, and grapling with delays of comfort, or an out-gate,
even when he is crying to God under trouble, and making a right use of
discovered sin, and its ill deserving, wherein somewhat has been spoken to
these four; 1. His exercise, He is waiting. 2. The Object of this his exercise,
He waits for the Lord. 3. His affection in this exercise* his soul is waiting.
4. His support in this exercise, he waits for the Lord, his soul does wait,
because he hopes in his word; I shall not repeat what has been spoken to these.

I come now to the 5. and last Head of this wrestling, contained in the sixth
Verse, wherein he gives an account of the measure of his affection in waiting;
He has said in the preceding Verse, my soul waits for the Lord; and now it
does not suffice him to repeat that, but will tell what measure of affection he
had in that waiting, and he sets it out in comparison of them that watch for
the morning; and says, that his soul waited more instantly and affectionatly
for God, than they did for the morning light; Who these are that watch for the
morning, it is not very necessar to determine. It was the lot of Shepherds, see
Luke 2.8. They watched all night over their flocks; and Jacob, Genesis 31.40.
Tells us, That in keeping Labans flocks, the drought consumed him by day, and
the frost by night, and his sleep departed from his eyes; and these shepherds,
especially, when they had cold and stormy nights, would think long for the
break of day, the light whereof would be comfortable to them, and refresh them
again; there were Travelers in those deserts, that bordered on the Land of
Canaan, who wanted the accommodations of Inns by the way, who were forced to
lodge abroad in the fields: and these considering the uncomfortableness of the
dark night, especially if stormy, and the hazard they were in by Arabian
Thieves and Robbers, they would long for the day light. And besides, these in
Wars, they had their Sentinels and Perdeus for watching, and those of them
especially whom they set nearest the Enemy, lying nearest the hazard in the
dark night, and being there alone, especially if the Season was stormy; How
instantly and eagerly would they long for the morning light, that they might be
relieved, whether the allusion be to one or all of these, or to somewhat else,
we shall not determine. The Psalmist fears not to assert his Soul in waiting
for God, is more earnest and ardent than any of these; my soul waits for the
Lord, more than they that watch for the morning. And lest any should think he
had overreached in so saying, he will repeat it, I say more, etc.

The substance of this Verse, having occurred before on these words in the
preceding Verse, My soul does wait, where ye heard of the Psalmists affection
in waiting for God, and how necessary and comfortable it is, when the Saints
are right, to be able to reflect, and to give an account of what they are doing
in trouble; therefore I shall pass it with a few short Notes, partly from what
is alluded to here, partly from the Psalmists assertion of himself.

1. As to what is alluded to here, of these that wanted the nights rest, or
being in hazard, were put to look greedily out, and long for the morning light.
I shall give you what I would gather from it, in these three.

1. Ye may here read the hard and bitter toil, with which many of the sons of
men are exercised in time, so that in the night appointed by God for rest, they
are in a condition that puts them to long for the morning light, I shall not
speak of these, who Deuteronomy. 28.67. are so hard put to it, that in the morning
they wish it were even, and at even they wish it were morning; but setting that
aside, many of the Children of men are put to very hard and bitter toil, as
Soldiers, Travelers through deserts, Ship-beaten men at Sea in Storms;
Shepherds in these beforementioned Countries, many are so toiled, that their
great expectation is to look out for an end of it. And what toil are many up
and down the Land, and it may be among your selves put unto for a present
throw-bearing, ye know it better than I can lay it before you; I mark it, that
others that have an easier lot, may be excited to prize that mercy.
Coffeehouse is a Viper that sucks poison out of the best lots that befall the
Children of men. How many can ly down and rise at their convenience, exempted
from the toil and bondage, that the generality of men are exposed unto; and yet
if ye will seek for contentment, ye will not readily find it amongst them that
have the best accommodations, ye will find men that have but very sober fare and
apparel, and much labor and toil to win at it, for contentment to exceed them
that fare deliciously and sumptuously, and wear fine apparel, and what is that
but a curse upon them from God for their ingratitude, a plague accompanying
them, and what they have; who consider not what toil others are put unto ^or
their little, and who have contentment in it, and yet they are not satisfied
with their abundance: And much more does it speak sadly to them, who when God
affords them more ease and rest, than he does others, will not take ease, but
weary themselves to commit iniquity, who will bereave themselves of rest, not
because they cannot get it, but because they will not take it when it is given
them; but either in their imaginations or practice, weary themselves to commit
iniquity, as the word is, Jer. 9.5. And partly from this toil, the children of
men are put into; I would press upon them, who experience this toil, to
consider what a poor bargain they make, when having such toil and labor here,
labor not to secure that rest which abides the people of God. I confess I may
say to them that have ease and good accommodations, that with Heaven and
everlasting Life, is very fair; and I shall add, more than condition, for the
Spirit of God has forwarned us to lay our account, that through much
tribulation we must enter into the kingdom of God: But shall I lay to poor
miserable bodies, that toil out their life for the bit and the brat (as ye use
to say) That and Hell too is very sad, That and Everlasting Perdition is most
dreadful. There is something to say when a rich glutton slips from his
sumptuous fare and fine clothing, down to the pit, Son, (says Abraham)
remember that thou in thy lifetime received thy good things, and now thou art
tormented. But for a poor miserable wretch that time never smiled upon, that
was pudled in the earth, and never got up his back, in fending for his daily
bread, and yet he gets Hell in end, that will be a Hell in the bosom of Hell,
that such a wretch understood not the language of providence toward him.

But a 2d word I take from that which is alluded unto here, and that is, That
the satisfaction of the sons of men in time, is generally, if not constantly
before their hand, like these poor men alluded to here, whatever be their lot
in the dark night, that which they would be at, is the morning light. I need
not astrict this to folk that are in toil and misery; take me the rich fool and
his full Barns, it is not that which he has in his hands at present, but his
expectation of many years to come, that is his satisfaction, Luke 12.19. Be thy
felicity what it will, as to earthly enjoyments, consult thy Conscience, and it
will tell thee, that it does not satisfy, by drinking at these Puddles, thou
but augments thy thirst, still thy satisfaction is before thy hand, and in
nothing thou possesses; I mean not now of them that have placed their
satisfaction in God, but of those that are seeking satisfaction in
creature comforts: Have what thou will, it will not satisfy, when thou have
gotten such a thing as thou would have had, thou must still have another; and
when thou have gotten that, thou must have more of it: Hence the mind of man,
when it is not centered on God, is still lusting and expecting satisfaction in
this and that, in something it wants. This Note preaches to all sorts of folk;
it is a document to them that are in a mean condition, and think, O were they
the length of other folk, and had that which they want, and others have, then
they would be well, and at ease: But consider thou, that these who have gotten
these things, and have not gotten God with them, never attained to
satisfaction; and though thou had them, and have not God with them, where art
thou for satisfaction? thy Straw-Pad, and their Down-Bed, are alike for giving
satisfaction, and it may be thine, is the softest of the two; and art not thou
a fool then in placing satisfaction in these things, when they that have them,
are as far from satisfaction as thou art; and it may be further; thou art like
the Bairn, who thinks, that if he were at the Hill head, he would be at the Sun
when it is going down; but when he is at the head of the Hill, he is as far
from satisfaction as he was; so it is with thee who art in a mean condition,
and thinks thou would be satisfied if thy lot were like others. It may be also
a document to discontented folk, that have (if they consider) what they would
be at, and yet it will not satisfy; if they consider that they are creatures,
and things of time, what means these dissatisfactions, discontents, and
to-looks to many things in the midst of enjoyments? Certainly upon this hand
it is a dreadful Preaching of an unmortified mind. O what a vast bottomless Gulf
is an unmortified mind? It Is like Hell and the Grave, that never have enough.
And O that many would seek out the guilt that is in their dissatisfaction,
lament their discontents, and mourn over their abuse of rich allowances, the
Crumbs whereof would be gathered up as a mercy by many, rather than be restless
for more, which being had would not satisfy. And upon the other hand, it is a
Proclamation to all, that happiness is not here; have what thou will, project
or get what thou will, thou will drink all these puddles dry; suppose thou had
all the profits, pleasures and preferments in the Universe, they will not
satisfy nor quench thy thirst after more. Why? God by the vanity of what thou
seeks after, is proclaiming that thy happiness is elsewhere. And as I said to
them that are put to toil, and kept low, though they had the things that others
have, they will not satisfy without God. So I repeat it to them that have many
things to enjoy, and have no satisfaction in them, and yet will not sift their
minds, to see if that be in God which they seek and miss in Creatures, they
shall never have satisfaction that is in him only, which will satisfy and hold
in thy mind from running out on many things.

And to press this further, I shall give you a third word from that which is
supposed here, that is, that change as a man will in time, he will find any
change still insignificant. The weary Shepherds in the night might long for the
day, but they behoved not to be careless in the day when it came, otherways
some mischance might befall the Flock. These Travelers in those Deserts, might
think the day sweet, in comparison of the dark night, and yet they might be set
on by Arabian Robbers in the day, as well as in the night. The Sentinel
Pardiu's, when they were relieved from off the Watch by night, knew not but
they might lose their life in Battle in the day: So that for as eager as men
are for changes in time, change as men will in time, they will find any change
they meet with in time still insignificant; and this is worth our
consideration, as Solomon says, Eccles. 6.10. That which has been is known
already to be man. Change as we will, we will not get out of time, and so will
not be free of vanity, if we seek an happiness in time; let a man shift as he
will in time, if he carry himself with him, he will carry his Cross with him,
he will carry his unmortified mind, though he were in a Paradise of Pleasure,
that will create a Cross to him; Why? He is but still in time, and there will
be dissatisfaction attending any change to that man that seeks a happiness in
time. I shall say no more of this, but were it well studied, it would cut short
many of our anxious expectations, it would bring us to that which Solomon has,
Eccles. 2.20. (though I will not say to Solomon's sense) that he went about to
cause his heart despair of all the labor which he took under the Sun, it would
make a man ^^ne hope of satisfaction in any change or lot, and discover unto
him that he will never find it, if it be not in God; and therefore whatever his
case be, and whatever he do as to duty, to be better, he would labor to find
his present condition an out-gate; he would think with himself it is but time,
and change as I will, I may be worse, and therefore it is my best, if I can, to
clout up my present condition with the least dissatisfaction may be win at, and
he that does so has made a good bargain: Why? Shift as he will while he is in
time, he will find Wormood in his Cup, and a Worm at the root of his Gourd,
which will mar his satisfaction. So much to be gathered from that which is
alluded to here.

I shall in the next place (having spoken to the substance of the matter on the
fifth Verse, except what relates to the measure of his affection in waiting)
give you what the Psalmist proposes here in three words, and go briefly through
them, if the Lord will.

And 1. See here that the Children of God can never be sure enough that they
have that blessed measure of patience and affection in waiting for God, that they
are free of passion, haste, bitterness, and fretfulness upon the one hand, and
carelessness, indifferency, and stupidity on the other, and yet have their
affections engaged, and set on that they are waiting for. It is not easy, I
say, to win to this, and folks can never be sure enough that they are in such a
temper, and therefore the Psalmist having said, v. 5. that he waits for God,
his soul waits; he repeats it again in this verse. as a thing that he would be
sure of. The ground of this is, that it is hard to keep off one of these
extremes I named before, in waiting for God: either a man is ready to turn
passionate, furious and fretful, or if he fall off that extreme, he is ready to
give way to loitering, to fall lazy, stupid and careless. The man that in
waiting is not hasty, and yet not careless, that is affectionate, and yet not
stupid, is a rare man; and therefore they that took upon the Saints waiting for
God as an easy task, they that sleep in, or slip in it without difficulty,
they would look well to it, that any waiting they have be not a cheat. The
Psalmist here finds it needful to look again and again, and make it sure, that
he is waiting.

A 2d. Note I give you from that proposed here, that the affection of the
patient man in waiting for God, should be in some sort suitable to the
excellency of the thing he waits for, and suitable to his need of it. The
Psalmist contents not himself, to say he is waiting, and that his soul is
waiting, that his affection in waiting is not asleep, but he asserts, that his
affection is screwed up in waiting, so that his affection in waiting for God,
does far transcend these that wait for the morning, and he bides by it* and
repeats it. Ye know how David speaks of his waiting, Psalm. 119.82. Mine eyes
fail for thy word, saying, when will thou comfort me? He looks out for God, as
one looks out for a person that they expect home, while he became bleared and
failed, and he looks upon that, as having a pathetick cry to God, saying, O,
when will thou comfort me? And Psalm. 123.2. Behold, as the eyes of servants
look unto the hands of their Masters, etc. How greedily and eagerly these
slaves looked for favor of them whom they served, so our eyes (say they) wait
on the Lord our God, until he have mercy on us. I say no more of this, but if
God be infinitely excellent, and if that which he brings with him be infinitely
excellent, above all other objects of out expectation, a creeping affection in
waiting for God, is but a proclaimed contempt of God. Thou thinks thou honors
God, by making many addresses to him; but where is thy suitable affection to
him, and that which thou waits for from him? Mal. 1.7. tells thee, that thou
offers polluted bread upon his altar, and says, his table is contemptible. A
man that waits not for God at all, speaks out what is in his heart, and that he
is a beast, and worse than a beast; but thou that pretends to wait for God, and
have no suitable affection to him in thy waiting, proclaims thy contempt of
him; thou waits for him, but thou would wait with more affection for the
poorest triffle thou would be at, or expect: And I shall add, that as waiting
for God would be with much affection, with affection suitable to his
excellency, so it would be suitable to thy need of him, and these things thou
waits for from him. Thou say, God is thy excellency, Jerusalem is thy chief
joy, the joy of the Lord is thy strength; but is thy affections suitable to thy
need of him, and his consolations? when, if thy comfort be suspended, if thou
can win at comfort in any other thing, thou waits not for him and his
consolation.

3ly. I shall add, that when affection is indeed aloft for God, there is no
hazard, no want of accommodation, that would pinch men so sore, as the want of
God will pinch a man that is set to enjoy God. The Psalmist, whose affection is
aloft, he waits more for God, than they that watch for the morning. I shall not
dip upon this, it is a mercy not to get leave to sleep, till folk be out of an
ill condition, when folks get no rest to the soles of their feet out of God.
And I wish them who want him, more disquietness, nor many loiterers have, till
they get to their feet, and seek for their Husband, and find him, and I wish
them no ill, while I pray for this to them. And I shall add, raised affection
for God; Who knows what a prognostic it might be of a sweet and comfortable
out-gate; and that such a souls song should be with the Psalmist here, Let
Israel hope, etc. Affectionat waiting for God, getting to the feet to run after
him; O! What a cloud might that be, like an hand-breadth at first, that will
cover the Sky, and at length bring abundance of rain? But want of affection
leaves folk in a woeful condition, to rot to dead. And I shall add, if affection
should be put out thus for God, and if want of God to an affectionat waiter be
a distress that pinsheth him above any hazard they are in, who are put to wait
for the morning: Then certainly the enjoyment of God, according to the measure
that a man does enjoy him should make him drink and forget his misery, and
remember his poverty no more: And the man that enjoys God, Though the fig tree
do not blossom and though there be no fruit in the vine, and the labor of the
olive fail, no meat in the fields, no flock in the folds, no herd in the stall.
Hab. 3.17. Though the earth be removed, and the mountains carried into the
midst of the sea, etc. Psalm. 46.2. He will be as far above the men of the world
in their enjoyments, as his affection while he wanted God, was above their
resentments. I shall go no further, God bless his word unto you.

SERMON XXXI.
Psalm 130. Verse 7. Let Israel hope in the Lord, for with the Lord there is
mercy, and with him there is plenteous redemption.

Verse 8 And he shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities.


YE may remember in the first six verses of this Psalm, we have the Psalmists
wrestling, which (as we showed you before) has three Branches; He has been
wrestling with difficulties, and plunging perplexities in his case, which are
represented under the notion of depths, in the first and second Verse, he has
been wrestling with the Conscience, and sense of Guilt, putting back his
Prayers, and offering to crush his hopes, and so interposing to obstruct his
success and access, verse 3, 4. and in the 5, and 6. he has been wrestling
with delays, either of comfort, or an out-gate, or both, and (notwithstanding
of all his hard exercise, in crying to God by Prayer in his trouble and
perplexity, in taking with the dreadful desert of guilt, and claiming to
pardoning mercy and forgiveness) he does therewith wrestle by patience and
hope. He waited on God, and that affectionatly; and his patience in waiting was
supported by hope in God, grounded on the Word of God.

Now in these two verses read, ye have the second part of the Psalm, containing
the Psalmists delivery, or victory; His delivery or victory is not expressly
asserted, but it is very sweetly employed in his improvement of the exercise he
has been under, and holding forth the good he has gotten; when it is well
with him, the issue he has gotten, he does not conceal it, nor only speak it
out, but he improves and lays it out for the good of God's Israel; when he
has got a sweet sight of the good of waiting and hoping in God, he conveens
them all, as it were, to come and write after his Copy, and encourages them to
hope in God, upon the account of mercy and pardon, and plenteous redemption;
and redeeming Israel from all his iniquities.

So the words contain first, an Exhortation to Israel, in the beginning of the
7. verse, Let Israel hope etc.

2. They contain motives and encouragements, pressing the exhortation, by way
of arguments, that this counsel should be hearkened unto; and these motives or
encouragements, are taken partly in the first place, from what is in God: In
the end of the 7. verse, Let Israel hope, etc. for with the Lord there is
mercy, etc. There is mercy and power, and authority in God, to bring redemption
to his people from all their sins and miseries. And the 2. Argument is taken
from this, that God will let out that mercy and redemption that is in him, for
the good of his people: Not only is there mercy and power with God, if he
please to let it out to redeem; but it is expressly asserted, that he will
redeem his people, verse 8. He shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities; a
promise which howsoever it be made out to Israel in all ages, yet it is
signally to be erified to the Jews in their Conversion in the latter days; for
the Apostle, Romans 11.26. adduces this promise out of Isai. 59.20. As it is
written, there shall come out of Zion the Deliverer, and shall turn away
ungodliness from Jacob; That is, that shall redeem Israel (as was hinted) from
all his iniquities.

To return to the Exhortation, Let Israel hope in the Lord; I have been (would
he say) assaying to hope in the Lord, and have found the good of it, for when I
was waiting for God, I was supported by hope in his Word, and now I have gotten
so good an account of my hope, that I dare recommend it from mine own
experience to all, and I have such a kindness to Israel, that any experience I
have gotten by waiting for God, and hoping in his Word; I will not hoord it up,
I will be no hookster of it, but recommend it to them as a common-good;
Therefore let Israel hope in the Lord.

That I may get somewhat dug out of the Treasure here, I shall reduce the
grounds of Observations to be gathered from this Exhortation, to four general
Heads.

1. I shall touch upon what is employed, and held out in the general scope of
these words.

2. I shall speak to the Duty recommended, and that is, Hope in the Lord.

3. I shall remark somewhat on the Recommender of this duty; it is the Psalmist
who had been trying Hope, and had found the good of it.

4. I shall add somewhat by way of reflection, on these to whom this Duty is
recommended, Let Israel hope; it is the Israel of God, among whom (as the word
is, Ezra 10.2.) there is hope concerning cases and lots, otherwise hopeless
and desperate.

1. For what is employed, and is the general scope of this Exhortation; I shall
(the Lord willing) deduce these two from it: 1. That the Psalmist is here
delivered, and is a victor, or has gotten some good account of his former
wrestling, waiting for God, and hoping in his word.

2. That the good account he has gotten, he communicats his experience of it
to the People of God.

1. I say, it is clear here, that if the Psalmist has not been actually
delivered from all his pressures; yet he has gotten so comfortable an account
of his hoping in God, that he dare from his experience recommend it to others
to hope in him; he bears witness of the great good to be reaped by hoping in
God. The Observation then is, That there will be a blessed account of all the
exercises of the Saints, and particularly of their waiting for God, and hoping
in his Word. The Psalmist essayed it here, and is able to give a good account
of it. This Point imports in the first place, That real needy Saints have many
errands to God, they are never out of his mister, and holden going to him,
which is a very enriching Trade, though it be not always pleasing and
satisfying to their flesh.

2. It supposes this, that as they have much ado with God, so they are very
earnest, till they get a good account of what ever it be they are waiting for
from him, they are not such as can cry out of the depths, and be indifferent,
whether they get a hearing, fall asleep, or turn stupid, but their pressures ly
so sore upon them, that they cannot be laid by and worn out with time, but they
must have access, and a good account of their suits.

And 3. As the point supposes these two; so it proposes that there will be a
good account gotten of all their exercises, and particularly of their waiting
for God, and hoping in his Word, their exercises are not lost labor; The Lord
bids them open their mouth wide, and he will fill it, Psalm. 81.10. When he bids
his people seek him, he can appeal to malice it self, to instruct, if ever he
bade them seek him in vain, Isai. 45.19. If he put poor Job to exercise
patience, he will make the world see the end of the Lord, that he is very
pitiful, and of tender mercy, Jam. 5.11. He has made it out in the manifold
experience of all his Saints, that that song, Psalm. 5.8. ult. Was and is still
abiding them, verily there is a reward for the righteous, a God that judges in
the earth. I might prove it further from the whole Book of Psalms, wherein what
ever sad exercise the Psalmist has been put unto, in the beginning or progress
of these Psalms, for the most part they all close comfortably with some sweet
word, intimating an issue and victory. And whereas ye find Heman Psalm. 88.
Closing sadly, yet ye will find him. 1 Kings 4.30, Put in among these great
wits, and understanding persons in his time.

But leaving all these, I shall give you these three words of Confirmation of
this Observation.

And 1. I say, they are all living that died in waiting on God, and hoping in
his word; I dare not say, that they were not affrighted, or that they were not
humbled, but they are living that died in that way of waiting on him. Gather
all Believers together, that have been from the beginning of the world, ye will
not find among them all, a Saint that has perished in this attempt, in waiting
for God by Faith and Hope.

2. Though the saints have been affrighted, and humbled, yet many a blessed
disappointment have exercised saints met with, and will meet with of their
fears and perplexing thoughts. It is no strange thing to hear the waiting man
say, I am cut off; and yet meeting with a blessed beguile, Ps. 31.22. I said, I
am cut off from before thine eyes, nevertheless thou heardest the voice of my
supplication, etc. The answer of my prayers, gave sense and suggestion the lie.
Nay, it is no wonder that flesh tempted, tempt the waiting man, to say, all men
are liars. So says the Psalmist, Psalm. 116.11. But see and hear him, verse 12.
What shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits toward me. Behold a man
casting the Bible, and all the Promises at the one bout, and at the next,
nonpluss'd with a burden of benefits and mercies.

3. I shall say this, that though exercised saints, and waiters on God have
essayed, and may essay many means in vain, as to any present success, yet that
proves not their case to be hopeless. The Bride, Cant. 3.1, 2, 3. Seeks her
beloved on the bed, in the streets, and broad-ways, and at the watchmen, in
all the means, and finds him not; yet when she went a little further, she found
him. Though the waiter for God has assayed all the means, without sensible
success, he is not to tine hope for all that, but to essay them again, we may
find that in the second essay, which we found not in the first.

For Use, If it be so then, that there will be a blessed account of all the
exercises of Saints, and particularly of their waiting for God; I would
enquire, who they are among you. 1. Who have any thing of this account to bring
forth to God's commendation? There may be a woeful generation taking up that
desperate Note, that ye have Mal. 3.14, 15. Who say, it is in vain to serve God,
and what profit is it, that we have kept his ordinances, and that we have
walked mournfully, etc. And like these, Isai. 58.3. Who say, Wherefore have we
fasted, and thou see not? and wherefore have we afflicted our soul? etc. But
have thou any thing to say for God, to refute that? Can thou say, It is good
for me to draw near to God, to wait upon him, I have not sought him in vain;
let the song fall on whose side it will, it shall not fall on my side, I will
keep it up to his commendation, I will sing, and say, that his Name endures for
ever; I was brought low, and he helped me, I sought the Lord, and he heard me,
and delivered me from all my fears, Psalm. 34.4, 6. Blessed are they who have so
good a report to bring upon God; who can bear witness for him, to show that the
Lord is upright, He is their Rock, and there is no unrighteousness in him,
Psalm. 92.15. But 2. Thou that have not found this, thou art waiting on God in
the use of the means; but thou have little to say to the commendation of God,
of hoping in him; will thou believe that there shall be a good account of all
thy exercise in waiting, believe that thou shall not for ever return ashamed,
that there will be an end of the Lord, and a good end, that thy expectation
shall not perish for ever, that though thou be laid in the grave with crushing,
thy dead men shall live, there shall be an end, and thy expectation shall not
be cut off; take the exhortation, that word to Mary, Luke 1.45. Blessed is she
that believes, for there shall be a performance of these things, which were
told her from the Lord. Thou that art running to God, and waiting on him, for
an issue of thy pressures, and sees no appearance of the day breaking, but
rather that the night grows darker, do not think that it will be ay so. Do
not follow out thy work and task, as a hopeless undertaking; follow not Christ
as Thomas did, to die with him, but sow in hope; expect that he that has
opened thy mouth wide will fill it, and not with an empy spoon, only do not
mistake while thou art holden at work; needful exercise is still requisite,
which will come in afterward, when I speak to the exercise of Faith and Hope;
and therefore here I shall leave it, and proceed to the next thing which I
marked, as employed.

2. When the Psalmist has got a breathing, and good account of his hope, he is
very communicative of it, he poures it out in Isreal's bosom: That which I mark
from it is, That the exercises and out-gates of the Saints, when they are
blessed of God to them, they make them very public minded; when the Lord drops
out any good thing to them, they would fain deal about them, for the good of
Gods people, and make many sharers in it. Ye know there is a Communion of
Saints, it is an Article of our Creed, it is a communion and intercourse, such
as is betwixt the members of the body, that when one member suffers, all the
members suffer with it, and when one rejoices, all rejoice with it; What one
has, is (at least should be) communicate for the good of the rest, and of the
whole body; and I might add, it is a sad thing when the duties of the communion
of Saints must be looked on as a crime, and transgression: But that which I am
now upon is, That this communion of Saints will be improved by all, who are
lively, and who are blessed of God, in their exercises and out-gates, as we may
see the Psalmist here, what good he has gotten by waiting on God, he
communicats it to Israel. I may confirm this two ways, 1. We find in Scripture,
when the people of God are in trouble themselves, they are never so throng
about their own case, or so taken up with themselves, but they have spare time
for the case of the Church, or others who are in the same or like exercise; If
our blessed Lord suffered being tempted, that he might succor them who are
tempted, Heb. 2.18. Then the saints when they are under tentation, pressures
and hard exercise, will find that to be a call to them, to have a large and
tender heart toward others, under the same exercise; yea to bring in the
pressures of all that are about them, as ye may see in that holy man, Psalm.
102. what a hard exercise he is under, from the beginning of the Psalm to verse
12, 13, and 14. -- Ye will find the blessed improvement of this I am upon, thou
shall arise and have mercy upon Sion, for the time to favor her, yea, the set
time is come, for thy servants take pleasure in her stones, and favor the
dust, etc. All that he has to do within doors, though his days be consumed
like smoke, his bons brunt as an hearth, his heart smitten and withered as
grass, his bones cleaving to his Skin; though he be like a P^lican in the
wilderness, and an owl in the desert (as in that 102 Psalm) yet all that
hinders him not to cry, That God would arise and have mercy upon Sion, but
rather excites him.

And a 2d Confirmation of the Point, I take from Scripture Precepts and
examples, that press us to communicate what good we get of God, to others for
their good, Luke 22.32. When Christ has told Peter of his fall and recovery,
he subjoyns to that: When thou art converted, strenthen thy brethren: And whosoever
will read, Psalm. 32.6. and the Verses following. Psalm. 66.16. -- They will
find, that the Psalmist, when ever he has gotten a proof of Gods goodness to
himself, he is very careful to communicate it to others, in direction,
instruction, encouragement, or comfort, according as God has communicate it to
him; I shall say no more from this, but let it condemn the selfish Disposition
of many, who being in trouble, the whole bensil of their Spirit is little
enough for themselves, and they have no inlet for the griefs and pressures of
others, and if it be well with them, if they be delivered, they are far from
remembering Joseph in Prison: They do not endeavor this publick-mindedness, to
communicate their experience for others good; such selfish frames provock God to
give folk humbling exercises, to learn them to be public minded. Now I have
done with the first general Head of the Doctrine, employed in the Exhortation,
Let Israel hope, etc.

I proceed in the 2d place, to the matter of the Exhortation, or the Duty
recommended, that is, to hope in the Lord, to exercise Faith and hope in God;
of this, ye may remember, I have been speaking at some length upon the 5. verse
before, which may save me a labor of insisting much on it now. But this of
Faith and Hope being a work and task of the people of God, while they are in
time, there can never be too much said to it. Therefore I shall offer to you
two grounds of Observation, which I shall take from the Psalmists recommending
of it to the people of God here over again.

1. His Exhortation implys the constant need, that the Saints will have of
Faith and Hope in time. 2. That the Saints have a constant warrant of Hoping,
and Believing in God.
1. Consider, though the Psalmist (as would appear) has gotten a good account
of his hope, yea, for all the issues he has gotten before; and that the saints
and people of God, in that generation, and before, had gotten of Faith and
Hope, they had trusted in God, and He had delivered them from all their fears,
and they were not ashamed, yet still he presses Faith and Hope, as that which
the Saints will still have need of, and wherein their life consists. The
Observation then is plain, That Faith and Hope are Graces whereof the Saints
will constantly stand in need, whatever deliveries or issues they get in time.
As here it is supposed the Psalmist has gotten an issue, yet he will not have
Faith and Hope out of request, with him, self and others of the Lords people.
Ye know it is said. 2 Cor. 5.7. That here we walk by faith, not by sight; we
must always have to do with the graces of Faith and Hope, as long as we live.
In all the times of our life they will never be useless, nor out of fashion,
and consequently these graces should never be out of esteem with us.

To deduce the constant need that we have of Faith and Hope, and so the
constant obligation that lies upon us to esteem of them, I shall branch the
point in five particulars.

1. Consider, that whenever the people of God get any good account of their
Faith and Hope in God, when they attain to any proofs of his help by Faith and
Hope; then without all peradventure they are engaged to praise God, and will
have an high esteem of these graces. It Is no small part of God's praise, when
he has done his people a good turn, to speak it out to the commendation of
God, as the Psalmist does, Psalm. 28.7. The Lord is my strength and my shield,
my heart trusted in him, and I am helped: And Psalm. 2. Blessed are all they
that put their trust in him: And with that Messenger to Mary, Blessed is she
that believed. If all the proofs of kindness that folks get by the exercise of
Faith and Hope, were well improved, it would be no small part of their
improvement, to cry up to Gods praise, these noble graces of Faith and Hope in
him.

2. Consider, that even when the Saints are put to exercise their Faith and
Hope in him in trouble; more Faith and Hope, to believe more, and hope more,
is, and will be found an out-gate and delivery in its own kind: To love the way
of believing and hoping in God better, is no small part of an out-gate. Thou it
may be mistakes the success of thy endeavors, thou cries to God from under thy
pressures, and thou hopes in God, yet thou sees no out-gate; but art thou
helped to believe and hope on? There thou have an out-gate till more come. If
thou do not weary to believe, if thy Anchor of Hope be not come home, but keeps
ground. And I shall add, were thou falling more in love with Faith and Hope,
thou were more delivered. When a man goes to God under his pressures, and puts
Faith and Hope in exercise, and comes away content to believe and hope on till
delivery come, he gets a double answer of his Prayer, and when he goes to God
again, and comes away with a greater love to Faith and Hope, he is yet more
delivered, though he get not an out-gate. It Is like Elijah's Meal, in the
strength whereof he walked 40 days, 1 King. 19.8. And that was an out-gate,
when Christ said to the poor woman, Luk 8.50. Fear not, only believe, and she
shall be made whole. So when David can say, Ps. 56.3. What time I am afraid, I
will trust in thee. He is a saved man, for all the fears and perplexities that
assaulted him, that is all a matter, he has an out-gate. So long as he can
trust in God, he will not fear what flesh can do unto him. So ye see there will
be a constant need of Faith and Hope to the Saints, and a constant obligation
lies on them to esteem of them as a Plank to carry them to the Shore, and as an
out-gate in themselves. Several other things would be touched, for the clearing
of this, which I remit to the Afternoon.

SERMON XXXII.
Psalm 130. Verse. 7. Let Israel hope in the Lord, for, etc.
FRom what is supposed in this Exhortation, and from the general scope thereof
already ye have heard partly, that there will be a good account of all the
exercises of the Saints, particularly of waiting on God; and partly, that it is
an evidence of blessed exercises and issues, when the Saints are
publick-minded, and communicative of what is betwixt God and them, for the
edification and good of others. I came in the morning to speak to the second
Head of Doctrine, to be gathered from this Exhortation, that is the duty
recommended, to hope in the Lord. From which (without any large repetition) I
proposed to deduce two Notes. The first on which I brake in, was, That Faith
and Hope are Graces that the Saints will constantly need, and which therefore
they will constantly esteem of, or at least should prize highly, for all the
issues the Psalmist himself, or the people of God, before or in the present
Generation had gotten, he will have Faith and Hope in God looked on as
constantly necessary. I deduced this first, in showing how, many proofs of Gods
help, attained to by Faith and Hope, should be an engagement to praise God, by
highly commending of these Graces. And 2. By showing, that in the greatest
pressures of Gods people, to get grace to believe more, is a blessed out-gate.

I proceed now to deduce the Point further; and in the third place, this
presses the constant necessity of Faith and Hope, and our obligation to esteem
of them, that no issues, no deliveries or out-gates warrands us to lay them by,
as if we had no more need of them. It is true (as it is 1 Cor. 13.) Love is the
great Grace, because of the longest continuance; and Faith and Hope will be
laid by in the next life, as to the way of exercising them now, but that says
not, that they will ever be unnecessar to us, while we are here upon earth.
David took a wrong measure, when Psalm. 30.6. He said in his prosperity, he
should never be moved: Therefore when God hid his face, he was troubled. When
the most glorious issues to be had here-away, are afforded, the Believer and
hoper in God must make for new storms, when he has gotten a Harbor, he must
look upon it but as a Creek, to take in new refreshment, and he must weigh
Anchor, and make to Sea again, and exercise his Faith and Hope.

4. If we consider the relation that Faith and Hope have to Duty, it will
discover the constant need that we have of them, and consequently the esteem
that we should have of them. The Fountain of all acceptable doing of duty is,
by abiding in Christ, by abiding in him we bring forth fruit, Joh. 15. and we
abide in him by Faith. The fountain of all our doing duty, is Faith and Hope;
Therefore says Paul, 1 Timothy 1.10. We both labor, and suffer reproach, because
we trust in the living God. Would a man have his heart purged from pollutions?
It Is faith that purifies the heart, Acts 15.9. Would a man go about any duty in
Religion? he must draw his Furniture out of Christ by Faith. To go about duty
with discouragement, is the way not only to render duty unacceptable, but to
cut the throat of it: Not only a man must make use of Faith for furniture to do
duty, but when duty is gone about, he has work for Faith to renew his strength
to continue in it; and when he has done his duty, and has denied himself, and
in his best performances is humbled for the iniquity of his holy things, he
has need of Faith to sit down under Christ's shadow, to put it up in his hand,
and to close with imputed righteousness. Thus ye see what need there is of
Faith and Hope, in respect of the relation they have to duty.

And 5. There is constant need of Faith in relation to Sense, and
manifestations of comfort and love. A man that wants Sense, and would be at it,
the only right way is by believing, that he may see, by believing, that he may
rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1.8. Believing, that he
may be sealed with the holy Spirit of promise, Ephesians. 1.13. And when a man is win
up to believing, and finds no sensible comfort, it is no call to cast away his
Faith, but he must cherish his Faith more, and yet more, till God be pleased to
send Sense: He must still hold the grip of Faith, if he would have sensible
manifestations flowing out rightly and solidly to him: Again when he has
gotten Sense, he has need of Faith still to try Sense, when he doubts of his
comfort, whether it be a delusion or not, and whether it be of God, or a lie in
his right hand; it is by Faith, and the rule of Faith, by which he must examine
and try that: So that when he is hugged in his Fathers bosom, there is need of
Faith, walking by its rule, to assure him that he is not deluded. And yet
further, when he has gotten Sense, and tried it by the rule of Faith, he has
need of Faith still; he must not observe Peter's way, while he was on the Mount
with Christ, Master (says he) it is good to be here, if thou will, let us make
three tabernacles, Mat. 17.4. But he must lay his account to come down again,
he must not reckon, now I see, and it will never be dark again, now I have
peace, and I shall have no more perplexity; but after a Sun-blink, he must come
down from the Mount of sensible enjoyment, and meet with desertion; and when he
has sensible manifestations, he must lay them at his Masters feet, and be
content to return to the Trade of Believing; Even as the Bride, Cant. 2.17.
when there has been much fair Weather betwixt the beloved and her; what says
she, Until the day break and the shadows flee away, turn my beloved, as if she
had said, I look not upon this as my ordinary allowance within time, the day is
not broken in time; The shadows are not fled away as yet, therefore I will
submit to it, that thou turn or flee, that thou withdraw, only on this
condition, that when I need, thou will come swiftly unto me like a roe, or a
young heart upon the mountains of Bether, or division.

Thus ye see how in all cases and lots, there is constant need of Faith and
Hope, and that there should be a constant esteem of these Graces; all that I
shall say from it by way of inference, shall be in the first place, to press
you to study this necessity well, that ye may not mistake, that ye may not be
surprised, what ever ye may meet with, if ye have Faith and Hope, God will not
let it rust, he will give you clouds to see through, dark nights of
Dispensations to grapple with. And once fix your self in the persuasion of the
constant usefulness and necessity of Faith and Hope, and it will help to break
many snares and temptations, and particularly your fretting and petting, and
the casting away of your confidence. Let Faith be your one thing. O how cruel
are they to themselves, that weaken their confidence, and cast away their
esteem of Faith and Hope? They consider not the constant necessity of these
Graces.

And 2dly. Particularly I would recommend to you, that (as I hinted in the
forenoon) ye would take, grace to believe for an out gate. Do never complain
that ye are ill-guided, so long as Faith keeps the Feet; that were the
moderation and sobriety becoming a Christian Spirit, That whatever means for an
issue be used, that it be a man's satisfaction to get grace to judge well of
God, and of all his dealing; Paul counted it a great favor, 2 Cor. 4.1. That
having received mercy, he fainted not; if folk knew what a woeful life, want of
delivery and issue joined with unbelief makes, they would think them delivered
folk, who get grace to believe, whose faith is not brangled; or though it be
brangled, yet it is not put off the field. Ye that have advanced to believing,
bless God for it, and follow it as your chiefest mercy.

And 3. I shall add as a consequence of what I had in the Explication of the
Point, that ye would learn to hold a loose grip of all things that come to give
Faith relief, when either ye meet with a temporary delivery from a difficulty,
or with a sun-blink of Consolation coming to Faith as its post, and saying, sit
down and rest you a while, hold a loose grip of the one, and the other. It is
but a fair blink in a Winter stormy day, and it will overcast again; Remember
when ye have drawn your breath a little, ye must up, and make to your Faith and
hope again, when ye have seen your Sun, he must be overclouded, and ye must
wait on the Lord, who hides his Face from the house of Jacob, and through the
clouds ye must look for him, Isai. 8.17. And therefore, as ye would not cast
your Sun-blinks, because they are not lasty (as many do) so ye must take heed,
ye sit not down upon them, like a tired body, set down to rest him, he sits not
long, least he grow stiff; The sober mind is a fixed mind, he feeds with an eye
to his journey, he takes his comfort, with an eye to the sight, wherein he
knows not how soon he may be engaged. So much for the first Note on the second
general Head of Doctrine, that the Saints will have constant need of Faith and
Hope, and therefore should highly esteem of them.

The second is, That if Faith and Hope be constantly necessary, then there is
need for a constant warrant for believing and hoping in God; Now what is my
warrant, the Psalmists Exhortation to hope in the Lord, imports the constant
will of God, concerning this, as a duty, even a constant warrant to believe and
hope, without any restriction of time, lot, person, or condition, Let Israel
hope, etc. The Observation then is clear, That it is allowed to the Saints at
all times to believe and hope in God, at all times, whatever their lot or case
be, or seem to say, there is no time wherein this duty wears out of fashion, or
the Command enjoining it, wears out of date; whatever times pass over them, or
lots they fall under; it is a constant duty, and it is a sin to neglect it; If
ye speak of Faith, for personal reconciliation, and the influence it has on
Duty, 1 John 3.23. This is the commandment, that we should believe on the Name
of his Son Jesus Christ; if ye respect Faith, as it is exercised about the
various lots and times, that pass over Gods people; it is a commanded duty at
all times, Psalm. 62.8. Trust in him at all times; there is no time wherein ye
are dispensed with, not to trust in him; yea, even these times wherein ye will
need God for a refuge, and if I might insist, I would let you see how Faith is
a commanded duty in the most desperate conditions and lots, Ps. 46.1, 2, 3. God
is our refuge, a very present help in time of trouble, Therefore we will not
fear though the earth be removed, and though the mountains he carried into the
midst of the sea, etc. The Believer in God thinks himself in a surer posture,
than the course of nature: The World may turn upside down, but the Believer is
then sure, having God for a refuge and a present help Hab. 3.17. Though the
fig tree do not blossom, though no fruit be in the vine* etc. yet he finds
warrant to believe, I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my
salvation, a fruit of Faith. Many would have been ready to say. What should I
do believing? if the trial had come half that length, but come what will come,
he finds ground to believe, Luke 8. A man comes to Christ with his sick
daughter, and she is a dead daughter, ere he come to the house, and they say,
thy daughter is dead, trouble not the Master. But what says Christ, verse 50.
Fear not, believe only, Faith has a warrant, when trouble goes from sickness
to death, not to fear, but only to believe; David was tried with formidable
things, as Psalm. 56. Yet that takes not away his warrant to believe; Therefore
verse 3. He says, what time I am afraid, I will trust in thee; my fear shall
feed my confidence, and not drive me from it. Look on him again as a man, whose
troubles and fears had confounded and run down; yet he looks not on himself as
a man, that might quit Faith for all that, Ps. 61.2. When I am at the ends of
the Earth, says he, when my heart is overwhelmed, when I have perplexity like
to make me swoun, when I am surcharged and laid by with them; yet from the ends
of the Earth I will cry unto thee, (an act of Faith) when my heart is
overwhelmed, lead me to the Rock that is higher than I; my heart and my flesh
failing, shall not warrant me to cast away my confidence, and the Acts
resulting thereon; and Job 3.5.14. Elihu says to Job, Although thou say,
thou shall not see him, yet Judgment is before him; Therefore trust thou in
him, and that was Abraham's practice, who against hope, believed in hope, Romans
4.18. when he could see no probability of the thing promised^ it is in that
case, in that Paroxism, the Believer is to trust in God; so ye see the Point is
clear, that Faith is the allowance of the Saints at all times, in all
conditions; and Faith has still a warrant, to put forth it self to exercise.
The rich good will of God, the immutability of God and his promise, bottoms
Faith in all times and conditions; it was a good word that David had, when the
sycophant Doeg came and told Saul of his coming to the house of Abimelech, and
flew fourscore five of the Priests; Why boastest thou in mischief, O mighty
man, the goodness of God endures continually; and seeing it is so, Faith has
continual ground to go upon.

For Use, I would give you these three words from it, The first shall be to
represent this as a mercy. 2. To press upon this ground constant believing and
hoping in God, as a duty. And 3. To speak a word to them that are troubled,
because they cannot get this Command constantly obeyed.

1. I would represent this as a mercy that its thy duty, to believe and hope in
God at all times, though I fear, I have but few to speak to on this score, few
would ever venture an hair of their head on Faith, or on God, if they could get
any other fend, so long as they could have any sinful shift ou^ of hell, ( I
had almost said in hell) it is to no purpose to speak to them of Faith; But are
there any of you sensible of the ill of Unbelief, that when ye would sit down
and take a lift of your self, or of your condition, or of anything that is dear
to you, your unbelief and discouragement is like to break you; the
discouragement of some, through the prevailing power of Unbelief, is so great,
that they turn like dyvors, they dare as soon look on hell, as on all the
perplexities that are in their case; I would say to such, does thou in this
case resent it as a mercy, that thou knows it is thy duty to believe, and a sin
to give way to discouragement and unbelief: O bless God, thou may venture on
Faith, which if thou had not, it is sad to think, what thou would do next; I am
now speaking to them that have any thing to do betwixt God and their souls,
though I fear there be few that have ado with what I am now upon; And O that I
could lament over you, and that ye could lament over your selves! But are there
any of you pressed with your souls condition, and yet ye are too fool hardy in
venturing upon unbelief and discouragement: One of two, either ye have never
tried these deep foords of discouragement and unbelief; or otherways ye are
under a dreadful tentation; for of all the mercies next unto Christ, a soul
that is crushed with discouragement and unbelief, will think this the greatest
mercy, that it has a warrant to believe; and if ye could bless him for that,
who knows what it would produce? if ye would bless him, that ye know, ye have a
command to believe, and that it is a sin to misbelieve, and give way to
discouragement.

But 2. If it be a constant commanded duty to believe and hope, will ye
constantly obey that command? Trust in him at all times; Whatever ye read in
your cases or lots, or in the times, read this, never to cast away your
confidence, but to believe and hope in God. Thou will say, I have few motives
to it; but on what account does thou forbear murder or theft, or any other
gross sin? Is it because thou wants temptations to them, or because God has
forbidden them? and have thou not a command for believing? Thou must not
abstain believing, till thy faith be budded; but because he has commanded, fall
about it; Thou thinks thy Faith little worth, it is a blind guess, like the
blind man's gropping for the wall. But shall I say. Faith in obedience to a
Command, believing with the judgment against the stream of thy own inclination,
is more acceptable to God, than if in thy believing, thou were sailing before
the wind; ye will say, ye press a command constantly to believe, but what
should I believe? I have no work for Faith but I have work enough for
Diffidence and distrust; I cannot stay now to deduce the Answer to this in
particular instances, relating to several cases and times: but (as I marked
before on this subject) there are general foundations that cannot be moved,
Catholic Cordials for every condition, and labor to believe these* when thou
cannot dip on particulars: As 1. Believe at all times, and in all conditions,
that thou art in God's hand, Remember that word, Mat. 14.27. It is I be not
afraid, believe that all the world cannot pull thee out of his hand; thou
may think thou art in frem'd handling, A messenger of Satan is sent to
buffet thee, a wicked man is sent to oppress thee, but believe thou art still
in Gods hand. 2. Believe, that as thou art in God's hand, so he in whose hand
thou art, does all things well, that is his Motto in all his dealing, Mark
7.37. And he will not begin at thee, to give beguile to Trusters in him. 3.
Believe, that his thoughts are not as your thoughts, neither, are his ways as
your ways, Isai. 55.8. And therefore although thou can see no outgate, yet he
sees it, and the way how to bring it about, and let him take his own way, and
do not limit him to thy model. 4 Believe that he has wisdom, power and love,
that thou may venture thy all upon, and that it cannot be so well, as when thou
ventures it upon these. 5. Believe that he is God and not man, thou would have
out-wearied the patience of men and angels, having had to do with them, but he
is God and not man, with whom thou have to do. 6. Believe that all that he
says or does to his people, or thee, ^ver says, go a way. The scope of all,
the sound of all, he does or says, is come, and go not away; desertions,
trials, scourges, or whatever else he sends, says, come. 7. Believe, that many
a disappointment will he give to thy false and deceitful heart, when thou have
said, Will thou cast off for ever? will he be favorable no more? is his mercy
clean gone for ever? does his promise fail for evermore? has he forgotten to
be gracious? has he in anger shut up his tender mercies? He will give these
thoughts the lie, and make thee re-cant, and eat in that language with shame
and repentance, and believe this, and say, I am treasuring up matter of
repentance and mourning for my self, when God comes and calls me to an account
for such thoughts of him. 8. Believe, that God is concerned in thee and his
people and interest, more than thou art, his stake is greater than thine; art
thou come unto him? Thou art given to him and he will count for thee, and every
one of his people; He that touches them, touches the apple of his eye. And
remember that argument Joshua has, Josh. 7.9. What will thou do unto thy great
Name? Believe that, and it will put thy mind to rest; these are foundations,
and Catholic Cordials, that thou may trust to at all times, and make use of
in all cases, when thou knows not how to put forth Faith, as to particulars;
And O! what sweet Cordials will flow out of them, for Faith and Hope to feed
upon, in the darkest of dispensations.

But 3. If time would permit, a word would be spoken to them, that are
troubled, because they cannot get this Command of believing and hoping in God,
constantly obeyed. Thou art convinced it is a commanded Duty, but thou cannot
win at it; Unbelief makes a slave of thee, when thou would comfort thy self
against sorrow, thy heart is faint within thee, thou would look through the
Cloud, but thine Eyes are dim, that thou cannot see through it; thou that art
so overpowered with Unbelief, look that it be thy weakness and not thy
wilfulness; How shall I evidence that, will thou say? Here is a proof of it,
mourn over that which thou cannot overcome; thou art overpowered with Unbelief,
and cannot help it come, and sit down before God, and cry, violence is done
thee. Tentation and Unbelief prevails with thee, and thou cannot master them,
but they overcome thee: lament that to God; if thou debate with Unbelief, it
will turn like a Snow Ball, that grows the more, the more it be rolled; but
mourning over it to God, is the best way to get it overcome: I thought to have
deduced this at more length; and showed you, it is an evidence of a blessed
frame, to be mourning for Gospel sins, as well as for sins against the Law; but
the day being short, I shall detain you no longer. God bless what ye have heard.

SERMON XXXIII.
Psalm 130. Verse. 7. Let Israel hope in the Lord, for with the Lord there is
mercy, etc.
I Am now entered (as ye heard) upon the second part of the Psalm, wherein the
Psalmist, who, just before was wrestling with very humbling things in his case,
is now triumphant and victorious; and though it be not expressed, that he has
gotten an outgate, yet he implies it very legibly in the improvement of it, in
his communicating the good that he had gotten to Israel the people of (...) an
hour of temptation, may be looked on as a very great folly, and a poor shift for
a man to betake himself unto, and a man may then be tempted to cast them away;
but when men have tried them well, they will see cause to revock all the
misconstructions that they had of Faith and Hope, and to commend them from the
rich advantage they have found in them, if ye will consider David, an eminent
example and pattern of believing, and hoping in God, ye will find these three
in him; one is, that he was as much put to it as any, to live the life of
faith; ye will find, that sometimes there is nothing betwixt him and fainting,
and over-giving, but believing; as Psalm. 27.13. I had fainted, unless I had
believed, etc. Ye will find that he had nothing for a casten-down soul, and
disquieted within, but hoping in God, Psalm. 42.43. Another is, that as ye find
him often put to it, to live by faith and hope. So ye will find him now and
then under a temptation, that he was at the next best under this shift, and
tempted to quite it. How often is he put to that of the Church, Lam. 3.18, I
said, my hope and my strength is perished from the Lord. So 1 Samuel 27.1. I
shall one day perish by the hand of Saul. And Psalm. 116.11. I said in my haste,
all men are liars. Behold what a sad conjunction is in this case, and what a
low opinion he has of faith and hope in an hour of temptation. But in the
third place, take him again at the turn of the Tide (as ye use to speak) ye
will find him in another tune, Psalm. 116 10. I believed, therefore have I
spoken: Not only esteeming of faith for his own use, but a man that dare
commend it to others, as Psalm. 27.14. Wait on the Lord, be of good courage, and
he shall strengthen thine heart; wait, I say, on the Lord.

All that I shall draw from this Head, shall be first, to recommend to the
people of God, who have hard pulls in time, to assay this Trade of trusting in
God, and hoping in him; it has not an enemy but an ignorant, one that is a
stranger to it, that knows not the worth that is in it, and the rich advantages
that follow it; were it more tried, it would have more to commend it, therefore
let it be more your study; and thou that would set about the Trade of believing
and hoping in God, must not take the report concerning faith and hope, from
every fit of a temptation, thou must lay thy account to meet with many a fiery
dart, and with many a reproach cast upon thy confidence, and to have thy self
counted a fool for cleaving to that way, but hold at it, and the more thou do
so, thou shall like it the better; not only will thou not need any to commend
it unto thee, but thou will commend it to all that will take thy advice and
counsel.

And 2. They that have been essaying faith and hope, and have gotten good of
it, they would be afraid in any after-assault they may be put to, to bring up
an ill report upon the way of faith and hope; thou may let these that never got
good of it, suspect it; but thou that have been helped to believe and wait on
God, and have seen an end of the Lord, and found the good of believing, that
can with the Psalmist, Psalm. 28.7. say, My heart trusted in him, and I am
helped. How guilty must thou be, if thy faith and hope be to seek in a new
strait? If after thou have found the good of believing, thou be put out
concerning it in a new trial, when that Song is cast up, Psalm. 107.1. O give
thanks unto the Lord, for he is good, for his mercy endures for ever: who-ever
let that Note ly by the second Verse tells thee, Let the redeemed of the Lord
say so, whom he has redeemed from the hand of the enemy. Who ever have a
slender opinion of faith and hope, it ill becomes thee to have it, who has
tried it, and has found the good of it, or to be to seek in esteeming of it in
a new trial.

But now I proceed to the 4th thing I proposed to be spoken to from this
Exhortation, that is, the consideration of the persons, who they are, to whom
this hope in God is recommended, Let Israel hope in the Lord, says he: Hope in
God is not an Anchor that will be budded on every one. It Is true, none are
secluded from coming to seek a right to hope in the right method, and due
order; but there is an hope of the hypocrite, that will perish; that will be
like the giving up of the Ghost, and that hope is only for fair weather, and
for little to do, but this hope of the Saints is the peculiar allowance of the
Saints at all times. Now for what is mean'd by Israel here, I shall not deny,
but in the first place we are to understand, that Nation of Israel, a peculiar
people to God, who in various Ages, while they continued a Church and Nation,
were meeting with work for their hope, and with many rich advantages and proofs
of the good of hoping in God; and in the latter days, when as it is Romans 11.26
All Israel shall be saved; they shall find this made out to them, that they may
hope in God. But it is not to be restricted to them only; since their off
casting, there is an Israel come in their place, as the Apostle tells us, Romans
9.6. That they are not all Israel, which are of Israel, all that Nation were
not true Israelits in Gods account: So Phil. 3.3. There is a circumcision even
among the Gentiles, who do worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in Jesus
Christ, and have no confidence in the flesh. And Gal. 6.16. he tells, There is
an Israel of God, Gods peculiar people, of whatsoever Nation, upon whom,
walking according to the Rule of the new Creature given them, there shall be
peace and mercy. Again we may consider Israel either Collectively, or
Distributively; Consider Israel Collectively for the Church of God,
correspondent to the ancient Nation of Israel: Then by Israel we are to
understand the invisible Church, the society of Gods converted Elect through
the World, yet not excluding particular visible Churches, who partake of the
privileges of the true Israel of God, according to their purity, and the
number of true Israelites that are among them. Again, Israel taken
Distributively, takes in every Child of God, who in his own place, according to
the tenor of the promises made to Israel, has no less ground to hope in God,
than Israel taken Collectively has.

In the prosecution of this Head, three things occurr to be spoken to,

1. That Israel is a Society that is allowed to hope in God.

2. That this hope is the common allowance of all and every one that is indeed
an Israelite, as well as of the Body of Israel in general. And

3. That it concerns every one that would claim to hope in God in all
exigencies, to make it sure that they are true Israelites indeed, and may put
their names in those passages and promises, wherein Isreal's privileges are
contained.

For the first, Israel are a people, that however matters go, have ground to
hope in God, however things fare in the world, or whatever may be said of the
desperate case of others, Israel is a Society that may still hope in God. Hence
when Ezra, Chap. 9 is laid by with mourning for that generation that had
mingled with the abominable Heathen, a godly man, Chap. 10.2. comes and tells
him, It Is true, we are guilty, yet there is hope in Israel concerning this
thing: Had such a thing fallen forth among others, it had been a presage of
dreadful news; but in Israel there is hope of pardon, hope of redress, hope of
making up this breach, in Israel things otherwise desperate, are not hopeless,
Jer. 31.15, 17. Though in Israel there be a Rachel weeping for her children,
and refusing to be comforted, because they are not. She looks upon it as
needless to offer to comfort her, when her Children are gone; yet even when
they are not, and she thinks, that rationally she refused to be comforted.
Verse 17. There is hope in thy end, says the Lord, that thy children shall
come again to their own border. It Is Isreal's privilege, that she can say that
none else can say: It Is Isreal's Song Psalm. 129. Many a time have they afflicted
me from my youth up, may Israel now say: She might say it, when others might
forbear it, yet have they not prevailed against me* Nebuchadnezar got me
swallowed down quick, but I proved spending mea^, and he was forced to cast up
that sweet morsel, The plowers plowed upon my back, and they made long their
furrows, but the righteous Lord has cut asunder the cords of the wicked. It Is
Israel's privilege, as it is Isa. 51.22, 23. To have the cup of trembling
taken out of her hand, and put into the hand of them that afflicted her etc.
It Is long since, if it had been prestable or practicable, that Israel should
have been sweept off the earth, Psalm. 83.4. There is a combination, Come, let
us cut them off from being a nation, that the name of Israel may be no more in
remembrance; and yet Israel is to the sore, hoping in God. It is true, it is
dangerous to be peremptor in applying this to particular visible Churches, for
God has taken away his Candlestick from many visible Churches, for their
provocations, yet there are two things that we may safely go upon in the
application of this; one is, That where God in his glory is much concerned, as
having signally interposed for a people, to make them his own; there is ground
of hope that God will not cast off that people for their provocations. For this
consider Exodus 32.12. and Numb. 14. v. 13, 14, 15, 16. When God is threatening
to cut off his people for their provocations, Moses interposes and interceeds
with God, O let not that be, says he, Why should the Egyptians say, for
mischief he brought them out, to stay them, in the mountains, and to consume
them from the face of the earth, because thou was not able to bring them into
the land which thou promised them; as if he had said, Lord, thou have been
eminently seen in owning this people, and if thou shall ruin them, it will
eminently reflect upon thy Glory, as well as it will destroy them. And Joshua
Chap. 7. when Israel is smitten upon the account of the accursed thing, and he
has strong apprehensions, that the Nations about will environ them, and cut
them off; his great argument ( v. 9.) is, What will thou do unto thy own great
Name: Thou have been eminent in owning thy people, and if they shall be ruined,
thy great Name will suffer. And Psalm. 74. Those complaints of the desolation of
the Sanctuary, and the insolency of the Enemy, are closed with that, How long
shall the enemy reproach? Shall the enemy blaspheme thy Name for ever? This is
one thing then that we may hold, that where God has been eminently seen in
working for a people, he will see to his great Name, that there be no ill
report brought up upon his guiding ^^em, as if for mischief he brought them
out, to slay them upon the mountains. And another thing we may close with,
which is more general, that whatever God do with a particular visible Church,
he will never want a Church, though he should take his leave of one Nation for
their provocations, he will go to another. So long as he is a Head, he will not
want Members; so long as he is a Husband, he will not want a Spouse; so long as
he is a King, he will not want Subjects. There must be an Israel, who will have
ground to hope in God.

There are many things which might be inferred from this, I might from it
exhort all wisely to consider of the case of God's Israel, and that they would
beware of concluding that there is no hope for them in God. Beware of looking
upon them, with a look of rejoicing over them, and speaking proudly in the day
of their distress, Obadi^ah verse. 12, 13 There is hope in Israel, though Israel
were as dry bones, and as dead men, their dry bones shall live, they shall up
again; and therefore take heed both what judgment thou passes on them, and what
thy carriage is toward them; they may be laid low, as for their own sins and
provocations, so for a trial to thee, to bring out what was lurking in thy
bosom before, and thou durst not bring it out while thou got such an
opportunity; and when he has done both, he will make it appear, that there is
hope in Israel.

But to leave this, I would press upon the people of God, to improve this their
privilege and allowance of hope in God; tine not heart, cast not away your
confidence, which has a great recompense of reward. I press not carnal
confidence, or carnal hopes upon any, I pray the Lord, the troubles many are
under, may crush these; but yet I would bid you cherish the hope of God's being
great in Israel, cherish divine hope, that is bottomed on the Word; ye who have
it, your hopes are better than other folks possessions, your Bible is better
than any security ye could seek without it: And in deducing this Use, I would
in the first place recommend to you that are Israelites, that ye would mind
your work, Isai. 43.21. This people have I formed for my self, they shall show
forth my praise. Israel are set apart for celebrating Gods praise, and to
celebrate his praise in that particular, by hoping in him, when their souls are
cast down and disquieted in them. Thou art not at thy work in thy generation,
who are not showing forth Gods praise, by thy believing and hoping in him. 2.
Ye would remember how peremptory, resolute and inplicite Israel may be, and
should be, in hoping in God* Israel must believe, when she cannot see, and when
she cannot give a distinct account of what she believes, she must believe, when
she cannot give the grounds of it. I shall give you an account of Isreal's Faith
and Hope, in the words of Mordecai to Esther, Chap. 4.14. If thou altogether
hold thy peace at this time, then shall there deliverance and enlargement arise
to the Jews from another place; But etc. It would have puzzled his wit, and the
wit of all the Israelits, to tell from what airt deliverance and enlargement
should come to the Jews; If Esther should hold her peace, how was it possible
they should be delivered; if God should not make use of her, the Heathen in an
hundred and twenty seven Provinces would soon cut them off, when a decree was
past to do it. But though Esther should hold her peace, Mordecal believes
enlargement will come to Israel, perish they cannot; therefore delivered they
must be, though he could not tell from whence it should come. The not
considering of this is a dreadful temptation to many; when Israel is low, not
only to cast away their confidence, but to betake themselves to some sinful
shift for their security; but it were better for thee so long as thou have the
Bible, for the ground of thy hope, to hold the conclusion, that Israel shall not
perish. 3. I recommend to Israel, to consider how they may be called, to stoop
ere they quit their hope of delivery, 2 Kings 6. Give wicked Jeboram a promise
that Israel shall be delivered, and relieved of the famine, he will go in
sackcloth, in hopes of performance; but let it come to that, that one harlot
contends with another about the eating of her son, have at Elisha's head, he
will not wait for the Lord any longer; but Israel in his hope must stoop low,
his anchor of hope must have a long cable, (If I may so word it) to reach the
bottomless Sea of hopelesness, Israel must not lose hope, when it comes to
that, Ezekiel. 37. That she is like dry bones in a valley; and the question is,
Let these bones li^e; yet they did live. And Psalm. 141.7. Our bones are
scattered at the graves mouth, as when one cutteth and cleaves wood upon the
Earth; we are like the Spales of Trees about the Hewer, hand; then Israel is
low; yet verse 8. Mine eyes are unto thee, says he, O God the Lord, in thee is
my trust. Nay, Isreal's hope must not be quite, when natural hope is gon^.
Abraham, Romans 4.18. Against hope believed in hope; he had hope when his hope is
contradicted by another hope. And Jon, 2.4. I said, I am cast out of thy sight,
yet will I look again toward thy holy temple. And I shall add but this one
word, Israel must not quite hope for growing trouble, Mic. 4.10. When the
Daughter of Zion is in pain, like a woman in travail, and thinks she is low
enough already within the City, she must go forth of the City, and dwell in the
field; yea, the Lord will not have her to quite hope, though she go even to
Babylon; for there shall she be delivered, there the Lord shall redeem her from
the hand of her enemies. Thus ye see how ye are called, what ever your
condition be, to cherish hope, and to let your hope be seen in all the Gospel
fruits of hope, in repentance for sin, in taking encouragement for duty, though
ye should have the storm in your teeth, for so doing. God bless his word to you.

SERMON XXXIV.
Psalm 130. Verse 7. Let Israel hope in the Lord, for, etc.
WE are here upon a very useful Counsel, a counsel dictated by the Holy Spirit
of God, and communicate by a man that had tried the good and ill, both of having
and wanting it; ye have heard how the Psalmist being delivered, is
communicative of his experience to others; ye have heard also, as ye will have
constant need of Hope, so there is a constant warrant for it: And ye have heard
further, that whatever be the opinion of others, yet whosoever have most tried
Faith and Hope, they will commend them most, and be most free in recommending
them, to those that have most use for them. I entered in the morning to
consider the persons, to whom hope in God is recommended, Let Israel hope in
the Lord. Whether that Nation while it stood a Church, or the Israel of God;
The Gospel Church, or the true members thereof; I closed with this, That go
things as they will, Israel is a society that still may hope; many may think
that there is no hope for them in God, That they are fallen down, and shall no
more rise up; but Israel are never a hopeless society.

I proceed now to the 2d thing I mentioned in this Head, to wit, That Hope in
God is the common allowance of all the people of God, not only taking Israel
collectively, but distributively, one by one, they are allowed to hope in God;
yea, (which will further clear the ground of the Doctrine) although many that
were true Israelits, did indeed come short of the Psalmist; and therefore
though he might hope, it might be thought they should stand a^ back, yet he is
free to encourage any, how mean and low soever they be, provided they be of
Israel, to hope in God. I confess, this Point is to be understood, with much
caution and warriness: There are general Promises made to the Church, that
every particular Believer may not apply, but with many restrictions. There are
also Promises made to some saints on particular accounts, to which every one
may not claim; but if we consider the great bull^ of the Promises, which are
the ground of hope, and the main scope of all the Promises; the Scripture takes
in one and other, as to sexes; the Promise is deduced. 2 Cor. 6.18. I will be a
father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, etc. where the weaker
and stronger, and sexes are equally taken in, also as to the Degrees of grace,
if it be true, it takes in all, Psalm. 115.13. He will bless them that fear the
Lord, both small and great, the small as well as the great are taken in to the
share of Blessings; The precious Ointment poured upon Aarons head, stays not
about his shoulders, or the principal parts of his Body, but goes down to the
skirts of his Garments, to the meanest and lowest Members; Psalm. 133.2. And
hence it is, that a Promise made to a great Joshua, (1.5.) in order to a great
employment to possess the people in the Land of Canaan; I will not fail thee,
nor forsake thee; though one would have thought that that was a peculiar
allowance to a Joshua, that might grip to that in so great an undertaking; yet
Heb. 13.5. None of the persecuted Hebrews are secluded from it, Let your
conversations be without cove^tousness, and be content with such things as ye
have, for he has said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee: he that said
that to the great Captain of his People Joshua, said it to the meanest
believing Hebrew; I might deduce this more distinctly, and show that the weak
Lambs are so far from being excluded, that there is a Promise, that they shall
be carried in his bosom, when the stronger shall get leave to walk on foot; and
because the heavy with young, will be put hardly to it, he will gently lead
them, Isai. 40.11. These that are sensible of their eminent worthlesness, that
are but dead things in their own eyes, and that think the crumbs that fall from
the Childrens Table too much for them, they may think to find in God a
magnifying of mercy, for eminent worthlesness, in stooping to them, and being
gracious and merciful to them; yea, these that have little or nothing of their
own, if they be sensible of it, and lying at the Fountain for supply, they may
look for the more of him, the less they had of their own; the weaker they be,
his strength shall be the more perfected in weakness; the more ignorant they
be, and as beasts before him, they may look to have the wonderful Counselor
taking the conduct and guiding of them; and as it is, 1 Cor. 12.13. These
Members of the Body, which we think to be less honorable, upon them we bestow
more abundant honor, and our uncomly parts have more abundant comeliness; so,
the meanest member, providing that it be a member, may look for more of him,
than if they had much in their own hand, so far are they from being neglected.

(...) shall not insist any more on this, there being something before my hand,
which I would speak at more length ununto, I know not if there be any among you
that are loath to look out to those riches in the Promises; but ye would know,
that hope in God is the allowance of all the Israel of God, that on the nail
fastened in a sure place, and who is given as a glorious Throne to his Father's
House, not only will be hung the Vessels of Flagons, but the offspring and the
issue, and all Vessels of small quantity, Isai. 22.24. That in noticing his
followers, he will lose none, he will despise none; the dust shall be as near
to his Footstool, as the most eminent, and things shall go well, thou shall not
want, so long as the supply is betwixt him and thee, if he have, thou needs not
fear want; these may much encourage them, who look upon themselves as the
out-wails and draiglers of the Flock, and have not the confidence to look to
the privileges of the Children. Thou man hope in God, and lay claim to the
Promises made to Israel, as well as the most eminent Believer, if thou be
studying to be an Israelite indeed.

And this leads me to the 3d thing that I proposed, to be spoken to upon this
Head, That is, That however hope in God be the common allowance of all Israel
great and small, yet it is the allowance only of them, who are Israelites
indeed; and therefore all that I have spoken hitherto, concerning an allowance,
to hope in God will be of little purpose to thee and me, except that we can
make it out, that we are of the Israel of God, who are allowed to hope in him;
it is dangerous for dogs to take the childrens bread: No but when folk
endeavor to be children, they may have hope; but when they cheat themselves
with hoping they are children, and take a blind guess to lean to, in stead of
hope, it is dangerous. Remember what I marked in the morning, from Romans 9 6.
That they are not all Israel, which are of Israel, there is a Jew outwardly,
and a Jew inwardly, and there is a circumcision and baptism, which is outward
in the flesh, and there is a circumcision and baptism which is inward of the
heart, in the Spirit, and not in the letter, a circumcision whose praise is of
men, and another whose praise i^ not of men, but of God, Romans 2.28, 29. And
therefore hope being the great cordial that is allowed to the Israel of God, I
would have all excited in order to the making of it sure, to make sure work in
this business, to prove and try whether they be Israelites indeed, upon whom
this cordial is allowed, and here, if I should follow out this purpose at
large, it would lead me to give all the marks of Regeneration, the marks of an
Israelite indeed; or if I should insist on these Characters of the true
Circumcision, that worship God in the Spirit and rejoice in Jesus Christ, that
have no confidence in the flesh, Philip. 3.3. A man cannot get true Religion in
shorter bounds nor in these words, whether ye read them backward or foreward,
or both backward and foreward, as bairns do the A, B, C. A true Israelite must
have no confidence in the flesh, all must be flesh to him that is not Christ,
and he must deny all confidence in it, whether they be fleshly privileges, or
any thing but Christ; and his renouncing confidence in the flesh, should lead
him to believe in Christ alone for Salvation, and rejoice in him; and the truth
of his rejoicing in Christ, should appear in worshipping God in Christ, with
inward and spiritual affections. And go backward, his worshipping of God in
Spirit, leads him back to rejoice in Christ Jesus for his salvation; and his
rejoicing in Christ leads him back to renounce all confidence in the flesh, and
to look upon believing in Christ, as no hopeless bargain: But I say, if I
should insist upon these, I should digress too much on this Head: Therefore in
deciphering who are true Israelits, that have ground of hope in God, I shall
confine my self to these two;

1. The time and occasion of Jacob's getting the Name of Israel, when he
wrestles with God in prayer.

2. The Epithet of a clean heart that is given to Israel, Psalm. 73.1. A little
to these two, as time will permit.

For the first, if ye will read the 32 of Genesis, the first time Jacob got
this name of Israel was when he is at Prayer with God; and compare it with Hos.
12.4. Ye will find some notable Characters of an Israelite indeed, and
especially of an Israelite or regenerat man, when he should be at the exercise
of Hope, in particular difficulties and exigencies.

And first in general, Jacob got that Name when he was at his Prayers, that was
the posture wherein he was, when instead of Jacob, he got the Name of Israel, a
prince and prevailer with God; the Lord tells it him, verse 28. He was a man,
who when he had any thing to do in the world, he seyed God first with it, he
labored to discuss all his difficulties at the Throne of Grace. A Prayerless
frame, although it be not always an evidence of a graceless man, yet it is an
evidence of a graceless frame, wherein the ground of Hope is much under the
water, in a cloud, and in the dark; a Praying Supplicant is an Israelite
indeed, in nearest capacity to put forth Hope on God; thou that can go through
thy difficulties, and not begin at God to discuss them, to seek an account of
thy pressures and griefs, remember Saul's pretense, 1 Samuel 13.12. For his
sacrificing, he would force himself, and offer a burnt offering without Samuel,
before he made not supplication and entreated the Face of God for favor and
peace; now this of Prayer being the general, the other particulars that follow
will deduce it more distinctly.

2. When he is called Israel, he is at occasional Prayer; Jacob as he was a
godly man, he had his ordinar addresses to God; Isaac his Father had his times
of going out to the fields to pray, Genesis 24.62. and David at evening, at
morning, and at noon will cry aloud, Psalm. 55.^7. But Jacob's ordinar diligence
in prayer, will not serve him, when a particular emergent of Providence presses
him, but he then doubles his diligence, we find him twice at it, once verse 9.
when he hears that Esau was coming against him, he runs first to God by prayer;
and another application we find verse 24. -- when he had sent over his Goods,
and his Wives and Servants over the foord, he falls a wrestling with the Angel
of the Covenant, until the break of day; what shall I say to many Israelites in
profession, who have not an habit of ordinary conversing with God in prayer?
But what shall I say further to them, who though they have ordinary addresses
to God; yet when they have peculiar occasions of prayer put in their hands, do
not double their diligence in that duty. O! but difficulties growing, and
diligence in Prayer not out-growing them; when eminent difficulties put not
folk to double their diligence in prayer, what wonder they get a sad account of
them, and that their neglect of prayer obscure the evidences of their being
Israelites indeed.

But 3. Consider that this prayer of Jacob's, when he gets the Name of Israel,
as it was an occasional Prayer, so it was a secret prayer, it is when verse 23.
he has sent all that he had over the brook, verse 24. he is left alone, and
there are none with him, that he wrestles with the Angel till the dawning of
the day, that is like an Israelite indeed, and like an Israelite that has very
clear ground of hope, when whatever be betwixt God and them in public, or in
the view of others, they have ay somewhat to lisp to God in secret, some
counsel is betwixt God and them, they have somewhat to say to him, and seek of
him, to which they would not willingly have others witness, that is an
Israelite indeed, whose inside is best, whose secret diligence is that wherein
he meets with most of God, who loves to retire himself out of the crowd of
public worshippers, to mutter somewhat in his Fathers bosom; look to it, what
conscience ye make of secret prayer; some have no occasion of prayer, but that
which is secret, other some, beside secret, have the burden of public prayer,
and ye know how it lies in the mire, totally neglected in the Family, and when
ye put God out of the family, what wonder ye get worse company? But ye who are
about Family Prayer, consider how it goes with you in secret Prayer, think with
your selves, here it is that I am put to the Test, here I must give an account,
if I be an Israelite indeed, when I want the wind of applause, when I have no
observer but God, and am without fear of censure, now I am to look to what is
under my tongue; diligence in secret prayer, is the character of an Israelite
indeed, who has ground to hope in God.

But 4. If ye consider these prayers of Jacob's, ye will find, that it is a
very humble prayer, O! but he is very humble when he begins, and when he comes
away from prayer. The Preface verse 10. is, Lord, I am not worthy of the least
of all thy mercies; The Original (as it is in the Margin) emphatically reads
it, I am less than the least of all thy mercies, and all the truth which thou
have showed to thy Servant; O! but there was an humble man, the least of all
the mercies that had been droped on him, so bulks with him, that he is less
than the least of them. Was not that a fit man (if I may speak of the fitness
of sinful dust) to speak to God? yea, as he began humble, so he comes off
humble; though he wrestled fervently, and would not let the Angel of the
Covenant go, till he blessed them, yet he came off halting, he gets an humbling
halt in his wrestling, that made him lame all his days, and why? even to teach
us that the most eminent, and near access, that true Israelites gets to God,
puts them, and keeps them in the dust; look to it, puffed up persons, that do
not, that cannot be at a low sail. I shall not determine on your Grace, but
sure it is not like an Israelite indeed, and consequently it is not like them,
that have eminent ground of hope; the humble Supplicant is the Israelite indeed.

And I shall add 5th. when Jacob got the Name of Israel, he is not only
praying, but he is very fervent in prayer, he is wrestling in prayer; it is so
called, Genesis 32.24. And he so wrestled with the Angel, that he would not let
him go till he blessed him, verse 26. And that is another bl^st Character of a
blessed Supplicant, that is an Israelite indeed, when his Supplication is
fervent; ye have a remarkable word to this purpose, Jam. 5.16. where
encouraging folk to pray one for another, he says, The effectual fervent prayer
of the righteous man avails much; an Israelite, and lukewarm prayer, an
Israelite, and coldrife prayer agree ill, an Israelite put to his prayers for
the blessing, and for his hopes, that has all lying on his prayers, as ye talk
of them, that have their fortune lying on their sword, so has the Israelite
indeed, all lying on his prayers; he has nothing but from the hand to the
mouth, till he get it by Prayer; he is like Israel in the wilderness, whose
Manna must come down from Heaven, else he will starve: for such an one not to
be fervent in prayer, O, what a Solecism i^ it?

But 6. These prayers of Jacob's, on the account whereof he got the Name of
Israel, were not only fervent, but penitential, he is said, as a prince, to
have power with God. verse 28. And Hos. 3.4. He had power with God, and he had
power with the Angel, and prevailed: and how? He weeped and made supplication
to him, he great upon the Ang^l ill he came speed; and he wept not only
fervently, but penitentially; ye know how J^shua (chapter 7.) wrestled and came no
speed, because Israel had sinned, and had not repented of it, till the accursed
thing was taken from among them. Ye know how Judge 10. Israel cry for help, God
will not hear them, till they repent, and put away the strange gods from among
them. Levit. 26, 40. -- It Is when they confess their iniquity, and the iniquity
of their fathers, and that they have walked contrary unto him, and when their
uncircumcised hearts were humbled, and they accept of the punishment of their
iniquity, that God remembers his Covenant. There are many Prayers seem fervent
like, which considering the pressures folks are under, are but tint Prayers,
not Israelites Prayers, because they are not penitent; we lay our Thumb upon
our guilt in Prayer, and till guilt be taken with, and repented of, God will
not hear.

But 7. This Prayer of Jacob's, wherein he got the name of Israel, was a
fiducial Prayer; he began to pray, verse. 9. by reflecting on the command God
gave him, to return to his Country, and to his kindred, and he would deal well
with him, and therefore he was sure God would protect him. And Hos. 12.4. He
deals with the Angel of the Covenant: And though all the Characters named
before were in a person, if this one be wanting, it will not make up the
Israelite indeed, who has ground of hope to come speed with God. Time has
exceedingly pre^ented me, but I hope not to ill purpose; I shall reverence
providence in it. Ye have heard much, how ye will be put to it to hope in God,
and how it is the allowance of Israel; and I have letten you see how ye may be
Israelites to hope in God. Particularly, I have laid Jacob the first Israelites
prayer before you, that ye may learn to write after his copy, that ye may feed
on it, and bring the first fruits from Heaven, by intercourse with God in
Prayer, rightly regulated and ordered. God bless his Word to you for this end.

SERMON XXXV.
Psalm 130. Verse 7. Let Israel hope in the Lord, for, etc.
THE Psalmist, as ye have heard, when he sees through his own wrestling, he
cannot, will not be but publick-minded to the Lord's Israel; and if he has
gotten any good in wrestling with God under difficulties, guilt and delays of
comfort or issue, the very good he has gotten, enlarges his heart, and makes
him publick-minded toward others; and what ever be the hight of his own
enlargement, he does not forget, that Faith and Hope will be still necessary;
neither does he forget, that there is a constant warrant for Faith and Hope in
God, and that they are of so universal and constant use; and whatever others
may think of that exercise, or whatever it might be he himself thought of it,
when he was in the midst of the trial, yet he now in his practice makes it out,
that these who try Faith and Hope most, will esteem them most, and will be most
confident in recommending them to all others of the Lords people.

That which now I am upon, is the consideration of the persons to whom hope in
God is recommended, it is to Israel, whether we take them Collectively or
Distributively, one by one; ye have heard that hope in God is the common
allowance of all the people of God: Not only is Israel a society, that may
still hope, however matters go, or whatever their case be, but hope in God,
according to the nature and tenor of the promises, is the common allowance of
all and every one of them; and in pursuance of this, I broke in upon that great
point, and our duty, that seeing however hope be the common allowance of all and
every one of Israel, yet it is their allowance only who are Israelites indeed.
Therefore these that would claim to that allowance of hope in God, they would
make it sure that they are Israelites indeed, that though they be not all
Israel that are of Israel, yet that they are Israelites in the spirit, though
not in the letter, whose praise is not of men, but of God. And forbearing to
speak abstractly of the marks of regeneration, I offered two things to be
spoken to, for clearing up who they are who are Israelites indeed, and may
claim to this allowance. One is, the occasion of Jacob's getting this name of
Israel, when he was with God in Prayer; to which I have spoken, and led you
through some Characters of Israelites indeed, who have ground of hope in God,
which I gathered from his Prayers.

Now I am to touch a little upon that other thing I proposed to be spoken unto,
to find out these Israelites, to whom hope in God belongs, and that is the
Character given to them by way of Explication, who they are, Psalm. 73.1. Truly
God is good to Israel, and who are there? Even such as are of a clean heart. I
shall not offer to make any common place of this, but in reference to my scope
in following forth this point, as ye heard the last day, that the Israelite
indeed is a praying man; so ye would take a look here of an Israelite indeed:
First, as a self-purifying man, one that purifies his heart. An Israelite
indeed, his great work is about his heart, he is one that desires to look as
God does, 1 Samuel 16.7. Man looks on the outward appearance, but God looks
on the heart; and so does the Israelite indeed, he desires to have that
Character, Romans 2.28. -- Not to be a Jew outwardly, or to have that
circumcision or baptism which is outward in the flesh; but to be a Jew or
Christian inwardly, and to have that circumcision and baptism of the heart, to
be one in the spirit, and not in the letter, to be one, whose praise is not of
men, but of God. An Israelite indeed, is one whose great study is, to keep the
heart with all diligence, as Solomon enjoins, Prove. 4.33. for out of it are the
issues of life.

2. A true Israelite in looking after his heart, is a man that finds very much
pollution there, and that needs to be cleansed and purged. He is a man that the
further he goes in searching after himself, he finds still the greater and the
greater abominations. He is a man, that though he bless God (as he has reason)
that he is kept from outward out-breakings; yet when he looks within himself,
he never wants that which makes him humble, and to carry a low Sail, so long as
he finds his heart a Cage of unclean Birds. He is a man in whose ears does
sound aloud that word which ye have Jer. 4.14. O Jerusalem, wash thine heart
from wickedness, that thou may be saved, how long shall thy vain thoughts
lodge within thee? He is one that abom^nats, and is sensible of the manifold
pollutions of his heart, not only upon the account of the many and gross evils
that he finds there, of the suspicions of hypocrisy and formality in the
performance of duties, that he is afraid he please himself with; or on this
account, that his heart should be Gods Throne, and kept at the Brides Chamber
for the Beloved, and he finds it no such thing; but further upon this account
and consideration, that he finds his heart can act more wickedness in a short
time, than many bodies could commit for a long time.

3. The sense that the Israelite indeed has of his heart-pollutions, appears
in his endeavors to be cleansed from them, that he may have his heart washed
from wickedness: He is a man that will not pay God with a sighing and going
backward; he is not satisfied, that his pollutions he knows them, and his
uncleanness are with him: No, no, he must be further benn, nothing but
bosomewashing, heart-cleansing will satisfy, and he must be set seriously on
work to that; and whereas other folk take their Faith, their Hope and
Confidence to play them with, all the stock that he has of Faith, Hope and
Confidence, or that he can win to, he puts it out to help to purge his heart,
according to that word, Act. 19.5. Purifying their hearts by faith. It not only
imports that the Israelite indeed finds, that there is no way of purging he
heart, but by Faith in Christ. But further, if he get any Faith, he sets it on
work to purify his heart. And 1 John 3.3. He that has this hope in him,
purifieth himself, even as he is pure. If he get any hope of being made like
Christ, his sense of the pollution of his heart is such, that it sets him on
work to purify the heart.

4. This endeavor of a true Israelite will not be altogether in vain, and
without success, but he may win, through grace, to be of a clean heart, as the
Psalmist suppones, although he win not to perfection, yet he may win to that
commended in Nathanael, Joh. 1.7. Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no
guile: Do not understand it, that there is any Israelite that has not the
seeds of hypocrisy and guile, But he is an Israelite indeed, that has not
approved of predomining, or reigning guile and hypocrisy, and that may be win
at, which I speak for their encouragment who are true Israelites.

And 5. This sense of inward pollution, and endeavor to purify the heart,
through the exercise of Faith in Christ, it will appear in the outward
conversation; if a man be an Israelite indeed, in whom there is no approven
guile, that must accompany him which ye have, Gal. 6.16. He must be a man that
walks according to the Rule of the new Creature.

Now these are some brief hints, which I have given you of the Characters of an
Israelite indeed; but when I have minted thus to decipher him, I have not done
with this point, it is a concerning point indeed, to make it sure that ye are
true Israelites, who may lay claim to hope in God: And therefore I would press
it a little further, in the doing of which, if I should offer to you motives
from what I said before, of Isreal's having still ground of hope in God, I
should run in a round, and come back upon that which ye have heard; and
therefore to press it another way, I shall press you to consider what is said
of the Israel of God, which may help to stir you up to make it sure that ye are
of that number, that have ground of hope in God. I find in that forecited
place, Gal. 6.16. Mercy and peace to be to their allowance, peace be on them,
and mercy, and upon all the Israel of God; mercy for their miseries, and peace
for their disquiets and vexations. And I find it said, Psalm. 73.1. That truly
God is good to Isreal's It is beyond all peradventure, that he is good to them,
which goodness is a solid ground of hope in all exigencies, that it shall be
well with Israel. And to press this motive, if the Lord may please to bless it
for your quickening and up-stirring, to make it sure ye are of that number, and
so have good ground to hope in God, I shall deduce this goodness of God to
Israel in three or four steps only.

And 1. In the general consider, that the goodness of God to his people, is
unquestionably so great, and so satisfying, that were it well known, it could
not but rationally invite all to share in it, by becoming true Israelites. I
may say of Gods goodness to Israel, as Christ said to that woman of Samaria,
Joh. 4.10. If thou knew the gift of God, and who it is that says to thee,
Give me to drink, thou would have asked of him, and he would have given thee
living water. If folk knew this goodness, they would need no other motive to
excite them to be Israelites, that they might share in it. That is remarkable
which we find of it, Jer. 31.12. They shall come and sing in the hight of Zion,
and shall flow together to the goodness of the Lord, for wheat, and wine, and
for oil, and for the young of the flock and of the herd: and their soul shall
be as a watered garden, and they shall not sorrow any more at all. What a
refreshful satisfying thing must the goodness of God be, that has such
effects: And verse. 14. I will satiate the soul of the priests with fatness, and
my people shall be satisfied with my goodness, says the Lord. It Is beyond all
peradventure, that the goodness of God to his Israel, is so satisfying and
satiating, that it has not a slighter, but he that is ignorant of it; were it
known, men's reason would tell them that they were irrational, if they should
not seek to share in it.

But 2. For your exciting to enquire after it in general, ye would consider,
that it is a goodness whereof little account can be given, but by experience;
there is no describing of it, but by feeling of it. David when he is overcome
with it, Psalm. 34.8. says, O taste and see that the Lord is good, blessed is
the man that trusts in him. A man must experimentally taste of, before he can
see this goodness of God as it is: And we find, 1 Pet. 2.23. the Apostle lays a
great stress on this, that no man as a new born babe can desire the sincere
milk of the word, that he may grow thereby, but he that has tasted that the
Lord is gracious. If one should enquire, what is all this goodness of God that
should invite me to make it sure, that I am an Israelite, that I may share in
it? There is no answer comparable to this, Taste and see that the Lord is good:
Speak of it to a stranger to it, in experience he cannot take it up; Prove.
14.10. The heart knows its own bitterness, and a stranger does not intermedle
with his joy. The world knows not what is betwixt God and his people, either in
their ups or downs: And if it be thought, that these who have tasted of this
goodness, can give an account of it, ye will find them profess, that the hight
of the account they can give of it, is to sit down and wonder at it, to admire
it, as being surcharged and overcome with it. What says David of it, Psalm.
36.7, 8. How excellent is thy loving kindness, O Lord! therefore the children
of men put their trust under the shadow of thy wings. They shall be abundantly
satisfied with the fatness of thy house, and thou shall make them drink of the
river of thy pl^asure. And Psalm. 31.19. O how great is thy goodness, which thou
have laid up for them that fear thee! etc. He wonders at it, as being overcome
with it, but he cannot well make language of that which he feels of Gods
goodness to Israel; so that experience is the only sit mean, to bring folk to
know and take up how good God is.

But yet 3. The Scripture is not wanting to give such hints of it, as we are
capable of, and such as may tell us, that it is a matchless goodness; I shall
not offer to enter upon this deep, to speak of all the goodness and kindness of
God to Israel, from Election to Conversion, from Conversion to Glorification.
To essay to find out or fathom this Ocean, were to lose our selves in this
Subject. There are three general words, which if we would ponder, might give
some hints of this matchless goodness of God to his people: As 1. That in an
appropriated and peculiar sense, it is said, That God is good to Israel: Is he
good to none else? Yes, Psalm. 145.9 The Lord is good to all, and his tender
mercies are over all his works, Psalm 104.24. The earth is full of his riches.
Psalm. 33 5. The earth is full of his goodness; yet notwithstanding all that
goodness to all his creatures, it is said in an appropriat and peculiar sense,
Truly God is good to Israel. It Is a goodness indeed, a goodness by it self;
whence I infer, that if the common goodness of God to all (which being compared
with his peculiar goodness to Israel, does scarce deserve that name) be so rich
and full, how rich and full must that his appropriat and peculiar goodness to
his chosen people be? If the crumbs cast to the dogs, and cast to them in
wrath, be so plentiful, what must the covered Table of his goodness to his
children be? If the common out-Pasture be so rank and fat, what must the
Enclosure be? If his common communications be such a goodness, what a goodness
is that, and what are these special communications, that are reserved for the
Chambers? O! When thou sees the men of this world glutting themselves with Gods
common goodness, and blessing themselves in it, as being so rich and satisfying
to them, will thou then consider how much more rich and satisfying must his
peculiar and Chamber-goodness be? that kindness must be a far other thing.

A 2d thing that may offer some account of this goodness, I take from the
various names it gets in Scriptu;e; that one Attribute of the goodness of God,
which ye have in your Catechism, comprehends several under it, or it may
undergo several notions of this goodness of God, in reference to the several
cases of the children of men; consider, it is called goodness, it is all good;
and therefore all that thou an Israelite meets with in thy way homeward, thou
may write upon it, This shall work together for my good, Romans 8.28. We know,
etc. Thou may say, as Psalm. 23.6. Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me
all the days of my life. Thou may say, as Psalm. 119.68. Thou art good, and do
good, and therefore he will do good to thee. Thou may say, It is good for me
that I was afflicted. That is one blessed hint of the goodness of God to Israel,
that what ever an Israelite meets with, it is goodness, or it has goodness
written upon it. Again, this goodness is called his love, Jer, 31.3. I have
loved thee with an everlasting love, therefore with loving kindness have I
drawn thee. It is called love, to make sure the former, that he will do nothing
to his people, but that which is good for them, because his love cannot endure
to hurt them. Who can expect any thing from love, but that which is good. And
love, because he will rest in his love, Zeph. 3.17. Love, that when any thing
would interpose to interrupt it to Israel, will not hear tell of it, he will
rest in his love: he has loved them, and will love them still. Again, because
an Israelite has no price to purchase goodness, when he needs it, therefore
goodness is called grace, upon the account of his freedom, that all the
goodness he communicats to his Israel, it shall be without money, and without
price: That if an Israelite has no price, and consequently has nothing to give
for it, he has to do with one, that can take no price, but communicats his
goodness freely. And further, if thou be one that art not only worthless, and
have no price, but thou art such an one, as art lying low in misery, have none
to have pity on thee, or bemoan thee, or to turn aside to ask how thou do?
His goodness is mercy, with a relation to thy misery, to consider thy trouble,
to know thy soul in adversities, Psalm. 31.7. To remember thee in thy low
estate, Psalm. 136.23. To sit down beside thee, and to stoop to the very dust
unto thee, that is his goodness. And I shall add further, for finding out of
this goodness, that if thou who art an Israelite, be vexed with thy own
waywardness, untractablness, what will then the goodness of God do unto thee in
that case? The goodness of God to thee in that case, is patience and
long-suffering, to wait long upon a peevish Israelite, to suffer his manners in
the Wilderness, not to chide with thee continually, nor to retain anger for
ever, but to see thy ways, and heal thee, Isai. 57.17. in Further, if thou be
one that is not only wayward, but has provoked him to strike thee with the
rod, what will goodness do to thee then? I shall not resume what I said before,
that Psalm. 119.71. It is good for thee that thou art afflicted; but in that
case, the goodness of God shall be clemency and moderation to thee, to punish
thee less than thy iniquities deserve, Ezra 9.13. When thy luxuriant branches
of corruption shoot forth, to debate with thee in measure, to stay his rough
wind in the day of his east wind, Isai. 27.8. He shall exercise such clemency
and moderation toward thee, that shall be admired and wondered at by thee, when
thou gets a right look of it. Thus, as the common goodness of God to all, is
one step to lift thee up to the consideration of his appropriat and peculiar
goodness to his people, so the many notes put upon his peculiar goodness, or
the many shapes (if I may so term it) wherein it turns it self unto thee, of
goodness, love, grace, mercy, patience, long-suffering, clemency, and
moderation; how do these set forth how good God is to Israel, and to thee who
art one of them. There is yet a 3d hint of this goodness, which may be taken up
more particularly, in reference to Isreal's various cases. And there is a 4th
general word to be said of it, that it is no complement, but a real goodness;
both which I leave till the Afternoon. God bless what ye have heard, for
Christ's sake.

SERMON XXXVI.
Psalm 130. Verse. 7, 8. Let Israel hope in the Lord for with the Lord there is
mercy, and with him is plenteous redemption. And, etc.
HOpe in God being of constant use, and a duty for which there is a constant
ground and warrant, it is not ill employed time that is spent in enquiring who
they be that (go the world as it will) hope in God. They are indeed the Israel
of God, to whom the warrant of hope is appropriated; and though these may be
discerned by all the marks of regeneration, yet none do give a more clear
encouragement to hope in God, than their wrestling with God as a Prince in
Prayer, and their endeavor to purge their hearts of sinful pollutions, that
God may have a Throne and Dominion there, and to exercise you to study to be
Israelites indeed (for though ye be of Israel, that is Christians by
profession, yet they are not all Israel, who are of Israel,) I was laying
before you some considerations, of the goodness of God to Israel; ye remember
it was told you in general, that the goodness of God was such to his people, as
might rationally persuade folk to seek to share in it with his Israel. 2. That
this goodness of God is better known by experience, than it can be talked of,
even by them that have tasted of it; for it is a ravishing and overcoming
goodness, Zech. 9.17. For how great is his goodness, and how great is his
beauty! And yet 3. I was minting to lay it before you from some hints the
Scripture gives of it; and in the first place was telling, that if the common
goodness of God to all be so rich, how rich must his peculiar goodness to his
people be? And in Explication of this, I was hinting at the various names and
notions o^ this goodness of God, held out in the Word, how it keeps all
temptations that they hurt not the true Israelites, but makes them work for
their good; how it is love and tenderness, how it is grace and free grace to
the unworthy, mercy to them in misery, patience and long-suffering to the
way-ward, clemency and moderation to them that wring strokes out of his hand.

I shall now add a word or two further, that will help to give an account what
this goodness of God is to Israel; and that is in the 3d place, to take a look
of it in reference to the various cases of the Saints; though the
considerations we had of it in the morning do look here-away, yet I shall now
deduce this consideration of it more distinctly.

And 1. That God is good to Israel, it may encourage Israel under weakness; for
why? It Is one of the Lord's designations, that he is called, the strength of
Israel, 1 Samuel 15.29. Also, the strength of Israel will not lie. The word
strength (as it is in the Margin) signifies not only strength, but eternity and
victory, and all may very well go together here, in this goodness of God to
them; he is strength to Israel out of weakness, to make them strong, when they
faint, to give them power, 2 Cor. 12.10. Heb. 11.34. When they have no might,
to increase strength to them, Isai. 40.29. He has strength to make the weak
say, I am strong, Joel 3.10. And he has streng^h to Israel, not for a fit, but
to eternity; Israel cannot be continued so long weak, that everlasting arms
will not give him strength, for in the Lord Jehovah is, everlasting strength,
and he is str^ngth to Israel; not simply to bear them through difficu^ties, and
to keep them from total sinking, but he is so the strength of Israel, as he is
the victory of Israel, in due time to make them Conquerours, and more than
Conquerours, through him that has loved them.

2. That God is good to Israel, it may encourage them (as I was hinting in the
morning) against unworthiness in themselves, For (as ye will hear in the
progress) with the Lord there is mercy, for Israel, says the Text; Seek all
Christ's Court, there is not a worthy person of all he has, but himself; and if
there be any addition, any competition amongst Christ's train and followers, it
lies in this, who shall be the greatest dyvors and debtors to free Grace, who
shall be the most unworthy, less than the least of his mercies; who shall be
the Mephibosheth, these whom David will allow to sit at his Table; but
worthlesness is a noble claim in Israel, a dyvor bill is a noble pasport^s
dittay is a claim, For with the Lord there is mercy.

3. That God is good to Israel, it may encourage all true Israelites, under the
multitude of their frequent recurring necessities, accompanied with the sense
of the ill improvement of what good things he has done for them, and to them.
I suppose amongst the many humbling considerations that the Israelites have of
their case, this is not the least, that they are daily needing, daily getting,
and daily misguiding proofs of love; they are like that man, Prove. 19.19. That
when he is delivered, must be delivered again; How often do they think with
themselves, What should they do looking again to God for relief? they have so
often needed, so often gotten, and as often proven dyvors, misguiding all they
got, selling themselves without money, and without price, which makes them
blush to look to God again for new supply, and new delivery; but the goodness
of God may encourage them to look again, For with the Lord (says the Text) is
plenteous redemption; that is, not only delivery, but delivery in great plenty,
so often as they need.

4. That God is good to Israel, it may encourage Israel under the Conscience of
guilt in particular, for so the Psalmist says here in particular, He will
redeem Israel from all his iniqui^ies, these things I but name now, because (if
the Lord will) I will have occasion in the progress to speak more amply.

5. The goodness of God to Israel may encourage them against the contempt they
meet with, and the mean and low condition, wherein they are put in the world,
many a time our hearts think it a wonder, that the Blood Royal of Heaven, the
excellent Ones in the Earth should be no more esteemed of in the World, while
we little mind that word, 1 John 3.1. Therefore the world knows us not,
because it knew him not. Otherwise we would think it a wonder that the Israel
of God, are not made the filth and off-scourings of all things; yea, but the
goodness of God is a cordial to Israel in this case, let the world count them
the filth and off-scourings of all things, yet the Lord has chosen Jacob for
himself, and Israel for his peculiar treasure, Psalm. 135.4. Let their nearest
relations cast them off, he will not cast off any of his Israel; Hence David
could sing, Psalm. 27.10. when my father and my mother forsake me, then the Lord
will take me up; and Isai. 44.21. O Israel, thou shall not be forgotten of me,
says the Lord, that is Israel's privilege; and verse 23. The Lord has
redeemed Jacob, and glorified himself in Israel. The world may leave the Israel
of God, to send for themselves, but in that case Israel may sing, as Psalm.
121.4. He that keeps Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep, the Lord is his
keeper, the Lord is a shade upon his right hand, the Sun shall not smite them
by day, nor the Moon by night; the Lord shall preserve them from evil, he shall
preserve their soul, he shall preserve their going out, and their coming in,
from this time forth and even for evermore; So that in all cases Israel has
ground of encouragement in the goodness of God, and who would look upon these
things and believe them, and not think themselves engaged to make it sure, that
they are of the Israel of God, that share in these mercies, and privileges.

And this leads me to the 4th word, that I proposed to be spoken to, for
pressing you to study to be Israelites in Spirit, and that is, that this
goodness of God to Israel, that I have been minting to lay before you (though I
have been but spilling it in the speaking to it) it is not cunningly devised
fables, it is not to trapane you in a course, wherein your expectations will be
defeat; but all that is said of it, are the true and faithful sayings of God. I
shall only offer to illustrat this in three words, and I have done with the
Point. 1. What is the language of all the common goodness of God to your
selves, to you who are profane, to you who are rebels, to you who are mockers
at all Religion, that think it an evidence of a silly Spirit, to fall in love
with holiness; What means all this common goodness of God to you? (I say) that
he makes not the Earth open and swallow you up quick into the pit, as he did
Core, Dathan, and Abiram, that he puts not forth his hand to sweep you off the
Earth, or makes you not monuments of his Justice and Judgment upon it? Know ye
(I say again) What all this means? I shall give it you in that word, Romans 2.4.
The riches of his goodness and forbearance, leads, or should lead you to
repentance, that so ye may come in to know, what his special and singular
goodness to Israel means, he is laying invitations at thy door, who art
traversing thy ways, whom the wind has bound up in its wings, and who art as
light as the wind in following thy follies, inviting thee to come in and be an
Israelite indeed, that thou may share in his peculiar goodness, and put him to
it, as he bids you. Hag. 2. See if he will prove a wilderness, or a land of
drought to you; He gives you a bill of defyance, if ye will turn in to him, and
be his Israel indeed, that ye shall turn your back upon him, and say, he
disappointed you. 2. The Scripture intimats the reality of his goodness to all
his Creatures, his kindness is palpable to all creatures beside man, Job 36.41.
He provideth for the ravens their food, when their young ones cry unto him, the
young lions roar after their prey, and seek their meat from God, Psalm. 104.21.
He feeds the fouls of the air, he clothes the lillies and the grass in the
field, which to day is, and to morrow is cast into the oven, Mat. 6.20. And
from all this, our blessed Lord gathers, verse 30. If God provide for fowls,
and so clothe the grass, will he not much more clothe you, O ye of little
faith? If God be good to all his creatures, and will he not be good to his own
children? And a 3. word to illustrat it, Christ gives you, Mat. 7.9. from
Parents goodness to their Children, who if they ask bread, will not give them a
stone, or if they ask a fish, will not give them a serpent; and then infers, if
ye then being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much
more shall your father which is in heaven give good gifts to them that ask him;
So God's common goodness to your selves, his common goodness to all the
creatures, and the natural affection of parents to their children, all of these
concur to demonstrat, that the goodness of God toward his people, is real and
no complement; and therefore to shut up this purpose with this word of
Exhortation, that ye would seek to be Israelites indeed, and to leave it at
every ones door, that do not study to be Israelites indeed, that they forsake
their own mercy; in slighting this peculiar goodness of God, and such as do so,
let them stand to their own hazard; so I have done with the Exhortation, Let
Israel hope in the Lord.

I proceed now to consider the encouragements, arguments, or grounds on which
the Psalmist presses, that Israel should hope in God; For with the Lord is
mercy, and with him is plenteous redemption, and he shall redeem Israel from
all his troubles and iniquities; ye see the Arguments are taken partly from
what is with God, or in God, and his power, for the good of his people, mercy
and Redemption, and that in great plenty, that is, authority and power to give
a proof of his mercy to Israel, and to rid them from all servitude and bondage;
and partly the Arguments are taken from that which God will let out for the
good of Israel, if mercy and plenteous redemption be with him, then he will
redeem Israel from all his iniquities.

I shall not here fall in upon a general Remark, That folks hopes would be well
and distinctly grounded, for the Psalmist does not satisfy himself to exhort
Israel to hope in God, but he lays down grounds of hope, on which they are to
go in the exercise of that Grace; This Point, if I were to stand upon it, would
give a check, both to the blind guesses of the wicked, who have hope enough
always, and all that men can say, cannot drive them from their carnal
confidence, when they cannot tell what their confident hope is, or wherein it
is grounded, only they have a blind guess, which they take for hope; and partly
it would give a check to the children of God, for their ^ndistinctness in their
hope, and the grounds of it, while they are hanging on God: I do not deny, but
when they are oppressed, they must look unto God, to undertake for them; and when
they are blind, and cannot see through the cloud in the dark day, they must
grip unto him, who must hold them by the right hand, and when they are in a
mist of confusion, they must grip after God. But confusion and undistinctness
in ordinary, makes much uncomfortable work; whereas if folk studied to be
distinct and clear in the grounds of their hope, they would not lean so little
weight on hope, as tentation often persuades them to do.

But to leave this, what I would say from these Arguments, I shall draw it to
these two general Heads; I Ye see there is somewhat supponed here anent them
that are put to hope, and who are warranted to hope in God, they are in such a
condition, that they are put to need mercy, and plenteous redemption, and that
from many iniquities. 2. There is somewhat proposed anent such persons, that
there is hope of mercy and plenteous redemption, for them, with, and in God;
and there is Gods power and willingness to redeem them from all iniquities, and
this they are to look to, and hope for.

For the first, That which is supposed, I shall take it up in three Notes; 1.
That the man called to hope in God, is miserable in himself, and put out of
himself, to see what is in God that makes for him. 2. That he is not only
simply miserable, but under a bondage that needs redemption, and plenteous
redemption. 3. That he is a man that above all pressures he is lying under,
finds the pressure of sin and guilt to be the greatest, for he must have a
peculiar Redemption for all his iniquities.

1. The man put to hope, and warranted to hope in God, is a man miserable in
himself, and put to look for mercy, he is not a man that is conceity,
presumptuous, dreaming on the account of any good he finds in himself; but he
is a man put out of himself, to consider what is in God, That with God there is
mercy. If I should offer to prove this, by adducing Scripture testimony, I
should triffle by your time needlessly; it is so clear through the tenor of the
Scripture, that the rejoicer in Jesus Christ presupposes no confidence in the
flesh, that it is in God, and God alone, that an Israelite finds ground of
hope; and therefore I rather choose to deduce the Point into a twofold
inference.

And 1. From this, be directed to try upon the one hand, your confidence and
hope, by your humility, as on the other hand, your humility by your hope, these
two are inseparably connected, that the one cannot be found without the other:
Upon the one hand, any encouragement that is gotten by Faith and hope, must not
highten our estimation of our selves; a puffed up hope is a very great
Solecism; for though thou be helped by hope to glory in God, yet discovered
infirmity in thy self, will keep thee low; though thou be lifted up by him,
thou will be kept in the dust in thy self, not to see more in thy self, but
to see more in him to make up thy beggars wants; and therefore thou must beware
that thy confidence and hope lessen thy humility. And on the other hand, thou
would try thy humility, if it be of the right stamp, and not a lazy, proud,
carnal discouragement; thy humility if it be of the right stamp, will not tempt
thee to cast away thy confidence and hope, though thou be still kept low, when
thou art discovered to be a dyvour and a rebel, thou will not refuse a pardon,
a thing wherein gracious souls are much defective, that if they be not kept up
in the wind of their attainment, they are broken in their hopes, but a humble
man must be a hoping man, and must reckon that all that he sees and finds in
himself, must not put him from his hopes; but if he wanted these things he
finds in himself, he should have no work for his hope, and blessed are they
that find humility and hope, encouragement and abasement to work to one
another hands; when the bias of one of these graces lies toward the
furtherance of the other, it is an evidence of a blessed frame; otherwise a proud
hope, or a hopeless humility, will be found to be of little worth.

A 2d Inference from the Point is, if Israel be called to hope, on the account
of what is in God, and with God, if he be called to hope, upon the account of
mercy, in relation to his misery, then Israel cannot be undone so long as there
is enough in God to do his turn, but is still to hope; O! may Israel say, what
have I to hope in? Hope says the Psalmist, for there is infinite fullness in
God, For with God there is mercy; Israel, ye need not cast away your hope and
confidence, so long as there is any thing in God to bottom it. And might I
break in here on it, O! what a blessed communion and stocking together (to speak
so) is there betwixt God and his people; ye know that God the Father, Son, and
holy Ghost, did always share with his people in all their lots, Isai. 63.9. In
all their afflictions he was afflicted. Zech. 2.8. He that touches them,
touches the apple of his eye. Jer. 32.41. He rejoices over them to do them
good, with his whole heart and soul: Ye know our blessed Cautioner took on our
nature, to share with us in all our sinless miseries, He was tempted in all
things, like as we are, but without sin. Heb. 4.15. Now he that shared once
with us in suffering, and always in sympathy, makes a common good of all the
fullness that is in him for his people, that what he has, is forthcoming for
them; and, O! the rich Promises that we have of this; Has the Father appointed
him a Kingdom, it will do him no good, if they share not in it, Luke 22.29. I
appoint unto you a Kingdom, as my father has appointed to me, Joh. 14.19.
Because I live, ye shall live also, because I live, I will not leave you dead,
Joh. 17.24. Father, I will that these whom thou have given me, be with me where
I am, that they may behold my glory, which thou have given me, Rev. 3.21. To
him that overcomes, will I grant to sit with me on my throne, even as I
overcame, and am set ^own with my Father on his Throne; see what delight he
has to communicate in lo^s with his people, and so it is in exigencies that
befall them, if they sit in darkness, he will be l^ght to them; if they be
foolish, he will be their wisdom; if weak, he will be their strength; if in
captivity and bondage, he will be their Redeemer. In a word, if he have, they
shall not want; and if it be in God and promised, it shall not fail; if it be
in the house among them, it shall be forthcoming to Believers, and hopers in
God; I pray you learn to reckon this gate, ye cannot tell, what may be your
work and exercise ere ye go from off the stage: and I have no commission to
recommend carnal confidence to you; but the Israel of God may speak bigg in
him, and boast their enemies, that seeing their Head is above the water, though
they be doucked they cannot drown; that all the attempts of enemies come now
too late to frustrat Christ's designs, unless they can bring him back again,
and set him before their bar. He has answered all challenges and charge against
his people, and therefore none can be heard to plead against them; they may
say, Shall tribulation, distress, persecution famine, n^^edness, pe^^l, or
sword, shall any of these separat us from the love of Christ? Nay in all these
we are more than conquerors. They come too late to harm the Saints, for he has
spilt their sport and game, who was dead, and is alive for evermore, and has
the keys of hell and death, he has du^g the teeth out of their heads, he has
drunk the poison out of all cups can be propined to them. And for duties and
undergoing difficulties, I shall give you that blessed directory of the
Apostle's, who 2 Cor, 3.5. says, We are not sufficient of our selves to think
any thing as of our selves; and yet Phil. 4.13. says, I can do all things
through Christ that strengthens me; I cannot think a good thought of my self,
and yet through Christ strengthening me, I can do all things; and this
condescendence of the Apostle to his insufficiency to think a good thought,
gives a sad check to many that never put Christ in their undertakings, but at a
dead lift, and therefore in such exigents, provock him to desert them, in
ordinary miskenning him; but were we left on him in ordinary, and employing him
in all things, whether duties or difficulties, it were a door of hope in more
than ordinary exigence, we might say, through Christ strengthening us, we can do
all things. Lord bless his word unto you.

SERMON XXXVII.
Psalm 130. Verse 7, 8. Let Israel hope in the Lord, for, etc.
YOU heard that these two Verses do contain the second part of the Psalm,
wherein, after that the Psalmist in the first 6 Verses, has been wrestling,
partly with plunging perplexities, represented under the notion of Depths,
verse. 1.2. Partly with the Conscience of guilt, verses 3.4. And partly with the
delays of comfort and an outgate, verses 5.6. After that, I say, the Psalmist
comes to get some issue and outgate, whereof he gives not a direct and express
account, but any good he has gotten, he presently makes it appear in good news
to Israel, he has an exhortation to them, to hope in the Lord, and has
Motives and Arguments pressing his Exhortation, which are taken partly from
what is in God, to the behove of his Israel, For with the Lord there is mercy,
etc. And partly from what he will let forth of this for their good and behove;
not only is mercy and plenteous redemption with him, but he shall redeem Israel
from all his iniquities. For the Exhortation, I spoke to it at length. And at
the last occasion I brake in upon the Motives. The Instructions to be gathered
from which, I reduced to two general Heads. 1. Something supposed concerning
them that are put to hope, and allowed to hope in God. And 2. Something
proposed concerning such as are called and allowed to hope, and as a ground to
their hope. For the first, That which is supposed in the Words, it may again be
reduced to these two Heads of Doctrine; 1. That the man called and allowed to
hope in God, is one that is acquainted with misery in himself, and is put to
look out to what is in God, or with him to do his turn: For with the Lord there
is mercy. That there is mercy with God, implys, That the man that is called,
and allowed to hope in God, is in himself miserable, and put to look out to God
for mercy; and so it is one of the blessed and sure characters of a person that
is called, and allowed to hope in God, that he is kept humble, not conceity,
nor dreaming of any good in himself, and the nearer he be to the dust, he has
the more warrant to hope; for the man that spears the right gate to hope, is he
that Lam. 3.29. Puts his mouth in the dust, if so be there may be hope; he
creeps low in the dust to seek encouragement to hope; and the man that is
called to live by Faith, is opposed to the man whose soul is lifted up in him,
and consequently to the man whose heart is not upright in him, Hab. 2.4. And
further, the man that is called to hope, and allowed to hope, in the humbling
sense of his misery; he is put to look without himself, to what is in God, or
with God for him; he is called to hope on the account of mercy, in relation to
his misery. It intimats, that the humble sensible man, the Israel of God, can
never be undone, so long as God is to the fore, and there is enough in him to
do his turn, though he be miserable, and wants that he stands in need of; yet
if it be in God, he shall not want: If mercy be in, and with God, he is made up
in the midst of his misery. To this I have spoken already, and shall not repeat.

I proceed to the second Observation, employed in that which is supposed,
concerning the man that is put to hope, and warranted to hope in God, That not
only is he simply miserable, and needing mercy, but he is under such a bondage
of sin and misery, as he cannot extricat himself out of it, except God
interpose; He needs not only mercy in God, but redemption, and plenteous
redemption in God, to rid him out of these bonds, wherein he is fettered and
bound, and out of which he is not able to deliver himself; Although the
consideration of sin will come in to be spoken to on the next Observation by it
self, yet I shall on this touch a little in general, both on the bondage of sin
and misery, under which the Israel of God are supponed to be lying. As for sin,
all men by nature are bound slaves to it, they are hurried away with every
impetuous blast of temptation, that blows upon their corruption; but it is the
Israel of God that are called and allowed to hope in God, that feel this
bondage. Hence the Apostle, ( Romans 7.19.) says, The good that I would, I do
not; but the evil that I would not, that I do: And he finds a law in his
members warring against the law of his mind, leading him captive to the law of
sin; on which account, he cries out, O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver
me from this body of death? There is a captivity indeed under sin, and he tells
the Galatians, Chap. 5.17. That the flesh lusts against the spirit, and the
spirit against the flesh, and these two are contrary, one to another, so that
they cannot do the things they would. So the Israel of God are under a bondage
of sin, when they would do good (as the same Apostle has it) ill is present
with them. And for the bondage of their misery, the Scripture is so full anent
it, and the experience of the Saints so amply confirms it, that it is needless
to stand on particular proofs and instances of it: How often are they put to
that, Psalm. 107.11. Because they rebelled, therefore he brought down their
heart with sorrow and labor, they fell and there was none to help.

In the Application of this, I shall speak a word, first to the wicked and
ungodly, and then to Gods Israel, who are called and allowed to hope in him,
notwithstanding this bondage they are under: For the first, to wit, the wicked,
They would from this look on it as a sad character, to know little, and be as
little sensible of their bondage through sin and misery. They look on a
licentious way of living in sin, when they have eyes full of adultery, and that
cannot cease from sin, as it is, 2 Pet. 2.14. When sin reigns in their mortal
bodies, and they obey it in the lusts thereof, and they yield their members as
instruments of unrighteousness unto sin, Romans 6.12. When they give themselves
up to work all uncleanness with greediness, Ephesians. 4.19. They look upon that as
their liberty, and they are never out of bonds, except when they are glutting
themselves with sin, they sl^ep not except they do ill. O! that such knew what
a madness, and distraction they are under, while they glory in their chains, as
if a madman should glory in his fetters; look to it, assure thy self thou shall
find sin to be a bondage, and need of looking to God for Redemption from it,
ere thou have a warrant to hope in God. And for the other Branch of this
Bondage, Misery and Trouble, I cannot tell you how many ways wicked men wander
in, ere they stand in need of Redemption out of it from God, Only I would lead
you in a few steps of their ill improvement of the misery they are under
through sin. In one or mo of which, the generality may read their Portraict.
And 1. It is the wickeds first se^^ hand to secure themselves against all
apprehensions of trouble or misery; the song they would fain essay to sing, is
that, Psalm. 10.6. They have said in their heart, they shall not be moved; for
they shall never be in adversity, and for that end they foster their atheism,
and deny a Providence: Would ye have a character of wicked men's first essay, ye
will find it, Ezekiel. 8.12. and 9.9. The Lord sees not, the Lord has forsaken
the earth; When they would commit all abominations, this is their cordial
against misery, Zeph. 1.12. They are settled on their lies, they say in their
heart, the Lord will neither do good nor evil. They neither fear him nor his
Providence.

But a 2d. step is this, if they pretend to own a Deity, and acknowledge a
Providence, they will admit of no intimation of any displeasure from God
against them, or their way, do what they will: If ye would waken a quarrel, and
make them your enemy, tell them God is angry with them for their sins, and will
be about with them, they will be about with you; they dow not endure to be told
of their faults, or of God's wrath and anger; I cannot give you this step more
distinctly, than in that, Jer. 5.12. When the Prophets spoke to them the word
of the Lord, they would not let it light, that it was God's mind; They have
belied the Lord (says he) and said, it was not he, neither shall evil come on
us, neither shall we see sword or famine; What will ye then do with the
Prophets, that say the contrary? verse 13. The Prophets shall become wind, and
the word is not in them: Thus shall it be done to them, they will be in their
tops, as wronging God, that tell them of Judgment for their sins. A 3d step of
their wandering, if all this do not the turn, if God fulfill the words of his
Servant, they have yet another fend, and it is to grow as stupid and senseless,
as they can make themselves under vengeance; this ye find deduced, Isai. 42.25.
The Lord has poured upon him the fury of his anger, and the strength of
battle, and it has set him on fire round about, yet he knew it not; it burned
him, yet he laid it not to heart: And Hos. 7.9. As the result of many a
debausht rant, from the beginning of the Chapter, Ephraim is smitten with
stupidity, strangers have devoured his strength, and he knows it not; yea, gray
hairs are here and there on him, yet he knows not: When vengeance cannot be
holden off, the next sanctuary is stupidity. But 4 If stupidity will not do the
turn, but God will smite, and they must find it, they will put on a hight and
greatness of spirit, that if any breach come, they will repair it, Isai. 9.9.
There is a generation that say in the pride and stoutness of their heart, the
bricks are fallen down, but we will build with hewn stones; The sycamores are
cut down, but we will change them into cedars, when they cannot avoid the
feeling of Gods stroke, they will set to it to make it up. A 5th step of their
abusing, or woeful improvement of their misery and bondage is, if they find that
what God has built, God will throw down, (as it is, Mal. 1.4. They will run
away to their carnal dreams and confidence, that God will own them, as Jer.
12.4. When great calamity comes upon them, on this very account, they say, He
may well shore, he will not lay on, or if he lay on, he will not see us ruined,
he will not see our last and. There is yet a 6th step, when all their essays
misgive upon their hand; instead of taking themselves to the waiting man's
posture, to look up to God in the sense of their misery for redemption, they
turn desperate and hopeless, their high flowen carnal expectations, resolves in
desperation, Jer. 2.25. Thou said there is no hope, no, for I have loved
strangers, and after them will I go. And Jer. 18.12. They said there is no
hope, but we will walk after our own devices, and we will every one do the
imagination of his evil heart; Their hopes that God will spare, resolves in
desperate hopelesness in the issue, like these whom Isai. 22.12. The Lord calls
to weeping and mourning, to baldness and girding with sackcloth; They give
themselves to joy and gladness, slaying oxen, etc. saying, Let us eat and
drink, for tomorrow we shall die. All these steps of the wickeds wandering, I
have laid before you, that in a brief view, ye may see the sinful byasses of
folks hearts in their woeful way of improving the bondage and misery they are
under, that any of you who are delivered from it, may bless God and be thankful
to him, and may mourn over them that are walking in any of their rods, or over
their precipieces.

But I said, I had also somewhat to say to the Israel of God, that are called
to hope in God, and allowed and warranted to hope in him, and shall briefly
touch three or four short words to them.

1. When an Israelite of God is brought under bondage, from which by no means he
can extricat himself, but needs redemption from God, he is bound to consider
and reflect on the way how he came there: This is the first thing he would
think on, how he has sold himself into that bondage, Isai. 50.1. Thus says the
Lord, where is the bill of your mothers divorcement, whom I have put away? or
which of my creditors is it to which I have sold you? Behold for your
iniquities have ye sold your selves, and for your transgressions is your mother
put away. It is a very useful and profitable meditation for them, that find the
yoke of their transgressions wreathed about their neck, to sit down and
consider how they came thither, how, either by giving way to temptation,
presenting baits to them, have taught it to be their captain, and given it the
mastery over them? or how by their folly and provocations, they have wreathed
that yoke on themselves, from which they cannot rid themselves, nor get leave
to walk haughtily.

2. An Israelite is then called to consider the holy hand of God, in making him
feel the bitter fruit of his folly, in this his bondage. Many not only give way
to temptations of sin, but delight in it, and God leaves them under the power
of it till they lament that their folly; and therefore when we are under bonds,
we would reflect, not only on the bringing of our selves in that bondage; but
on our delighting in these sins that procured it.

3. The scope of the Point leads me to press this, that when an Israelite is in
misery, and finds the hand of God pursuing him, he would take another look of
things, than to look upon them as insuperable, though he cannot expede himself;
yet with God there is redemption, when thou have essayed to shake off the yoke
of thy transgressions, that thou have wreathed on thy own neck, and have
labored in the very fire, and wearied thy self for very vanity, as the word
is, Hab. 2.13. Sit not down hopeless, look not on thy case, as not only
deplorable, but desperate, call not thy wound grievous, and thy bruise
incurable, for with God there is plenteous redemption to break these bonds,
that to thee are insuperable. Only remember in the 4th place, that thou take
the right way to an out-gate; thy bonds will sit fast by thee, not only till
thou resent thy folly, in drawing them on, but till thou run to him to set thee
at liberty; the language of all thy bondage, and the bonds wherewith thou have
bound thy self, thou may take up in that, Psalm. 107.13. when he brought down
their heart with labor, and there was none to help; then they cried to the
Lord in their trouble, and he saved them out of their distresses; Thou art
brought in bondage through thy folly, thou uses means to be out of it, but thy
difficulties continue insuperable, every essay thou makes to be quit of them,
miscarries; but see that it be not because thou art not at the right door with
them, no marvail they continue till thou come to him, with whom is plenteous
redemption. So much for the 2d Point, That the man put and allowed to hope in
God, is under such a bondage of sin and misery, as he cannot extricat himself
out of it, till God interpose and redeem him.

The 3d Observation employed in that which is supposed here, anent hopers in
God, is that of all bondage and slavery, the bondage of sin is the greatest to
the Israel of God, to the man that is called and allowed to hope in God. On
this account it is, that the Psalmist does not content himself, to say, There
is plenteous redemption with God in the general; but there must be a particular
Promise subjoined, That he shall redeem Israel from all his Iniquities. That
there be redemption in and with God, will not content an Israelite, except
there be in it a redemption from sin; because redemption from sin is Israel's
great business and affair, I shall not need to confirm the truth of this,
either from Scripture proofs or instances, where we find the Saints especially
troubled with sin; amongst the crowd of their exercises, sin has been their
great exercise. Nor shall I need to stand to give reasons of the Point, as that
sin is the greatest evil, the fountain whence all our misery and bondage flows;
and they that seek relief from their bondage, without seeking redemption from
sin, are like these that seek to dry up the stream, miskenning the fountain.
But passing these, I shall speak a word, first in general, and then in
particular, to the Israel of God, how sin is taken up by an Israelite, in a
right frame, as the greatest bondage and slavery.

In general, I recommend more conscience making of sin, and more exercise about
sin, a thing, I fear, little in practice amongst the generality; ye will get
men in times of difficulty, with their hands on their loins, having pangs, and
crying out, as a woman in travail, by reason of affliction, who will have very
few thoughts of sin, and less exercise about it; there is often times much
trembling of mind, where there is little trouble of conscience, or none, and ye
would beware of confounding these two. A man's mind may be troubled and
confounded, and put through other, when he has the answer of a good
Conscience, as being at peace with God through the blood of Christ, and a man's
mind may be troubled, when his conscience is asleep, and has no exercise for
sin; and therefore in times when there may be much anxiety and vexation in
folks mind, about dispensations of Providence, let not the great business be
trouble, but sin, and whatever ye meet with, take that along with you, Isai.
27.9. By this therefore shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all
the fruit to take away his sin; The conscience of sin, and exercise about it,
would take away the clamor and di^ that is about trouble, a conscience troubled
about sin, will soon justify God, in inflicting any trouble on body or mind,
and will say as Ezra 9.13. Thou have punished us less than our iniquities
deserve. And a man at peace with God, though he have tribulation in the world,
and exercise of Conscience for sin, yet in Christ he shall have peace; but a
vexed and discontented mind about trouble, without any exercise or trouble of
conscience for sin, may make a man evil company to himself, and bad enough
company to others whom he has to do with in the world.

SERMON XXXVIII.
Psalm 130. Verse 7. Let Israel hope in the Lord, for with the Lord there is
mercy, etc.
HOpe in God, as it is the man's wealth who confesses himself to be a pilgrim
and stranger on the earth, for he is saved by hope, not an hope that is seen,
for then it should be no hope, Romans 8.24. So there is no undertaking, that the
saints may have more encouragement for than to hope in God; it is that which
many times comes between them and sinking, and giving it over, as in the
Psalmist, Psalm. 42.5. Why art thou cast down, O my soul, and why art thou
disquieted in me, hope in God, for I shall yet praise him; and whereas the
world may think the hope of the Saints a blind guess, and say of their souls,
there is no help for them in God, and temptation within, or probability
without, may confirm, or seem to confirm the worlds verdict; yet to a right
discerner, it has a fair field to go on, and a broad board to feed on, Let
Israel hope in the Lord, for with the Lord there is mercy, etc.

I am yet (as ye may remember) detained on some truths imported here,
concerning right hopes in God: As 1. That on the account of emptiness and
misery at home, they are left upon God, with whom there is mercy. 2. That upon
the account of bondage and pressures, from which they are not able to extricat
themselves, they are left on God, with whom is plenteous redemption. And 3.
That among all the pressures necessitating them to look to God for Redemption;
There is none pinches them so hard, and sticks so close to them, as sin, so
that there is need of a particular Promise of redemption from that.

I left in the morning with a general word from the last of these, That sin,
and the bondage we are under through sin, should be more our exercise, we
should silence all clamors about trouble, with being throng about guilt, that
we should look on troubles and afflictions, as things that we may get home
with, whether we be rid of them or not; but we should look on redemption from
sin, as a thing absolutely necessar, For without holiness, none shall see God;
and that we should not take every trouble of mind, for kindly exercise of
Conscience for sin, we should not let Conscience be sleeping in the bosom of a
Delilah, while there is a clamor made about trouble, and that because it will
not be suffered to sleep there without interruption. Now to follow out this a
little more particularly, I shall offer you four or five words from the Text,
about their right exercise, whose trouble is about sin, or some Characters of
them who have ground of hope, that God will redeem them from all iniquity.

And 1. (which is more general) they that would approve themselves to God, in
their exercise about sin, must learn to look on sin as a burden, whereof they
would be rid, as a bondage from which they need redemption, In the right Israel
of God, that is rightly exercised about sin, no grievance goes so near the
heart, as that of sin. The want of a delivery from trouble, if they could be
delivered from sinning under it, or from having their corruption irritat to sin
more by it, it would be to them an outgate, and they would drink and forget
their misery, if they could get sin shaken off, if they could get that weight
laid aside, and be made light to run the race that is set before them; What
will ye say to this, ye to whom wickedness is sweet, and who hide it under your
tongue, who spare sin, and forsake it not, who count it not a bondage, but a
liberty; surely to a true Israelite sin is the most unsupportable burden.

2. They that look aright on sin, as on a burden whereof they would be rid,
they must look on it as an iniquity, abominable and hateful, He shall redeem
Israel from all his iniquities; and as the phrase is, Psalm. 32.5. Thou
forgavest the iniquity of my sin. Some sins may be troublesome or vexatious, and
folk would not care to be quit of them, on that, or some other carnal account;
but there is none rightly exercised with sin, that do not weary of it, as
hateful, abominable, and ugly in God's Eyes. Thou may desire to be quit of one
sin, because it crusheth another sin, but that is no evidence of a right
groaning under the pressure of iniquity till it be groaned under as loathsome to
God.

3. As they that are rightly exercised about sin, look on it as a burden, and
as iniquity; so all of it is hateful and abominable as such; I might here, if I
would follow it out, point out to you, that there is an all of sin in every one
of mankind, that there is an all of sin even in Israel, who are allowed to hope
in God, a notion that David notices, Psalm. 140.12. Mine iniquities have taken
hold on me so that I cannot look up, they are more than the hairs of mine head.
And O, but they that are well acquaint with their own heart, that are often
upon a self-examination and search, and do not live strangers to themselves,
they will find greater and greater abominations there. Whither do they turn
them, but they will find pollutions in their omissions, and commissions, in
reference both to Law and Gospel, in reference to mercies received, and
corrections inflicted, etc. But that which I am upon is, That Israel looks upon
all sin as iniquity. A partial opposition of sin, is a self-deceiving
undertaking, a sacrificing of many sinful delights to one predominant, a
burning of many Cities, to save one Zoar, will not be taken off saints hands,
as a right opposition of sin. As far as iniquity extends, so far must their
groaning under, and opposition to it extend.

4. They that are rightly exercised about sin, will find it a pressure that
needs a redemption, that is a pressure that they will not get shaken off till God
interpose. There is some other thing in delivery from iniquity, than for a man
to think he will go forth as Sampson, and shake him as at other times. No, a
man will be put to look to God to attain it. I confess, painfulness in the use
of means is our duty, and it will never be taken off our hands, for us to say,
that iniquity is our burden, and hurtful to us, so long as we are not using
means to be rid of it. No, there must be endeavors on our part to cast out
these Devils by Fasting and Prayer; and though it were to beat down the body,
and bring it in subjection (as the Apostle does, 1 Cor. 9.27.) in the exercise
of Mortification, that must not be wanting; but it fears me, there is little of
the painful work of Mortification to be found among Christians in those days,
profession is the broadest thing in Religion among all, and next to that some
positive duties; but for the serious study of Mortification, to get Satan trod
under foot, to be above corruption: O! how few Christians can have a sober
testimony on that account? And yet shall I say it, that next to thy closing
with Christ, and making him thy City of Refuge, thy painfulness in
Mortification will be thy great Test? But that which I am now on, is to lay
before you, that on the one hand, slipped in Mortification (I had almost said
sleeped in Mortification) of sin, is much to be suspected, when some iniquities
that had power over you seem to be subdued, but ye never did any thing to
subdue them: ye would remember that parable, Mat. 12.43. of the unclean spirit
that goes out of a man; many Devils go out, that are not casten out; that is,
he withdraws to take the man from off his watch, and to surprise him, to put
himself in a capacity to return again to his house whence he came out, with
seven other spirits more wicked than himself. But further, as slipped in
Mortification, will not hold water; so on the other hand, when we have used all
pains to mortify and subdue sin, our endeavors will not prove effectual,
though Prayer and Fasting be our duty, and the use of other means, till God
come and give redemption from it. It is God only that has power over iniquity;
yea, it may be, that he has a judicial hand in it, and has past a sentence,
making it thy plague as well as thy sin, that till thou know the plague of
thine own heart, and look up to him for delivery from it as a plague, thou
shall not be rid of it. And therefore, as on the one hand thou must be at pains
to get the burden and bondage of sin shaken off, that Naphthali may be a Hind
let loose; so on the other hand, thou must not mistake, though thy pains be not
effectual as to that thing, but remember, though when thou have done all thou
can, thou cannot rid thy self of iniquity, and it will be with thee; he in whom
thou art called, and allowed to hope, can deliver thee.

But 5. Iniquity being a burden and bondage, and abominable and hateful to the
true Israelite, and the wrestler, to be free of it, finding that he cannot get
himself rid of it. God interposing to redeem from it, is a peculiar mercy:
That Is a proof that with him is plenteous redemption, if he redeem him from
iniquity. This is the main point, and a point that I cannot enough batter on
you; Redemption from iniquity to a right discerner, will make up all
redemptions. Let a man be a servant, a slave, a bondman, a worm, and not a
man, he is the Lords freeman, if he be redeemed from iniquity. Isai. 33.2. Then
the inhabitant shall not say, I am sick: the people that dwell therein shall be
forgiven their iniquity. It Is a noble Physic for sickness to be a pardoned
man, it is a noble antidot to all pressures, to be redeemed from iniquity; it
compenses and makes more than up all other pressures, to be redeemed from this
pressure. And as this redemption makes up all other redemptions, so other
redemptions without this, will signify little to a right discerner, this to
him is the choice of mercies; let God cast him in trouble, and bring him out of
trouble, if he bring him not from the bondage of iniquity, it is no delivery to
him; if when he is cast into the furnace his skum depart not from him, but he
brings it out with him; he can see a plague in other redemptions, when the
bondage of sin continues. In a word, to the right discerner of the bondage of
sin, God is a matchless God to him on this very account, that he pardons
iniquity, and passes by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage; a
place, which with others I had occasion to make use of, in speaking on the 4.
verse: And whoever are complaining of pressures, and seeking to be rid of them,
and yet they continue, if ye would read the language of that dispensation
aright, here it is, God is making that pressure to ly on; till redemption from
sin be looked on as the crownning mercy, which if we enjoy, we cannot be
miserable; and if we want it, have what we will, we cannot be happy. Mind this
mercy more, redemption from iniquity, to humble uncircumcised hearts, to be
groaning under the bondage of sin, longing for delivery from that woeful Trade
of walking contrary to God, and provocking him to walk contrary to you, and to
punish you seven times more, and seven times more, till ye be humbled, and take
with the chastisement of your iniquity. Remember I have left it with you in the
Name of the Lord, that there be more conscience making of sin, and of being
exercised mainly about it, and putting God to redeem you from it; let this be
your great task and exercise, whatever be your exercise otherwise. Now I have
done with that which is supposed in the motives backing the Exhortation to hope
in God.

I come then to that which is proposed, to encourage to hope in God: And I
suppose the rest of the Doctrines in these two Verses may be distinctly enough
reduced to these four. 1. That relative to Isreal's misery, There is mercy in
God, or with him. 2. That relative to Isreal's bondage, There is plenteous
redemption with God. 3. That what is with God, shall be put forth as the Israel
of God needs it: Redemption is with him, and he shall redeem, etc. 4. We
shall speak a little to this redemption from iniquity, how God works it?

For the first, it may thus be taken up, that it is a great encouragement to
Israel, to hope in God, in all cases and exigents, that there is mercy with
God. This mercy of God is in effect the goodness of God, that Attribute of God
which ye have in your Catechism. It Is the goodness of God, I say, expressed under
a notion relative to the misery of man, and so ye have it, Psalm. 136.1. O give
thanks to the Lord, for he is good. How is that evidenced? for his mercy
endures for ever. He who is good in himself, and does good to others, as David
has it, Psalm. 119.68. He is good, and manifests his goodness, by doing good to
othe^s, by his mercy that endures for ever. Not to insist on the various
notions and expressions of this goodness of God, if we look to it in the
fountain, his goodness, as it is communicate to his creatures, is called his
love, and his goodness in the fountain is called his love, because it is an
eminent proof of his goodness, that he loves with an everlasting love, Jer.
31.3. That he has a love to his people, wherein he will rest, Zeph. 3.17. That
he has such a love to them, as nothing shall separate from; and partly because
he does not bestow this his goodness grudgingly, or complementingly, but in
love: Love stretches out the hand of bounty, Jer. 32.41. He rejoices over
them to do them good, with his whole heart, and with his whole soul. Again, is
the goodness of God in its root and fountain, is called the love of God to his
people, so in respect of its freedom, and their ill-deserving to partake of it.
It Is called the grace of God, a term that we find frequently occurring in
Scripture, and it is nothing else but the goodness of God, or the effects of his
goodness freely communicate, freely bestowed, without money or price, where
there is no merit or deserving, yea, where there is much undeserving, or
deserving of the contrary. Again, this goodness of God, as it is manifested in
opposition to the waywardness and peevishness of his people, it is called
patience and long-suffering; for his patience, in waiting on them, and his
long-suffering, in bearing with their manners in the Wilderness, what is it but
the goodness of God, overcoming the waywardness and peevish disposition in his
people? Again, the goodness of God, as it is still continued, even when Justice
and Severity takes place, it is called Clemency and Moderation, that in measure
when it shuts forth, he debateth with it, and stayth his rough wind in the
day of his east wind, Isai. 27.8. And that in wrath he remembers mercy, Hab.
3.2. There the goodness of God moderating deserved strokes, droping in proofs
of love, in the midst of deserved wrath, all these are the goodness of God
represented to us under various notions; and here in the Text, the goodness of
God in reference to his peoples misery, is called mercy. And Exodus 34.6. When
the Lord proclaims his Name in Moses hearing, ye will find there are various
notions of the goodness of God that I have been speaking of, and in the same
method. The first Letter of his Name is Merciful, to nominat that the first
look that God takes of poor man, is pity and compassion, in reference to his
misery. The next Letter is Gracious, to intimate that God having looked on
miserable man, as the obje^^ of his compassion, because it might be objected,
God has great compassion, but what deserves miserable man? He has nothing to
commend him, yea, he has much to discommend him. It is answered, God is not
only merciful to compassionat miserable man, but he is gracious to notice him,
and compassionat him freely, without merit, and contrary to demerit. Then he is
Long suffering, etc. Now in reference to this mercy of God, there are three
things I intend to touch on, before I come to the use. 1. To open up the nature
of this mercy. 2. To speak a little of the object of it. And 3. to the
properties of it.

In speaking to the first, I shall wave all School speculations anent it, as
whether mercy and punitive justice be essential to God, and on what account
they can be called essential Attributes, seeing mercy presupposes man miserable,
which is one of the Socinian foundations, to overthrow the satisfaction of
Christ; but that might be easily cleared, by adding a word to what has been
already said, That mercy in God is nothing but the goodness of God* with
relation to the object to which it is communicate, and punitive justice is
nothing else but that essential Attribute of his holiness, vindicating and
avenging himself on a sinner, the object of his justice; and if we consider the
mercy and justice of God thus; we will find it no difficulty to rank them among
the essential Attributes of God, yea, that it is blasphemy to deny them to be
such.

I thought to have cleared to you, how that mercy is no passion nor
perturbation in God, as it is in man, though it be, for our encouragment to
hope in him, expressed in most pathetick terms; as also to have cleared, That the
Earth ^s full of his Mercy and Goodness. Psalm. 33.5. All creatures share in it;
yet there are vessels of mercy before preprepared to glory, Romans 9.23. That are
objects of his especial mercy; and to have spoken to its properties, how it is
real and not complementing; How he delights in mercy, Mic. 7.18. How it is
free, eternal, sure and rich for all necessities. But for want of time I
forbear, and recommend you and what ye have heard, to His blessing, whose word
it is.

SERMON XXXIX.
Psalm 130. Verse 7, -- For with the Lord there is mercy, --
THough when a look is taken of God's Israel, none are more low and empty in
themselves, none that claim greater acquaintance with the dust, than they are
enabled to do; yet none have such ample ground of encouragement as they, if
they be Israel: though they be in misery and under bondage and particularly
oppressed with, and under the bondage of sin, yet Israel is still allowed, and
commanded to hope in God; and that because Israel's wealth and happiness, and
the ground of his encouragement is without himself. Though he be poor and
needy, yet the Lord thinks on him, though he have nothing, in God he possesses
all things; Though his house be not so with God, yet his salvation and desire
lies in this, That God has made with him an everlasting covenant, well ordered
in all things and sure; And in a word, have what he will, or be what he will in
himself, yet he may hope in God, considering what is with God, Let Israel hope
in the Lord, for with the Lord, etc.

I have spoken from this argument, pressing hope in God, to what is imported in
it, as to the hopers condition, that he is indigent and miserable in himself,
needing to look for mercy in God; that he is in bondage, needing to look for
plenteous redemption with God, and particularly that he is under the bondage of
iniquity, which puts him to look for a particular redemption from that from
him, that redeems Israel from all his iniquities. And the last day I came to
break in on what is proposed in the words for Israel's encouragement to hope in
God. The first Observation of four, which I could scarce break in on was, That
it is the great encouragement of God's people to hope in him in all exigents
and cases, that there is mercy with God, that they have to do with a God, with
whom there is mercy: This mercy (as I then cleared) is nothing else but the
goodness of God (and consequently an essential attribute) relating to the
misery of the object to which it is communicate, even as his punitive Justice is
an essential Attribute, being nothing else but his Holiness, manifesting it
self against sin; for as the goodness of God undergoes various notions, on
diverse accounts (as was said) so it has the name of mercy, with relation to
the misery of man.

In prosecuting of this, I proponed to speak 1. more generally to the nature of
this mercy. 2. To the Object. To the Properties. And 4. Of the use of the whole.

For the first, the nature of this Mercy, 1. It must be fixed; that this mercy
is free of all passion, or perturbation in God. When we consider God as
merciful, we must not conceive of him as of one subject to the passions of
grief or sorrow, for the misery of others, as mercy in man is to be considered;
and therefore mercy in men used to be condemned by the Stoics, as being in
their opinion, a debasing of the spirit of man, below the hight and greatness
that it ought to have; and it is reported of Agesilaus King of Sparta, that he
said, it was difficult for a man, both to be merciful and wise at once, because
if he were merciful, it would be ready to transport him to that which was not
suitable to a wise man, but we have nothing to do with that debate here. Mercy
in God is free of passion or perturbation, of sorrow or grief for others
misery, as it is in creatures, it is only the goodness of God willing to
remove, allay, or sweeten the misery of others, only though God in his mercy be
free of passion, or perturbation, yet he sweetens, allays, or removes the
misery of man, as tenderly and carefully as if he were affected with it.
Therefore for our capacity, and better uptaking of it, the mercy of God is
spoken of as very passionat, affecting and transporting in him, as Isai. 63.9.
He is spoken of, as being afflicted in all the afflictions of his people. Zech.
2.8. as being touched on the apple of his eye, when they are touched. Jud.
10.16. as having his soul grieved, or shortened in his resolution to punish,
when he looked on his peoples misery. And Hos. 11.8. As being put to a very
great perplexity about them. How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? How shall I
deliver thee, Israel? How shall I make thee as Admah? how shall I set thee as
Zeboim? my heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled together. All
which terms are borrowed to show, that however God in showing mercy, be free of
passion or perturbation, yet is he no less tender and careful in showing mercy,
than if these passions abounded in him.

2. It is to be considered, that it is to be wondered, that he should be
merciful, when none of these things are in him, that prompts men to be
merciful; all his mercy we owe to his goodness allanerly. Men are prompted to
be merciful to others* because they are of the same nature with them. Beside
that, weakness and softness of spirit that is in some, may make them
compassionat others in misery. The experience others have had of such
pressures, may excite compassion to others in the like case; men's relations may
warm and affect their hearts with compassion to their relations in misery, when
yet they will be less concerned how it fares with others not so related to
them, and men considering not so much the simple trouble, as the age and
dignity of the persons troubled when they see such in trouble, it may waken
compassion. But all these are far removed from the Majesty of God, he is
infinitely above, and infinitely distinct from man's nature; neither is his
nature subject to Misery; yet he is no less merciful, but infinitely more
merciful, than if all these things that serve to excite mercy in men were in
him.

Only 3. Take one word more concerning this mercy that is with God in general,
because it is not so easy as many think to take up this mercy in an infinite and
glorious Spirit: He has been pleased to bring this mercy in him a little
nearer to us, and to take up his dwelling in our nature, in giving the Son of
his Love to be incarnat, and our kinsman, a man of sorrows, and acquainted with
grief, experiencing the misery of man, that his mercy may run through this
channel, that his infinite mercy may be communicate to us, through the tender
bowels of a merciful and faithful high Priest, who was in all things made like
to his brethren, Heb. 2.17. And who is touched with the feeling of our
infirmities, and was in all things tempted as we are, yet without sin, Heb.
4.15. To assure us that he can be touched with our miseries.

But I proceed in the 2d place, to speak to the Object of this mercy in God;
and here in general, all the creatures of God, do in some measure partake of
this mercy of God, Psalm. 145.9. His tender mercies are over all his works, or
upon all his works, as the word will read, or to be seen in all his works,
Psalm. 33.5. The earth is full of the goodness of the Lord, Psalm. 119.64, The
earth is full of his mercy, his mercy is extended to the very ravenous birds
and beasts, whose needy cries are looked on as directed to a merciful God, Job.
38.41. He provideth for the raven his food, when his young ones cry unto him,
Psalm. 104.21. The young lions roar after their prey, and seek their meat from
God. Psalm. 147.9. He gives to the beast his food, and to the young ravens
which cry, Joel 1.20. In time of drought, the beasts of the field cry unto him.
And Jonah 4. God respects not only the infants that were in Niniveh, who knew
not the right hand by the left, but the very cattle; and if beasts partake of
the mercy of God, then wicked men are not deprived of it. Luke 6.35. He is kind
to the unthankful, and to the evil, ver. 35. and the commentary put on this,
verse 36. Be ye therefore merciful as your heavenly Father is merciful. The
visible Church, they yet more peculiarly are the object of Gods mercy, as
witness all the promises made to Israel of old, for the elects sake that were
among them; But the most peculiar objects of his mercy, are his own elect, who
(as ye heard, Romans 9.23.) are vessels of mercy, which he has before prepared to
glory; His mercies toward them cannot be enumerated. The mercy of their
Election, Exodus 33.19. and Romans 9.15. He has mercy on whom he will have mercy,
compassion on him, on whom he will have compassion, It is not of him that
wills, nor of him that runs, but of him that shows mercy, No, but election
may be called, and is an act of Dominion and Soveraignity; yet its scope is
mercy. Then there is the mercy of their Regeneration, Tit. 3.5. According to
his mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration, etc. And being
regenerat, what a heap of mercy and goodness follows them all their days, Psalm.
23.6. The mercy of pardoning their iniquity. Exodus 34.6. The mercy of hearing
their prayers, as he says in another case, Exodus 22.27. When he shall cry unto
me, I will hear, for I am gracious. The mercy of moderation in the midst of
wrath, Hab. 3.2. And not to enumerat all the mercies conferred on the saints,
the consummation of their mercies, lies in their everlasting happiness, Jude
verse 20 Looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life; Then
they will get that Prayer answered, put up in the behalf of Onesiphorus, 2 Timothy
1.18. The Lord grant that he may find mercy of the Lord in that day. Thus the
Elect from Election to eternal Glorification are the objects of Gods peculiar
mercy. I shall only in speaking to the object of this mercy in God, desire you
further to take notice, under what notions the godly are described, when he
promises to express his mercy to them, and to ensure it to them, he is merciful
to them, because they are his own elect; yet ye may notice these names and
notions under which mercy is holden out and ensured to them, and I shall name
four or five.

1. They are described as penitents bemoaning their sin, and turning from their
evil way, Jer. 31.18. When Ephraim is bemoaning himself, crying, Turn thou me,
and I shall be turned, and repenting, then it follows, I will surely have mercy
on him. An impenitent posture may obstruct mercy in its effects, from coming to
a godly man.

2. The Objects of this Mercy are described to be lovers of him, and keepers of
his commands, as in the second command, Showing mercy to thousands of them that
love me, etc. It is not simply to keepers of the commands, but to such as keep
them from a principle of love; neglected obedience, or obedience not from a
principle of love, may obstruct the manifestations of mercy.

3. The objects of this special mercy, are described to be fearers of God,
Psalm. 103.17. The mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting upon
them that fear him, and Luke 1.50. His mercy is upon them that fear him from
generation to generation. A heart standing in awe of God, a man that has all
his performances, and even his love seasoned with fear, is the man that is
under the drop of Mercy.

4. The Objects of this peculiar Mercy, are described to be merciful folk, Mat.
5.7. Blessed are the merciful for they shall obtain mercy: They that have
obtained mercy themselves, cannot but have merciful bowels to deal about them,
according to their ability, and as there is cause: and a cruel unmerciful
disposition is a shrewd token that such an one has not obtained mercy. But more
of this afterward.

5. And Lastly, The Objects of this Mercy are described to be tender walkers,
according to the Rule and Pattern set before them, Gal. 6.16. As many as walk
according to this rule, peace be on them and mercy. Their tender walk puts them
not without Mercies mister. The more tender they are in their walk, they see
the more need of mercy, and this keeps them under the drop of mercy. So much
for the Object of this Mercy that is with God, and for the characters of them
to whom it is expressed, which would be looked to by all of you, who would be
partakers of it.

I proceed now in the 3d place, to speak to the properties of this Mercy, which
will help to unfold the nature of it a little more distinctly; and among all
the Properties that might be assigned to it; a little briefly to these five.

1. This would be fixed, that the mercy of God is a real mercy. Ye will get
fair weather and complemental mercy enough in the World; mercy professed where
it is not, and where it kythes not in any effect, ye will get mercy enough like
that, Jam. 2.15. When a brother or sister is naked, or destitute of daily food,
men that will say to them depart in peace, be ye warmed and filled, but they
give them nothing needful for the body. The whole world (as one says) are like
Histrionicks counterfeit, masked persons, and in nothing more than in their
pretenses and professions of mercy; but the mercy of God is a real mercy, a
mercy that folk may lippen to; if ye enquire for it in the inward affection,
what can be required, but it is adduced to express it? Isai. 23.15. It is
expressed by sounding of the bowels, Jer. 31.20. By bowels being troubled or
moved, Hos. 11.8. By the turning of the heart within, and repentings kindled
together: All these expressions are to point out, how cordial and real the Lord
is, as to the inward affection of mercy; and for the Effects of it, men want
rather eyes to discern them, than the mercies themselves: Even his own people
are straightened in their own bowels, how to keep the proofs of mercy, when his
heart is enlarged to bestow them, and yet they never want a proof of his mercy,
while they have a room in the Hospital of his Heart, and Faith to believe that
they are in the Hospital of his Compassion, that is an evident proof how real
his mercy is.

2. As his mercy is real, so the Scripture tells, it is that wherein he
delights, Mic. 7.18. He retains not his anger for ever. Why? Because he
delights in mercy: No, but he delights in himself and in all his Attributes,
and in the manifestation of them in the World, but in a peculiar manner in his
mercy upon diverse accounts. He may be said to delight in it, partly on the
account of the frequency of his merciful dispensations and manifestations, in
acts of mercy. For works of Judgment toward his people, are his Work, his
strange Work, and his Act, his strange Act. Isai. 28.21. But the earth is full
of the goodness of the Lord, Psalm. 35.5. All the paths of the Lord are mercy
and truth, to such as keep his covenant, etc. Psalm. 25.10. Again, he delights
in mercy, because there is nothing flows from him, but that which may invite,
and not hinder sinners from coming to him, and being objects of his mercy. It
is true, he wills the death of sinners for sin, to glorify his Justice; Yet
Ezekiel. 18.23. He has no pleasure at all in the death of him that dies, but
rather that he should return from his ways and live. Nothing flows from him to
seclude any from his mercy, that will not seclude themselves, even when he
strikes, it is to drive to his mercy, when he afflicts, the language is, Turn
you and live, why will ye die, O house of Israel? Again, he delights in mercy,
because all the good he does to his people, he does it not grudgingly. Many a
good turn among men is (as ye speak (spilt in the doing: But the good that he
does to his people, he does it with his whole heart and soul, Jer. 32.41. He
acts mercy toward his people (to speak so) as one in his own Element, and as
going about a work that is kindly to him, if I may so word it. And lastly, he
delights in mercy, because (to speak after the manner of men) he has no
pleasure that his people should ever raise any cloud betwixt his mercy and
them; the people of God cannot do themselves a greater wrong, nor him a greater
unkindness (if ye understand it aright) than by their provocations, to
incapacitat him, to manifest his mercy toward them; But mistake not this, for
he has a Sovereignty in his grace, even when they in a manner necessitat him,
to keep up the acts of his mercy, and to afflict them; hence when they go
onfrowardly in the way of their own heart, his tender mercy will make a
stepping-stone of impediments, that are put in its way, Isai. 57.17. Because he
delights in mercy, he will come over all these impediments to do them a good
turn freely.

And that is a 3d property of this mercy, it is a free mercy, it is a mercy
bestowed without money, and without price; But this (as I told you the last
day) is comprehended under the notion of Grace, that is imported in the
Goodness of God, in that it is freely given. And therefore Exodus 33.19. cited,
Romans 9.15. He will have mercy on whom he will have mercy, compassion, etc. And
it is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that shows mercy;
There is no place for disputing here, Why? he will have mercy on such and such,
and not on others; it is an act of his royal prerogative in grace, that none
can hinder, for who can hinder him to do with his own what he will.

A 4th Property of this mercy with God is, That it is an eternal mercy; I do
not mean, that any creature that gets not an Interest in the mercy of God, in
this life, may look to be partaker of it after this life, that was the Opinion
of Origin that Devils and damned men and women should at length share in the
mercy of God. Either thou must grip mercy here, or thou have done with it
eternally. But to them that close with mercy here, it is an everlasting mercy.
Hence is that over-word of the 136. Psalm, His mercy endures for ever; and
Psalm. 103.17. His mercy is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear
him; from election to their eternal glorification; so David finds that his
tender mercies and loving kindnesses have been for ever of old. And the Church,
Lam. 3.23. finds, It is of the Lords mercies that they are not consumed,
because his compassions fails not. And David sings, Psalm, 23.6. Surely goodness
and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life. It is an everlasting and
eternal mercy.

There is a 5th property I intended to have spoken to, and that is the fullness
and riches of this mercy; but because I am to speak a little more to that, I
shall leave it, and the Use of the whole Doctrine to the afternoon. God bless
his word unto you.

SERMON XL.
Psalm 130. Verse 7. For with the Lord there is mercy, etc.
WHen some time is spent in speaking of the Mercy of God, we are very far from
sowing pillows to the Armholes, or from making Kercheffs to the heads of the
secure; although I confess many do break their necks upon this blessed refuge
of God's mercy, and it will be their double condemnation, that the mercy and
goodness of God, that should have led them to repentance, was an occasion of
their hardening in mischief. Consider but the Scriptures design, in speaking of
that mercy that is with God, that it is partly to leave Rebels, and Wanderers
without excuse, when mercy is in their offer, and they will have none of it.
And partly and especially, to be the great cordial of the miserable man, who
when he is under all pressures that are ready to sink him, has this for his
refuge, that with God there is mercy, as in Psalm. 13. who when he is troubled
with soul-perplexities and desertion, with apprehensions of being cut off, and
that his enemies should insult over him, has this for his cordial, verse. 5.
But I have trusted in thy mercy; and the sweet result of that is added, My
heart shall rejoice in thy salvation: and verse. 6. I will sing unto the Lord,
because he has dealt bountifully with me: that will be the sweet issue of the
misterful man's trusting in Gods mercy.

Now ye have heard somewhat of the nature of this mercy in general, somewhat of
the peculiar objects of it, and under what names and notions mercy is holden
out, and ensured to the godly man: I have also spoken somewhat of the
properties of this mercy, that it is a real mercy, that wherein God delights,
and that it is free and eternal; and before I come to the use, I am to speak a
little to the fifth.

A 5th property then of mercy with God is, that it is a rich, full, and
infinite mercy, a mercy to reach all the miseries and needs of his people; as
to the riches and fullness of his mercy, the Scripture very plenteously speaks
of it, it is said of God, that he is rich in mercy, Ephesians. 2.4. He is said to be
plentiful in mercy, and full of compassion, Psalm. 86.5. His mercies are
manifold mercies, Neh. 9.19. So they are called great mercies, Neh. 9.31. Psalm.
119.156. Isa. 54 7. And Dan. 9.18. It Is great mercy that Ushers in a
supplication, we do not present our supplications before thee for our own
righteousness, but for thy great mercies, It is said further, that he has not
only tender mercies, that are very compassionat and condescending, but he has
a multitude of tender mercies, Psalm. 51.1. Psalm. 69.16. He is said to have
abundant mercies, in that 1 Pet. 1.3. He has mercies in such abundance, that
they are infinitely above the mercies of man, when David had it in his choice,
whether he would have three years famine, or three months fleeing before the
enemy, or three days pestilence, 2 Samuel 24.14. Let us now fall (saih he) into
the hand of the Lord, for his mercies are great, and let us not fall into the
hand of man. And to add no more, it is said of Gods mercies, Psalm. 103.4. That
he crowns us with his tender mercies, etc. That is, partly he surrounds his
people with proofs of love on every hand, as a Crown compasses the head, that
they cannot turn them about, but mercy compasses them about as with a shield,
as it is Psalm. 5.12. And partly, his mercies put respect and honor on his
people, as if they set a Crown on every Saints head, and made them Kings and
Priests unto God, as David says, Psalm. 18.35. Thy gentleness has made me great.

Thus I have let you see how copiously the Scripture speaks of the fullness and
richness of this mercy, and that I may let you see it in some particular
evidences and instances, consider,

1. That the mercy of God toward his people, is a mercy to pity them, when no
eye pities them, when they are the object of contempt and abhorrency, as Ezekiel.
16 when they are cast out into the open field, lying polluted in their blood,
having no eye to pity them, then it is a time of love, and he says to them,
Live, and he spreads his skirt over them; that is rich mercy, to take the
refuse of the earth, and make them the objects of his special mercy.

2. His mercy is full and rich, in giving a vent to it self, even when he is
letting out severity, his mercy manifests it self, even when he lifts up his
hand, and is striking, in inviting them whom he strikes, to turn, that they die
not, as Job 10. when he is destroying him, as he apprehended, after he has
enumerat some common providence about him, he says, verse. 13. These things
thou have hid in thy heart, I know that this is with thee, I know there is some
other thing in thy heart, than what I can read in thy dealing.

3. The riches and fullness of this mercy appears in pitying and passing by the
peevishness and waywardness of his people, especially when they take with it,
and be moan it, in that they have been as a bullock unaccustomed to the yoke,
Isai. 57.17. For the iniquity of his covetousness was I wroth, and smote him; I
hid me, and was wroth, and he went on in the way of his heart; and what
follows? I have seen his way, and will heal him, and will restore comfort unto
him and to his mourners. I am God, and not man, I am a merciful God, I Will
misken my petted people, and heal them, I Will not prosecute this quarrel.

4. The riches and fullness of his mercy appears in his fetching an Argument
from his strokes, to pity his people; a stroke extorted out of his hand, to
pity his people; a stroke inflicted in justice, mercy will make it an Argument
to pity the afflicted, Jer. 31.20. Is Ephraim my dear son? Is he a pleasant
child? For since I spoke against him, I do earnestly remember him still; my
chiding and contending with him has wakened my bowels toward him, I will
surely have mercy on him.

5. The fullness and riches of this mercy appears in this, that he considers
tenderly the consequences of his pleading, if he quarrel with them, mercy tells
him, he may soon get the victory, but that will lose him his people, therefore
he will forbear, Isai. 57.16. I will not contend for ever, nor will I be always
wroth. Why? The spirit should fail before me, and the souls that I have made: I
could soon destroy them, but that I may not do, and therefore will not contend
for ever, etc.

And 6. The riches and fullness of his mercy may be read in this, that when he
lets out bowels of mercy, there will be no mercy which the Creature needs, will
be withheld from them. When Ishmael has slain Gedaliah, whom the King of
Babylon had made the Jews Governor, and they are afraid of the Chaldeans; Be
not afraid of the King of Babylon, (says he) for I am with you, to save and
deliver you, and I will show mercy to you, that he may have mercy on you, Jer.
42.11, 12. Fear not, if ye partake of my mercy, I will make the Chaldeans
compassionat you: So Psalm. 106 44. He regarded their affliction, when he heard
their cry, and he remembered his Covenant, and repented according to the
multitude of his mercies. What follows? he made them also to be pitied of all
that carried them captives. He needs no other instruments of compassion to his
people, nor bitter enemies, when he will have compassion on them. So Solomon
prays, Give them compassion before them that carry them captive, 1 King. 8.50.
And Hezekiah when he is to keep the Passover, tells the people, If they turn
again to the Lord, their brethren and children shall find compassion before
them that lead them captive, 2 Chronicles. 30.9. Gods compassion can soon bring the
compassion of men, in so far as he sees it needful. Thus ye see in a few hints,
how rich and full the mercy of God is. In a word, it is a mercy for all the
needs and pressures of his people, a Plaster broad enough to cover, and
effectual enough to cure all their griefs and sores.

For the use of this great truth, That with the Lord there is mercy, I shall
briefly touch on five inferences from it, and leave it.

And 1. If this mercy of God be relative to man's misery, if it be good news
manifested to the Creature, on the account of its misery, then those who are
partakers of this mercy, would have much sense of their misery; mercy will not
relish to any, but to the man sensible of his misery; a pardon will signify
nothing, but to a Rebel that is sensible of his Rebellion: And here all that I
have spoken of the riches, freeness, fullness, etc. of this mercy; if ye read it
right, will be the first Lesson ye will learn from it; all this is not
proclaimed for a complement, but because it is needed by the miserable: And
consequently thou must infer, If I have a right to you mercy, it must not be
ordinary thoughts of my misery that I must have there must be deeps of misery
in me, to call for deeps of mercy in God. If we thus fence the point, we need
not fear that it be a sleeping Pillow to the secure; look what misery is in
thee to close with every thing in mercy. If mercy be free, look what
ill-deserving is in thee; if pardoning-mercy be in God, look what sense of
unpardoned guilt is in thee; if multitudes of mercies be in God, what sense of
multitude of miseries is in thee? They that have a right to mercy, must tryst
it in the dust, in the very pit of misery.

2. From this, that there is mercy with God, there is ground of assurance
offered and afforded to the miserable, that their irrecoverable case by the
Covenant of Works is not now desperate. O! the blessed intimation of that
Attribute to fallen man, that with God there is mercy; How good news was it,
and should it be? What had been the case of Adam and all his posterity, after
the Covenant of Works was broken, had it not been for this blessed Attribute that
interposed? But now, because there is mercy with God, irrecoverable distresses
are not desperate: Somewhat ye heard of this from verse. 2, and 4. What a
deplorable case had all been in, if there had been no more to be looked for, but
that, verse. 3. If thou, Lord, mark iniquities, O Lord, who should stand? But a
gracious answer is added, verse. 4. But there is forgivenness or mercy with
thee; and how this is pressed upon the account of Gods mercy, ye have an account
given, Jer. 55.67. Seek ye the Lord, while he may be found, call on him while
he is near; let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous his thoughts,
and let him return to the Lord: Why? For he will have mercy on him, and to our
God, for he will abundantly pardon. That there is mercy in God abundantly to
pardon, is an intimation to the man that is in an irrecoverable condition, to
look again to God; And in that 2d of Joel, after that the Lord has uttered a
sore and terrible Judgment, and has told verse ^1. That he will utter his
voice before his Army, for his Camp is very great, and strong is he that
executes his word; (and in the by, if the Lord has a Nation to punish, he
needs not raise, and bring in an uncouth Nation to punish them, he can cause
Grasshoppers or Locusts do his turn) after all that, Verse 12, 13. He bids them
turn to him with all their heart, with fasting, weeping and mourning, for he is
gracious and merciful, slow to anger and of great kindness, and repents him
of the evil: When the Lord is setting forth, and inflicting an apparent and
remediless stroke, this yet invites to repentance, That he is gracious and
merciful, and therefore as on the one hand, thou that slights this offered
mercy, and makes it a pillow to security, who when thou hears tell there is
mercy with God, makes no use of it, but rather abuses it, to go on in sin; O
the Justice of God in the day of thy accounts, will be a sad sight in
comparison of mercy; or, justice execute on slighters of mercy, will be
dreadful Justice, then it will be, Hills and mountains fall on us, and bide us
from the face of the Lamb, What, There is little terror in a Lambs Face; yea,
but the fight of the Lambs face in the day of count and reckoning, that he that
offered mercy was a Lamb, that mercy was with him will be most dreadful; think
on it, slighters of the Gospel, sit-fasts, never-do-wells, abusers of mercy, or
ye that would take mercy in the accomplishment, but never give mercy
employment, who follow your abominations, if not openly, yet secretly; better
for you that ye had sitten all your time at the foot of Sinai, than at the foot
of mercy in Zion. This is often told you, but little laid to heart, and the
ofter it be told many, the less it is laid to heart; but the day will come,
when many will get Hell affrighting memories, wherein ye will remember, that
which drops at your feet, and is not noticed, or is stepped over, and not
regarded: So on the other hand, thou who on the account of hopelesness in thy
condition, runs away from God, take heed what thou do, thou looks on thy case
as incurable, and what will thou do with it? If thou run away, where will thou
go next? Thy case must either break thee, or thou will grow stupid under it:
and besides, if thou run away, thou reproaches the mercy of God, so far as thou
can, while thou runs from him with any condition, how desperate and
irrecoverable so ever: and will thou bring up an ill report on his mercy, as if
there were no cure in it for thy case? When thou should rather sing, as David.
Psalm. 13.5. In opposition to every hopeless like case, But I have trusted in
thy mercy, my heart shall rejoice in thy salvation; O then take heed that thou
reproach not, nor bring not up an ill report on this rich and full mercy in
God, by running from it, whatever thy condition be.

3. Come here all ye that are making mercy your refuge under all your
pressures, miseries, troubles, temptations, desertion, or whatever ail you,
that know no other door to knock at, but mercy in God, ye have no song but that
one which David had, Psalm. 13. before cited, and that I can never often enough
repeat: though God seem to forget him for ever, and hide his face for ever from
him, though when he takes counsel in his soul, he has sorrow in his heart
daily, though his enemies had exalted themselves, and said, they had prevailed
over him, and re^oyced, and the sleep of death seems to approach, he has
nothing to all that, But I have trusted in thy mercy; Take a look how richly
thou art made up, that trusts in this mercy: Remember the song that follows in
that Psalm. and thou will not find it an heartless shift, My heart, says ^e,
shall rejoice in thy salvation, I will sing to the Lord, because ^e has dealt
bountifully with me; And the Psalmist sings, Psalm. 31.7. I will be glad and
rejoice in thy mercy; Why? For thou have considered my trouble, thou have known
my soul in adversity, I got acquaintance with thee in adversity, which
otherwise I had not been capable of; therefore I will be glad and rejoice in
thy mercy; and consider that sweet song, Psalm. 136.23. Who remembered us in our
low estate, Why? for his mercy endures for ever; or as Hezekiah has it, Isai.
38.27. He loved my soul from the pit of corruption; That is the word in the
Original: His love and mercy have an Adamantine virtue, to draw a soul out of
the pit of corruption, when he remembers us in our low estate, consider thou
that have made mercy thy refuge, how sweetly it can kep a deep distress, Psalm.
69.15. Let not the water flood overflow me, hear me, O Lord, for thy loving
kindness is good, turn unto me, according to the multitude of thy tender
mercies; And Psalm. 86.14. O God, the proud are risen up against me, and the
assemblies of violent men have sought after my soul; but thou, O Lord, art a
God full of compassion, gracious, long suffering, and plenteous in mercy and
truth; O turn unto me and have mercy on me. Consider what a good account of
very hopeless trials mercy will give, Jam. 5.11. Ye have heard of Jobs
patience, and have seen the end of the Lord; and what was the end of the Lord,
even this, That the Lord is very pitiful and of tender mercy; O but they are
sad difficulties, which tender mercy and pity in God will not afford relief
unto; and therefore think not your self in a poor plight, who have mercy for
your refuge, who have no song to sing, But I have trusted, etc.

4. When ye have closed with, and are made up by this mercy, look how ye
improve it, and do not abuse it: I confess, the want of the faith of mercy in a
strait, is an estranging thing, Zech. 11.8. My soul loathed them, and their
soul also abhorred me; but when thou grips to mercy, see what influence it has
on thy heart for warming it, for putting it in a sweet and tender frame on thy
part; may I say it, I defy folk to abuse mercy, taken by the right handle; O
the alluring, melting, constraining, persuading power that is in mercy rightly
closed with; and O that folk could win to this gate of making use of mercy,
Romans 11.1. The Apostle in pressing holiness, says, I beseech you, brethren, by
the mercy of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, etc. And I
may allude to that, Phil. 2.1. If there be any consolation in Christ, if any
comfort of love, if any fellowship of the spirit, if any bowels of mercy,
fulfill ye my joy; If folk knew what overcoming mercy means, they would let it
be seen in a tender walk. Thou talks of mercy, yet thou art not overcome with
it, thou art not melted, nor made more tender by it; what a cheater of thy
self, and abuser of mercy art thou? Remember the abuse of outward mercies, will
make a sad dittay; Ezra 9. If after all these we break his commands. But ah!
what shall be said when folk pretend to special mercy, and abuse it?

But 5. Among other Uses that ought to be made of believed and closed with
mercy, this is one, That we learn to be merciful, Luke 6.36. We must be
merciful, as is our heavenly Father, even in loving enemies, etc. Ye heard in
the morning from Mat. 5.7. That it is the merciful that obtain mercy: And that
Parable of the man that had much forgiven him, and would not forgive his fellow
servant, but cast him in prison, Mat. 18.23. -- It was a sad evidence that he
was not pardoned himself. In a word, thou who art much in mercies common, it
will make thee of a merciful and meek temper, which is that pressed, Tit. 3.2.
That we should speak evil of no man, be no brawlers, etc. but gentle, showing
meekness to all men, seeing we our selves were sometime disobedient, deceived,
serving diverse lusts: -- But after that the kindness and love of God our
Savior toward man appeared, not by works of righteousness which we have done,
but according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of Regeneration, and
renewing of the Holy Ghost; A boisterous, malicious, unmerciful temper in any,
is but a poor Evidence, that such live under the drop of the multitude of the
tender mercies that are with God. But the time being ended, I leave this great
Point and you to the rich blessing of this merciful God, To whom be glory.

SERMON XLI.
Psalm 130. Verse 7, -- For with the Lord there is mercy, --
THe Songs of the people of God, while they are within time, are made up of
very mixed Notes; yet in this they are sweet, that their over-word, or last
word is still the best of it, Poor and needy are they, and may they be, yet
they are thought upon by God; Troubled they may be, but not distressed; perplexed,
but not in despair; persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed,
2 Cor. 4.8, 9. Much may they have to say, both from within them, and about
them, to brangle their thread of hope, which is their great stock and
storehouse; but they have infinitely more above them to support it; though
Israel be in misery and bondage, and under servitude through sin; yet says the
Text, Let Israel hope in God; Let nothing they find within, or about them in
the world brangle their confidence, For with the Lord there is mercy.

Ye may remember, that from these encouragements to Israel to hope in God, I
have been marking what is employed on the part of hopers, that they need mercy
and redemption, and particularly redemption from iniquity; and I began to speak
the last day to what is proposed for their encouragement, notwithstanding all
these disadvantages they are under, and I took some time to speak to that sweet
Attribute of Mercy in God. In speaking to which ye had some account in general
of the nature of this mercy, and of the Object and Properties of it; and
somewhat was spoken to the Use of the whole Doctrine; A Doctrine, which though
some may abuse, and break their neck on, and which will be the sad dittay of
these within the visible Church, That mercy was in their offer, and they
slighted it; yet it is a Doctrine absolutely necessary, to them that are lying
under the sense of sin and misery.

Now I proceed to a 2d. main Point, to encourage Israel to hope in God, That
with him is plenteous redemption, That is, both Authority to redeem, and power
to vindicat his people out of the bondage and servitude, wherein they are, and
that in a great measure, a plenteous redemption, and that is connected with the
former, with the Lord there is mercy, and with him is plenteous redemption;
That same God with whom there is mercy, has also plenteous redemption, which
gives a ground to this general Remark, that I shall batter out a little, that
mercy in God, is not a bare naked affection (if I may so word it) in him, as ye
may find it amongst creatures, some are very merciful and compassionat, and can
condole the case of others in chains, when they cannot help them, they may weep
over them, whom they cannot relieve: But I say, mercy is not such a bare naked
affection in God, but it is accompanied with authority and power, to make the
effects of his mercy forthcoming for the miserable, as he finds there is cause.

To lay this a little open to you; and in the passing through, to hint at some
Uses of it, I shall speak a little to these three; 1. What this redemption
imports. 2. Why it is called redemption. And 3. What the plenty of this
redemption that is with God, may look to, or hint at.

For the first, What redemption imports, ye know that redemption properly is a
recovery, by paying of a price, or by exchange or otherwise, of that which has
been brought in bondage, or under the power of another. Now redemption when it
is attribute to God, imports a recovery of his people out of that bondage of
sin and misery, unto which through their own folly, they have cast themselves:
And for the import of it, beside mercy relative to their misery, who have sold
themselves; it imports both authority to redeem, and power to redeem. 1.
Authority, and authority of Soveraignity in Dominion, to recover, or bring
back, what, or whom he pleases, out of that bondage and servitude, under which
they had brought themselves. To allude to that Plea of the Caldeans, anent the
Redemption of Captives, Isai. 49.24. Shall the lawful Captive be delivered, we
have taken them lawful Captives, and who has authority to interpose and take
them from us? So when guilt, and justice pursuing for guilt, has the Israel of
God, lawful Captives, in that case he has authority, and supremacy, a
sovereign dominion to interpose for the Redemption of his people, when he will,
as it is said, Psalm. 3.8. Salvation belongs to the Lord; it is his prerogative
royal to give salvation, to redeem, as Princes have a power Paramount to pardon
Crimes the Law strikes against; he has a power to pardon, to love freely, to
see his peoples ways, and to heal them, Isai. 57.18. That is the first thing
then imported in this redemption, an authority and right to redeem; and before
I pass from it. I would leave this word with the people of God, that when
their distresses are great and many, and all other doors are shut on them, they
would learn to look to Sovereignty in God, as the Latin Proverb is, They may be
in that case wherein salvation cannot save them, and then they must look no
laigher than God, and to a Sovereign Dominion in God to redeem, remembering
whatever be the sad premises in their case, he has a dominion to make the
conclusion what he pleases, his authority and sovereign dominion can make the
conclusion comfortable, when the premises writes bitter things against them;
this would be the last anchor that we would hold by, when all others are driven
and come home; and I would have you so far from mistaking and stumbling, when
ye look to Sovereignty in God, and ye are brought so low, that you have no
claim, but to put off your Ornaments, and see what God will do to you; all
things in your case, or what ye can look to for relief, are so hopeless and
desperate, only ye dare not limit God, I would in this case have you so far from
stumbling at Sovereignty in God, that I would have you rather afraid, when ye
have any thing to look to beneath it. It is sad when God is afflicting his
people with cross Providence, it should be with them, as with that people.
Jer. 2.37. They go forth from him with their hands on their head, and the Lord
has rejected their confidence, that is a sad trade when Gods work of
Providence is, to blast and reject their carnal confidence, and to defeat them,
that they shall not prosper in them, because they will not quite them, and lay
their deplorable case at the footstool of Sovereignty in God; So much for the
first thing imported in redemption, That is, authority to redeem.

2. This Redemption in God imports further, even a power to exercise that
authority and dominion, for the actual redemption of his people, many a time
experience shows that authority is baffled and affronted in the world, because
it is not in its way backed with power; but our blessed Lord, who has authority
to redeem, has also power to exercise that authority, and actually to redeem,
he is the God of the Spirits of all flesh, to whom nothing is too hard, Psalm.
115.3. Our God is in heaven, he has done whatever he pleased. Psalm. 135.6.
Whatever the Lord pleased, that he did in heaven and in the earth, etc. And ye
have his power asserted in this very affair, Isai. 29.24. Shall (say they) the
prey be taken from the mighty, or the lawful captive be delivered? We hear tell
(would they say) of the redemption of Israel from the Babylonish captivity; but
we plead, that they are not only lawful captives, taken in war, but we are
mighty to detain them; yea, but (says the Lord) even the captives of the mighty
shall be taken away, and the prey of the terrible shall be delivered, were ye
never so mighty and terrible, when I interpose, I will redeem, and recover the
prey. I shall not need to insist further in the confirmation of this.

But 1. Any of you who are afflicted and sensible of your straits, and of the
sins that have drawn them on; will ye believe this, that there is not only
mercy with God, but power to manifest that mercy, and it may content you to ly
in the Hospital of his heart, till he see it fit to manifest his power for your
redemption. If there be with him not only mercy, but redemption, it must
certainly say some other thing, than ordinarily we apprehend, that he wants
neither power nor good will to redeem his people, for with their God there is
mercy, and with him, etc. and therefore were their hazard as peremptor, as that
of the three children, Dan. 3. Who were to be cast in the fiery furnace, this
is support enough, Our God whom we serve (say they) is able to deliver us, etc.
and therefore when we are in straits, and reckon that we want proofs of his
power, we would reckon also, that it is not for want of good will, for with him
is mercy, and it should content and quiet our hearts, to take lodging in his
compassion, till he let the world see, that with him also is plenteous
redemption in the effects of it.

2. From this I would recommend to you, to study to believe this power much; it
is not for nothing that it is said of Abraham, Romans 4.20, 21. That he staggered
not at the promise through unbelief, but was strong in faith, giving glory to
God; Why? He was fully persuaded, that what he promised, he was also able to
perform; and the three children did not speak ordinary news, when they tell
Nebuchadnezzar, The God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the fiery
furnace; It is true, generally people think they doubt not of the power of God,
all their doubting is, about his goodwill, as that man, Mat. 8.2. Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean; but they that know themselves best, will see
atheism at the bottom of their diffidence, and a doubting of his power as well
as of his goodwill; therefore this is an evidence, that folks win easily to
Faith in smaller and petty Trials, wherein there is not much need of power,
then their Faith will soar aloft: but in great Trials they succumb and sink,
and find their Faith a seeking; and whence flows this, but from unbelief, That
with God there is power to redeem: and therefore I beseech the people of God to
study to believe, and be fixed in the faith of the Attributes of God,
especially in the faith of his power in difficulties.

But 3. From this I say, I would have the people of God not to stumble, though
in their straits they be left on the Power and Omnipotency of God alone, to
relieve them; Let Israel hope, Why? Not because they can extricat themselves
out of difficulties, not because ordinary help will do their turn, but because
with God is redemption, and plenteous redemption; because God is Omnipotent to
vindicat them out of their bondage; it is kindly to have saints brought
frequently to be in Gods mister, that nothing but God can do their turn; so
that they think they have done with it, if God interpose not, when they are
brought to such perplexing questions, as that Ezekiel. 37. Can these dry bones
live? That only Omnipotent Power in God can answer; then they would not stumble
when they are brought that low, that their Faith is left upon the Omnipotency
of God alone; that power of God, if (as Abraham did) thou take it up rightly;
If thou believe on him who quickens the dead, and calls on things that are not,
as if they were, because he makes them to be: It is enough to answer all thy
difficult questions; Therefore (whatever thy difficulties be) guard against
stumbling from this, That with God is redemption, and plenteous redemption. So
much from what is imported in this redemption.

I proceed in the 2d place to give you some account, why this is called
redemption; and if we restrict redemption here to Israel (and it is these who
are bidden hope on the account of this Redemption, and it is Israel, that (
verse 8.) He will redeem from all their iniquities) The deliveries of the Lords
people are fitly and frequently expressed, under the name of Redemption, not only
their deliverance from sin, as verse 8. but deliverance from trouble, as Psalm.
25. Redeem Israel, O God, out of all his troubles. Now, I say, That most fitly
and frequently, the deliveries of Gods people are called a Redemption on a
threefold account, which I shall first propone, and then speak to.

1. As they have a relation to their spiritual Redemption by Christ. 2. As they
have a relation to the troublers of Israel, his people, from whose power they
are redeemed. 3. As they have relation to the issue of their troubles; That it
is a redemption, and setting them at freedom from servitude and bonds.

1. I say, The deliverances of the people of God are called a Redemption, all
of them, because they are founded on, and are the result of their eternal and
spiritual Redemption, through Christ, all their deliverances are the
appendices, and (as ye call it) the bounty super added to that great
Redemption, which they have by the satisfaction of Christ; and upon this
account it is, that deliverances to the people of God are noticed, as evidences
of his love to them in Christ, Psalm. 18.19. He delivered me, says David,
because he delighted in me. It was a proof of reconciled love to him in Christ,
That God delivered him from his troubles; and hence all that the Lords people
get, and their deliveries among the rest, are gifts bestowed on them with
Christ, Romans 8.32. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us
all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things; Unto the Israel
of God, Christ is first freely given, and then with him, in him, and through
him, all other things, and their deliveries among the rest, are afforded them
on that account.

This I mark on a threefold account. 1. To press upon folk the exercise of
piety, and the making sure of an interest in Christ, and his Redemption; for
that is your ground and claim to all other mercies. When Christ is diverting his
Disciples from careful anxiety, Mat. 6.33. He bids them seek the Kingdom of God
first, and all other things shall be added to them. And 1 Timothy 4.8. Bodily
exercise profits little, but godliness is profitable unto all things, having
promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come. Many never mind
this, that godliness, and making sure an interest in Christ, is the only
thriving gate: as for such as find prosperity in another method, I shall speak
to them just now. But for you that are godly, or pretend to godliness, to be
taken up in seeking things in time, ye forget your main work; when ye are too
eager and keen in your pursuit of these things, wherein if God love you, he
will not let you thrive: I wot not what of this is among you, but if there be a
nearness, a nippedness, and eagerness after the things of the world, in that
you may read your poverty; if ye be seeking God, and making an Idol of the
world, or any things in it, he loves you better than to let you prosper in that
pursuit; and if ye would thrive indeed, put godliness in the first place, begin
at it as the work of all your thrift.

But 2. Because many may laugh at this Exhortation, founded on this, that other
mercies come as the result of Redemption through Christ, and therefore that
folk ought in the first place to sicker an interest in him; and think that they
speed best in things of time, that neglect Piety, I might bid them laugh at
leisure. Many profane folks, that have had more prosperity than heart could
wish, and have thought they should never be in adversity, and that they had no
need of God to hold to their head; they have win through it all, and have been
put to embrace dunghills, and in their straightened condition have been
contemptible, when the godly have shined in their greatest poverty. But that
which I press here, is, that every lot that folk have, they would see how they
hold it, by what Title and Right, thou that gets the mercy of prosperity, or a
delivery out of trouble, if thou be not interested in Christ, and a Student of
holiness, it is but as a Bone cast at a Dog for thy portion, as it is Psalm.
17.4. And I shall tell you the Testament of such men, from that parable, Luke
16.25. Son, (says Abraham to the rich glutton) remember that thou in thy
lifetime receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things; but now
he is comforted, and thou art tormented. Thou have prosperity while thou
neglects piety, but it may be thou art getting what thou gets in wrath; and
while thou art running to Satan and perdition, thou gets outward mercies as a
Post-horse, to further thee in that deplorable Journey; yea, thou who art a
child of God, may be getting outward mercies, when God is not pleased with
thee. There is a sad word 1 Cor. 10.5. after the Apostle has spoken of great
mercies conferred on Gods people, he subjoyns, But with many of them God was
not well pleased, for they were overthrown in the wilderness: And therefore
thou that would put a right value on mercies, read them at that rate, Isai.
42.16. where when he has spoken of bringing the blind by the way they knew
not, making darkness light before them, and crooked things straight, he
subjoyns, These things will I do unto them, and not forsake them; look if thou
has God with what thou have. Have a man what he will, till he have interest in
him, and stand in his favor, he has little cause to insult or boast. If thy
mercies be not the result of redemption through Christ, they will turn a snare.

But a 3d word of Inference from this, is, that it is an invitation to the
fearers of God, who have an interest in his love, and are studying to walk
tenderly, to look sweetly on their portion and lot in time, whatever it be; it
may be thy share in the things in time is little, thy troubles many, thy
breathing times betwixt troubles short, thy comfort mixed with what is bitter
and sad; but that which will make all relish, is, that the same love that has
given Christ for thee, and to thee, and will give thee everlasting happiness,
has afforded these mercies as the result and appendices of that great
redemption, and that same love will sanctify all thy crosses, and make them
work for thy good: And O! How sweet might sorry accommodations, mean food and
raiment be, to have this written over them, That love that has given Christ
for me, and to me, and will give me a Crown one day, has given me these? This
might be rich and sweet Sauce to a sober Diet, excellent Furniture to a poor
House, to learn to look on these as the result of the great Bargain. Seek to
have your interest in Christ, your Union and Communion with him more near and
warm, and to be more tender: That thus ye may look on your mercies and be
comforted; the Lord bless what ye have heard.

SERMON XLII.
Psalm 130. Verse. 7. -- And with him is plenteous redemption.
MAny are the exceptions and grounds of fears which the people of God
entertain, for fostering their discouragement, and no fewer are the Cordials
that are allowed in God to make out that to them, that when they are afraid,
they are called to trust in God; when Israel is invited to hope in God, if
misery and ill-deserving retard their obedience to that command, they are told
here, that with the Lord there is mercy. If they look on themselves as lawful
Captives, and none have a right to offer to rescue or ransom them, they are
told here, that with the Lord there is redemption, a Sovereign Authority, Right
and Power, to step in when he will, and vindicate them into freedom: If they
look upon it as hard and impossible ever to get out of the bonds they are
under, with him is plenteous redemption, as the Psalmist sings, Psalm. 146.7. To
loose the Prisoners, and open the prison doors, and set them at liberty. This
is that I was speaking to in the morning, That with God there is redemption. I
cleared, that this Redemption imported Authority and Right to redeem, and power
to reedeem and vindicate: And I came in the second place to clear in what
respects this Redemption is so called, or in what respects his delivery of his
people is called, a Redemption of them. And the first to which I have spoken,
it is because all their deliverances are founded upon, and are the result of
their eternal Redemption through Christ; the Uses whereof I mentioned, and
shall not repeat.

I proceed now in the 2d place, to clear that their Redemption is so called, or
their delivery is called Redemption, in relation to their trouble, and the
instruments of their trouble, from whom God will redeem them; not by paying a
price for them, for that is already paid to Justice, for doing away the
controversy that God the principal Creditor had with them, who therefore put
them in Bonds, and under Arrest; but by the strong hand he redeems them from
the instruments of their trouble, to their own cost, as Isai. 52.3. The Lord
tells his people, that they had sold themselves for naught, they had made a
poor Bargain, or they had provoked God to sell them into their enemies hands
for naught, but they should be redeemed as cheap, without money, Isai. 43.14.
The Lord proves himself to be the Redeemer of his people by this, that for
their sakes he had sent to Babylon, to get them redeemed hence, and had brought
down all their Nobles, and the Caldeans, whose cry is in the Ships, or to the
Ships, to seek Vessels to run away, when Cyrus came and turned in the River on
the City. And Isai. 49.24, 25, 26. when they accounted the people of God their
prey, and lawful captives, the Lord not only tells them, that the captives of
the mighty shall be taken away, and the prey of the terrible shall be
delivered, but he will pay a ransom to the Caldeans for them, and what is
that? I will feed them that oppress thee with their own flesh, and they shall
be drunk with their own blood, as with sweet wine: That shall be the ransom
that he will give the Caldeans, when he delivers his people. I shall not
dwell on this; in general it holds out this, that they are in a sad and ill
taking, who are left by themselves to take Gods people to task; they are as
these who would go betwixt a Man and his Wife, who when the friendship is made
up, will get little thanks, and therefore they are rather to be pitied than
envyed. It bods little good to men, when God makes use of them to be
instruments of the afflictions of his people; and any that ye would wish good
unto, pray that they may be preserved from that Pit, and any ye see engaged in
it, ye cannot do them a better turn, than to stand in the Gapp for them, and
pray they may be delivered out of it, for it is fatal and prodigious to be
instruments of the people of Gods trouble, and to be found standing in his way
when he is to redeem them.

But in the 3d place, I told you, that their Delivery is called Redemption, in
relation to the issue of their delivery from their troubles, as the Captive or
Prisoner, when he is redeemed, or the ransom paid, is set free, enlarged, and
set at liberty to go where he will: So God's delivering of a people, brings
freedom and enlargement, a breaking of Bonds, an opening of Prison doors, a
vindicating of them from bondage and slavery. Hence the delivery of the saints
is metaphorically expressed, by setting of them at large, or in a large place,
Psalm. 18.19. The Psalmist was hampered before, when he was in trouble, but he
got enlargement and skiproom by God's delivering of him; So Psalm. 31.8. David
says, Thou have not shut me up into the hand of the Enemy, thou have set my
feet in a large place, or room; had I been amongst my enemies, they had hemmed
me in; but God in delivering me, gives me elbow-room; and, Psalm. 118.5. I
called on the Lord in distress, the Lord answered me, and set me in a large
place; or answered me in a large place: (for these words, and set me, are a
supplement in the Text, that is, with enlargement; by enlargement and freedom
he delivered me; So Job 36.16. Where Elihu is giving Job an account what he
might have expected, had he improved God's corrections aright. Even so (says
he) would he have removed thee out of the strait into a broad place, where
there is no straitness; Thou art (would he say, as verse 8.) bound in fetters,
and holden in cords of affliction; but had thou hearkened to the instructions
communicate to thee by the Rod, God should have brought thee out of that strait
into a broad place, where there is no straitness; so that in respect of the
issue, delivery is enlargement, a giving of skuproom to them that were in bonds
and pressures before.

And from this I would have you reflecting on two or three words, 1. It
imports, that when the people of God are in trouble, unredeemed, they should be
in straits, and as under pressures, sensible of their affliction, their bonds
should press them; Therefore in that forecited place, Job 36.8. Affliction is
called bonds, or fetters and cords, and Job, when he is viewing God's dealing
with him, says, Chap. 13.27. Thou put my feet also in the stocks; not only
did he put him in prison, for a man in prison, has room to walk up and down,
but in prison he put his feet in the stocks; importing that folks should find a
pressure when God afflicts them, they should be straightened when they are in the
stocks; stupidity is ill company, when God is using means means to waken out of
security, and to make folk sensible, and to be taking too much elbow room, when
folks are under an arrest of Providence, it is no good evidence, that he will
give enlargement, Job 35.15. Hypocrites in heart heap up wrath, they cry not
when he binds them; when folks are straightened, they would feel it, and
especially they should find their straitning, that they may cry to God when he
binds them, Psalm. 107.12. He brought down their hearts with labor; he brake
their spirits with toil, he hammered their undaunted hearts with sit-fast and
sore pressures, and further he dealt so with them till they fell down, and
there was none to help, and then they cried to the Lord in their trouble, and
he saved them, etc. That is the great design of pressures, when folks are so
hampered, that they cannot stir their feet, when they are so straightened that
they wot not what hand to turn them to, it is, That they may cry to God, and he
may save them.

Hence, 2. Many sad lamentations may the visible Church, and even saints write
over their own frames under pressures, that they are so little affected; and
particularly, that be they pressed never so much, there is little prayer under
their pressures, as in that forecited place, Job 36.13. When Elihu is telling
what should be folks carriage, when they are bound with fetters, and holden in
cords of affliction, he tells the Hypocrites in heart, heap up wrath, they cry
not when God binds them; few folks pressures are seen in their prayers, either
in doubling their diligence in their duty, or in their manner of going about
it, they have few prayers, that look like distressed folks prayers; O let
fruitless improvers of pressures, ponder at large Job 36.8. to 18. Where when
Elihu has told the benefit of well improved pressures, and the hazard of ill
improved pressures, he tells Job verse 16. Even so would he have removed thee
out of the strait into a broad place; But verse 17. Thou has fulfilled the
judgment of the wicked, justice and judgment take hold on thee; Therefore
because there is wrath, beware lest he take thee away with his stroke, then a
great ransom cannot deliver thee; evil improved pressures, will occasion sad
reflections, and may bring on strokes, from which folks will not easily come to
be delivered; O how often may we write that over ill improved pressures, which ye
have, Psalm. 81.13. O that my people had hearkened to me, and Israel had walked
in my ways, I would soon have subdued their enemies, and turned my hand against
their adversaries. And Isai. 48.18. O that thou had hearkened to my
commandment, then had thy peace been as a river, etc. It must be otherwise
with pressed saints, than it is with others. It is a sin and a shame that so
many ruins are under saints hands, not improved, but a double sin and shame,
that they should increase under their hand, and an evidence they have not been
improved.

But a 3d word most directly from what I have spoken on this branch, is this,
That if every delivery be a redemption and enlargement, Then it calls the
people of God to be comforted and enlarged, under every mercy and proof of
love, how mean soever it be. The Lord who calls men in the day of adversity to
consider, calls them in the day of prosperity to be comforted, and joyful in
any measure of redemption that they meet with, Eccl. 7.14. And it is marked by
Nehemiah and others, when God had brought Israel into the land of Canaan, and
gave them abundance of good things, they delighted themselves in his great
goodness, Neh. 9.25. a practice very rare among God's people, proofs of love,
particular redemption trists them, which calls them to rejoice in God and his
goodness, and yet they are where they were when they got them, their mercies
are little seen upon them, by any enlargements given them; and what wonder
therefore that mercies be withholden from them, who cannot be worse with the
want of them, than when they have them, they droop when they have, and they
droop when they want: the having of them is no enlargement to them, and this
they mourn not for as a sin, they are better at picking quarrels at them, than
at being thankful for them, which speaks a proud unsubdued selfie disposition.

I shall not stand to discuss the shifts and pretexts, that folks make use of
in their byasses, in setting no value on Redemptions bestowed on them, many a
time their own spirit is a spirit of bondage, when God allows on them a spirit
of liberty. It is not the want of allowances from God, but the want of
enlargement of heart, a slavish servil disposition, that makes a spirit of
bondage, when it is not Gods allowance. Sometime they pretend the smalness of
the mercy, to undervalue it, when they rather proclaim the want of humility in
themselves. The humbled Church, Lam. 3.22. Under many pressures sees, That it
is of the Lords mercies that we are not consumed; if our mercies be compared
with our lustings, or deservings, they will be great and admirable mercies. And
sometimes the cloud of continued pressures hides the sight of partial
Redemptions; but certainly, every evidence of mercy remembered in wrath, is a
redemption, and should be delighted in, and our heart should be enlarged in
receiving it as such, in a word, it is an evidence of a blessed disposition, when
whatever be folks lots, they love not to cast out with God, they love not to
fish faults with his Providence, to miscal a mean mercy, how insignificant
soever it be to their sense; and when they are content to pick up their mercies
amongst the crowds of their crosses, that these shall not tempt them, not to be
comforted in the meanest mercy; and who knows but such a frame, if it were
studied, might prove a door of hope to the increase and growth of favors; they
that delight to commend mercies, shall find them grow. Now I have done with the
accounts on which deliveries are called Redemptions.

In the third place it remains, that I should speak a little to the
plentifulness of these redemptions; With him there is plenteous redemption. Ye
heard the last day when I was speaking of the mercy of God, That God is full of
compassion, and plenteous in mercy, Psalm. 86.5, 15. That he has manifold
mercies. Neh. 9.19. and that he is abundant in goodness, Exodus 34.6. Here He is
plenteous in redemption, and this has relation to these two.

1. To the variety of the pressures, the saints may be assaulted with, for
plenteous redemption speaks plentiful pressures.

2. To the recurring of these pressures, that when folk are brought out of
them, they fall in them again through their own folly; There is plenteous
redemption with God in relation to both.

For the first, The variety of pressures wherewith saints may be assaulted,
There is somewhat, 1. Supposed here, That not only the Israel of God may have
pressures, but a variety, a great many of them; Hence Eliphaz, Job 5.19.
Supposing Job a penitent, says, God should deliver him in six troubles and in
seven, a number of perfection, 2 Cor. 4.8. The Apostle says, we are troubled on
every side, and Chapter 6.7. He tells, There is need of the armor of
righteousness, both on the right and left hand; there is no hand we can turn us
to, would he say, but there is need of armor, Chap. 7.5. Troubled on every
side, without are fightings, and within were fears; and in a word, the Church
tells us, Lam. 2.22. That God had called, as in a solemn day, her terrors round
about her, in the day of Gods anger no pressure was wanting, and there was a
convention of them.

1. Hence from this, that variety of pressures are the lot of the people of
God, it does on the one hand point out, that they are ill to tame, ill to hold,
like a wild ass, snuffing up the wind; it is not easy sisting them, except
they be hedged in on all hands; hard wedges tells there are hard stone or
timber to be divided; and they who have many pressures, may sit down and lament
over their dispositions, that less would not do their turn; many might steal
more quietly in to heaven, were it not for their dispositions, that are so wild
and ill to be tamed; Though yet I shall add, the more pressures thou have, if
thou could improve them well, thou has the more doors open for mercy, and
occasions to get meat out of the eater.

2. From it I would have many folks learning to silence their murmuring and
complaining, many have learned a gad of crying ere they be touched; there be
many, who though there be pressures be such, as many of the people of God would
count an outgate, yet there is no biding of their complaining: O! what would
many of you do if ye were put in Job's case, who in one day was stripped of all
that he had, and the next day of his health and quietness of mind, and yet he
was born through; it is a great evidence of mortification, to be enabled to
bear pressures well, to make little din of grievances; much din and crying
under them, tells there are many boyls to be let out, and many complaints call
on God to lay more on folk to tame them better. O! be sober, and if ye be put
in a Babel, see if ye can build houses there, and make your pressures as
supportable, as lawfully ye may without sin, make them not intolerable, for
that is to break your back, but see how tolerable ye can make them, without
sinning against God, that ye may dwell beside your cross, with silence and
submission, who wots, but ere many days go over, ye may meet with an out-gate.

But 2. As variety of pressures are supposed here; so it expresses plenty of
Redemption in God for all that variety; time will not permit me to break in on
that other thing, that this plenteous Redemption relates to, the recurring of
pressures, how frequently the people of God may fall under repeated pressures,
and may be ofter than once pressed, but here for variety of pressures, there is
plenteous redemption, He will deliver in six troubles, and in seven, Job 5.19.
If they be assaulted on the right and left hand, there is armor of
righteousness for both, 2 Cor. 6.7. If they be troubled on every side, he can
keep them from being distressed if perplexed, they shall not despair, etc 1
Cor. 4.8. If they be troubled on every side, have fightings without, and fears
within, God that comforts those that are cast down, can comfort them, 2 Cor.
7.8. When thou sits down, and cannot tell all thy pressures, and are like a
weak patient, who when his wounds are opened up, swerfs, thy heart grows sick
and thou faints. He is all sufficient to afford Cordials for thy support; thou
cannot have so many wants, but he can supply them: And as the old man said to
the Levit, Judges 19.20 All thy wants shall be upon him; Thou cannot be
straightened in God, though through the narrowness of thy confidence, thou may be
straightened in thy own bowels, for with him is plenteous redemption; Think upon
this, ye that have to do with it, ye that in your pressures are left on God
alone, bring up a good report on him, cry not up your wants above his
furniture; cry not up your griefs above his consolations, which cannot be
exhausted; this would make folks life not so comfortless as often times they make
it to themselves, while they cry out, What will they do with this, and with
that, it (...) come in their way? If indeed such a thing be before thee we may
say, as it was said to Jeremy. Jer. 12 5. If thou have run with the footmen,
and they have wearied thee, then how can thou contend with horses? If thy few
pressures have laid thee by, What will thou do with more and greater? If in the
land of peace, wherein thou trusted, they have wearied thee, (I shall not say
thou will have that atheistical word, What ca^ God do?) But what will thou do,
if it come to the swellings of Jordan? But if thou keep thy eye and heart on
that word, With God is plenteous redemption; and then ask, what shall I do with
my troubles? I say, even bear them, go to God and get much from him to bear
them; many proofs of his power and love, his all sufficiency is infinite to
bear thee through; and bod well of him, and have well: look down on the greatest
number of pressures as tolerable in his strength. I love not carnal confidence,
but God loves not drooping, or that folk should go discouraged to their work,
though humble they should be. They that go drooping to their work, will come
halting from it: but though a solemn assembly of terrors should surround you,
hold your eye o^ plenteous redemption in God, and it shall be well with you.
God bless his word to you for Christ's sake.

SERMON XLIII.
Psalm 130. Verse 7. And with him is plenteous redemption. And he shall redeem
Israel from all his iniquities.
AS there is no searching out of the Almighty to perfection, as to what he is
in himself, for he is higher than the Heavens (as it is said of his Wisdom) and
deeper than the Earth. So that what can we do or know? Job 11.7 8. So we are as
little able to comprehend or fathom all that is in him, for the good of his
people, and what wonder when over and above all particular Promises, he has
given himself away to be their God, has made infinitness their portion. Here
we have a taste of what riches are in him for the behove of his people; That
for misery in Israel, with the Lord there is mercy; that for bondage and
slavery in Israel, with him is plenteous redemption: And for the particular
bondage and pressure of sin, He will redeem Israel from all his iniquities.

I have already said somewhat to that attribute of mercy in God; and the last
day I came to a close of this. That with him is plenteous redemption; ye heard
that this redemption imports, partly authority to interpo^^, and partly power
to back authority, to vindicat his people: Ye heard also that it was called
redemption on a threefold account; 1. On the account of its rise and fountain,
that every redemption and delivery the people of God get, is founded on, and is
the result of their great Redemption by Christ. 2. It is so called, with an eye
to the trouble and troublers from which he redeems his Israel, but without
money. 3. That it is so called, upon the account of the issue; when the Lord
delivers his people, he sets them at freedom and liberty, he sets their feet in
a large place, as it is, Psalm. 18.19. I came also to speak of the plenteousness
of this Redemption; The Text says, that not only there is redemption, but
plenteous redemption with him; and (as I showed) it is called plenteous
redemption on a double account. 1. In relation to the great plenty and variety
of pressures, wherewith the people of God may be assaulted on the right and on
the left hand, with fightings without, and fears within; and as the Church has
it, Lam. 2.22. They may have their terrors called as in a solemn day round
about them; but in reference to all these, he has plenteous redemption, to
deliver from six troubles and from seven, to put on the armor of righteousness
when they are assaulted on the right hand and on the left, when they are
troubled on every side, to keep them from being distressed; When perplexed, to
keep them from despair, etc. 2 Cor. 4.8. Of this I have spoken, and shall not
repeat.

It remains in the 2d place, That I speak to this plenteous Redemption, as it
relates to the frequent relapses of the people of God into bondage through
their folly, after the Lord has brought them out of former pressures, they
betray themselves, and bring themselves under new pressures, they fall in new
provocations, that bring them in new difficulties, which puts them again and
again to look up to redemption in God. I shall follow out this a little in
three heads.

1. It is not a thing unusual to see the people of God after they have been
redeemed, to fall in relapses, and needing new redemptions; for plenteous
redemption in God needed not be proclaimed, if they were not obnoxious to
frequent relapses in bondage, and pressures through their sin, if they were not
like that passionat man, or man of great wrath that suffers punishment; for if
thou deliver him (says he) thou must do it again, Prove. 19.19. Let God pull
them out of the mire, by his mighty and gracious hand, they will be as ready to
fall in it again, as if they had not been in it before; This is the complaint
made of the Lords people, Psalm. 106.43. Many a time did he deliver them, they
got redemption often, but they provoked him with their counsel, and were
brought low for iniquity. They were often well, but could not hold themselves
so. And if ye will consider the History deduced, Jud. 2.16. to 20. It is marked
when they had provoked the Lord, to put them in bondage, that he raised up
Judges, which delivered them out of the hand of these that spoiled them; but
they would not hearken to their Judges, but went a whoring after other gods,
and when for that they were brought in bondage, the Lord raised them up Judges,
and was with the Judges to deliver them from enemies, but when the Judge was
dead, they returned and corrupted themselves. And Jud. 10.10, to 13. The Lord
lays it home to them, when they came and complained to him by reason of the
bondage they were under by the Ammonites, I delivered you (says he) from the
Egyptians, Amorites, the children of Ammon, and from the Philistines, the
Sydonians also, and the Amalekites, and Maonites, when ye cried to me, yet ye
have forsaken me, and served other gods; ye would not hold your selves well,
when ye were well, therefore ye are now under the power of the Ammonites. I
need not stand to tell you, how this relapsing into bondage comes. Defection,
declining, and departing from God, is the sinful bias of our hearts, when ever
we are right, that motion is preternatural, or rather supernatural; we are
naturally inclined to go a whoring from God; and not only so, but we are
possessed with a carnal confidence, that we shall do well, when we get our will,
and God is provoked to blast that carnal confidence, by giving us a proof of
what is in our hearts; and further the abuse both of bondage, and delivery out
of bondage; when folk can give a sorry and poor account of what they have
profited by the one, or by the other. It is no wonder that God be provoked to
leave them in the mire, and to need Redemption anew.

Now all that I shall take from this shall be these two words. To guard all
flesh that they lean not the weight of their guiding on their outward
condition, and complain not of any lots they are under, as if they would do
better, if freed of them; many when they are low, are ready to assoil
themselves, as to the neglect of duty, they are under this or that, which if
they were freed of, they would do well, that is but a cheat. The Wall might go
up in troublesome times, as Neh. 9.25 When with the one hand they held the
weapon, and built with the other; Men's tempers are such, that give them their
will in outward conditions, they would not do better till God mend their
Dispositions, thou will say, thou art under want, and have no time to seek God;
but had thou Cresus's wealth, thou would not seek him better, if thy
disposition were not helped. Thou has this or that fashrie, and if that were
taken off thee, thou would be more diligent, but considers not that if thou
wanted that fashry or trouble, thou would be more lazy, and if thou could
guide the lot thou art under, it would quicken thee to diligence, and help thee
to diligence, and help thee to improve it to a spiritual advantage: In a word,
blame not thy lot, of thy want of a disposition, but thy disposition, and then
thou shall be in a capacity to go about duty, and get the good of thy lot
whatever it be.

2. That as we would not complain of lots, so we would not trust our fairds and
resolutions, to do right when God sends redemption, when we are delivered, how
does the Novelty of it affect us, when God has broken the yoke and burst the
bonds; we say, we will not transgress, Jer. 2.20. But he that trusts in his own
heart is a fool, Prove. 28.26. For Psalm. 106.12, 13. When that people were on
the edge of the red Sea, newly delivered, then they believed his word, and sang
his praises, but they soon forgot his works, they waited not for his counsel;
they that have gotten a redemption wherewith they are affected, if they be not
on their guard, they may put themselves in a condition, wherein they may need a
new proof of plenteous Redemption.

But 2. As relapses in bondage after we are redeemed, are too usual in the
people of God, so it is a heinous and terrible aggravation of their fault. It
needs a peculiar promise, That with God is plenteous redemption to them that
are sensible of it, it is no light matter (let folk think of it what they will)
to sell themselves for naught. And when God has redeemed them, to sell
themselves over again; it was a terrible aggravation of Solomon's fault, that he
turned away from the Lord God of Israel, after that he had appeared to him
twice, 1 Kin. 11.9. That after God had manifested himself to him, he ran away
from him, and Ezra 9.13. Ye will see how that godly and reader man, looks on
such a practice as this; After all this is come upon us, for our evil deeds,
and for our great trespasses seeing thou our God has punished us less tha^ our
iniquities deserve* and has given us such deliverance as this, should we again
break by commandment, and join in affinity with the people of these
abominations, would thou not be angry with us till thou had consumed us, so
that there should be no remnant nor escaping. He has a dreadful apprehension
of the desert of relapses after Redemption, and no wonder they be so looked
upon, if we consider partly, that the Lord delivers his people out of trouble
on these very terms, that they should not turn again to folly, Psalm. 85.8. The
Lord will speak peace to his people and saints, but let them not turn again to
folly; And, Jer. 3.19. When a great objection is moved, How shall I put thee
among the children, and give thee a pleasant land, a goodly heritage of the
host of nations? he answers thus, Thou shall call me, my father, and shall not
turn away from me. Now to frustrat Gods very end, and the terms on which he
gives Redemption, must be a sad aggravation of guilt: And further it is sad, if
we consider, that God's giving particular Redemption to his people, is
accompanied with engagements on our part, with our own consent to do our duty,
Jer. 2.20. When of old time I had broken thy yoke, and burst thy bonds, thou
said, I will not transgress; thou took fair in hand, when on every high hill,
and under every green tree, thou wandered, playing the harlot; thou said, thou
would give my kindness in delivering thee another meeting, when thou have
foully deboarded: And further, it may be sad, to look on their relapses, on the
account of the folly that is in them; as in that, Psalm. 85.8. When God speaks
peace to his people, if they turn to sin, it is a folly; there is a folly and
madness in that prank, for them who having sinned, and God has corrected them
for sin, and made them to find sin an evil and bitter thing, to try again
conclusions of that kind, and relapse in these sins, that has bred them so
much bitterness, who after they have met God in their teeth, hedging up their
way with thorns, that they should not find their loves, and God has delivered
them, yet no sooner are they delivered, but they fall to that same way of
sinning, which brought them in bondage; what a folly and madness is in that?

For Use, let me entreat you not to look lightly on relapses, which have such
heinous aggravations, whether they be private or public relapses, lest God be
provoked to make it apparent, that he looks not lightly on them, lest (as it
is Amos 7 7.) after the grasshoppers, and contending by fire, he come with a
plum-line, and will not hearken to that pleading, Forgive, I beseech thee; by
whom shall Jacob arise? for he is small. Therefore I say, look not lightly on
these relapses; a Fever is dangerous, but relapsing in it, after something that
looks like a Cool, is far more dangerous. Thou that have been low, and God has
helped thee out of thy low condition, and made thee to wonder at his goodness.
Consider thy posture, if thou be backsliden, and how much need thou have of a
new Redemption, and learn to aggravat that guilt, by thy relapsing in it.

But the 3d thing to be marked in this plenteous redemtion, is, that though it
be very usual in the Lords people, to relapse into slavery and bondage; and
though it be an heinous fault so to do, yet there is in God plenteous
redemption, even for that, there is redemption with him for them, who after
they have been delivered, have through their folly relapsed into bondage. I
shall not need to stand to prove this any length from Scripture, Psalm. 106.43.
-- Many times did he deliver them. but they provoked him by their counsel, and
were brought low by their iniquity; nevertheless he regarded their affliction,
when he heard their cry, and he remembered for them his Covenant, and repented
according to the multitude of his mercies; there is plenteous redemption. And
when Judge. 10. he has told them, v. 13. that when they had often relapsed, and
he had delivered them, and now they had forsaken him, and served other gods,
and he would deliver them no more; yet when they insist, and will not quite
him, it is added, v. 16. that his soul was grieved for the misery of Israel;
their misery pleaded with him to have compassion on them, and deliver them. And
Neh. 9. chapter How many proofs of love are there recorded from Egypt all along in
the wilderness, and in the promised land, notwithstanding their rebellions, and
when he had wrought for them over and over again, and they still relapsed, he
was provoked to say, he would destroy them; yet he tells, that he wrought for
his own Names sake, that it might not be polluted among the Heathen; for
whatever they did deserve, his Name did not deserve to suffer, therefore he
wrought for them; and relative to this is that invitation, Jer. 3.1. Thou have
played the harlot with many lovers, (not at once, but successively, and in the
intervals, between deliveries) yet return again to me, says the Lord. I shall
not insist on this, but they that are under convictions of private and public
relapses, and of the hazard of relapses, and cannot tell what to make of them,
or what will be the latter end of their running back and back again into
bondage after deliveries, they may encourage themselves from this, that with
the Lord our God there is plenteous redemption. And if ye say, how, and in what
terms may folk that have thus relapsed, look out for this redemption in God.
Something for the direction of faith may come to be spoken to in the next
Doctrine, and therefore here I shall only press on them that would look our for
redemption. First, That much neglected, and yet most necessary work of
Repentance, according to that, which some would have a plague, but I think
sounds like a promise, Ezekiel 7.16. They that escape of them, shall escape on the
mountains, and shall be like doves of the valleys, all of them mourning every
one for his iniquity. O to see that frame of spirit, to see repentance more in
fashion among us; God has made us smart many ways, because we would not
afflict our selves, and yet we will not do it. O! this is an impenitent
generation, pray for repentance. 2. I would have you in the study of
repentance, lo^king to the aggravations of sin, and that from your frequent
relapsing in it, that after we have felt the bitterness of our folly, we have
turned again to it, that we have given up to walk with God, after we have
spoken of much blessedness in his company, that when we have found the
threatenings verified, and promises made out to us and to others, yet the bias
of our hearts is out of course, and we will try these woeful conclusions of new.
O! take a look of the dreadful aggravations that relapsing in bondage has with
it. 3. As the result of all this, I would recommend to you to be in Gods
reverence, in reference to that which I spoke the last day, even his
prerogative-royal, in free grace, for any redemption that we can expect. I told
you of Gods rejecting carnal confidences, that folk shall not prosper in them,
because they would not quite them, and lay their deplorable case at the
footstool of Sovereignty in him, and nothing looks with a more dreadful aspect
to right discernets, than to see the temper of the Jews among us, who ( Jer.
12.4. when the Land is mourning) say, he shall not see our last end. And Chap
2.8. The vessels of the Lords house shall come back again: And there is nothing
more hopeful under relapses, than to be putting off our ornaments, to see what
God will do with us; to be non-plussed under convictions of relapses, and to be
casting our selves at the Footstool of Sovereignty in free grace: Were we in
that humble posture, it would speak more ground of hope, than all our carnal
confidences, which are made Pillows to sleep on in our security. Now I have
done with the second main Point, to encourage Irsael to hope in God, that with
him is plenteous redemption.

I proceed now to the 3d Observation, that at the entry to these words I
proposed to be spoken to, That what God is, or what is in God, is put forth by
God, for the behove of his people, according as they need it. I gather this
from the connection of the two Verses, with God there is merey, and with him
there is plenteous redemption; and what follows? And he shall redeem Israel
from all his iniquity. If he have mercy to compassionat them in their misery,
and if he have authority and power to vindicate them from bondage, it shall be
seen in their actual deliverance. The point is plain and obvious. Gods
all sufficiency, his furniture for the need of his people shall not be wanting,
but put forth actually, as he sees good, for the behove of his people. If he
have plenteous redemption, he shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities.
Hence it is, that in Scripture we have not only an account of furniture in God
(if I may so word it) for his people, That with him is mercy, and with him is
plenteous redemption; and of promises, wherein God engages himself to put forth
that furniture for their behove; but the Scripture gives an account of his
actual putting forth that mercy and power for them, Jer. 31.10. There are news
to be sent and published in the Isles afar off, and what is that? He that
scattered Israel will gather them, and keep him as a shepherd does his flock;
and what more? For the Lord has redeemed Jacob, and ransomed him from the hand
of him that was stronger than he. It Is spoken of as a thing done, and on this
account David in his Prayer promises himself a good day, Psalm. 35.9. My soul
shall be joyful in the Lord, it shall rejoice in his salvation; all my bones
shall say (alluding to that, Psalm. 51.8. Make me to hear joy and gladness,
that the bones which thou have broken may rejoice; who is like unto thee, that
delivers the poor from him that is too strong for him; yea, the poor and the
needy from him that spoils him? I am (would he say) looking for a Song, when
not so much as a broken bone shall be dumb, but all shall get a voice to sing
praise for actual redemption. I shall not need to stand to prove this from the
all sufficiency of God, from his love and affection to his people, and from his
fidelity, that cannot lie: Nor will I break in on the particular inferences of
this point now: Only in general be not vexed, take it not ill, though ye be put
to, and kept at a task, to keep a good report in your hearts of God, when
temptation says, as Psalm. 77.7, 8, 9. The Lord has cast off for ever, and will
be favorable no more, his mercy is clean gone, etc. When temptation says, what
means this and that in my case? If all this mercy and redemption be with God,
(and thou may then have a hard steek of work to keep up a good report of him,
when so many Hell Firebrarnds are going thick and threefold.) Be encouraged
and comforted in this, that a day comes, when actual redemption shall take all
these off thy hand, and thou shall not have it to say only, That with God is
redemption, in opposition to thy troubles, but he has redeemed Jacob, and
ransomed him from the hand of him that was stronger than he. Be comforted in
this, ye that are engaged in a task to keep up a good report of God against
prejudices; The time is coming, when he will leave you little to say to his
commendation, when he shall come and relieve you, and make actual redemption,
give the lie to all mistakes and prejudices whatsoever.

SERMON XLIV.
Psalm 130. Verse. 8. And he shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities.
I Am now, ye see, toward the close of this Psalm, which has detained me so
long, upon the account of the riches and universal usefulness of the matter
therein contained: Ye may remember, that after that Exhortation to Israel, to
hope in the Lord, I came to the motives encouraging them so to do; wherein
somewhat was spoken to what is supponed concerning the Israel of God, called to
hope, and allowed to hope in God, that they are under the sense of misery,
needing mercy, and under the sense of bondage, needing plenteous redemption,
and in particular, under the sense of the bondage of sin, putting them in need
to be redeemed from all their iniquities; and in speaking to what is proposed
for the encouragment of such to hope in God: I hinted somewhat concerning these
two great truths, That with God there is mercy, and with him is plenteous
redemption.

You may remember, that I told you, there be two words further to be gathered
from this 8. v. One is, that what is in or with God, it shall be put forth for
the behove of his people, as they have need, he shall redeem Israel; and
another is, That it is in particular Isreal's great mercy, that God shall be a
Redeemer to him from all his iniquities,

For the first of these, I brake in on it on the close of the mornings
Exercise, that what is in, or with God, shall be put forth for the behove of
his people as they need it, and they shall find it made forthcoming to them as
they need it; for if there be with him plenteous redemption, he shall redeem
Israel from all his iniquities.

I left at a general word of Use from this, That we should not take it ill, to
be kept at a task of bringing up a good report on God against all prejudices,
and whatsoever temptation suggests of him; for the time is coming (which the
Lord will hasten in his time) that he will leave us little to say to his
commendation, his own performances will say so much, and declare him to be
exalted above all blessing and praise: The time is coming, that they shall not
think shame of it, that (if we may so word it) have spoken good of him behind
his back, and would not take a report of him, but from his Bible.

But to follow out this a little, for the comfort of them that are looking for
the accomplishment of what is in, or with God, for the behove of his people. I
shall lead you to a fourfold direction, in order to this, and endeavor to put
a close to this Scripture.

The first direction is this, That ye would study to be well acquaint with the
Word, to be well acquaint with what God has declared is in him for his people.
The Bible should be a well-finger'd Book in gloomy times. David knew well what
he was doing, when he made the Statutes his song in the house of his
pilgrimage: and the reason why I press this acquaintance with the Word, is, to
help you to prevent a double hazard; there is on the one hand the hazard of
ignorance of the Word, when folk know not their wealth contained in their
Charter. When folk are like Hagar, beside the Well, and yet like to cast their
Ishmael from them, like to die for thirst, because their eyes are not open to
discern it. Ignorance undoes many folk, because they know not their allowance:
And another hazard upon the other hand, that by pressing you to be acquaint
with the Scripture, I would have avoided, and that is the hazard of mistaking
and overreaching, when folks lusts and carnal expectations would make a light
and ground of expectation to themselves, when they look for what God has not
promised, or has not absolutely promised, or not always, these are dangerous,
we had need to have our expectations well bottomed, lest a disappointment
founded on a mistake, make us to misbelieve that which is really promised; a
crush in a carnal expectation may make us look on the Bible as a poor Cordial
in difficulties, we would therefore guard against both ignorance, and
mistaking, or overreaching.

A 2d Direction is, That when ye have found any thing in the Bible that is
useful for you, your first work would be, to prize the certainty of what is
contained there. I spoke to this at great length on these words, v. 5. In his
Word do I hope. That the Scriptures are the Word of God, of Divine Authority,
but I can never enough press it; folks that have their Treasure and Storehouse
in the Bible, prize the Bible, look on it as the word of him that cannot lie,
as a tried word, as silver tried in a furnace of earth, purified seven times,
Psalm. 12.6. That many have ventured their all upon, and never found crack nor
slaw in, (to speak so) and Ministers had done with their task, if the certainty
of this truth, that the Scriptures are the Word of God, were believed, and if
thou cannot get the Promises believed, will thou look out on the threatenings,
that thou discerns to be accomplished, and thou needs not doubt of a promise,
so long as thou have a threatening, which thou see verified: Ponder that word,
Zech. 8.14, 15. Thus says the Lord, as I thought to punish you when your
fathers provoked me to wrath, and I repented not; So again have I thought in
those days to do well unto Jerusalem, and to the house of Judah: fear not. If
ye doubt of my promises, that are not yet accomplished, take a confirmation of
them from my threatenings, which ye found verified.

A 3d Direction I would give them that are looking for the accomplishment of
what is in, or with God, and he has promised, is, that having found out what
is contained in the Scripture, and prized it as of infallible verity and
certainty, then put to your Faith to it, that he shall redeem Israel from all
his iniquity, for he has said it. I cannot give you this Direction more
succinctly, than the Lord gives it to Habakkuk, who when he had prayed against
the Caldeans, Chap. 1. he is bidden, Chap. 2.2, to write the vision, and make
it plain upon tables, speak it out, conceal it not, that he that runs may read
it. For v. 3. the vision is yet for an appointed time, it will not come
presently, but at the end it shall speak and not lie: though it tarry, wait for
it, there is Faith's work now, because it will surely come, it will not tarry.
Ye may remember I spoke also to this, when I was upon these words, And in his
word do I hope. But in following it out now, I shall only touch on three or
four words concerning Faith's looking out to what God shall do, and make out to
Israel: And 1. I would have you looking on Faith as the most eminent and
honorable of employments, though not the most sensible and satisfactory. There
is much work my a fall in Saints hand, which may be sweeter, and may go better
with them, but no work is so eminent and accceptable to God: So it is said of
Abraham, Romans 4.20. He staggered not at the promise of God through unbelief,
but was strong in faith, giving glory to God. And Joh. 20.28. When Thomas,
after he had evidenced, he was a man that would not believe, without seeing the
print of the nails, and thrusting his hand into Christ's side, he makes a great
phrase, and says, My Lord, and my God. Well (says Christ) Thomas, because thou
have seen me, thou have believed, but blessed are they that have not seen, and
yet have believed. Thomas, ye might have been more acceptably employed in
giving me credit, although ye had not gotten sensible satisfaction. 2. Another
word is, that distrust is the inlet to all folks miscarriages in a stormy
time; a man is even as tint as if he were in the Sea bottom, as to any
acceptable acquitting of himself to God in his work, before his promise be
accomplished. When ever he is overpowered with unbelief, then he is ready to
say, There is no hope, we will walk every one in the imagination of his own
heart. Ponder that word. Heb. 3.18, 19. To whom swear he that they should not
enter into his rest, but to them that believed not? So they could not enter in,
because of unbelief. There the thing that held the people out of the promised
Land, and made them perish in the Wilderness, unbelief: And compare it with 1
Cor. 10.6. to 11. Where ye find them lusters, idolaters, fornicators, tempters
of Christ, murmurers. To tell that, make once folk unbelievers, and ye may make
them any of these, or all of them upon a suitable temptation. There is no ill
turn that occurs, but an unbeliever capacitats himself for it, if mercy in God
prevent it not. And a 3d word concerning this exercise of Faith (and I shall
add no more) is, that it says not a little to the granting or denying of a
delivery, to the hastening, or for-slowing of an issue, this exercise of faith.
If unbelief keep out of the promised Land, and make Israel fall and wander in
the Wilderness forty years, as in that Heb 3.18. Then blessed believing
hastens the performance of the promise, Luke 1.45. Blessed is she that
believed, for there shall be a performance of these things which was told her
from the Lord. Little knows folk, how God may be provoked to make their
unbelief the rule of their allowance, that, when they bod little, they shall
see as little: No, but God may, and often does shame the unbelief of his
people, and make their false eyes see that they were in the wrong to him; but
certainly unbelief of its own nature is obstructive of the performance of
promises; and if many die in the Wilderness, they have as their carnal
confidence on the one hand, so their unbelief and despondency on the other, to
blame for it. And I shall add more, if unbelief withhold not the accomplishment
of the promise, it may have a black issue, when the accomplishment of the
promise, comes to the man that entertains it. And as to this, I would on the
one hand commend to you that Passage, to be pondered, concerning that
blasphemous lord, 2 King. 7.2. who when Elisha Prophesied of incredible plenty
in Samaria, said, If the Lord would make windows in heaven, might this thing
be? It shall be, says the Prophet, and thou shall see it with thine eyes, but
shall not eat thereof, and it was so; he was a Grandee, on whose hand the King
leaned, and thought, if there were any fores to be had, he should have a share;
and the King giving him the charge of the Gate, the people trod upon him, and
he died. And on the other hand, ponder that comfortable Song that believers
sing, Isai. 25.9. Lo, this is our God, we have waited for him, and he will save
us: this is our God, we have waited for him, we will be glad, and rejoice in
his salvation. O, that Saints, would think, that such a turn of providence may
come their way, that will make them say and sing, I trusted in him in a strait,
when not only he was invisible (as he is always in himself,) but wrapped up in a
cloud of mysterious dispensations; O! that ye would think that such a song is
possible and sweet; but if that be a sweet song, what bitter youling will it
put them to, or may they have, who when God appears, must say, Lo, there he is,
but we waited not for him; so soon as he went out of our sight, we tint all
hope, we knew not what it was to wait for him, who hid his face from the house
of Jacob; we knew not what it was to bear his indignation, till he should arise
and plead our cause, and execute judgment for us, and believe that he should
bring us out to the light, to behold his righteousness; Thus ye see what an
important matter it is, that we put forth Faith and keep it in exercise, for
the accomplishment of what is in and with God, for his people, which is the
third Direction.

A 4th Direction which I give, and leave this Note, and that is, That ye would
wisely consider what the Lord means, when he puts his people to the exercise of
their Faith so much, about that which he will do. He will redeem Israel from
all their iniquities; and yet he puts Israel to believe it: What means the
Lord, I say, in holding them at that task of believing: and here, without
offering to encroach upon the depth of the wisdom and knowledge of God, in his
Providence, the people of God have somewhat to look to without and about them,
and somewhat to look to within them, if they look to somewhat without or about
them; God has more ado in the world, than a particular saint, or even a
particular Church to satisfy; O! the deep contexture of Providence, how
unsearchable are his counsels? and his ways past finding out; That what is very
unsatisfactory to one or one Society, God may have holy ends for it in the
world: But to come nearer, What have Believers to look to in the world without
them? Take it in that word, which the Lord has to Abraham, when he is making
the Covenant with him, Genesis 15.16. When he has told him, that though his seed
should go down to Egypt, yet in the fourth generation they should come hither
again; If Abraham should ask, Why should they stay there so long? He answers,
The iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full; God holds his people at the task
of believing; while the enemies cup is a filling, might I insist upon this, I
might tell you, That the enemies cup is often very long in filling, but longer
without the Church, than within the Church; four hundred years to the Amorites
was long, yet they being a people without the Church, they took all that time
to fill their cup; but elsewhere their enemies ripe faster, their cup is sooner
filled; and I might add, a cup that is long a filling, is ordinarily a very
bitter cup, when it is holden to the head of enemies; when the cup of the
Amorites is full, utter extermination, rooting out, and offcutting comes upon
them; Lord save them whom folks wish well unto, from a long fristed plague; a
long brewing storm is more dread sulthan hand payment: And therefore it would
not stumble folk to see wicked men for born, but if it were rightly looked on,
every days forbearance would be an argument of pity; for a cup that is long a
filling, is most bitter, when it is held to the head. But that which I am upon
is, that the people of God, when they are at the trade of believing, have
something to look to without them, and particularly to the cup of enemies that
is a filling: But again, when they are holden at the task of believing, they
would also look to something within them, and among them; What means it, that
God has given many rich and precious Promises to Believers, and yet they get
no more in hand, but Faith to believe them, if they can win to that, where are
his former loving kindnesses which he has sworn to David? For looking within
you, and among you, ponder that word, which ye have, Isai. 10.12. When the Lord
has performed his whole work upon mount Zion and Jerusalem, he will punish the
fruit of the stout heart of the King of Assyria, and the glory of his high
looks; and compare it with the Verses preceding, there ye will find the
Assyrians desperately blaspheming, he says, Are not my princes altogether Kings,
as my hand has found the kingdoms of the idols, and whose graven images did
excel them of Jerusalem, and of Samaria: Shall I not, as I have done unto
Samaria and her idols, so do to Jerusalem and her idols? What nation has been
delivered out of my hand, that the God of Israel should deliver Jerusalem out
of my hand. One would think now, were he a God in Heaven, he would sit no more
with a blasphemous atheist, he will suffer him no more to blaspheme and
reproach with an high contempt of him and his authority, he will now be
known by the judgment which he shall execute: but at leisure, he will make
himself known, but not till he have done his whole work on Mount Sion and on
Jerusalem, for all the haste, his work on Mount Zion and on Jerusalem, is the
greatest haste, he will let the Assyrian blaspheme on, and trod down all
before him, till that be done; his great work is to do good by the Assyrians
within his Church, and among his people, and when his work is done there, he
will reckon with him, and be known by the judgment which he executes upon him:
And if ye ask, what this may be within the Church, and among the people of God,
that he will have them minding, when he puts them to send by Faith on the
Promises; I dare not offer to give you an exact account of it, but only to cast
some ground for work to your hand; if ye mind practically to improve such a
Doctrine, I shall briefly hint at some Scriptures, which will give you some
light in what it is; The first is that, Deuteronomy. 8.15, 16. Wherein the Lord tells,
he led his people through a great and terrible wilderness, wherein were fiery
serpents, and scorpions and drought, and brought water to them out of the
flint, and fed them with Manna, which their fathers knew not; Wherefore? That
he might humble and prove them, to do them good, at their latter end: These
Dispensations were humbling and proving, humbling, not crushing, for ye will
get crushing without Prayer, and discouragement without pains, but humbling
must be the product of Prayer and pains; they are not humbled, says the Lord,
even to this day, Jer. 44.10. Every broken body is not an humbled body; though
from pride of heart, they may be irritat, cankered, crushed, and to help to
this, proving must be added, which brings discoveries; and folk would try what
discoveries, their being put to send by Faith, brings forth, and lays before
them; proving will often bring butt, that which ye thought was not there benn
(as ye use to speak) passion, pride, fretting, haste, a legion of foul evils;
and it would bod well, if when folks are put to fend by Faith, amongst the
Promises, if they met with such discoveries, and saw ugly bossoms, and were
bearing about their abominations, and humbled under them: Another Scripture
that will hint a word of Direction to you, what your work should be, while put
to fend by Faith, is that, Jer. 2.19. Thine own wickedness shall correct thee,
and thy backslidings shall reprove thee; know then and see, that it is an evil
thing and bitter, that thou have forsaken the Lord, etc. This is it I was on in
the morning, Repentance, Repentance, O! how abasing is it, when our wickedness
and backsliding are sent to reprove and convert us, not only in keeping up the
performance of Promises, but in the execution of threatenings, when God makes
all the world wise of a peoples wickedness, when he goes, as it were, to
the street with their faults, when he spits in their face, and shoots them
with Miriam, without the camp; and it were a blessed work, if this led to
Repentance. And a 3d piece of work I would recommend to you, is, to see if ye
can believe indeed, Try if ye have Faith, and a well breathed Faith, a biding
Faith that will set its face to a storm; remember that word that Christ has
to his disciples, Mark 4.40. Why are ye so fearful, O! ye of little faith? How
is it that ye have no Faith? when they in a storm, like to drovvn, and cried,
Master, cares thou not that we perish, when he has rebuked the vvind and sea,
he gives them this check; There are many, who for all the times and exercises
have past over them, have had some dreilling and skirmishes for Faith, which
are presently discust; but God may see it meet to give them exercise for a
fight of Faith, to see if their Faith be a fresh-weather-Faith, or a Faith that
will venture on the Deep at his word; and look that Christ have not that to
say, Why are ye so fearful? how is it that ye have no faith? He is learning his
people to believe, when he puts them to live and fend among the Promises by
Faith. And a 4th word I give you, which I will not say should be written
upon gold Letters, but upon your hearts, who would fend by Faith amongst the
Promises, till the performance come, and it is that, Rev. 3.10. Here is the
patience and faith of the saints; Having spoken before of sore troubles, why
is Patience put first, and then Faith, because many a time Faith may not have a
turn to put its hand to, but to vvait for God, and see if ye can vvin to that
Faith, which when it has not a turn to do, but patiently wait on God, is
about that. And a fifth word I recommend to you, is that spoken of David, Acts
13.36. It is said, After he had served his own generation by the will of God,
he fell on sleep; Whatever may be the particular meaning of the place, it may
safely be taken up thus, That David took his generation work, as God put it in
his hand, he was not a carver or prescriber, but a submitter to God; if it was
a generation work, a work commanded by God, and necessary for him to be
studied; when the people of God are put to fend by Faith amongst the Promises,
till performance come, O! what thoughts of heart will they have, were they thus
and thus employed, how refreshful would it be to them? but many have no more,
but that they are cast idle, and necessitat to sit idle at Christ's feet, and
look up to him, and their idleness is very unpleasant to flesh; But thou who
art in that posture, would learn to believe, thou can never be put out of
Work. A godly man can never be an idle man, change his work he may, but idle
he cannot be, were it but to bear and submit to want of work, it is work; And
O! how sweet is that, let the saint be tossed as a ball in a large place, they
are always at work acceptable to God: And then ye would learn to see beauty in
a generation work, be what it will, that is the knack of it (to speak so) the
main thing to be noticed. If thou be serving thy generation by the will of God,
however it be in a work that is unpleasant to thee, even thy idleset, thy
humbling work, thou should learn to see a beauty in it, that thou may lay it on
his altar as an acceptable service to him, as if thou were at work more
refreshing to thee. These are some few thoughts why the Lord on several
accounts, holds his people at the trade of Faith, and sends them to fend by
Faith among the Promises till the performance come. I shall go no further. The
Lord bless his word to you.

SERMON XLV.
Psalm 130. Verse 8. And he shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities.
I Am now drawing toward a close of this Psalm, upon which I have insisted so
long, upon the account of the constant and universal usefulness of the subject
matter therein contianed.

From the Arguments encouraging Israel to hope in God, which is the Exhortation
in the 7 verse, from these Arguments, I say, to press and invite to hope in
God, I have been marking somewhat that is supposed, that is the case of God's
Israel, who are invited to hope, and allowed to hope in God, that they are
under misery and bondage, and particularly under the bondage of sin; And I have
spoken also to what is proposed for their encouragement, as 1. That there is
mercy with God. 2. That with him there is plenteous redemption. And, 3. From
the connection betwixt the seventh and eighth Verses, That what is in God, and
with God, for the behove of his people, will undoubtedly be put forth and
manifested to them, as they stand in need of it; for if he have mercy, he shall
compassionat them in their misery, if plenteous redemption be with him, He
shall redeem Israel from all their iniquities; If he have authority and power
to redeem, it shall undoubtedly be evinced in actual redeeming of them.

Now there remains a 4th Observation to be spoken to, That it is the great and
peculiar ground of hope and encouragement to God's Israel, that he will redeem
them from all their iniquities, which is the very words of the Text, He shall
redeem Israel from all his iniquities; Therefore let Israel hope in the Lord;
This Point though it be rich and full in it self, yet I may be the more brief
in the handling of it; That on the 4th Verse I spoke at great length to that
Doctrine, concerning forgiveness of sins; I shall therefore here first Explain
the Point a little, as it is held out in the Text, and then speak to some
Inferences and Uses from it.

What we say in Explication of the Point, may be reduced to 4 Heads.

1. More generally ye would consider, That it is a great encouragement to God's
people, that guilt, sin and iniquity, needs not mar their hope in God; for
though Israel have sinned, and though their sins here be called iniquities, and
though there be an all of these iniquities, notwithstanding all that, the
Spirit of God makes it here evident, Israel may hope in God, for He shall
redeem them from all their iniquities. By the Covenant of Works, iniquity
getting once place, all hope is forefault, that bargain being once broken, it
is everlastingly, and irrecoverably broken: But here is the Gospels glad news,
and great encouragement, That iniquities, if folks be seeking redemption from
them, needs not hinder hope in God; That when as it is, Romans 3.20 By the deeds
of the law, there shall no flesh be justified in his sight; For by the law is
the knowledge of sin; That Verse 21. There is a righteousness of God without
the Law manifested, being witnessed by the Law and the Prophets, that affords
ground of hope, that when Israel has trespassed against God, Yet now there is
hope in Israel concerning this thing, Ezra 10.2. In a word, these are no small
part of the glad news of the Gospel, That there is any trysting betwixt God and
sinful man, That every step in guilt, is not a step into utter despair, That
man upon every failing, has not done everlastingly with any ground of hope to
the sight of God's face in favor. That Is the first, and chief part of the glad
news of the Gospel.

2. Consider what it is that God does in reference to iniquity, which gives
ground of hope to Israel; He redeems from iniquity. Now as ye heard from Verse
4. There is in iniquity these two, The guilt, or offense done to God, and the
obligation to punishment resulting thereon. And there is the dominion power and
tyranny of sin, which it exexcises over the sinner, where it once gets access;
Now redemption from both these is the work of God by Christ, He redeems from
the guilt of sin, by the price and merit of his death, by that infinite,
complete and sufficient ransom which he has paid to Justice, to appease the
wrath of God, and to restore the guilty sinner to favor with him, and he
redeems from the dominion, power and tyranny of sin, by the power and virtue of
his death; and to this may be applied, that of Tit. 2.14. He gave himself for
us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify to himself a
peculiar people, zealous of good works; He gave himself for us, not only by his
death, to expiat the guilt of sin, but that he might break the bonds of
iniquity, and make us a purified and peculiar people to himself, zealous of
good works. I shall not need here to obviat the Socinians cavillations, who
from this phrase of redeeming from iniquity, would obscure the truth of the
satisfaction of Christ, as if the term Redemption did not import a
satisfaction, or paying of a price, for, say they, We are redeemed from the
iniquity and power of Satan, to whom no satisfaction is paid. But that is but
a mistake of the import of the phrase; for as it is spoken of in reference to
God, it imports constantly a ransom, as Job. 33.24. Deliver him from going down
to the pit, I have found a ransom; and, 1 John 2.2. He is the propitiation for
our sins; but when it is spoken in reference to sin or Satan, it is improperly
taken, and is a redemption by force, as if a person arrested for debt in
prison, when the principal Creditor were satisfied, his Cautioner should break
the fetters, that is redemption from sin; and as if he should deliver him from
the Jailer, by giving him a broken Head, that is redemption from Satan.

3. Ye would consider the universality of this Redemption, and this is also in
the Text, He shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities, holding forth the
universal extent of their Redemption, which for your better understanding ye
shall shortly take up under these three, 1. He redeems his people from the
guilt of all their sins; for as on the one hand, there is no sin so little that
God will pass over without a satisfaction; There is no venial sin that needs
not a satisfaction to Justice, and that merits not condemnation, for Romans 6.23.
The wages of sin is death. even eternal death, which is opposed there to
eternal life, the gift of God; So on the other hand, no sins of his people are
so heinous, though they be iniquities, as in the Text, though they be scarlet
and crimson colored sins, as Isai. 1.18. But if God in Christ be made use of,
they shall be redeemed from them, He will blot out as a thick cloud their
transgressions, and as a cloud their sins, when they return to him, for he has
redeemed them, Isai. 44.22. So he will redeem them from the guilt of all their
iniquities. 2. This universal all may be understood in relation to the power of
iniquity, that where he falls in on the sinner, he redeems from the bondage and
slavery of all sin, and when that work is rightly undertaken in his strength,
the sinner is a slave to no iniquity, he balks none, he spares no Zoar, no
Delila, no darling sin, when he comes to redeem and subdue the iniquities of
his people, all that is iniquity, he puts them to take it to task, to have a
respect to all his commands, Psalm. 119.6. And to esteem all his precepts
concerning all things to be right, and to hate every false way; verse 128. A
study of universal Mortification is that which he puts them on to, when he will
redeem from iniquity. And 3. The universal all may be extended yet further,
even to all the degrees of iniquity, that not only does he redeem his people
from the guilt, and from the power and dominion of all sin, but he sets them on
work to purge out all sin, and in due time he will redeem them from the
relics and remainders of sin; every thing that has the relic or remainder
of iniquity in it, he will redeem them from it in due time.

And 4. Ye would consider the object of this mercy, who they are that he will
redeem from all iniquity, they are his people Israel, the object of God's power
and mercy in redeeming, in his being a propitiation for sin, in redeeming from
the power and guilt of sin, are Israel, and they only; That as Adam when he
fell, drew all his seed along into perdition with himself: So Christ the second
Adam, will redeem all his seed, which is the true import of that comparison,
institute betwixt the first Adam and the second, Romans 5. and not to prove an
universal redemption, for then as all fell in Adam, so all should be actually
redeemed and liberat by Christ; but the meaning is, That as in Adam, all his
seed fell with him, so by Christ all his seed are redeemed; and as in Adam all
fell not, Christ was excepted, so by Christ all are not redeemed, his seed only
are recovered. This is a Point I need not enter to debate. It is too evident,
many are not redeemed by Christ, for many have not the outward means, that make
offer of redemption by Christ, many never heard tell of Christ, and if Christ
had paid a price for all, it were not agreeable to Justice, that so many
should be put to suffer punishment in hell. It is clear also from that, that
Christ would not pray for the world, Joh. 17.9. And he did not die for them for
whom he would not pray; and he does not sanctify himself for all, therefore he
redeems not all; and yet this needs be no impediment to them to look to him for
Redemption, who find their need of him, their fleeing to him for refuge, and
gripping to him for satisfaction, opens up the council of God, that they are
among the given ones to be redeemed by Christ; only remember, that as none of
God's Israel are secluded from this redemption, how worthless soever they be,
Though they may be secluded from these gifts and measures of graces afforded to
others, yet not from this redemption, from all iniquity; That is the
common-good of all, that is the nail fastened in the sure place, on which all the
vessels of greater and smaller quantity are hung; so on the other hand, it is
to Israel alone, and to none other that this redemption is ensured.

Having thus explained the Point, it remains, That we should draw some Uses
from it, and put a close to the Psalm, and there are four or five words of
inference that I would give you from what has been said. 1. See here what is
the great concerning business, the chief Interest and exercise of the true
Israel of God, It is the matter of iniquity, what to do with it, how to be rid
of it, and delivered from it; therefore after all the former encouragements to
hope in God, That with him is mercy, and with him is plenteous redemption, this
comes in as the reserve, that he shall redeem Israel from all his Iniquities;
To tell, that the great exercise of a true Israelite, will be about iniquity;
the conscience of sin and guilt, what to do with that, how to get the
conscience pacified, in reference to it; this exercise is a great stranger in
the visible Church, there may be much trouble of mind, where the conscience is
dormient and sleeping. There may be much vexation and fash^ie about trouble and
cross dispensations of providence, when guilt is little minded, but ye would
look to it: I shall not say they are not Israelites that fall into this error;
but surely it looks not like a true Israelite, where sin is not made the main
exercise; where daily searching out of sin, and endeavors to have the
conscience purified and purged from guilt, is not folks great task. And I shall
add, that exercise about sin and guilt, would give a more comfortable account
about trouble. If we were studying to have this Text made out to us, He shall
redeem Israel out of all his iniquities, we should find that of Psalm. 25.
Redeem Israel, O God, out of all his troubles, also made out to us; redemption
from iniquity would bod well, were a good prognostic of redemption from
trouble; for as ye heard from Isai. 10.12. Trouble has a work on Mount Zion;
and if ye would know what that is, see 27.9. By this therefore shall the
iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit, to take away his sin,
when he makes all the stones of the Altar as chalk stones, etc. Were trouble
getting its work, it should have the less ado when it had gotten its errand;
and therefore ye that are fasht and vexed folks with the Cross, tossed with many
troubles, shall I say to you, that ye run long on little ground, and to little
purpose; if ye had more ado about sin, ye should have less ado about trouble,
or your exercise about it should soon be discust: Therefore look on it as a
mark of a true Israelite, that whatever exercise he have, sin is the greatest
exercise.

2. Whereas folk may seem to have some exercise about sin, but all that it
amounts to, is, to take with sin, and grip to pardoning mercy; and this is very
common in the visible Church, to name sin, and to name pardon; and upon the
naming of sin, to make a present Plaster of pardon, and there is an end. To
obviat this mistake, take this word, That the pardon of sin, and purging out of
sin, must go together hand in hand: But in this mistake me not, I would hurt
none, nor have I commission to hurt any. Ye may remember, that when I was on
the 4th Verse, I told you, that the filthiness of sin remains after the pardon
of sin; but remember also, that I then told you, God strikes at the guilt and
power of sin both at once, that where Christ comes with the merit of his death,
he comes also with the power of his death, he lays the Axe to the root of the
Tree; but I would not be mistaken in this either, the pardoned sinner gets not
the power of sin presently subdued; yea, when he is pardoned, the power of sin
may fash him more than before, and when sin is in the dead-throws, it may vex
him most with struggling. Many a sad bout may pardoned sinners have along
their life, with their predominants; but wherever God pardons sin, he sets
folks to be in necks with sin, and to have the dominion and power of sin
subdued, that sin reign not in their mortal bodies, they and sin will not dwell
in peace in one house, they will not be taken alive captive without a scart;
they oppose it, and protest against the prevailing of it, they sin not with
full consent: And O! but this is needful, to have the renovation of the
Disposition, to be a Seal of the pardon of sin; that when thou have gripped
pardon, thou may know by this that thou art not delivered, because it sends
thee back to get sin subdued and mortified, with greater eagerness and bensil
of spirit, that if the pardon of sin take not away the filthiness of sin, yet
it sets thee in a stated war with it, and opposition unto it, that thou and it
shall never be friends, and God then evidences the pardoning of thy sin, when
he helps thee to subdue sin: And it is no wonder that folk have a cold Coal to
blow at, when they are under a temptation, that they are not pardoned, and have
nothing to witness, that they have any thing like the renovation of their
disposition; though in that case God forbid that I should forbid such to run to
Christ for pardon, but in running to him for pardon of sin, through the merit
of his death, and in gripping to pardon, carry along the virtue of his death,
for the subduing of sin.

3. This leads me to a 3d word of Inference; many of you may say ye are put to
a hard task, when ye are put seek redemption from iniquity, from the power of
sin, as well as from the guilt of sin: And I grant, it is a hard task indeed,
and they that essay it in earnest, will find it an insuperable task. Can the
Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his spots? Then may they also do good
that are accustomed to do evil; Twin them of their life, as soon as twin them
of their Delilah; or take their darling-sin out of their bosom, What shall
they then do with it? This point tells, that God can and will redeem Israel
from all their iniquities. I would in order to this, have you looking two ways
on Gods interposing to subdue iniquity; one is, that ye would never look on the
subjugation or subduing of sin as leill come, wherein ye are not put to employ
God. There be many evils that ye are not tempted to, or if tempted to them, ye
get them easily under foot, ye are never sent to God to subdue them. Ye have
reason to suspect ye have never been tried enough with these evils; if in
earnest ye be tried with evils, ye will be sent to God for the mortification of
them, otherwise any mortification ye get of ills without him, it will fail you
when ye have most ado with it, and ye will find that Satan is not cast out, but
gone out, and will return and surprise you, for ye must be put to God, for a
right redemption from iniquity. And 2. on the other hand, I would have you
looking on no iniquity, even that which most enslaves you, as on an iniquity
that he cannot subdue, or were not willing to subdue, if he were seriously
employed; ye have his word for it, Mic. 7. where when he has said, v. 18. He
is a God that pardons iniquity, and passes by transgression. He adds, v. 19.
that he will have compassion, and subdue our iniquities. He can break in pieces
the Gates of Brass, and cut in sunder the bars of Iron: (To allude to that,
Psalm. 107.16. and Isai. 45.29.) He can burst all these bonds under which a
sinner is shut up in slavery and servitude, and deliver him from those base
lusts that carried him captive, and held him in bondage. How deeply was Paul
engaged in persecution? How mad was he in pursuance of that woeful Trade? Yet
when God interposed, he made him stand unholden. What Monsters were these, 1
Cor. 6.8, 9. Fornicators, idolaters, adulterous, thieves, covetous, drunkards,
effeminat, etc. Yet v. 11. he tells them, Such were some of you, but ye are
washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified, in the Name of the Lord
Jesus, and by the spirit of our God. As upon the one hand, I would not only
have these that are puddled with their corruptions, that all their purposes and
resolutions to reform misgive them, looking upon it as a cause of their ill
success, that Christ is little employed, but also I would have them looking on
no prevailing predominant evil, as impossible to his power to subdue it; So on
the other hand, O that this might speak a word to profligat profane persons,
that cannot sleep except they do ill, that cannot go to bed unless they be full
as beasts, that rake the life from them rather than twin them and their lusts;
they are so habituat to excess and riot, they cannot forbear it; Thinks thou
that an excuse, that thou cannot help it? What an excuse would it be for a
Thief arraigned at the Bar to say, he must be forgiven, for he cannot hold up
his hands? No more will it excuse thee for drunkenness, lasciviousness, etc. To
say, Thou cannot help it, it is an aggravation of thy crime, and no excuse. But
here I would leave it at the door of all profligat wretches, as a witness
against them, that God is able to redeem from all these iniquities, if they
will come to him, God is able to cast out all these Devils that enslave thee:
That deaf Devil, that will not let thee hear what God speaks to thee; That dumb
Devil, that will not suffer thee to pray to him; That filthy swinish Devil,
that will never suffer thee to be out of the mire of some abomination. I here
leave it, I say, at the door of such Monsters, that there is power in God, if
they will employ him, to redeem them from all their iniquities: But here it
sticks, the power of God is little employed to redeem from the power of sin,
because the Conscience is little touched with the guilt of sin. O! pray to God,
that your Conseiences may be awaked, that ye may cry, What shall we do to be
saved? That sin may be a burden to you, as it will be when the Conscience is
touched; and if ye will not pray, know that God can do that when you little
dream of it, as ye may see in Cain, Judas, Achitophel, who could not keep their
Consciences asleep; to tell, that folk have not Consciences at their command;
but if the Conscience be touched with guilt, know there is power in God to
redeem from iniquities.

4. A fourth word of Inference is, That if God (as ye heard in the Explication)
do redeem from all iniquities, then not only must ye endeavor the pardon of
sin, and the mortification of sin, but that the mortification of sin be
universal, ye must spare a Zoar, a Delilah, a bosom sin or idol, but seek that
all sin may be subdued, the man that is rightly engaged against sin, it will
not satisfy him that he has got the wings of sin clipped, and made it to
couch, that it break not out, but he must be at war with it, so long as there
is a tapoun of sin (as ye use to speak) under ground: it must be his exercise
to be about the mortification of sin, till he be quit of sin altogether;
Redemption from all iniquity imports, That the remainder of sin will be a
burden, as was it to Paul, Romans 7. And made him cry out, O miserable man that I
am, who shall deliver me from this body of death! and here is the task and
touchstone of the truly godly, it will not content them, though sin do not
reign, but the remainder of sin, the bird-lime of sin, the clog of corruption
will be a burden to them; and these who in their security do satisfy
themselves, to get sin kept under the hatches, they provock God to write what
is in their bosom, in their practice, and when any thing breaks out in a person
that has the name of Religion, it is an evidence they have not been busy
within doors, else he needed not to have that Bell rung to him, to give him
warning of it.

And hence 5. If the very remainders and seeds of sin be a burden to the Israel
of God, till they get home, ye may gather how much those who are true
Israelites, exercised with the guilt and power of sin, will be taken up with
the thoughts of a complete liberation from sin, with that which the Apostle
speaks of. Romans 8.23. Waiting for the adoption, to wit, the redemption of our
bodies. And Christ, Luke 21.28. Bids look up, and lift up our heads, for the
day of our redemption draws near; This is it an Israelite indeed is taken up
with. There are many folk who when they are vexed in the world, would be gone,
wherein they look rather to the ills they would flee from, than the good they
look for. But here is the exercise of a true Israelite, they long to be home,
that they may be completely Redeemed from all iniquity; that they may sin no
more, that as it is, Ephesians. 5.27. They may be presented a glorious bride unto
Christ not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but may be holy and
without blemish; and they that are vexed here with the stirring, and
foul-sticking slime of their corruptions, would be taking a Pisgah look of that
day that is coming, when they shall be Redeemed from all Iniquity, from the
least degree and grain of it, and shall be made perfectly holy. We shall say no
more, but Lord bless what ye have heard.

FINIS.
Courteous Reader, help the following Errata with thy Pen; the first number
shows the Page; the second, the Line; R. is for read. D. dele, or blot out.
F. for. and. ib. ibidem, or in the same Page.
Page 2. 28 and 29. r. rendered degrees 6. 29. d. either. 9. 12. r. wakens. 16.
10. r. surcharging. 21. 15. r. is he. 28. 1. F. that, r. then. 31. 30. r. to be
put out of prayer's mister. 56. 10. r. F. ordinary, r. ordinances. 61. 4. r.
meet the sinner. 84. 3. r. wherein, as in a mirror, the desert of sin may be
seen. 92. 6. f. will, r. ill. ib. 11. r. provock, 96. 33. f. eye, r. cry. 105.
27. r. to desire to be rid of it. 3ly. That sin, etc. 108. 7. r. would not.
109. 5. r. would have none. 113. 30. r. pardoning. 117, 8. d. but. 118. 1 r.
are not to be limited. ib. 8. r. if they may venture. 119. 32. r. and as they
are a bond. 126. 34. r. aftergame. 129. 25. f. only, r. also. 132. 14. r.
satisfactorly. 133. 35. f. use, r. rise. 139. 20. r. takes away actual
ordination to punishment, and yet will have the sinner suffering punishment.
150. 35. r. serious. 170. 31. r. takes a view. 198. 22. d. unself. 202. 5. r.
stamp of. 212. 33. r. indignity offered 213. 27. r. having run through these
things shortly. ib. 36. r. seemed. 217. 36. r. therefore. 218. 12. d. like.
222. 18. r. or take them not so near them. 223. 4. r. cleansed my heart. 230-7.
r. and a man. 240. 16. close the parenthesis after such. 258 17. r. be ground
for temptation. 262. 17. r. patient. 279. 1. d. out his wisdom. 280. 15. f.
many. r. may. 182. 13. r. what thou will do. 283. 4. r. and out of. 298. 20. r.
begin its exercise, 299. 10. r. and this ye must know. 303. 18. r. if the
priest. 311. 27. r. ambiguous. 312. 19. r. fixed. 316. 17. r. therefore it is
so soon. 319. 10. d. in. 342. 6. r. in that word. 358. 15. r. among other
things. 364. 7. r. speaking meat. 367. 28. r. can these bones live. 394. 9. r.
from all his iniquities. 451. 10. r. though their pressures be such. 458. 28.
r. not find their lovers. 462. 24. close the parenthesis after rejoice. 467. 1.
r. much work may fall. 480. 14. r. redeem Israel from all, etc.


