HYPOCRISY DISCOVERED: OR, A Further Manifestation of the secret Design,
Practices and intentions of the Protector, so called, to seat himself in, and
be vested with the Power and Office of chief Magistrate in this Nation,
contrary to those many Declarations, Engagements, and Protestations in
opposition thereunto, not only as it was contrary to an Act of Parliament,
made after many outgoings of God, against the late King and his Monarchy, but
also as it did oppose the Kingdom and Interest of our Lord Jesus.

Isa. 29. 15, 16. Woe to them that seek deep to hide their Council from the
Lord, and their works are in the dark, and they say, who sees us, and who
knows us. Surely your turning of things up-side-down shall be esteemed as the
Potters clay, etc. To the READER.
BEing a little affected with the sense of the dishonor brought upon the Name,
Works and ways of God, the precious Cause and Interest of Christ, and his
poor people at this day; and that therein many as I hope truly fearing God are
consenting and drawn aside by the deceiving of the Protector (so called)
through the too high estimation and good opinion they have of that person, for
such being dealt with for strengthening his hands in this way of his own
choosing, they will acknowledge his turning short upon former professions,
whereby Saints were engaged, and his apparent evil in his accession to, and
(...) worse administration of the Government. But yet defend themselves with a
hope (their advantages in siding and pertaking with him, tending to blind
their eyes) that there may be good intentions and integrity at the bottom;
forgetting (as is to be feared) that the appearance of evil is to be avoided,
and not the least committed, for the greatest good; And though I am far from
taking pleasure to rake into the Sores and Infirmities of any, knowing so much
of my own; yet for the Lord his work and Peoples sake, to rescue the feet of
some and prevent others from falling into his snare; yea for his sake also, if
the Lord so please to bless it (with whom private applications have not
prevailed) the lancing of a putrified sore being necessary, and in order to its
Cure: I have thought it my duty, therein also, I trust, following the mind of
the Lord, who is making his folly manifest unto all, that he may proceed no
further, a little in some particulars to open him and his ways.

HYPOCRISY DISCOVERED, etc.
IT might be remembered with what cheerfulnes of heart out of love, to the Lord
and his work (when the last invasion was from Scotland, many of the choicest
spirited Saints, came out of several parts of the Nation to engage against
them; What their entertainment also was from the Army, those at Warrington
bridge very well know. The new Moddel was never so slighted, scorned and
reproached by the old Officers, and Army as these were; who instead of
receiving acknowledgement for their so seasonable appearance in the
common-service; were returned under as great contempt, as could be possibly
laid upon them: Its worthy to be observed, that this enmity (now more
heightened) in some Officers and others of the Army, against that spirit (now
more refined) which then appeared in these godly persons began to show it self,
not only at Warrington-bridge, but also when M. G. Harrison was with his Horse
in Scotland, which was some time before.
The good People bearing all with meekness and patience, unwilling to harbor
a hard thought of him, who yet gave countenance to all the unworthy dealings
they met with. Upon his return from the Battle at Worcester, several Persons
(eminent for godliness) of the Congregations in and about London came to him,
as to acknowledge the Lords goodness in that his wonderful appearance, so
also that he would employ his utmost endeavors with the Parliament, for the
further improvement of it to answer the Lords design, and the great
expectations upon the hearts of his people. When some complained of the so long
delays of business in the Parliament, In answer thereunto; he did declare there
was not above six men (if so many) in the House that had a heart (or minded) to
any thing. And when such told him that therefore it was very requisite a period
should be put to their sitting; and others more fit, to be chosen in their
rooms, and that the most public spirited people of the Nation did much desire
it: This he could not but acknowledge ought to be so; yet did so fear that
honest spirit which pressed after it, that he durst not venture to go about it,
least the power coming too much into their hands, he should be hindered of what
we may now perceive he had then propounded to himself. And therefore did go on
with the Parliament, though they had not a heart to do any thing till such time
(as is well mentioned) they begun to entrench upon him; the plain truth is,
there was such juggling (in the letting them sit so long, afterward dissolving
them; in choosing the Little Parliament, and some of them contriving to bring
the Power to him) that it would take up too much time and paper to declare it.
To which he replied amongst other things, that there was no more hopes of
drawing on the Parliament thereunto then was of making a Bar of Iron become a
Lute string; but desired that they with the Congregations to which they did
relate, would seek unto the Lord, to know his pleasure in what was to be done
and to let him know, what upon such seeking should be set upon their hearts,
which accordingly they did; and waiting again upon him, gave this as the sum of
what had been set upon them. That though they desired to acknowledge the
Parliament in those many worthy things, wherein it had pleased the Lord of his
grace to own them; yet were they persuaded, that he had cut them short of
spirit to the residue of his work; and therefore did propose that a short time
of six Months or thereabouts might be put, beyond which the Parliament might
not sit, and in the interim care to be take for qualifications of persons to be
elected to succeed in the Government; which might be furnished by the Lord, for
the carrying on of his work, whereupon by very harsh (not to say reviling)
speeches, he soon discovered that he was altered from what he seemed to be when
formerly they had been with him, being fallen with some of the grandees of the
Parliament, by whose means as was then feared and as since evident ground is
given to judge, he hoped to bring about some ends of his own, and so slighting
them and the advice so solemnly brought unto him, having formerly engaged them
to ask council from the Lord, they were dismissed; but left this behind with
him to pause upon; That seeing he would not hear, they would turn unto the
Lord, whose ears are always open to the cries of his People: And its
observable that hence forth instead of improving the Talents God had put into
his hands for advance of his Work, the good of his People and the whole Nation,
he rather put himself into a contrary course appearing with an uncontrowlable
violence for the carrying on the Act of Oblivion to ingratiate himself, which
effectually he did) with that generation, from whom all our troubles arose;
wherein was forgiven to them; three times more then would have paid many poor
and well-affected; the money due to them upon Public Faith, (which in the
Parliaments streights had been advanced) and other public debts, and they put
into a capacity of oppressing their well affected Tenants and Neighbor, as by
sad experience has been found, besides many other mischiefs that Act produced;
and though there wanted not those who in love and faithfulness, desired to deal
with and persuade him to desist his violence in that which was to gratify the
common enemy, and grieve the Saints and well-affected: he turned the deaf-ear
to all, laying hold upon every thing that tended to please the multitude,
rather then the good People of the Nation (and termed them a discontented blood
thirsty people, that would never be satisfied till they had raked out their
bowels,) living at a rate far above the ordinary sphere, carrying it yet fair
with the Parliament; who would not deny him (or rather from whom he would not
be denied) any thing wherein he appeard, until it pleased the Lord to engage
us in a War with Holland, which those who were chiefly entrusted with the
management of it, (I mean the Commissioners for the Admiralty and Navy)
endeavored to carry on effectually, and so as might not increase the charge of
the Commonwealth, and to that end reported their opinion to the Parliament,
that (the work now lying at Sea) the defect of a sufficient number of
Seafairing men might be supplied out of the Land-army, which accordingly was
done once or twice; but this continuing, he easily perceived would eclipse his
greatness, and indeed frustrate his design of setting up himself, and 3000.
more of his Army being voted to go to Sea, he (who before reviled the
Messengers of several Church for but mentioning that the Parliament should set
a short time for their own sitting, and so go off with honor) with a Junto of
his Officers resolves the dissolving of them, which is accordingly put in
execution, but under a very specious pretense as by the Declaration of the Army
upon that occasion, and by his Speech to those who succeeded in government
appears, which compared with these his after actions too manifestly declares
that all was but a Vizard to cover his ugly design of enslaving the Nation to
his lust; whereby (which is the bitterness of it) is brought such a reproach
upon the Name, Ways and people of God, as none but himself in respect of his
high profession was capable of bringing the like.

The Parliament being dissolved, In a short time after, the supreme Authority
(by him and his officers is put into the hands of a certain number of persons
in an extraordinary manner brought together for the exercise thereof, as
appears by his speech to them, who at their first meeting wanted a name (and
many yet are to seek what to call them) though after debate by a Vote of the
major part (for they themselves divided about it) they were called (though very
unlike to it) a Parliament: He with the Council that had managed affairs in
the intervale were called to sit with them, which all but himself and M. G.
Lambert accepted of; Good people who rather suspect themselves then others
(could not give way to any jealous thought of him) Judged his staying away was
that he might not greaten himself, rather then that it was in order thereunto;
but though he absented himself from the Parliament: where (to use his own
terms) he would have been rendered very cheap (unless his sincerity to the
work and cause of Christ appeared) some there honoring men so far as they
honor the Lord, (and having men's persons no further in admiration (yet he
failed not to ply the Council where businesses of greatest concernment were
transacted, which he kept much under his own girdle, and wanted not a daily
account of what passed in the Parliament from his Brothers, Allies, Officers
and others, whose endeavor it was upon some pretense or other to obstruct
every good business that came into debate, and so to render all their
endeavors ineffectual for answering the great ends of their assembling, and
beget some colorable ground of returning the power into his own hands, That
meeting (as the sequel demonstrated) being designed, but (...) stirrup for him
to mount into the Saddle, and all things being prepared in a morning (two hours
at least earlier then ordinary) these get together into the Parliament House
and with as much gravity as for mality, move the resigning the power
accordingly, but this as early as it was, met with opposition, so that they
durst not hazard a vote in it, but sneakingly withdraw without vote or
adjournment to any other place or time, leaving a considerable number behind,
who were soon turned out by Musketeers and the before said run-aways subscribe
a thing called a resignation, which is as significant, as if so many Porters or
other persons had met to set up one of their own chooseing: This resignation
(contrived in private and subscribed at Whitehall) being brought to him (as one
surprised in the business) calls upon his innocent Officers to go together, and
pray that he might be guided what to do in it; And since upon occasions has
made very solemn Protestations of his ignorance in it, until the resignation
was brought to him, though its well known, he was acquainted with the
contrivance long before. And himself had spoken to Sr. Gilbert Pickering to go
to a meeting where the thing called the Government was framing, which also was
read to him before the dissolution of that assembly; and the day before, (even
the Lords day at his house) were met of his Brothers, Allies, Officers and
dependents, about the number of forty, who there agreed their early meeting at
the house the next morning, to vote (as is aforesaid) the translating (...)
him, but they failing, by the opposition they met with, his Soldiers were
ready to force, what by fraud the others could not bring about. The veil being
now taken off, he sits down in the Seat of them (to wit, the late King and his
race, whom the Lord had plucked up, and presently appears acting their
Principles, casting off the work of God, seeking nothing but his own
settlement: for which he knew in reason he had laid a good foundation by the
Act of Oblivion, and other popular Acts; but especially by setting the edge of
his Power against the poor despised people that had been faithful to the Lord
and his work in the former wonderful dispensations, and reproaching those
honest hearts of that Assembly (called the little Parliament) who were turned
out of the House as enemies to Magistracy, Ministry, and Propriety, because
they agreed not to gratify him in his lust.

The first considerable fruit (...) Government, after he had sworn to govern
according to Law, and the Paper called the Instrument of Government, is
contrary to them all, the imprisoning Mr. Feake, Mr. Powell, and Mr. Simpson,
persons unspotted in their lives and conversations, all Ministers and laborers
in the work of the Gospel, and such as are not inferior to many in the Nation,
having been eminently owned by the Lord in his work, much more of the like
nature after appeared M. G. Harrison, Col. Rich, M. Carry, Quart. M. G.
Courtney, M. G. Overton, Cornet Day, Mr Spitle-house, John Jones, Col. Allured,
(...) to this day remain in prison against whom no crime is objected, but its
said they may have their Liberty if they will, though when that is inquired
into, it cannot be, unless they will engage to the present Government; which
is contrary to their consciences, to acknowledge him as an authority, much less
a rightful Authority over them, and which is worse, to bind them up from
following the Lord, how signal soever his appearances should be: With all
have, also in order to settlement at home, the peace must be concluded with the
Dutch, and that upon terms sufficiently dishonorable, after all the eminent
appearances of the Lord, in every engagement; leaving the guilt of blood, in a
very great measure, at the door of this Nation; which both the long sitting and
the little Parliamen^ did abhor to assent unto, being thoroughly sensible that
the finger of God, and not their lust had led them into that war, but this must
be done also under fair pretense of having peace with Protestants, that the
more vigorously a war may be carried on against Antichrist, but was not this to
make himself wiser than God, and indeed is it not plain, that the meaning of it
was, that he might have ships and men to bring home gold from the Indies,
whereby as he had set up himself, so he might maintain himself in despite of
all; and this being blasted, the return of gold failing, no stone must be left
unturned, for getting it nearer home, the good and well-affected will not be
deluded by him; and now he that would not be dissuaded (...) ^arrying on the
Act of Oblivion (though told that thereby he would be cast out of the hearts of
good people, which he himself confessed, that he thought it would tend much
thereunto) with a high hand unjustly and unrighteously breaks the same, to
raise a revenue, whereby he may be enabled further to oppress them and others.
This together with his ^educing the forces, and abridging their pay for his own
ends, and self preservation, which he would never be drawn unto for the sake of
the Lord, his work, and the Nations ease, does evidently to half an eye declare
by what principle he acted. Upon the same ground and principle (Jeroboam like,
whatever is pretended) the National Parochial Clergy, in their corrupt and
Antichristian standing and maintenance; are upheld and imposed upon the good
people of this Nation, and the succession thereof provided for, in a way as bad
if not worse, then that which derives it self through the Papacy, and of this
he greatly boasts in (...) page of his first Speech to the Parliament, as a
blessed fruit of Government, to put a stop to that heady way (as he phrases it)
of every one making himself a Preacher. When he has been often heard in
England, Scotland and Ireland; but especially upon Pencland hills in Scotland,
at Glascoe to the Presbytery there, and at Edinburgh, when he would maintain
laymens preaching in opposition to the Scots that spoke against it, to urge
that scripture, Number. 26.27, 28, 29. where word was brought to Moses that Eldad
and Medad prophesied in the Camp, and that Moses (though his servant desired
him to forbid them) did say unto him envyest thou for my sake: I would all the
Lords people were Prophets, and that the Lord would put his spirit upon them;
and as Moses did judge his servant to be of a ridgid narrow spirit, because he
would have them forbidden prophesying; so himself judged the Scots and
Presbyterians to be of the same spirit, who would speak against laymens
preaching, of which see move in a Book entitled, Several Letters and Passages
between the Lord Genesis Cromwell and the Governor of Edinburgh Castle, with the
Ministers there, Page 10 Let the Saints and Churches (even all that fear the
Lord in these Nations) well weigh those his words, its to be fearred he can
turn himself into any shape, as may best serve his designs; having formerly
said of the Earl of Manchester, that (...) would never be well so long as he
kept those hedge Priests about him, reflecting upon Mr. Ash and Mr. Good,
persons of approved gifts and grace, who then waited upon his Lordship: yea,
let this be compared with his Speech to the little Parliament, fol 2^ But when
it came to other trials as in that of Wales, which I must confess for my own
part, I set my self upon; if I should inform what discountenance that business
of the poor people of God there had, who had watchings over them: Men like so
many Wolves, ready to catch the Lamb as soon as it was brought into the World;
how signally they threw that business under foot, to the discountenancing of
the honest people there, and to the coun^enancing of the Malignant party of
this Commonw^al^^; I need but say it was so, many have f^lt it by sad
experience, who will better impart that business to you, which for my self and
fellow Officers, I think was as perfect a trial of their spirits, (meaning the
old Parliament) as any thing, it being known to many of us, that God has
kindled a seed there not to be parralleld, since the Primitive times of this
seed are those, that have lately declared against him, by their Paper
entitled, A Word for God, or a Testimony on Truths behalf, to which the Reader
is referred for further satisfaction. Now its needful you should know what
that business in Wales was, that he would have you understand, met with such
opposition from that Parliament, as ministered occasion to him and his Officers
to break them; It was upon the best information, I can get, briefly thus: An
Act was obtained enabling Commissioners to eject ignorant, scandalous and
insufficient Ministers and Schoolmasters, and to place in their rooms such as
sho^ be approved of for that high calling or to employ some in an Itenerary
way, as should be judged most conducible for the spreading of the Gospel.
These Commissioners vigorously put in execution this Act, so that in some
Countries there were not left above 5, or 6, of the old stock, few were found
fit or willing to be settled in the room of the ejected, but many were
encouraged and received maintenance out of the public treasury to preach in
an Itenerary way, whose labor were successful, and Schoolmasters fearing the
Lord were settled in all Market Towns, and many considerable Parishes, the
benefit whereof had they been continued, would soon have been discerned; but
this Powers continuance was only for 3. years, which expired the March before
the Parliaments dissolution. Many clamours (for less was not expected) were
against those Commissioners, and Petitions fomented against them by the
disaffected and Malignant party there. So that the Parliament, thought not fit
to renew the Act (no other discouragement then this the well-affected in Wales
received from them) however the sequel declares, that if the Parliament laid
their little finger for the crushing that seed (as his expression is, not to be
parrelleld since the Primative times) I am sure he has laid his loins, and if
their but looking a little asquint upon them d^clared they had no spirit to the
further work; his setting himself in direct opposition thereunto, demonstrates
what spirit he is acted by; and I doubt not, but the Lord in due time will give
a Resurrection to that seed, both there and in other parts of the Nation. And
it may not be forgotten, that it being perceived (...) fearing the Lord, and
waiting for the salvation of Israel, that the (...) Parliament were declining
in their zeal to and for the Lords Work and Cause; they appointed a Meeting at
Alhallows (and from thence afterward removed unto Blackefryers) once a week)
to pray unto the Lord for the pouering out of his spirit, the coming of
Christ's kingdom, and the performance of Promises and Prophesies relating to
the same, and consequently removing out of the way whatsoever might let, and
for the executing his judgments upon Babylon. This Meeting was under the
discontin^^nce of the Parliament; things being reported in the worst sense to
several eminent Members thereof, though occasionally there were reflectings
upon them, as a block in the way of the Lords work: but the touching upon their
declining was so acceptable to him, that he encouraged his O^s and others to
frequent the same; and Major Packer can tell you, that the General told him, he
was a Rogue and Knave if he did neglect (...) them; but not long after, when
the pride, pomp and avarice of him and his Army, and their sleepiness in the
Cause of Christ came to be touched upon, and together therewith a jealousy
that not with a right mind the Parliament had been dissolved, was discovered
(as then and since appears, there was ground sufficient for such thoughts) he
set himself in opposition to them, not contenting himself with railing and
reviling speeches against the most eminent of them (for whom time was he had
better words) but declaring that he would have his hands up in their blood to
the sleeves, and would lay down his old bones in opposing them, venting many
bitter and biteting reproaches (if not blasphemies) against the Lords Spirit,
by which they were acted, calling it the spirit of the Devil, the ministration
of evil Angels, a thousand times worse than the spirit of Antichrist, though
he never went to hear and try, as faithful friends of his had earnestly
desired him; and though formerly he had so much applauded the meeting, yet now
says that from the first time of their meeting, the spirit of the Devil and
not of God acted the same; at last he stirred up the Council, during the
sitting of the little Parliament to send for Mr. Simpson, and Mr. Feake by
Warrant, who appearing thereunto, no matter being found to make good a charge
against them, they were for that time dismissed, only it is observable, that
in this meeting Mr. Feake with much solemnity exhorted that as he should, they
also would so speak and carry themselves as in the presence of God, the holy
Angels and men, for that which should be said would be recorded in heaven, upon
which Mr. Feake proceeded to deal faithfully with him (the then General) but
was interrupted by him, and charged with falsehood; Mr. Feake having among other
things mentioned how much he was grieved for him, in tampering with the King,
and that since Worcester fight the Army minding the dividing the Kings Lands,
Houses and Parks, the spirit of Prayer was gone off from them, and that he had
observed the Lords way in carrying on his work had been to furnish some to one
part, and some to another part of it; some to that in England, others to that
for Ireland, and others for Scotland; these three things the now called
Protector objected against, as falsehoods in these words, or to this effect: I
speak as in the presence of God, Angels and men; yea, says he, I call God to
record upon your soul and mine; yea, I speak it in the Holy Ghost that these
particulars are not true, affirming that he had not so much as a thought in him
of tampering with the King, whilst one might to half the length of the Table;
though it is well known that he with the Officers of the Army had kept three
days at Winsor to shame and humble themselves for that their evil in the
Proposals they had tendered the King, which was the only thing Mr. Feake
mentioned to demonstrate that their tampering; but besides this the Lord knows
and himself knows, that he has to several persons acknowledged what offers he
had from the late King, as to Honors, etc. mentioning a George and Blew
Ribbon, such simple knacks suitable to King-ship or Monarchy, if he would have
complied with him, and said that his foot had almost slipped, and that he had
fallen into those temptations, but that the Lord delivered him, and seemed very
much to bless the Lord and rejoice therein, whereby it plainly appears, he had
not only thoughts of so doing, but did really tamper with him, which of
necessity must hold longer than whilst one might go the length of the longest
Table in England; with the like confidence he affirmed, that the spirit of
Prayer was not gone off from the Officers, or that they had so minded their
arrears, though the eminents for godliness amongst them frequently be meaned
it, that their meeting to seek and serve the Lord had been neglected; and for
their minding their arrears, sure it will not need that more words should be
used, their present possessions sufficiently demonstrate; nor will any of them
that have but the least spark of ingenuity deny the same. And for the third
particular, says he, you mean my Lord Fairefax (though Mr. Feake affirmed, he
did not think of him, or had he any individual in his eye) he good man (as his
expression was) by reason of his many bodily infirmities, and upon no other
account declined that service. But those of the old Parliament who attended
that godly renowned Person (for whose faithfulness and usefulnes the Lord is
ever thankfully to be acknowledged) are able to affirm his answer to be to this
effect. That he looked upon the People of Scotland against whom they were to
engage, as having many godly amongst them, and that willingly he would not have
his hand in the blood of any such; nevertheless did conceive that the
Parliament were the Lords people, and might be carrying on the cause of God,
wherein he should gladly have been further serviceable; but that the Lord did
very much cut him short of spirit for that work, which (in humility) he
conceived was, that some more worthy than he, who would bring more glory to God
might be employed in it; and that all might know, the work was Gods, and no
man's, former experiences were sufficient to evidence that, if he had been
satisfied in his mind, bodily infirmities (under which he had labored in the
most of the War) would not have hindered his proceedings: This is the more
largely expressed, because he has been frequently found in high asseverations,
whereby he used to obtain credit, when its to be feared, he little considers
what he speaks; and at this time he had also prepared an Auditory of Aldermen,
Citizens, Ministers, and Officers of the Army, who doubtless (there not being
time given to open this as now it is) went away taking for granted, that Mr.
Feake had been left to speak vainly and unadvisedly in these things; and there
was and is cause to think that so solemn an appeal as this of his was, when he
should say he speaks in the holy Ghost, and yet speaks falsely, will not fall to
the ground. And is not his profession of love to those he now persecutes and
imprisons a proof of his readiness to protest and affirm, what yet he has
little minded, for did he weigh what he says, how durst he boast, he loves
some of them as his own soul; and yet when no crime is objected (though
endeavors were not wanting by his own instruments to have drawn them, as
others have been into their snares and intanglements) separates them from the
fellowship of Saints and other dear relations, hurrying them to remote and
obscure Prisons, without giving them notice to accommodate for the same, or let
any know whether they were to go, though the tender yoakfellow of one of them
was at that time in hourly expectation to be brought to bed, which more then in
humane carriage [had not the Lord mercifully prevented) might have produced (as
it greatly endangered) the death of Mother and Child; is it a fruit of such
love to be feasting at Hamptoncourt Hamman like, Ester. 3. 15. the same day he
sends them to prison, and does not the removal of M. G. Harrison from Portland
where the Governor showed him common respect) to the Isle of Wight (as has
been boasted for his better accommodation) spring from the same root seeing
that since his coming thither, he might not receive a Letter from any or send
so much as to his own wife, and this by special instructions from Court unless
the Officer there have the perusal of it, and his wife coming to visit him
(besides other great incivilities to her as well as him from the Commander
there) must not stir out of the Castle until she will go for good and all, or a
servant to go forth to bring in necessarys or any friend speak with him but
under a guard.

Is the adding of Bannishment to Mr. Rogers his bonds after more then 12.
months causeless Imprisonment, when his wife being but three days before
delivered of Child, lying weak of a Fever, a fruit of such love; what
Gospel-rule is there for such expressions of Love? did the primitive Saints so
manifest theirs? but the Scripture says your Brethren that hated you cast you
out for my names sake, etc. Esaiah 66. 5. if they proceed to lay violent hands
on, and beat their fellow servants, though they pretend to be brethren (yet the
hol^ spirit (who best knows their deceitful hearts) affirms they hate them,
and though his words at some times, and to some persons be smoother and softer
than Butter and Oil; yet War and a drawn sword is in his heart: therefore at
other times (for he can change his language (...) company (...) occasion
serves) he has given his mouth to evil, and his tongue to slander, reproach
and revile those whom yet he will call Christian friends and brethren. What
shall we say to these thing he who time was (none more than he) quickened and
invited others in streights (and when the Lords work labored under many
difficulties) to assemble together to seek the Lord, is of a sudden grown
jealous of all such meetings, and gives occasion for the greatest scandal that
ever was upon them, as if their tendency were only to sedition, and instead of
acknowledging the Lord and waiting for his council, Juntoes are held for the
carrying on things according to the craft, wisdom and policy of the world; It
is termed no less than Hypocrisy in the little Parliament to set apart and
keep days of Humiliation within themselves; and when any met more privately,
as some did, that is branded with division and carrying on designs, and this
even to this day with more then ordinary confidence urged as true: May it not
be feared that none would so report of and suspect others, but such as had
themselves abused the blessed ways and ordinances of God to bring about their
own contrivances; and if this should be so, sooner or later they will feel and
others shall see that God will not be mocked, who will bring hidden things to
light, which is the joy of the upright, but the hypocrites fear. Now
considering what comeliness the Lords work had put upon this man, his great
aptness to deceive by his plausible way of speaking, the high profession he
made, and his too frequent calling God to witness, in all which most good men
were more ready to condemn themselves than suspect him; it is no less then a
very good finger of the Lord, that so far makes him manifest, as by the few
forementioned particulars, though but as it were a comparing himself with
himself, and that there has been more rottennes in his way than any man (most
curiously observing the same) is able to hold forth, The all-seeing God who
searches and reveals secrets, seems to declare, in as much as he has most
evidently turned his hand against him in most or all things, this man has set
his hand unto, since his more grossly turning off from the cause of God, which
by what ensues may a little appear. The Sandy bottom (his access to the
Government, is grounded upon) being formerly touched, I shall here only
mention the aforesaid in significant resignation, being in the Preamble of his
Oath, laid as the foundation, and indeed that a business so hatched and
continued, and so early a coming to the House for a Vote to invest the Power
in his hands should be frustrated, may not be esteemed less than a
disappointment upon him from the Lord. And seeing also in the Preamble of his
Oath is alleged, that upon full and mature consideration had thereof, and by
the desires and advice of Persons of interest and fidelity in this
Commonwealth, he had undertaken the government: there is the more ground to
conclude, that in this, he and they were much left to themselves, that
provision should not be made against that law which enacts, The Office, style,
power, dignity, or Authority of King in this Nation, shall not reside in or be
exercised by any single Person, and makes it treason for any by force of Arms
or otherwise to be ayding or assisting to any persons, that shall by any way or
means be promoting any to that Office, but the same remains and was a law in
force when he lifted up his hand unto the Lord, that he would govern thereby.

And may it not be feared, that he rather designed to arrogate to himself the
glory of these sucesses at Dunbar and Worcester, both given upon the 3. of
September. (the latter whereof when standers by, knew not the meaning of it, he
termed the crowning mercy) rather then to give the same unto the Lord from
whom they came, otherwise he would have remembered to have kept holy this day,
which without due respect unto him, he assigned for the assembling his
Parliament, the profanation and prophaners of which day have been generally
overtaken with signal judgments; and it was observed that the late King
suffered in his reputation amongst the sober people of this Nation, and was
ever on the declining hand from the time of his manifest neglect of that day.
Who may not see that the Lord blasted this man's expectations from his
Parliament, so on that day assembled, to whom in his first Speech, he says,
That to see a free Parliament, he had desired as his life, and to keep them so,
should be more then his life; and yet some faithful Patriots, but using
freedom in debate, which contrary to Parliamentary Privilege he takes notice
of, upon the 9. day (for wonders are not of long continuance) though sworn not
to employ the Militia (the Parliament sitting) without their Consent, contrary
to that Oath, and those high professions; he locks up the door of the House,
and by his Soldiers keeps out those that will not comply with his interest.
And was it not the Lords doing though the House was so garbled, whereby at
least two part of three were his Council, Allies, Officers, and their
relations; yet should not confirm his Government, the only and chief thing he
aimed at; And no less is the Lord to be acknowledged in turning their edge
against himself, who had so much irritated them against those, whom he terms
the Fifth Monarchy men, a praying faithful (though a despis^d) people, whose
chiefest crime occasioning his rage upon such, will be found witnessing for the
work of the Lord against his Apostasy and Usurpation. To whose ear in Europe
has not the report reached of the Lords lifted up hand against him in the
India undertaking, which is the more to be noted by us, in regard that he and
all his Courtiers, upon all occasions boasted of it, as that whereby it should
appear he had not Apostatized, but effectually in the most prudent and best way
was carrying on the Cause against the common enemy, which others by their
giddiness would have dishonored and lost. And that none might share with him in
the honor of it, even his garbled Parliament (without whom they sitting
nothing of that kind ought to have been done) by the old tricks of the
Courtiers coming earlier than usual to the House, must Vote (upon pretense of
keeping under secrecy) the management of that Expedition to him and his
Council, who were notwanting to make all necessary Provisions for such an
undertaking, and might well conclude (as they did) success answerable to what
their hearts could desire, unless being fallen under the Lords displeasure their
disappointment should be, (as by a miracle from him.) His Fleet and Forces go
forth with all renown of former successes and victories reputation, of wisdom,
courage and valor; and at their first arrival before St. Domingo, the place
designed to be possessed, the inhabiting Spanyard struck with terror, for sake
the town for 3 days together, this advantage not being improved, they take
courage and return for the defense of it. Near 10000. men are landed who
marching toward it are incountred, repulsed by about 300. a second attempt is
made, and again they are put to flight, and near 1000. slain by fifty poor
Negroes, I^fidels and Idolaters, which in a sense may be called the people of
Gods curse. Having in these incounters and by sickness lost near 3000. men or
more, and so dismayed, as that the shaking of the leaves, and the noise of Crabs
become an affrighting to them, all courage and wisdom being taken from them,
quitting Hispaniola they reimbarque for Jamaica, where they are sure to meet
with no opposition; but what be the Lords further pleasure concerning them is
yet hid from us, only note, soon after their arrival there, one of their
Ships, which had in her greatest store of provisions is set on fire, consumed
and lost, and in return of part of the Fleet for England, ^he Vice Admiral, a
Ship of the 2 d. rank perishes in the Sea by fire, with about 150 men in her,
so as the common Seamen did observe and say, sure this was no other then the
Lords own finger against them; the certain account of Gods blasting this
expedition thus miraculously (so contrary to what he at the putting on of his
Harness, had so vainly boasted off) was brought unto him, when he was speaking
Peace and safety; and that none should make him afraid, having broke in pieces
the plots (as they are called at Court) that were against him by some Officers
of the Armies of England, Scotland, of the Fleet, and that of the Caveleers;
whereupon he vaunted, abusing that word, That no weapon formed against him
should prosper: whereas it is conjectured, that the contrivance and management
of the foresaid attempts were his own designs, and acted by some of his own
Agents; at the same time also he had secured such of the 5th Monarchy-men (so
called) of whom he had any jealousy, or could not be drawn to serve his lust;
and having now (self-denyingly) disposed the government of Ireland to his son
Henry (none like him for such a trust;) and that of Scotland also in hands
fitted to answer his ends; it remained only, that he should make himself Lord
Paramount, King or Emperor over the whole, and the succession in his heirs; for
color whereof a Petition was carrying on in the Army, City, and diverse
Countries, yea, in Prisons. All which well becomes him, that has not stuck to
say of Ambition, as Luther of covetousness, The Devil had never tempted him
to it; yea, that he could say in the same spirit David did. He was not puffed in
mind, he was as a weaned child, he ^aught not high things. Now does not this
so signal a frustration of his hopes, give us grounds to judge that the Lord
has set himself against him for evil, and this being a stroke of his sending,
there shall be found no healing of it, which through the pride and stoutness of
his heart, he will not see nor acknowledge but says, He will repair the fallen
Bricks with Freestone, the Cicamore with Cedars. And as Baalam did beat his
Ass though the Angel withstood him, he imprisons the instrument, Venables and
Penn (who formerly whilst in the Lord work were found faithful and often
blessed with success) as if the miscarriage had been through their treachery,
when every eye may see, it was from God, who withheld wisdom and courage; but
whilst his Physicians are applying plasters, and he is licking himself whole,
Genesis Blake (which few have observed as they should) missing the Provisions sent
to enable his continuance out, until he should meet with and catch the Spanish
Plate fleet (for which he had waited some time) returning empty handed. And
thus when there is none shut up or left the mighty Lord, the Lord of hosts
pleads the cause of his people, giving him a miscarrying womb, and dry
breasts, and so blasts him in both the ends of the earth, whereunto he had
spread his wings to get name and fame, by two such Fleets, as scarce ever any
King of England had at once upon the Seas; the charge of which Expedition a
Million of money did not desray. At last gold and silver every way failing, we
have an acknowledgment in the Preamble of his declaration for a Fast, that
rebukes from God are upon him, but those for the evil and apostasy of others;
not giving glory to God in confessing his own, and adding to this his riotous
Feasting, and as is boasted with rare Music, entertaining the Popish
Ambassador of France, the day seven night before his fast, which is far from
telling the Nations the Lord has founded Zion, and the poor 'of his people
shall trust in it, Isa. 14 32. Is there not strong ground of jealousy
ministered to fear, that (...) heart is hardened rather than humbled under the
Lords mighty hand, who assuredly will not be mocked by him; and its to be
hoped, his People will not be further deluded; for can any reasonably think,
the War brought upon us from Spain, which his lust provoked unto, and for
which the anger of the Lord has so smoaked against him, is (as in his
Declaration, he would persuade) principally for the advancement of the kingdom
of Christ, when at the same time, which is worthy observation, he makes Peace
with France, a popish Nation, guilty of much blood of Saints, the forces within
whose territories (among others) so lately and barbarously embrued their hands
in the blood of the poor Waldenses, and by whose Ambassador such grievous
condition has been obtruded on the remainder of them. Having thus opened the
foregoing particulars, some whereof were not so generally known; and others
(its to be doubted) not so duly observed, I shall now for the sake of those who
would not be swayed by their fond affections, but their judgments grounded
upon the word of truth, which is able to make the man of God perfect readily
furnished to every good work, present a few scriptures which if the Lord please
to open by his spirit (the best interpreter) may be of further use unto them.
Gal. 2.18. If I build again the things destroyed, I make my self a
transgressor. Isa. 31.1. Woe to them that go down to Egypt for help, and stay
on horses, and trust on charriots, because they are many; and in horsemen,
because they very strong; but they look not to the holy one of Israel, neither
seek the Lord. Read Isa. 30.3 first verses, They take council but not of me,
and cover with a coveting, but not of my spirit. Hab. 2. 9. Woe to him that
coveteth an evil, covetousnes to his house, that he might set his nest on
high. v. 6. Woe to him that increases that that is not his, how long; and to
him that ladeth himself with thick clay. v. 15. Woe to him that gives his
neighbor drink, that put thy bottle to him and make him drunken also.
Hos 8.3. Israel has cast off the thing that is good, the enemy shall pursue
him. v. 4 They have set Kings but not by me, they have made Princes and I knew
it not. Amos 6. 1. Woe to them that are at ease in Sion, etc. v. 3. Ye that put
far away the evil day, and cause the seat of violence to come near. v. 4. That
lie upon beds of ivory, and stretch themselves upon their couches, and eat the
lamb^ out of the flock, and the calves out of the midst of the stall. v. 5.
That chant to the sound of the Viol, and invent themselves instruments of
music like David; that drink wine in bowls, anointing themselves with the
chief ointments; but they are not grieved for the afflictions of Joseph. v. 12.
For ye have turned judgment into Gall, and the fruit of righteousness into
H^mlock. v. 13. Ye which rejoice in a thing of naught, which say, have we not
taken horns unto us by our own strength. Hos. 5.6, 7. They shall go with their
flocks and their herds to seek the Lord, but they shall not find him, he has
withdrawn himself from them; they have dealt treacherously with the Lord, for
they have begotten stron children. Now shall a month devour them with their
portions. Isa. 65. 11. But ye are they that forsake the Lord, that forget my
holy mountain, that prepare a table for that troop, and that furnish a drink
offering for that number; therefore will I number you, etc. v. 12, 13, 14, 15,
compared with cap. 66 v. 3, 4, 5, 6. Isa. 29. 15. Woe to them that seek deep to
hide their council from the Lord, and their works arein the dark; and they say,
who sees us and who knows; surely your turning things upside down shall be
esteemed as the potters clay, etc. v. 21. That make a man an offender for a
word, and lay a snare for him hat reproves in the gate; and turn a side the
just for a thing of naught. Mat. 2^ 48. But and if that evil servant shall say
in his heart, my Lord delayeth his coming, and shall begin to smite his fellow
servant, and to eat and drink with the drunken, the Lord of that servant shall
come in a day when he looked not for him, and in an hour that he is not aware
of, and shall cut him in sunder, and appoint him his portion with the
hypocrites. Isa. 30.8. Now go write it before them in a Table, and note it in a
Book, that it may be for a time to come for ever and ever.

[Reader, wanting room at present you may please to read th^s^ scriptures in
order at large, as they stand, for they should have come in here: viz Isai. 30
v. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. and 2 Chronicles. 36. v. 16. Isa. 26. 11.
Psalm. 14. 6. and Prove. 1. v. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28.]

If that which is written be for our learning, then where we find like sins,
we may with sobriety and humble reverence apply such judgments and sentences to
them as the holy spirit in the scripture has given in like cases; if it was so
fatal to Pharaoh though a heathen for not letting Gods people go free (he
being come down to deliver them, Exo. 3. 8.) as brought upon him all those sore
plagues; if God reckoned the Amalekites interruption, because he had begun to
deliver his people, a laying their hands upon his throne, Exodus 17. 16. And
therefore would have war with them for ever. If God was so angry with the
Congregation of Israel, when they but spoke of making them a Captain to go back
into Egypt, whilst their chief Leaders mourned before him for the same. Number.
14.4, 5, 6. 32 37. What shall we say of the present transgressions, when after
the mighty God has bowed the heavens, and may be said to have come down, as in
Isa. 64. 13. after he has begun to deliver his people out of Egyptian
bondage, even to the drowning of Pharaoh and his host, when the Captain of the
Lords Army, the General himself, shall not only return to Egypt, but beat
them of the congregation, that will not return with him, having thereby,
brought so evil report upon that good land (to wit) the glorious Cause of God
and his Christ, that the wisdom, powerfulnes and love of God (which were
fairly written upon his late works) the Kingdom of Christ and his poor people
waiting for the same, were never under so great a reproach; too many now
questioning whither there be either God, Christ's Cause or People, or all be not
a devised fable, only for men to attain their lusts by. Seeing then things
revealed belong to us, and where we find on the house top breach of Promise
lying, hypocrisy and perjury, departing away from God, hating of brethren
which is Murder. 1 John 3. 15.) Oppression, Revolt, Persecution, love of this
world and the things of it, where judgment is turned backward, where justice
stands a far off; where truth is fallen, where equity cannot enter; yea he
that departs from evil and will testify for good, makes himself a prey; I
say of such persons and their things, Gods people are taught by Moses and the
Prophets, by Christ and his Apostles how to judge of them, that their way is
displeasing to the Lord, they are enemies to the Cross of Christ, a shameful
spuing will come upon all their glory. Therefore all that love their God, their
own souls, and the good of their own Country, ought to depart from the tents of
such men, least by their compliance, that woe of calling evil good befall them,
and so pertaking in a measure of their sins, they partake in their plagues
also; Rather if the God of all grace so please; and oh that it might seem good
in his sight, that judgment might return unto righteousness, and that all of
each judgment, that are upright in soul with one heart might follow hard after
the same.

Finis.

