Vera Effigies Reverendi Doni. Iosephi Hall Norwici nuper Episcopi


A LETTER Concerning Christmasse; Sent to a Knight in SUFFOLK: By that
Reverent Father in God Dr. JOSEPH HALL, late Lord Bishop of NORWICH.

London, Printed by E.C. for Fran Grove, dwelling on Snow-hill. 1659.

To the Reader.
I Here present you with a true Copy of a Letter sent by Dr. Joseph Hall, late
of Norwich Bishop, to the Right Worshipful Sir John Wentworth Knight, in
Suffolk; And this Iaverre to be Transcribed by me John Smith from the Bishops
own hand-writting, and I wish it as good success as St. Paul's Letter to the
Corinthians had (that you may not read it with prejuduce) that ye sorrow Godly,
So that in nothing ye be hurt thereby. And rather then this so worthy a Letter
should have been obscured ^ one Family I have ventured it to the Public; that
they may save the good that was meant to my Noble Friend and Kinsman before
mentioned, and that that hvmble and meek Author (and Saint now in
Abrahams-bosom; might have his due of all.

Now the Lord grace us with all Spiritual Blessings, till he bring us to Glory
the perfection of Grace; for the attainment of which, together with all
External Prosperity, and Temporal Felicity in this life, You shall never want
the instant Prayer of,

John Smith, Gent.

A Letter Concerning Christmas, sent to a Knight in Suffolk.
By that Reverent Father in God Dr. JOSEPH HALL, the late Lord Bishop of
NORWICH.
Sir, with my loving Remembrance, etc.
IT cannot but be a great grief to any wise and moderate Christian, to see
Zealous and well meaning Souls carried away after the giddy humor of their
new Tea^ers, to a contempt of all holy and Reverant Antiquity; and to an eager
affectation of Novel Fancies, even whilst they cry out most utterly against
Innovation; when the Practice and Judgment of the whole Christian World, even
from the days of the blessed apostles to this present Age, is pleaded, for ^^y
Form of Government, or Laudable Observation, they are straight taught That old
things are passed, and that all things are become new; making their word good
by so new, and unheard of an Interpretation of Scripture, whereby they may as
justly argue the introducing of a new Church, a new Gospel, a new Religion,
with the annulling of the Old; and that they may not want an alsufficient
Patronage of their fond conceit, our blessed Savior himself is brought in, who
in his Sermon on the Mount controlled the antiquity of the Pharisaical glosses
of the Law. Mat. 5.21, 27. Ye have heard that it has been said by them of old,
thus and thus; but I say unto you thus and thus, and as if the Son of God in
checking the upstart Antiquities of a misgrounded and unreasonable tradition,
meant to condemn the truly ancient and commendable customs of the whole
Christian Church, which all sober and judicious Christians are wont to look
upon with meet respect and reverence: and certainly whosoever shall have set
down this resolution with himself to slight those, either Institutions or
Practices which are derived to us from the Primitive Times, and have ever since
been entertained by the whole Church of Christ upon earth, that man has laid
sufficient foundation of Schisms and dangerous Singularities: And does that
which the most eminent of the Fathers St. Augustine, charge with no less then
the most insolent madness, Insolenti sini est, etc. For me and my Friends, God
give us grace to take the advice which our Savior gave his Spouse, To go forth
by the footsteps of the flock, and to feed our Kids besides the Shepherds
Tents, Canticle 1.8 And to walk in the sure paths of incorrupt Antiquity, for
the celebration of the Solemn Feast of our Saviors Nativity, Resurrection,
Ascension, and the coming down of the Holy Ghost, which you say is cried down
by your Zealous Lecturers: One would think these should be reasons enough in
those wonderful and unspeakable benefits, which those days serve to
Commemorate unto us; for (to instance in the said Feast of the Nativity) when
the Angel brought the news of that blessed Birth to the Jewish shepherds:
Behold (says he) I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be unto
all people; for unto you is born this day a Savior, Luke 2.10. If then the
report of this blessing were the best tidings of the greatest joy that ever
was, or ever could be possibly incident unto mankind, why should not the
commemoration thereof be answerable: where we conceive the greatest joy, what
should hinder us to express it in a joyful Festivity; but you are taught to
say the day conferred nothing on the blessing: that every day we should with
equal thankfulness remember this inestimable benefit of the Incarnation of the
Son of God. So as a set Aniversary day is altogether needless. Know then and
consider, that the all-Wise God, who knew it fit that his people should every
day think of the great work of the Creation, and of that miraculous Deliverance
of the Egyptian servitude, and should daily give honor to their Almighty
Creator and Deliverer; yet ordained one day of seven for the more special
Recognition of these mavelous works, as well knowing, how apt we are to
forget those Duties, wherewith we are only encharged in common, without the
designement of a particular renumeration: Besides, the same reason will hold
proportionable against any monthly or annual Celebration whatsoever: The Jews
should have been much to blame, if they had not every Day thankfully remembered
the great Deliverance which God wrought for them from the bloody design of
cruel Haman: yet it was thought requisite, if not necessary, that there should
be two special days of Purim set apart for the Aniversary memorial of that
wonderful preservation, the like may be said for the English Purim of November.
It is well in besides the general tie of our thankfulness, a precise Day
ordained by Authority can enough quicken our unthankful dullness to give God his
own for so great a mercy: Shall we say it is the work of the year, what needs a
day? As therefore no Day should pass over our heads without a grateful
acknowledgement of the great mystery of God Incarnate: So withal the wisdom
of the Primitive Church, no doubt but by the Direction of the Holy Ghost has
pitched upon one special Day wherein we should entirely devote our thoughts to
the Meditation of this Work which the Angels of Heaven cannot enough admire.
But we are told, that perhaps we miss of the Day, since the Season is
Litigious, uncertain, unknown, and in all likelihood other then our December,
and that it is purposely not revealed, that it may not be kept.

As to the first, I deny not that the just Day is not certainly known, the
great Savior of the World, that would have his second coming without
observation going before it, would have his first coming without observation
following it: he meant to come down without noise, without a recorded notice,
even in the second hundred so ancient we are sure this Festivity is. There was
question and different opinions of the season, the just knowledge and
determination whereof, matters nothing at all to the duty of our celebration;
most sure we are that such a day there was, and no less sure that it was the
happiest day that ever looked forth into the World: It is all one to us, whether
this day, or that, we content our selves with this, that it has pleased the
Church for many hundred years to ordain this day for the Commemoration of that
transcendent blessing, what care we to stand upon these 12. hours that made up
the Artificial day wherein this wonderful work was wrought, which we are sure
cannot be much changed by so many intercalations, so long and constant a
practice of the Christian Church upon so holy grounds, it is no less warrant to
us, then if an Angel from heaven should have revealed unto us the just hour of
this blessed Nativitie.

As to the second, Surely, whosoever shall tell you, that God did purposely
hide this day from us that it might escape a Celebration, as he concealed the
burial of Moses to avoid the danger of an Idolatrous Adoration, makes himself a
presumptuous Commentator upon the Actions of the Almighty; when did God tell
him so? or what Revelation can he pretend for so bold an assertion? If this
were the matter, why then did not the same God, with equal caution conceal the
day of the Passion, Resurrection, and Ascension of our blessed Savior, and of
the descent of the Holy Ghost, the Observation of all which Days, is with no
less vehemence, and upon the same danger cried down by these scrupulous
persons; either therefore let him say that God would have these other Feast
days observed because he would have them known to the World, or yield that he
did not therefore conceal the day of the Nativity of Christ, because he would
not have it observed.

But you hear it said, there is Popery and Superstition in keeping that Day.
Tell those that suggest so, that they cast a foul slander upon the Saints of
God in the Primitive Church, upon the Holy and Learned Fathers, who Preached,
and wrote so, and kept the Feast of Christ's Nativity; which sacred Solemnity
many hundred years before Popery was hatched, and that they little know what
wrong they do to Religion and themselves, and what honor they put upon that
Superstition which they profess to detest, in ascribing that to Popery which
was the mere act of holy and devout Christians.

But to color this Plea, you are taught that the mystery of Iniquity began
early to work, even in the very Apostolic Times; and that Antichrist did
secretly put in his claw before his whole body appeared. Surely there is a
singular Use wont to be made of this shift by those which would avoid the
countenance of all Primitive Authority, to any displeasing (however lawful and
laudible) Institutions and practices: so the Anabaptists tells us, that the
baptizing of Infants is one of the timely workings of the mystery of Iniquity;
so the blasphemous Nestorians of our time tell us that the mystery of the
blessed Trinity of persons in the unity of one Godhead, is but an ancient
device of Antichrist, working under hand before his formal exhibition. Every
sort is apt to make this Challenge, and therefore it behooves us wisely to
distinguish betwixt those things which men did as good Christians, and those
which they did as engaged to their own private, or to the more common Interest
of others: What advantage can we conceive it might be to Antichrist, that
Christ should have a day celebrated to the memory of his blessed Birth, and
that devout Christians should meet together in their Holy Assemblies, to praise
God for the benefit of that happy Incarnation: And what other effect could be
expected from so Religious a Work, but Glory to GOD and Edification to Men? Who
can suppose that the enemy of Christ should gain by the honor done to Christ?
Away therefore with this groundless Imagination, and let us be so Popish, so
Superstitious, as those holy Fathers, and Doctors of the Primitive Church,
famous for Learning and Piety, who Lived and Died devout Observers of this
Christian Festival.

But you are bidden to ask what warrant we find in the Word of God (which is
to be the rule of all our actions) for the solemn keeping of this Day? In
answer you may tell that Questionist, that to argue from the Scripture
Negatively in things of this nature is somewhat Untheological. Ask you him
again with better reason, what Scripture he finds to forbid it, for if that be
unlawful to be done, which is not in Gods Word commanded* then much rather
that which is not there forbidden, cannot be unlawful to be done: General
grounds of Edification, Decency, peaceable Conformity to the Injunctions of our
Spiritual Governors, are in these Cases more then enough to build our Practice
upon: If it be Replied that we are Enjoined six days to Labor, and forbidden
to observe Days and Times as being part of the Jewish Pedoegogie (two common
pretenses with which the eyes of the Jgnorant are wont to be bleared) know that
for the first, it is not so much Preceptive, as Permissive, neither was it the
intentions of the Almighty to interpose the command of Humane affairs in the
first Table of his Royal Law, wherein Himself and his Service is imediately
concerned, in such like expressions; may, and shall, are equivalent and
promiscvovsly used, that instance is clear and pregnant, Genesis 2.16. The Lord,
(says the Text) commanded the man, Saying, Eating thou shall eat of every Tree
in the Garden, which our last Version renders well to the sense: Thou may
freely eat of every tree of the Garden. And if that charge in the 4th.
Commandment were absolute and peremptory, what Humane Authority could dispense
with those large threads of Time, which we usually cut out of the six days for
Sacred occasions, what warrant could we have to intermit our work for a daily
Lecture; or a monthly Fast, or for an Aniversary Fifth of November; And if
notwithstanding this command of God it be allowed to be in the power of man,
whether Sovereign (as Constantine appropriated it) or Spiritual, to ordain the
setting of some set parcels of time to holy uses, why should it be stuck at in
the Appropriating and Observing the Pious and useful Celebration of this
Festival. As for that other suggestion of the Apostles taxation of observing
Days and Times; any one that has but half an eye may see that it has respect
to those Judaical Holy days, which were part of the Ceremonial Law, now long
since out of date, as being of Typical signification, and shadows of things to
come, should we therefore go about to revive those Jewish Feasts, or did we
erect any new day to an essential part of the worship of God? or place holiness
in it as such? We should justly incur that blame which the Apostles cast upon
the Galatians and Colossians, False Teachers; but to wrest this forbiddance to
a Christian solemn Purity, which is merely commemoration of a blessing
received, without any prefiguration of things to come, without any opinion of
holiness anexed to the day, is no other then injurious violence.

Upon all this which has been said, and upon a serious weighing of what ever
may be further alleged to the contrary, I dare confidently affirm that there
is no just reason why good Christians should not withal godly cheerfulness
observe this, which that holy Father styled the Metropolis of all Feasts, to
which I add that those, which by their Example and Doctrine slight this Day,
causing their People to dishonor it with their worst clothes, with shops open,
with servile works, stand guilty before God of an high and sinful contempt of
that lawful Authority under which they live; for as much by the Statutes of
our Land made by the full concurrence of King and State: This is commanded to
be kept holy by all English Subjects, and this power is backed by the charge of
God; Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake.

If now after all this I should let my Pen loose to the suffragant Testjmonies,
whether of Antiquity, or Modern Divines, and Reformed Churches, I should tire
your patience, and instead of a Letter send you a Volume, let it suffice, that
ever since the second 100* years after Christ, this Feast has without
contradiction obtained due respect in the Church of God, and received many
noble Elogies and passionate inforcements from the Learned and holy Fathers of
the Church, amongst the rest that of Gregory Nazianzen [in his Orations upon
the Day of the Nativity of Christ] is so remarkable, that I may not omit it, as
that which sets forth the excess of joyful respect wherewith the Ancient
Christians were wont to keep this day. Let us says he, Celebrate this Feast,
not in a Panegyrical, but Divine, not in a worldly, but supersecular manner:
not regarding so much our selves, or others; as the worship of Christ, and how
shall we effect this? not with Crowning our doors with Garlands, nor leading of
Dances, nor adorning our Streets, not by feeding our eyes, not by delighting
our ears with pleasant Songs, not by effeminating our smell with perfumes, not
with humouring our taste with dainties, not with pleasing our touch, not with
silken and costly clothes, and not with the sparkling Jewels, not with the
luster of Gold, not with the artifice of counterfeit colors; let us leave
these things to Pagans; for their pomp, etc. But we who adore the word of the
Father, if we think fit to affect delicacies, let us feed our selves with the
dainties of the Law of God, and with those Divine Discourses, especial which
are fitting for this present Festival. So that Learned and eloquent Father to
his Auditors of Constantinople, where to, let me (if you please) have leave to
add one or two practical instances, one shall be of the good Emperor
Theodosius, lying now for eight months under the severe Censure of Bishop
Ambrose when the Feast of the Nativity drew near, what moan did that Religious
Prince make to his Courtiers, that he was by that resolute Bishop shut out (for
his blood-guiltiness) from partaking with the assembly in that holy Service,
and what importunate means did he make for his admission, Hist. tri. partit.
lib. 9. cap. 30. Had that gracious Emperor been of the Diet of these our new
Divines he would have slighted that repulse, and gladly taken this occasion of
absense from that Superstitious Solemnity, or had one of these grave Monitors
been at his elbow, he might have saved that pious Prince the expense of many
sighs and tears, which now he bestowed upon his abstention from that dearly
affected Devotion. The other shall be a History of as much note, as horror, too
clear a proof of the ancient Celebration of this Feastival, it was under the
Tyrany of Dioclesian, and his Co-partner Maximinus, Nicephor. 1.7. ca. 6. that
20000. Christians met to Celebrate the Feast of this Nativity in the large
Church of Nicomedia, which were made an Holocaust, and burnt together with that
goodly Fabric to ashes on that day; Lo so great a multitude as 20000.
Christians of al ages, of both Sexes, had not thus met together in a time of
so mortal danger, to celebrate this Feast, if the holy Zeal of their duty had
not told them they ought to keep that day, which these Novellers teach us to
contemn.

Now let these bold men see, of how contrary a disposition they are to those,
blessed Martyrs, which as this day sent up their Souls (like Manoahs Angel) to
Heaven in those flames.

After thus much said, I should be glad to know (since reason there can be
none) what Authority induces these Gain-saiers to oppose so ancient and
received a Custom in the Church of God; you tell me of a double Testimony
cyted to this purpose, the one of Socrates the Historian, which I suppose is
fetched out of the 5th. Book of Eclesiastical Story Chap. 21. where upon
occasion of the Feast of Easter, he passes his Judgment upon the indeffrent
nature of all those ancient Feasts which were of use in the Primitive Times,
showing, that the Apostles never meant to make any Law for the keeping them,
but left men to the free observation thereof.

For Answer whereunto, I do not tell you that this Author is wont to be
impeached of Novatianism, and therefore may seem fit to yield Patronage to such
a Clyent; I rather say, that take him at the worst, he is no enemy to our
opinion, or Practice, we agree with him that the Apostles would have men free
from servitude of the Jewish observation of days, that they enacted no Law for
set Festivals, but left persons and places so to their liberty in these Cases,
that none should impose a necessity upon others; this were to be pressed upon
Victor Bishop of Rome, who violently obtruded a day for the Celebration of
Easter upon all Churches (supposing in the mean time an Easter universally kept
of all Christians, though not on the same day.) This makes nothing against us,
who place no Holiness in the very hours, nor plead any Apostolical injunction
for days, nor tie any person, or Church to our strict Calender, but only hold
it fit out of obedience to the Laws both of our Church and Kingdom, to continue
a joyful Celebration of a memorial Day to the honor of our blessed Savior:
But that other Authority which you tell me was urged to this purpose, I confess
does not a little amaze me: it was, you say, of K. James our Learned Sovereign
of late and blessed memory, whose testimony was brought in before the credulous
people (not without the just applause of a Solomon-like-wisdom) as crying down
these Festivals: and in a certain Speech of his applauding the purity of the
Church of Scotland above that of Geneva, for that it observed not the common
Feasts of Christ's Nativity and Resurrection, etc. Is it possible, that any
mouth could name that wife and good King, in such a cause, whom all the world
knows to have been as zealous a Patron of these Festivals, as any lived upon
earth; and if he had let fall any such Speech before he had any Down upon his
chin, and whiles he was under the Ferule, what candor is it to produce it now
to the contradiction of his better experience, and riper judgment: Nay, is it
not famously known that it was one of the main errands of his journey into his
Native Kingdom of Scotland, to reduce that Church into a conformity to the rest
of the Churches of Christendom in the observation of these Solemn Days, and to
this purpose was it not one of the main businesses which he set on work in the
Assembly at Perth. [one of the 5. Articles of Perth] And wherein he employed
the service of his worthy Chaplain, Dr. Young Dean of Winchester, to recall and
re-establish these Festivals. And accordingly in pursuance of his Majesty's
earnest desires this way, was it not enacted in that Assembly, that the said
Feasts should be duly kept? Doubtless it was, and that not without much wise
care and holy caution, which act because it cannot be had every where, and is
well worthy of your notice: and that which clears the point in hand, I have
thought good here to insert: The tenor of it, therefore is this, As we abhor the
superstitious observation of Festival days by the Papist: and detest all
licentious and profane abuse thereof, by the common sort of professors, so we
think that the inestimable benefits received from God by our Lord Jesus Christ's
Birth, Passion, Resurrection, Ascension, and sending down of the Holy Ghost,
was commendably and godly remembered at certain particular days, and times, by
the whole Churches of the World, and may be also now; therefore the Assembly
ordains that every Minister shall upon these days have the commemoration of the
aforesaid inestimable benefits, and make choice of several pertinent Texts of
Scripture, and frame their doctrine and Exhortations thereto, and rebuke all
Superstitious observation, and licentious profanation thereof. I could, if it
were needful, give you other proofs of K. James his zeal for these days: but
what should I spend time in proving there is a Sun in the Heaven, and light in
the Sun, the name of that great King suffers for his exces this way. Seeing
then the Church of God, his anointed Law, Antiquity, and Reason, are for us in
this point (and I doubt not but we will gladly be on their side) Away with all
Innovations and frivolous quarrels, we were divided enough before, and little
needed any new rents; the God of Peace quiet all these distempers, and unite
our hearts one to another, and all to Himself; Farewell in the Lord.

FINIS.

