SUNDRY REASONS Inducing Major Robert Huntington TO Lay down his Commission.
Humbly presented to The honorable Houses OF PARLIAMENT.

Printed in the Year 1648.

SUNDRY REASONS INDUCING Major Robert Huntington to lay down his Commission.
Humbly presented to the honorable Houses of PARLIAMENT.
HAving taken up Arms in defense of the Authority and Power of King and
Parliament under the Command of the Lord Gray of VVarke, and the Earl of
Manchester, during their several employments, with the Forces of the Eastern
Association; and at the Modelling of this Army under the present Lord General,
having been appointed by the honorable Houses of Parliament, Major to the now
Regiment of Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell, in each of which employments have
served constantly and faithfully, answerable to the trust reposed in me. And
having lately quit the said employment, and laid down my Commission, I hold my
self tied both in duty and conscience, to render the true reason thereof,
which in the general is briefly this; Because the Principles, Designs, and
Actions of those Officers, which have a great influence upon the Army, are (as
I conceive) very repugnant and destructive to the honor and safety of
Parliament and Kingdom, from whom they derive their Authority. The particulars
whereof being a Breviate of my sad Observations, will appear in the following
Narrative.

First, That upon the Orders of Parliament for disbanding this Army, Lieutenant
General Cromwell and Commissary-Generall Ireton were sent Commissioners to
Walden, to reduce the Army to their obedience, but more especially, in in Order
to the present supply of Forces for the service of Ireland: But they, contrary
to the trust reposed in them, very much hindered that service, not only by
discountenancing those that were obedient and willing, but also by giving
encouragement to the unwilling and disobedient; declaring, that there had
lately been much cruelty and injustice in the Parliaments proceedings against
them (meaning the Army) and Commissary-Generall Ireton in further pursuance
thereof, framed those Papers and Writings then sent from the Army to the
Parliament and Kingdom, saying also to the Agitators, That is was lawful and
fit for us to deny disbanding, till we had received equal and just
satisfaction for our past service; Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell further adding,
That we were in a double capacity, as Soldiers, and as Commoners; and having
our pay as Soldiers, we have something else to stand upon as Commoners. And when
upon the Rendezvous at Tripple Heath the Commissioners of Parliament, according
to their Orders, acquainted every Regiment with what the Parliament had already
done, and would further do in Order to the desires of the Army, the Soldiery
being before prepared, and notwithstanding any thing could be said or offered
to them by the Commissioners, they still cried out for Justice, Justice.

And for the effecting of their further purposes, advice was given by
Lieutenant General Cromwell, and Commissary General Ireton, to remove the
Kings person from Holdenby, or to secure him there by other Guards then those
appointed by the Commissioners of Parliament, which was thought most fit to be
carried on by the private Soldiery of the Army, and promoted by the Agitators
of each Regiment, whose first business was to secure the Garrison of Oxon,
with the Guns and Ammunition there, from thence to march to Holdenby in
prosecution of the former advice, which was accordingly acted by Cornet Joyce;
who when he had done the business, sent a letter to the General then at
Kynton, acquainting his Excellency that the King was on his March toward
Newmarket: The General being troubled thereat, told Commissary-Generall Ireton
that he did not like it, demanding withal who gave those Orders; He replied,
that he gave Orders only for securing the King there, and not for taking him
away from thence; Lieutenant-Generall Cromwell coming then from London, said,
that if this had not been done, the King would have been fetched away by Order
of Parliament, or else Collonell Graves by the advice of the Commissioners
would have carried him to London, throwing themselves upon the favor of
Parliament for that service. The same day Cornet Joyce being told that the
General was displeased with him for bringing the King from Holdenby, he
answered, that Lieutenant-Generall Cromwell gave him orders at London to do
what he had done, both there and at Oxford.

The person of the King being now in the power of the Army, the business of
Lieutenant General Cromwell, was to Court his Majesty (both by Members of the
Army, and several Gentlemen formerly in the Kings Service) into a good opinion
and belief of the proceedings of the Army, as also into a disaffection and
dislike of the proceedings of Parliament, pretending to show that his Majesty's
interest would far better suit with the principles of Independencie then of
Presbytery: and when the King did allege (as many times he did) that the
Power of Parliament was the Power by which we fought, Lieutenant General-
Cromwell would reply, that we were not only Soldiers, but Commoners; promising
that the Army would be for the King in the settlement of his whole business,
if the King and his party would sit still and not declare, nor Act against the
Army, but give them leave only to manage the present business in hand.

That when the King was at Newmarket, the Parliament thought fit to send to his
Majesty, humbly desiring, that in Order to his safety, and their addresses for
a speedy settlement, he would be pleased to come to Richmond; contrary hereunto
resolution was taken by the aforesaid Officers of the Army, That if the King
could not be diverted by persuasion (to which his Majesty was very opposite)
that then they would stop him by force at Royston, where his Majesty was to
lodge the first night, keeping accordingly continual Guards upon him, against
any power that should be sent by Order of Parliament to take him from us: And
to this purpose, outguards were also kept to preserve his escape from us, with
the Commissioners of whom we had specially Orders given to be careful; for
that they did daily show a dislike to the present proceedings of the Army
against the Parliament, and that the King was most conversant, and private in
discourse with them; His Majesty saying, that if any man should hinder his
going (now his Houses had desired him upon his late Message of the 12. of May
1647.) it should be done by force, and by laying hold on his Bridle, which if
any were so bold to do, he would endeavor to make it his last. But contrary
to his Majesty's expectation, the next Morning when the King and the Officers
of the Army were putting this to an issue, came the Votes of both Houses to the
King, of their compliance with that which the Army formerly desired: After
which his Majesty did incline to hearken to the desires of the Army, and not
before: Whereupon at Caversham, the King was continually solicited by
Messengers from Lieutenant General Cromwell, and Commissary-Generall Ireton,
proffering any thing his Majesty should desire, as Revenues, Chaplains, Wife,
Children, servants of his own; visitation of Friends, access of Letters, and
(by Commissary-Generall Ireton) that his Negative Voice should not be meddled
withal, and that he had convinced those that reasoned against it at the
General Council of the Army: And all this they would do, that his Majesty
might the better see into all our Actions, and know our principles, which lead
us to give him all those things out of conscience; For that we were not a
people hating his Majesty's person or Monarchical Government, but that we like
it as the best, and that by this King, saying also, that they did hold it a
very unreasonable thing for the Parliament to abridge him of them, often
promising, that if his Majesty will sit still and not Act against them, they
would in the first place restore him to all these, and upon the settlement of
our own Just rights and liberties make him the most Glorious Prince in
Christendom; That to this purpose for a settlement they were making several
Proposals to be offered to the Commissioners of Parliament then sent down to
the Army, which should be as bounds for our party as to the Kings business,
and that his Majesty should have liberty to get as much of those abated as he
could, for that many things therein were proposed only to give satisfaction to
others which were our Friends, promising the King that at the same time the
Commissioners of Parliament should see the Proposalls, His Majesty should have
a copy of them also, pretending to carry a very equal hand between King and
Parliament, in Order to the settlement of the Kingdom by him, which besides
their own Judgment and conscience, they did see a necessity of it as to the
people; Commissary General Ireton further saying; that what was offered in
these Proposalls should be so just and reasonable, that if there were but six
men in the Kingdom, that would fight to make them good, he would make the
seventh against any power that should oppose them.

The Headquarters being removed from Reading to Bedford, His Majesty to
Woborne, the Proposalls were given to me by Commissary-Generall Ireton, to
present to the King; which His Majesty having read, told me, he would never
treat with Army or Parliament upon those Proposalls, as he was then minded: But
the next day His Majesty understanding that a Force was put upon his Houses of
Parliament by a Tumult, sent for me again and said unto me, Go along with Sir
John Barkley to the General and Lievtenant-Generall, and tell them, that to
avoid a new war, I will now treat with them upon their Proposalls, or on any
thing else in order to a Peace, only let me be saved in honor and conscience:
Sir John Barkley falling sick by the way, I delivered this Message to the
Lievtenant-Generall, and Commissary-Generall Ireton, who advised me not to
acquaint the General with it, till 10 or 12 Officers of the Army were met
together at the Generals Quarters, and then they would bethink themselves of
some persons to be sent to the King about it; And accordingly Com. Genesis Ireton
Col. Raynsborow, Col. Hamond, and Col. Rich, attended the King at Woborne for
three hours together, debating the whole business with the King upon the
Proposals; upon which debate, many of the most material things the King
disliked were afterward struck out, and many other things much abated by
promises, whereupon his Majesty was pretty well satisfied.

Within a day or two after his Majesty removed to Stoke, and there calling for
me, told me he feared an Engagement between the City and the Army; saying, he
had not time to write any thing under his hand, but would send it to the
General after me, commanding me to tell Com. Genesis Ireton, with whom he had
formerly Treated upon the Proposals, that he would wholly throw himself upon
us, and trust us for a settlement of the Kingdom as we had promised; saying,
if we proved honest men, we should (without question) make the Kingdom happy,
and save much sheding of blood. This Message from His Majesty, I delivered to
Com. Genesis Ireton at Colebrook, who seemed to receive it with joy, saying, That
we should be the veryest Knaves that ever lived, if in every thing we made not
good what ever we had promised, because the King by his not declaring against
us, had given us great advantage against our Adversaries.

After our Marching through London with the Army. His Majesty being at Hampton
Court, Leivt. Genesis Cromwell, and Com. Genesis Ireton, sent the King word several
times, that the reason why they made no more have in business, was because
that Party which did then sit in the House while Pelham was Speaker did much
obstruct the business, so that they could not carry it on at present. The
Leivt. Genesis often saying, really they should be pulled out by the ears: And to
that purpose caused a Regiment of Horse to Rendevouze at Hide Park to have put
that in execution as he himself expressed, had it not been carried by Vote in
the House that day as he desired: The day before, the Parliament Voted once
more, the sending of the Propositions of both Kingdoms to the King by the
Commissioners of each Kingdom at Hampton Court. Com. Genesis Ireton, bad me tell
the King, that such a thing was to be done to morrow in the House, but his
Majesty need not be troubled at it, for that they intended it to no other end,
but to make good some promises of the Parliament, which the Nation of Scotland
expected performance of: And that it was not expected or desired his Majesty
should either Sign them or Treat upon them, for which there should be no
advantage taken against the King. Upon the delivery of which Message, His
Majesty Replied, he knew not what Answer to give to please all without a
Treaty. Next day after this Vote passed, the Leivt. General asking me
thereupon, if the King did not wonder at these Votes; I told him no: For that
Com. Genesis Ireton, had sent such a Message by me the day before the Vote passed,
to signify the reason of it: The Leivt. General Replied, that really it was
the truth, and that we (speaking of the Parliament) intended nothing else by
it, but to satisfy the Scots, which otherwise, might be troublesome. And the
Leivt. Genesis and Com. General enquiring after His Majesty's Answer to the
Propositions, and what it would be, it was showed them both privately in a
Garden-house in Putney, and in some part amended to their own mind. But before
this the King doubting what answer to give, sent me to Leiv. General Cromwell,
as unsatisfied with the proceedings of the Army, fearing they intended not to
make good what they had promised: and the rather because his Majesty understood
that Leiv. Genesis Cromwell, and Com. Genesis Ireton, agreed with the rest of the
House in some late Votes that opposed the Proposals of the Army, they severally
replied, that they would not have his Majesty mistrust them, for that since the
House would go so high, they only concurred with them, that their
unreasonablenesse might the better appear to the Kingdom; And the Leiv. Genesis
bad me further assure the King, that if the Army remained an Army, his Majesty
should trust the Proposals with what was promised to be the worst of his
conditions which should be made for him; and then striking his hand on his
breast (in his Chamber at Putney,) bade me tell the King, he might rest
confident and assured of it; and many times the same Message has been sent to
the King from them both, but with this addition from Com. Genesis Ireton, that
they would purge and purge, and never leave purging the Houses, till they had
made them of such a temper as should do his Majesty's business. And rather
then they would fall short of what was promised, he would join with French,
Spaniard, Cavileir or any that would join with him to force them to it. Upon
the delivery of which Message the King made Answer, that if they do, they
would do more then he durst do. After this the delay of the settlement of the
Kingdom was excused upon the commotions of Col. Martin, and Col. Rainsborough
with their adherents; the Leiv. Genesis saying, that speedy course must be taken
for outing them, the House and Army, because they were now putting the Army
into a Mutuny, by having hands in publishing several printed Papers, calling
themselves the Agents of five Regiments, and the agreement of the people,
although some men had encouragement from Leiv. Genesis Cromwell, for the
prosecution of those papers; and he being further pressed to show himself in it,
he desired to be excused at the present, for that he might show himself
hereafter for their better advantage, though in the company of those men which
were of different judgments he would often say, that these people were a
giddy-headed party, and that there was no trust nor truth in them; and to that
purpose wrote a Letter to Col. Whaley that day the King went from Hampton
Court, intimating doubtfully that his Majesty's Person was in danger by them,
and that he should keep Outguard to prevent them; which Letter was presently
showed to the King by Col. Whaley.

That about six days after, when it was fully known by the Parliament and Army
that the King was in the Isle of Wight, Com. Genesis Ireton standing by the fire
side in his Quarters at Kingstone, and some speaking of an agreement likely to
be made between the King and Parliament, now the Person of the King was out of
the power of the Army: Com. Genesis Ireton replied, with a discontented
countenance, that he hoped it would be such a Peace, as we might with a good
conscience fight against them both. Thus they who at the first taking the King
from Holdenby into the power of the Army, cried down Presbyterian Government,
the proceedings of this present Parliament and their perpetuity, and instead
thereof held forth an earnest inclination to a moderate Episcopacy, with a new
election of Members to sit in Parliament for the speedy settlement of the
Kingdom, and afterward when the Eleaven Members had left the House, and
marching through London with the Army, the seven Lords impeached, the four
Aldermen of London committed to the Tower, and other Citizens committed also;
then again they cried up Presbyterian Government, the perpetuity of this
present Parliament. Leiv. Genesis Cromwell further pleasing himself with the
great Sums of money, which were in Arrear from each County to the Army; and
the Tax of sixty thousand l. per Month for our maintenance; now says he, we
may be for ought I know an Army so long as we live; and since the sending forth
the Orders of Parliament for the calling their Members together, Leiv. Genesis
Cromwell perceiving the Houses will not answer his expectation, he is now again
uttering words, persuading the hearers to a prejudice against the proceedings
of Parliament, again crying down Presbyterian Government, setting up a single
Interest, which he calls an honest Interest, and that we have done ill in
forsaking of it; to this purpose it was lately thought fit, to put the Army
upon the choosing new Agitators, and to draw forth of the House of Parliament
60 or 70 of the Members thereof, much agreeing with his words he spoke formerly
in his Chamber at Kingstone, saying, what sway Stapleton and Hollis had
heretofore in the Kingdom, and he knew nothing to the contrary, but that he
was as well able to govern the Kingdom as either of them; so that in all his
discourse nothing more appears in his seeking after the Government of King,
Parliament, City, and Kingdom; for the effecting whereof he thought it
necessary, and delivers it as his Judgment, that a considerable Party of the
Chief Citizens of London, and some of every County, be clapped up in Castles and
Garrisons, for the more quiet and submissive carriage of every place to which
they belong. Further, saying, that from the rising of the late Tumult in
London, there should be an occasion taken, to hang the Recorder and Aldermen of
London then in the Tower; that the City might see the more they did stir in
opposition, the more they should suffer, adding that the City must first be
made an example. And since that Leivt. Gen Cromwell was sent down from the
Parliament for the reducing of the Army to their obedience, he has most
frequently in public and private, delivered these ensuing heads as his
Principles, from whence all the foregoing particulars have ensued, being sully
confirmed as I humbly conceive by his practice in the transaction of his last
years business.

1. That every single man, is Judge of just and right, as the good and ill of a
Kingdom. 2. That the Interest of honest men, is the Interest of the Kingdom,
and those only are deemed honest men by him, that are conformable to his
judgment and practice: Which may appear in many particulars. To instance but
one in the choice of Col. Raynsborow to be Vice Admiral; L. General Cromwell
being asked how he could trust a man whose Interest was so directly opposite to
what he had professed, and to one whom he had lately aimed to remove from all
places of trust. He answered, that he had now received particular assurance
from Col. Raynsborow, as great as could be given by man, that he would be
conformable to the Judgment and descretion of himself and Com. General
Ireton, for the mannaging of the whole business at Sea. 3. That it is lawful
to pass through any Forms of Government, for the accomplishing of his end,
and therefore either to purge the Houses, and support the remaining Party by
force everlastingly. Or to put a period to them by force, is very lawful and
suitable to the Interest of honest men. 4. That it is lawful to play the Knave
with a Knave.
These Gentlemen aforesaid in the Army thus Principled, and as by many other
circumstances may appear, acting accordingly, give too much cause to believe
that the success which may be obtained by the Army (except timely prevented by
the wisdom of the Parliament) will be made use of to the distroying of all
that Power for which we first Engaged, and having (for above these twelve
Months past) sadly and with much reluctance observed these several passages
aforesaid, yet we have some hopes that at length, there might be a returning to
the obedience of the Parliament; and contrary hereunto, knowing that
Resolutions were taken up, that in case the Power of Parliament cannot be
gained to countenance their Designs, then to proceed without it. I therefore
chose to quit my self of my Command wherein I have served the Parliament for
these five years last past: And put my self upon the greatest hazards by
discovering these truths, rather then by hopes of gain with troubled mind,
continue an assistant or abetter of such as gives affronts to the Parliament
and Kingdom by abusing of their Power and Authority, to carry on their
particular Designs. Against whom (in the midst of danger, I shall ever avow the
Truth of this Narrative: And my self to be a constant faithful and obedient
Servant to the Parliament of England

August the 2. 1648. To. Huntington.

FINIS.

