THE REBELS TEXT OPENED, AND THEIR Solemn Appeal ANSWERED.

Being a SERMON Preached in the Parish Church of Up-Lime, on the
Thanksgiving-Day for our Wonderful Deliverance from the late Horrid Rebellion.

Being Sunday, July 26. 1685.

By CHARLES HVTTON, A. M. and Rector of the said Parish.

Accipe nunc Danaum insidias, and crimine ab uno Disce omnes.

Virg. Aen. 2. LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Sign of the Bishop's
Head in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1686.

To the Right Worshipful Sir John Cotton of Botheraux Castle in Cornwall,
Knight, and one of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for that County.
SIR,
THIS Sermon you were pleased to desire a Copy of, and others since commanded
me to Print it: I have now gratified both, and run the risque of public
censures, which yet I expect from none but the dissenting and rebellious Party:
and those I as much despise as they do Government. If it be a crime to Preach
up Loyalty to God, and the King, in an age wherein there are such numerous and
daring Rebels to both; I must confess my self guilty of it: but shall not ask
pardon of them, till they beg theirs from God, and repent of this great sin,
which (like Witches, to whom they are compared) it is doubtful whether they will
ever do. However to leave such among us without excuse, this Sermon with some
little alterations has already visited other Churches and Counties besides my
own, and is now like to visit more; that if possible, the Antidote may be as
diffusive as the Poison: yet how to expel it quite, whether by making new Laws,
or rather reviving the old, and putting them in a vigorous execution, is humbly
submitted to the wisdom of the present Parliament; from whose united Heads, and
Hearts, and Hands, we now hope for, and almost promise our selves a perfect
Cure. And I am confident you will not be wanting in your Sphere to contribute
what you can toward it; you, who stood so firm to the Church, and Crown,
amidst those black and dismal storms that formerly clouded, and eclipsed both;
and have ever since, even when things ran high again in favor of Rebellion,
and once more threatened ruin to our ancient English Monarchy, and Episcopacy,
preserved your Integrity, and Loyalty entire: which therefore together with
your Charity and Hospitality (Virtues that are natural to your Family) without
doubt you will carry with you to your Grave; as those will carry you farther,
even to the regions of Bliss and Immortality: where that you may late, and
safely arrive, is the hearty Prayer of,

SIR, Your most humble Servant, and obliged Kinsman, Charles Hutton.
From Vp-Lime October 24. 1685.
JOSHUA xxii. 22. The Lord God of gods, the Lord God of gods, he knows, and
Israel be shall know, if it be in rebellion, or if in transgression against the
Lord, (save us not this day.)


IT is the unhappy Fate of the Holy Scriptures to be abused into a kind of
public Armory, whence the several contending Parties of the Christian World
fetch Weapons to arm themselves, and fight each other; no Sect is so
profligate, no not that which perverts Faith into Faction, and Religion into
Rebellion, but has recourse to the Sacred Bible to palliate and justify their
impious actions: Neither is this some new thing not heard of in former Ages;
since we find it practiced above sixteen hundred years ago by the grand
Impostor of the World: He would fain have persuaded the Blessed Jesus to have
thrown himself headlong from the lofty Temple, on presumption the good Angels
would miraculously interpose, and prevent all danger in his Fall: And this he
proved our Savior might lawfully do, from a distorted Passage of David's
Psalms, Psalm. 91.11, 12. And Satan has always had, and still has his Agents and
Emissaries, that use the same Devilish Policy. This they were at in Forty two,
and, God knows, played it then with too great success: And though some of those
are long since dead, and gone to their own place; yet, as if there were a
transmigration of Souls, and they did live again in their present Successors,
the same evil Spirit is conjured up again, and appears in Samuel's Mantle;
there being men found in our days, who, though in open and actual Rebellion
against God and the King, and involved in all those crimes that horrid Sin
includes, had nevertheless the impudence to appeal to Heaven for the justice of
their Arms, and to challenge God to decide for them in the Day of Battle. And
this plainly appears by a Clause in their late bloody and blasphemous
Declaration; in the Close of which, those very words I just now repeated, as
near as I can remember them, are inserted: and it is further confirmed, by
their insisting on this very Text, as I am credibly informed, the Day before
the Battle. Now since this their solemn Appeal has been answered from Heaven in
a most solemn and stupendous manner, and God has decided against them to their
entire Defeat, and total Overthrow; I know no place of Scripture fitter to be
insisted on at this time: partly to confirm some of you in your unshaken
Loyalty, and to convince others that waver'd in it; and partly to clear the
Text from those corrupt Glosses, false Doctrines, and fallacious Inferences,
which Rebel and Army Preachers have raised from it: And that I may do this
effectually, I shall give you the real Occasion, natural Division, and genuine
Application of the Words.

First, For the real occasion of these words, and that was this; Moses the
Servant of the Lord, and Ruler of his People Israel, after he had conducted
them safe from Egypt to the borders of Canaan, and cut his passage thither,
through continual Miracles, Victories, and Successes, being conscious to
himself of his great Age, and warned from Heaven of his approaching Fate, by
Gods command adopts Joshua into the Copartnership of his royal Government, that
it might sit more easy on his shoulders, when he came to bear it all, which he
must do after his death, Number. 27.20. and withal among many other excellent
instructions how to govern that stubborn and rebellious people, he gives him
some relating to the division of the promised Land among the several Tribes,
willing him to observe this method in making it: The Reubenites, Gadites, and
half Tribe of Manasseh should take up their habitation in Gilead, and Bashan,
and other adjacent Countries, which lay on this side Jordan, because they had
been very importunate to fix their abode there, and for their good services he
had granted it; but 'twas on this condition, that they continued to assist
their Brethren the Children of Israel in conquering the Land of Canaan; and
when that was done, and that Land divided between the other nine Tribes and
half, these two Tribes and half might return, and dwell in the Countries which
themselves first chose, Number. 32.29, 30, etc. accordingly after Moses had
resigned his meek and righteous Soul unto God, and his reverend and aged body
was interred by Him in some obscure and unknown grave, lest the giddy
multitude, that so often murmured against him whilst alive, should, now he was
dead, repent of their former insolent behavior, and to compensate for it,
worship his ashes, and adore his very dust: after this (I say) he that was
before his Partner, and now his Successor, Joshua, having finished his Conquest
of the Holy Land, and divided it among the nine Tribes and half; pursuant to
the instructions of his dying Predecessor, dismisses the two other Tribes and
half, giving them their deserved praise and commendation, and seasonable advice
to serve the great God, who had prosper'd their Arms, and given them rest from
all their Enemies; and withal full power and commission to return and dwell in
their wished for, chosen, and promised possession, Joshua 22.1, 2, etc. Now in
their journey homeward, these two Tribes and half, as they passed by the
borders of Jordan, set up a great Altar there; not one destined for Sacrifice
or Oblation, but an Altar of remembrance to succeeding Ages, that they
acknowledged, and adored the same God which Israel did; and had as much right
as they to come and worship at Shiloh, the place where Gods honor dwelt, and
where his Service was most solemnly performed, ver. 9, 10. but this made so
great a noise, that it alarmed their Brethren the Children of Israel, and
caused them to think of revenging this innovation by sacrificing them on it,
who first built this Altar; for a new Altar they thought bespoke a new
Religion, and all those Schismatics and Separatists that had a hand in it: and
therefore they are for reducing them to order and conformity, by outward
compulsion and force; and to this end resolve to make War upon them, ver. 11,
12, etc. but before they proceed to this extremity (which is commonly, or ought
to be, the last, and never used but in case of necessity) they sent selected
Messengers from every Tribe, to demand the reason of this proceeding; and why
they had erected an Altar (as it were) in defiance to that at Shiloh: if they
were prejudiced against their Country, because it had not the visible Symbols
of God's special Presence in it, as Canaan had, they were content these two
Tribes and a half should come and dwell among them, although they themselves
were straightened by it, ver. 19. Notwithstanding if the land of your possession
be unclean, then pass ye over unto the land of the possession of the Lord,
wherein the Lord's Tabernacle dwells, and take possession among us: but rebel
not against the Lord, nor rebel against us in building you an Altar, besides
the Altar of the Lord. They would endure any inconveniency, rather than suffer
a Schism or Separation to happen among them. Now to this heavy Charge, the
Reubenites, Gadites, and half Tribe of Manasseh, plead Not guilty; and solemnly
protest before God, who searches the hearts, That they had no other design in
rearing this Altar, than the making it a Memorial for Posterity to understand
that they were Worshippers of the same God, and ought to partake of the same
Ecclesiastical Privileges that their Brethren enjoyed that dwelt in the Holy
Land. This was the true account of themselves and their Proceedings; and if
their incensed Brethren would not believe it, nor any thing satisfy their
boiling rage but their utter extirpation, all that they had left, and was
lawful for them to do, was to invoke the God of Heaven, who is the great
Protector of the innocent, to defend them from their Brethrens undeserved
wrath, or at least so far to mitigate and appease it, that they might be
delivered from the dire effects thereof. The Lord God of gods, etc.

In the Words I shall consider these three Parts: I. A public Declaration of
the Sovereign Power and Majesty of God, That he is Omniscient and Omnipresent,
the supreme Lord, Governor and Judge of the whole World, The Lord God of gods,
etc. II. A Solemn Appeal to this supreme Lord, Governor and Judge, for the
Equity of their Proceedings; they desire help and deliverance from him upon
these and no other terms, That they were not in Rebellion or Transgression
against the Lord, The Lord God of gods, he knows, etc. III. A Supposition, That
if they were Rebels, the Lord would not save them, If it be in rebellion, or if
in transgression against the Lord, save us not this day.


I begin with the First, viz.

I. A public Declaration of the Sovereign Power and Majesty of God, That he is
Omniscient and Omnipresent, the supreme Lord, Governor and Judge of the whole
World, The Lord God of gods, etc.

All the Power and Majesty of Kings and Princes, of the high and mighty Men of
the Earth, are but so many Streams and Rivulets that flow from this universal
and inexhaustible Spring; they are but so many Beams and Rays darted from this
Almighty Sun, the Father of Lights, with whom there is no variableness, or
shadow of turning, James 1.17. All the Knowledge and Wisdom of the subtilest
Politicians, the profoundest Divines, the acutest Philosophers, and the
learnedest Councillors, are but so many Particles of that infinite and
boundless understanding, of that eternal and ubiquitary Soul (if I may so style
the Divine Essence) from whence these intelligent and discerning Faculties
proceed: And though for their Knowledge and Wisdom, as well as Power and
Majesty, Men may be said to be Gods, and Kings and Princes are so called in
Holy Scripture, Psalm. 82.6. yet this acknowledgment must be made by us, and all
Creatures; which was here openly declared by the two Tribes and half, and
unanimously assented to by all the rest, That there is one Sovereign Lord, The
Lord God of gods, etc. he knows absolutely and independently, and not by
Comparison or derivation; He knows intuitively, and not by the help of Reason
or Discourse, not by the assistance of Premises or Conclusion. But this Divine
Knowledge is too wonderful for us, it is so high we cannot attain unto it,
Psalm. 139.6. We may admire and adore, and we ought to do so, but we can never
comprehend it; however the contemplation and adoration of this and all the
other Attributes of God, as it is our business here on Earth, so 'twill be part
of our happiness in Heaven; where we shall know as we are known, where Faith
will be consummate in Vision, and we shall see face to face. But in the interim
we may make this good Use of God's Omniscience and Omnipresence, to restrain
our selves and others by it from open or secret sins.

1. In vain (O Hypocrite!) do thou seek darkness and solitude to conceal thy
vice, and cover thy impiety, unless thou could go where the Almighty sees
not, hide thy self where his knowledge cannot reach, and fly from thine own
Soul, thou can not be concealed from the All-seeing Eye of God, The Lord God
of gods, he knows; He knows what thou do in thy Closet, and secret Chambers,
in thy silent and midnight Walks, and in thy most obscure Retirement.

2. In vain (O Atheist!) do thou endeavor to banish God from all thy
thoughts, and blasphemously imagine there is no such vast and infinite
Knowledge in the Most High: Do what thou can, the fear of the Almighty and
invisible Power will break in upon thee, and the dread of Divine Vengeance will
overtake thee; especially in times of public calamity, or private distress:
then notwithstanding all thy sottish Arts and methods to keep it off, thou will
be haunted with the Apparition of a Deity, and the dismal apprehensions of a
Judgment to come: then this ingenuous and open Confession will be extorted from
thee, The Lord God of gods, he knows; He knows that I have been a great Sinner
before him, and that I have no other way to escape his Justice, but by flying
to his Mercy, that Mercy which I have hitherto abused and denied.

3. In vain (O Rebel!) do thou go about to overturn and destroy that
Government, which has hitherto preserved thee; in vain endeavor to raise thy
self on thy Countries ruin, and Brethrens downfall; Thy Works of Darkness are
brought to light, thy Mystery of Iniquity revealed, and all thy Plots, which
were laid as deep as Hell, are discovered by a Ray from Heaven, The Lord God of
gods, he knows; He knows thy secret Clubs and close Cabals: and though he may,
and sometimes does permit thy Twins of mischief to come to the Birth; yet he
will not suffer them to be delivered; but he has delivered us, and does, and
therefore we trust he will still deliver us. And so much may suffice for the
first Part of my Text, viz. a public Declaration or Recognition of the
Sovereign Power and Majesty of God, that he is Omniscient and Omnipresent, the
supreme Lord, Governor and Judge of the whole World. The Lord God of gods, the
Lord God of gods, he knows; which is twice repeated, to make the more lively
Impression on us. I come now to the second Part, viz.

II. A solemn Appeal to this Sovereign Lord and supreme Judge, for the Equity
of their Proceedings; they desire help, and expect deliverance from him upon
these and no other terms, That they were not in Rebellion, nor transgression
against the Lord.

It Is usual with Good men, when their reputation is called in question, and
they are accused of some heavy crime, of which they are altogether innocent, to
appeal to Heaven for an Evidence in their Cause, and solemnly to request, that
when men cannot, or will not, God himself would appear in their vindication.
Thus when righteous Job was disheartened by his best Friends, which should have
been his chiefest Comforters, and uncharitably charged by them for being a
great Sinner, because he had been a great Sufferer under the afflicting hand of
God; he had no other way left to clear himself, but by calling on the Almighty,
to testify the integrity of his heart, and the innocence of his life, Job
16.19. Behold, my witness is in heaven, and my record is on high. Thus when
pious David was slandered by reviling Shimei, traduced for being a Murderer, a
Man of Blood, and charged with the death of Saul, and all his house, in whose
stead he reigned, 2 Samuel 16.7, 8. the only course he steered to take off this
abominable imputation, was to refer his Cause to God, and to implore the Divine
assistance to do him right, Psalm 7.8, 10. Judge me, O Lord, according to my
righteousness, and according to my integrity that is in me; My defense is from
God, who saves the upright in heart. Thus when holy Paul was aspersed by false
Teachers, that were then crept into the Corinthian Church, and misrepresented
by them as one whose bodily presence was weak, and speech contemptible, 2 Cor.
10.10. as one that had taken but little pains in the Lord's Vineyard, which he
was sent to dress; to vindicate himself from this unjust calumny, St Paul
thinks himself obliged to give them a short Narrative of his labors, and
travels in the Gospel; which he does, Chap. 11. from ver. 21. to 30. and after
the enumeration of several Particulars, makes this general Conclusion, That
none of those great Pretenders to the Christian Religion had done and suffered
so much for it, as he: And this he confirms by a most solemn Asseveration,
wherein God is made a Party and a Judge, ver. 31. The God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, which is blessed for evermore, knows, that I lie not. And
this is the reason why in our Courts of Justice, the Witnesses that pass
betwixt man and man, and betwixt the King and the Prisoner at the Bar, are
required to take a Corporal Oath, wherein they solemnly appeal to God for the
truth of what they say, and tacitly imply, that they are so far from expecting
God's help, that they imprecate his wrath and vengeance upon themselves, in
case they swear falsely; So help me God. And this was the true cause why the
Reubenites, Gadites, and half Tribe of Manasseh make this solemn Appeal here in
my Text, The Lord God of gods, etc. he knows: They were charged by their
Brethren, the Children of Israel, with the horrid crimes of Schism and
Rebellion; with making a Schism in the Church, and a Rebellion in the State,
(and the one is commonly a step to the other, first a Schismatic, and next a
Rebel) and those that were their Accusers, to strike the greater terror and
astonishment, did it with their Swords in their hands. Now to wipe off this
harsh censure and severe reflection, which their uncharitable Brethren had
passed on them for erecting this new Altar; they all solemnly protest before
God, That they did it in the simplicity of their hearts, and with no other
design than to signify to future Ages, that their Children and Childrens
Children had a right to the Covenant God made with their Father Abraham, were
Members of the same visible Church, and Worshippers of the same living God:
They did not build it to offer Sacrifices, or to perform any other religious
Service there; but barely as a Memorial, that they were of the same Extraction
and Religion, as those were that inhabited the Holy Land. And if this Answer
did not satisfy, but they were resolved to proceed to Acts of Hostility, and
to make War upon them, they solemnly appeal to God to be the Umpire and
Arbitrator betwixt them; and neither hoped for mercy or deliverance from their
hands, in case their Apology were untrue, The Lord God of gods, etc. he knows.
And indeed the Event proved, that these Reubenites, Gadites, and half Tribe of
Manasseh, were in the right: For the Children of Israel were immediately
convinced that they had done nothing out of opposition to the Government, or
disobedience to their Governors; and thereupon disbanded their Army, and
blessed the most high God that had kept them from destroying their innocent
Brethren, Josh. 22.32, 33.

But here I must remark, That such solemn appeals as these are then only
lawful, when the Persons are truly innocent that make them, and necessitated in
their own defense to do it: and the instances I before gave you, were of such
men, their cause was just and good, and yet traduced as otherwise; and
therefore they were not afraid solemnly to invite God to be a witness, and a
Judge in it. And this will plainly appear by making a stricter inquiry into
those circumstances these two Tribes and half were in, when this solemn Appeal
was extorted from them: they were now on the other side Jordan, where their
great distance from Shiloh, together with their own strength, being soon able
to raise a considerable Army of old experienced Soldiers, might easily have
tempted them, (and not without prospect of success) to have endeavored an
alteration of Government both in Church and State; especially having so fair an
opportunity to have done it, as their Brethrens being first in Arms afforded
them; and they might have really pretended in their own justification, that
they only undertook a defensive War, (which was the false pretense of the old
Rebels in Forty Two) and did but stand upon their own guard to hinder their
Brethren from cutting their Throats. But they were ignorant of such sinful
shifts and evasions, in those pure and elder times; and knowing themselves to
be Joshua's Subjects (who by Gods own appointment succeeded Moses in the
Government of Israel) they knew it was unlawful upon any pretense whatsoever to
resist their Sovereign Prince: and therefore instead of lifting up their Hands
against him in a Warlike manner, they lift them up to Heaven in a devout and
praying posture, beseeching, and importuning the God of it, to convince him of
their innocence; and by that means to keep him from destroying them. This was
really the case of the two Tribes and half; they did not under the greatest
provocation that could be, enter into a defensive War, nor take any Solemn
League and Covenant to begin, and carry it on. But for men that by all the ties
of Nature, and obligations of sacred Oaths, are bound to yield allegiance and
subjection to their lawful King, nevertheless to Levy an Offensive War against
him, and to carry it on by the same ungodly and bloody means by which it was
begun: for such as these to appeal to Heaven for the justice of their Arms, and
to challenge God to decide for them in the day of Battle, is such a piece of
arrogance and presumption, as can scarce be paralleled in all the Volumes of
Antiquity. And yet this was the case of our late mad Reformers: They invaded
our Land, and made War upon their Lawful Prince, and so were Rebels; they
traduced his Royal Person, and Government, and so were Slanderers; they
deceived the people with innumerable false stories and legendary tales, and so
were Liars; they robbed, and plunderd their fellow subjects of their proper
Goods, and so were Thieves: and lastly, they imbrued their hands in their
Brethrens Blood, and so were Murderers. Yet these men, I say, had the forehead
to conjure the God of Heaven, as their Arms were just, to give the Victory on
their side. Good God! into what an age are we fallen, that can reconcile
Paradoxes, and twist Contradictions! That men should be enemies to arbitrary
power, and yet endeavor to introduce it! that men should advance the Glory of
God, by committing Sacrilege! that men should be the People of God, that by
their works show themselves the Children of the Devil, who was a Liar, and
Murderer from the beginning! And, lastly, that men should pretend to fight for
Religion, who really have none! These are such mysterious Riddles, as it is
beyond the skill of an Oedipus to resolve.

But possibly some of you may imagine this discourse has too much zeal and
transport in it; yet I am confident that imagination will soon vanish, when you
seriously consider Gods honor is deeply concerned, and seems to lie at stake,
being highly affronted and abused by such vile Hypocrites as these: and we know
the meekest man upon earth grew angry and impatient, when he saw the Israelites
worship, and dance before the Golden Calf, Exo. 32.19. and when we see the
people running after such another Idol, and falling down before it, it is high
time to tell Judah of her sins, and Israel of her transgressions: And they,
whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear, (for they are a
rebellious house) yet let them know there has been a Prophet among them, Ezekiel.
2.5. And truly without vanity I may say, I have faithfully discharged my duty
in this particular, having often, and earnestly beseech'd you with abundance of
arguments, and vehemence of speech, to take heed of Rebellion which is as the
sin of Witchcraft; to beware of resisting the higher powers, for they that
resist shall receive to themselves damnation; to lay to heart the character
Jacob gives of his two ungodly children, Genesis 49.5.6. Simeon and Levi are
Brethren, instruments of cruelty are in their habitations; O my soul come not
thou into their secret; unto their assembly mine honor be not thou united: for
in their anger they would slay Kings, and dig down the walls of Church and
State. These things I have frequently inculcated, and pressed upon your
consciences, as you can all bear me witness, and I know I got some enemies by
endeavoring to convince men of this great truth: but I verily believe they now
wish they had taken my advice, which has been so often given them from this
Sacred Place; and then all the spoil and plunder, the rapine and destruction,
the wounds and bloodshed which we so lately felt, might happily have been
prevented; then they might have lived in peace, in their own houses, with their
own families, and under their own Vine and Fig Tree. But because they would not
know in this their day the things that did belong to their peace, they are now
therefore hid from their eyes, Luke 19.42. Now they must all put their hands
upon their mouths, and confess, The Lord is just in all his ways and righteous
in all his works; now they must acknowledge themselves confuted by their own
daring argument, and that their cause was bad, because God did decide it
against them in the day of Battle.

Now the use I shall make of this second part is this, To beg you to take heed
of appealing to the great God to justify your unrighteous Deeds; To beware of
Fathering the Works and Inventions of the Devil upon the God of Truth: This is
a Sin of a monstrous guilt, and prodigious magnitude, and if not the very sin
against the Holy Ghost, it is near of Kin to it; and certainly the very same
that Simon Magus did commit, when he gave out that himself was some great one;
and what he did, though 'twas by the instigation of the Devil, to be done by
inspiration from God, Acts 8.9, 10. This sin, I say, if not the same, is next
to that which is unpardonable; and therefore St. Peter left that great Impostor
in a very doubtful and almost desperate condition, affording him no other hopes
or comfort but this, Perhaps the thought of thine heart may be forgiven thee;
perceive that thou art in the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity, ver.
22, 23. It Is a bold attempt to play with Lightning, or face the Thunder, or run
upon a Cannons mouth ready to be discharged. It Is more daring and dangerous to
mock God, and gild the blackest Villainies with the specious fringes of the
glory of God, and the Protestant Religion: whereas the glory of God was never
more sullied, and the Protestant Religion never more barbarously handled, than
in the House of such pretended Friends, who (as Brutus did Caesar) have given
it more mortal Wounds, than all its other Enemies round about. But such
Incendiaries as these, who bring unholy Fire to Gods Holy Altar, instead of
burning that, must expect to perish in the Flames, themselves have kindled: For
God will be sanctified in them that come nigh him, and will be glorified before
all the people, Lev. 5.3.

And (my Brethren) it is fit God should be glorified by us at this time; as for
all his other mercies, so for that great mercy which we commemorate this day,
and which comprehends so many under it, no less than the entire defeat, and
total overthrow of our implacable Enemies, whose tender mercies are cruel; no
less than the preservation of our gracious King, and all his Loyal Subjects; of
our Liberties and Properties, our Lives and Fortunes, our Laws and Religion,
from the hands of such desperate men as threatened to trample under feet, and
quite destroy them. For it has pleased God, and his Debtors we are for it, to
cross the bloody and treacherous designs of all those who bare an ill will to
our Sion; and to disappoint the wicked and crafty devices of an aspiring
Absolon, and conspiring Achitophel, who impiously attempted to pull David from
his Throne, and to lay his honor in the dust: it has pleased Almighty God,
(and we are ever bound to bless him for it, beyond the expectation of all, and
the belief too of many) to put a sudden and happy end to a bloody and unnatural
Rebellion, which might have been prolonged for many Years, and wasted and worn
us out to nothing, and at last ended in the desolation of our Country, and the
translation of our Kingdom into the hands of some Foreign Power. But in the
midst of these heavy Judgments God was pleased to remember mercy, and to think
on the poor Church of England; which he has redeemed of old, and so
miraculously preserved ever since the first happy Reformation, and to preserve
and continue us Members of the same; who after the manner which some call
Heresy, and others Superstition, so worship the God of our Fathers, Acts 24.14.
So I pass from the second part, viz. the Solemn Appeal, to the third, which is,

III. The supposition, That if they were Rebels, or Transgressors against the
Lord, that he would not save them, If it be in rebellion, or if in
transgression against the Lord, save us not this day.

These two Tribes and half were so far convinced of the horrid Sin of
Rebellion, whether it respect that which is made immediately against God, or
that which is raised against our lawful Prince; that if they had been guilty of
either, they confessed they deserved no mercy from the hands of God or Man. And
well might they think so, if we consider the true nature of this sin, and the
indications of Gods wrath against it.

First, If we consider the nature of Rebellion, as it immediately respects God,
it is a most enormous Crime, no less than an endeavor to pull the Almighty from
his Throne, and seat our selves in it; to wrest the Scepter out of his hand,
and take it into ours: and in effect, and as far as man is able, to ungod the
Deity. And this was Lucifer's great sin, too great to be forgiven, for which he
was thrown from the highest Heaven into the lowest Hell; he was for invading
the incommunicable Attributes and Prerogatives of God, and for assuming that
divine honor and glory which can be imparted to no Creature whatsoever, as is
plain from Isa. 14.13, 14. I will ascend into Heaven, I will exalt my Throne
above the Stars of God, I will ascend above the heights of the Clouds, I will
be like the most high: not like him in purity and holiness, that he never aimed
at; but in Dominion and Majesty, and that cast him into the bottomless Pit, and
continues him there to the Judgment of the great day, Jude 6. And every wilful
and presumptuous Sinner is such a kind of Rebel, though not to that
unpardonable degree; his vicious Life is a perfect contradiction to Heaven, and
an open defiance to him that made him; every sin he knowingly commits, is as it
were an Arrow shot against the Almighty, and an audacious attempt to destroy
his very being; I will not allow the World to be made, governed, and judged by
an All-wise and All-powerful God, nor submit my self to any of his Laws, to be
ruled and restrained by them; but am resolved to live at large, and as loosly
as I please; without God, and without hope in the World. This is the result of
every obstinate Offenders Discourse; this the genuine interpretation of all his
wicked actions.

But besides this Rebellion against God, there is another that comes but little
short of it, and that is Rebellion against our lawful Prince; and this too is a
sin of a deep dye, and a malignant nature; no less than an attempt to deface
the Image, and resist the Authority of God. For as Kings Reign by his Power, so
they bear his stamp: and for Subjects to invade either, is in effect to offer
violence to Heaven, and fight against God himself; as he that offers an
indignity to a Viceroy, does really affront the Sovereign that deputed him. But
the nature of this sin will best appear by surveying some evil properties that
belong to it, which are these:

First Rebellion contradicts the Principles of the Christian Religion, and
thwarts the practices of those holy and inspired men that first taught them;
look over all the sacred Books of the New Testament, and search every Chapter
and Verse in it, from the beginning to the end, and I am confident you will
find no one thing more inculcated than Obedience unto Sovereign Princes, and a
quiet and peaceable submission to that Government under which we live; I am
confident you will find no one thing more expressly condemned, and severely
threatened, than resisting the higher Powers, and rising up in Arms against
them, Romans 13.1, 2, etc. Tit. 3.1. 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. and several other places, I
have not now leisure to name; and probably the reason may be this, because all
the other duties which concern God, and our Neighbor, depend very much upon
the regular administration of humane affairs, and the due subordination of
Mankind one to another, and cannot possibly be performed without it. God cannot
be served, nor Man subsist and be provided for as he ought, unless Government
be secured: and that can never stand without this Doctrine of non-resistance to
support it; take away this main Pillar, and humane Societies must dissolve and
fall to the ground: this no doubt was the reason why our Savior and his
Apostles have guarded the Sovereign Authority with so many positive Precepts,
and fenced it with so many repeated Rules, as that there are scarce more about
his own Divinity. And they were not like the ancient Stoics, men that only
spoke great things, and did not do them; their practice was correspondent to
their Doctrine, and they maintained Passive Obedience by being themselves the
first Examples of it. Christ himself could have commanded Legions of Angels to
his assistance, one of which had been strong enough to have baffled and
confounded all the Roman Legions; His Apostles could have wrought innumerable
Miracles, the least of which might have rescued them from the violent hands of
Herod, or Pontius Pilate, of Nero, or Dioclesian: But they durst not fetch Arms
from Heaven to fight against the Lords Anointed; their Weapons were purely
spiritual, even Prayers and Tears, the Spirit and Word of God, which in the
hands of faithful Christians are mighty to the pulling down the strong holds of
sin, 2 Cor. 10.4. and they renounced all Carnal Weapons, even Sword and Pistol,
Pike and Gun; which in the hands of Rebels serve only to set up Satan's Kingdom,
and enlarge the Devils Dominions. This was the temper of those truly primitive
and Apostolic Spirits; they took care to write after that fair Copy, the
Prince of Peace had left them; and would (as he had done before them) rather
part with all, even life it self, than give the least disturbance to the State,
or show themselves Enemies to Caesar. And it is strange that men should fancy
themselves Christ's Disciples, and yet scorn to stoop so low as to take up their
Cross and follow him; it is strange that men should dream of reigning with
Christ hereafter, that are not content to suffer with him here: yet such
strange men are all Rebels, and so contrary is Rebellion to the Principles of
Christianity, and to the practices of the first and best Christians.

Secondly, Rebellion opens the Sluices of Impiety, and lets in a deluge of
mischiefs upon a Land; such as Fire, Sword, and Famine; Rapes, Plunder and
Murders; Spoils, Rapine, and Devastation. These are some of the Black Retinue
that wait upon this Cruel Master, (who like Beelzebub) has such Fiends and
Furies to attend him; creates a kind of Hell where e're he comes, and in a
manner damns that place before the day of Judgment.

Thirdly, Rebellion destroys humane Societies, and puts Mankind into the same
condition with wild Beasts, making them to worry and devour each other: such
men will not be governed by Law, nor guided by reason, nor ruled by Religion,
but are deaf to those, and hearken only to their boundless Appetites, and
extravagant Lusts, and will act as these hurry them on, and not as the other do
persuade them: In such a case we should always live in a perfect state of War;
the World it self would be but a greater humane Slaughterhouse, and mankind
become so many Butchers to knock down and kill one another.

These are some sprinklings of that deluge of woe which men bring upon
themselves and Country by Rebellion: and if my heart would serve me to describe
the miseries and Calamities of that which lately happened here, and that other
which broke out in forty one, and you would suffer your thoughts and
meditations to dwell a while on both; I am confident you would ingenuously
confess, that not one half has been told you, and the whole can never be
expressed. And so much may suffice to show you the nature of this horrid sin,
by the inseparable properties that belong to it. I come next to treat of the
indications of Gods wrath against it.

And first, As for that Rebellion which immediately strikes at God, and is
raised against the Divine Majesty; Lucifer, and his Sable Train are eternal
Monuments of Gods heavy displeasure against it; for their mutiny and
insurrection in Heaven, for their Rebellion and transgression against the Lord,
they are condemned to the torments of Hell, and the unspeakable pains of a sad
Eternity, Jude 6.

And secondly, As for that Rebellion which strikes at Sovereign Princes, and is
raised against their Royal Crown and Dignity, we have a convincing proof of
Gods severe indignation against it, and that in an instance, which for the
suddenness and dreadfulness of the punishment, is exactly parallel to it: for
their murmuring and speaking against Moses who was the Ruler of that People,
and but endeavoring to form a Rebellion against him, Corah and his Accomplices
are swallowed up alive, and sent quick to Hell, to suffer the vengeance of
Eternal Fire, Number. 16.31, 32, 33. and God being of the same unchangeable
nature, without doubt retains the same hatred to both sorts of Rebels, and is
as angry with them now as ever: and this he has abundantly testified, by
showing some visible tokens of his displeasure on them in all Ages, and
punishing them with some extraordinary and unusual Death; as I could easily
make out from innumerable Examples of the past and present times, but that I am
loath to tire your patience in doing it. Let it suffice to instance in one more
only, and him I cannot omit, because we have all seen him so exactly paralleled
in these days, and that is Absolon, He was a beautiful, popular, and ambitious
Prince; beautiful all acknowledge him to be, 2 Samuel 14.25. in all Israel there
was none so much praised as Absolon for his Beauty, from the soal of his Foot
to the Crown of his Head there was no blemish in him; his complaisant and
cringing carriage shows him popular, he hugs, and caresses, and kisses the
meanest of the people, chapter 15.5, 6. and his ungrateful and unnatural demeanor
toward his Royal Father David, speaks him extremely ambitious: For though he
was once pardoned his life, and before and after, the greatest Favorite at
Court, and, through that good King's excessive kindness, raised to be the
second man in the Kingdom; yet this does not satisfy his aspiring Soul. He is
for being the first, and snatching the Crown from his Father's head, and that
Crown too, which after his Father's death did not of Right belong unto him: and
in order to it, he had frequent Consults how to accomplish his intended
Treason, and at these Consults crafty Achitophel was still the chief, chap.
16.20. At last 'twas resolved, That Absolon should cover his Rebellion with the
specious pretense of Religion, a Vizard which it often wears to hide its
monstrous deformity, chap. 15.7, 8. But this Vizard was soon plucked off, and
Absolon appeared barefaced at the Head of a great Army, who proclaimed him King
in Hebron: And this was done when there was another, better and rightful King
in Israel; and it was done by some of those that either did, or pretended to
follow him at first in the simplicity of their hearts, ver. 10, 11. to show how
easily men may pass from the lowest to the highest pitch of wickedness. And now
'twas time for David to arm against so formidable a Foe: and accordingly he
does, dividing his Army into three Parts, with which he commanded his Generals
to enclose, and fight him, whilst he himself unwillingly staid at Manahim, to
expect the issue of the Battle; and the Event was this, That Absolon's Army was
all slain, and scattered, and he himself that was Head of it, though he escaped
a little while, and fled for his life, was afterward dismounted from the Mule
he rode on, and seized on in a Wood by the Kings Servants, and at last was put
to death, by several Wounds, he receiving no less than three from Joab, and
more from the hands of those Ten young men that compas'd him about, and slew
him, 2 Samuel 18.14, 15. Thus fell the unfortunate Absolon, and by the many fatal
strokes were given him, he seemed to die more than once, because he had been
the death of so many, and shed so much innocent blood. Thus fell the
short-lived King, that was proclaimed one day, and slain the next; and he fell
in this exemplary and remarkable manner, because he was a Rebel to his lawful
Prince, If it be in Rebellion, or if in transgression against the Lord, save us
not this day.

But here I must observe to you, that we are not always to judge of the
goodness of a cause by the success that may attend it: then Turks were more in
the right than Christians, the Blessed Jesus must yield to Mahomet, and the
Sacred Bible to the Alcoran; for that those Infidels have been too victorious,
and conquered and harassed a great part of the Christian world. For the most
part indeed God blasts ungodly Enterprises in the very bud; or if he permits
them to come to maturity, he meets with them at the long run by some sad and
fatal disappointment even in this world; but this is not always so, and this
general rule (as all others) admits of some exceptions: Sometimes a good Prince
is unprosperous in asserting his own undoubted Right, born down with the stream
of unhappy and cross events, and at last comes to be imprisoned and dye on a
Scaffold. This, I say, sometimes happens to a good Prince, to have a short and
troublesome Reign, and in the end to be deposed and murdered; whilst an ungodly
and daring Usurper steps into his Throne and reigns in peace, and dies in his
bed. Sometimes Rebellion thrives, and Treason prospers; and the uncircumcised
Philistines, professed Enemies to God and Goodness, prevail over his own people,
and carry away the Ark in triumph, 1 Samuel 4.10, 11. and profane it with their
Heathen Temples and Idols, for the space of twenty years: all which time the
Church of God was under an Eclipse; and his people being destitute of the
Divine presence and Worship, were in a cloudy and disconsolate condition, Chap.
7.2. And it came to pass whilst the Ark abode in Kiriath-jearim, that the time
was long; for it was twenty years: and all the house of Israel lamented after
the Lord. But at last these days of mourning were over, and God caused the Ark
to be brought back again, and plagued all those that had a hand in taking, or
keeping it away. And Israel was again blessed with their usual victories and
success, ver. 10, 11. All which are such plain Emblems of our troubles in
Church and State, during the late Usurpation, and of the happy revolution that
happened afterward, which settled us once more upon the sure foundations of peace
and truth, that I need not spend time to draw the parallel, and make it
plainer. The result of all is this, That if we look only on the present state
of things, and no further, we may err in our judgment about them, and charge
God foolishly for the unequal distribution of them: but if we look forward,
even to the final issue and event of things, when prosperous wickedness shall
be covered with shame and confusion, and afflicted piety lift up her head, and
be circled with a Crown of Glory; then we shall absolve Providence, and
acknowledge that all the works of God are just and good; and that he will by no
means condemn the righteous, or justify the wicked, Exodus 23.7.

I come now briefly to apply the third and last Part, in drawing this Use or
Inference from it: Beware of rebelling against God, or against Caesar; They
have both long hands, and will strike sure at last, although the blow be long a
coming. Our God is a consuming fire, says the Apostle, Heb. 12.22. and the
wrath of a King is as Messengers of Death, says the Wise man, Prove. 16.14. Take
heed therefore of stirring up this fire, lest it consume thee; take heed of
provoking this wrath, lest the Messengers of Death lay hold on thee. For every
man's experience may convince him of this Great Truth, That no Weapon formed
against God, or his Anointed, does ever prosper; but in the end cuts off those
Rebels that first formed it, Isai. 54.17. Survey the many broken Vessels and
shipwrack'd Tables, that every where float upon the Ocean of this World, and
they all loudly proclaim to Standers-by, That they split upon this very Rock;
and call to them to avoid it with as much care and circumspection, as they
would a Scylla or Charybdis. Alas! how many Souls have fallen in, and perished
in these Depths of Satan, and yet all the while thought themselves secure, and
sailing on toward the heighths of God, even the Haven of an happy Eternity?
Wherefore, let others fatal miscarriages set us right, and the Rocks on which
they split keep us from being cast away. It Is dangerous, we say, to meddle with
Edg-Tools, lest they cut our Fingers; it is more dangerous to effront God, who
can cast Soul and Body into Hellfire; or to oppose our lawful Sovereign, who
may be truly styled, A King of Miracles, as well as his dearest Brother the
late King of Blessed Memory, to whom he seems to be an exact Parallel; so that
we may truly say, what the Israelites did in the like case, When the Lord
turned again the captivity of Sion, (and we were in a miserable Captivity
during the Rebels Domination here) we were like unto them that dream; We could
scarce believe our own senses, and that we were delivered from Captivity, when
really it was so. And indeed so many miraculous circumstances did concur in the
bringing it to pass, which I have not now time to enumerate, that we may truly
say, This is the Finger of God, This has God done, and it is mavelous in our
eyes, Psalm. 118.23. Mavelous, that so strong an Army as the Rebels were,
should be so suddenly broken, and shattered to pieces; and that a handful of
men should do it! and therefore we may add that part of Deborah's Song of
Thanksgiving for her Signal Victory over Sisera, Judge. 5.20, 31. They fought
from heaven, the Stars in their courses fought against the Rebels: So let all
thine Enemies perish, O Lord; but let them that love him be as the Sun when he
goes forth in his might. I shall conclude my Discourse on this Subject with
that excellent counsel of Solomon, which I hope will now sink down into your
hearts, and for the future influence your whole lives and conversations; and
that is, Prove. 24.21, 22. My Son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle
not with them that are given to change: for their calamity shall rise suddenly,
and who knows the ruin of them both.

FINIS.
Sermons Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
DOctor Hick's Sermon of Temptation, before the Lord Mayor. DOctor Hick's
Sermon at the Act at Oxford. DOctor Hick's Peculium Dei, before the Lord Mayor.
DOctor Hick's True Notion of Persecution. DOctor Hick's Moral Shechinah. DOctor
Hick's Sermon before the Lord Mayor, Jan. 30. DOctor Hick's Sermon before the
L. Mayor, at the Spittle. DOctor Hick's Sermon at Worcester, May 29. Dr.
Sharp's Sermon at the Yorkshire Feast. Dr. Sharp's Sermon before the House of
Commons. Dr. Sharp's Duty and Happiness of Doing Good. Dr. Sharp's Sermon at
the Election of the Lord Mayor. Dr. Calamy's Sermon, May 29. 1682. before the
Lord Mayor. Dr. Calamy's Sermon, September. 9. 1683. Dr. Calamy's Sermon,
September. 30. 1683. before the Lord Mayor. Dr. Calamy's Sermon September 2.
1684. before the Lord Mayor. Dr. Smith's Sermon. Dr. Bisby's Sermon,
Prosecution no Persecution. Dr. Bisby's Modern Pharisees. Dr. Bisby's Two
Assize-Sermons. Dr. Moore's Sermon before the Lord Mayor, 1682. Dr. Moore's
Sermon before the Lord Mayor, 1684. Dr. Scot's Sermon before the Artillery
Company. Dr. Scot's Sermon before the L. Mayor, Dec. 16. 1683. Dr. Scot's
Sermon at Dr. Croun's Funeral. Dr. Scot's Sermon July 26. 1685. Dr. Scot's
Assize-Sermon, at Chelmsford. Mr. Lamb's Sermon before the King at Windsor. Mr.
Lamb's Sermon before the Lord Mayor. Mr. Lamb's Sermon, wherein the Liberty of
Humane Nature is Stated, Discussed and Limited. Mr. Wagstaff's Sermon, September.
9. 1685. Mr. Wagstaff's Sermon before the Lord Mayor. Mr. Wagstaff's Sermon,
July 26. 1685. Mr. Brown's Visitation-Sermon. Mr. Brown's Sermon of Holy Days.
Mr. Wray's Sermon, The Rebellious City Destroyed, September 2. Mr. Brown's
Loyalty protesting against Popery, and Fanaticism Popishly affected. Mr.
Resberry's Sermon at the Charter House. Mr. Resberry's Sermon at Sir Alan
Broderick's Funeral. Mr. Payne's Sermon at the Brentwood-Feast. Mr. Payne's
Sermon September 9. Mr. Milbourne's Original of Rebellion, Preached January 30.
Mr. Milbourne's Sermon September 9. 1683. Mr. Battel's Assize-Sermon at
Hertford. Mr. Leigh's Sermon of the Keeping of Holy Days, Preached before the
Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of London. Mr. Grail's Four Sermons: I. Of True
Reformation of Our Selves. II. Of Pious Reverence toward God and the King.
III. Of Just Abhorrence of Usurping Republicans. IV. Of Due Affection to the
Monarchy.
Mr. Gascarth's Sermon at Duke Lauderdale Funeral. Mr. Holland's Assize-Sermon.
The End of the Catalogue.

