A Cornerstone Laid toward the Building of a NEW COLLEGE (that is to say, a
new Body of Physicians) IN LONDON. Upon Occasion of the vexatious and
oppressive proceedings acted in the name of the Society called the COLLEGE of
PHYSICIANS: For the better information of all men, as well as of Physicians,
Chirurgians, and Apothecaries, touching the unhappy estate of the Art of
Physic, here in ENGLAND.

It being an APOLOGY for the better Education of PHYSICIANS.

By Adrian Huyberts, Physician.

Rode, Caper, Vitem; -- tamen hinc
In tua quod fundi cornua possit, erit.
LONDON, Printed for the Author. 1675.

THis Apology of mine shall be divided into four Parts:

1. The Occasion of my present Persecution.

2. The Pretenses upon which it is grounded: in the disquisition whereof, I
have discovered under how great a Mystery of Iniquity this Art has hitherto
been managed, to the abuse and detriment of the Nobility, Gentry, and all the
People.

3. The manner of the Colleges vexatious proceeding to ruin me.

4. An Account of my self, as to my education in Physic, my Practice both here
and Beyond Sea, and my behavior toward all English abroad; especially the
friends of his Majesty.

It is not for the sake of my own particular, that I appear hear in Print: For,
were not my Case the Concern of all other Practitioners; and were not the
people of England concerned in having the Gowns of my Adversaries thus stripped
over their ears, that they may read and know them naked as they are, and not be
abused any longer about matter of Medicine: And had not I well understood, that
by their present persecution, a most just occasion has been given me to serve
the Public, by being smart and plain in discourse to inform the world, as well
as to serve my self, I would have been content to have born all in silence: But
Conscience of duty has called me forth.

In order therefore to the better understanding of the Collegiates Quarrel at
me, know, that at my first coming into England from my Travels, a Merchant of
quality, being in a deplorable condition, having called diverse of the Doctors
that are best reputed, to his assistance, it was all in vain; For, after many
Trials of skill, and useless applications, they gave him over: upon which, I
being called to the same Patient, did (by Gods blessing) recover him. At which,
some of his former Physicians, being angry when they were told it, could not
hold (it seems) but said, they would rather have had him died, than that I,
being none of their Society, should have cured him. And for this, with some
other of my Performances of the same nature, they have waited for an
Opportunity to fall upon me.

I could give many more like instances of time past; For, I have been very
willing to entertain such Patients as they had given over to the Grave: But I
forbear, and may do it upon occasion, if they put me to it. That which moves
them to molest me now is, partly to pay old Scores of envy, and partly to
satisfy the humor of one of their fellow Doctors. One would have thought, my
house being in the fields betwixt Chelsey and Kensington, I should have been
far enough out of the reach of malice; but that Doctor living not far from
Charing Cross, having now and then a Patient about Westminster, and my
Neighbor-villages, it was my hap to be called among some of them, and (by Gods
Blessing) to cure those whom he, and several other of his fellow Doctors of the
College could not. This (it seems) was Crime enough; and upon this it was,
that he framed a complaint against me at the College. When St. Peter had cured
the lame man, the Jews could not deny he had done a good work; however, it was
against their interest to tolerate him, therefore they concluded he should not
practice any more, though in the name of Jesus, but contrived how to lay hold
on him upon some pretenses. So those Gentlemen, though a great part of my
practice be to cure the poor members of Jesus freely for his sake, do use me
like Jews, have been busy with pretenses to disturb my Practice. To this
purpose a Council was called; and a Junior Doctor of the gang they employed to
be their Pedee-Solicitor, as having a busy humor, and but little else to do;
and so he is condemned to carry the Green-bag after the other Doctor. The more
grave and cunning of the number seem to wash their hands of the business; But
these are the two wights that now wear the name of the College in the
prosecution at law against me: and yet there is also a Tippling Committee of
Juniors of the same Society, that have little else to do; to whom they give
account what passes, and from whom they receive also Counsel and Instructions
what next to do, to give trouble to other Physicians.

Secondly, as to their pretenses for the commencing of this malicious Suit,
they are diverse.

1. The First is their Foundational pretense, viz. a Statute supposed to be
made in the 14th and 15 year of King Henry the 8th. Whereby a confirmation is
pretended to have been made of a Patent before granted by the same King Henry,
wherein certain persons (to the number of 6, or 7,) and their Successors, were
constituted a College of Physicians, and none but themselves, and such as are
approved by them, to be permitted to practice Physic in London City, and 7,
miles about. Now, for the slighting of this pretense, give me leave, with all
reverence to the Law of the Land, and its learned Professors, to produce
certain Circumstances, whereby it may appear questionable, whether ever any
such Law, as is pretended, were passed in due form, as a Law or Statute in
England ought to be. One Circumstance very material is; that it does not appear
by any Record, that the Royal Assent was given to it. It Is granted, such a Bill
was tendered in the Parliament in the 14th and 15th year of King Henry the 8th
and a copy of such a Bill is to be seen in the Rolls; which seems to be but a
mere Copy of somewhat that was set on foot then, but perished in the birth,
because neither at Top nor Bottom of it is to be seen, Le Roy le veult, the
only Signature whereby any thing is known to be a Law.

Another Circumstance that may induce a man to believe it no Statute, is,
because the contents or powers contained in it, are such as militate against
the very Spirit of an English Parliament, the great Sanctuary of the public
freedom: For, nothing can be more difficult than to believe, that a Parliament
would concur to invest any sort of men, with so extravagant Powers over their
fellow Subjects, as are contained in that supposed Statute, viz. so sit
themselves as a Court of Judicature, and there to convent any practisers not
licensed by themselves, and upon informations without Oath, and without a trial
per Pares, themselves being the only parties, to take upon them to judge and
condemn men; and this without remedy by appeal to any Superior Court in case
of Injustice, but to suffer penalties both in their purses by Fines and
Amercements, and persons by imprisonments, according to such sentence as they
shall please to pass against them; so that they may be ruined in matter of
livelihood, and their bodies rot in Jayle, till these their Judges and
Adversaries shall please to set them free. It cannot enter into any English
heart to imagine, that our Ancestors would entail upon us by Law so great a
Slavery, so manifestly contrary to Magna Charta and to all the fundamental Laws
and Liberties of the Subject. -- If it be objected, that the said supposed
Statute ought to be believed a real one, because it appears to have been in
print about a hundred years ago, and has been since collected into the great
Book of Statutes. Let such Objector consider, how easy a matter it might be to
impose upon a Printer a Copy of a Bill instead of a Statute, to be printed
among Statutes; especially about matter of Physic, whose concerns in those
days were but in few hands, and those but very slender, insomuch that the Art
it self was poor in improvement, and the professors very inconsiderable
persons. And after it had been once printed as a Law how easy a matter it was
in process of time for the Lawyers themselves unawares to accept it, and Mr.
Pulton to reprint it as such without further inquiry, and to hand it as
authentic down to Posterity: So that it is no marvel at all, that the mistake
should run on to such a height at length, as to take it pro confesso, and admit
of it for a Law in Courts of Judicature, and give judgment accordingly; as in
the case of Dr. Bonham recorded by my Lord Cook, and others. But it is withal
to be considered, that in this latter Age, the City of London it self
increasing to a vast amplitude, the number of Physicians also being exceedingly
augmented, and the extravagant Insolences of the Collegiates, with their
enmity and opposition to the Professors of a more excellent way of Physic,
monstrously increasing with their pride and covetousness, irritated men to
resist their pretended power, and by assistance of the most learned Gentlemen
of the long Robe to enquire into the bottom of it; which upon diverse Trials
afterward in Courts of Law was found to be but Sandy; as in the several Cases
of Dr. William Trigge, Doctor Barker, Doctor Stephen Trigge, Doctor Read,
Fettiplace, and others; in whose trials they successively were either
overthrown or else nonsuited, when great multitudes of people were present,
who came thither to testify what Benefits they had received by Cure from those
men, after they had tried the Collegiates and could find none: which being
done, they had the satisfaction to hoot them out of the great Hall of Justice.
-- Before I leave this point, it cannot be amiss to add one passage very
remarkable, much to the purpose; and that was in the days of the Usurper
Oliver, from whom the Colledge-men had gotten such Countenance, that they,
after the having received several defeats at Law in suing of others, took
courage notwithstanding to Arrest one Dr. Read, that lived then in Moor-fields,
and they brought the Cause to a Hearing in the Court of Common Pleas, supposing
they must needs carry it before the then Chief Justice St. John, because he
having been a Creature of Olivers seemed most likely to favor a Cause that was
favored by his Master. And the Colledge-party laboring to prove the Legality
of their Patent, the Record pretended to justify it was there produced in
Court; and upon view of it, the said Chief Justice declared openly, he could
not admit it as a good Record; for which he gave diverse Reasons, too copious
here to be inserted. I have presumed the rather to give this instance, because
whatever St. John was, as to his siding with the Rump Parliament, yet no Lawyer
(I presume) will deny him to have been an able Judge, to understand whether
that pretended Record were an Authentic Statute, or no: However, the vast body
of the people there present, were so apprehensive it was a Cause of general
concern, that upon the Judges declaring his opinion, they filled Guild Hall
with acclamations; and the Colledge-pretenders sneak't away, not daring a long
time after to venture upon any further disturbance. The consideration of these
things is that which gives me courage, to stand up in my own defense at Law a
single man against the injurious assault of a ^^^^rous Combination: And for two
things I bless Almighty God with all my heart; the one is, that the Rise of
their malice has been, because I did good where they could not; And the other
is, that it is my lot to live in a time, wherein the Benches of Westminster
Hall are replenished with Judges, such as for reputation of Learning, Justice,
and high affection to the Subjects Liberty, exceed all times that have gone
before.

A third Circumstance, giving cause to believe it no Statute, and that what
evidence they insist on to prove a Statute, is really but a mere Copy of some
Bill that might in those days be tendered to the Parliament, but not passed,
is this: That in the third year of the same Kings Reign, there was an
Establishment settled of a certain power by a particular Statute to license such
persons as were fit for the Practice of Physic in London and Parts about it;
which power was by that Statute lodged in the hands of the Bishop of London, or
the Dean of St. Paul's, and so, a much better provision made for the Government
of Physic than what is now pretended, forasmuch as they were learned hands in
whom the Trust was then reposed to judge of fit persons: and certainly those
Trustees were more fit than the present Collegiate pretenders can be, in regard
they were not as these are, parties in the profits of the Profession. And if
any one should object, that Bishops and Deans, being busied about matters of a
more Sacred importance, are not like to be fit Judges of Physical Concerns, as
men bred up to the faculty may be; I answer on the behalf of those Reverend
Persons, that they are raised to that dignity for their excellency of learning;
and if men who are to be Licensed, do bring them good Certificates of their
integrity of life, and good success in their Practice, which is the surest
evidence of a man's Learning and knowledge proper for his faculty, (nay it only
is necessary, and other kinds of Learning in a Physician, but ornamental) then
I suppose the trust is better reposed in Conscientious hands of those Learned
and Reverend Fathers; who are more like to deal impartially in approbation,
than men of our own profession, who have given the world too great a proof of
their appetite of domineering and devouring one another, as well as their
Brethren, who like not their way nor their Society; having abundant cause to
decline them. -- And here now (gentle Reader) if it were proper for me in this
place, it were a work worthy of your patience, to let me clear up three
particulars: 1. That it is altogether impracticable among Physicians, to set up
any number of them to be Judges of their Brethren, because there can be no
certain Rules; and if there be no Rules fixed to Judge by, then those Judges are
left to be Arbitrary, and may reject or oppress whom they please; but that
there can be no Rules for this way of Judgment which may be grounded upon the
faculty it self, is evident by what wise Celsus says in his Preface, Est enim
haec Ars Coniecturalis; neque respondet ei plerumque non solum conjectura, sed
etiam experientia; For, this Art of ours is but Conjectural, and for the most
part not only our Conjecture, but our former experience also does fail us in
the making of our Judgment* And to this concur also all the rest of the old
Masters of the Art, as I might demonstrate in their own expressions. And the
Reason of it is sufficiently set forth by that great Philosopher of this latter
Age, my Lord Chancellor Bacon, in his Book called The Advancement of Learning;
wherein he sets forth the wonderful variety, or different propriety of Temper
that is in men's Bodies, which occasioneth a great facility to error; wherefore
the Art is to be reckoned among Arts Conjectural; and that it must therefore
needs be but Conjectural, because of the inconstancy and variety of the
Subject. viz. man's Body. And he says, whereas all other Arts and Sciences are
Judged by their power and operation, not by their success or work, only
Physicians bear away honor or disgrace principally from the event, which is
ever an unequal Judicature: For, Who can tell, if a Patient die or recover,
whether it be by Accident or by Art? So then, there is no necessity from the
Art it self, why only Physicians, and not other men, should be Judges. 2. It is
utterly impossible, unless men can be found out perfect in the knowledge of all
that is knowable in Physic, to make any number of them Judges over the rest.
For, whereas other professions of men are to be bounded, having certain Rules
to Judge by; as the Divine has the Sacred Scriptures; the Lawyer certain
Maxims, Statutes and Customs, whereby to steer his Course; and so these
Professions are with Reason made Incorporations, exclusive of all other men
from them: Only Physic is not alike capable, because the received Rules of it
are not aeternae veritatis, i. e. not perpetual: so says the same Celsus: so
also says daily experience, the Business of Physic being upon perpetual
improvement; and so will be (the Treasures of natural Subjects, and the
Reasons, flowing from every fresh inquiry and discovery, being inexhaustible,
and alterable,) to the end of the world, though all the hands and heads in the
world were employed about it. -- I my self have lived long enough (almost forty
years acquainted with this Art) to see it by improvement in all points turned
topsie-turvie, the old Learning belonging to it exploded by Scholars
themselves, the old Education in Academies judged incompetent, the places
themselves being too narrow to afford much observation or experience, and the
manner of life more speculative and notional than Mechanic or laborious, which
a Physitian's ought to be; for, all notions of curing not derived from labor
and practice, are mere talkative vanities; and be they dressed never so
learnedly and quaint, can only make a formal Doctor, not a Physician, at best
but only the better fit him to be bound Prentice to some able Practiser in a
populous City, that under him he may work out his way, to become indeed a
Doctor. I have also lived to see diverse medicines, which, at the first usage of
them in the world, were exclaimed against and condemned by their Colledg-men,
as noyous and hurtful to the Kings Subjects, to be now found of so much good
use, beyond the remedies of former time, that in a little while they have
convinced the obstinate coudemners, and the very same are now printed by
themselves in their Pharmacopeia for public use; and in many difficult, as
well as common Cases, because but few of the Collegiate Rulers are acquainted
with any other improvements, they rely on them as their great Arcanaes And no
question but ere 20, or 40, years more be past, so great a Spirit being now up
and at work, for furthrr and further improvement among the working Physicians,
even those very Remedies which are now to be magnified as the greatest, will
ere long also be judged far inferior, and give place to others that will be of
a more noble attainment. What a mischief then must it needs be, if any number
of Academian Thinkers should successively be translated still to London, and
there be settled with power by Law, to be Arbitrators over other Physicians of a
more laborious and practical Course of Study; whose Coals they are scarce
worthy to carry, unless it be to learn under them how to make effectual, safe,
and pleasant Physic! On the other side, what a happiness would it be, if the
reverend Churchmen would consider these things, and what Authorty has been
entrusted in them only by Law, for the approvement of Physicians, and the
prevention of that Tyranny which the more idle and formal speculators of
Physic, have hitherto exercised over the industrious practical Physicians,
under pretense of Law; and thereby strangled (as much as in them lay) time
after time, their worthy endeavors for the advancement of Science! For, it is
still to be presumed, the reverend Bishops are the only Trustees in the Law
concerning this matter, seeing their Statute of the third of Henry 8th was
never yet so much as doubted of, as this pretended one of the Collegiates of
the 14th has been, and in Court diverse times rejected. Besides, it is apparent
enough, to any one that considers the whole course of proceeding in Parliament;
which is, when they make a Law for a new establishing of any thing, always to
repeal the former Law that had appointed another of a contrary nature. How then
can we believe, a Parliament could forget it self so far, as to form a Law to
remove the first power of licensing Practisers of Physic out of the hands of
the Clergy, into other hands, and yet the latter supposed Law not contain so
much as one word of repealing the former; Certainly, it is more rational to
suppose, that (whatever has been pretended) the Parliament did indeed never
pass the Bill proposed, seeing it would have been a strange thing so to have
left Physicians at an uncertainty for licensing, as they must needs be if both
were Statutes in force, and the power divided betwixt the Clergy and College.
If Physicians then have a mind to be Licensed, their surest way and most
unquestionably Legal, is to do as I have done long since take a License from
the Clergy; by which and my other Advantages in Law I question not to be
abundantly able, to justify my self self and my practice, against my malicious
persecutors.

A Fourth Circumstance that may lead a man to believe it no Statute, arises by
the success of the late grand attempt, which the Colledge-men made in the year
1663. when they presented an Address unto this Parliament now in being, to pass
a Bill they had prepared, not only for confirmation of the Powers contained in
their former supposed Statute, but for enlargement of them also to such a
monstrous magnitude as is almost incredible; insomuch that the honorable
Committee, to whom the house of Commons had referred the Bill, and thereupon to
report to the house their Opinion, after a full hearing of the Counsel that
appeared for all parties, both Physicians and others, were so well satisfied of
the monstrosity of their demands, that they dismissed the Colledge-men, re
infecta, who retuned home with a flea in their ears and have ever since been
wondrous quiet, till of late, upon pretense of I know not what new Chimaeraes,
they begin again to be troublesome; yea, I have been informed, that after the
Committee had had many days patience, to admit a full Scrutiny into the nature
of their Cause, there appeared on the last day none on the College side but
two of their own fellows, who had on this occasion acted as Sollicitors; so
that one of the Lawyers employed by the defendants, had the pleasure to
observe, how ill a Cause it was, seeing their own Lawyers declined to appear
any more in the Business. So there was an end of it, all being dismissed by the
honorable Committee. Yet the men do boast, and would give the Parliament (as I
hear) new trouble: But it is possible, others may be beforehand with them there,
with Reasons to desire a Reformation, and to remonstrate the miserable estate,
into which Physicians, and the Art it self, have in all times been reduced, and
would be in the future for want of improvement, if those men might have their
way of domination. I can here challenge them, and do, in the view of the world,
to nominate any one particular of improvement, that their Society has made in
the Art of curing, since their first Incorporation, and I will prove the
contrary. As for their pretensions of discoveries in Anatomy, if they insist
upon them, I am ready to prove, they have done nothing in all their Anatomick
Theaters, which may conduce to better Cure; and no more than what may serve the
Salta-di-Banco's upon a Stage, it being the last part they have to play, or
trick to show, to entertain Spectators, and amuse the world, to uphold some
Repute among such as are ignorant; and draw on Customers; so that it is
wonderful to see how many, even of the Nobility, and Gentry, as well as the
Citizens, are taken by this sort of trick, the Mock-shews of pretended
discovery by Anatomy. But how little is to be expected from such Actors, that
honorable Gentleman Mr. Boil tells you, in his Book of Experimental
Philosophy, where he says he does not see wherein by any of those new
discoveries, any thing has been done, to better the Cure of Diseases. You may
take his word: And if the Masters of the stage please to justify themselves, I
will in public, evidence they have done nothing by it worth a straw, beyond
what was done by the Ancients. Yet know withal, I reverence so much of Anatomy
as is necessary: and half a years time spent in it is enough to fit any
Physician or Chirurgian for practice. The new Nicities serve for naught but
ostentation and discourse. But as for noble Medicaments, the Rulers and Leaders
among them, have (I will make it evident, by almost forty years observation)
made it their business to stifle, or else discredit them, and discourage the
Practisers or downright abuse and vex them under pretense of law; though these
are the sort of men, to whom the world have in this Age been obliged (as I can
by instances make appear) for the delicacie, easiness, and improvement of
Medicine. But I would not be too large, to tire the Reader; therefore I proceed.

2. Their Second pretense of Suit against me is, that I am a Chemist. This some
persons have told me that had it from some of their own mouths. Upon this Point
I answer, that it is my glory to be a Chemist; though among some ignorant of
all Science; and others not skilled in this, it is hardly thought of; and the
only reason is this, because the other sort of Physicians, and their Agents,
being either wholly ignorant, or at best but dablers in it, do count it their
interest to cry out and clamor against it to fright the weaker persons, lest
the experience of its excellency, should detect their own ignorance and
insufficiency, and thereby annihilate their reputation and profit among the
People. But they may do well to remember, that in the beginning of the year
1665 when some worthy Physicians endeavored, and had countenance from many of
the chiefest of the Nobility, who gave their approbation to an instrument in
writing under their hands, for the erecting of a new Society of Physicians for
the advancement of Physic by Chemical Medicaments and Practice, as easiest,
safest, and most effectual for Cure of his Majesty's Subjects, one of the Arts
then used by the Collegiates, to prevent the setting up of this Society, was,
immediately to put on a pretense, that they also are Chemists, and make and use
those Remedies as much as any; and this pretense they sometimes take up when
they happen to be conversant among any ingenious persons that are knowing in
this Art: But on the other hand, if they chance to light into Practice among
people ignorant of the Art, and who also are either religiously, or naturally
melancholy, and consequently timorous, suspicious, and apt to entertain their
Suggestions, then they work on the dark side, secretly whisper and blaspheme
this noble way of Medicine, as dangerous, and as such that though it cure one
disease at present, yet it leaves a root of ill behind, which after long time,
if not shortly, springs up into the same or some worse disease, so that by such
little Arts as these, they and their Agents do play on both sides, to uphold a
tottering Reputation; which is now almost down, and will be quite ere long; the
eyes of the world being opened every day more and more to discover them, and
the Mystery of their Craft. In this matter know, I do not include all of that
Society; but it is the usual practice of a prevailing party among those few
fellows thereof who rule all. And now, seeing I so often mention that Society,
know that the Government of it is not managed by the ablest and the most
learned: But by such as grow up in Seniority of entrance as Fellows, be they
wise or unwise. And to show the world how much a few do affect Domination over
the vast multitude of their Brethren, generally more learned than themselves,
be pleased to consider that only the set number of men called Fellows, do look
upon themselves alone to be the College, and all others must truckle under, by
the names of Candidate, or Licentiate. Only (forsooth) a new Project was lately
laid for a Feather in the Cap, by the name of honorary, to be conferred upon
some out-liers in Town, and new-comers from the Universities, that had repute
for Learning: And this contrivance was made, not out of love to the men's
merits, but merely for fear lest these should make a Secess to Mount Aventine,
and set up for a popular Rebellion, in some free Society, against the Senate of
the College. For, the number of Physicians flocking to London being very
great, it was by them thought meet to train as many of them as they could, into
a dependence (forsooth) upon the College: But how? Not to be Fellows or
Sharers in the Reglement of the Society; but as things tack't to, or mere
hangers on, pleased with a Rattle, and called honorary fellows, which is a
Title only a little more plausible than the poor word Licentiates; for, their
piteous Privilege thereby is no more, than what is enjoyed by mere
Licenciates; which is, to have the favor (in sooth) of free Practice among
their Worships, but not a bit of interest in the Lordship and Authority; that
is meat for their Masters. When I look over the new List of Honoraries, what a
shame is it, think I, that men of better learning and repute, should be content
to be made mere properties, and no part of the Party! And now what (I pray you)
shall become of all the rest? Here are still in London, abundance of Physicians
more; some broke loose from the Nonconforming Ministry, others from the
Universities here, or from Beyond Sea, in the habit of Doctors: and these (I
hear) have many of them offered themselves to be herded also in the College:
But it seems, all their Truckling will not do; the Sanctorum must not be made
too common, nor the Commons be over-stock't, and therefore they, for their
pitiful petitions of Address, are left to champ upon a denial, and graze
among the Vulgar.

This Mystery being opened, it is time to return where I left; that is, to tell
you what became of the new Society of Physicians, which, so many of the
Nobility and prime Gentry subscribed unto, as most necessary to be erected in
the year 1665. know, that the great Plague then befalling this Noble City, the
design for that time was of necessity laid aside, though most of its Members
did stay in Town, while most of the Collegiates ran away, except Dr. Wharton
and three or four of the Novices; to show how well they deserve henceforth to
be called The College of Physicians of London.

Before I leave the Subject of Chemistry, I have only a short word to add in
defense of this Queen of Arts; which is the Mother not only of the noblest
Physic, but of abundance of other Inventions the most useful for Mankind; of
which a large Catalogue might be given, if it were fit to be more copious. But
what I have to say is, if any ill ever happened thereby, it is no otherwise
than what is usual by use of the common Medicines, when they are prepared by
ignorant, careless, or knavish hands; whereas, Remedies well prepared by Art
Chemical, do seem to be as the hands of God reached down from Heaven in this
latter Age, in exceeding mercy to poor man, when his iniquities have so altered
the whole Scene of diseases, that in every one almost there is a touch of that
which Hippocrates called (...), Somewhat that is admirable or extraordinary,
which makes them exceedingly different from what they were in the days of him,
or Galen; and indeed, from what they were a hundred years ago, and less; so
that the old Art and Remedies are insufficient to deal with them. And therefore
from hence it is, that the Society of Apothecaries of London have wisely
undertaken and executed a design most laudable, to supply the defect, and
answer public necessity, by erecting a grand Laboratory and Repository in
their Public Hall, for Chymick Medicaments; to have them there ready made, of
all sorts, to prevent fraud in the Shops of private Operators (who have been
wont heretofore to be (for the most part) the only Preparers for common Sale)
and to answer the Prescripts of such Physicians as understand the use of them;
who may now be confident of having them good there (and at one rate or price
common to all men) upon the Public faith and honor of the whole Company,
rather than from the hand of any private Sales-men.

And whereas the common mistake of people is, when Chemical Medicines are
named, that thereby are meant only Mineral Medicines, with the fear of which
the malicious idle ignorant Physicians have bug-bear'd them often; know, that
though most admirable Remedies are made out of Minerals* and Metalls well
prepared, to cure many strange diseases, which other Remedies will not, and are
as safe for use as milk it self, (and indeed only safe, because all other,
being in such Cases insufficient, are for that Cause most dangerous) yet no men
do use the parts of Animals and Plants, and Salts, more than the Chemists do;
but exceedingly more to the purpose, being Chymically prepared; because by this
Art they are made to cure abundance of obstinate diseases, which they can never
effect, if prepared the Galenical way: and for proof of this, I could run over
a whole field of Instances, if it were not too tedious. But to end this
particular, let it suffice to tell you, that it is the glory of Chemistry, to
have contributed in a few years, more to manifestation of the virtues of
Plants, Animals, and Salts, than all the Sectators of Aristotle and Galen, have
done from their times to this day: which is the reason why many Chemical
Practisers do seldom use other, unless there be a necessity. On the other side,
it is observed in the practice of our Adversaries, that they are most frequent
even when there is no necessity in the use of the common Chemical Mineral
Medicaments set down in their Pharmacopeia; which are things of but the lowest
form in Chemistry, and neglected by knowing men in this Age of Improvement; yet
used by those our Masters, as their ultimum Refugium, upon every little puzzle
in their Practice, and as their grand Arcanaes. Whereas I remember their
Predecessors were wont to cry out upon them, and damn all the growing
Practisers who in those days durst use them, as dangerous, and enemies to the
health of mankind; though every days experience did manifest that they then
condemned what they understood not, and that they produced such notable effects
in curing, as could not be attained by the old Remedies, in the most deplorable
Diseases. Nor have matters gone thus only in London, to the discouragement of
all the most useful Laborers in this Faculty; but should I revolve and repeat
the History of time past, from the time of Paracelsus; how he was abused by
Erastus, and by almost all the Academian Professors throughout Germany; and how
tyrannically that sort of men behaved themselves toward him; and afterward
how they, in most of the Universities and great Cities of Europe, persecuted
his very memory, and all such as being enlightened by his Labors did follow his
way, for discovery of better Medicine, down to the year 1603; at which time the
laborious famous Quercetan, and Sr. Tbeodore de Mayerne, were both of them in
two several public Sentences of the Academian Professors, and whole College
of Physicians in Paris, printed by their Order, condemned, and in positive
terms the whole Art it self of Chemistry, as men not only unworthy to be
consulted with by the Physicians of that College: especially Mayerne,
declaring him an unlearned, impudent, drunken mad fellow; exhorting all Nations
to abominate them both, and banish them and the like practisers, out of their
Territories as Monsters of mankind: And threatening all the fellows of that
College, that if they consult with either of them about any Patient, they
shall be deprived of all privilege belonging to their College. Which is also
at this day one great mystery made use of by our London-Collegiates; whereby
they resolve to correspond only with each other, in hope to ingross the Trade
among themselves; supposing the name of a College must needs carry away the
reputation from all other Physicians, if they deny (upon occasion) to consult
with them, because they are none of the College. O fine Confederacy! now good
people look to your Purses. But what I pray you became of Quercetan and Mayerne
after this? You may read their Sentences published at large, in that
unanswerable Book called Medela Medicinae; which was written by Dr. Marchamont
Nedham, eleven years ago; where he tells you, that for all this, the one of
those Condemned persons became famous in France, the Kings Chief Physician, and
lived to see that College repent of their folly, and their Successors become
admirers of those Chemical Books and Remedies which they had so rashly damned.
The other, (viz. Mayerne) became Physician to two Kings of England, and two of
France, and left a name of great wealth and honor behind him. Now by these
things you may understand, what a wondrous precious thing an All-wise College
may be in any Noble City; and what Advancers of the Art of Curing, if either
damning and suppressing laborious Improvers, or the inthroning of Arrogance,
and such a course of Study and sort of Learning as is impertinent to Physic,
can effect it.

3. The third Pretense is, because I am not one of or with their College. I
confess I am not, nor will I ever be, There are good store of the best Physians
about Town that are of the same mind; and they have their Reasons for it, which
(upon occasion) they will produce: I also have my Reasons, part of which may be
picked out of what I have already said. And to accept a License from them, is to
acknowledge a power which I am not satisfied they have, or ought to have;
seeing that if (as I said before) we revolve the transactions of time past, it is
to be found upon Record, that such Collegiate Establishments or Corporations of
Physic, have been the great hinderers of the progress of this Art throughout
all Europe, and still are; which has made the most ingenious Scholars which
are Laborers and Inquirers, in the Universities and Capital Cities of all the
Countries where I have traveled, sigh and swell with indignation, to see how
their most laudable endeavors are discountenanced, and calumniated by that
sort of Medicasters, because they outdo, and shame them by diligence; and,
it is to be lamented there has been so little hope to see a through Reformation
in this Faculty, both as to the manner of men's education for it, the full
freedom of its Professors, and the dismantling of those Societies; the natural
tendency of whose power has ever been (as I can prove in facto) to tyranny
over their Brethren, and monopoly of the Art.

It may be soberly inquired, in Cicero's Language, Cui Bono? To what end are
they continued now, having been erected in the old time of ignorance, when
Physic and other Sciences were at a stand, and all the world brutishly and
tamely acquiesced in Notions received from the Greeks and Arabians, and did set
up their Hercules Pillars with a Nil ultra? But hear what that most learned
Lord Bacon said, in the Book of Advancement of Learning. I dare (says he)
confidently avouch, that the wisdom we have extracted chiefly from the
Grecians, is but a Childhood of knowledge. And he further says thus, Medicine
therefore has been such hitherto, as has been more professed than labored,
and yet more labored than advanced, seeing the pains bestowed therein has
been, more in Circle than in Progression; for, I find much Iteration, but small
addition in the writers of that Faculty. And to the same purpose writes Dr.
Mar. Nedham in Medela Medicinae, in these words, I may safely say, that there
has been more of importance done for the advancement of Physic, since my Lord
Bacon wrote his Book, than ever was done in the world before: For, in former
time, men contented themselves with the little skill that was left them by
others, making no progress; but ran a round in commenting upon the Greeks and
Arabs, as the Oracles of Physic; and usually one Commentator has stolen out
of another, so that you have but the same dish of Crambe new cook't: And if you
have but one of the most voluminous you have all. Therefore, in the former Age,
it might be easy enough, the Art it self being fixed and staked down to certain
Points, Maxims, or Rules, to set down Rules also how to judge the Professors,
and with some color of Reason condemn that for Male practice, which answered
not to the Doctrine of their Rulers. But in this Age, when the faculty of
Physic is so vastly diffused, and fresh discoveries of Physical preparation,
and of Doctrine touching the nature of Diseases, are daily made, that any sort
of Practisers should be Authorized as Judges, to determine who is a good or a
bad Practiser, when they can have no certain Rules to judge them by; or perhaps
they understand not the nature of the Medicines used, though they be told of
the Preparation; or perhaps they will out of envy or hatred to such Physicians,
decrie what is more excellent (as they have done heretofore) this seems to be
against the very Reason, Interest, and end of Government: And therefore without
all question, the abolishment of a nipping domination over the growth of the
Art of Physic, in the hands of a few Ingrossers in Collegiate Societies, will
in a short time be judged by the Princes and Estates of Europe, to be most
necessary; the exercise of it having hitherto been the great Impediment of the
Progress of Medicine.

But if things be thus, what then shall be next? Is it fit all should be at
liberty; I answer yes for the present; but not without Government: Let such as
do amiss answer for it at the Laws. A Government ought to be: But seeing men,
as Physicians, for the foregoing Reasons, cannot make certain Laws or Rules
whereby to judge one another, the Government of this Profession (till the King
and Parliament be at leisure to reform the matter) may be left in general to
the Laws of the Land. It seems to be one of the most unreasonable things in the
world; and nothing (I think) can be more destructive to the Liberty of the
Subject, or make a man more miserable, than that if he be sick, he should not
with freedom use what Physician he believes can best cure him, but he must be
limited to an accepting of such or such a one, of such a Company, or else can
have none that he phansies, but the man shall be molested, perhaps undone, for
doing the sick service: and all under a supposal of avoiding thereby the use of
bad Physic among the people. The vanity of which Supposal, and the security of
mankind thereby, has already here in part been discovered, and will be much
more before the end of this Discourse; in showing of how pernicious a
consequence it has been to Physic, to inthrone a few Physicians to Lord it
over all the rest. Wherefore, if the whole Body of Physicians here in this City
be really the Physicians of London, Why may they not, being part of the City,
be taken hereafter under the City Government? Be obliged to take Apprentices,
such young men as have taken degrees in other Arts at some University; who when
they have served their time at work under a City-Physician, may then be made a
free Practiser of London? Such a populous City is the only place (being a
Theater of all Diseases) wherein to breed up men Physicians indeed; such as may
practice with real knowledge; not fill the world with Cobwebs of idle
speculations and notions, as men of the old way of Education are wont to do;
and which may furnish his Majesty's Armies and Fleets Royal, with Physicians,
as the Society of Chirurgerie do with Chirurgians; and be content to submit to
a Law, that if they run away from the City in the time of Plague, or depart
without special License of Authority, to forfeit their freedom of Practice
therein any more. This alteration may seem uncouth at the first mention; but
should it be established by public Authority, the consequence would be, that
the City would not be so basely deserted in the time of its necessity and few
could incurr (having been thus bred) any suspicion of ignorance in the Art;
which is now made the pretense of a great Clamor by the Collegiates, against
many ingenious men, whose first Education in the world was not in this Art, but
afterward betook themselves to learn it in the most proper way of learning;
which is by labor, and have soon out-strip't the Scholasticks in right
knowledge of the Materia Medica, to the comfort of many thousands of his
Majesty's poor Subjects; many of which have been left by the collegiates, who
might else have perished for want of a purse, to run through the tedious methods
and means of that Adverse party. But to avoid Calumny because they seek every
occasion to sow it, know that in this I plead not on the behalf of any
Impostors, or real ignorants; I only point out a way of better Education for
Practice, which may prevent all Ignorants, in the future, as far as by the wit
of man they may possibly be prevented in this Profession.

In the mean time, till this which I here humbly mention, or some better
establishment be thought of by others more able, it would be happy for the Art,
if Certificates of a Physician's having lived in good reputation for his
manners and Practice, may be accepted as a sufficient evidence of his ability,
and fitness to be licensed; either by the reverend Clergy, according as is
directed in the first Statute of the 3d year of Henry 8th (which never was yet
repealed) or else by some other persons not Physicians, as by Authority shall
be thought meet. Ratione Legis cessante cessat ipsa Lex. If in former time, a
King and his Parliament had reason to enact such a Statute (the very being of
which, as a Statute, has yet been a question among some eminent Lawyers)
nevertheless the condition of the very Art, and all the affairs of Physic,
being so altered (as is before declared) and so many Reasons lying now against
the continuation, it is not in the least doubted by the ingenious and laborious
improvers of Medicine; that when the same Authority shall be rightly informed
of these things, in a full and clear Remonstrance, which may be presented to
them, they will see reason abundant for the repealing of that Statute of the
14th of Henry the 8th (if it be one) and enact such a form of Government, as
may conduce to the improvement of the Art, and the general comfort of the
people.

4. Their Fourth pretense of Suit against me is, that I have refused to leave
off Practicing as a Doctor. There is such ado about this Feather in the Cap
called Doctor of Physic, that I often wish it might be despised by the People.
If they knew so well as I do, of how slight esteem it is beyond Sea, and how
easy to be gained, so many would not dote as they have done, upon many that
run loose from being Schoolmasters, or Preachers, in England, to be made
Doctors at Leyden, and the like places Beyond Sea; and by reading a few Books
and prating, intrude into a Calling, which is not to be acquired but by years
of labor, and study of Experimental, not School-philosophy. Such talking
Book-Doctors the world is too full of, and too many of them have crept in from
time to time, to be Principal Fellows of the College here (of whose names you
may ere long have a Catalogue;) to which they have been, and are admitted upon
producing a Diploma; which is a Parchment and public Seal of some foreign
University, and the answering of a few questions about Doctrine and Method; and
because Leyden in Holland has been a fruitful Mother of such English Brats,
(too many of which are now dominering among us) they are by our own
University-men in scorn called Leaden Doctors: But the fittest name for all
Physicians, that thus slightly by the Book enter upon the Stage of the World,
from our own or foreign Universities, to Practice, is the due word of
distinction, Book-Doctors. For, it is Galen's own Expression [ Duobus Cruribus
innitimur; quotidiana inspectione, and experientia, etc.] we Physicians (says
he) do stand upon two Legs, viz. daily Inspection and Experience: But of the
Book-practitioners he says, they are like those that take upon them [ Ex Libro
navigare] to Sail by the Book: and so both Passengers and Patients are in a
^^ke condition of Safety. I have declared the ^^king this degree for very good
Reasons; I might have had it in Holland when I would; but because the way of
distributing degrees is grown so corrupt, (and as it is managed in
Universities) serves but to impose upon mankind rather than secure them of a
benefit by it, I did decline it; reckoning it more honest, to rest upon a
knowledge and Conscience of my own Sufficiency in Physic to advance me, rather
than to cloth my self with an empty Title; and so by my example, approve a
corrupt Course of Formality which ought to be despised, seeing it is made a mere
matter of course, equally open to any per Courtesy, or per-Penny be they
sufficient for it or no. What sad Souls have I seen too often passed among the
best Universities, unto this degree of Physic! Wine, Venison, and Pence, have
been a customary Passport to the old words of Institution, Abunde satisfecisti,
egregie Domine Doctor. I have been in an University abroad, where I will for
ten pounds, procure any Novice that can but frame, or get a Friend to frame for
him, a Thesis to read, and act some other slight Forms of exercise in the
public place, to be made a Doctor; and this is the place that too many of our
people run to, Yea more, if any one will but send the Money, no matter who he
be, nor where; for, though the Professor* who gives the degree never see his
face, he shall with grant of a private Diploma, be dubbed a Doctor. Of so
little esteem is it among Foreigners; and ought to be in all the world, till
mankind can have better Security of Physic thereby: Which can never be had but
by breeding up youth, (as I before said) in the liberal Arts first in some
University (which is but the Ornamental part;) and afterward to be bound
Apprentices (for* our Art it self, and the Philosophy proper to it, arises,
and is improved, only by Mechanic Operation) under a Freeman practicant of
this City, in order to the becoming free for Practice here. The passing of such
a Formality as this, or the like, men can seldom be deceived by; and it is the
most probable means to make able Doctors, and to prevent the miserable
scandalous inconveniences of the other corrupt Formality, whereby the world
(like the Dog in the Fable) is too frequently mistaken with the shadow, instead
of the Substance.

Thus having done with their pretenses, I now pass on to the Third Point of
this Apology; which is, the manner of their vexatious proceeding at Law to
oppress me; wherein I shall be very brief.

I am, and would have been a man of peace, but by no means could obtain it:
For, after they had arrested me by Writ, and carried on the Suit against me in
the King's Bench, I made application to them by my Self and Friends: Sergeant
Wiseman (his Majesty's chief Chirurgian) having well known me many years, very
courteously went with me to the President of the College; who at first
promised very fair, but when I went alone to him the second time, to know what
I might expect, he told me, They had many Weeds in their Garden* and they must
take a course to root them out: which was all the answer I could get; so I
troubled him no more. And as for the Countesse's Doctor (my great Prosecutor)
he sent me word by a person of quality, that if I would lay down my practice,
they would lay aside their quarrel in Law; but upon no other terms: Whereupon,
I provided to defend my self, the Suit going on. And they having given my
Attorney a Declaration against me, I prepared to put in my Exceptions: and then
on a sudden (upon I know not what by-design) they let fall their Action in that
Court, and arrested me, this last vacation, upon another Action in the Court of
Marshalsey, where a new charge of expenses was brought upon me, with great loss
besides of my time and Practice, through perpetual attendance upon the Suit,
till I had brought the Cause on to be ready for a Trial there: And truly, it
had been then tried, had I not been advised by able Counsel, not to suffer so
important a Cause to be tried in a petty Court, but to remove it back by Habeas
Corpus into the King's Bench again as the more noble place; which I have done,
and there I expect a Trial this Michaelmas-Term: which brings another great
expense upon me, and loss of time; it being the great Artifice of the
Colledgemen, by tumbling me from Court to Court, to tire out and ruin me, and
terrify all others, if they can.

Now being come to the fourth and last Point of my discourse, I humbly crave
leave to wind up all, with a short account of my own Education and Practice.
They say I am an Apothecary; it is well it is no worse; and it had been well for
their Worships, if they had at first been bred so too; for so, the Apothecaries
had not been put to it, to acquaint them with the Materia Medica and the way of
Practice (as they are wont to do) at their coming to Town. I did indeed begin,
as they ought to have done; that is, learn to operate Medicine: I was called
from Trinity College nigh Dublin in Ireland (where I had sometime been bred)
to live with the ablest Apothecary there, his name Jacob Rickmans; I serv^d him
seven years, and became a freeman of Dublin. The ablest Physicians that ever I
met with abroad, were first bred Apothecaries, or Chemists, or both, after they
had qualified themselves with University-learning in other Arts and Sciences:
For, other Nations do think it as necessary for a Practicioner of Physic to be
first bred in both those working employments, as it is for him that intends to
read, first to learn his Letters.

After I had been thus initiated in the University and afterward in learning
the skill to prepare and compound Medicine, my inclination next led me to
travel, to see what I could learn abroad. From Ireland I took England in my
way; and after some time spent here, I passed into Holland; and from thence
into Germany, France, and many parts of Spain, to try in those Countries what
improvement might be made in Physic: And at length I returning into Holland,
there took up my Rest. It is about 26 years since I cured in Roterdam some that
now belong to the London College, who at this time do live in London. About the
same time I lodged others of them in my house, lent them my money, left my
whole employment for eight days together to show them the Country at my own
charge, lodged some in my own Bed. For which I have been invited with fair
words, and by Letters to receive a Recompense; but in the present dealing of
that Society behold my Reward. I have been told since by the Chiefest of them,
that no Place would permit me to Practice as I do: And the malignity of Spirit
is risen so high among them, that I am sued, terrified, threatened banishment
from my place of Practice; my very house and Laboratory designed to Strangers
(if a man may believe some of their own Talkers;) and all to fright me away for
Ireland, whither they say I am going. It Is true, that I have been invited to go
thither, to reside at Dublin, by two of the Aldermen of that City, with large
Promises; and the like invitations I have had from Holland, to return thither:
But my Resolution is to abide where I now dwell, unless the Collegiates drive
me into London for shelter: For, one where or other I will be within the scent
of them, and invite such sick as they leave off for incurable, if they can find
in their hearts to send them to me; and I hope they will believe it is as
possible for me, as for an Old woman, to cure such as they too often have
sentenced to death, for want of sufficient Medicines. Wheresoever I shall be, in
City, or out, my house shall be open (as it now is) to receive all poor
diseased Ones, and to furnish them freely with easy effectual Medicines, when
they must not come nigh the Gates of my All-wise Adversaries. They have (I
hear) lately proposed to the Company of Apothecaries this delicate Tender, for
the Cure forsooth of the poor; that some few of their Fellows shall attend at
set-hours monthly at their College, to give Bills of Direction to the poor
sick: But upon what Terms I pray you? Truly, it is with a most gracious
bountiful Proviso; provided that the Apothecaries will give gratis such
Medicines as they shall prescribe. Wonderful Charity at other men's Cost! They
will be so noble, as to find Brains, Pen, Ink, and Paper: Somewhat they think
they must seem to do, for mere shame; because the poor, and the middle sort of
Citizens have (for the most part) renounced* them as too tedious to their
purses, and in their Prescripts, therefore are glad to flock for help to
others: but it is pleasant to think of the worthy project, that the poor
'Pothecary is to pay for all. But, by your leave (says he) Two words to a
Bargain; and so there is like to be no more news of this fair proposal, when
men have done laughing at it.

By this I perceive, there is no danger that they will draw away my poorer
Customers from me; for whose Relief I have prepared effectual Remedies, such as
will according to the mind of Hippocrates, cure Cito, Tuto, and Jucunde; and
fitted a Method of my own, answerable to their Virtues, having spent 38. years
in laborious pains and Travels, to gain experience and knowledge in Physic
above the common sort; I have looked into the Practice of the best Physicians,
and Artists of diverse Nations, and compared them with one another, and their
opinions touching the Nature of their Medicines, their manner of using them,
the operation of them, and their Doctrines about Diseases. I hope then, it will
not be thought I Practice without a Method; which though it be not the same
that the more Common Collegiates, and the mere Academians do dote upon, yet
it is much more direct and plain to the purpose; and with it my Remedies are
such as my self and my Patients may depend upon. And besides the general extent
of many of them, I have other Medicines which are appropriated to particular
distempers. As for example, I have cured desperate Quartans, some of a Twelve
months continuance: But generally, in all Agues, I cure the fits in a few
days: Quotidian fits I commonly take away with one Dose; Tertian two Doses,
and Quartan with three: which is not done by chance, the Medicine being such as
is particularly appropriate to an Ague quatenus Ague: It is a Celestial Liquor
(if I may so call it) suited to all Palates and Constitutions, and to be used
at any time of the year; and will for performance challenge a whole Regiment of
Pots and Glasses.

I would not be counted a fool in boasting; for, it is not my natural temper:
but oppression compells me thus to play the fool, if in my Case it be a folly;
For, I have reason to speak out* that those of his Majesty's friends who once
were with him in exile, may testify who I am, and what services I did them
Beyond Sea in their Sicknesses; and I know they will, touching their own Cases,
make a just Report. I could wish that most noble Lady the Countess of
Chesterfield were alive, to make up the number in testifying on my behalf, how
many of her friend* I cured while she was called my Lady Stanhope, at the
Hague, in the Prince of Orange's Court. Colonel Bampfield is yet living, who
after he had conveyed away his Highness the Duke of York from St. James', out
of his Enemies hands into Holland, the next year fell into a violent Fever; and
when his Physicians despaired of his Recovery, that Lady sent to me then at
Roterdam to hasten to her: when I came into the Colonels Chamber, Doctor Romp^
was there; and after we had discoursed together about the Patient, he appeared
a man of another Spirit than our Collegiates* and said, I commit the Colonel to
your care; and do you know, that incurring him, you will not only oblige me,
but the whole Court. -- About that time, I cured Sr. Francis Mack-worth of
miserable pains; about the Cure of which he said, he had before spent much
money in trying what he could in England, France, and Holland, and had met with
no ease; but it pleased God to enable me to cure him in three weeks. A
Gentleman who was then Sr. Francis his Lieutenant, is now Captain to one of his
Majesty's foot-Companies; his name is Captain Read, and he lives at this time
in Pel-Mel. I could instance in a hundred more: but I ought to be no more
copious than needs must in my own particular; therefore I draw now toward an
end. Only let me give this short word more; That in the year 1669. before my
return to England, though I depised degrees in Physic; for the Reasons that I
have told you, I was however willing to be declared Medicus in Vtrecht, by Dr.
Dimermeere, the States Professor in that University I was so admitted; and
being shortly after returned into England, I was advised to desire a License
and Practicandum from his Grace L. Archbishop of Canterbury; under whose
protection it has been my happiness to practice, and do the like services for
several of his Majesty's and the Duke of York's Servants here at White Hall and
St. James', as I did heretofore beyond Sea.

And now must my hands, after all this, be bound up from doing good? It were a
strange reward for all my labors. Nevertheless, my enemies go on; and to dress
me up fit to be made their Martyr, they have been busy in representing me in
the form of some strange Creature, by Slanders touching me and my
qualifications: and among other particulars, it has been reported up and down
that I am a Papist: but if to profess and practice the contrary in Foreign parts
and in my Parish, of Kensington, in which I received the holy Sacrament, be a
sign of such a one, and cannot acquit me from the imputation, then they may go
on with the Report. But methinks, they of all men, should be afraid to seek to
weaken my Cause at Law, by branding me as a Papist: For as it is true, that the
Statute of the 3d. of K. James does lay a severe penalty upon any Papist, who
shall presume to practice Physic in England: so it is a shameful thing and
most incongruous, for these Collegiates to make use of that Statute, in
disparagement of me (and I hope Authority will take notice of it) when it is
known themselves have contrary to that Law, entitled diverse members and
Licentiates of their College that are noted Papists; and others also that are
talked on as dangerously suspected, and may perhaps in time be convicted: that
the world may be convinced how well in this particular also they deserve; and
how convenient a thing it is, to suffer such men to enjoy an Authority by a
Law, who in the use of it are so bold, as to violate the Laws and act against
them.

Turpe est Doctori cum culpa redarguit ipsum. So I humbly commend them and
their Monopoly, and this my Apology, to be laid to heart by all the Nation.
FINIS.

