AN EXPOSITION Of the BOOK of JOB: Being the Sum of CCCXVI Lectures, Preached
in the CITY of EDINBURGH.

BY George Hutcheson, Minister of the Gospel.

JAMES V. 11. Behold, we count them happy which endure. Ye have heard of the
Patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord: that the Lord is very
pitiful and of tender mercy.

LONDON, Printed for Ralph Smith at the Bible in the first Court, entering into
Gresham-Colledge out of Bishopsgate-street, 1669.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
IN this Essay, I do offer unto thee a further proof of my willingness to
contribute my Mite toward the Opening up of the Sense of Scripture so briefly
as I could, and the pointing at the Principal Doctrines contained therein, for
the benefit of those who delight in the Law of the Lord, and who desire to
converse with God speaking thereby unto his Church.

That this Book of Sacred Scripture (which treats of a Subject, the study
whereof is very necessary, in all the times that pass over the People of God)
does need, in a special manner, the assistance of a Guide and Interpreter, for
the right understanding thereof, will be denied by none who do peruse the
Scriptures with any measure of attention; and is evidenced by the endeavors of
many Learned men, who (upon the account of difficulties occurring in this Book,
as well as of the excellency of the Subject Matter) have taken great pains to
open it up. After whose elaborate Writings it might seem altogether needless
that I (who do acknowledge my self fitter to sit at the feet of many of those
eminent Worthies) should attempt any thing toward the Explication of it, were
it not that the most of their Writings are wrapped up in a Language not
understood by them whose Edification I chiefly design by this Piece; and those
I have seen in English are either so very brief, that ordinary capacities will
not be able to deduce and enlarge what they have compared in a succinct
Paraphrase; or so large and copious (far beyond the bulk of this, which yet I
could not contract in so little bounds as I desired) that I know not if many,
at least among us, have been at the expense to purchase, or can have so much
spare time as to peruse those Helps.

Having also had occasion for full eleven years (from 1649. to 1660. to search
into this Scripture, in order to my Lecturing upon it at some special times in
the ordinary course of my Ministry, I found somewhat to be adverted unto in the
Explication of the greatest part thereof (namely, Job's complaint, Chap. 3. and
the Debate betwixt him and his Friends) which needs not at all be regarded in
explaining any other Dogmatical Book of Scripture, unless it be some
infirmities and tentations of Saints, recorded in the Book of Psalms and
elsewhere. For, beside the pointing at the Literal Sense of the Sentences here
recorded, and the Observation of the Scope of those who spoke them, it is
necessary that the Interpreter act the part of a President in the Dispute, by
examining every Argument adduced by either Party, and passing judgment
thereupon according to the tenor of the Scripture. Which if he neglect to do
(as some have altogether neglected it, and others have but rarely touched it)
he will put himself to much needless pains, in forcing an Orthodox sense of
contradictory Assertions, and of Assertions which God himself condemns in the
close of the Dispute; and he may well gather together many sound General
Truths, worthy to be made use of, whether by Ministers in Preaching, or by
People in their private Meditation; but he will not prove an exact Interpreter
of this Book, nor will he point out what God principally intends thereby; which
is to instruct us concerning the infirmities of eminent Saints, renowned for
Patience, as well as concerning their graces; and concerning their mistakes
about Providential dispensations toward Good and Evil men, and other the like
escapes: which being cleared and refuted (as they are, by Elihu and by God
Himself) they do afford most useful Instructions to Believers in all ages.

Therefore (following the example of Merlin, and of Mercer who broke the ice to
him) I have made it my great business in those Debates (after the Resolution of
the Context, and the Explication of particular Sentences so far as I judged
needful) to take notice of what is Orthodox or Censurable in their
Argumentations; and from their very mistakes (as well as from the General
Truths hinted by them) have deduced Instructions and Cautions for our
admonition. In which undertaking how successful I have been, I leave to the
consideration of the candid and judicious Reader.

I need insist the less, here, upon this or the like purposes, that in the
Introductory Discourses to Chap 4. and Chap. 32. and in explicating Chap. 38.4.
I have given a brief view of the scope of the several parts of this Book, of
the Dispute betwixt Job and his Friends, and of the Censure passed upon it,
first, by Elihu, and afterward by God Himself; where the judicious Reader will
find some directions for regulating of his thoughts concerning the Discourses
of all those several Parties. He will find the Question stated betwixt Job and
his Friends, with a brief account of the mistakes on either hand; He will find
it determined what Principles Elihu makes use of in his censure of Job, and
whether he did err, as the other Friends did: And the scope of Gods censure,
passed upon Job's discourses and carriage, will be laid briefly before him.

What I have said elsewhere concerning the method of my writing upon Scripture
(with which the method here is the same, so far as the Subject Matter would
permit) may save me the trouble of repeating it here. And my former Apologies,
concerning the frequent repetition of Doctrines, must have place here also upon
this special account, That the Subject Matter of the Debate betwixt Job and his
Friends (not to say that Elihu insists much upon the same things, and that Gods
Censure consists but of one Argument, confirmed by an Induction of many
Instances) being but one principal Thesis, which is managed (especially by his
Friends) with very few Arguments, often repeated and set off with many
Rhetorications; I could neither explain them, nor deduce Instructions from
them, without falling upon the same things again and again. And therefore I
have often judged it convenient to omit those Cautions, to be gathered from
their mistakes, which I had frequently marked before.

I did not judge it necessary to insist upon every sentence in Job's passionate
complaint, Chap. 3. especially toward the beginning thereof; as judging that,
whatever a pregnant spirit may collect from his great artifice in contriving of
his bitter imprecations; yet, the scope of the Spirit of God, in recording
thereof, is only to point out his weakness and transport through passion: the
evidences whereof I made it my work to collect and observe. Likewise, when Job
speaks of Minerals and Jewels, Chap. 28. I did not judge it suitable to digress
in discoursing upon them; seeing his scope (which I did mainly tend) led me to
look to some other things. And when Elihu, and afterward God Himself do largely
insist upon many acts of Providence to be seen in the course of Nature, and in
the governing and ordering of diverse particular creatures (whereof Job and his
Friends gave some hints in their Discourses;) I was not willing to attempt an
exact and large Natural History in explaining of those instances. Any who
desire satisfaction in that will find more in the laborate and learned Writings
of others than my poor store can afford. And I judged that those for whom I
chiefly design this Piece will be edified, rather by minding them what is the
scope of all those instances (what is narrated concerning them, being first a
little explained) than by such discourses, could I afford them. The scope also
of those Instances being to point out the Incomprehensibleness of the Counsels
of God, evidenced by many things among the Creatures which surpass the skill
and conduct of man; I judged it most fit, in order to this scope, to forbear
dipping too much upon them.

Thus (Christian Reader) thou have a brief account of the scope and nature of
this undertaking, which, without seeking after any other Patrociny (though I
stand especially obliged to many whom I do much honor upon the best accounts;
and while I was Lecturing upon this Subject, I had a purpose concerning the
choice of a Patron, which I know not if it would be convenient to prosecute, as
my case now stands) I recommend to thy favorable acceptance and perusal. It
pleased the Lord (to whose praise alone I mention it) to make the Lecturing
upon this Subject not altogether unfruitful in a very difficult time. And those
who remember what were our exercises then, will find several hints relating
thereunto scattered in this Piece. Now having resolved to publish this Summary
of what was more amply delivered (the Subject Matter being of general and
constant use in all ages and times) I do accompany it with my hearty Prayer to
God, that he will bless the perusal of it unto thee, and that it may contribute
to clear some of thy dark steps toward thy everlasting rest. I am

Thy Servant in Christ Jesus, George Hutcheson.

ERRATA.
Courteous Reader,
Having received many sheets of this Copy, I do find (notwithstanding the great
care of the Printers, especially in the progress) some mistakes which may
readily retard thee. As for the misprinting of Books of Scriture (as Psalm. is
sometime put for Isai. and Gal. for Eccles.) or the Chapters and verses, thy
acquaintance with the Scriptures will (I hope) correct that. Neither shall I
trouble thee with literal mistakes, or with the defect, redundancy or
permutation of particles and words, where the sense will easily lead thee to be
a Corrector thy self, or runs smooth enough with the words as they stand. Only
I desire thou will correct these few with thy Pen; where (a) signifies the
first, and (b) the second column of the page.

Page 11. (a) line 26. for posterity read prosperity, p. 15. (a) l. 39. for
living r. lying, p. 18. (a) l. 46. for preserved r. persevered, p. 19. (a) l.
14. for respect r. reject, l. 48. for plot r. lot, (b) l. 39. for immediately
r. undenyably, p. 77. (b) l. 38. for now r. nor, p. 86. (b) l. 33. for heat r.
heart, p. 92. (a) l. last save seven, for he spoke r. we speak, p. 93. (a) l.
45: for greatness r. gentleness, p. 115. (b) l. last save two, r. their
motions, p. 126. (b) l. 37. r. hold them, p. 135. (a) l. last save eight, for
to him r. by him, p. 146. (b) l. last save ten, for could r. would, p. 149. (b)
l. 32. r. that as, p. 162. (b) l. 3. r. his own, l. last save twelve, for any
r. my, p. 163. (b) l. 1. r. that he might, l. last save nine, for might may r.
many might, p. 169. (b) l. 8. for Truths r. Tricks, p. 177. (a) l. 18. for to
God r. for God, l. last save five, for Truth r. God of Truth, p. 179. (a) l.
28. for could r. would, p. 181. (b) l. 41. for may, r. God may, p. 202. (b) l.
43 for This r. Thus, p. 206. (b) l. 45. for like r. likewise, p. 217. (a) l.
12. for There r. Therefore, p. 229. (a) l. 24. r. well managed, p. 363. (b) l.
28. for fryst r. tryst, p. 365. (a) l. 33 for yet r. got, p. 378. (b) l. 33. r.
many may, p. 379, (a) l. last save one, for taste r. task, p. 400. (b) l. 6. r.
to come, p. 401. (b) l. last save fifteen, r. as little, p. 410. (a) l. 10. r.
make men, p. 423. (a) l. 32. for Gods r. Jobs, p. 449. (a) l. 52. for refused
r. refuted, Chapter 37. p. 8. (b) l. last save fourteen, for yet r. get, Chap. 38.
p. 12. (b) l. last save twelve, for Answer r. Answerer.

If thou find any material escapes in the sheets which I have not seen, the
correcting thereof is remitted to thy own care.

AN EXPOSITION Of the Book of JOB.
The ARGUMENT.
THis Book of Holy Scripture treats of a Subject very profitable and useful for
the Church in all Ages; as containing a Narrative of the life of the Servant of
God, Job, a man famous in the after ages of the Church; Ezekiel. 14.14, 20. Jam.
5.11. Or, an account of the various lots that befell him, and the remarkable
dispensations of Providence toward him, together with his carriage under the
same. How, after he had been tried, and kept his integrity, in a prosperous
condition; it pleased the Lord to plunge him into an abyss of troubles, and
leave him there wrestling with afflictions upon his body, tentations in his
mind, sleightings from his Relations, and misconstructions and opposition from
his godly Friends, till his trial was perfected, and both his graces and
infirmities did appear in their own colors; after which his sky did clear
again, and he was restored to his former prosperous estate with advantage.
These things did not only come to pass; for the edification and special
advantage of Job himself, and others who lived with him; and especially for
proving of the truth of the grace of God in him, and for giving the lie to the
malicious calumnies of Satan, as the case is stated, Chap. 1.8, -- 11. and
Chap. 2, 3, 5. But it has pleased the Lord to record the same in holy Writing,
for the general good of Believers in all ages, to whom he is held forth as a
pattern, Jam. 5.11. And indeed, if we take a view of this Book, containing a
description of Job, in his piety, trials, conflicts and the consequences
thereof; It holds out a mirror, wherein we may see the vanity and instability
of all things under the Sun; a document of what trials the godly may be
obnoxious unto, and may consist with true piety and the favor of God; a
pattern of faith and patience under many and pressing trials; the worth of
Sincerity and of a good Conscience in a day of trial; many Mysteries of Divine
Providence and Sovereignty; the blessed issue of the godlies trials; a notable
experience for the godly in like cases, whereas, it seems, he had few or none
(at least as to some of his trials) to pave the way before him, etc. These, and
many the like precious Instructions, are communicate to us from the experience
and lot of this eminent Believer. Yea, his very Infirmities, and the discovery
of his dross in the furnace, are recorded for the advantage of weak Believers,
when they observe that the perfection of most eminent Saints, within time,
consists not in sinlessness, but in sincerity; and that God, though he reprove
the faults, yet, does not reject the persons of his own, but does accept, yea
commend, his own grace in them, even when it is surrounded with many weaknesses.

Concerning the Book in general, I shall touch at a few particulars necessary
to be premitted. And,

First, It would be fixed that this Book contains a true History, or a
Narration concerning a man who really was, and concerning things which really
came to pass in the world; and not a Fiction or Parable only, made use of for
Instruction and Example, and for inculcating the precious Truths therein
contained. Such Representations, wherein persons and things that never had a
being are brought in in Doctrine, are indeed not unusual in Scripture, as being
very profitable in many respects; Witness that Parable of Nathan to David, 2 Samuel 12.1, 2. and of the Glutton and Lazarus, Luke 16.19, etc. Yet here there
is so punctual and particular an account of his Country, Children, prosperity
before his trial, and restitution after it, together with a description of his
Friends and their Country and Pedigree (things not usual in recording a
Parable) that it were a wrong to look on it otherwise then as a true History.
And withal, the Spirit of God, speaking of him afterward (Ezekiel. 14. Jam. 5.) as
of one who had really been, does put the truth of this History beyond all
debate and controversy.

Secondly, As to the time wherein Job lived, though the Scripture does no where
expressly determine it; yet this seems to be most certain, that as he lived
after Abraham, so before the Law was given upon Mount Sinai. For, upon the one
hand, we will find his Friends, who debate with him, to be of the posterity of
Abraham, Nahor, and Esau, which evinceth that Job and they lived after Abraham.
And, on the other hand, His Sacrificing at home in his own Country, Chap. 1.
and 42. and the acceptance thereof by God, evinceth that the Law was not yet
given, after the Promulgation whereof it was not lawful to sacrifice any where
but in the place where God had put his Name. It is neither easy nor necessary
particularly to determine, whether he lived, and these things came to pass,
during the time of Israel's sojourning in Egypt, or about the time of their
deliverance from that bondage; as some do conceive diverse passages in this Book
do point at that deliverance as a thing lately done: But it suffices us that
the Book records an History of great Antiquity.

Thirdly, As concerning the Penman of this Book, the Scripture is likewise
silent, and therefore we need not determine, whether it was written by Job
himself, or some of his Friends, and found by Moses in Midian when he lived in
exile there; or by Moses himself, or some other Prophet, which must necessarily
follow upon their opinion, who hold that the writing of Scripture was first
begun by God himself, when he wrote the two Tables of the Law upon Mount Sinai.
It is sufficient for our faith, that it was written by the direction of the
Spirit of God, who recommends Job, as he is described in this Book, as an
eminent Saint, and a pattern to Believers, Ezekiel. 14. Jam. 5. And albeit there
be many things recorded here, which did not proceed from the Spirit of God, but
from men's ignorance, erroneous principles, passions, etc. (as there are also
many passages in the Book of Psalms, and other places of Scripture mentioning
the exercises and tentations of Saints:) yet this is no reason why it should
not be looked on as a part of the Canon of Holy Scripture, seeing these very
mistakes and infirmities, together with the Lords discussing and clearing
thereof, do tend to the edification and instruction of the Church, and are
recorded for that end. And who ever was the Penman, yet the style thereof seems
to prove its Antiquity, being most grave and heroic, and most of it in Poesy.

Fourthly, As for the partition and sum of this Book, the Apostle James, Chap.
5.11. reduces it all to these two heads, the patience of Job under his trials,
and the end of the Lord, in giving him an issue. But I shall branch it out more
particularly in these: 1. The sudden change of Jobs prosperous and flourishing
condition into a deluge of trials, upon his Goods and Children, Chap. 1. upon
his body, Chap. 2. and upon his mind, Chap. 3. 2. A Dispute betwixt him and the
three Friends, concerning his Integrity, occasioned by this change, to Chapter 32.
3. The decision of this Controversy, begun by Elihu, to Chapter 38. and closed by
God himself, to Chapter 42.10. 4. Jobs restitution from Chapter 42.10. to the end. The
two first parts do belong to that head of his patience, and the two last do
hold forth the end of the Lord.


CHAP. I.
This Chapter may be reduced to these two Heads. 1. A description of Job, who
was to be tried, from his Piety and former Prosperity, to ver. 6. wherein he is
described, from his Country, Name, and Piety, ver. 1. from his outward
prosperity, having a numerous issue, ver. 2. great Riches and Eminency, ver. 3.
and, his Children living in great concord and amity, ver. 4. And, from a
special act of his Piety in reference to his Children, ver. 5. 2. Jobs
begun-tryal, in the loss of his Goods and Children, wherein is contained, The
original and rise of his trial, which was, the Holy Providence of God; loosing
the reins to Satan to afflict him so far, for silencing of all calumnies that
might be vented against his integrity, ver. 6. -- 12. The trial it self, as it
was represented to Job in its blackest colors, ver. 13. -- 19. And, his
carriage under his trial, ver. 20, 21. together with Gods testimony concerning
the same, ver. 22.

Verse 1. There was a man in the Land of Vz, whose name was Job, and that man
was perfect and upright, and one that feared God, and eschewed evil.
THe History of Jobs sad sufferings is ushered in with a description of him,
which may be taken up in four Branches. The first branch of the description is
taken from such common circumstances as tend to clear the truth of the History;
such as, his Country where he lived, and his name, ver. 1. -- It is said,
There was such a man which (together with what follows) clears that this is
not a Fiction. And the word here rendered Man, signifies not an ordinary man,
but an eminent and excellent man, such as Job was, both for endowments and
authority. As for his Country, the Land of Uz, the name has certainly been
given it from some ancient possessour thereof. Now we find in Scripture mention
made of several bearing that name, One, the Grandchild of Shem, Genesis 10.23. who
is recorded by Historians, to have given the name to the Country about
Damascus, toward the North border of the Land of Canaan. Anonother, the son of
Nahor, Genesis 22.20, 21. (where the name Huz, is the same with Uz, in the
Original) who gave the name to a part of Arabia the Desert. And a third of the
Posterity of Esau, Genesis 36.28. whence a part, at least, of Edom, in Arabia
Petrea, or, the Stony, seems to have taken the name of Uz, Lam. 4.21. And
because these two Arabia's bordered one upon another, and possibly also these
two Lands of Uz, this may be conceived as a reason why the Land of Uz is
sometime spoken of as a large Country, comprehending several Nations and
Kings, Jer. 25.20. In one of these two last Countries did Job live, for it is
expressly said, ver. 3. that he dwelt in the East (which, it seems, must be
understood, according to the usual reckoning of Scripture, with relation to the
Land of Canaan) as these Countries also lay. And it seems most probable also
that he lived in Arabia the Desert, being either of the Posterity of Nahor, or
of the sons of Abraham by Keturah, who settled also there, Genesis 25 9. For in
this Country, or the Regions about, did his Friends live; It was here where
Travelers were straitened with want of water, from which he draws the
comparison, Chapter 6.15, -- 20. It did border upon the Sabeans a people in Arabia
Foelix, or, the Happy, and stretched also toward the Caldeans, from both which
Countries Robbers came upon him, Chapter 1.15, 17. And (not to insist any longer)
we find by the History it self, that he lived in a Country so near the Sea
(namely the Red Sea) as he was acquainted with the Sea Monsters there, Chapter
41.1. And so near Canaan, that he is not a stranger to the River Jordan, Chap.
40.23. As for his Name, Job, or the signification thereof, there is no
necessity to insist on it. We find one Job among the Sons of Issachar, Genesis
46.13. But neither was he this man, nor are the names written one way in the
Original. They walk upon as great uncertainty, who take Job to be that Jobab,
Genesis 10.29. of the Posterity of Shem, or (rather) another of the Posterity of
Esau, who reigned over Edom, Genesis 36.33. whose name Jobab (they say) was
contracted, in and after his calamity, into that of Job. His name is indeed
derived from a root, which signifies, to be at enmity; which, being taken
actively, may point out what an enemy, or, opposite, he was to all injustice
and unjust persons, in the exercise of his Office while he was in prosperity,
Chap. 29.14, 15, 16, 17. And if we take it passively, it may point out how much
he was maligned, for his Piety and Justice, by Satan and his Instruments. And
if, ^ithal, we assert that he had not this name, so contracted, till his
calamities came upon him (for which, notwithstanding, there is no ground) it
may intimate what great opposition he sustained, after that God once gave him
up to be tried. But leaving these uncertainties, that which is further
remarkable in this verse, Is,

The second branch of this description, taken from his piety and fruits of his
faith; where, albeit either of these expressions, perfectness and uprightness,
when put alone in Scripture, does comprehend all that is here signified by
both; Yet being here both expressed, they may be thus distinguished: His
perfectness points at his inward integrity, sincerity and streightness of
heart; and his uprightness expresses his streightness in outward conversation,
and in his dealing with men. Unto this is added his fearing of God, to show
that his honesty was not a mere moral uprightness, but was accompanied with,
and flowed from true Piety and a Filial awe of God. From whence also flowed his
eschewing of evil, or a guarding against sin, with the occasions thereof, and
the insinuations and tentations whereby it assaulted and pursued him; and an
avoiding and turning from it by repentance, when he was at any time overtaken
with it. And this also is added as a further qualification of his perfectness
and uprightness; that it was no sinlesness, but a sincere wrestling against sin.

From this Verse Learn,

1. Such is the freedom and efficacy of the grace of God, that he can when he
will, raise up eminent servants to himself, in very corrupt places and
societies; As here he has a godly Job in the Land of Uz, who was not of the
blessed seed of Abraham. So was there some awe of God in Gerar where Abraham
did not look for it, Genesis 20.8, -- 11. a Melchisedeck among the cursed
Canaanites, and a Rahab in Jericho, as well as a Job and his godly Friends in
Arabia. And albeit it be conceived that the Lord did not reject, and wholly
give up the body of all other Nations, before the time that he entered into an
express Covenant with Israel upon Mount Sinai; And therefore it was nothing
strange, that there were then such eminent Saints in diverse parts of the
world: Yet these instances, in that time, may teach us to leave a latitude to
free grace in all ages of the world, and in all places (how corrupt soever)
where any spark of the knowledge of God in Christ may be had. And as it did
much condemn and aggravate the Apostasy of the Nations, that (beside the
knowledge of God, to be gathered from the works of Creation, Romans 1.19, 20.)
they had such eminent Saints, who did contribute to keep in the light of the
knowledge of the true God among them: So their eminency in grace may condemn
them who come far short under more plentiful means.

2. As true godliness is a man's chiefest advantage, (and therefore it is named
in the first place, in this description of Job, before his Children and Wealth)
So an approven religious man is he who has inward simplicity and godly
sincerity in his heart, free from hypocrisy or any wicked bias; For, herein
was Job commendable, that he was a perfect man, or single hearted and sincere.
And this is premitted to the rest, as chiefly taken notice of by God, next unto
faith in the promised Messiah, whereof this and the rest are fruits and effects.

3. No man can prove his sincerity before God, nor has warrant to pretend to
any such thing, who does not make Conscience of streightness and uprightness in
his outward conversation, whereby men's profession is adorned before the World;
Therefore it is added, That man was perfect and upright.

4. Moral honesty and uprightness in conversation, will not prove the truth of
men's Piety and Religion; unless it be conjoined with the fear of God, and the
conscientious performance of the immediate duties of Religion; Therefore, also,
it is subjoyned, and one that seared God.

5. The root of all true Religion is (not a slavish, but) a filial aw of God,
imprinted and stamped on the heart; without which, duties of Religion will not
seriously and reverently be performed: nor yet duties toward men be regarded in
all times and cases; Therefore is all his Religion summed up in this, as the
root of all, he feared God; as frequently also in Scripture Piety is thus
described. And this is subjoyned to the former, of his uprightness and
perfectness; to show, that the fear and awe of God put him to be sincere before
him, and to deal uprightly with all men; as Genesis 42.18 Neb 5.15.

6. The most holy of the sons of men, while they are within tim^, are not
sinless, but ^^^to ^nded with sins and infirmities, and with ten^^^^ns and
(...) pursuing and drawing them thereunto; Therefore, least his Perfection
might be mistaken, it is added; that he obnoxious to evil, to be esch^wed, or,
turned from.

7. Sincerity and true Godliness, (albeit it b^ compassed with tentations and
weaknesses; yet) does evidence it self in an hatred of sin, and universally of
all sin; in a careful avoiding thereof, and all the occasions of it; and, in
serious repentance and turning from these sins wherein men are overtaken; For,
Job looked on sin as evil to be abhorred, and did so judge indefinitely, of
all, or what^oever was evil; and did evidence the truth of this his abhorrency,
by eschewing of evil, or turning from it, (as the word also will read) when he
fell into it.

8. As men's tenderness, in avoiding and repenting for sin, increases,
according as they entertain the aw o^ fear of God in their hearts; so the fear
of God is the cleanly motive and rise of their circumspect walking, without
which, their cautiousness in avoiding of sin for base by-ends will not be
accepted; Therefore is his eschewing evil subjoyned to his fearing of God,
which was the fountain from which that circumspectness flowed, and the motive
persuading him thereunto.

Verse. 2, And there were born unto him seven sons and three daughters.

3. His substance also was seven thousand sheep, and three thousand camels, and
five hundred yoke of oxen, and five hundred sheasses, and a very great
household; so that this man was the greatest of all the men of the east.

4. And his sons went and feasted in their houses every one his day, and sent
and called for their three sisters to eat and to drink with them.


The third branch of this description of Job, is taken from his outward
prosperous and flourishing condition, consisting in several things. As namely,
first, a numerous Issue, ver. 2.

2. Great wealth, ver. 3. which is described both absolutely, from the several
particulars wherein his wealth consisted; that he had many Sheep for meat and
clothing, many Camels for carrying of burdens in long journeys, as Genesis 37.25.
many Oxen for labor and tillage, as ver. 14. many Asses for ordinary travel
and burdens nearer home, and a very great household, by which we may understand,
both that he had a numerous family of servants, or bought slaves, which were
then a part of men's wealth; as also (as the word will bear) much service, or,
husbandry and labor for them, as is clear from the following narration, ver.
14. -- 17. His wealth and riches is also described comparatively, that he was
the greatest of all men of East, or his neighbors about him; and that both as
to the matter of wealth, of which the former part of the verse speaks; as
also (which is a third proof of his flourishing condition) that he was greatest
in respect of eminency, being a ch^ef Magistrate among them, Chap ^9.7, 8, 9,
10, 25. and so the Original may be read not only, So that this man was the
greatest, etc. as an amplification of the greatness of his wealth: But, (as
another addition to his prosperity, b^side that of wealth) and this man was the
greatest, etc.

4. His outward flourishing condition consisted in the great amity and concord,
that was among his Children; evidenced by his sons mutual feasting one another
and inviting and bringing their Sisters to share with them, ver. 4. This they
are said to do every one his day, not that they continually and daily feasted,
but that it w^nt by course among them, every one feasting the rest either on
his Birth day or at some set time agreed upon among them. Now all this ample
description of his prosperous condition tends to commend his Piety, both in the
time of his enjoyment, and under the loss thereof.

Doct. 1. As Children are of themselves the choicest of outward blessings, and
to the godly a reward of piety; Psalm. 127.3. etc. and 128.1, 2, etc. So the
increase and number of them is an addition to the mercy; For, here Children are
mentioned first, as the chief part of Jobs outward prosperity, to be preferred
to his other wealth; And their number is recorded as heightning the mercy, that
there were born to him seven sons and three daughters. This may speak sadly to
them who are not thankful for Children, or who do grudge, and look upon it as a
burden, when God blesses them with a numerous issue; and especially to those
who do not improve that mercy, nor endeavor to make them blessings indeed, by
a pious Education, as we find was Jobs practice ver. 5.

2. As God has given sufficient proof, that he could well allow wealth and
prosp^rity upon his people, were it for their good; (as here he heaped great
riches upon godly Job, as he did likewise upon others at other times.) So just
dealing toward others, and tender walking before God, will never hinder men's
thriving, so far as God sees meet and good for them; For, here an upright man,
who durst wrong none, and a fearer of God ver. 1. who made conscience of
religious duties, is yet rich, and greater then all the men of the East. And,
indeed, however we reckon, Piety has the promises, even of this life, 1 Timothy 4
8.

3 As it does exceedingly commend Wealth, and prove it be a blessing, that men
do purchase it in an ingenuous lawful calling; So the worth thereof, being
acquired, consist in this, that men are thereby enabled to provide against
their daily necessities; For, albeit Job had Gold, as appears from chap. 31.24.
(as Abraham also had Silver and Gold, as well as Cattle, Genesis 24.35.) Yet here
his wealth is rather reckoned by his Sheep, Camels, Oxen, etc. partly, to show
that such was the simplicity of these days, that men acquired their wealth,
chiefly, by that ingenuous calling of improving their Stock and Cattle, and not
by unhandsom and unlawful shifts; and partly, also, to show that they looked
not upon it as their wealth to heap up treasures, upon which they might dote as
their happiness, nor yet to multiply such things for pomp and grandeur, which
are to little purpose; But chiefly, that they had means necessary for food and
raiment, and for their daily labor and affairs. Thus also David^, 1 Chronicles.
27.26, etc. and Uzzi^h, 2, Chron. 26.10. had Ca^tel and husbandry.

4. It is no small mercy when godly men are not only blessed with singular
wealth and riches, ^ut when, with Gods approbation, they are advanced also to
have power and authority, that they may see to the administration of Justice,
and the promoting of Piety among men; For, thus also this man was the greatest
of all the men in the East

5. Family-peace is a choice blessing, and a crowning part of a man's outward
prosperity, and particularly, when Children do l^ve in amity and concord
together; For, here it shuts up the account of J^^s outward prosperity, that
his Children did live together in so great intimacy. If it be sad when bonds of
friendship are broken among men; much more when they become void of natural
affection. And albeit the training of Children in Piety, be a special mean to
entertain this amity among them, as it was with Job in his family; ver. 5. Yet
we find godly men have missed of this mercy in their fam^lies. Adam in his
family had a Cant who slew his brother; Isaac, an Esau who hated, and threatened
to kill his brother Jacob; Joseph is hated and sold by his Brethren, in Jacobs
family; and sad dissensions fell out among some of David's sons.

6 Moderate feasting, and inviting of friends thereunto, is a lawful mean of
entertaining friendship and amity among them: provided we observe necessary
cautions in this use of our liberty; avoiding superfluity and excess, or going
beyond our ability, in these things, as if our belly were our God; not
neglecting the poor, Luke 14.12, 13 14. not mispending time, by taking up too
much thereof in feasting, whereas it might be better improved; or making
feasting our daily work, Luke 16.19 Nor feasting unseasonably, in a time when
the Lord calls to mourning, Amos 6.4, 5, 6. Joel 2.16. Isai 22.12, 13.
Therefore it is recorded here, as a lawful practice, that his sons went and
feasted in their houses, every one his day, and sent and called for their
Sisters (whose modesty could not allow them to keep their turns in making these
feasts, nor yet to be too forward of themselves to go abroad without
invitation) to eat and drink with them. Thus we find several examples of
feasting not disapproved in the Scripture, as Joseph's feasting of his brethren,
Genesis 43. their Feasts at Sheep-shearing, 1 Samuel 25.4, 5, 6, etc. 2 Samuel 13 23,
24. and the like occasions. And Christ honored a Marriage Feast with his
presence, Joh. 2. It is not needful here to inquite why they did not also
invite their Father and Mother; but this is certain, that Job did allow
thereof, permitting them to go about in their turns with it, ver. 5. though
with some godly solicitude, least they had exceeded in it.

7. A man well rooted in Piety will keep his feet in very tempting conditions
of life, and will not be shaken with the pleasures or other distractions of a
prosperous estate; For, it is Jobs commendation that he was a godly man in a
married Estate, having the burden of many Children, great wealth, a great
family, great dignity, and a great calm of tranquillity and concord among his
Children. Thus Daniel and Nehemiah are tender and near God in the eminent
employments of a great Court. No lawful condition of life is inconsistent with
true Piety, though, many a time, our weakness and corruption do stumble upon
them; and make impediments of them.

Verse 5. And it was so, when the days of their feasting were gone about, that
Job sent and sanctified them, and rose up early in the morning, and offered
burnt offerings, according to the number of them all: For Job said, It may be
that my sons have sinned, and cursed God in their hearts; Thus did Job
continually.
The last branch of this description of Job is taken from a special act of his
Piety in reference to his Children, and their practice formerly mentioned, ver.
4. In that he feared least his children should provoke God to wrath by any
miscarriage in the time of their keeping society together, and therefore was
careful, after their feasting, to bring them together to make addresses unto
God, and to offer Sacrifices for what faults (and especially in want of
reverence to God) might have escaped them. In this his practice, Consider.

First, The time wherein he gives this proof of his Piety, when the days of
their feasting were gone about; which is not necessarily to be understood that
he did not call them together till every one of them had, in their turn, made a
feast to the rest. For that had been too long a delay, unless they kept all
their Feasts, one immediately after another. But it seems rather that when any
one of them had made a feast in his course, then he called them all to worship
and self-examination. Thus the words are expounded in the end of the verse,
Thus did Job continually, or, all the days, that is, after every one of the
days wherein they had feasted, ver. 4. This teaches, That after all our
actions, and especially after liberal diversions and recreations, it is our
duty to examine our selves that we may find out what may have escaped us, and
to draw near to God, that we may discern in what frame we are, and may make use
of him for righting what is amiss: As here Jobs practice, in timing this
address to God, does hold forth.

Secondly, The ground of this his pious practice, which was his godly
solicitude least his sons had sinned, namely, by cursing God in their hearts
which does explain the former General. Otherwise, he needed not make a
supposition, or, May be, of it, that his sons, being of the posterity of Adam,
did daily sin. The sin he fears here, is, Cursing of God, which in the
Original, both here, and ver. 11. and Chap. 2.9. and 1 King. 21.13. is,
Blessing of God; and Cursing is so expressed, oftimes, in Scripture, out of an
holy indignation at the thing, abhorring to name it, except in some cleanly
terms. And here we are not to conceive that he was jealous that they had broken
out in gross blasphemy; but if his sons had forgotten, or not sanctified God in
their hearts, or thought of him irreverently, he sets it out under this odious
name, as having indeed a tendency thereunto; and this is pointed at by cursing
in their hearts.

Hence, Learn,

1. There is just ground of holy jealousy that there may be a bitter root,
even of gross wickedness, lurking in men who have been well educated, and who
have a fair outward carriage, if not also some good principles; And that this
root may at some time bud forth, after it has long lurked: For Job is thus
jealous of his sons, of whose Education there is no question but it was
religious, and of whom no blemish is recorded in the matter of their carriage,
but rather intimations to the contrary. He names only his Sons here, not
secluding his daughters, who as they were at the feasts, ver. 4. so (no doubt)
they were also brought to join in this solemn worship. But Sons are here put
for all his Children; Or if we further inquire why he mentions only Sons, it
may be conceived that he was most jealous of them, least they had taken more
liberty of excess in feasting, then their sisters sex or modesty could permit,
which might have drawn them to that evil he fears.

2. There is no time wherein men are more ready to miscarry, and discover any
bitter root in them, then when they are about the liberal use of the creatures,
and amidst occasions of mirth and cheerfulness; For; it is in the time of their
feasting that Job is afraid they had miscarried. And therefore at such occasions
men had need to keep a strict watch, See Eccl. 2.2. and. 7.2, 3.

3. Cursing or blaspheming of God, reproachful, unbeseeming, and irreverent
conceptions or expressions of him, or his providence, are a great height of
impiety in any, especially in these who profess the true Religion; For, this
Job looks upon as the worst of out breakings, to curse God, whom all ought to
honor and magnify, and in a right understanding of whom, and a right reading
of his dealing, our life and happiness does consist.

4. Truly-godly and conscientious men are much opposite to this fearful evil,
of blaspheming or reproaching of God; In so much that they dare not name it
without horror; As here, Job will not so much as pronounce it but in a smooth
expression.

5. The godlies tenderness and abhorrency of this evil, does also appear in
this, That any thing that has a tendency to reproaching and blasphemy is
formidable to them; As here Job, in his tenderness, looks upon any
forgetfulness or irreverence in their hearts, as dreadful, and under the same
name with the evil to which it tended.

6. His supposing that, it may be, they had committed this evil, does not only
intimate that he could not know their hearts, and therefore can only be
suspicious and jealous of them: As also, That this may evince they were godly
men in his esteem, seeing he can only suspect their miscarriage. But further,
it holds out.

1. That the most tender and godly men are most jealous and suspicious of
themselves, or others under their charge; As here, holy Job is jealous of his
Children, when yet no external carriage of theirs had bewrayed them.

2. That considering our natural corruption, even suspicions and jealousies of
our miscarriage, and sins of ignorance and inadvertency, whereof we can have
but suspicious, are a call to us to renew repentance, and to run to the open
Fountain; For, so does Job upon a may be that his sons have sinned. See Psalm.
19.12.

Thirdly, his practice it self, or his carriage being under this godly
jealousy; Namely, that he did send to bring his children to public worship
with due preparation, and, rising early, did offer Sacrifices for all and every
one of them, so many burnt Offerings as there were Children.

Hence learn,

1. It is not sufficient that men have tenderness to be suspicious of their own
case, or the case of others under them; or that they have light to discern what
is really amiss; unless their light and tenderness be laid forth in a
conscientious use of means, which may prevent evils, or cure what is wrong:
For, so does Job here express his tenderness, by drawing his sons to public
worship, after their feasting.

2. Such ought to be the care of Parents to have the souls of their Children
prospering, that it must not be laid aside even when their Children are grown
up and retired to families of their own; For, here Job takes pains about the
souls of his Children, even when they had houses of their own. ver. 4. He calls
them to him, to worship God with him, and they do yet reverence and submit to
him, and come.

3. Since the fall of Adam there is no expiation of sin, nor daring to approach
to God, but by Christ, represented of old by Sacrifices; For, here in Jobs days
they had burnt Offerings, and long before that, Adam had taught it to Cain and
Abel. And Job is said to offer them, because; before the giving of the Law on
Mount Sinai, the Head of the Family, or the first born, was the Priest to offer
up the Sacrifices of the Family.

4. For the solid expiation of sin, general notions of Christ and his
sufferings are not sufficient, unless men make particular applications thereof
by faith to themselves, for expiating of their particular faults; Therefore did
Job offer burnt Offerings according to the number of them all: Not aquiescing
in a general sacrifice for the whole family, he offered a Sacrifice for every
one of them.

5. Holy duties, and especially duties of public worship, ought not to be
abruptly gone about, but with due preparation; For, Job sent and sanctified
them (or, prepared them by the observation of some external Ceremonies then in
use, as also by Prayer and Examination) before he brought them to the public
Sacrifice. See, Eccles. 5.1. etc.

6. The service of God ought to be performed with much activity and diligence,
no opportunity being neglected, nor letting unrepented-off guilt lie over,
without speedy repentance and an application of the remedy; For, he rose up
early in the morning, and offered, etc. Taking hold of the first opportunity to
expiate any guilt they had contracted.

Fourthly, His constancy in this practice, Thus did Job continually or, all the
days: As often as they feasted, he renewed this practice.

Hereby, Teaching.

1. As our Inclinations are continually evil by nature; So even experience of
former failings, our repentance for them, and our being put to need Christ for
expiation thereof, cannot (without the special assistance of grace) secure us
against new failings, if we mere with new tentations; For, Jobs continued
practice insinuates that he was jealous l^st, even after former approaches to
God, they might fall into new ^ollies.

2. Constancy in tenderness, godly jealousy, and renovation of repentance, is
a very clear proof, and sweet commendation of Piety; when no length of time, or
conceit of former performances, do take off any thing of our former edge, For,
its a proof of Jobs singular Piety, that he did thus continually.

3. It does commend the riches of free grace, and of Christ's merit, that it
cannot be exhausted, but after we have never so frequently been made partakers
thereof, that Storehouse remains still full for these who by faith and renewed
repentance shall have recourse thereunto: So much also is imported in Jobs
continual use-making of Sacrifices, day by day; as finding that which was
signified by them so full, as it could never be exhausted.

Verse. 6. Now there was a day, when the sons of God came to present themselves
before the LORD, and Satan came also among them.

7. And the LORD said unto Satan, Whence come thou? Then Satan answered the
LORD, and said, From going too and fro in the earth, and from walking up and
down in it.

8. And the LORD said unto Satan, Have thou considered my servant Job, that
there is none like him in the earth? a perfect and an upright man, one that
fears God, and escheweth evil.

9. Then Satan answered the LORD, and said, Does Job fear God for naught?

10. Have not thou made an hedge about him, and about his house, and about all
that he has on every side? thou have blessed the work of his hands, and his
substance is increased in the land.

11. But put forth thine hand now, and touch all that he has, and he will
curse thee to thy face.

12. And the LORD said unto Satan, Behold, all that he has is in thy power:
only upon himself put not forth thy hand. So Satan went forth from the presence
of the LORD.


Follows the second part of the Chapter containing Jobs begun-tryal, in the
loss of Goods, Servants and Children. In the first branch whereof (in these
verses) the original and rise of this trial is recorded: which is, The holy and
wise Providence of God, who, having determined to afflict this holy man, for
vindicating of his integrity against all calumnies, does loose the reins to
Satan, as his Instrument, to afflict him, so far, and so much, only, as it
pleased him to permit.

This matter it here expressed by way of conference or deliberation, in
borrowed terms, alluding to the practice of Kings and Princes, whose Servants
and Officers, appearing in their Courts, do give an account of their services
and what is entrusted to them, and do receive Orders and Commissions to go
about such services as are thought expedient. The same form of speech is again
repeated, Chap. 2. and we have another very like unto it, 1 King. 22.18, 19,
20. etc. And here we are not to expound the words literally, as if the Lord had
any fixed days for keeping of his Courts, whose Dominion is actually excercised
every moment; Or as if Satan made any local appearance before God, or there
were any speech (properly so called) betwixt God and him (for God being an
infinite Spirit, and Satan also a spirit, though finite and unclean, they have
no use of speech, such as is among men;) Or as if the Lord within time should
begin to determine Jobs trial, or should be solicited by the malicious
importunity of Satan to torture an innocent man; for his purposes are eternal,
and all his works known to him from the beginning, Act. 15.18. But the proper
meaning of these borrowed expressions is, in sum, this, That after Job had
enjoyed a long time of prosperity, and kept his integrity, It pleased the Lord
(to whom Angels and Devils are obedient and subject) to manifest his effectual
Providence, at this time, in trying Job with adversity, making use of Satan as
his Instrument in that work: whereby Jobs integrity, though well known to God
before, might yet further be manifested, to the silencing of all calumnies
whereby Satan and his Instruments did asperse his Piety in his calm and
prosperous day. This being the true scope and meaning of these borrowed
expressions; as the manner of expressing these Mysteries of Divine Providence,
in borrowed terms fitted to our capacity, does comm^nd the great condescendence
of God, and his respect to our dullness, in speaking of heavenly things in
earthly terms, and consequently, calls for much proficiency at our hands; Joh.
3.12. So this account of the Original of Jobs trial is very seasonably prefixed
to it, as a key to open it up unto us; whereas, otherwise, looking upon the
trial in it self, it might seem very dark. For hereby, in the very entering
into this cloud and tempest, we are informed,

1. Concerning the original cause of this trouble, which is Gods good pleasure
and will, who did not expose him to the fury of Satan to be dealt with as he
pleased, but, as the Sovereign orderer of this business, employed Satan, as his
Instrument, to afflict him, to make use of Sabeans, and Chaldeans, Fire and
wind, for that end; and accordingly, did not only permit Satan to assault Job,
but did bridle and restrain him in the letting loose of his fury and rage.

2. We are also informed what were Gods thoughts concerning Job, when he thus
afflicts him, That albeit Job felt only the sad stroke, and did often apprehend
much displeasure; Yet God had no quarrel at him, but does highly commend his
Integrity, even when he loses the chain to Satan, to afflict him.

3. We are also informed concerning Gods scope in this trial, which is not to
ruin Job, as he often apprehended, but to try him and discover his Integrity,
to the silencing of malicious calumnies, and then to give him an out gate. As
these are sweet Cordials to the truly godly in their hot Conflicts; So they
have the more need to fix their hearts in the faith of them, before they enter,
and while they are entering in trials, that, ordinarily, in the throng of the
Tempest they are ready to lose the sight of all these, and to see little in
their case, but the unbridled fury of Satan and his Instrum^nts, nothing but
wrath in God, no respecting of their Integrity, no issue of their lot, but
utter ruin, etc.

I come more particularly to speak to the particular verses according to this
general scope and sum, and to lay open these borrowed expressions according to
the analogy of faith. And

First, As to the time of this determination, there was a day, ver. 6. This
does, in general, signify, that after Job had enjoyed a long time of
prosperity, this decree of trying him did break forth in execution. And
particularly, it points a^ that day, ver. 13. -- 18. wherein these sad things
befell him. This teaches, That so long as we are within time, we ought to lay
our accounts for reelings and changes, little knowing what a day may bring
forth; Prove. 27.1. For, here, after many calm days, There was a day wherein the
tide began to turn upon this holy man.

Secondly, As to the appearance of Servants and Ministers, the Sons of God, and
Satan, in his Courts, ver. 6. By the Sons of God here, we are neither to
understand any of the children of men, who are made sons of God by being
members of the true visible Church, Genesis 6.2. or by internal Regeneration, Job.
1.12, 13. Nor yet Magistrates, who are called Children of the most High, Psalm.
82.6. But they are the holy Angels who get this name, both here and Chap. 38.
And though it be denied, Heb. 1.5. that any of them are that Son of God by
eternal Generation, yet all of them are sons of God, by Creation and Adoption,
and because they do represent somewhat of him in his nature and holiness; And
do also represent him in their Office and carrying of Ambassages unto men. It
is said, these came to present themselves before the Lord; not that they are
any time absent, or out of his presence, Matthew. 18.10. Luke 1.19. but to
express their ready willingness to receive or execute any of his Commands, as
Ministers of great Princes do come daily to receive their Instructions. Where
it is said, Satan came also among them; by Satan, or, that Adversary, we are to
understand that Prince of Devils, together with all these evil spirits that
fall with him. His coming among them, or, in the midst of them, does not import
that he has any communion with these blessed Spirits; nor that he is in the
presence of God by way of approbation, as they are; nor yet that he voluntarily
comes before God, as they do: But the borrowed expression does only import,
That, as on great Court days, not only Princes and their Guards and Attendants
do appear there, but Delinquents also; So, Satan is made to appear before God,
to whom he is subject and accomptable, as the sequel clears. And as in great
Conventions, some naughty persons are ready to thrust in among the crowd, to do
some ill turn; So Satan is ready to catch at all opportunities to tempt or
accuse; as the sequel here does also make manifest.

In this we may learn,

1. S^^h is the greatness of God; that not only all the Angels are obedient,
but even the very Devils are subject to him, as here we see* (...) this was
necessary to be premitted to this dispensation, wherein so much o^ Greatness
and Sovereignty was to appear; To show that m^n man learn to cure many of then
distemp^rs of spirit, occasioned by the cross dispensations of Provi^^nce, by
taking a right view of God, the Author (...)

2. Here we have also a comprehensive view of the Administration and Government
of the World; W^^^^e (...) still to be seen and acknowledged, as supreme (...);
things beneath (instanced here in the person and enjoyments of Job) are a part
of the object about which his Providence is exercised So that it cannot,
without blasphemy, be said that he has forsaken the earth, Ezekiel. 9.9. o^ that
he does not take notice of the meanest things therein, were it even the hairs
of our head, Matthew. 1^.39 The Ministers to be employed for executing of his
pleasure, are, not only Angels, whom he imployeth both to good to his people,
and for evil of punishment also: But Devils also, whom he imployeth sometime,
as his Executioners against the wicked, and, sometime (as here) to be a scourge
to his own children: Not out of any necessity, having sufficient besi^e to
employ, but because he sees it best.

3. This name, Satan or that Adversary, As it does point out a Character of a
wicked disposition, and of one who is of the Devil, to be an adversary to all
g^^d; As here, Satan, after his own fall, proves to mankind: So it reaches us
further, that the emnity betwixt the seed of the Woman, and the S^rpent and h^s
seed, was known by the godly from the beginning, and consequently, they were
taught to resolve on a (...) conflict in their course of holiness: Therefore
(...) he here designed by the name of Satan.

(...) Lesson needful yet to be inculcated, after all the ^^^ments of his
opposition in former ages, Ephesians. 6.10, etc The forgetting whereof is the cause
why we are ^o often (...) prized, while we live and walk as if we were (...)
Enemies.

Thirdly, As to the Lords calling of Satan to an account, and his answer
thereunto, ver. 7. We are not to conceive that God makes any enquity, as
needing Information; but only that he is supreme to call Satan to an account.
Nor are we to dream of any speech, properly so called, betwixt God and Satan,
the terms here being only figu^ative and borrowed to point out some other
thing. Nor yet are we to understand Satan's speech, of his going to and f^^i^
the earth, and then of his walking up and down in it, as a c^mplaint, that
however he used diligence, in going to and fro, tempting, yet was he so ^ema^d
in, that he had no success, not could get a desired ^e^^, but was still forced
to walk up and do^n, compare, Matthew. 12 43. It is true, indeed, Satan is
unsatiable in his malice, notwithstanding a^ ^his success; yet this form of
speech is used where desired success is, Zech. 1 10, 11. and 6.7. And here both
the expressions ^o only point out his restless and assiduous activity. Withal,
it is to be considered, that Satan is said thus to go to and fro in the earth,
because, however Devils, since their fall are thrust down to Hell; yet till the
Judgment of the great Day (till which they are reserved, then to get their
(...) and sin sentence; and compl^^^ punishment, Jude ver. 6.) they have their
chains ^^gthened, to come and tempt and afflict in this (...) world, and so
have also power in the (...), to raise Tempe^ts, etc. Eph^s. 2.2. This does
(...) out

1. That Satan is restless and assiduously diligent in obstructing men's
happiness, as being vexed that they should fill that room in Heaven from which
he fell; For this (...) does he go to and fro in the earth, and walk up and
down in it, by temptations, calamities and persecutions ((...) much as he is
permitted) hindering men from embracing Piety, or retarding their progress, or
weakening their hands therein. See 1 Pet. 5.^. Luk 22.31. Rev. 12.12. We should
remember that we sojourn in a world where Devils are, and do haunt among us He
is such a wa^ker in the Earth, as does diligently mark and observe all
particulars, that he may apply his tentations sutably to his purpose; He does
so go to and from it, that no place, how remote soever from other distractions,
can secure us from his tentations, if God do not hide us; And, he is so
incessant and restless, Going to and fro, and walking up and down, that he will
not be put away by never so many repulses, but will again and again assault and
tempt.

2. Whatever be the malice, power, or restlesness of Satan* Yet it as to be
still fixed that he is subject and accountable to God, in all he is permitted
to do, and that God has an eye upon all his proceedings in the world: For,
this Question, Whence come thou? does import Gods overruling Providence over
him, no less then if a Judicial enquiry were made into his Actions, and he
called daily to give an account of them.

3. A^b^^t God, notwithstanding his overruling Providence, do not altogether
bind up Satan, but do suffer him to act many strange parts in the wo^ld, by
himself immediately, or by his Instruments; Yet it is firmly to be believed
that God does not approve of, or take pleasure in, these h^s violences; For,
this Question does also import Gods indignation and dislike of him and his
proceedings, as Questions are made use of in Scripture to testify dislike, 1
King. 9 12.13. And hence it also is that the sons of God are not here called to
an account, as being approved of him.

Fourthly, The Lords Interrogation concerning Job, v. 8. po^nting him out to
Satan as a rare and singular Saint, giving him these Characters, v. 1. with
some addition; does teach,

1. The Lord not only sees and knows such as fear him, and what their to^
and wrastlings are; but does also command and approve of them, and take delight
in them; As by this his commendation of Job does appear.

2. Albeit Saints want not their own sins and failings, yet the Lord looks more
to their good than to their ill, Numb 23.21. And albeit he know more of their
failings then any, yet his commendation and esteem of them is singular; As
he^^, more is said by God to Jobs advantage, th^n is recorded of him by the
Writer of the History, v 1 That he was his Servant, and none like him in the
Earth.

3. As it is a notable evidence of the truth of Piety, when men do so give up
themselves thereunto, as not to be their own, nor devoted to their own or any
others lusts, but are entirely resigned to be at Gods command; So whoever do
thus make conscience of their way, God will own them as his servants, whom he
will protect and reward: Therefore does the Lord here call Job, who was perfect
and upright, etc. My Servant Job, both as being one who was not his own, nor a
slave to any of his own corruptions, nor any lust of others, and as owning him
for a servant upon this account.

4. Albeit there be different degrees of growth among the people of God, and
none, who are truly sincere, will be rejected, because they come not up to the
measure of others; Yet it is indeed a commendation to be upon the growing hand
and going on to perfection, and studying to be eminent in the grace of God;
For, this is a peculiar commendation of Job, that not only he was a perfect and
upright man, etc. but that there is none like him the Earth, to wit, in his
time and generation, or, at least, that he was singular in some graces,
especially that of patience, Jam. 5.11.

5. The Piety of Saints is the eyesore of Satan and his servants, who cannot
endure that any should do better then themselves, or by their light should
condemn them; For, this Question, Have thou considered my Servant Job? does
import so much, that Satan looked upon Jobs Piety with an evil eye.

6. The Lord is pleased to glory in his Children over Satan, and takes pleasure
to vex him by their integrity, For, this Question, Have thou considered, etc?
Does also import the Lords taking pleasure to vex Satan, that such an eminent
Servant was kept in his integrity, notwithstanding Satan's rage and restless
activity in the earth. And this certainly proves, that the Lord is much engaged
in the Saints quarrels with Satan, seeing he brings them upon the stage, and
accounts it his glory to bring them through in despite of Satan's malice.

Fifthly, Satan's reply to this Interrogation; v 9.10, 11. contains a confident
charge that Job was an Hipocrite, as pretending to serve God only because of
his prosperous condition, and because God protected him and blessed and
increased his substance; And (for confirmation of this charge, as not being
sufficient of it self to prove his unsoundness) an appellation to a day of
trial, which he calls for, confidently boasting that th^n Job would impudently
blaspheme God. In sum, Satan's charge is, That it is hard in a day of prosperity
to discern who indeed fear God till they be tried. And this, in effect is
Satan's language in his Instruments in the world, calumniating the Piety of
Saints, upon one account or other.

Hence we may learn,

1. Satan is a false accuser and liar; For, not only does he lie of Gods
service to his face, as if it were not worth the following without an hire of
temporal prosperity; but he lies of Job to God, calling him a mercenary man,
when he was indeed perfect and upright, mis-judging of his intentions when he
could not condemn his actions, and boasting, that if he were tried, he would
blaspheme, which he did not. If he dare thus lie of us to God, how much more to
selves? If he did not spare to Question even the sonship of Christ, Mat. 4.3.
What wonder is it if he spare not to quarrel our interest? And he cares not
thus to lie and calumniate; For if he get Saints vexed, or brought to trouble
by his lies, as Job was, he has his design, in part.

2. Piety, when it cannot be got suppressed by Satan and his Instruments, is
subject to calumnies and misconstructions; As here befalls Job. It is most
common and usual to call Saints Hypocrites, and under that notion to persecute
them, as Christ was first called a Samaritan and wicked person, and then
crucified as such. And suitable to every condition wherein a Saint is, Satan and
his Instruments have their calumnies fitted. If one be poor who fears God, its
alleged that discontent and melancholy, or some fleshly by end, sets him on
work; If they be mean and simple, its averred that their folly and ignorance
make them so scrupulous and precise, Jo^. 7 49. If they be Ministers, its
alleged to be their occupation only that makes them trouble themselves about
these things; If they be great men, they are looked upon as minding only their
own Interests and advantage in what they claim to of Piety, etc. So that
whatever the Saints case be, they may expect to be reproached in the world.

3. There are diverse remarkable truths insinuated in this calumny of Satan,
which are partly extorted from him, and partly produced for his own ends. Such
as,

1. Albeit he did calumniate Job in saying, He did not fear God for naught; and
there may be, and are, many who serve God sincerely, even in a prosperous
condition; Yet there is this general verity in it; That it is not so easy to
discern in a day of prosperity who are sincere, and who not; and a day of trial
may discover, both hypocrisy in some, and weakness in real Saints (as appeared
in Job) which could hardly be discerned in their calm day.

2. Albeit Prosperity be no sufficient furnace to discover all the dross that
is in the sons of men; Yet it is no small commendation of real Saints, that
they hold their feet in the slippery places of Prosperity and Ease; For, this
very calumny does insinuate that Satan had essayed him in it, and yet could
allege no miscarriage in him, unless a day of adversity discovered it. Even
they who have kept their feet in adversity, may be in hazard to slip in
prosperity, 2 Chronicles 32.24, 25, 31.

3. What ever commendation it be of the grace of God in Saints, to stand fast
amidst the snares of prosperity; Yet it is an unquestionable evidence of
hypocrisy, to keep up a form of godliness, only while we are in prosperity,
and then to turn our back upon it in adversity; For, this assertion of Satan,
that to serve God in prosperity, and to curse him in adversity, is a mark of
hypocrisy, is a sure truth, albeit he did unjustly allege it against Job.
However, they must be much worse, who do prosper, and yet, notwithstanding all
the advantages of prosperity, have not so much as a form, but (it may be) lose
what they had in a meaner condition.

4. Albeit Saints do live in the midst of dangers, yet Providence does so guard
them, and every thing that is theirs, that, without his permission, Satan or
his Instruments cannot touch any of them; For, Satan grants that God had made
an hedge not only about him, but about his house and all that he has on every
side, so that he could not touch him. Without Gods permission, Satan cannot so
much as enter into a s^ine, Matthew. 8.31. so that we have no reason to fear him,
or his threatenings, unless our Rock sell us, see Numb. 23.23.

5. Satan is so malicious and restless, that he does not cease to assault, even
where he gets no success; For, Satan insinuates that, not being able to ensnare
him by his prosperity, he had attempted to make a breach upon him by bringing
on trial, but without success, And therefore he speaks angrily of Gods
Protection, Have thou not made an hedge about him, etc? We ought to acknowledge
the kindness of God, not only in upholding and in giving issues, when he let us
trials break in upon us, but in frustrating many an attempt to bring us into
trouble.

6. What ever Satan seem to promise of prosperity to those that follow his way;
yet it is an unquestionable verity that Prosperity is the gift of God, and that
it is Gods blessing upon men's use of a lawful Calling that makes rich; For this
Satan is forced to acknowledge, Thou have blessed the works of his hands, (or
his lawful Industry) and so his Substance (or, Cattle) is increased in the Land.

7. All that men enjoy is so at Gods disposal, that the very least touch of his
Power can overturn what is best settled, and of longest continuance; For, so
much does Satan express, for his own ends, But put forth thine hand now, and
touch all that he has, and then it is to be understood that such a change will
come upon his posterity, as will tempt him to curse God.

8. It is an unquestionable evidence of honestly, even by Satan's own
confession, when a man cleaves to God, and his service, both in well and woe:
For, so much may he gathered from his arguing here: If there can be nothing
objected against Job, but that he is a mercenary because of his prosperity, and
that this will appear if he put to trial; Then it will undeniably follow, if
Job continue to serve and cleave to God in his adversity as he had done before,
he is an honest man.

9. Satan's aim in bringing Saints to trouble, is not only to draw them to some
lesser sins, but even to open and desperate blasphemy, such as himself is
guilty of; For, so Satan alleges, He will curse thee, (or, Bless thee, as v.
5.) and that to thy face, as the thing he aimed at in this assault. So that
they are but foolish who hearken to his tentations to lesser sins, as if they
could sist there: For his prevailing in one degree is but a bait to draw them
on to what is more gross, till they come to this height of impiety. And more
particularly, We ought to remember that tentations to fretting and murmuring
under trouble come fom Satan, who thereby is training on Saints to that height
of impiety, which here he designs.

Sixthly, Gods purpose concerning Job (propounded by way of concession, with a
limitation, to Satan, and Satan's accepting and going about the employment, v.
12.) does import this much, That Gods purpose to try Job, for removing of all
calumnies, did now break forth; for which end, he loosed some links of Satan's
chain, who was lying at wait to catch all advantages, And now, finding way,
went actively about that business. Not that Satan is ever in Gods presence by
way of approbation, or that he goes ever out from it, as to Gods Providential
noticing and overruling all that he does: But the borrowed phrase imports,
that finding the chain loosed, he went nimbly about the execution of what he
was permitted to do.

Hence learn,

1. It pleases the Lord, sometime, to expose his dearest Children, whom he
singularly approves, to trial, that being tried on all hands, their integrity
may appear, and any dross that is in them may be discovered and purged out;
For, so befell Job here.

2. It is neither inconsistent with true Grace in a Saint, nor with Gods love
to him, that sometime he and his concernments be permitted unto Satan's power,
to exercise him, either immediately by his own hand, or mediately by his
Instruments; For, says the Lord, Behold all that he has is in thy power, or
hand. Thus was Paul also bufferred by a Messenger of Satan, 2 Cor. 12.7.

3. However men do usually think light of outward mercies, when they enjoy
them, Yet it is, and will be found, a sharp and searching trial to be stripped
of all these outward comforts; For, it is here yielded unto as a trial indeed,
all that he has is in thy power.

4. When God exposes his sincere Children to trial, he does (so to say)) lay a
wager on their head against Satan, that they shall not renounce their Integrity
whatever come upon them; For, this Concession, all that he has is in thy
power, in answer to Satan's malicious Proposition, v. 11. does import this much,
That this piece of trial should clear the Controversy betwixt God and Satan,
whether Job was an honest man, as God asserted, or would blaspheme under trial,
as Satan alleged. And the Behold, prefixed to this permission given to Satan,
is not so much a note of admiration, (God, to speak after the manner of the
man, wondering at Satan's impudence) as an intimation that God would have it now
beheld and soon, by Satan and others, which of them spoke truth concerning Job.
This, as it serves for our caution, and to put us in mind of how great
concernment our carriage under tentation is; so it may assure all these who
flee to God in Christ, for furniture and through-bearing under trial, that he
has no small interest in the matter, to glorify himself and give the foil to
Satan, by granting their desire.

5. In the trials of the Children of God, though Satan's hand therein be sinful,
and a venting of his malice against the Image of God in his Children; Yet in
the same exercise they ought to observe a Supreme and Holy Hand of God, whose
part and end therein is holy: For, here, even that which Satan sinfully
desired, v. 11. God does holily grant for his own wise ends: All that he has
is in thy power

6. Albeit Satan be boundless in his malice against Saints; yet he is always so
limited by God, as no more trial is let forth then he sees meet for
effectuating of his holy purposes and ends; For, this permission is limited
with a restriction, Only upon himself, etc.

7. What ever trials the Lord let loose upon Saints, yet it is no small
moderation thereof if the Lord spare men's own persons; For, that is the
limitation and mercy here, in the loss of all other things, Only upon himself
put not forth thine hand, of which see Chap. 2.4, 5, 6.

8. Satan is so restless and malicious, and so vigilant in seeking occasions
against the people of God, that an opportunity never sooner offers, but he is
ready to take hold thereof: Therefore it is subjoyned, So Satan went forth from
the presence of the Lord, of the effects whereof the next verses give a full
account.

Verse 13. And there was a day when his sons and his daughters were eating And
drinking wine in their eldest brothers house.

14. And there came a messenger unto Job, and said, The oxen were ploughing,
and the asses feeding besides them,

15. And the Sabeans fell upon them, and took them away; yea, they have slain
the servants with the edge of the sword, and I only am escaped alone to tell
thee.

16. While he was yet speaking, there came also another, and said, The fire of
God is fallen from heaven, and has burnt up the sheep, and the servants, and
consumed them, and I only am escaped alone to tell thee.

17. While he was yet speaking, there came also another, and said, The Caldeans
made out three bands, and fell upon the camels, and have carried them away,
yea, and slain the servants with the edge of the sword, and I only am escaped
alone to tell thee.

18. While he was yet speaking, there came also another, and said, Thy sons and
thy daughters were eating and drinking wine in their eldest brothers house:

19. And behold, there came a great wind from the wilderness, and smote the
four corners of the house, and it fell upon the young men, and they are dead,
and I only am escaped alone to tell thee.


In these verses is contained the trial it self, or the execution of the former
deliberation, according to Gods holy purpose and the permission given to Satan:
Wherein Job is indeed stripped of all that was put into Satan's hand, his
Cattle, Servants and Children, and this is so brought about, and so represented
to Job, as might take deepest impression upon him. Herein I shall consider,

First, The time of this trial, ver. 13. even when his Children were feasting,
of which he had been afraid before, lest it might draw on a trial, ver. 5. This
was the time Satan choosed for the execution of the saddest part of Jobs trial,
in cutting off his Children, ver. 18.19. and for bringing him the news of all
the rest. 13, 14, 15, etc. Hereby teaching.

1. There is great necessity of watchfulness and sobriety in all times and
cases, seeing trouble may break in when we least dream, or are ready to think
all is well; For, his family were keeping their most solemn time of joy, in the
eldest Brothers house, when the storm brake. Much more have the wicked reason
to fear such a clap. Dan. 5.5. See. Luke 21, 34.

2. Satan is a most subtle adversary, and can (by Gods permission) order
trials so, as may fasten sharpest tentations, even upon the fears and
tenderness of Saints; For, therefore is this solemn day chosen wherein to let
out all these troubles on Job, that his own fears and tentations, ver. 5. might
be quickened thereby,

Secondly, The several parts of this trial, which are four.

First, A lesser, one as to the hand seen in it, being from earth, ver. 14.15.
which was, the taking away of the Oxen and Asses, and k^lling the servants who
labored with, and attended them. This was done by the Sabeans, a people
descend^ng from one Sheba, of the posterity of Abraham, Genesis 25.1, 2, 3, For
albeit there were other Sabeans descending from others, Genesis 10.7, 28. yet it
is conceived that these lived further off from Job then Abraham's posterity did.

Secondly, A greater trial, in respect of the Instruments, or mean employed in
infl^cting of it, ver. 16. The Sheep and Servants who kept them, being consumed
by an extraordinary great fire falling down from heaven, as if God were become
his party, by his own immediate hand. That a fire of God signifies a great
fire, is clear from other passages, where a great City is called, in the
Original, a City of God, Jonah 3.2, 3. and great Mountains, are called,
Mountains of God, Psalm. 36.6. etc.

The Third part of his trial, ver. 17. though inflicted by men, is yet
greater, considering how he is thereby stripped of all the remainder of his
substance and wealth; for his Oxen, Asses, and Sheep, being already taken away
or destroyed, now his Camels (which only remained of his great substance,
mentioned, ver. 3.) are taken away, and the Servants killed by the Caldeans,
who in an hostile manner invaded them. We need not think it strange that the
Caldeans or some roving parties of them, should run as far abroad as Arabia the
Desert, were Job lived, seeing sometime before that, we find a King of Shinar,
or, Caldea, as far from home as Sodom and Gomorrhah, where he and his
confederates were oppressing such as were weaker then themselves, Genesis 14.1,
etc. Unless we conclude that they were some Colonies come out from among the
Caldeans, and retaining still the name of their Nation and Country, as a
judicious Writer conceives these petty Kings, mentioned Genesis 14. to have been.

The Fourth and last part of his trial, ver. 18, 19. is sorest of all, and
therefore a behold is prefixed to it, ver. 19. and that considering,

1 The object of this stroke, his whole Children, as well as the Servants
attending them. These, who might have been his comfort under the rest of his
afflictions, are here reserved last, only to put the cap-stone upon his trial.
And albeit, ver. 19 it be only said, the house fell upon the young men; Yet
seeing his Daughters were there also. ver. 13, 18. and none escaped the stroke
but the Messenger, ver. 19. It is certain that they perished also; and the
young men, or, his sons, are only nam^d, as being his greatest loss, and the
most bitter part of all that trial.

2. The time when this stroke came, even when they were feasting; which was the
time wherein Job was most afraid of their sinning against God, ver. 5.

3. The manner of the stroke, by a whirlwind overturning the house and cutting
them all off; as if God, being angry at them, would declare so much by this
more immediate stroke. It is further to be considered, that all these
particular trials have this one thing common, that in every stroke there is
still one servant left, to carry the news speedily and certainly, for Jobs
further exercise and trial; so that (upon that account) it had been a small
matter though he had gone with the rest.

The words being thus explained, it is not very necessary to dip into
Particulars, It may suffice us to take notice of a few more General
Observations; As,

1. That the things of time are uncertain, is not only a truth asserted by God,
but verified in the experience of Saints, as well as others; For, here a godly
man, abounding in wealth and Children, is stripped in a moment of all his
enjoyments: Only three or four discouraging Servants, who were abroad, are left
to bring him the sad news: And, within his house, he has a Wife who was not
comfortable, but a trial and tentation to him. Chap. 2.9. And who, together
with the domestics that were l^ft, Proved very peevish in the day of his
trouble. Chap. 19.15 16.17. This is a truth which very few who live at ease, do
seriously Study, little considering that they may outlive all their temporal
prosperity, and their fairest day may be over-clouded ere night (as this
Feast Day of Jobs Children ended in sadness) that so they may seek after a more
enduring substance. See Psalm. 62.10, Prove. 23.4 5. 1 Timothy 6.17.

2. It may sweeten a low condition to them whose lot it is, when they consider
that great Prosperity does oftentimes, but contribute to make the trial of want
the sharper; As here Jobs former great wealth makes it more sharp to be now
deprived thereof, then if he had never enjoyed it.

3. The sovereignty of God over his Creatures is absolute; He may strip, when
he pleases, even a righteous man, to the very skin; As here he does with Job.
For all being his creatures, and all their enjoyments being from him, he has
much more power then the Potter over the clay, to do with his own what he will,
without giving us any ground of quarelling or murmuring.

4. Satan, in so far as he is permitted by God, is furious in his cruelty
against Saints, and of great power to execute his malice; As here appears in
his dealing with Job His power to vex them if not hindered by God, appears in
the command he has in the Air, Ephesians. 2.2. to raise Tempests, Whirlwinds and
Lightnings, as here, ver. 16.19. As also in the power he has over the Children
of disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2. to drive them, by tentations fitted to their temper,
to serve him in his designs; As here he draws on the Sabeans and Caldeans, who
were ordinary robbers, with hope of prey. And his malicious cruelty, in
executing his power, appears in his furious ruining and cutting off all Jobs
wealth; So that he would leave nothing to Saints, i^ he had his will Saints
have need to abide near God, under his protection, and to pray that they be not
led into tentation, lest, if Satan get an opportunity he endeavors to win now
them, Luk 22.31 and to be avenged of that vexation they give him, by their
being near God.

5. God, in his holy wisdom, does so order the trials of his people, as they
may be trials indeed; that so both their faith and their infirmities may
appear; For, so did he overrule this trial of Jobs, wherein the black masks put
upon it by Satan (of which afterward) are permitted by him, that Job might be
tried indeed, and put to give a proof of what was in him. Saints ought not to
stumble at this; for afflictions being sent to try them, they must be so
ordered and dispensed as may reach that end, see 1 Pet. 4.12.

6. It is no small exercise under affliction, when one trial comes upon the
back of another; and breach is made upon breach, as if it were a feeding storm;
For, hereby the Lord tried Job, letting one messenger come with sad news upon
the heels of another. Hereby warning us not to fall asleep under any trial, as
if, because of that, we should meet with no more; and to expect that when we
are under variety of trials, they will breed variety of Exercises, and sift us
narrowly.

7. As it may be the lot of Gods Children; so it is a very sharp trial, when
among their multiplied sorrows, the last is still the saddest; As here, Jobs
trial grows in every step, as has been explained. And particularly, the Lord
suffers it so to come to pass, that he gets not notice first of the loss of his
Children, which might have made him take little notice of lesser losses
afterward: But after he is afflicted with sad news of the loss of all his goods
before, the news of that loss comes last, as it were to give him the dead
stroke.

8. As the wisdom of God, in ordering the trials of his people, ought to be
adored; So we ought also to take notice of the cunning policy of Satan, in
conveighing afflictions so as may occasion most tentation, to the minds of the
afflicted, and may hide Gods purpose in afflicting. Of these policies we have
some instances, recorded, for our edifications, in this his proceeding with
Job. As

1. That he counts it not enough to afflict him, but conveighs the matter so,
as Jobs mind may be kept poring upon it, and it held in his view, and that in
its blackest colors; Therefore is a servant still left to carry the tidings,
and lay them before him in the worst terms. And this is an usual snare, wherein
Saints are kept under trials, that they get not leave to forget their misery,
or to look out toward encouragements under it, but are arrested and held musing
continually upon it; And that not as it is indeed in it self, or in regard of
what God can bring out of it: (For in studying our trials, we ought also to
study our strength in God to bear them, the up-making of our loss in him, what
advantages his wisdom and love can bring out of them, etc.) But as their
distempered and discouraged minds represent it, with all the bitterness and
aggravations thereof. This sad bondage Job himself complains of, Chap. 9.27, 28.

2. That he propounds the trial so as Job may not only read his present loss by
it, but may be led also to drive into what may ensue upon it: So by stripping
him of all, he would drive him to despair of subsistence for the future, and by
showing him that the Oxen were plowing only, would put him in mind that there
was no hope of an Harvest. After-games in trouble are that which ordinarily
trouble the afflicted most, while they look out upon all the imaginable sad
consequences of their present case, as if they were already under them all. Not
considering that their present work is to manage their present exercise,
believing that God will either disappoint their fears, or furnish them with
strength, when that which they fear becomes their exercise indeed.

3. That he vexes him not only with variety of trials on every hand, but so
contrives the account made to Job of them, as the storm grows still the
greater; to make him apprehend that he is so far from a calm, or end of his
trial, that wrath is but only beginning to appear. This is indeed the sad case
of the impenitent and wicked, Isa. 9.12, 17, 21. Yet Saints ought to guard
against such a tentation, as if growing wrath were against them in growing
trials, and still more and worse, ready to break out upon them.

4. That he so contrives the coming of the messengers, that while one is
speaking, another comes with more sad news, so that he gets not leave to draw
his breath betwixt the one news and the other; this he complains of, in his
after-exercise, Chapter 7.19. and 9 18. And hereby, as the people of God are taught
to expect not only variety of successive trials, but even many troubles crowded
one upon the back of another, till all their terrors be gathered at in a solemn
Assembly, Lam. 2.22. So, if they be humbled indeed under such Exercises, they
will count it a mercy, if they get leave but to breath a moment betwixt the
pangs of Affliction.

5. That in all this he hides himself, his designs and wrath; And endeavors to
represent God and Man, Heaven and Earth, and the course of Nature, as all armed
against Job. Sometimes he lets him see Instruments, the Sabeans and Caldeans,
that he may be imbittered against them, being so egregiously wronged without
any provocation given, and so might sin against God: And sometime he so
conveighs the trial, as if God were his party in wrath, sending fire to devour
his Sheep, and a whirlwind to cut off his Children in their sin. All which may
warn us, That it is not easy to discern Satan and his snares in a trial; That
Gods mind may be very far contrary to these false Alarms we get in trouble;
That no dispensation, seeming to speak wrath, ought to be hearkened unto, where
the word speaks love, as it was with Job: And, That it is not the way and
manner of death whereby we ought to judge of men's estate, whose way has been
upright: for the sudden death of Jobs Children did not speak wrath from God
against them. All things, considered together, may teach us how subtle Satan
is, to present many tentations to Saints upon their case; and how contrary Gods
mind, in afflicting, may be to these false Alarms we have from Satan.

Verse. 20. Then Job arose and rent his mantle, and shaved his head, and fell
down upon the ground, and worshipped,

21. And said, Naked came I out of my mothers womb; and naked shall I return
thither: the LORD gave, and the LORD has taken away, blessed be Name of the
LORD.


In these verses is contained an account of Jobs carriage under this his trial;
evidenced,

1. By his practices, v. 20 which are, partly, such as evidenced his sense of
the affliction, In that he arose, and rent his mantle and shaved his head,
which were signs of his sorrow and abasement before the Lord (see Genesis 37 34
Josh 7.6. Isai. 22.12. Jer. 7.29.) though more suitable before the coming of
Christ then since; Yea even then, the resting on such things was condemned,
Joel 2.13. And whereas Job seems by shaving of his head, to go cont^ary to that
Precept, Levit. 19 27. It suffi^eth (beside what furth^r might be said) to know
that Job lived not under the Law, but before it. Partly, his practices are such
as evidenced his moderation of his sense, and that he did not let his spirit
rise, but submitted to God, falling down on the ground, and worshipping.

2. By his Profession and speech, v. 21. wherein, he studies to find out for
himself grounds of Submission and Patience; taken from the common Law of
Nature, that as we came naked into the world, so we must go naked out of it;
And from the Providence and Sovereignty of God, who dispenses all things at
his pleasure. And upon these grounds he infers a conclusion, contrary to
what Satan intended. For, in stead of cursing God, as he alleged Job would
do, v. 11. he blesses God who had continued these mercies so long.

From v. 20. learn,

1. Piety does not teach men Stoicism, or to despise and harden themselves
under the Rod of God; but allows them to be sensible when they are afflicted;
For, it is commendable in Job, that in this case, He arose, and rent his
Mantle, and shaved his head. See Jer. 5.3.

2. As it is the duty of the Children of God to be sensible and mournful under
Affliction, so this is very consistent with a patient and meek frame of spirit
under trouble; For, Job, a pattern of Patience, sets himself in a mournful
posture, and that without guilt, as appears from Gods own verdict, v. 22.

3. Albeit Sense and Sorrow under trouble be very consistent with Patience; yet
Saints in such a posture have need to be upon their guard, lest they devord:
For, Job, does not satisfy himself with expressing only his sorrow, but
somewhat to testify his humble submission.

4. It is the safe way of managing sense of trouble, and a clear evidence that
we do not devord under it, if we run to God with all that grieves us; For, so
does Job, add worshipping to his former practices. Which speak sadly against
those who estrange themselves from God under trouble Dan. 9.13.

5. It is not our simple going to God, under sense of trouble, that will prove
us free of passion, unless it be managed with much humility and self abasement
before God: For, thus Job, in this mournful posture, fell down upon the ground
and worshipped.

From v. 21. learn,

1. As Patience it wise and considerate, proceeding upon solid grounds and
reasons, whereas impatience is rash and unreasonable: So it is the duty of the
people of God under trouble to study and seek out arguments, whereby they may
persuade themselves to be patient; (For such is the practice of patient Job
here;) and not to make it their work to muster up their own difficulties before
their eyes, till their corruptions be irritated; as is the practice of too many.

2. It will contribute much toward the begetting of Patience and Submission, if
man consider the uncertainty of man's life; that it is but a coming into the
world, and a going out of it again; a being born, and, so soon as we are born,
under a necessity to learn to die; For, so does patient Job look on his life, I
came out, and I shall return Such as do thus look upon life, will not much
regard the various events wherewith they are exercised in it.

3. It is, also, no small help to Patience, if men consider that in their
lowest condition, they want nothing which they can claim by original right;
For, so does Job reckon, Naked came I out of my Mothers womb, and therefore
ought not to complain, since as yet I am not so quite destitute.

4. Men may see just reason to be patient under trouble, if they remember that
they are certain once to be deprived of these things, about the want whereof
they are so ready to contend, and that they will want them, when they have
greatest need of comfort by them, if they could do any good; For, so does Job
argue, Naked shall I return thither; not to his Mothers womb, (of which he has
been speaking) but to the Earth, our common Mother, which, it seems, he pointed
to in his speaking, being now living upon it. This truth the Apostle points at
as certain, that he may press moderation and contentment, 1 Timothy 6 6, 7, 8. And
indeed, right reason will teach that we ought not to take it ill when we lose
that at any time, of which we are certain within a short time to be stripped for
ever. Nor should Saints quarrel if God put it to a trial, whether that forgoing
of all worldly enjoyments, which is an unavoidable necessity upon all men, will
be done by them as an act of voluntary subjection and submission.

5. God is the dispenser of all outward lots, the giver, continuer and blesser
of all lawful enjoyments, the withdrawer of Mercies and inflicter of Rods; For
so is here asserted, The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away. This, being
well studied, may teach the rich neither to be proud, nor to despise others;
and the poor, not to be discontented or envy others.

6. It is a necessary study under affliction, to eye God more then instruments;
as being that which will both humble us, and yet comfort us that we are still
in his hand: For, thus Job, in his trial, looks to God and not to the Sabeans
or Caldeans, The Lord gave and the Lord, has taken away.

7. The study of Gods Sovereignty and Providence, and that nothing we enjoy is
our own, but his gift, may persuade us to stoop to want, when it is made our
lot; For, thus does Job persuade himself to submit, If the Lord give and take
away at his pleasure, he ought not to set limits to him; and if the Lord gave
all that he enjoyed, why may he not take away, and dispose of his own as he
will. Thus also do Saints keep themselves humble, when they are enabled to lay
forth much of their wealth in Gods service, 1 Chronicles. 29.14.

8. What ever be Satan's designs, in procuring afflictions to come on Saints;
Yet, through mercy, he will be disappointed; So much appeals in the conclusion
of Jobs discourse, where, in stead of cursing, he blesses the name of the
Lord. And albeit other Saints may come short of this, and Job himself afterward
came not up this height; Yet Satan will always be disappointed, in his last and
final design against Saints.

9. It is an act of holy prudence, in Saints under trouble, to strain
themselves to the quite contrary of what tentations and corruptions would drive
them unto; As here, when the tentation is laid to make him curse, and his heart
might be ready to rise and swell at these strange lots, He, on the contrary,
blesses. Hence it is that the Psalmist so frequently sings praises in saddest
conditions.

10. It is a commendable duty, and a clear proof of Patience and submission,
when we study matter of praise, and accordingly do set about the duty, in a
time of trouble; For here Jobs practice, and the result of his arguments for
Patience, is, blessed be the name of the Lord. Hereby testifying that God was
to be blessed for continuing so long these mercies he had now taken away; That
God was praiseworthy in himself, and for choice^ mercies yet continued,
notwithstanding all he had done; And, that God ought to be praised that (though
he was afflicted, Yet) his trials were cleanly, that he was enabled to bear
them, that they were such as God could bring good out of them, Romans 8.28. And,
that he did not leave him with out hope of a blessed issue.

Verse. 22. In all this Job sinned not, nor charged God foolishly.
This verse gives an account of Gods testimony concerning this carriage of Job,
That in all this Job sinned not, not that he was perfect without sin, but that
in this particular, he charged not God foolishly or laid not folly to Gods
charge. The word in the Original rendered, foolishly, or, folly, signifies that
which is unsavory or indigested. And so, in sum, this testimony imports, That
Job kept his feet in that, wherein Satan alleged he would slide, in that he did
not accuse God, or his Providence, for what came upon him; which as it had been
unsavory so to speak of God, and reflect upon his Wisdom: So it had argued
great folly and an indigested frame of Spirit in him.

Doct. 1. They are indeed Conquerours under trouble, who are kept free from
sin and provocation in their hour of Trial; For, this was Jobs Victory that in
all this Job sinned not.

2. Albeit troubles do suggest tentations to many sins; Yet the great sin to be
avoided by the Godly under trouble, is, misconstructing of God and his dealing,
The godly, who study to avoid this evil, are reputed as not sinning under
trouble; and Misconstructers of him and his dealing do sin heinously, did they
seem, otherwise, never so sensible or tender under trouble: For, thus is that
General explained, He sinned not, in that he charged not God foolishly.

3. Misconstructers of God do both reflect upon the Infinite Wisdom and deep
Counsels of God, in ordering the lots of his people; And they also do proclaim
their own folly, in their want of skill to judge aright of Gods proceeding, and
in following a course which may well vex themselves, but cannot profit them at
all: In both which respects, they bewray a disordered and ind^gested frame of
spirit, which should be unsavory to the godly; and will be so when they are in
a right frame. All this is imported in the emphasis of the Original word; that
Job, by not misconstructing, not murmuring, did not charge God with folly,
which had been foolishness, and an unsavory indigested course on his part. See
Psalm. 73.21, 22.

4. Whatever advantage Saints do give to Satan over themselves, in an hour of
trial; Yet by the power of grace, they may be enab^ed so to walk as may refute
all his calumnies of them, and make him a liar; even as God in the issue will,
once for all, wipe off all the aspersions which Satan casts upon his followers:
For, whereas Satan had said, ver. 11, that Job would curse God to his face,
here Jobs carriage gives him the lie, who charged not God foolishly.

5. As God does always take notice of his peoples carriage; so especially under
trouble: And who so keep their feet in a time of trial, they are observed and
commended by God: For, here the Lord records it, as a thing he noticed, and to
Jobs commendation, that in all this he sinned not.

6. Saints ought not to measure Gods approbation of their way, under trouble,
by any present comfortable issue; seeing the Lord may take notice of, and
commend the integrity of those, whom yet he sees it not fit to deliver; For,
Job is here commended, while the trial is not only continued, but growing upon
him.

CHAP. II.
This Chapter contains yet more of the first Part of the Book; Or, a further
account of the change of Jobs prosperous case into an afflicted and calamitous
condition. Now the Tentations wherewith Job was assaulted, being, partly, by
Afflictions, and, partly, by Suggestion; As in the former Chapter there is an
account of some part of his Affliction, on his Children, Servants, and Goods:
So here there is further recorded, a more near and sharp Affl^ction on his
body, a suggestion from his Wife, and a remote occasion of many vexations to
his spirit, in his Friends coming to visit him.

So the Chapter may be taken up in these, 1. Jobs trial and affliction upon his
Body, the Original and rise whereof is recorded, ver. 1. -- 6. the trial it
self, ver. 7. and his carriage under it, ver. 8. 2. His Wifes suggestion, to
drive him from his integrity, with his refutation thereof. ver. 9, 10. 3. His
three Friends coming to visit him, which occasioned much trouble to him. ver.
11, 12, 13.

Verse. 1. Again, there was a day when the sons of God came to present
themselves before the LORD, and Satan came also among them to present himself
before the LORD.

2. And the LORD said unto Satan, From whence come thou? And Satan answered
the LORD, and said, From going to and fro in the earth, and from walking up and
down in it.


THe Original and rise of this further trial of Job (which is, the holy
Providence of God permitting Satan to afflict him yet more, for the further
evidencing of his integrity) is expressed, to ver. 7. in the same terms that
formerly were made use of Chap 1.6, 7, etc. with some alterations suitable to
the present purpose: So that it is not necessary to insist on what is already
explained; but it will suffice to point at what is here added, as it occurreth
in the several verses.

In these two verses there is represented unto us a second view of the Lords
Sovevaign Dominion and holy Providence, over and about all things, even Angels,
who continually attend him, and Satan, whom he calls to an account, The purpose
is the same with that, Chap. 1.6, 7. only where it is there said, that Satan
came among, or, in the midst of the Sons of God, here it is added, that he came
among them, to present himself before the Lord, as they also did. Though the
expressions concerning both be alike, yet it is not to be conceived that they
appeared on alike terms. But on Satan's part (for what it signifies in respect
of Angels, has been cleared upon the former Chapter) it imports only his
necessitated subjection unto God, before whom he must present himself, and his
watching all advantages to vex the godly. As for the time when divine
Providence let this further trial break forth, expressed under the name of a
day, we cannot determine how long time intervened betwixt the former day,
wherein Job had been so sharply afflicted, and this day wherein Satan is again
let loose. Only it seems the time has not been so short, but that the former
trial had leisure to work upon him, and to search the frame of his spirit more
narrowly. And this seems to be imported in that expression, ver. 3. he still
holds fast his integrity. And yet it appears, also, that the time has not
been so long as to make the memory of his former trial wear out; But that the
matter was so ordered as it might be an addition to the bitterness of the
present stroke, and the present trial might make his old sores to bleed afresh.

Doct. 1. God is unchangeable, and still the same in power and glory, in all
times and vicissitudes; For, here upon a new discovery of his Dominion, he is
described as formerly, by his State and attendants, and the subjection of
Devils to him.

2. Gods Providence is also uniform and still the same, and universal, as to
all times, and as having a supreme hand in all Occurents; For, here on this
other day, the Supreme Providence of God is described in the same terms as
formerly.

3. As new trials do require renewed furniture to bear them, even by those who
have been supported in former trials; So, in particular, it is necessary that
Saints, in every new difficulty, take a renewed look of the Suprem hand and
Providence of God, which does not weary to attend them in six troubles, and
also in seven, though they do, often times, weary and cease to look up to it;
Therefore, when this new trial is to come upon Job, a new sight of Gods
Soveragin Dominion and Providence is here premitted to it.

4. It ought also to be firmly believed by the godly, that the Lord does not
only take notice of some one, or more, of Satan's actings, but that he has an
eye upon, and overrules all of them; So that in all assaults from him, they
may be assured that they are still in Gods hand: For, this repeated calling of
Satan to an account, from whence come thou? does import Gods constant
overruling of him, in all times.

5. Such is the malice and restless cruelty of Satan, that no success in his
attempts does satisfy him; but he is still at work to project further trouble
against the Saints, so long as they are within his reach: For, notwithstanding
Job is now brought very low, yet he not only appears this second time, to catch
all advantages to get him more troubled, seeing he could proceed no further
without a new Commission; but he professes his continued activity, in going to
and fro in the earth, etc. to prosecute his malicious designs. Such as do take
notice of this insatiable cruelty, will find themselves called to draw near
unto, and to make sure an interest in, the Lords pity and compassion.

Verse. 3. And the LORD said unto Satan, Have thou considered my servant Job,
that there is none like him in the earth, a perfect and upright man, one that
fears God, and escheweth evil? and still he holds fast his integrity,
although thou movedst me against him, to destroy him without cause.
In this verse we have the Lords Interrogation concerning Job, containing not
only the commendation formerly given before his trials, Chap. 1.8. but a new
addition to it, from his integrity in the late trial. Job being so tried as
none but a righteous man could keep his feet under such dispensations of
Providence, the Lord is pleased to commend him, not only as a godly man, but as
a tried godly man, who still holds fast his integrity. And this his
commendation is further amplified from an account of his trouble, which might
have tempted him to miscarry; Wherein we are to remark.

1. The greatness of his trouble. Though Satan, Chap. 1.11. call it but a
touch; yet the Lord calls it a destroying, or, swallowing up, as it is in the
Original; and that not of his Children, Servants and Goods only, but of himself
also (to destroy him) considering his sympathy and interest: Hereby
anticipating that calumny, ver. 4, 5. that Job was but little concerned in what
had hitherto befallen him.

2. The motive and rise of this trouble; Thou movedst me against him, to
destroy him. This does not import any imputation upon the blessed God, as if he
were moved by Satan to do any thing, especially without cause, as it after
follows. But the borrowed expression does only intimate thus, That, as God,
purposing to do good unto his people, makes way for fulfilling of his purpose,
by their Prayers to him, which he is pleased to say do move and prevail with
him; So, purposing to try his people, he takes occasion of the wicked calumnies
cast upon them by Satan and his Instruments, to manifest this his purpose.

3. The causlessness of this trouble; Thou movedst me -- without cause. Albeit
it be true tha^ God did thus destroy Job to no purpose or in vain, (which the
word will also signify) as to Satan's great design, who gained not his point by
it; Yet that is not the chief thing intended in this expression, of destroying
him without cause. Neither does it import that God afflicted him without any
cause of reason, having nothing before his eyes but only to vex him: For he had
holy purposes in it, to try his graces, refute calumnies, afford a singular
ground of experience for all after-ages, etc. But it is to be understood of the
procuring cause or quarrel, that God did thus afflict him without any quarrel
at him. Which yet must not be understood absolutely; For Job had Original sin
and many actual infirmities; and those of themselves did not only deserve great
temporal afflictions, but eternal death also, if God should have proceeded in
justice against him. But the meaning is that, as to Satan's accusation, there
was no such hypocrisy in Job as he alleged he was guilty of, to procure this
stroke. For he had endeavored to serve God sincerely, and did not sin
maliciously or wilfully, which are the faults at which God is specially angry
in his peo- Deuteronomy. 32.5. 1 John 5 18. In sum, Job was no hypocrite, as Satan did
insinuate, and the Lords chief end in afflicting him was not to punish his sin,
but to try him Wherein, notwithstanding, the Lord was just and holy, even when
he thus afflicted without cause. For he has sovereign power over the Being
which he has given, to inflict upon it what he pleases. And there is so much
also in the most innocent as may stop their mouths under greatest trials. All
these considerations, put together, tend to the heightening of Jobs
commendation, That he held fast h^s integrity, not only in prosperity, or when
God was sending a light tou^h of afflict^on, but when he was destroying and
swallowing him up; and when the Lord was doing this, not in pursuance of any
quarrel, but was destroying an innocent man, to refute the calumnies cast upon
his integrity.

To omit what has been already observed, on Chapter ^.8. we may here gather some
further Instructions. And,

First, The L^rds repeating of that commendation of Job, being now in an
affl^cted condition, which forms he had given him in his prosperity, does
teach, That the Lords estimation of his people, and of his grace in them, does
not alter with their external cond^tion; But true grace has the same luster,
in the Eyes of God, upon the Dunghill, that it has upon the Throne: For, now in
Jobs low estate, he gets the same commendation, which he got before, My Servant
Job, there is none l^ke him in the Earth etc.

Secondly, The addition to his commendation^, and still he holds fast his
Integrity, notwithstanding his trial, may teach,

1. Constancy in Piety, notwithstanding the sharp tentations of an afflicted
condition, is a singular commendation in Gods esteem; For, hereby Job so
acqui^^ himself that the old Characters of his Piety are not sufficient,
without this new addition to his commendation. See, 1 Pet. 1.7. And the reason
of this is insinuated in the word, holding fast, which, in the Original,
imports a retaining and holding of a thing firmly and with our whole strength,
because of difficulties and opposition; as the traveller keeps his garment in a
windy day: Implying, Not only, That when Gods people are assaulted with
tentations, it is their duty, and their practice when in a right frame, to put
forth their strength, that they may hold fast their integrity and what they
have received from the Lord? Heb. 4.14. Rev 2.13.25. and 3.11. But, That it is
an hard task to stand fast in trial, and therefore the more commendable to bear
out in such a tempest.

2. Whatever it be in Religion wherewith men please th^mselves, yet nothing
pleases God better than sincerity and up^ightness, especially when it is
preserved in under affliction and in a trying condition: For, this is the Lord
commends, that Job still holds fast his integrity. And he does, as it were,
glory over Satan in this, Have thou considered my servant Job? -- and still he
holds fast his integrity. The Question does not only import that God had an
eye upon him, and did notice him, now when he was in the furnace, but that he
did delight to vex Satan with the sight of his constant integrity. See Revel.
2.13. and 3.10.

3. As God is especially pleased with men's sincerity, so it is against that
that Satan plants his chief Engines and Battery; For, the thing which Job had
chiefly to hold fast, in this trial, was, his integrity. Satan did not assault
Jobs outward prosperity, but to barter his integrity thereby. Nor is it men's
Formality, or outward Profession, that he does so much malign, if he can keep
them from being sincere in that they do. And Saints may be helped to know their
own sincerity, if it were but by Satan's great opposition unto them, wherewith
Formalists are not acquainted.

4. Albeit it be no small d^fficulty to stand fast, and to continue streigh^
and upright, in sharp trials; Yet the truly sincere are, by the grace of God,
^^le to do it, and to abide never so many and sharp assaults: For, hereof we
h^ve an experience in Job, still he holds fast his integ^i^y. Great, is he
who is in Believers than he that is in the world, 1 Job. 4.4. and even weak
grace, suppo^ted by God, is a party too hard for all opposition.

5. It is an act of Divine Wisdom, when kings of the world are going to ruin,
not to cast away Piety also and a good Conscience, o^, because God strips us of
outward contentments, therefore to turn our back upon that which ought to be a
Cordial under all pressures; For, this is commended, as act of great wi^dom in
Job, that, when other thing were p^lled from him, still he hold fast his
integrity: To take another course will nothing b^ne ^t men, or ease their
griefs, but does inde^d double their losses.

Thirdly, The amplification of this commendation (though thou movedst me
against him, to destroy him without cause) does teach*

1. When any do sincerely cleave to God in trouble, God will not think lightly
of their trouble, but will look upon it in all the aggravations thereof; that
he may take occasion to let out more of his compassion, and may heighten their
commendation who endure such sharp assaults: For, thus does God describe Jobs
trial as a destroying, or, swallowing of him up, both to testify his own
tender compassion, and to commend Job, who had held fast his integrity when he
had so many tentations to discover his weakness, being so destroyed and
swallowed up.

2. When God afflicts his people, he does it not willingly, Lam. 3.33. or as
taking pleasure in their miseries; So much is import^d in this, Thou movedst me
to destroy him: Where the borrowed phrase may intimate, in a sound sense, That
as m^n may be moved by solicitation to do that which, otherwise, they have no
pleasu^e to do; So God go^th about this work, of afflicting Saints, not as one
pleased with their pressures, though he be well s^t^^fied with their behavior
under them. He is the Lord who takes pleasure in the prosperity of his
servants, Psalm. 35.27. And therefore he does affl^ct them only when it is
necessary, for trying of their graces, or for correcting of them for their
faults, and purging of their corruptions, 1 Pet. 1.6, 7. Psalm. 89 30, -- 33.
Isai. 27.9. And this will easily appear to the godly, by his readiness to be
reconciled unto them, by his tender usage and kindness under trouble. Psalm.
31.7. and by his bringing of them out of trouble when their trial is perfected.

3. Whatever God intend in afflicting his people, yet such as have any hand
therein shall bear the blame in whole; Therefore is it all laid over upon
Satan, Thou movedst me, etc. as only guilty in this matter, having done all he
could to get Job ruined. Hence it is that Gods afflicting of his people is (so
to s^y) a blowing of the b^llows to kindle his displeasure against wicked
Instruments, Psalm 47 5, 6. Zech. 1.15.

4. Albeit the most perfect of Saints upon earth have so much sin, as of it
self, deserves not only temporal afflictions, but eternal wrath; Yet the Lord
is pleased, sometimes to afflict them without respect to their sin, only that
his grace may shine in them, and that the calumnies of Satan may be refuted:
For so much is imported in this, Thou movedst me to destroy him without cause,
as has been explained. See Job. 9.2, 3. It is true, as Saints are sinful
creatures, so their sincerity will not be a Savior to expiate or cover their
failings; nor yet ought they to omit, in every trial (how cleanly soever) to
become thereby more acqua^nted with their own sinfulness, and to make use of
the Rod to purge it out. Yet they are allowed to look out also toward Gods more
high purposes in their trials, than only to chasten them for sin.

5. Albeit the Lord will not respect such as come to him under justly procured
strokes; Yet a good Conscience under trouble is a great advantage: For, it is
no small advantage to be destroyed without cause, and not to have an evil
Conscience to heighten the affliction. And this the Lord noticeth and speaks
of, not only as heightning Jobs commendation, but as being an advantage in it
self. See 1 Pet. 4.15, 16.

6. It is a special commendation, and proof of integrity, to bear cleanly
trials with much submission; and when men's hearts do not accuse them of
dishonesty, and yet they stoop and cleave to God: For, this is Jobs
commendation, Still he holds fast his integrity, though thou movedst me
against him, to destroy him without cause. It is true, we ought so much the
more to stoop, and to bless God, when our trials are cleanly, and not dipped in
our own provocations, Yet seldom do we abstain from judging of God when he
judges, except when sin stops our mouths, Psalm. 51.4. with Romans 3.4.

Verse. 4. And Satan answered the LORD, and said, Skin for skin, yea all that a
man has will he give for his life.

5. But put forth thine hand now, and touch his bone and his flesh, and he will
curse thee to thy face.


In these verses we have Satan's answer to the Lords Interrogation, containing a
new and further accusatino against Job as an hypocrite, notwithstanding all
that God had said to the commendation of his constancy under affliction. Having
before slandered Jobs actions and course of life during his prosperity, he does
now slander his behavior under his sufferings. And though he did at first
speak of those trials, which had already come upon Job, as a plot which would
discover his unsoundness, when he desired God to try him therewith; Chap. 1.10,
11. Yet now he speaks diminutively of these sufferings, as no sufficient trial
of his honesty: Asserting that it was not any love to God made him carry so
fair, but merely love to himself, as not caring how many skins and bodies too,
were lost, so himself were preserved; and as desiring, by his continuance in an
hypocritical profession of godliness, to prevent any trouble that might be sent
upon his own person. This Assertion he holds out, and offers to clear, by a
common Proverb (usual in in those times, wherein the exchange of Commodities
was the usual way of Traffic, as yet one slave, or captive, uses to be
exchanged for another.) Skin for skin, yea all that a man has, will he give
for his life. Which signifies, in general, that nothing outward is so dear to
a man as his own life. Whence he would infer, that it was no wonder Job did
hypocritically stoop under his former losses, that God might spare the Rod from
off himself. And for further confirmation of this Assertion, he appeals to a
new trial, desiring to have that link of the Chain loosed, whereby he was
restrained from touching Jobs person; Avouching that if God would touch his
bone and his flesh (or, smite him in his person, so as might reach him to the
marrow) he would maliciously and desperately curse God, even to his face: Which
in the Original (as also Chap. 1.11.) is propounded by way of tacit
imprecation against himself, or, of an Oath importing an imprecation, If he
curse thee not, etc.

This, as to the form of speech, is the same with that, Chap. 1.9, 10, 11.
where it was observed. That it is Satan's design in trouble, to tempt men to
curse God; and, How malicious a slanderer Satan is, not caring how falsely he
calumniate, so he get Saints vexed: As here not only does he reflect upon Jobs
integrity, but upon his tenderness and sympathy, as if he regarded not the
stroke upon his Children, Servants and Goods, when the contrary did appear from
his practice, Chap. 1.20. But the subject matter, here, may further teach,

1. Satan is so incessant in his attempts against Saints, that he will not give
over, when he has got the soil: but is ready to assault a fresh upon every
occasion; As here, after Jobs former triumph over his calumnies, he makes this
fresh assault.

2. As Satan is incessant in his malicious endeavors; so he is fall of shifts
and inventions, in bearing out his calumnies against the people of God, or in
driving in those fiery darts of bosom-tentations wherewith he vexes them: For,
when all he had to say before against Job is immediately refuted, now he has a
new pretense whereupon to question his integrity. This is daily verified in the
calumnies cast by Satan's Inst^uments upon the people of God. One of them is no
sooner refuted, but they are ready to invent another. And this is also felt by
Saints in their spiritual Conflicts with Bosom-tentations, which come in as
waves and billows, one upon the back of another, to over-whelm their spirits.

3. It is never to be expected by the Lords people, but that Satan will be
ready to extenuate and decry the grace of God in them, so much as he can; For,
here again he makes it his work to blast Jobs integrity in his former trial.
Which may teach them not to trust or hearken unto his suggestions.

4. Whatever measure of affliction Satan be permitted to bring upon Saints, yet
such is his malice, that nothing will satisfy him but their utter ruin; For,
now when Job is stripped of all, he thinks it not enough, so long as his person
and life are free; Put forth thine hand, and touch his bone and his flesh. And
therefore we have little cause to fall asleep because we have endured many
trials, since we know not what sharper trials this malicious Adversary may be
designing for us, if he be permitted by God so to do.

5. Albeit Satan be a malicious liar, and do here notably injure this holy man;
yet there are some Gene^a^ T^uths insinuated in this Discourse, whereof he
makes use to drive his design. As

1. That life and bodily health are special and chief outward mercies. Memb^rs
of the body are sometime h^zarded for preserving of life, and men have
warr^ntab^y spent all they had on Physicians, for recovering of health, Luke
8.43. And therefore they do hainously sin who under-value this special benefit,
or do prostitute it to the service of their lusts.

2. But, albeit every trial have its own weight, yet, personal trials are most
sharp, and will most narrowly search out hypocrisy or sincerity in the person
so tried, and the nearer they come, they will be the more searching: For, in so
far Satan said true, that a man may be more ready to curse God, or, miscarry,
if the trial touch his bone and flesh, than if it come only on what more
remotely concerns him. Hence it appears to have been an act of special favor,
that Jobs own person was excepted in the former trial, Chap. 1 12.

3 That it is a special proof of unsoundness in men, when t^yals and
^ffl^ctions are slighted because they touch not themselves so neatly, or when
they make a show of Piety, only that trials may be kept from off themselves;
For, this was the some of Satan's charge against Job, which is an evidence of
gross hypocrisy, had it been true.

Verse 6. And the LORD said unto Satan, Behold, he is in thine hand, but save
his life.
In this verse we have the Lords further loosing of the chain, permitting Satan
to afflict Jobs body, but not to take away his life Or this form of speech, and
of Gods limiting of Satan, see Chap. 1.12.

Here we may further learn,

1. After the Lords people have endured many and sharp trials, it may please
the Lord to inflict yet more and sharper trials, for further discovering of
what is in them; As he^e, after all that Job has endured, more is laid upon
him. And albeit Saints may be ready to stumble at this, yet it may silence and
satisfy them, if they rem^mber, the sovereignty of God, who may dispose of his
own as he will; that Gods special love and sharp trials may very well consist
together; that true grace will teach men not to quarrel God because of crosses;
and, that trials, yea, many and growing trials, are necessary, to discover them
unto themselves, to fit them for special proofs of Gods love, and to vindicate
their Profession from the many aspersions cast upon it.

2. As it is very consistent with Gods love to his people, to suffer them to be
tempted in their souls by the fiery darts of Satan; So the bodies also of such
as are dear to God may be left in Satan's hand to ^fflict them, by himself, or
by Witches his Instruments: For, so was it with Job, Behold, he is in thine
hand. Hence come many of those diseases which surpass the skill of Physicians,
Luke 13.16.

3. Whatever be Satan's hand in the trials of the godly, yet they ought still to
eye an overruling hand of Providence, ordering all of them, and setting bounds
and limits to Satan's malice in them; For, here, the rise of this trial is from
Gods holy Providence, Behold he is in thy hand, and Satan is limited, but save
his life.

4. In the sharpest trials of Saints, there is still some mercy and moderation
to be observed, and that Satan is never able to compass all his design; For,
here there is an exception, and a reservation of that which Satan aimed at, no
less than the other degrees of his affliction, But save his life, or, spare it
and do not take it away.

5. The continuance and sparing of life, even under sharpest affl^ctions, is a
mercy for which God is to be acknowledged; For, here, in the midst of Jobs
trials, it is reserved as a mercy to him, save his life. See Lam. 3.39. The
mercy whereof in J^bs case, though much mistak^n by him, may appear, partly, in
this, That hereby the Lord would teach his Church in all Ages, that he has
power of life and death, and can preserve his people and interests in most
desperate cases, and betwixt the very jaw bones of death, Psalm. 66.8, 9, 10.
and 68.20. And, partly, in this, That however Job, being a reconciled man,
would have died at any time in Gods favor; Yet the Lord will not take him away
in a cloud, nor give Satan any appearance of advantage to say that Job died in
an ill case, or, fretting: But will have him to live in and after those storms,
as a monument of Gods mercy, and to clear and vindicate his integrity. As
indeed, It is no small mercy to the Lords people, when clouds upon their
condition are cleared before they go hence and be no more.

6. The Lords people may enjoy many mercies which yet, in their darkness,
passion and haste, they esteem rather burdens than m^rcies; For, so will we
afterward find Job judging of his continued life, which here is reserved in
mercy.

Verse. 7. So went Satan forth from the presence of the LORD, and smote Job with
sore boyls, from the sole of his foot unto his crown.
In this verse we have the trial it self, or, Satan's executing of what is
permitted him to do; Who, finding the chain loosed, goes actively about it:
And expresses his great rage and malice, in inflicting a most painful k^nd of
disease, and that not on one or some parts of Jobs body only, which had been
sore enough, but so universally, as there is not a part of his body left free.
Only, as some conceive, his tongue and lips escape, that thereby (as Satan
designed it) he might blaspheme God.

Hence learn,

1. Satan's going forth from the presence of the Lord, does not only import his
activity in cruelty, when ever he finds an opportunity; But that, albeit he can
act nothing but that only which God perm^ts, yet he does not ^ye God, (whose
presence he neglects) but seeks only to vent his own malice thereby. And
therefore he must be accountable to God, as a cruel Murther^r, in those actings
which God does holily permit and order.

2. Submission and stooping unto God under trials, will not, always, prevent
new trials; For, notwithstanding Jobs meek and pious submission, Chap. 1.20,
21. the Lord permits Satan to add this new trial. When trials have not shaken
our Submission and Patience, the Lord takes pleasure to put us to give new
proofs of that resolution; and he may see it fit also (as the event clears in
Job) to discover the seeds of impatience and passion in us, that we may ascribe
the glory of our standing out, not to our selves but to God.

3. When God has any of his people to try, they are to expect that the trial
will be sharp, and a trial indeed; For, so dealt he with Job, who is smitten
with sore boils, from the sole of his foot unto his crown. Which how sharp it
was, may appear from Jobs own frequent complaints, of his loathsome breath, of
worms and dust upon his body, of his skin eaten up and broken, his bones
assaulted; etc. And indeed, This was a very sore trial, whether we consider the
exquisite pain, and the ugliness and deformity, that was in, and accompanied
this stroke; or the contemptible and low condition to which it brought him,
having no sound part of his body whereon to lie, being loathsome, not only to
his servants, but to his most intimate Relations. All which may teach the
Children of God to submit to that measure of humiliation, which it shall please
God to prescribe; and that they should not mistake or stumble, albeit their
bodies be made like the bodies of Job and Lazarus.

4. The people of God ought not to stumble, albeit their afflictions be such,
and so great, as they seem to differ nothing from the plagues of the wicked;
and albeit they can see no sign of love, in the nature and kind of their
affliction, till they look up to the heart of the striker: For, Job is smitten
with boils, and sore boils, the same with the Plague inflicted upon the
Egyptians, Exodus 9.9. and that which is threatened to be inflicted upon
incorrigible Rebels, Deuteronomy. 28.27. as the word in the Original clears.

5. Trials are so fitted to the measure of grace in sufferers, as the strongest
shall undergo so much as they can bear by divine assistance, whereas the weaker
shall have no more than they may also subsist under; For, eminent Job gets an
eminent trial, so that he and his boils, and weaker ones with their lesser
trials, are equal.

6. Albeit too many do dote upon the beauty of their own bodies, and so sin
against God; yet it may humble us, when we consider that they are composed of
such materials, as if God should let the humors loose, they would become a
burden to our selves, and loathsome to all: For, here, Satan getting leave to
inflame his blood, and trouble the humors of his body, it becomes full sore
boils.

Verse. 8. And he took him a potsheard to scrape himself withal; and he sat
down among the ashes.
In this verse an account is given of Jobs carriage under this trial. No
mention is made of any thing he said, till afterward that his Wife put him to
it; But his practice gives some account of the inward frame of his spirit.

1. That he took him a potsheard to scrape himself withal. Where we are to
conceive (as himself complains afterward, Chap. 19.13 -- 17.) that his disease
was so loathsome, that none would come near unto him, to minister unto him
Clothes, Oils, or other things necessary: So that he was necessitated to serve
himself. And withal, that his own hands were so swelled with Boyls, or his
disease was so loathsome, that he could not touch his sores immediately with
his fingers, but behoved to take a Potsheard, or what came nearest to hand, to
scrape away the filthy matter that ran out of his Boyls.

2. That he sat down among the ashes. Which was not so much an act of
necessity, that he could not get leave to stay in the house, because of the ill
favor of his sores, but behoved to go out and ly upon the dunghill. This indeed
may be the lot of Saints, to be so basely esteemed of and entreated, Lam. 4.5.
1 Cor. 4.9. -- 13. Yet it appears that he had his wife with him, ver. 9. and he
had his Bed and Couch still, Chap. 7.4, 13. But it was in him a voluntary act
of repentance and humiliation, whereof this was an external ceremonial sign,
Chap. 42.6 Math. 11.21. which (it seems) he performed, at least at solemn
times, both in the house, and, possibly, when he went abroad also, as when his
Friends saw him afar off, and sat down on the ground with him. Chap. 2.12, 13.
And this external Ceremony (which now is ceased) was made use of, Partly, to
express the greatness of trouble, that it brought the afflicted even to the
dust, as Job 30.19. Partly, to express their stooping to God considering their
original, and that they were but dust, Genesis 3.19. And partly (as humility is
full of hope) to express their pleading for favor at Gods hand, considering
they were but dust. Psalm 103.14

Doct. 1 When God has any of his people to try under affl^ctions, it pleases
him sometime, to bind up the bowels of compassion and sympathy in all about
them, that so the trial may work; As here Job is left to shift for his own ease
in his pain.

2. In judging of men's integrity under trial, the Lord looks not only, or so
much to what they say, as to their actings; For, albeit Job say nothing as yet
under this distress (being probably overwhelmed, and tentations boiling within
him) yet he does that which witnesses his patient submission.

3. It is no small proof of submission and patience, when men under pressures
and bodily infirmities do not turn desperate, but do conscientiously use all
lawful means which may make their condition so easy as can be; For, this speaks
for Job, that he casts not off care of his body, but makes use of such lawful
means of ease as he could get. He took him a potsheard to scrape himself
withal.

4. As proud risings of heart under trouble are of a certain sign of a
distempered spirit; So an humble man, who makes his acquaintance with the dust
under trouble, does thereby prove himself an honest and patient man: For, this
is another proof of Jobs patience and integrity, he sat down among the ashes.

5. No man has made such proficiency in humility, he needs to grow in it; and
when men have been humbled under troubles, it becomes them, when they are put
to new exercises, to be yet more humbled: For, albeit Job had been humbled
before, Chap. 1.20. yet, upon this new emergent, he again sat down among the
ashes.

6. None have ever essayed the rich advantages of humility under trouble, and
how sweet it is, to stoop so low as the violence of the storm blows over them,
but they will be ready to grow in it upon renewed occasions; For, so much does
Jobs renewed practice in humbling himself again before God, teach us.

Verse. 9 Then said his wife unto him, Do thou still retain thine integrity?
Curse God and die.
Follows, in this and the following verse a new assault upon Jobs integrity,
with his victory over it. Satan, having before indirectly essayed to draw him
to curse God, but without success, does now stir up his wife directly to
suggest that motion to him. In this verse wherein this suggestion and tentation
is recorded, we may consider.

1. The tempter, or, Instrument employed to suggest this unto him, his wife. It
is but a groundless dream of the Rabbis that she was Dinah, Jacob's daughter;
Yet (not to enquire into the truth of her grace, and whether she were only now
overpowered with a tentation, as we find not that she makes any reply to her
Husbands reproof verse 10.) it is unquestionable that she had been well
educated and exercised in that family, and yet she becomes a tentation to him
to draw him to sin; And it seems that she, being within Satan's commission, was
reserved by him as a fit Instrument thus to tempt Job; as some few servants
also were spared, to add to his affliction, as we heard from Chap. 1. and will
hear further from Jobs own complaints, Chap. 19.

2. The tentation, or, suggestion, wherein she disswades him from retaining his
integrity, and advises him to curse God and die. The word being (as was marked
Chap. 1.5.) Bless God and die, Some do understand it properly, and excuse her,
as urging no more then what his three friends did press; That he should not
stand so stiffly to the maintenance of his integrity, but should glorify God
by confessing of his sin, before he were thus cut off, or, albeit, he should
die after he had so done. But this Interpretation does not suit with the
sharpness of the reproof, given her by Job, verse. 10. Therefore, whether we
render it, to Curse, in a proper sense: or to Bless, by way of Derision and
Irony, all comes to one purpose: She seeing him stoop to God, notwithstanding
all had come upon him, does thus express her self; Will thou yet stoop to God
and bless him, as thou did formerly ( Chap. 1.21.) when he does thus handle
thee? Ay, bless him still, go on so to do, and mark what will be the issue, He
will even cut thee off, notwithstanding all thy Piety and blessing of him, Or
rather thus, (for it is safest to take the word in the sense made use of by
Satan, ver. 5. and Chap. 1.11. whose design she did prosecute by this motion)
Why would thou any longer continue in a course of Piety? What have thou reaped
by it, but such an heap of afflictions, one upon the back of another? Nay
rather, since thou art cast into such a deep pit of miseries, from which there
is no hope of relief, and since all thy honesty cannot so much as procure thee
an issue by death, Spare not openly to curse and blaspheme God, which will
either provoke him to cut thee off; or Magistrates, according to the law, will
do it.

Doct. 1. In a day of trial, the Godly may expect that even mercies, which seem
to be reserved for their comfort, will prove an addition to their trial; as
here Jobs wife does prove to him, whereas it might have seemed that she was
continued with him for his comfort in this his sad and desolate condition.

2. When trials come upon any one in a Society, if the person tried be not
ensnared to sin, yet some one or other of his Interests and Relations may be
catched; For, though Satan miss of Job, who was his chief aim, yet he gets
advantage of his wife.

3. As Corruption may lurk long under Grace, so, much more may gross
naughtiness lurk long in a religious Family, and in a person going along in the
religious duties therein performed; as here is to be seen in this woman, who
(no doubt) before this time went along with the rest of the Family in the
duties performed therein.

4. A day of adversity will readily discover that naughtiness of persons in a
Society, which lies hid in times of prosperity; For, it is at that time her
corruptions break forth. And it cannot but be very sad, when those who live
peaceably till afflictions come on, do then prove Instruments of grief and
vexation.

5. It is the poor and wretched imploym^nt of such as are employed by Satan,
not only to serve him in their own persons, but to become baits and snares to
others, to draw them along with them; For, Jobs wife, being thus ensnared, is
employed to tempt her husband to the like sinful course.

6. As Saints, in a day of affliction, may look for sharpest trials from
nearest Friends and natural Relations; So, in particular, S^tan looks upon
wives, when they are corrupt themselves, as the most effectual Instruments to
draw their husbands to sin; Therefore does he make use of Jobs wife to tempt
him. Thus did he tempt Adam by Evah, and Jezabel did stir up Achab to be more
wicked, I Kings 21.25.

7. It is no strange thing to see men contemned in the world, and accounted
simple and silly, even upon the account of these things for which they are
commended of God; For, God had commended Job because of his integrity, ver. 3.
and his wife accounts it his folly. Do thou still retain thine Integrity? So
that upright walkers have much need of Self-denial, and not to consu^t with
flesh and blood.

8. It is an evidence of the power of Conscience in men, that in their most
desperately sinful courses, they cannot so extinguish the light thereof, but
they see the great hazard of their way; And it is an evidence of their great
slavery under sin, that no hazard does deter them from it: For, this woman,
notwithstanding all her distemper, is convinced of this, that blasphemy
deserves death, (which should warn us to avoid the least degrees of it, in
murmu^^ng and fretting against God) And yet she advises her husband to run
upon the hazard, Curse God and die. Albeit that law concerning blasphemers,
Lev. 24.14, 15, 16. was not written in Jobs days; yet it appears from her
expressions, that the thing it self was then known, by the light of Nature or
by immediate Revelation.

9. We may also, from her speech, take notice of some of the wicked suggestions
of Satan and our corrupt flesh, in an hour of trial. As,

1. When men's hearts do rise in pride against Gods dealing, and do under-value
Piety, because of affl^ction and want of ease; Do thou still retain thine
Integrity? says she, when thou art thus affl^cted? See Mal. 3.13 14.

2. When men have such a prejudice against afflictions and trials, that they
scruple at no sin which may seem to promise ease of a present trouble; Curse
God and die, says she, and so thou will get out of this toil and vexation.

3. When men are so earnest to avoid a present trouble, as they do not consider
that they may be running upon a greater affl^ction; Curse God, says she, and
die, that so thou may see an end of thy pain; little considering that death is
not the end of all trouble to all men, and especially to those who enter in at
the gates of death voluntarily blaspheming and cursing God, as she advises him
to do.

Verse. 10. But he said unto her, Thou speak as one of the foolish women
speak^th; what? shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not
receive evil? In all this did not Job sin with his lips.
Follows Jobs answer unto, and refutation of this suggestion. Albeit he had
hitherto kept silence, yet he cannot let this suggestion pass without a reply.
And though no doubt, he was a tender husband, who behaved himself so
conscientiously, even toward servants, Chap. 31.13, 14.15. Yet in this case,
the zeal of God prompts him to make a sharp return to her motion. And

1. He points out how unbecoming it was that such a motion should flow from
her; It might possibly have been expected that one of the foolish women,
Nabalesses (so the word is in the Original) or, Pagans, about them, should have
spoken so in a day of trial; But it did not beseem one so instructed, and who
enjoyed so many means of knowledge as she did, to be so badly principled.

2. He points out the absurdity of her counsel in it self, That they who have
received good things from the Lord, Should not be content to submit to evil
things, or afflictions, when God sees it meet to exercise them therewith; But
that, whenever the tide begins to turn, they should be weary of Piety, and turn
blasphemers. For clearing whereof, consider,

1. That question, What? or also, and his propounding of the Refutation by way
of Interrogation, does insinuate, both the vehemence of Jobs zeal, and the
clear evidence of the truth propo^nded, that it may extort a confession from
those who are most prejudged, if they will but consider it.

2. What he speaks of receiving good and evil, is not to be understood of the
simple act of receiving; For in that the Lord does not s^^k o^t conf^ne, but
f^nds good or evil, as it pleases him, and makes them our lot. But he speaks
of the manne^ of rece^ving, that as we receive and entertain good things
cheerfully and contentedly, so it is our duty to receive evil things
submissively and patiently.

Doct. 1. As zeal for God is seemly and becomes Saints; so tentations and
suggest^ons should be roughly entertained, and not dallyed with, from
whomsoever they come: For, Job does entertain this motion from his wife with
much zeal and indignation. See Matthew 16.22, 23. So also ought rising
suggestions in our own bosoms be entertained.

2. As sin is odious and hateful in any; so it is mo^e abominable in some th^n
others; And when sin is looked upon, not only in its own nature, but as
committed by such persons who have lived under many means, and had many
engag^ments to holy walking put upon them; ^t will exceedingly heighten the
sinfulness thereof: For, so does Job aggravate the sin of his wife, Thou
speak as one of the foolish women speaks.

3. To renounce God and Piety under trouble, or because of it, is an act of the
highest folly, and rather beseeming Pagans then Professors of the true
Religion, who will find it their advantage to cleave to God in trouble, and
that to do otherwise were to lose more then trouble can otherwise take from
them, and to deprive themselves of a sovereign antidote against the venom of
afflictions; For, in the counsel she gave, Job reckons that she speaks as one
of the foolish women.

4 It is not enough that we reprove faults in others, unless we take pains also
to inform them, and to root out the prejudices and corrupt principles which
mislead them; Therefore Job, after the reproof, subjoyns an information, What?
or also (as the word will read, adding this to the former reproof) Shall we
receive good, etc?

5. When men do rightly consider their own case, they will find that an hour of
tentation does so bemist them, and over-cloud their judgments, that they want
the use of their very common Principles; Therefore does Job put home this
Refutation with Questions, as being so clear, that her Light and Conscience
could not decline it, if she would advert.

6. It is a very great fault in men to arrogate to themselves to be their own
carvers, and that they will endure no lot but what pleases them; For, we are
but receivers, not prescribers.

7. Seeing all the good we enjoy comes by the gift of God, there is no reason
we should murmur if he dispose of his own as he will, and take back his gift at
his pleasure; For, We receive good at the hand of God, and therefore should
acquiesce in his disposing thereof at his pleasure.

8. It is a very great fault to limit God constantly to one way of dealing with
his people, and that we cannot endure to submit to changes; For, Job insinuates
that we must resolve both for good and evil, in the service of our Generation.

9. It is also a fault, that men, enjoying a long time of prosperity, should so
settle themselves in case, that they cannot endure a new assault of trouble;
seeing these vicissitudes in our condition are necessary for us, and Gods
sparing of us long may very well persuade us to endure trials in their season;
For, Shall we receive good, and shall we not receive evil?

10. It is yet a further degree of miscarriage, when men have received so many
proofs of love from God, and yet when the same hand lets out a needful trouble,
they are ready to question and doubt of this love, and so quarrel him; For, if
we have received good, we ought, without mistaking, receive evil, when it is
made our lot. For as evil, coming to us out of the hand of God, changes its
nature, and becomes good; so it becomes them who have tasted much of Gods
bounty and love, not to mistake every change of dealing. In a word, Jobs
arguing does teach, That no man does rightly improve prosperity, but he who is
fitted thereby to bear adversity more submissively; That no godly man ought to
repine at any mean (how bitter soever) which may contribute to purge out his
corruptions, and promote his Communion with God; and, That when God freely
conferreth good things upon us, we should not take it ill if sometime he make
us taste the bitter fruits of our own ill deserving; Nor should we decline to
undergo any toil and service in our Generation, when God has, by many proofs
of love, prevented us, and (so to say) put an hire and encouragement in our
hand.

11. Men ought not to suspend their submission to trying dispensations, till
they find them pleasing to their sense; But it is the touchstone of their
submission, if, when they find their condition bitter, yet, they do acquiesce:
For, Job acknowledged his lot to be, in it self, evil (of which see on Amos
3.6.) and yet he pleads for submission, Should we not receive evil?

In the end of the verse there is subjoyned a testimony concerning this
behavior of Job. Nothing is further expressed concerning his wife, who
probably, was convinced and put to silence by this reproof. But to refute
Satan's calumny, God passes his sentence of approbation upon what Job had done,
That in all this Job sinned not with his lips. It is somewhat different from
that testimony, Chap. 1.22. which is more ample. Here it is imported, That
albeit there were somewhat boiling in his breast, which afterward burst forth;
Chap. 3. yet not only did he forbear to express it, when the stroke came upon
him, ver. 8. and when his wife tempted him, v. 9. But when he spoke, he spoke
contrary to any suggestions that were in his heart.

Doct. 1. In all conflicts and trials, the eye of God is upon his people, to
observe and pass sentence according to their behavior; For, this sentence
presupposes Gods observing of Job.

2. Albeit it be very bitter to the people of God to be frequently tossed with
renewed tentations and assaults; Yet this may encourage them, that every
renewed conflict, and their standing out in it, draws out a new commendation
from God; For, here a new sentence is passed in Jobs favors.

3. It should be seriously remembered by Saints, that the thing which God
chiefly observes under trial, is, how they study to avoid sin, and that he will
commend accordingly; For, that is the thing God did eye and commend in Job,
that in all this did not Job sin.

4. As Saints may expect that their sincere carriage, especially under long and
renewed afflictions, will be attended with some humbling discoveries of
themselves; So God will not deny his testimony to their sincerity;
notwithstanding these discoveries; For, Job is still commended, notwithstanding
it be employed that there was some disorder in his spirit, which he endeavored
to suppress.

5. When Saints find tentations boiling in their hearts, ready to break forth;
it is acceptable service, as to mourn for them before God, so to endeavor to
suppress them by silence, and (as they have occasion) to speak contrary to the
suggestions of their own hearts; as being a mean to honor God, to prevent the
scandal of the weak, and even to cure their own distempers: For, this is a part
of Jobs commendation, that he did not sin with his lips, but suppressed his
thoughts, and spoke on Gods behalf against the suggestions of his wife. See
Psalm. 39.1, 9. and 106.33.

Verse. 11. Now when Jobs three friends heard of all this evil that was come
upon him, they came every one from his own place: Eliphaz the Temanite, and
Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite; for they had made an appointment
together to come to mourn with him, and to comfort him.

12. And when they lift up their eyes afar off, and knew him not, they lifted
up their voice, and wept, and they rent every one his mantle, and sprinkled
dust upon their heads toward heaven,

13. So they sat down with him upon the ground seven days and seven nights, and
none spoke a word unto him: for they saw that his grief was very great.


In the third part of the Chapter is recorded, how Job was visited by three of
his Friends; which occasioned much exercise and trouble to him, though not
intended by them. In it we have to consider.

1. The persons who performed this office of love to Job, His three Friends
came every one from his own place, who are further described by their Names and
Original, Eliphaz being descended of Teman, the grandchild of Esau, Genesis 36 11.
Bildad being of the posterity of Shuah, the son of Abraham by Keturah, Genesis
25.1, 2. Zophar is called the Naamathite, being either descended of that
Timuah, the son Esau, Genesis 36.40. who is called Naamath, by transposition of
letters, usual in Scripture names, or dwelling in the City Naamath, afterward
possessed by Judah, toward the coast of Edom, Joshuah 15.21, 41. These were the
three chief persons who came to visit him, of whom there is most mention, and
who probably came first. Though we find Elihu was with him also, Chap. 32. and,
it seems, others likewise. Chap. 35.4. And this account of his friends and
their descent, gives some light to the knowledge of the time wherein Job lived.

2. The occasion and rise of this visit, when they heard of all this evil that
was come upon him, they came every one from his own place Job had now so small
a family, and those so froward, Chap. 19.15.16. that he could not send any to
acquaint his friends with his condition; But they hearing of what had befallen
him (which considering Jobs dignity, was divulged far and near, and gave
occasion to every man to speak and judge of it as he thought fit) do appoint to
come together and visit him. So that this visit was not made till some time
after the stroke, when the report of it was now spread in the Countries about;
though it cannot certainly be determined how long time intervened betwixt the
one and the other.

3. Their resolution and scope in this visit; They made an appointment together
(that it might have more weight, and they might be helpful one to another) to
come to mourn with him, and comfort him; or, to testify, by their sympathy,
how much they were affected with his condition, that so they might be in a
nearer capacity to minister comfort to him, and he might be better prepared to
receive it from their hands.

4. Their putting of this resolution in practice, at least the first part of
it, or, their sympathizing with him; ver. 12, 13. which is witnessed by their
weeping aloud, and other Ceremonial expressions of sorrow, Such as, renting of
their Mantles (of which, Chap. 1.20.) and casting up dust toward Heaven, that
it might fall down upon their heads, in sign of grief and humility, Josh. 7, 6.
Neh. 9.1. Lam. 2.10. And by their sitting so much of seven days and nights as
was fit for visiting of him (for no doubt, they withdrew and slept sometimes)
upon the ground beside him, in token of joining with him; and, their keeping
silence all the while, at least speaking nothing of what was their main errand,
which was also an expression of their great sorrow, Lam 2.10.

5. The reasons of this their practice, Which are,

1. That when they lift up their eyes afarr off they knew him not, ver. 12. Job
being either now walking abroad, or lying in the fields, to take the fresh air,
when they came toward him, or they looking upon him at distance, when they came
unto the room where he was, do find him so altered with his afflictions and
boyls, that they can hardly know him, which does excite them to so much sorrow.

2. (which is the reason of their so long silence in particular) They saw that
his grief was very great, ver. -- 13. which was (no doubt) awaked and augmented
at their coming to him. This did not only render Job incapable to admit of any
comfort they intended for him, but did also astonish them selves, and leave
them in the dark where to begin to deal with him a man so afflicted,
considering their principles upon which they afterward proceed with him. In all
this, as we find much tenderness and affection in them; so their long silence,
forbearing to be comfortable to a man so distressed, is not free of blame, as
contributing not a little to make Job apprehend that they judged hardly of his
condition because of his stroke, and so giving occasion to these distempe^s
which afterward brake forth. Though in all this the holy Providence of God is
to be adored, who would have Jobs comfort suspended, that he might be tried yet
more; and who, by their unseasonable silence, gave occasion to Job to open his
mouth, in the next Chapter; and so made way for the following debate which is
so useful to the Church of God in all Ages.

From ver. 11. Learn.

1. It is not strange to see such things befall godly men as may be matter of
talking, and may expose them as a wonder to all about them; For, such things
befell Job as are heard by his Friends in their several Countries. See, Psalm.
71.7.

2. It is a point of spiritual prudence in Godly men, beside their ordinary
familiars and acquaintances, to make sure of some special and godly friends, of
whom they may make use in all exigents; and if they cannot have such nearer at
hand, to make use even of such as are at a distance; For, Job has his three
friends, in the Countries about. Which may condemn them who may have godly
friends nearer at hand, and yet make no use of them. See, Eccles. 4 8. -- 12.

3. It is the duty of Godly Friends to be tender of those in affliction;
Neither staying for invitations to come and visit their afflicted Friends, nor
yet contenting themselves with occasional visits, but coming of purpose to
tender them in their sad condition; For, when they heard of all this evil --
they came every one from his own place Friends are tried by adversity. See
Prove. 17.17. and 18.24. Psalm. 38.11.

4 There is no affliction of the truly godly so desperate, that it is destitute
of any ground of comfort, or warranteth them to give themselves wholly up to
sorrow; For, they Judge that there is need and cause, as to mourn with him, So,
to comfort him. See Ezra. 10.2. I These. 4.13.

5. Such may be the sad condition, even of Godly and experienced Saints, and so
exceedingly may afflictions and tentations confound and over-whelm them; that
they will need the help of others to point out these comforts and
encouragements which are allowed upon them: For they find it a necessary duty
to come to comfort Job, in this extremity.

6. Albeit the Consolations of God have their own weight, by whomsoever they be
tendered; yet none can so fitly, or with hope of success, minister them unto
the afflicted, as those who feelingly sympathize with them in afflictions;
Whereby they become serious in seeking out fit encouragements, and tender and
feeling in the application thereof, and do also conciliate favor with the
afflicted, making way for their applications; For, they come, first, to mourn
with him, and then, to comfort him.

7. As the afflictions of some Saints may be so great, as to need the sympathy
of many, to afford them some case; so the comforting of such is a work of such
intricacy and difficulty, as will require the concurrent help of many able men:
For, upon these considerations, They made an appointment together, to come to
mourn with him, and to comfort him.

From ver. 12, 13. learn,

1. As trouble will soon make a strange alteration upon men; so it is nothing
strange to see these bodies of the Saints, which will one day be glorious in
Heaven, so transformed with sores, as Friends and Acquaintances can hardly
discern the faces of their old friends; And to see such a change upon the
outward state of Saints, as their friends can hardly know they are the men they
are: For, they lift up their eyes a far off, and knew him not, by reason of the
present deformity of his body, and the sordid condition wherein he was,
compared with his former state and grandeur. See Lam. 4.7, 8.

2. It is the duty and property of truly godly friends, to be really (and not
in appearance only) affected with the afflicted condition of their friends, and
to join cordially with them in humiliation and sorrow; So much do they witness
by their practice, weeping, renting their Ma^tles, sprinkling dust on their
heads, and sitting down with him upon the ground, seven days and seven nights.

3. The more narrow view men take of the afflictions of others, the more will
it affect them, if they be truly tender; For, albeit they were affected with
the report, yet it is when they lift up their eyes and knew him not, that they
are so singularly affected; it being rare to find such sense of a trouble at a
distance. See Lam. 3.51.

4. It may please God to let out such troubles upon his people, as surpasses
all humane Consolation, that himself alone may be seen in supporting and
comforting: For, though they can sympathize, yet they cannot comfort, but spoke
not a word to him.

5. Such is our weakness, that one lawful duty is ready to shuffle out another;
And particularly, great abundance of sorrow, given way unto, may hinder men
from being comfortable to the afflicted, as it does hinder the afflicted from
receiving it. For, though (notwithstanding their erroneous principles, of which
afterward) they resolved, upon the report, to come and comfort him; Yet now
when they come, and saw that his grief was very great, and his affliction so
extreme, that he is scarce capable of comfort, they are so overwhelmed with
sorrow, that in stead of comforting him, they sit silent. See Is. 24.4.

6. In all our good and honest purposes, we have need of especial dependence
upon God, that they be not frustrated; For, they who came, not only to mourn
with him, but to comfort him, albeit they joined in the one, yet they not only
missed of the other, but run a contrary course, as may not only appear in the
following Debates, but even in their present unseasonable silence for so long a
time; which did minister occasion to many tentations, when their behavior
spoke them so much astonished; and declared that they looked on his condition
as desperate, since they did not so much as speak one comfortable word unto
him. Which long silence, being added to Jobs other troubles, did at last
over-drive him to break forth in the following bitter complaint.

7. When God has his people to try and exercise, they may expect that every
promising mean will disappoint them, and rather augment, then ease, their
trouble; As Job found by experience in the person of dear Friends, who had come
so great a length to visit him.

CHAP. III.
Hitherto we have heard of the change of Jobs outward Prosperity into a deluge
of Adversity, upon his Goods, Servants, Children and Body; all which redoubled
assaults he has sustained with invincible courage and patience,
notwithstanding all suggestions and tentations to the contrary. Now we are led
a step further, to see some change in that calm of his mind; which (being
pressed and overcharged with the greatness and continuance of his affliction,
the unseasonable silence of his Friends, and, belike, with some desertion also)
does breath out a little of humane Infirmity and Passion; Not against God, but
against his own being, that ever he was, or that now he was not taken away by
death. By all which, not only was there an occasion presented of the future
Debates betwixt him and his Friends, which are so specially useful to the
Church of God in all Ages: But, withal, the Lord does thereby make it appear,
that it was by grace that Job had hitherto stood it out, there being no little
infirmity in him, if grace had not kept it at under. Besides, The Lord will
have the experience of this eminent Saint so mixed, as infirm Believers, whose
weaknesses are ready to break forth in times of tentation and trial, may not be
discouraged. For, if nothing had appeared in Job, all the time of his trial,
but that undaunted courage, and patient submission, recorded in the former
Chapters; how might it have weakened the hands of Christ's weak Lambs, whose
Passions and Infirmities under tentation, are their humbling burden? But now,
when they shall find such an eminent Worthy, renowned for his Patience, so much
foiled by his own Impatience, it will encourage them (not to please themselves
in these Infirmities, but) not to cast away their confidence, because of the
dross which appeared in them when they are in the furnace. Considering that
when God appears to try his people, not only the grace of God in them, but
their nature, will appear in its own colors: As appears not only in Job, but
in David, Psalm. 116.11. and other Saints. So that Believers may not only reap
Edification by the discoveries of Gods grace in Job, but even by the breakings
out of his infirmities, recorded in this Book.

The Chapter contains a very sad lamentation of an afflicted man, set forth
with much Eloquence, and (as the Learned in the Original language observe) in
Poesy, which continues from ver. 3. of this Chapter, to Chap. 42.7. And it
pleased the Spirit of God to cause write it in Verse, (as other choice
Scriptures are) because of the gravity and sublimity of the Subject Matter, and
that it might the more easily be learned by heart, and retained in the memory.
The Lamentation and Complaint may be summed up in a threefold wish. 1. That he
had never been born, which being propounded, ver. 1. is prosecuted at large, to
ver. 11. 2. That he had died so soon as he was born, ver. 11. -- 19. 3. That he
were now dead, and that now at last he might get free from his troubles by
death, ver. 20. -- 26.

Verse. 1. After this opened Job his mouth, and cursed his day.
IN this Verse we have a Proposition of the first Branch of Jobs Complaint;
Wherein, Consider,

1. The time of it, was after this; Some while after those seven days wherein
his friends sat silent beside him, Chap. 2.13. Now his first heat under the
trial being over, and getting leisure to ruminate upon, and aggravate all his
grievances, and his Friends, from whom he expected comfort, being silent, he
breaks forth, and opened his mouth. Which phrase does here import, not so much
to speak with a loud voice, or upon deliberation, and boldly, as simply this,
that he now at last brake off that silence, for which he had been commended,
Chap. 2.10. or, interrupted that long silence of himself and his Friends, Chap.
2.13.

2. His lamentation and complaint, He cursed his day, or his Birthday, as the
sequel clears, though it may be extended also to the day of his present
trouble, wherein his troubles were continued upon him. This day he cursed, that
is, being d^ssatisfi^d that ever he was born, he pronounces that a most vile
and miserable day (as the word imports) which fell to be his Birth day. And his
passion, not knowing whereupon else to wreak and avenge it self, pours it self
forth in wishing many strange things to befall that day, as he enlarges himself
in the following verses. Though it must be granted that it had been no sin in
Job, if he had simply lamented under so sad afflictions; For Nature cannot but
cry out when it is overcharged: Yet this language does indeed fly very high,
and is unquestionably spoken in passion, as being some sparks of that which was
in him by nature. And this complaint is not free from indirect limiting of the
Wisdom and Dominion of God; of unjust fretting, that he being a righteous man,
should be so afflicted; though himself afterward yield that righteous men may
be afflicted; and, of much rashness in expression. Yet, as his speeches are not
to be justified, so they are not to be strictly examined; as being the language
of a Child raving in a Fever, And we are to consider,

1. That Satan does not reach his design by all this; For those speeches are
not directed (as Satan alleged he would) against God, not yet simply against
the day, as it is Gods creature; But they, chiefly, hold out his impatience and
discontent at his present being, repenting that ever he was born, or died not
from the womb, or was yet alive. All which discontents he vents (to ease
himself,) upon the day of his birth, in so far as upon it he came into the
world to suffer these things. And so these words are to be understood, as other
lamentations of the like nature, such as David's cursing of the ^ountains of
Gilboah, 2 Samuel 1.21. and Jeremie's passionate fits, Jer. 20.14, -- 18 Now the
que^^ion betwixt God and Satan was not, whether Job had sin or not? but,
Whether he was an Hypocrite, or not? nor yet, Whether Jobs frailty would appear
in the furnace? but, Whether he would maliciously curse and renounce God,
because of affliction? This is so far from appearing here, that (albeit in so
hot a furnace, it is no wonder he cast a scum, yet) his case and his carriage
being compared together, it is Jobs victory, and a great foil to Satan, that he
devords not more. And albeit the Lord might (by his power and grace) have
prevented even this measure of failing; Yet it was more for his honor that
Infirmity broke out so far, That his weaknesses might be as comfortable to
after-ages, as his graces (as is before marked) and that the power of God might
b^ the more conspicuous in supporting him, 2 Cor 12.7, 8.9. and grace might
shine in his cleaving to God in the midst of all this, as appears from the
following debate.

2. Albeit his weakness do thus, for a time, break forth, when his Reason and
Experience are at under, and he is sensible of nothing but pain and sorrow; yet
he does not persist in this distemper, nor is it the only thing that appears in
the furnace, but he has much better purpose afterward in the behalf of God.
And therefore as in a battle, men do not judge of affairs by what may occur in
the heat of the conflict, (wherein Parties may retire and fall on again) but by
the issue of the fight; So Job is not to be judged by those fits of distemper,
seeing he recovered out of them at last; and so God himself judges of him,
Jam. 5.11. Yea, those violent fits do serve to demonstrate the strength of
grace in him, which prevailed at last over them all. And his victory was the
more glorious, that his conflict had been sharp.

From this verse we may learn,

1. There are, in the most subdued Child of God, strong corruptions, ready to
break forth in trial; For, so appears in Job, an holy and mortified man, as he
is described, Chap. 1.1, 8. and Chap. 31. throughout. The best of men ought to
be sensible that they have, by nature, an evil heart of unbelief, even when
they are strong in the faith; that they have luke-warmness under their zeal,
passion under their meekness, etc.

2. Albeit natural corruptions may lurk long, even in the Furnace of
Affliction; Yet long and multiplied tentation will bring it forth: As here we
may gather from Jobs experience, who was not only blameless and straight before
the trial came, but having stood it out long under his trial, does now at last
discover his weakness. Which may teach godly men, and even those who have kept
their integrity in many trials, to be still upon their guard, and not to be
high-minded, but fear; nor sing the triumph, because of some petty
achievements, before the complete victory be obtained. For,

1. Every exercise and trial will not be a trial to every man, nor an
irritation to every corruption within him.

2. The length and continuance of a trial is a new trial, and may discover that
which the simple trial does not reach; as here we see in Job.

3. When men get leisure in cold blood to reflect and pore upon their case, (as
Job did during that long silence of himself and his friends) it will prove more
grievous then at first it does.

4. When men are disappointed of what they expect under trouble (as Job was of
his Friends comfort) it will grieve them more then if they, in sobriety, had
expected no such thing.

Doct. 3. The Lords in judging of the grace and integrity of his followers,
does afford many grains of allowance, and graciously passes overmuch weakness,
wherein they do not approve themselves; For, notwithstanding all this weakness,
yet not only did the Lord before declare him a righteous man; but even after
the trial, he commends him as a pattern of patience, Jam. 5.11. though he had
vented so much passion.

4. Albeit a small trial be sufficient to discover weakness in the best of
Saints, if God leave them to themselves; yet most usually their weakness
appears not but in great and sharp trials; nor will they be so tenderly
indulged if they fail in lesser trials, when their exercise is not so sharp:
Therefore are those bitter fits of Job recorded together with his great and
overwhelming trouble, that his example, may embolden none to allow themselves
in the like bitterness and passion, when their trial is nothing like his.

Verse 2. And Job spoke, and said,

3. Let the day perish wherein I was born, and the night in which it was said,
There is a manchild conceived.

4. Let that day be darkness, let not God regard it from above, neither let the
light shine upon it.

5. Let darkness and the shadow of death stain it, let a cloud dwell upon it,
let the blackness of the day terrify it.

6. As for that night, let darkness seize upon it, let it not be joined unto
the days of the year, let it not come into the number of the months.

7. Lo, let that night be solitary, let no joyful voice come therein.

8. Let them curse it that curse the day, who are ready to raise up their
mourning.

9. Let the stars of the twilight thereof be dark, let it look for light but
have none, neither let it see the dawning of the day:

10. Because it shut not up the doors of my mothers womb, nor hid sorrow from
mine eyes.


In these verses we have an account at large of Jobs wish that he had never
been born, set down by way of imprecation against the day of his birth, ver. 3.
-- 9. to which a reason is subjoyned, v. 10. The Imprecation is set forth with
great variety of purpose, and a flood of eloquent expressions, suggested by his
present sense of trouble and passion: And it is denounced,

First, Against that day in all its parts, as it comprehends both day and
night, or, is a natural day or 24. hours, ver. 3. Where, he wishes that
(albeit sometime it had been a day of good tidings, of the birth of a Son) it
may perish. A vain wish, importing his desire, either that that day had never
been, or that now it should never come in account among the days of the year;
or that it never be kept for a birth day (as the custom was among some people)
but, whenever it comes about, that it be infamous.

Secondly, against the day, or, that which is the light-part of that natural
day, ver. 4, 5. Unto which he wishes,

1. Darkness, without light to shine upon it, and that not ordinary darkness,
but like unto the shadow of death, which imports great darkness ( Isa. 9.1, 2.
and elsewhere,) like the darkness which is in deep pits, where the dead are,
who never see the light; or such darkness as seiseth upon the eyes of dying
men, whose day of life is drawing to the dark shades of death; or palpable
darkness, the horror whereof might affright men to death. This darkness he
(further) wishes unto it, not for a part of the day only, but all along a
cloud dwelling upon it. By all which, it should be stained, or, its beauty hid
and taken away, as a Room without light; and the blackness of the day should
terrify it, or, make it terrible to others.

2. He wishes that God may not regard it from above. That it may not only want
light, but all other evidences of his favor and noticing of it; such as, dew,
rain, etc. or its being happy, by any good event upon it. By all which
expressions, so appositely chosen, though he pour forth his own passion; Yet,
withal, he insinuates these truths.

1. That it is a great, though ordinary mercy, that we enjoy the light of the
day; seeing it would be a curse to the day, or rather to men, to want it. And,
that it is a mercy God has so contrived the vicissitudes of light and
darkness; as may be most comfortable, and not terrible.

2. That Gods Providence does so particularly notice every day, as the blessing
and comfort thereof depends on him; If he do not regard it from above, it will
prove but a sad day.

Thirdly, Against the night, ver. 6, 7, 8, 9. Unto which he wishes.

1. That darkness may seize upon it, ver. 6. -- which (though it be natural to
the night to be dark) he wishes to it in a singular manner, v. 9. That it may
not have the very light of Stars, which are comfortable in the night; as small
mercies are in sad times; and that no light, or dawning of the day, may succeed
to it; and so it should be denied all hope of comfort; which rendereth hard
conditions intolerable.

2. That Nature should disclaim it from coming in the account of the course of
the Sun or Moon; ver. -- 6. or, that it should not be reckoned among joyful
nights. Which is, indeed, a great curse, when any creature stands useless.

3. Whereas it was an usual custom to have Festival Assemblies and mirth in the
night; 1 These. 5.6, 7. (the abuse whereof is not here approved, but only the
custom alluded unto) it is wished that this might be honored with none such;
but that it be a mournful solitary night; wherein men are deprived of the
society of friends; which is one of the great comforts of time, v. 7.

4. That it may be execrated by all, as well as it was by him (as grieved
persons would have all to be displeased with that which vexes themselves) and
that with as great vehemence as those hired mourning women (who have signs of
sorrow and tears at their command, and who, in imitation of real mourners, are
ready to raise up and renew their mourning, after they have mourned much
before} do use to execrate the day of their Benefactors death, ver. 8. The
expressions allude to that custom, 2 Chronicles. 35.25. Jer. 9.17. Amos 5.16. And
this I take to be the right translation and sense of this verse, rather then
(with some) to understand it of Mariners, who, being tossed with a Tempest, do
curse the day in which they went to Sea, and are ready, by their wishes, to
raise up Leviathan (which is here rendered, their mourning) or, the
Sea Monsters, to swallow them up. For (though Jobs resentments; in this Chapter
be no less unreasonable then if one should wish to be violently swallowed, to
avoid a present tempest; yet) that is not the usual practice of Mariners in a
Tempest. Jonah 1.5, 6. Neither do they hit upon the true sense, who, taking
Leviathan also for a proper Name, do understand it here, figuratively, of the
Devil, that great Dragon, whom some wicked men are ready to raise up in great
trouble, that they may consult him about an issue, as Saul did; 1 Samuel 28. and
all of them are ready to raise him up by their cursed invocating of him, that
either they may be delivered, or cut off. For though Job be passionate enough
in this Discourse; yet he was very far from this height of impiety. The reason
of all this Imprecation, v. 10. is, because that day fell out to be his
birthday, upon which so much sorrow followed: reckoning, that if he had not
been born, he had not met withal that vexation. If we consider this whole
Imprecation against the day of his birth, with the ground of it; As we may not
ascend so high, as to tax Job of blasphemy, or of condemning the order of
Nature, and, consequently, of condemning God who established it: So we cannot
but discern great passion and impatience, evidenced by its fruits and effects,
in these particulars.

1. His inconsiderateness; That trouble being so natural to Adams posterity,
Chap. 5.7. as is acknowledged by himself Chap. 14.1. and submitted unto Chap.
1.21. and 2.10. Yet he does now free at it. They had need of much wisdom,
considerately to ponder all things, who would be patient in trouble, Iam. 1.5.
with 4.

2. His rash stubbornness in fretting at trouble. For albeit it be lawful to
desire to be rid of trouble, with submission to the will of God; Yet when we
see it is the Lords will that we should be under trouble, it is not our duty
peremptorily to stand out and refuse, but to stoop and submit: For by this
submission we take the sting out of our own crosses, Jer. 10.19. Whereas want
of resolution and stooping, doubleth the bitterness thereof.

3. His selfishness; Had this complaint been because of common troubles upon
the people of God, it had been more tolerable: But being only for his own ease;
and that (albeit he disputed afterward that Saints might be in the like case)
sorrow was not hid from his eyes (ver. 10.) as if he had been a privileged
person, was very selfish. Impatience is, ordinarily, a great ponderer of
greifs, because they are ours, little weighing the troubles of others.

4. His absurd and unreasonable blaming of a wrong cause of his trouble; For
what influence had his birthday on his trouble? or on his birth either? it
being but a naked circumstance. Impatience is still unreasonable, and when a
man is thereby imbittered, he madly breaks forth on what comes nearest him,
whether it be too blame or not.

5. His poor shift which he takes to help himself; For, beside that he wishes
a thing impossible, as the expunging of a day, he wishes also that which was
unprofitable for his help. For suppose the day were either so expunged, or
marked, as he wishes; what could that help him now? would it recall all his
sufferings? But it is always found that impatience takes the longest way, and
falls not upon the most speedy remedy and mean of help.

6. His ingratitude, and under-valuing of all the mercies he had received, as
not able to counter-balance his present grief; contrary to his own Principle
formerly, Chap. 2.10, But now his birth, and all the mercies he had received,
are his burden. Ingratitude will soon bury in oblivion many favors, if we be
cast in any trouble; But it is our duty to remember former kindnesses, or
present continued mercies, even in the midst of trouble, and to reckon that new
proofs of love are worth the waiting, for, albeit we be kept in a furnace of
affliction.

These are some of Jobs infirmities, which (without further descanting upon the
words) we are, to take notice of in this discourse; not to conclude him wicked,
but passionate; and to point out what tentations and infirmities we are,
especially, to provide against in an hour of trial. For which end it is that
God will have all that Job spoke and said (ver. 2.) here recorded: To show,
that he takes notice of his peoples behavior under afflictions, and to set up
a Beacon to all after-ages, in the experience of this holy man.

Verse. 11. Why died I not from the womb? why did I not give up the ghost when I
came out of the belly?

12. Why did the knees prevent me? or why the breasts that I should suck?


In these verses we have Jobs second wish, to which reasons as subjoyned, v.
13. -- 19. His wish is set down by way of Expostulation, of which see on v. 20.
And it amounts in sum, to this; That since his former wish was to no purpose,
seeing he was born and came into the world, he now wishes he had died so soon
as he was born. And therefore regrates that, in the birth, ha was not left in
that helpless hour by the Midwife; or that ever any care was taken of him, by
laying him, when he was born, upon their knees, or by giving him suck, without
which he had soon perished. From this complaint, no less passionate then the
former, Observe,

1. The mercies which he complains to have received, of knees preventing him,
and breasts to give him suck, do insinuate to us, That so soon as we come into
the world we have so many seeds of death in us, that every step of our life
needs a proof of mercy to preserve it; Without the knees, to bear us, and the
breasts to give us suck, we would soon return to dust again. So that we may
truly be said to be born to die, and to be going to death, from the day wherein
we first receive life.

2. Job having quit his former wish as unprofitable and impossible, he is not,
for all that, brought to submit; but bends his wit to devise new ways of his
own, and with a great deal of Oratory paints them out as plausible: Teaching,
That is no easy task to bring our minds to a conformity with Gods way and
will; but many diverse courses and shifts will we essay, rather then submit to
God, and follow that way of relief which he has pointed out to us. Submission
and patience was a nearer and more ready case of Jobs grievances, then any of
those; yet he w^ll rather multiply impossible wishes, then come to that.

3. We may observe how all these mercies, of his birth, care of him in his
infancy, etc. (whereof Saints have esteemed much, and made good use, Psalm. 22.9,
10, 11.) are now all become crosses in his account. Which as it flows from
great ingratitude in him, or whosoever shall be found guilty of the like; So it
teaches us not to place our happiness in these or any the like common mercies,
which may be so soon and easily imbittered and made grievous to our frail and
corrupt nature.

Verse. 13. For now should I have lien still, and been quiet, I should have
slept; then had I been at rest.

14. With kings and counselors of the earth, which built desolate places for
themselves.

15. Or with princes that had gold, who filled their houses with silver:

16. Or as an hidden untimely birth I had not been; as infants which never saw
light.

17. There the wicked cease from troubling: and there the weary be at rest.

18. There the prisoners rest together, they hear not the voice of the
oppressor.

19. The small and great are there, and the servant is free from his master.


His reasons whereby he endeavors to render his passionate wish plausible, may
be summed up in this one, the great rest and quiet (like a sleep) which he
fancieth in death, ver. 13. This he further amplifieth.

1. That whereas he is now abased, he had then been equal with the best, even
with Kings and great Counselors, who built themselves stately Houses or
Monuments, where desolations had formerly been, ver. 14. and who had their
Houses replenished with wealth, ver. 15.

2. That, at least, if he had died from the womb, he had been in no worse case
then an Abortive, and so had prevented all those miseries which befell him since
his birth, ver. 16.

3. That (as he fancieth) the rest of death is a singular rest, beyond any ease
he could find here. For wicked troublers cannot pursue men thither, but they
who are wearied with oppression, get leave to rest there, ver. 17.
particularly, prisoners, or slaves, are free from their oppressing creditors
and exacters, ver. 18. and death does so level all, as Masters and Servants are
equal, and Servants are no more under the power of their imperious Masters,
ver. 19. In sum, he points out death as a common rest from outward violence and
oppression, from weakness, weariness, servitude, or any the like toil;
reflecting, in some of those, upon his own sufferings by the Sabeans and
Chaldeans, and upon the wearied and tossed condition of his body.

In this Reason we may remark those Truths,

1. That death is a rest to man from outward troubles, whatever they be; As is
here at length deduced. Which, in its own kind, is a mercy, that outward
troubles will follow us no further then death, if all be well beside.

2. That as nothing temporal gives men a privilege against death, Psalm. 49.6,
7, etc. So albeit there be diversity of ranks of men here, yet death levels
all, and makes them equal, Ezekiel. 32.21, 22, etc. For, Kings, Princes,
Oppressors, the weary, small and great, the Servant and his Master, do all
tryst at death, and are all alike there. But in Jobs reasoning from these
considerations, and in reference to his scope, we will find many mistakes.

1. Whatever rest and ease be in death, yet it was not the will of God that Job
should be resting now, but fighting and serving his Generation, by the will of
God; after which he was, in due time, to fall asleep, as Acts 13.36. Now it is
our great fault to see a beauty in any temporal condition, save (in so far) as
it is the will of God to make it out lot, who makes every thing beautiful in
its season, Eccles. 3.11.

2. His reasoning imports that his great drift, in wishing he had died, is, his
own case. Now ease, how desirable soever it appear, is not to be impatiently
sought after; But we should rather acquiesce to be on service as it is carved
out, wherein we may meet with many proofs and experiences of what is in
ourselves and in God for us.

3. Albeit desires and longings after death be the fools only backdoor in
trouble; Yet death and the rest thereof, in it self considered, ought nor to be
so much doated upon. For notwithstanding all he says here of death; yet not
only is death contrary to nature, and as in the grave our bodies feel not the
troubles of this life, so as little do they feel or are sensible of the quiet
in the grave; But whatever rest be in death, yet it is not a complete out-gate
but in Christ, nor is it a common rest to all without any difference, as to
their states who rest there.

4. He is so much out of conceit with his present case, that he would be
content of any (were it even to be an Abortive) rather then the present. Thus
does our folly judge any condition better then our own, whereof we would soon
repent us, if we were essayed with a change.

5. It will be found, upon trial, that his wishes came far short of what good
the Lord was doing to him. For, albeit somewhat like that, ver. 16. may be true
of a wicked man, that an untimely birth is better then he, Eccl. 6.3. Yet who,
in his right wits, would consider Job in the whole of his life, and think an
Abortive comparable to him, who had so eminently honored God, and was blessed
of him, in his former days, and who was now employed to give so eminent a
proof of his integrity in the furnace? So far short may the desires of godly
men fall, even of that good which they presently enjoy, if they had eyes to see
it. And so infinitely wise is God, who knows better how to guide us then our
selves do; and so gracious, that he does not ask our consent to deal better
with us then we could carve to our selves.

Verse. 20. Wherefore is light given to him that is in misery, and life unto the
bitter in soul?
From this to the end of the Chapter we have Jobs third wish, with the reasons
whereby he presses it. The wish is propounded in this verse by way of
Expostulation (as the former was) and is only repeated from thence in the
Translation, ver. 23. to make the sense the clearer. The sum of the wish is,
That, since none of the former desires we^e now possible, but that he was now
come that length of his time, he desires that now at length the Lord would put
an end to his toil; and expostulates that light (i. e. the light of the Sun,
Eccl. 11.7, 8. or life, as is afterward added) is continued with him. Unto this
he subjoyns the first reason of his Expostulation, taken from his great
trouble, being in so much trouble as might denominate him a miserable man; and
so disconsolate and anxious, by reason of trouble, as made him bitter in soul.

As to the Expostulation, his expressions do indeed flow from that great misery
and bitterness, which himself afterward resents. Yet it is to be remarked, that
albeit this Expostulation reflect on God, who had given and continued his life;
yet reverence to God does lead him to forbear to name him in his complaint.
Hereby pointing out, That grace, even when it is most overpowered with weakness
and passion, will yet, one way or other, be letting forth some Evidences of it
self, and of its respect toward God, if it could be discerned. But further, in
this Expostulation, we may observe.

1. He continues still in the strain and heat of his passion, his Fever is
not yet calmed, notwithstanding all his former ravings. To teach us, That
distempers of mind and passions, let loose under tentation and trouble, are not
soon and easily calmed and quieted again; but they will lead men from one
extravagant desire and complaint to another.

2. He not only insists still to have his will satisfied, which is man's great
Idol; albeit it be true, that it were his misery to get his will in many
things: But still he pursues that particular desire of death, as the only
comfortable issue in his apprehension; whereas there were many better nearer at
hand, as strength to bear his trial, faith in Gods love notwithstanding all his
afflictions; and even a comfortable issue within time, after his trial was
perfected, as the sequel cleared. But it is our folly and weakness so to dote
upon one imagined way of relief, as we cannot observe any beside.

3. He propounds his desire by way of Expostulation, questioning, Wherefore is
light given? which flows not so much from a desire of Information, as from a
bitter proud Passion, full of conceit of its own skill. This is a distemper
incident to men, especially under trouble, that they dare quarrel God, as if
they could guide better then he, and that they judge every thing unreasonable,
of the reasons whereof they are not capable. Not considering that we ought to
adore Infinite Wisdom, and stoop to Sovereignty, when we are in the dark.

4. Albeit it was his sin to despise the good gift of life; Yet his distemper
teaches, That the Lord, by leaving us to our selves, can make our best things,
even our selves, and our lives, a burden, instead of a comfort; As here his
experience does teach. So also Chap. 7.15, 16.20. Which may teach us, to
acknowledge Gods goodness, that any thing is made comfortable to us, within
time.

In the first reason we may observe,

1. It is no strange thing to see Saints put in that pitiful plight by trouble,
as may even render their life a burden to them, as they are men compassed with
infirmities; For, that is the pitiful reason why he wishes to be dead; He is
in misery, and bitter in soul.

2. Outward troubles are but a small part of Saints complaints, but that which
makes afflictions grievous to them, is, the inward exercise of mind, which
usually accompanies the same; For, that is subjoyned to his misery, that he is
bitter in soul, This is sharper then any outward trouble; For without this,
trouble will be very easy, and a sound mind will bear much.

3. Among other sad distempers of soul accompanying trouble, this is not the
least, when soul-serenity and tranquillity is disturbed, and men are imbittered
thereby; insomuch that, although they do not question their state of
Reconciliation; yet, they can read no love in what they suffer, nor walk under
it with meekness, but are taken up with hard constructions of God and his
dealing: For, this is his case in particular, He is bitter in soul.

4. When Saints narrowly examine their sad lots, they will find that whatever
is intolerable in them, comes of themselves, when either their apprehensions
represent them as sadder then indeed they are; or when their broken spirits do
render their case more insupportable then otherwise it would be: For, so must
we judge of Jobs complaint. It is true, he was under great affliction, yet it
flowed from his own apprehension, that he looks on himself as miserable, or in
misery. And whereas he complains of a bitter soul, much of that flowed from his
own giving way to that distemper of spirit. For albeit, God may be said to fill
us with bitterness, Job 9.18. Lam. 3.15. in so far as he sends on the trouble
which we take occasion to be imbittered at, and gives way to men's own spirits,
yet it flows from their own passion, pride and haste, that they are so
imbittered.

5. Whatever be in the troubles of Saints, whether really, or in their
apprehension; Yet nothing of that, warrants them to complain of God and his
dealing, or to be weary of their own life and lot: For, whatever Jobs case was,
yet his trouble was no relevant reason why he should so passionately desire to
die. Some are indeed more peevish and absurd then others in this particular;
who, upon the very least discontent, and crossing of their humor, were it in
never so great mercy, would lie down and die, as Jonah 4.2, 3. Yet let men be
able to instruct their case to be most really sad, that is no reason why they
should so desire death, as to complain and expostulate, if they be not
satisfied. The like sentence may we pass upon all our reasonings against any of
Gods dealing.

Verse. 21. Which long for death, but it comes not, and dig for it more then
for hid treasures?

22. Which rejoice exceedingly, and are glad when they can find the grave?


The second reason of his Expostulation, and an effect of the former, is taken
from his earnest desire after death, though it succeeded not; That (though he
betook himself to no ill shift which might take away his life; yet in his
desires) he longed as seriously for it, as men do labor for treasures, v. 21.
And was not (as all men naturally are) afraid of death and the grave, but would
be glad to meet with it, ver. 22. Now his nature was afflicted to want what he
desired, and therefore he longs to be at it, and expostulates that he is not
satisfied. If we look to the strength of this Argument; Though it be the
advantage of a godly man (such as Job was) that the testimony of his Conscience
leads him to look death thus confidently in the face; Yet not only does Job now
pursue this desire, rather in Passion, than with an eye to his Integrity, and
looking rather to death, as the common end of all men's outward trouble, then to
what is beyond death: But (did his desire flow from never so holy a principle)
he soars too high, and is too peremptory in it. For we find that Saints, in
cold blood, have deprecated death in such gloomy days: As we will find in many
of the Psalms. In particular, In this reasoning we may Observe,

1. He is too earnestly bent for death, which was an evidence he was wrong, and
that God would not give it; For God, by his Providential Dispensation in
continuing him alive, retorted the Argument, that because he doated much on
death, therefore it was not fit he should meet with it. Whatever outward lot
our hearts are bent upon, under tentation, we may suspect it is an Idol; And
that God will guide those whom he loves, rather any way than that.

2. The excess of his inclination after death made the want of it a cross, so
that he complains it comes not; whereas if he had been sober, he might have
found another out-gate; and however, yet his grief through the want of it had
been less. This teaches, Partly, that it is an evidence of men's insobriety in
desiring lawful things, when they cannot brook a disappointment, nor are
content, having done their duty, to submit to what God shall think best: For,
if Job had soberly desired death, he would not have added, but it comes not.
Partly, that many augment their own afflictions, by unsober doting on
out-gates of their own, which being denied them, it heightens their grief,
their own Affections adding Oil to the flame. As Jobs vehement longing after
death renders the disappointment bitter. He longs and digs for death, but it
comes not; Whereas sobriety affords a present out-gate of Gods providing. His
Salvation, of his allowance and carving, is near, Psalm. 85.9. when salvation of
our prescribing, and desired by us, is far off.

3. His argument is ill founded, That, because he exceedingly desires death,
Therefore he may complain and quarrel, if God do not yield it to him. There is
no reason that our will should be a law, not only whereby we will walk our
selves, but pointing out, and prescribing to God what he should do to us. And
yet this is the exercise of many, They have an irregular lusting will, and then
they repine if it be not satisfied; As if they were not to acknowledge a Lord
over them.

Verse. 23. Why is light given to a man whose way is hid, and whom God has
hedged in.

24. For my sighing before I eat, and my roarings are poured out like the
waters.


In these verses Job repeats the first reason of his Expostulation, taken from
his afflicted condition, and does enlarge it yet further, that he may confirm
the former reason, that he did justly desire death so earnestly as he did. And,

1. He propounds the case in general, ver. 23. That any man may desire death,
and complain if it be withheld, whose way is hid and hedged in, or who is so
overwhelmed with darkness and confusion, and involved in a labyrinth of
perplexities, that he knows not what to make of his case, nor whether to turn
him; and when he would turn himself to any hand to seek relief, he finds God
hedging him in on all hands, without any hope of relief.

2. He propounds his own case in particular, v. 24. to instruct that he was a
man so afflicted; Showing that his ordinary refreshments did not abate nor
divert his sorrows, but even before the face of his meat, and while it was set
before him, his sighing and sorrow continued without intermission; Yea, his
sorrows were so great, as made him roar, and that so impetuously and
abundantly, as a current of waters running down.

Not to insist on what has been before marked (That, supposing all this were
true of Jobs case, yet, he had his own imbittered spirit to blame for much of
this disorder following upon his trouble; And albeit the Lord had dealt so with
him, it was not a relevant reason why he should decline to stoop under Gods
hand so long as he pleased, leaving it upon God to order his dark path, and
submitting to digest his re^eshments with sorrow:) We may, further, from ver.
23 learn,

1. When people are in trouble, it contributes to the heightning thereof, that
they do constantly pore upon it, in all the aggravations thereof; For, Job is
so much taken up with this subject, that he returns to it again, alter what he
had said, v. 20.

2. It is much to be adverted unto by these in trouble, that self-love do not
lead them to aggravate afflictions more because theirs, then they would do if
they were on others, or then impartial observers would esteem of them.
Therefore both here, and, ver. 20. he propounds the matter in Thesi, and of any
man, whosoever, thus afflicted, to show that he was not partial to himself in
this cause. It is true, Self-love in such a case is not easily discerned, nor
is Job to be assoiled even as to this; yet his way of speaking insinuates that
he held this to be a duty.

3. It is to be expected that, how clear soever men be in their light before
trouble comes, yet trouble and tentation come accompanied with darkness and
confusion; so that they will hardly be able to judge any thing aright of their
case, or to know what to do; For, his way, wherein he would walk toward an
issue, is hid. See Lam. 3.1, 2. Hence we may gather, That the sad apprehensions
of Saints, under trouble, ought to be looked upon as the conjectures of these
who are groping the dark. And they had need to examine well any light they get
in an hour of tentation.

4. Darkness, confusion and perplexity, are the immediate fruits of bitterness
of spirit; whereunto when men give way, they involve themselves in a thick
cloud, much whereof might be prevented by meekness and patience, whereby they
possess their souls: For, upon that, v. 20 that he is bitter in soul, it
follows here, his way is hid.

5. Whatever way confusion and darkness come upon troubled Saints; yet it is a
very humbling exercise, to be in a strait without knowing Gods mind in it, or
what to do for relief; For, this pressed Job to his impatient wishes, that his
way is hid. This lays a man, as an object of great compassion, at Christ's
feet.

6. It is another great addition to the perplexities of Saints, when, as their
light is darkened, so, their attempts to get relief are in vain; and wherever
they turn them, they are hemmed in with insuperable difficulties, till they
lose all hope of out-gate; For, this is a part of his grievous complaint, that,
he is hedged in. See Job 19.8. Lam 3.7. This may point out, that men's troubles
are never insupportable, were they never so sad, so long as there appears any
hope of out-gate.

7. Men's natural courage will be so far from bearing out under Gods hand, that
it will only contribute to heighten their distemper and disorder, when it is
crushed and borne down; For his complaint is, that a strong stout man (as the
word in the Original is) should have his way hid, etc. His courage and strength
cannot shake it off, but makes him repine the more.

8. It is the duty, and great advantage, of men in trouble, not to lose a sight
of Gods hand in their troubles and perplexities: Even albeit, in stead of
meekness (which should be the result of that sight) it should afflict them the
more that their Rock should seem to sell them: For, Job loses not this fight,
that God has hedged him in, though he fail in b^ing imbittered at it. And
albeit Job had a great hand in his own perplexities; Yet God is the over-ruler
and orderer, even of that dispensation. And this ought to be looked unto, both
to humble us, when we see that God gives us up to that confusion and
perplexity which we sinfully choose, and lets us lie under it, till we see the
folly of our passions; and when we are humbled, to encourage us, considering
that God, who has a holy hand in these distempers, can remove them, though
insuperable by us; and can give, in due time, some meat out of that eater, and
some blessed advantage and fruit, even of our folly.

From ver. 24. Learn,

1. It concerns persons in trouble, to guard wel^ that they make not a noise
without cause: For if it be sinful enough to be imbittered when trouble is
saddest, much more, when they are so under very easy trouble: Therefore Job,
to clear that he complained not without cause, subjoyns (to what he had said to
the case in general) what his case in particular was, which drew on bitterness,
darkness and perplexity. For my sighing comes etc.

2. It is the duty and commendable practice of godly men, that, how much soever
they be weary of life; Yet they dare use no unlawful shift to take it away, nor
neglect any mean of preserving life: For, while Job is complaining that his
life is continued, he still makes use of meat, as resolving to wait Gods time
and way of taking away that life which is so great a burden to him.

3. When the spirits of men are broken with trouble, whatever diversion lawful
Recreations may sometime afford them, yet they will not be always effectual;
Nor will Natural comforts, at any time, cure Spiritual exercise of mind; For,
says he, my sighing comes before the face of my meat. He had not so much
respite as ^o eat without sighing.

4. A child of God may be under much perplexity and distress, who yet is not
able to vent it much, through the abundance thereof, over whelming him; For he
mentions his trouble as great, even when he does express it but by sighing, and
can do no more.

5. When great distress of mind once gets an open vent, it will be very
impetuous and violent, so long at the mind is unsubdued before God, and the
more violent, that it bath been long restrained: For, from more secret sighing,
he proceeds to roarings, lik a Lion, who is rather violently overpowered, then
voluntarily yields. This is an expression usually made use of to represent
the complaints of those whose great spirits have not yet learned to stoop to
God, nor have set about repentance, Ezekiel. 24.23. Where in the Original it is,
Ye shall not mourn nor weep -- but roar one toward another; and Prove. 5.11.
the Adulterer shall roar at last, as the Hebrew has it. See, also Is. 59.11.

6. The impetuous disorders of men's spirits, being once broken loose, are not
soon stopped in their course, but they will abundantly overflow all, to the
weakening and exhausting of their spirits, if grace prevent it not; For, his
roarings were poured out like the waters, in respect of the abundance of them,
and in respect of the effects of them, dissolving and pouring him out like
water, as Psalm. 22.14.

7. Though Job do thus insist to aggravate his trouble, that he may justify
his desire of death, and complain that it is denied him; Yet the argument is
not sufficient to infer that desire. For, neither is God to be quarelled, nor
pleaded with, whatever he do; nor was Job himself free of bringing on these
distempers, through his Passion. And therefore he had no cause to blame God,
when himself had perverted his own way. Prove. 19.3. Nor ought he to prescribe
an out-gate, of death, to himself, whereas he might find a nearer relief by his
own patience and meekness. And whatever his condition was, which made his life
heavy and grievous to him; Yet it was great cowardice to long to be away only
that he might be rid of trouble. Sense of sin, which cleaves fast to us while
we are in this life, or a desire to be with Christ, may justify a moderate
desire after death; Phil. 1.23, Yea the t^oubles we meet with in our Pilgrimage
ought so to loose our roots, as we be not unwilling to depart when God calls us;
But no trouble can warrant us impatiently to long for death. In a word, it is
sweet when love draws our hearts out of time, but not when trouble chaseth us
out of it.

Verse. 25. For the thing which I greatly feared is come upon me, and that which
I was afraid of, is come unto me.

26. I was not in safety, neither had Trust, neither was I quiet: yet trouble
came.


The third reason of his Expostulation is taken from his former Piety, and
carefulness to avoid sin which might provoke God to send on troubles; which
since it had not succeeded, he would be taken away by death. Some expound the
words as an aggravation of his misery, That he never wanted trouble, but in his
greatest Prosperity was filled with vexations. But neither does this agree with
the Scriptures account of his former prosperity; Nor do his Friends so
understand him, who upon these words, chiefly, do ground their subsequent
debates: Taking it ill that he, who was so afflicted, should claim to Piety and
a good conscience, and so denied his Antecedent, that he had been a godly man,
though now afflicted. Whereas they should rather have repelled his Consequence,
That, because he had been a godly man, therefore he might lawfully take it ill
to be afflicted; Considering Gods Sovereign Dominion and infinite wisdom, and
the relics of sin which are in the best of men, upon which grounds Elihu and
God himself do afterward silence his complaints.

In asserting of his Piety and Integrity, he does not describe it at large, but
with reference to his particular case, That he was a man who, in the height of
his prosperity, did not betake himself to carnal ease, but was still under a
fear that a change might come, and that he or his might provoke God to shake
him out of his quiet estate; and therefore labored to prevent it by frequent
addresses to God: Chap. 15. And yet all this his solicitude had not availed to
prevent trouble. This he sets down both positively, ver. 25, that what he had
feared, and studied to prevent, was come upon him; and negatively, ver. 26.
that though he had not been secure, yet that had not prevented trouble. Both
are to one purpose, the repetition serving only to show how much he was
affected with it. And for further clearing of the purpose, Consider,

1. If it be enquired; How this fear and solicitude can be accounted an
evidence of his Piety; it being rather like that anxiety which is never in
quiet, nor contented with any thing, and contrary to our allowance, to be
joyful in prosperity, Eccl. 7.14.

Ans. It would be considered that Job's fear was not a tormenting fear about
troubles to come, but a fear of wisdom and caution, foreseeing trouble that he
might prevent it. Nor was it a fear opposite to lawful comfort, but opposed to
carnal security; Nor was it a fear causing him to live in a perpetual distrust
of God as an Enemy, reckoning that undoubtedly he would afflict him: But a fear
of doing that which might provoke God to afflict him.

2. If it be enquired, how this profession of his fearing, and his not being in
safety and quiet, agrees with Chap. 29 18. where he professes that he
resolved to die in his nest?

Answ. If that expression, Chap. 29. (of which more fully in its own place)
does import any more then his taking lawful comfort in his outward prosperity,
it does only point at some sits of security into which sometimes he fell;
according to which God does not judge of a man (neither does Job judge so of
himself) but according to the more constant tenor of his life.

3. As for the scope and drift of this complaint and argument, It tends, in the
first place, to justify his excessive roarings under trouble. ver. 24 to which
it is immediately subjoyned; by showing that he could not but be so much
disquieted, considering how trouble had come upon him a godly man, walking so
cautiously and tenderly to prevent trouble. His design in it is, also, to
confirm his Expostulation with God for continuing of him in life. For finding
that, notwithstanding all his godly care and solicitude, and the means he had
used to prevent trouble, trouble and commotion had come upon him, he could not
well digest it, but would be dead; there being no hope that Piety could bring
him out of trouble, since it had not prevented it. Thus does Job argue, but
with more Passion then Reason, if we consider (beside what is afterward to be
marked) that God by his absolute dominion may afflict the most holy, yea, even
a sinless creature; and that Piety is otherwise richly advantageous, though it
neither prevent, nor remove, trouble. Nor is a godly man's case so desperate, if
he reckon right, nor his continuance under trouble so unprofitable an exercise,
as to make him weary of life.

From this purpose Learn,

1. It is a sure evidence of Piety not to be secure in Prosperity, but to look
on all things as mutable, that we may prepare for changes, and be afraid to
offend God; For, thus does Job assert his Piety, I was afraid, I was not in
safety, neither had I rest, neither was I quiet. It is a sinful temper to be
like the rich man, taking rest and ease in the midst of wealth. Luke 12.18, 19.
and it is much worse, to be secure because of Prosperity, when judgments are
upon others about us, Amos 6.3. -- 6.

2. It is very rare to see tender walkers, (who are apprehensive of troubles,
loosed from the creatures, and fearing to offend God) meet with troubles in
reality; For, Job looks upon it as a strange dispensation, that he fearing, and
not being in quiet, yet trouble came. It is true, the Lord may deal so with the
wicked, Prove. 10.24. Isa. 66.4. Yet the godly do often find, that the more they
are loosed from the creatures, the more assurance they have of enjoying them,
and that, many times, apprehended troubles are made their sore exercise, when
yet they never meet with them in reality, Isa. 51.12, 13. And that because that
very antecedent exercise produces those fruits which are called for under real
trouble.

3. Whatever be Gods more ordinary way with mortified and exercised Saints; yet
he has not so tied himself to this method, but that things which they fear,
may yet come upon them; and albeit their hearts be not settled on the
creatures, yet they may be shaken out of their enjoyments; For, so did Job find
by experience. Out mortification, preparation, fear, and other exercises, will
not always prevent trouble. For God may have wise and holy ends for afflicting
even such tender walkers, that he may try, discover, and augment their faith
and patience, may mortify the remainders of sin in them, may glorify his
grace and power in their support under great troubles, etc. Yet it should be
considered, that Saints may be much mistaken of their case, when God thus
exercises them, notwithstanding their fears and tenderness. For albeit trouble
may come on such, yet, upon due examination, it will be found far more sweet
then what they feared; As may be seen in Jobs case. His fear was to be shaken
out of his prosperity as the punishment of sin, Chap. 1.5. But his affliction
was only a trial of faith. His fear now is that God has done all this in
wrath, without any respect had to his piety (as the scope of his reasoning
imports) which was his mistake, and contrary to Gods own verdict in the midst
of the trouble, Chap. 2.3. and after it, Chap. 42.7, 8.

4. Trouble will put men back to try what their former carriage has been, and
whether they have had a sinful hand in procuring of it: As here Job is put back
to look what his exercise has been before trouble came. These who will not
examine their ways daily, trouble will force them to a back-search and then that
will not satisfy nor give quiet, which our wit can invent, or our Consciences
fancy to themselves in a calm day; But Conscience will be put to it, to speak
the truth impartially.

5. Albeit, sometimes, the minds of the people of God may be so feeble and
broken under trouble, that their Consciences dare not assert their integrity,
but will be ready to succumb under every challenge, how unjust soever,
restoring what they took not away, Psalm. 69.4. Yet a really good Conscience
needs not (and in those who know their privilege and allowance, will not)
alter its testimony in the worst times, but what it says in peace, it will
speak out in greatest trouble: For, Job here, in the height of his trouble,
does assert his integrity, and afterward maintains it.

6. Albeit it be our duty to bless God, and comfort our selves, that in our
troubles we have a good Conscience to support us; yet the corruption of Saints
may take advantage of their being sincere, and such as have not sinfully
procured trouble, to bear it the more impatiently; For, Job makes it an
argument of his discontent, that he was thus dealt with, when he was walking
tenderly. And this is his fault all along, that having a good Conscience, and a
just quarrel, he did manage and maintain it too hotly and bitterly. And to
silence this unreasonable passion, Saints do so frequently get sin and their
own guilt mixed in their cup of trouble. Otherwise God would not be justified,
but rather judged by us, when he judges us, Psalm. 51.4. with Romans 3.4.

7. It is an act of spiritual prudence in Saints, to propound to themseves no
other events of pious diligence then what are certain, lest disappointments
make them faint; For, Job expecting (though without any warrant) that his
solicitude should have prevented trouble, and being now disappointed, it makes
him lose heart of his diligence, and of his life and all.

CHAP. IV.
Hitherto, in the first part of this Book, we had an account of the sad change
of Jobs condition, and his sharp Trials, by Affliction, Suggestion,
unseasonable Silence of Friends, and inward Desertion and Tentation. The Second
Part of the Book, to chap. 32. gives an account of another sharp trial and
exercise of his Faith, in maintaining an hot dispute, in defense of his
Integrity, against his three Friends, who called his Piety in question because
of his afflictions. The dispute drew to a great length (two of them grappling
with him thrice, and the last twice, and he answering to them all) because of
the great eagerness of both parties; of the Friends, to humble Job as a wicked
man, and of Job to maintain his own integrity. And at last, the Friends do give
over, rather out of weariness, and judging him desperate, chap. 32.1. then any
way satisfied with what he had said. In all which debate, whatever was Satan's
design, or the motives inducing the Friends to enter and insist on this
Dispute, yet the Lord has so ordered, as it contributes exceedingly to
manifest the invincible power of God in Job, and the strength of his faith,
supporting him when his Friends were combined to crush him; and to clear many
mysteries of Divine Providence in the world, which are no where in Scripture
more amply discussed then in this Book.

Before we enter, with those Disputants, into the heat of the Debate, it will
be necessary to premit some Generals, by way of Introduction, which may serve
as a Key to open up the Scope and Drift of this Part of the Book. And,

1. As to the occasion and rise of this Debate; It flowed, more remotely, from
Jobs great and extraordinary Afflictions, which his Friends conceived could not
have come upon him, had he been a godly man. And while they are musing upon
this, during their seven days silence, chap. 2.13. a more near occasion offers
it self, of his bitter and impatient like complaint, chap. 3. and particularly,
that, ver. 25, 26. of chap. 3. he had asserted his Integrity and Piety; which
they judged not only to be false, considering how God had plagued him; But a
justifying of himself, and a condemning of God, which is the character and
property of wicked men: and therefore they are set on edge to enter the lists
with him.

2. As to the Question debated, or the state of the Controversy betwixt them;
There is the greater need to fix it clearly and well, that an Error in this
first Concoction cannot but occasion miserable mistakes and wrestings
throughout the Dispute, as may be perceived by the Judicious, in some
Interpreters. And in clearing thereof, I shall not insist upon any singular
Principles, or ways, made use of by the several Friends in prosecution of the
Principal Question, which some Interpreters labor to cull out of some of their
speeches. Those (if any such there be, which yet is very questionable) may be
seasonable enough pointed at when I come at them. Nor yet shall I insist upon
what is yielded and taken for granted, both by Job and them, in this debate;
Namely, That all afflictions fall under the eye and knowledge of God; That he
is the Principal Author, Dispenser and Orderer of all afflictions; And, That by
reason of the holiness, greatness and sovereignty of God, no imputation can be
fastened upon him in afflicting, as if he did any wrong. Hence, we will find so
much spoken on all hands in commendation of the Wisdom, Power, Dominion,
Holiness, etc. of God; Which they inculcate, to drive Job to acknowledge his
wickedness, being afflicted by so holy a God; and Job endeavors to outstrip
them on that Subject, being assured that the acknowledgment thereof was nothing
prejudicial to his cause. But the true state of the difference betwixt them,
was this; The Friends, upon the one hand, laid this for a Principle, That it
was most agreeable to the Holiness and Justice of God, that the godly and
wicked do receive a present reward proportionable to their way; and that if the
wicked at any time prospered, their prosperity was but momentany, and ended in
visible judgments; And if the godly were at any time afflicted, their
afflictions speedily ended in visible blessings. And therefore when they
consider Jobs case, being so suddenly turned out of his prosperity, and so long
and so sore afflicted, beyond the ordinary trials of faithful men, especially
carrying so ill under it, as he had done, chap. 3. They conclude that he
behoved to have been either a grossly wicked man, or a close hypocrite. Hence
they judge it their most seasonable way to prove him wicked, and to bear him
down and humble him; that so they might have ground whereupon to comfort him,
being penitent. That this was the drift of their Discourses will sufficiently
appear from their several speeches; and we may find Job noticing this as their
particular and chief design, chap. 21.27, 28. and chap. 32.1. they give him up
as an obstinate man, because he would not take with wickedness. But Job, upon
the other hand, maintains that neither love nor hatred can be known by outward
afflictions, but that Saints may be under as great outward trouble as the
wicked. And therefore he rejects their counsel, to take with former wickedness
and hypocrisy, and begin anew to seek God; and adheres to the testimony of his
Conscience, which bare witness to his Integrity, notwithstanding all assaults
from within, or from without. Hence he grants that he is a sinner, but not that
he is an hypocrite or wicked man; That God is righteous who afflicted him, and
yet he is not unrighteous, though afflicted by a righteous God; albeit neither
he nor they could sufficiently reconcile these two, nor sufficiently clear how
they were consistent; That though he be not sinless nor perfect, to seclude
free grace, Yet he was sincere according to the tenor of the Covenant of
grace, and perfect before men. Those and many the like Principles we will find
scattered throughout his speeches, while he constantly insists to defend
himself in the main cause.

3. Having considered the state of the Controversy, it is necessary We pass
some verdict and censure upon the dispute, on either hand, whereby our thoughts
may be regulated in going through it. For albeit all that is here recorded, be
Sacred Scripture, in so far as it contains an infallible account of what each
of them said, and that they spoke so; Yet when we consider that both parties
are rebuked by God for what they utter in the debate, and that they speak of
many things in contradictory terms; We can no further justify the purposes
uttered by them, then we find the general consent of other Scriptures bearing
witness thereunto, as we cannot either justify the complaints and tentations
of Saints which are recorded in the Book of Psalms and elsewhere, as sound
Divinity, but do look upon them as recorded in Scripture, only for this end,
that their example and experience may serve for Caution and Instruction to the
godly in all Ages.

Hence, on the Friends part, we may remark, 1. They maintain a false principle
throughout the Dispute, That God afflicted none as he afflicted Job, but wicked
men; which they insist so much upon, because, otherwise, they were not able to
reconcile such sharp dealing with the righteousness of God. Whereas the
Scripture, elsewhere, assures us that all things come alike to all, Eccles.
9.2. to which the Principle Job closely adhereth, chap. 9.22. and elsewhere
throughout the dispute. 2. They do also express a rash and uncharitable
judgment in their Discourse; in that they judged of the godly man's state by his
fits of tentation, and disordered frame and expressions in the heat of his
distemper: Judging that to proceed from a wicked disposition, and,
consequently, to be the mark of a wicked man, which was extorted from him
through the violence of tentation, and was only an evidence of that common
infirmity of Saints, which we find recorded in Scripture to have broken forth
in David and other godly men, as well as him. Hence, all their reflections upon
his complaints do fall short of their conclusion, to prove him a wicked man,
though indeed they reproved what was truly culpable in him. 3. In their
Doctrine concerning Gods Judgments upon wicked men (which is the great Argument
whereby they endeavor to prove him wicked) we must acknowledge there is much
truth, if we take in eternal punishment among the rest, to be inflicted upon
the wicked, whether they escape in this life or not; and if we understand it of
the deserving of all wicked men, according to the sentence of the Law; and that
God uses so to deal with some wicked men, whom he makes public spectacles of
his Justice, to deterr others. In these respects we find some of their speeches
cited, or, at least alluded unto, in other Scriptures, as Job 5.13. with 1 Cor.
3.19. and several of their expressions will be found to have some parallels in
other Books of the Old Testament. Yet in their speaking of these outward and
visible judgments that come on wicked men, there is a double mistake. One, That
they not only pleaded the Law-sentence and the Deserving of such men, or that
God did execute these threatenings, accordingly on some, even in this life,
which Job never denied, chap. 27.11, 12, 13, 14, etc. But they pleaded also the
real and actual execution of all that was threatened, and that on every one of
the wicked, even in this life: And so asserted that to be universally true,
which is only rue of some. For Job (agreeably to the Scriptures) maintained
that God exercised a great variety of dispensations toward wicked men in this
life, chap. 21.23, 24, 25. And (as may be gathered from the scope of most of
his speeches) that oft-times, God sees it fit to spare wicked men in this
life, notwithstanding their ill-deserving; yea, and to heap prosperity upon
them, until their death; That so he may exercise the faith and patience of the
godly; and may teach all to look out to a Day of Judgment, and the eternal
reward of Wickedness and Piety. Another mistake is, That they asserted these
calamities to be proper to the wicked, which are common also to the godly. For,
albeit temporal calamities, inflicted on a wicked man, are real curses, and
fruits of his sin; Yet the Scripture elsewhere clears that the same lots may
also befall the godly, either for chastisement, or for the trial of their faith
and patience, and that the supporting grace of God may he magnified in them, as
Jobs own experience does witness. Thus, as to the external stroke, there may be
one event to the righteous and to the wicked, etc. Eccles. 9.2. 4. Their
Doctrine concerning Gods Sovereignty, Holiness, and Justice, (whereby they
labored to drive Job from his confidence) is true doctrine; and therefore Job
strives to outstrip them in commending those Attributes of God. Yet they did
ill apply this doctrine, and made a bad use of it, to crush a godly man; as if
these Attributes of God could not consist with his being sincere, since he was
afflicted. Whereas the Scriptures do abundantly clear, That it is no imputation
to the Holiness, or other Attributes of God, that he afflict a godly man, to
purge out the remainders of sin in him, or for otherwise ends. Nor does God
allow that any of his Attributes should deter any of his Children from coming
to him, and from cleaving to their integrity, under whatsoever lot. 5. In their
Exhortations and Encouragements to Repentance, they have very good and sweet
General Doctrine, But very ill applied to him, as if he had been unconverted;
whom therefore they exhort to begin of new, as if he had been an Hypocrite
before; upon which account, he rejects all they spoke to this purpose. They do
also strain these Encouragements too much, especially as they relate to
Temporal Deliverances. For albeit sometime the Lord it pleased to deliver the
godly (after they have repented and improved their trials) out of affliction;
and even Job himself found the truth of some of their Doctrine, in his own
experience, notwithstanding his apprehensions to the contrary; yet it is not
always true, that the godly, even when penitent and tender, are delivered from
afflictions; but they are sufficiently rewarded and encouraged otherwise,
albeit they spend their whole life in outward trouble.

These are some of the most material mistakes in their Principles and
Discourses, all which are summed up by the Lord in this, Ye have not spoken of
me the thing that is right, as my servant Job has, chap. 42.7. And these
remarks being consonant to the current of Scripture-truths, they may serve as a
Rule and Standart whereby to judge of their particular Assertions, and do
warrant us to make use, not only of the General Truths held forth by them, but
even of their mistakes, according to this Rule. And in the very entry, those
their Principles, and their prosecution thereof, may afford these Cautions and
Instructions. 1. Even godly and wise men may err, and have erred in points of
great moment; As appears from this instance of these three men, whose
Discourses (setting aside their Errors) do evidence them to have been very
godly and able men, considering the times wherein they lived, very great
adorers of the Divine Attributes, and eminent Friends to Holiness. 2. One bad
and unsound Principle is apt to breed many Errors and Miscarriages; As in
these men, all their mistakes in point of Doctrine, and all their harsh dealing
with Job, flowed mainly from their false principle concerning Gods proceedings
in this life with godly and wicked men. 3. It is not sufficient that men,
resolving to comfort afflicted Friends, come furnished with good resolutions,
and much affection and compassion, unless they bring clear light and solid
doctrine also; For, in this they failed, though they wanted not affection, and
a desire to comfort him, chap. 2.11. 4. In Gods deep wisdom, Satan may be
permitted to prevail, even with good men, to make them serve his turn unawares;
For, he makes use of their mistakes to add not a little to Jobs affliction, who
had been delivered into his hand, to vex him. 5. When even good men are yoked
in debate, ordinarily they are thereby the more confirmed in their own opinion,
till God interpose; As appears in their insisting so long in this debate, till
God put a close to it.

Again, on Jobs part, he had sound Doctrine, and a good Cause, but too hotly
managed. For in defending his own integrity (partly through the sharpness of
his trouble, the heat of the Dispute, and such harsh usage from his Friends;
partly, through inward tentation and desertion, and his not being able to
reconcile Gods present dealing with the testimony of his own Conscience, all
which made him forget Satan's great design upon him.) There escape him some rash
expressions concerning his own Integrity (which sounded not only that he was
not wicked, as his Friends alleged, but as if he thought there was no cause
why he should be so afflicted) and some indirect reflections against God, as
dealing too hardly with a godly man; together with some impatient wishes and
desires; For which he is checked and convinced by Elihu, and then by God
himself. So that in judging of Jobs Discourses, though we are not to condemn
his Doctrine, yet from his way of propounding it, we may gather useful
Instructions concerning the Infirmities of most upright men, when hard put to
it in the Furnace of Affliction; which are no less edifying, in their own kind,
then is his invincincible faith, cleaving to God in the height of his troubles
and distempers.

Having premitted this necessary Key, I proceed to the Dispute it self, Where
Eliphaz, as being most aged and grave, or most zealous and vehement of all the
Friends, first enters the lists. Whose scope in this large Discourse, chap. 4.
and 5. (beside a brief preface, chap. 4.1, 2. and a short Conclusion, chap.
5.27.) may be reduced to these two Heads. 1. By way of Reprehension, He labors
from Gods dealing with Job, and his own carriage under the Rod, to convince him
of wickedness and hypocrisy, From chap. 4.3. to chap. 5.6. 2. By way
Encouragement and Direction, He exhorts him to begin of new to seek God, and to
bear his afflictions patiently, in hope of a good issue.

So this Chapter may be taken up in these, 1. A Preface to his Speech, ver. 1,
2. 2. Three Arguments whereby he endeavors to prove Job a wicked man, guilty
of close (if not gross) hypocrisy. One, taken from his carriage under
affliction, compared with his carriage toward others in the like case, ver. 3,
4, 5, 6. Another, from common experience of Gods dealing with godly and wicked
men, ver. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. And the third, from a vision he had from God to this
purpose, and (belike) upon this very occasion, ver. 12. -- 21.

Verse. 1. Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered and said,

2. If we assay to commune with thee, will thou be grieved? but who can
withold himself from speaking?


IN these Verses, Eliphaz, judging himself concerned to speak, and make answer
to Jobs former complaint, does usher in his Discourse with a Preface full of
insinuation and apology; Showing that he knew that what he and his Companions
had to say, (for he speaks in the plural number, we, and it may be they
consulted together, ere he began to speak) would not be very pleasant; and they
were not willing to grieve him, or augment his distemper, were it not that they
conceived Gods honor, and Jobs own good, were interessed in the business: In
which case, no zealous and honest man could be silent. As to this Preface, It
being certain that he was in an error, there was no necessity he should thus
speak to Job, nor could any pretense of zeal, or affection to Job, warrant him
to crush the afflicted man by his unsound Assertions. And though he begin thus
moderately, yet both he and the rest soon forget it afterward in the heat of
dispute, when supposed, or real, reflections upon themselves kindled their
passion. Yea, even in what he says and proceeds in, we will find much needful
moderation wanting. For having propounded the Question, Whether Job would be
grieved? he waits for no Answer, which might have prepared the way for a more
peaceable Conference; Nor does he more diligently examine Jobs spirit and way,
before he condemned him; yea; though he had resolved to condemn him, yet he
might have begun with more lenitives to prepare the way. All which warns us,
that men may not only have fair pretenses, but even good intentions and motions
of zeal and honesty, when yet their proceedings, through want of knowledge, are
wrong. Yet looking upon the speech with his own supposition, that he was right,
and for God, it may teach,

1. It is very hard to speak to afflicted and Broken spirits, and touch their
sores; but they will be grieved, or (as the word is) wearied unto rage and
fainting; For, the question imports, that their essaying to commune with him,
or their very trying the matter, would grieve him. They need the tongue of the
learned who would speak a word in season to such, Isai. 50.4.

2. Truly godly men are very tender of such as are afflicted in spirit, and
unwilling to add affliction to them who are already wounded; For, the question
imports, also, that they were sensible of this unpleasant fruit of their
Discourse, and did much desire he should not be grieved, and would gladly avoid
it, if it were possible. See 2 King. 4.27. Psalm. 69.22. -- 26.

3. Whatever tenderness is due to the afflicted; yet when a matter nearly
concerns the honor of God, and the real profit of the afflicted, zeal and
affection should postpone all other considerations to the vindicating of the
honor of God, and the doing of real service to our friends: For, upon this
Supposition, whatever resentment they might have for grieving of him, yet he
adds, But who can withold himself from speaking? as not being able to
endure, that God (as he judged) should be so far wronged, nor standing to
displease Job, if so be he might do him profitable service.

Verse. 3. Behold thou have instructed many, and thou have strengthened the weak
hands.

4. Thy words have upholden him that was falling, and thou have strengthened
the feeble knees.

5. But now it is come upon thee, and thou faintest; it touches thee, and thou
art troubled.

6. Is not this thy fear, thy confidence, thy hope, and the uprightness of thy
ways?


Follows the first part of the speech, wherein Eliphaz by four Arguments
(whereof three are in this Chapter) endeavors to prove him a wicked man, or an
hypocrite. The first Argument (in these verses) is taken from his own carriage
under affliction, compared with his behavior toward others in the like case;
which, by a note of attention, Behold, he bids him take notice of, as a known
thing, if not also by way of derision and check. The Argument may be thus
summed up; He must be, at best, but a close hypocrite, who having been stout
enough in comforting others in trouble; Yet, when trouble comes upon himself,
does succumb and turn impatient, not following that course which he had
prescribed to others: But such is Jobs case, He was clear and stout enough till
the Rod touched himself, and then he faints. Therefore Job, at best, is but an
hypocrite. An Argument not much unlike that sophistry of Satan, Chap. 2.4, 5.
And that I may clear the Text, and sift out what truth or error is in this
reasoning, I branch out the Argument, as it lies in the Text, in three Heads.

First, Jobs former carriage toward others, ver. 3, 4. Wherein are four acts of
his diligence and carefulness toward others, which some distinguish thus; He
instructed the ignorant, though there were many of them about him, H^
strengthened, or, stirred up, the weak hands, or such as were sluggish and
remiss in their duty; He upheld, or reclamed back-sliders, who had saln in
sinful courses; and, he comforted the sorrowful and discouraged, through
afflictions. This Interpretation does indeed point out, Partly, What are the
various failings and tempers of men, especially within a visible Church, (for,
no doubt Job had such about him) The generality are either ignorant, or
lukewarm, or breaking out in gross scandals, or crushed with afflictions; and
but a few keeping out in a lively and encouraged frame in all conditions.
Partly, What are the various duties and remedies proper for every one of these
diseases; and, partly, That the grace of God in men teaches them to be
communicative of what they have received, and will teach, even the greatest, to
stoop and impart of what they have received, to the meanest: For, Job; a great
Prince, is not only careful of his Family in this particular, Chap. 1.5. But
puts forth himself to do good to others also, whether Subjects, or
Neighbors.

But if we consider the Application of this to Jobs case, ver. 5, 6. we may
rather understand all these particulars of his dealing with those that were in
trouble. And so the first word, of instruction, is general, whereof the three
following are an Explication; That when any were in such perplexity of mind,
that they were ready to succumb and give it over (for so we are to understand
not only that of falling, but of weak hands, and feeble knees, which are
effects and evidences of fainting minds, and therefore the one is put to
signify the other, Is. 35.3, 4.) He was so powerful by his Instructions and
Encouragements, that they were kept from crushing by his means. And so it
teaches,

1. Not only true Piety has not been so thin sown, as men would think; but
trouble and exercise of mind has not been unusal in Jobs time; For, here have
been weak hands, and feeble knees among them. Trouble, both outward and inward,
and the Church, are Twins, who grow up together. And in all ages, Saints have
not wanted their own exercise and bickerrings in getting to heaven.

2. Tentations, and trouble or exercise of mind, when we give way thereunto,
are very crushing, and apt to discourage in duty; Yea, if not Evangelically
managed, may tend to Apostasy: For, so is soul-trouble here described by its
effects. It not only causes weak hands and feeble knees, but may resolve into
falling See Heb. 12.12, 13. Therefore those beginnings should be adverted unto,
and that we be not discouraged in following duty, lest that draw to worse.

3. It is very commendable in men to consider the poor, and to prove
comfortable to the afflicted in mind; For, this was commendable in Job, that he
strengthened the weak hands, etc. And therefore, in sad times of many searching
thoughts of heart, men would endeavor to be no discouragers (as one may
discourage many) but rather to be useful in comforting, as they have a calling
and opportunity

4. God in his Providence has so ordered, that Comforters will still be found
for the afflicted in mind, as here a Job is provided for those about him. Gods
faithfulness is engaged, that his people under tentation shall find such a way
to escape, that they may be able to bear it. 1 Cor. 10.13. And this is one
special mean of support, among others, to have a faithful and useful friend, to
encourage and direct them. So that Saints in distress may certainly expect (in
Gods due time and way) consolation and comforters, were it even in Arabia where
Job lived.

5. In dealing with crushed and tender minds, Jobs practice affords two Rules
necessary to be observed,

1. That the afflicted be well instructed, and their judgments informed in
divine truth, which will cure much anxiety, disquiet and diffidence, which flow
from ignorance, Psalm. 9.10. For, Job made it his work to instruct many

2. That whatever Instructions, or reproofs and admonitions be found necessary
to give them (as afflicted souls may need such;) yet care must be had that they
be not thereby weakened, but strengthened to keep their grips: For, Jobs scope
in all his Instructions was still to strengthen and uphold. See 1 Samuel 12.20,
21.

Doct. 6. God not only can, but (when he sees it fit) does add an effectual
blessing to the weak endeavors of his servants and children, for strengthening
and encouraging of fainting souls, and other gracious effects; As here, his
words upheld him that was falling, etc. which may encourage men, as they have a
calling, to go forth in the strength of the Lord, to deal with souls according
to their various cases, which, otherwise, does appear to be an insuperable
task, as Exodus 6.9. and Jer. 22.21. See 1 Cor. 1.22. 2 Cor. 10.4, 5.

Secondly, Jobs present behavior under his own trouble, ver. 5. He who had
been stout enough so long as trouble kept off himself now, when it comes and
but touches himself, becomes so faint in spirit, and troubled and perplexed
in mind, that he knows not what to do. In this he reflects upon Jobs former
complaint, Chap 3. wherein there was distemper of spirit more then enough
discovered. And it does hold out these Truths.

1. Greatness of trouble may drive a man from the comfortable use of what light
he may have in his judgment, ready to minister to others in cold blood: For,
Job, who comforted others, now faints and is troubled. This needs not seem
strange if we consider, Partly, That comforting of souls is the work of God;
and therefore, had men never so much clear light, yet, if God withdraw, they
will want the use of it when they have most need. Yea, Ministers, who dispense
Consolation to others, may yet be disconsolate enough themselves, till God
interpose. Not that men are warranted to lie by from making use of what light
they have, for their own encouragement, 1 Samuel 30 6. But that their activity
without dependence upon God, will not effectuate any thing. Partly, That there
is a great difference betwixt a trial apprehended in our judgment, and felt by
sense. In the one case, a man's judgment may be clear enough, and his spirit
resolute; But in the other, his spirit and judgment being overcharged, he
cannot so easily recollect and fix himself. Hence it was, that even our Lord
was troubled in soul, when the real sense of trouble came upon him, Joh. 12.27.

2. Faintness and discouragement of spirit, when way it given thereunto, does
soon perplex men, that had they never so much light, they will want the
comfortable use of it; for, when once faints, then he is easily troubled,
confounded and perplexed. So that humble fortitude of mind being endeavored
and studied after, it keeps a man in a near capacity to receive influences and
direction from God, for expeding him out of his perplexities, Psalm. 27.14. Yet
in this challenge we may observe a double injury done to Job.

1. That Eliphaz does so much aggravate his weakness and frailty. For neither
did he so faint, as to quit his grips of an interest in Gods love and favor;
Nor is it solidly argued, That because, in his tentations, his weakness did
appear in his fainting and perplexities, Therefore he is a wicked man, as he
would infer in the following verses. It is our mercy that God does otherwise
judge of the ravings and swoundings of his afflicted Children: For, if this
were sound Divinity, that every able comforter of others, when he is not able
to comfort himself, and every one that faints and is perplexed, when God is
emptying and humbling him under trouble, is a wicked man or hypocrite; Who of
all the Lords tried Worthies should ever dare to claim to integrity? These
things do indeed proclaim our frailty, and, oft-times we our selves have a
sinful hand therein; Yet, the experience of Saints, recorded in Scripture, does
witness that they are incident to the best of Saints.

2. Eliphaz does also too much extenuate Jobs trial and tentation, drawing
forth this weakness; calling it but a touch, contrary to their thoughts
thereof, Chap. 2.12. It is true, a touch may import a sharp stroke, which a man
is made to feel, as Chap. 2.5. Yet it is but a very slender word to express all
Jobs great afflictions. And it teaches, That many are apt to pry into, and
aggrava^e the failings of Saints, who do little ponder the strong tentations
they have to drive them so to slip. But God (though he be angry with those who
raise a clamor above their strait) does ponder our tentations, when he judges
of our failings, and consequently, pitieth, as Elisha did the Shunamite, 2
King. 4.27.

The third head of his Argument, is, an Inference and conclusion drawn from his
comparing the former two together, ver. 6. Wherein he thinks himself so clear,
that he dare appeal to Job himself, whether this his way did not prove his
Religion unsound and hypocritical: and that by his fainting, who had comforted
others, he had given a poor proof of that Piety to which he had so much
pretended. Some take up those Questions thus; Has not thy fear been thy
confidence? and the uprightness of thy ways, been thy hope? That is, Does it
not now appear that thy pretending to Piety, to fear God and walk uprightly (of
which Chap. 1.1.) was only mercenary, because thou trusted and hoped to
continue in prosperity thereby, seeing now when thou art stripped of what thou
enjoyedst, thou faintest, and discoverest that thou wast not sincere? This was
Satan's very calumny against Job, Chap. 1.9, 10. now cast in his teeth by a
godly friend; As oft-times, also, the child of God may meet with his own very
bosom tentations cast up to him by way of reproach, for his further trial, and
that he may be roused up to resist these tentations which, otherwise, he does
but too much cherish. Psalm. 22.1, 7, 8, with 9. And whatever wrong they did to
Job in this (of which we heard somewhat on the former verse and somewhat will
be added hereafter) yet there is a general truth in this, That time-servers can
take up a form of godliness, when it seems to be for their advantage, which
trouble, and disappointment of their carnal expectation, will soon make them
shake off. Others read the words thus, Would not thy fear be thy confidence?
and the uprightness of thy way thy hope? That is, If thou were truly a fearer
of God and an upright walker, thou would not faint so desperately as thou do,
but that would support thee in the hope and confidence of Gods help. Any of
these readings do well enough serve their end, to endeavor to prove him
wicked; (though this last be not so consonant to their Principles, who were not
so clear that truly-godly men might fall in so great troubles) Yet the
Original, placing the copulative, and, before the last word only, makes it but
one continued sentence, thus; Is it not thy fear, thy confidence, thy hope and
the uprightness of thy way? where no such connexions do appear. But in sum, by
this vehement Interrogation, importing (as our Translation has it) that all
his Religion was come to this crushed posture (mentioned, ver. 5.) in trouble;
he would bear this upon him, to consider if his carriage did witness any truth
of Religion in him, call it by what name he will, of fear, confidence, hope, or
upright way: as it seems these have been the usual terms whereby they
expressed or described true Piety.

In this Inference Job is notably injured by Eliphaz; (as has been marked on
ver. 5.) while he judges of his state by a fit of infirmity; while he
supposes that every skilled Comforter is able to comfort himself, when God
hides his face: or, that the strongest of Saints may not stagger under trial,
and may not be able to prescribe a remedy, which yet, in every case, themselves
cannot apply to themselves. And here we may remark the power of delusion, that
while he is maintaining so manifest untruths; yet he is so confident that he
dare appeal to Job himself; Is not this thy fear, etc? Can thou say that this
is consistent with Piety? or that thou have any of it? We must not measure or
judge of men's soundness in doctrine by their confidence in maintaining thereof;
for st^ong delusions are let loose on some, to make them believe lies, 2 These.
2.10, 11, 12. Yet we may, from these words, observe somewhat further for our
Instruction.

1 The words hold out a notable Compend and Sum of true Piety; The root whereof
is a filial fear of God, the effects, an upright way; and the supporters of
both these, Confidence in God through a Mediator (not leaning to our own
worth) and hope, fetching food from afarr, to feed faith: So much may be
gathered from all these words conjoined, whereby, it seems, it was usual among
them to describe Piety.

2. The word rendered confidence (as it is also, Chap. 8.14. and 31.24. Psalm.
78.7. Prove. 3.26.) deserves to be considered. For it signifies also folly,
Psalm. 49.14. and so it is very applicable to faith, which natural men do
account folly, 1 Cor. 2.14. because it wants evidence (as the Greek word
there imports,) and Saints, in so far as they are unrenewed, may be ready to
despise it, as a very poor shift; And therefore men ought to take heed whose
testimony they receive concerning the way of faith. Likewise, a word from the
same root signifies, Orion, Job 9.9. and 38.31. Amos 5.8. or, that
Constellation which, appearing in the beginning of Winter, causes, ordinarily,
great tempests and uncertainty of seasons, or is a sign thereof, And this also
may hint at somewhat concerning faith; That a believer must not expect a
constant calm and serenity, but many tempests to assault his faith and many
tossings up and down; while yet faith keeps its hold, as a Ship tiding at
Anchor in a storm, is secure, though tossed.

3. These words (if we abstract from Jobs case, and allow some latitude to
Saints in an hour of tentation) do also point out these general sound truths.

1. It is a sad aggravation of men's sin in any wrong course, when their own
former light and practice does witness against them in it; As here he makes use
of Jobs former practice, to condemn his present way. See, Romans 2.20, 21. Gal.
4.15.

2. Grace should shine in trouble, and in our carriage under it, when
hypocrisy will weary and give it over; For, in it self (however he mistook
Job) it is a great fault, when it may be said to a man in trouble, Is not this
thy fear, thy confidence, etc? The very hour of trouble is the time wherein
sincerity and confidence in God should appear.

3. Albeit the strongest of Saints may stagger in a trial; Yet true Piety and
Sincerity may be a Cordial to uphold the heart in greatest troubles; For,
herein, he said true, that true Piety and Confidence might have kept him from
fainting; and so it served Job as a Cordial, even though God should slay him,
Chap. 13.15, 16. And thus it supported Hezekiah, when threatened with an
unexpected death, 2 King. 20.3. Though in all this he do too rigidly censure
Job, as if his disturbance of spirit were an evidence that he had totally
succumbed: and as if there had been no metal in him, because he did cast a
scum in the furnace.

4. Times of trouble may discover that in men which they did not know, or, not
seriously enough ponder: For, this Question, Is not this thy fear, etc? albeit
it do not sufficiently conclude, from the premises, that Job, might know he had
no fear of God; yet, it may well intimate that he might learn some things
concerning himself and his Piety, which he knew not so experimentally before:
Namely, what clouds and passions trouble might raise in a formerly calm mind;
how far one may faint, who was resolute before he engaged in trouble; What
mis-apprehensions a gracious Saint may have of his own lot, and of Gods dealing
with him, etc. Hence, the discovery of the thoughts of many hearts (not only of
the wicked, but even of the Children of God, who may discover that which they
hardly knew to be in them) is a remarkable consequent of trouble, Luke 2.35.

Verse. 7. Remember, I pray thee, who ever perished being innocent? or where
were the righteous cut off?

8. Even as I have seen, they that plow iniquity, and sow wickedness, reap the
same.


Eliphaz's Second Argument does tend directly to prove Job and his Children
also wicked, seeing he and they were so afflicted as none but the wicked use to
be; which he confirms from experience and the common Observations of men. This
Argument from experience is propounded in these verses, both negatively, that
no godly man was afflicted as he, ver. 7. and positively, that only the wicked
were so plagued, ver. 8. He puts Job to it, to bring out, from all his
remembrance and observation, one instance of a man who was innocent, from gross
wickedness, and righteous, by imputation and the sincerity of begun
sanctification, who perished, or was cut off, as he and his Children were, ver.
7. And on the contrary, he produces his own observation of the wickeds so
perishing; which was so ordinary, equitable, and proportionable to their sin,
that it past for a common Proverb, That the wicked did justly reap the fruit of
their sinful ways and courses, v. 8. In this Argument we may observe these
truths,

1. It is our duty to remark all the dealings of God with the sons of men, in
mercy or in judgment, and to make use of them; as Eliphaz here calls on Job to
bring forth what he remembered, and does himself give an account of what he has
seen, See Psalm. 28.5. and 37.35, 36. and 64.9. and 3.4. Isa. 5.12.

2. It is also commendable in fallible men, that they do not imperiously
obtrude their light on others, but are as willing to receive as to offer light,
that so truth may be lifted out: For, in propounding this Argument, he puts Job
to bring forth his Observations, as he gives an account what himself had seen.

3. Such as lay claim to true Piety ought to be righteous persons, by being
sheltered under the wings of imputed righteousness, and drawing virtue from
Christ to enable them for a sincere and upright conversation; so as they may be
innocent and free (at least) of gross provocations: For, so are they here
described, the innocent and righteous.

4. None who are truly godly, do ever perish eternally, nor are they so left in
trouble, as they have no door of hope, here, or hereafter; For, in that sense
it is true, none perish being innocent, nor are the righteous cut off, though
Eliphaz take it more generally. See 2 Cor. 4.8, 9. and 6.9, 10.

5. As to be wicked is, oft-times no easy task, but laborious, like plowing,
and expensive, like sowing; So they will, sooner or later, (though not always
visibly here) reap a proportionable reward of their wickedness: For, in this
sense his own Observation, ver. 8. is true and just, that as men sow so they
should reap, Gal. 6.7, 8. Though there may a long time intervene betwixt the
sin and the punishment, as there is betwixt Seed-time and Harvest.

6. When the Lord lets the wicked prosper, and the godly seem to perish and be
cut off in this life, it may be sore tentation, even to an holy man, to think
hardly of the godlies way, because so afflicted: For, Eliphaz is induced, on
this account to condemn Job. And albeit his Principles did mislead him so to
judge; yet even where men's light is clear, it will not be easy to get over
such stumbling blocks, unless we go to the Sanctuary, Psalm. 73.3. -- 17.

But beside these truths, there are diverse great mistakes in this Argument.

First, In the main Argument, taken from outward lots and dispensations in this
life, whereby he would prove Job and his Children to be wicked. For the General
Principle is false, that none are so afflicted but the wicked, and that every
one who perishes and is cut off (as his Children were) is wicked. It has been
already cleared that the godly and wicked may fall under the same outward
sufferings, Eccles. 9.1, 2. and consequently, that no man's former life ought to
be judged by his present afflictions. These Friends held (as appears from their
debates) that there is no such stroke inflicted, but as a punishment of sin
according to the rule of strict justice. But the Scriptures make clear that,
beside afflictions which are punishments, properly so called; there are, also,
fatherly chastisements, of such as are dear to God, for their folly, 1 Cor.
11.32. Psalm. 89.31, 32, 33. Trials and exercises of faith, 1 Pet. 1.6, 7. and
Martyrdom, for a testimony to the truth, Rev. 12.11. Yea, the Scriptures do
clear that not only the godly and wicked may be under the same affliction; But
that the wicked may prosper, while the godly are in affliction, Psalm. 73.3, 12,
13, 14. And that the wicked may prevail to afflict him that is more righteous
then himself, Hab. 1.13. All which truths, as they contrary to Eliphaz's
principles, so they may help us to judge righteous judgment concerning the
various dispensations of God in the world, and to judge charitably of these
under affliction. And particularly we may here conclude, That events in war are
no concluding argument, to prove that those who are put to the worse have an
unjust quarrel. For people, in a most just quarrel, have been put to the worse
by wicked men in a wicked quarrel, because of their sins who have maintained
the just cause, as appears from the war with Benjamin, Judge. 20. and the war of
the ten Tribes against Judah, 2 Chronicles. 28.6 7, 8, 9 10. Nor does Gods
determining against a people, after a solemn Appeal, prove the injustice of
their Cause. For,

1. All wars are upon the matter, an App^al to God, after that appeals to
Justice by Law suits, or to the people, by Declarations, do not put an end to
Controversies. And therefore if God may deny success in a righteous cause, for
holy and righteous ends, where there is not a formal Appeal; The solemnity of
an Appeal has nothing in it to oblige God beyond the equity of the Cause.

2. Appeals have been made to God by his Saints, (as by David, Psalm. 7.3, 4,
5.) who yet have long suffered after their Appeal. For Appeals, in Scripture
terms, import no more, then our committing of our cause to God, that he, in due
time, and by his own means, may clear our innocence, and this will certainly be
granted.

3. If an Appeal be made to God, that, by the next immediate event, he may
clear the righteous Cause, such an Appeal is a great sin, and a^ l^miting of
the Holy One of Israel. And being a sin on both hands, God uses to punish it
rather in his people, maintaining his cause, then in Enemies owning an unjust
cause. For they who work wickedness are delivered, when they tempt God, Mal.
3.15. And not they who are Gods people, maintaining his Cause and Truth. And
consequently, in such a case, The loss of a Battle is rather a proof of a just
quarrel (which God will not let prosper by sinful means) then of an unjust.

Secondly, As the general Principle is false, and consequently concludes
nothing against Jobs Children, upon whom he reflects, ver. 10, 1^. So the
Application thereof to Jobs case is nothing sounder. It is true, he was sore
afflicted, and Job himself did not expect an issue, (and though he had been cut
off out of this life, it had not proved him wicked, as has been said) yet he
had not perished, nor was cut off. But, in the issue, God made it appear that
he can raise up men (when he pleases) from the pit, and when their bones lie
scattered about the graves mouth, to see his goodness in the land of the
living. Whence we may gather, That Saints may seem to themselves, and others,
to be in a desperate and lost condition, when yet it will prove otherwise. So
also may a righteous Cause be triumphed over, as irrecoverably crushed, which
yet at last will prove a Conqueror.

Thirdly, His confirmation of this main Arguments, taken from Experience, is a
weak proof. For,

1. Albeit they found by experience (which was indeed their stumbling block)
That, in that nonage of the Church, God had more ordinarily trained on his
people with outward encouragments, and plagued the wicked: Yet that did not
evince that he would always follow that method, seeing it was not promised. His
outward signal dispensations in one time or age, are not a constant ground for
our expectation and faith, but the word alone. Though, indeed, it be true, that
after eminent proofs of Gods appearing for his people, and against the wicked,
it is not easy to submit to want the like again.

2. Though the world had but lasted a short while, till their days, compared
with its continuance since; yet they could not undertake they had known all
that God had done, or did remember all they knew, or seriously remark all they
saw. And consequently, their observation and experience could not found an
universal Principle, seeing they might be deficient in it. And indeed, before
their time, there were not only instances of Noah and Lot much vexed in soul,
but of Abel cut off by his wicked brother, which might fully answer that
Question, ver. 7. and refute what he brought from experience. But it seems,
that that and the like were not marked, either because more rate, or because
their principles did so prepossess them, as they did not advert to any thing
which contradicted the same. As it is most ordinary that prejudices and
preingagements do shut out clearest truths.

3. Their exp^rience was not so large then as now; and therefore it needed not
seem strange, albeit Job should cast the first copy to all after-ages, of a
godly man so afflicted. Nor need Saints stumble, being approved in their way by
the Word, to hazard upon a trial wherein no godly man has trod before them;
and (when they have no experience of any in the like case before them) to
leave, in their trial, an experience to all who shall come after them, as it
seems Abel and Job did. In sum, from all this we may conclude, how safe and
sure it is to judge of persons and lots by the word, and what hazard there is
to look to dispensations or experiences, without it.

Verse. 9. By the blast of God they perish, and by the breath of his nostrils
are they consumed.

10. The roaring of the lion, and the voice of the fierce lion, and the teeth
of the young lions are broken.

11. The old lion perishes for lack of prey, and the stout lions whelps are
scattered abroad.


This Argument from Experience, is, in these verses, further enlarged. And, to
make it have impression on Job, he amplifieth the stroke of God upon the
wicked, with diverse reflections upon the case of Job and his Children, to make
him apprehend how like the one case is to the other. And,

1. He sets before him the manner of the wickeds destruction; ver. 9. where by
the blast, and breath of God, we are to understand, his anger immediately let
forth, and his extraordinary power exerted against sinners, to consume them and
make them perish; as Eliphaz supposes that God had destroyed Jobs Children and
some of his Goods; for the expressions allude to that which had befaln them.

2. He sets before him the object of those judgments, which are oppressors
and their Children, who are compared to Lions for their cruelty and fierceness,
ver. 10, 11. Where most of the names of Lions in Scripture, taken from their
several Ages, are gathered together, to point at old Job and his Children, in
their several ages.

3. He points out the effects of Gods destroying of them, That then their
terror and cruelty (signified by their roaring, voice, and teeth) are made to
cease, ver. 10. and old oppressors want necessary means of subsistence and
comfort, as Job did, and their children were scattered and gone, as his were,
ver. 11. Here, it may be enquired (for further clearing of the words.)

1. Whether by these reflections he point at Jobs Children also as oppressors?

Answ. Though they may be called by the name of young Lions, only as Children
to him who was (as he judged) a Lion-like oppressor; yet the breaking of the
teeth of young Lions, implies further, that he judged them oppressors also;
and elsewhere we find ( Chap. 8.4.) that they charged guilt upon his Children,
for which God had destroyed them.

2. It may be enquired, how Job could be charged as guilty of such a crime of
oppression, who had such a public testimony of being a lover of Justice and
Equity, Job 29.11, -- 17? or, How his Children could be charged with it, of
whose meddling with affairs nothing is recorded, far less of their cruelty?

Answ. 1. Eliphaz's Principles led him to charge this crime upon them, though
there were no other evidence of it, but that they were thus afflicted. For his
way of reasoning was thus, sure they must have been oppressors, else they had
not been so crushed.

2. If we consider that Job, in doing justice (and, it may be, his sons under
him, and at his command) behoved to irritate those whose were in the wrong, and
whom he crushed; Chap. 29.17. we may easily gather that these would be now
ready to say, God had justly rewarded him thus, for wronging and oppressing of
them (as they judged it to be) which agreeing with Eliphaz's Principles, he
(without any further examination) takes it for granted that their complaints
were just.

This Discourse is no less faulty then the former Argument, to conclude that,
because this is Gods common course with Oppressors, therefore none of them are
exempted, and only such were so crushed, and that every calumny against a Saint
in trouble should be looked on as a just and true accusation. And his mistake
in these Reflections, may further teach us,

1. It is usual for Saints to lie under great misconstructions, both concerning
their afflictions, and the cause of them; Not only to have sore trouble lying
upon them, and it painted out in its worst colors, as if God in wrath were a
party, and in all the branches thereof: But imputations upon their carriage
received in the world, and believed by godly men, as well as suggested to their
own bosoms. As here Job has his case held out to him by Eliphaz, as pursu^d by
an angry God, to utter ruin in his person and posterity, for his great
oppressions. This may teach men to look and learn to a surer testimony, being
denied to popular applause, and not stumbling though they be misconstructed,
even by Saints.

2. It may please God, after he has taken innocent men out of the world, to
suffer their names to lie under reproach behind them, for the trial of their
Relations who are left behind, and that all may expect that day, wherein there
will be a Resurrection of names, as well as of bodies; For, here, Jobs
Children, after their death, lie under this imputation, that they had been
oppressors.

But if we look on this Discourse in it self, abstracting from Eliphaz's
mis-application, and as it contains Gods sentence against wicked men and
oppressors, (which he does execute, when, and upon whom, he will, and not as
Eliphaz prescribed to him) it may instruct us in these General Truths.

1. God is too hard a party for sinners to grapple with; For, his blast, and
the breath of his nostrils, can consume them; yea, a look of him can bring to
nothing, Chap. 7 8. See Psalm. 90.11.

2. As all gross sinners do evidence their beastly brutishness, in the
unreasonable beastly courses which they follow to satisfy their lusts, 2 Pet.
2.12 So, in particular, Oppressors are, in effect, beasts, in regard of their
cruelty and violence; and because no bonds of reason or civility can restrain
them from doing evil, when it is in the power of their hand, Mic. 2.1.
Therefore are they compared to Lions, young Lions, and fierce Lions. So also to
Dragons and Leviathans, Psalm. 74.13, 14.

3. Oppressors do justly meet with the reward of their brutish fury, in that,
when they will no more be held by the bonds of Divine Precepts then Beasts are,
God takes them in the net of Divine Vengeance, whereby their fury is bridled:
For, so much is imported in breaking of their roaring, voice and teeth. It is a
great blessing, and a mean to prevent many judgments, when men in power are
bounded by a Conscience and the fear of God, Genesis 48.18. Neh. 5.15.

4. Albeit oppressors think to gain much to themselves and their heirs, by
oppression; yet, oft-times, in Gods righteous judgment, it falls out otherwise,
that they come to great misery themselves, and bring dissipation upon their
families: For, this is the Law-sentence against such (though not always
executed in this life) The old Lion perishes for lack of prey, and the stout
Lions whelps are scattered abroad.

Verse. 12. Now a thing was secretly brought to me, and mine ear received a
little thereof.

13. In thoughts from the visions of the night, when deep sleep falls on men,

14. Fear came upon me, and trembling, which made all my bones to shake.

15. Then a spirit passed before my face, the hair of my flesh stood up.

16. It stood still, but I could not discern the form thereof: an image was
before mine eyes, there was silence, and I heard a voice, saying,


The third Argument is contained in a Vision which he had from God, belike on
this same occasion, it being so suitable to Jobs case, though mistaken by
Eliphaz, and produced to prove a wrong conclusion. The sum of the Argument is
held forth in the first words spoken by God in that Vision, v. 17. That it is
great presumption (and, as Eliphaz understood it, the character of a wicked
man) to implead Gods righteousness in his afflicting of men. To enforce which
Argument Eliphaz produces,

1. The divine Authority of this Doctrine, giving a large account how he
received it from God, v. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.

2. The reasons whereby God, speaking to him, did confirm that Argument and
Challenge, v. 18, 19, 20, 21.

Before I enter upon the words, somewhat must be cleared concerning this Vision
in general. And,

1. It may be enquired, whether Eliphaz had indeed such a Vision and Revelation
from God; or did only feign that he had one, to conciliate Authority to his
Doctrine?

Answ. The circumstances and manner of this Vision being so exactly consonant
to what is elsewhere recorded of the like manifestations; the Doctrine here
published being divine; and the man being a godly man who makes this Narration;
it is not to be questioned but that indeed he had such a Vision and Revelation.

2. It will then be enquired, Whether the Lord did approve of Eliphaz's
Principles and Opinion, that he thus appears in a Vision, to confirm him in his
judgment?

Answ. Nothing less; For, Chap 42.7. he tells him that he had not spoken right
of him. Yea, this divine Revelation (as we shall hear) contains nothing of
Eliphaz's Assertions, That the righteousness of God, who afflicts, proves the
man who is afflicted to be unrighteous; and that there is no mids betwixt these
two, but either God who afflicts, or the man who is afflicted, must be unjust.
This doctrine has nothing of this, but does only lay down these grounds upon
which Elihu, and afterward God himself, do deal with Job; viz. That the
righteousness and spotless purity of God being infinitely above the creatures,
Man ought not to plead his own righteousness under affliction, to the prejudice
of Gods righteousness who afflicts him.

3. It may then further be enquired, How Eliphaz comes to make use of this
doctrine, to prove his Conclusion against Job?

Answ. It may safely be conceived, that, being biased and prepossessed with
his own opinion, he looked through his own prejudicate Spectacles upon Divine
Truth; judging that this challenge from God did not only bear a charging of Job
with infirmity, in managing of his cause and bearing of his affliction; but a
reprehension of gross wickedness, such as he had already concluded him guilty
of, because of his afflictions. So great is the power of delusion, that even
when men are taught by immediate Revelations, they will expound them according
to their own fancies; And even Visions from God may be wrested by them who have
prejudices. As, Act. 21.4. when the Spirit foretold Paul's hazards at Jerusalem,
his friends affection made them say, as if it were from the Spirit of God, that
he should not go thither, which was very far contrary to the purpose of God.

I come now to open up this Vision and Revelation, as it lies in the Text. And

First, (in these verses) he gives an account how he received it from the
Lord. This he does largely insist upon, producing the several circumstances
thereof, evidencing that he had it indeed from God; which did both assure
himself, and might assure Job, that the following Message was from God. And it
does teach us, How caut^ous we ought to be, in admitting any light, or
obtrud^ng it upon others, but what we know to be truth and the mind of God In
prosecution of this purpose, I shall not insist to speak of the several ways
whereby God did c^mmunicate his mind of old O which, see Heb. 1.1. Numb. 12.6,
8. Job 33.15. and elsewhere. But shall only speak to the particulars in the
Text. And,

First, He gives an account of the manner how this Vision came to him, and the
measure of his receiving it, ver. 12. That this thing, or, word and message,
was brought secretly, or by stealth, unto him; Not only without the knowledge
or observation of others, but suddenly and unexpectedly to himself; and, it
seems also, the voice was so low and secret, that it required special attention
to perceive and take it up. And accordingly he adds, that his ear received
but a little thereof. Not only did the Vision soon pass, so that he had but a
short while of it; But, though he received the whole Vision, yet it was but a
little of it he could comprehend; whereby he both evidenceth his modesty, in
giving an account of his proficiency, and professes his real incapacity to
comprehend the depth of this Divine Revelation, though he retained the whole
words of it.

Doct. 1. God is not forgetful of his people on earth; But where ever there are
worshippers of him, he does keep intercourse with them, and communicates his
mind and counsels to them; As here we s^e was his way with these godly men in
Arabia.

2. When ordinary means do fail, the Lord is not wanting, immediately and by
himself, to keep up a fellowship and intercourse with his people; As here he
did by Visions before the Scriptures were written. And though we are not to
expect the like Revelations now, yet his way then does assure us of this
general truth, That God is not so tied to means (though he has obliged us not
to neglect them) as he will not do for his people without and above them, as
their need shall require.

3. It is an evidence of the Lords kindness to his people, that he not only
communicates much to them, which none know but the receivers; But that he is
pleased, often times, to surprise themselves with unexpected proofs of his love;
As, here a thing was brought by stealth unto him, without the privity of
others, and when he was not expecting it. See, Genesis 16.13.

4. Gods manifestations of himself do not serve to cherish laziness; but, where
they are sanctified, will excite to diligence and improvement of the
opportunity; For, so much is imported in that the thing was secret, requiring
his attention, and he had but a little thereof, a short time of the passing
Vision, to be well emproved.

5. The manifestations of God are never altogether without fruit, in a godly
soul; for his ears received thereof, and was edified thereby.

6. The Sons of men are but narrow mouthed vessels, and unable to comprehend
all that God communicates unto them; For, says he, mine ears received a little
thereof; See, 1. Cor. 13.12.

7. The more a man do indeed receive of God, the more sober will he become, and
the more sensible of his own incapacity and non proficiency; For, so much does
his humble and modest confession import, Mine ears received but a little
thereof.

Secondly, He gives an account of the time when this Vision was given him, ver.
13. Though it was in the night, yet it seems not to have been a divine
Revelation by a dream; But that (either at home, after he had notice of Jobs
trouble, or during these seven days wherein he stayed with Job, Chap. 2.13. or,
it may be after, Job's late complaint, Chap. 3. which seems to be reflected
upon by what God here reveals to him,) while he is seriously meditating upon
this matter, even at that time of the night wherein men use to sleep most
soundly; and revolving in his thoughts former Visions from God, if they could
afford any thing to speak to Jobs case: Then this Vision came to inform him
what to say, if his prejudged opinion had not mistaken it.

Hence we may Learn.

1. Such as would deal effectually with men in affliction, had need to be very
serious and advised what to say; and to attain this, will cost them pains,
sometime even to the loss of their rest and sheep: For, Eliphaz is put to his
thoughts, when deep sleep falls on men.

2. Though God see it fit to humble his servants in all their endeavors; yet
the diligent will find their defects richly made up by God: For, though his
thoughts did not afford the light that was necessary to inform or convince Job;
yet God does supply that by this Vision.

5. Albeit there was no necessary connection betwixt Eliphaz's exercise and
this Vision; Yet we may, from this instance, gather some Rules, whereby to
discern when we are in a frame for receiving manifestations of God. As,

1. Serious and assiduous exercise in holy duties, especially in meditation,
will bring hearts into a fit frame for much of God to be manifested unto them,
and for clearing of doubts and perplexities thereby; For, he is upon his
thoughts, and much raised in them (as the word imports, which signifies also
the uppermost branches of a tree) when he got this Vision. See, Psalm. 63.4, 5,
6.

2. Men's studying to improve what they have received is the way to receive
more; For, while he is in thoughts from Visions of the night, or, meditating on
former Visions, this new Vision comes,

3. As the night season, when all things were quiet, was most fit for these
divine revelations; So men thrive best in fellowship with God, and knowing of
his mind, when they withdraw themselves from the distractions of time, so far
as the necessary discharge of their lawful callings will permit.

Thirdly, He gives an account of the Vision it self, with the terror going
before and accompanying it, ver. 14, 15. The Lord having a Message to reveal to
him, sent a Spirit, or, Angel in visible shape, to carry it. And to prepare him
for this, he is surprised with a fit of fear and trembling, making even his
bones to shake; And when the Spirit appeared, moving before him up and down,
his fear did yet continue, causing his hair to stand up. Hence we are taught,

1. So dear are Gods people to him, that he will employ even blessed Angels to
minister unto them, and (if it be needful) to carry Messages from him unto
them; As here, A Spirit passed before his face, to bring this Revelation. See
Heb. 1.14. Psalm. 91.11, 12.

2. This terrifying way of extraordinary Visions, which was usual in these
times, served,

1. To prepare them with reverence to receive the message; as Elijah had a
Wind, Earthquake and Fire going before the still voice, 1 King. 19.11, 12.
Which warns us to advert how we receive any message that comes to us from God.
And unless our hearts be stamped with holy awe and reverence in hearing of it,
it cannot be expected that it will produce any other saving effect.

2. It served to humble and abase them whom he did exalt with such
extraordinary Revelations, Thus was Paul, after his rapture, humbled with a
Messenger of Satan, 2 Cor. 12.7. And thus was Daniel, when he had many Visions,
humbled with grief and weakness, Dan. 7.15. and 8.27. and 10.8. Such is our
weakness, and so ready are we to miscarry, that it is necessary we meet with
humblings proportionable to ou^ enjoyments.

3. It serves to teach us to bless God for the calm Word, which comes to us by
the ministry of men, seeing these instances do teach us, that we could not
endure the presence of an Angel, much less of God himself to speak his mind
unto us.

Fourthly, He makes a confession of his own incapacity to comprehend this
Vision. As before he told it was but a little of the matter revealed that he
received, ver. 12. So here, he declares that not only when the Spirit, or.
Angel, passed by before him, and first appeared, ver. 15. but even when it
stood still, he could not discern its shape and form, wherein it appeared,
distinctly; only some image, or, confused representation of it, was before him,
ver. 16. -- The reason whereof, was, partly, the splendor and brightness
wherein the spirit appeared; partly his sudden surprizal, and the astonishment
of his spirit thereby. This did insinuate,

1. That Divine Truths were not then so clearly known and manifested, but kept
up in a mystery.

2. That within time we are but little capable of more immediate manifestations
of God, which would dazzle our eyes, and confound our judgments. And therefore
they are in great wisdom, suspended till we come to know as we are known.

3. That the Lord would, hereby, keep those who got those manifestations, from
doting on the Vision, or external representations in it, that so they might
take heed to the message. Hence we find Elijah wrapping his face in his Mantle,
when God spoke to him, 1 King. 19.13. and Moses hiding his face, Exodus 3.6. To
intimate that, though these extraordinary Sights and Visions served to assure
them of the presence of God; yet gazing thereupon was not the great benefit to
be reaped by them, but their great care was to hearken to what was said, Which
teaches us, That no glorious manifestation, or operation of God, will profit
us, if we neglect his voice in his Word.

Lastly, He recounts how, after all this, God did communicate his mind to him,
by an audible voice, ver. -- 16. There was silence, and I heard a voice; after
the tumultuous distempers of his mind were calmed and put to silence, he hea^d
the voice: Or, as some read it, he heard a still calm voice. So did he also
speak to Elijah, 1 Kings 19.12. and because of this, it is said, ver. 12. that
it came secretly to him. And this way of uttering divine Revelations silently,
or, in a calm voice, was imitated by Satan in some of h^s Oracles, Isa. 8.19.
and 29.4.

Hence learn,

1. Gods humbling dispensations toward his people will all come to a good
issue, and the close of all his dealing will still be sweet; For, after all his
humbling and fear, preparing him for the Vision, and assuring him that God was
present, the voice comes, which brings the refreshful light.

2. The composing of our spirits, from the confusions and tumultuous disorders
incident to them, is a necessary antecedent to Gods revealing of his mind; For,
when there was silence, (as our reading has it) I heard a voice.

3. As for this way of the Lords speaking, by a still, or, calm, voic^, (as the
Original will also bear) albe^t we n^ed enquire after no reason why he m^kes
use of it, who does all things after the counsel of his own will; yet, without
wresting, we may observe these in it.

1. The Lord, hereby did teach, that these supernatural Truths were Mysteries,
not blazed abroad throughout the world, but (so to say) whispered am^ng some
few Believers. And as the Oracles of God were thus confin^d, during all the
time of the Old Testament, Psalm. 147 19, 20 Romans 3.2. So in all ages, they are
but few to whom they are savingly revealed, Matthew. 11 25.

2. The Lord hereby did press attention on these to whom he revealed his mind
(as was marked on, v. 12.) while he spoke not so loud as might reach them
whether they attended or not, but in a still voice, which might excite them
seriously to hearken.

3. Hereby also the Lord declared that he will not be a terror to such as
delight to converse with him in his Word; For, to such he would not appear in
Wind, Earthquakes or Fire, 1 King. 19. (though those were necessary for
preparation) but in a still sweet voice, which needed not affright them.

4. Hereby, also, may be pointed out, That, however men ought to speak the
Truths of God so audibly as they may be heard, and with that zeal and fervency
that becomes; yet, it is not the clamorous voice that makes the word
effectual, but the weight and importance of the matter seriously pressed home
by the Spirit of God: For, even by this still voice, God communicated his will,
and made it to be obeyed in the world. See Eccl. 9.17.

Verse. 17. Shall mortal man be more just then God? shall a man be more pure
then his maker?
Follows the Revelation it self, or, the Doctrine which God revealed to him
by this still voice; consisting of an Assertion, or, Challenge, v. 17. and a
confirmation thereof, ver. 18, -- 21. In the Explication whereof, we need not
insist to remark any false Principles or mistakes, such as we find in Eliphaz's
former Arguments. For (as we said before) this is a divine Oracle, sent by God
to clear this case; and according to which God himself deals with Job at last.
Only Eliphaz mistaking it, does press it upon Job as an argument and proof of
his wickedness; in which sense Job rejects it with the rest of his doctrine,
till God comes to calm his passion, and tell him more fully his fault; and
then he takes with all that is here asserted, by way of reproof of his
miscarriage.

Hence, in the entry, we may Observe,

1. It may please God to suffer Saints to meet with no smaller tentations, then
if God in his Word, or speaking from Heaven, were condemning them; For, here
Eliphaz charge Job as a man condemned by God in this Vision. And this is no
small trial, if we consider, either that Gods sentence in his Word is
unrepealable, not to be rescinded nor contradicted by our dreams and delusions;
or, the tenderness of Saints, whose property it is to tremble at the Word of
God.

2. A chief cause of raising groundless tentations and fears from the Word, is,
when men do not distinguish betwixt the standing state of their person, and
their present condition or carriage. Seeing they may be faulty in this last,
when their state of Reconciliation stands firm. And therefore, when faults are
reproved, men ought not to conclude that their persons are condemned, which
does hinder repentance and amendment of faults, by crushing discouragement;
For, herein did Eliphaz wrest this Vision, and render it a tentation and trial
to Jobs faith, that he mis-applyed this reproof of his fault, to the condemning
of his state and person.

3. It is a commendable exercise of faith, when Saints have made sure their
peace with God through Jesus Christ, as not to hearken, though even a voice
from heaven should seem to contradict the Word on which they have builded, 2
Pet. 1.18, 19. Gal. 1.8, 9. So not to hearken to every sentence of Scripture
which may seem to brangle that confidence which they have founded upon Christ,
as he is revealed in the Covenant, and general current of the Scriptures: As
knowing, That Satan can wrest Scriptures, as he did in tempting Christ, Matthew.
4. That he can abuse our weakness, in a time of trial, by tempting us to
apprehend that to be the mind of God in Scripture, which he never intended when
he gave it to the Church; and, That no particular sentence of Scripture ought
to be expounded contrary to the scope of the whole Scriptures; which is, to
invite all to come to Christ, in the due order, and to deter none who are
willing to come; and to assure such as flee to Christ that he well-pleased with
them, how-ever he may correct them for their faults; and exercise their faith
by sharp trials. Upon these grounds, albeit Job failed in not taking with what
God reprehended in him, yet he very safely rejects even this Vision (as it is
mistaken and misapplyed by Eliphaz) as not being sent to condemn him in the
matter of his integrity.

The sum of the Assertion in this verse is, That no man can be more pure and
just then God. Where the comparison is instituted betwixt mortal, frail, man,
(a^ the first word signifies) and the strong Lord; and betwixt the strongest
of men (as the next word is) and his Maker. And the truth of the Assertion is
so clear, that God appeals even to man himself; Whether himself will not
confess that God ought to be above him in those? and whether it be not just
ground of challenge (as the Question also imports) if a man should presume to
compare with God, as his Superior in purity and justice? The meaning of all
this is not barely this, That no man can stand just and righteous before God,
without a remission; But that, Let a man be never so just or sincere, yet there
ought no comparison be made betwixt his righteousness and Gods. Nor yet does
this import that men do directly institute any comparison, or pronounce
themselves more pure and righteous then God: But many do it indirectly, when
they reflect upon the Lords Purposes or Providence, and call him to the Bar of
their corrupt Reason, to give an account of his proceedings. And particularly,
when godly men do bitterly complain of God and his Providence, because of their
afflictions. Which is, in effect, an extolling of their own righteousness, as
if it should exempt them from trouble; and an extenuating of Gods
righteousness, as doing wrong in afflicting them. And so this doctrine is a
very just check to Jobs complaint, ( Chap. 3.25, 26.) that his Piety had not
prevented affliction. Which (with other the like complaints) are expounded to
amount to no less then a condemning of God, that he might justify himself,
both by Elihu, Chap. 35.2. and by God himself, Chap. 40.8. To obviate which
presumption this Doctrine is very seasonable; wherein the Lord does not require
that he should quit his righteousness, because a righteous God had afflicted
him; but that he should be sober in his complaints, and not reflect on God.

From this purpose, thus cleared, Learn,

1. God is most righteous, pure and holy, both in himself, and in his
administrations; so that he can do no wrong, nor ought to be challenged by any:
For, this comparison imports that God, our Maker, is just and pure. See Psalm
51.4. Romans 3.4. Psalm. 145.17. Sufficient Arguments are not wanting whereby to
clear this righteousness of God in all his dealing, and particularly, in his
afflicting godly men, and suffering the wicked to prosper: But when we consider
his absolute Dominion and Sovereignty, and his holiness in himself, it will put
the matter beyond all debate, though we dip no further into the particulars.

2. This righteousness and holiness of God is so infinitely transcendent, that
the holiness of the best of men cannot compare with it; but it becomes
impurity, except he look on them in a Mediator: For, so does this comparison
expressly teach us, See Isa. 6.5. and 64 6.

3. Though God be thus just and holy, and that infinitely above the best of
men; Yet men are not wanting, in many cases, to reproach and reflect upon the
righteousness of God, yea, and to cry up their own worth and holiness, to the
prejudice of his righteousness: For, this assertion, and comparison betwixt God
and man, being revealed upon weighty cause, does import that some are ready, in
their practice, to go contrary to it. And this should warn us to ponder how
deep many of our distempers draw, that we may be afraid of reflecting upon, or
reproaching of, God, when possibly we do not apprehend it.

4. An impatient complainer under affliction, (especially because he is a
righteous man, and has a good Conscience, and yet is afflicted) does, in
effect, wrong God and his righteousness, and sinfully extol his own holiness;
For, this was, in particular, Jobs fault, which the Lord reproves here, as a
preferring of his own righteousness to Gods. Whence we may gather, that God
looks upon the complaints, even of afflicted Saints, as more sinful then
themselves consider.

5. Whatever liberty men take to vent their passions, and to judge harshly of
God and his dealing; and whatever their passion suggest for justifying thereof,
As Jonas 4.9. Yet men's own Consciences and Reason, in cold blood, will tell
them that their sentence is unjust, and that their carriage deserves a sharp
rebuke and challenge: For, in this debate, the Lords sets the man himself to be
judge, Shall mortal man be more just then God? Intimating, that when the
passionate man should come to himself, he would pass sentence in Gods favors,
and be a most severe censurer of his own folly.

6. Men's f^ailty and mortality bear witness against them, that they are not
perfectly pure; (the fruits and consequences of sin proving the remainders
thereof to be yet in them) and that they may not compare with God: For, so much
is intimated in this, Shall mortal man be more just then God? Which teaches us
that man bears about with him visible badges of his imperfection, which it is a
wonder he should forget in his passion.

7. Man, considered not only in his frailties, but even in his strength and
best endowments, is infinitely inferior to God; as being but man still, who
may not compare with God: So much is imported in the next Question; Shall a man
(even a strong man) be more pure, etc?

8. If men consider that God is their Creator and Maker, and consequently,
that they have no degree of perfection which is not from God; they will find it
an high presumption to compete with Him, in the point of perfection; For, Shall
a man be more pure then his Maker?

Verse. 18. Behold, he put no trust in his servants; and his angels he charged
with folly:
Follows a Confirmation of this Assertion, by a comparison instituted betwixt
Angels and Men; wherein it is argued, that if even Angels cannot plead purity
before God, ver. 18. much less man, who lies under many disadvantages whereof
Angels are free, ver. 19, etc. and this, in the entry, teaches, That albeit it
be an unquestionable truth, that man may not compete with God in the point of
purity; yet, such is the blind stubborness of men, or, at best, their
passionate inadvertency in some cases, that they are little sensible of this
truth, and do little improve it in their practice: Therefore it must not only
be asserted here, but disputed and proved also.

In this verse we have the first branch of the comparison, or the case and
state of Angels before God; to which ^ Behold, is prefixed, as being
remarkable: For the words, some read them thus, He puts no trust in his
servants, though he put light, of purity, (or praise, that is, praiseworthy
excellencies) in those his messengers: But I shall not insist on these, seeing
they come all to one purpose with our own Translation. And, for clearing of the
words, we are not to restrict them only to fallen Devils, who do not usually (if
at all) get the name of servants: But they are to be understood even of the
confirmed Angels. Not simply, as they are now confirmed, but upon an impossible
supposition, thus; That if they were compared with God, or considered in
themselves, without his supporting and confirming grace, and, especially if
they should contend with God (which yet will never be:) they would not only be
found impure, but would have fallen into the same sin with Devils, to wit,
unfaithfulness in Gods service, and foolish and mad attenpts against his Empire
and glory. In sum, Though they are not privatively impu^e, yet comparatively,
or, being compared with God, they are impure: and being left to themselves,
they would be found not trusty, or to be confided in (as the phrase is, Joh.
2.23, 24.) having that frailty, as creatures, which would betray them to
disloyalty; and they would commit acts of folly.

Doct. 1. So transcendent is the infinite perfection and purity of God,
compared with the most perfect of creatures, as is admirable and wonderful, and
ought not to be thought upon by us, without elevated minds and affections, even
to admiration: Therefore does this comparison begin with Behold.

2. It speaks the Supreme Dominion and Excellency of God, and how little need
he has of the service of base men; That the glorious Angels are but his
Ministers and Servants, attending continually to fulfill his command; For, his
Servants are Angels, as the latter part of the verse expounds the former. See
Psalm. 1^4 4. and of their services, in attending his presence, tendering the
welfare of his people, etc. See Isai. 6.1, 2, 3. Psalm 34.7. and 91.^1. Matthew.
4.10. and 24, 31. Luke 16.22. Heb. 1.14. and elsewhere.

3. The choice of created perfection, being compared with God, is but impurity:
for, He put no trust in his servants, etc. See Chap. 15.15. Hence it is, that
Angels do cover their faces, in the presence of God, and do proclaim him only
holy, Isa. 6.2, 3.

4. The chief of created and dependent perfection is mutable and unstable,
without Gods support; For, even Angels he charged with folly. What was found in
Devils would be found in all of them, if left to themselves. Which may teach
creatures still to depend on God, in their most established and settled state.

5. Trust and confidence is so weighty a thing, that nothing which is created
and dependent can bear the weight of it, though it were never so perfect; For,
he put no trust, even in his servants, to warn all, that nothing can bear the
weight of our confidence but God alone.

Verse. 19. How much less on them that dwell in houses of clay, whose foundation
is in the dust, which are crushed before the moth?
Follows, the Second Branch of the Comparison, or, the Inference, from the
condition of Angels, to prove the imperfection of men before God. The word of
comparison, in the Original, may either be rendered, How much less? and so it
relates to the first part of the former verse. If he put no trust in his
Angels, how much less in man? Or, How much more? and so it answers to the
latter part of the verse. If he charge Angels with folly; how much more may he
charge man? In sum, the scope comes to this, If Angels cannot plead purity in
comparison of God, nor be trusted in, as having any stability, without
supporting grace; How shall man dare to enter the lists with God? And to make
this inference good, there are insinuated three disadvantages that men have in
point of purity and stability, being compared with Angels,

1. Angels are Spirits; Men, though they have souls, yet they officiate in a
body of clay.

2. Angels are near God in Heaven; Men are kept on the Earth, as on their basis
and foundation, while they are in their bodies.

3. Angels are sinless; Man has sin resident in him, as appears by his frailty
and mortality, being but mouldring dust, and proving so since the fall, Gen
3.19. and being destroyed before the moth, sooner cut off then these weak
creatures, and appointed to be destroyed and consumed by moths and worms.

Doct. 1. Albeit vain man be ready to swell in pride before God; yet upon a
right reckoning, he will find himself inferior, in the point of purity and
righteousness, even to other creatures; as this comparison does teach: And if
Angels do cover their faces before God, and proclaim him holy; how dare men
quarrel?

2. Albeit men do not see nor regard their impurity and sinfulness in it self;
yet it is so visible in the frailty of their constitution, and daily miseries,
as they must be blind who will not observe it: For, thus is it convincingly
demonstrated here.

3. Albeit Man was created perfect in his kind; yet his very corporal and
animal life in the body, common to him with beasts, did speak him more weak and
mutable in himself then Angels; and now since the fall, these affections that
are common to him with beasts do most easily mislead and pervert him; For, it
is man's disadvantage, that he dwells in an house of clay.

4. As Man's body was but formed of the dust; so his fall has brought him so
experimentally to know that his base original, as may make him sober in his
quarrellings with God; For, it may lay him low, that his foundation is in the
dust, both as to the constitution of his body, and as to his habitation. See
Genesis 18.27.

5. Whatever man do think of his present disadvantages and defects; yet his
mortality, and the consideration of his being easily crushed, and how the worms
will triumph over him, may quell his pride, especially before God: For, this
lays him low, that he is destroyed before the moth. See Isai. 2.22.

Verse. 20. They are destroyed from morning to evening: they perish for ever
without any regarding it.

21. Does not their excellency which is in them, go away? they die, even
without wisdom.


To inculcate this doctrine of man's Mortality, (which man himself does so
frequently forget, and little improve) it is here insisted on, and laid before
us in these particulars,

1. The brevity and uncertainty of man's life, being destroyed from morning to
evening, ver. 20. -- that is, between a morning and an evening; or, destroyable
every moment of the day. Or, being but short-lived, like that creature which is
said to live but one day. See, Psalm. 39.5. Or, being cut off in a short time,
when God begins to deal with him. Isa. 38.12. Psalm. 90.5, 6. Or, his whole
life, and every day of it, from morning to evening, being but a daily dying,
and traveling from the womb to the grave. All these do well enough suit the
scope; and may teach us.

1. That death in it self is a destroying, or, breaking and braying in pieces;
as making havoc of the poor man, crushing his imagined excellencies, and
irreparably ruining him in his being, though without prejudice to the power of
God, to be exerted in his future Resurrection; Therefore it is said, They are
destroyed, or, broken in pieces.

2. As death is terrible in it self, so man lies under so great hazard of it,
as may keep him low before God; being a creature that is dying daily, though he
consider it not; being uncertain what moment it may arrest him; being unable to
hinder the stroke of death to do its work in a short time; and having but a
short while of life, if well considered, how long soever it be forborne: All
these humbling considerations are imported in their being destroyed from
morning to evening.

2. That, in regard the death of man is ordinary, it is but little regarded,
ver. -- 20. That they perish for ever, is not to be understood, here, of
eternal destruction (for this sentence is true of all men, even godly men;) But
that men are continually dying and perishing, in all times and ages; and that,
though this be a great stroke, and a perishing for ever, without any hope of
restitution to this life again; Yet, it is but little noticed or emproved.
Neither do they who are left behind make the use of that which they so
ordinarily see; nor do they who die ever return to give any proof of their
proficiency by that stroke. This teaches,

1. Death is, in this respect, a great stroke; that it cuts off a man
irrecoverably from all his enjoyments, and from all opportunity of emproving
any condition, in this life; So that if a man do not improve time while he has
it, and have no hope of somewhat beyond time, he is in a poor condition: In
this respect, all men at death perish for ever, without hope of returning to
this life.

2. It is the constant course of divine Providence, that as one generation is
coming, so another is going; And that, at all times, death is still snatching
some from there idols, liberating others from their toil, separating dearest
friends, and preaching the doctrine of Mortality to all; For, thus also they
perish for ever, in all ages and times.

3. Albeit it be the duty of the sons of men to improve every document of
mortality, which is laid before them in the experience of others; Eccl. 7.2.
Yet such is the stupidity of most, that they profit nothing thereby; nor are
made to study the uncertainty of man's life, or the vanity of many of men's
projects on earth; Luke 12.19, 20. For thus they perish without any regarding,
See, Psalm. 49.13, 14.

4. Such is the stupidity and corruption of men, that even remarkable
dispensations, becoming ordinary, are slighted, and do not affect them; For,
albeit death be a singular stroke, yet being ordinary for ever, in all times,
there is no regarding, or emproving of it. As wonders will nor profit them who
do not improve the ordinary means, Luke 16.31. So the more ordinary and
frequent wonders be, our corrupt hearts will regard them the less.

3. That by death men are stripped of all their excellency which is in them, ver.
21 -- Which is not so much to be understood of the souls leaving the body; as
of their parting with all their external pomp and glory at death. For both in
sickness before death, the memory, judgment and other endowments of the mind,
do perish in some; beauty and strength of body do languish in all; and at
death, there is nothing left but a loathsome carcass, and all worldly pomp and
splendor is cut off from them. It is here to be remembered that the Spirit of
God does not hear speak of men as to their eternal state, but as to their
external condition which they enjoyed in the world. And it teaches,

1. God is very bountiful to the sons of men, in conferring many excellencies
upon them, both in their bodies, minds and outward estate; For, there is
supposed an excellency in them. And albeit it be man's fault to value these too
highly, as their chief and only excellency; yet their own true worth, and Gods
bounty in conferring of them, ought not to be forgotten.

2. God is also so kind, as to continue all, or many, of these excellencies
with men, even to the grave; For, so is here supposed, that their excellency
does not go away till then.

3. Whatever forbearance the sons of men get in this life; yet death will strip
them of all their outward splendor and pomp; For, then all their excellency
does go away. See Psalm. 49.17. Isa. 14.9, 10. etc.

4. It is a very great fault, and a gross neglect in men, that this ordinary
plain lesson, of the vanity of outward excellencies, is so little studied; For,
this Question, Does not their excellency which is in them go away? does import
that it is a clear case, and yet withal, that many do so walk as if they did
not believe nor heed it, and therefore must be posed if they do not believe and
consider it.

4. That they die without wisdom, ver. -- 21. or, they die, and there is no
wisdom. This may be true, generally, of all men, that though some have profited
much better in their life then others; yet all may confess that they die before
they be so wise, as to understand as they ought, what it is to live well, or to
improve the examples of mortality which they have seen in their time. It may
also be understood only of the wicked, who die without the knowledge of God,
and without that wisdom which flows from right numbering of their days, Psalm.
49.20. and, 90.12. But it is more safe to understand it generally, in this
sense, That they die, without having any skill or wisdom how to avoid death:
And it teaches, however wicked men play many pranks with their wit in their
lives, and do nimbly extricate themselves imminent hazards; and though a
prudent man, foreseeing the storm, may be able to avoid it, Prove. 22.3. and
27.12. Yet death will triumph over all their skill and parts; their wit cannot
deliver them from death, nor afford them any way to escape it. Thus they die,
even without wisdom. See 2 Samuel 3.33. Eccl. 2.16.

CHAP. V.
In this Chapter Eliphaz yet continues his Discourse to Job; consisting (as
was marked on Chap. 4.) of a reprehension, wherein he labors to convince Job
of wickedness, or hypocrisy; and of some Exhortations to amend his life, and
turn to God, considering the hand of God that was upon him. Now having in the
former Chapter (after the Preface,) propounded three Arguments to prove his
Charge against Job; In this Chapter. 1. He adds his fourth and last Argument to
prove that Job was not a godly, but a wicked man; Namely, That no Saint was
ever like him, or in such a case, ver. 1. but he was very like the wicked, both
in his carriage, ver. 2. and his case, ver. 3, 4, 5. 2. Unto this Dispute he
subjoyns two Exhortations unto Job, suitable (as he judged) to his case, 1. That
he would repent and turn to God, with submission and stooping; which, being
ushered in with a motive, taken from the consideration of the cause and rise of
trouble, ver. 6, 7. and propounded, ver. 8. is further pressed by many
instances of Gods Providence in the world, ver. 9. -- 16. 2. That having
repented and made his peace with God, he would be patient under affliction,
considering the advantages and issue thereof, if he will be penitent and
patient, ver. 17. -- 26. Unto all which the Conclusion of the whole Discourse
is subjoyned, ver. 27.

Verse. 1. Call now, if there be any that will answer thee, and to which of the
saints will thou turn?
THis last Argument is the same in substance with that Second Argument, Chap.
4.7-11. taken from Experience, and that there was never any like him but wicked
men. And there is here also somewhat couched of his first Argument, as may
appear by comparing ver. 2. with Chap. 4.5, 6. Only here he repeats this
Argument in a new dress, with many new flowers of Eloquence, as putting much
confidence in the strength of it. And in this verse he propounds the Argument
negatively, That no Saint was ever like Job. If he should call to all the
Saints alive, or turn him to any of them that ever were, none of them would be
of his opinion, or take his part; nor would the experience of any of them
testify, that ever they had been in a case like his, or (which may be gathered
as a part of the charge, ver. 2.) had behaved themselves as he did. As for
Papists, who, from this Text, would gather that it is lawful to pray to Saints
departed, and that we may expect the benefit of their Intercession; Beside that
this does cross the clear literal Exposition already given, it would be
considered,

1. This Text does not affirm any such thing, as that it would be to purpose to
call on Saints, but does insinuate the contrary, that Saints will not answer
any who call to them. For these affirmative Questions are to be expounded
negatively, that there will be none to answer, though he should turn to the
Saints.

2. Their interpreting of this Text to this sense does over-turn their fancy of
a Limbus Patrum, wherein they dream that the godly Fathers were kept till the
Ascension of Christ. And consequently, they not being in Heaven (as they
allege) men could not in Jobs days, expect any benefit of their Intercession.
Some do understand these Saints of Angels, and that upon other grounds then
that fancy of their Intercession for men; as that Job had no Vision by the
Ministry of Angels, as Eliphaz had, Chap. 4. or Angels would all abandon him,
if he should contend with God. But this Interpretation is contrary to the
opposition that is here made betwixt these Saints, and the wicked, or foolish
man, ver. 2. which leads us to understand that by Saints are meant godly men.

For this Argument, as it has been interpreted, I have spoken to the weakness
thereof, on Chap. 4. That neither did they know (or, at least, remember) the
case of all the godly before them, as of Abel, and those who (belike) were
oppressed by Nimrod, that mighty Hunter, Genesis 10.9. though their case did not
in all things, quadrate with Jobs. Nor is it a sure Argument to conclude a man
wicked, because he had no pattern of a godly man so exercised before him. For
the first sufferer could not have any instances of sufferers going before him:
Nor ought the sovereignty of God be so limited, as that he may not deal with
Saints otherwise then he has dealt with others before.

With these cautions we may from this verse Learn,

1. Among other encouragements of the people of God under trouble, this has
its own weight, when they find that others of the people of God have been in
the like case before them; whereby they may be assured that such a condition is
consistent with Gods love, and will have a good issue, here, or hereafter: For,
Eliphaz supposes it had been a great advantage, if Job had any to answer him,
or, parallel his case, or could turn to any Saint, who had been like him. See 1
Pet. 4.12.

2. It may please the Lord so to order the trial of a Saint, as his case may
appear singular, such as no other godly man has been in the like; And that
either, because they are the first that are exercised in such a sort, or, if
there have been any so afflicted, yet they do not know of it: or if they know
of the sad afflictions of others; yet they may be ready to cry up their own
trial as singular. Thus Eliphaz judges Jobs case to be singular, which might
in some sense be true, all circumstances considered; nor does Job in his
Replies, stand on the disproving thereof, but rather aggravates his own trial,
all he can. See Lam. 1.12.

3. Albeit to be so afflicted as never Saint was before, do not prove a man
wicked (as has been said) whose state and carriage are approved by the Word;
yet it is a sore aggravation of a trial to a child of God, to be put in a
singular condition from all the rest of Saints; And though the exercise of
others ought not to be the rule and standart by which we must limit God in his
dealing to us; yet it is a difficulty not easily got over, when we are so dealt
with: For, albeit this reasoning of Eliphaz be but weak; yet his making an
Argument of it, implies that it is apt to be a tentation. And so the Saints
have looked on it, Lam. 1.12. Dan. 9.12. And this may warn us,

1. Not to make too much noise, when our trials are but ordinary, and such as
the people of God have essayed before us; See Psalm. 73.15. 1 Cor. 10.13. For it
were presumption in us to seek exemption from what has been the ordinary lot
of the godly; It is an evidence we are his people, when he deals with us as
formerly with others beloved of him, Heb. 12.7, 8. and, in the experience of
others, we may be helped to discern both causes of troubles, and snares in them.

2. It may warn us not to set our lusts, passion, self-love, and love to ease,
on work to aggravate our trials above what they are in reality; For herein we
are not only injurious to God and his dealing, but to our selves also by
creating many discouragements and tentations, which arise upon our mistakes.

Verse. 2. For wrath kills the foolish man, and envy slays the silly one.
Eliphaz proceeds to press his Argument, positively; That (as Job is nothing
like the godly, So) he is very like the wicked. This he instanceth, first, (in
this verse) in the matter of his carriage under trouble, which relates (as has
been said) to that challenge, Chap. 4.5, 6. Here, by wrath, we are not to
understand the wrath of God, but man's own wrath. And the meaning, in short, is;
Eliphaz judging of Jobs complaint, Chap. 3. as testifying much wrath, or
passion, and bitterness under Gods hand (so wrath is taken, Chap. 18.4.) and
much envy, or resentment (whereof Psalm. 73. is a large Commentary) that he was
so afflicted, while others prospered; and that, by so doing, he tormented
himself. He does, from this his carriage, infer, that he was a fool, or wicked
man; it being their way so to behave themselves in trouble.

If this had been all true, it were by far the sadder charge then that which
follows, of his outward case like the wickeds. But the mistake lies here,
That, because of some few fits of Jobs folly, flowing from his weakness, he
charge upon him an habit of folly, and that he was a fool indeed; whereas
Saints should not be judged according to their fits of passion.

With this caution, we may here Learn,

1. Wicked men, how wise so ever they seem to be, are really the only fools and
silly men in the world; not only upon the account of their miscarriage under
trouble, (of which after) but in regard they do not ponder things seriously,
but are taken up only with what is present and before their eyes; nor do they
prize or seek their own real good, so they be deluded with a present show or
appearance of good, Psalm 4 6. And they do walk at random, without any right
end, o^ mending any right means for attaining their end. Upon this account it
is that they get the name of silly men, and fools, both here, and ver. 3. and
Psalm. 14.1. and 49.13. and 73 3. and frequently.

2. The Child^en of God, giving way to their own weakn^ss in trouble, may fall
in some miscarriages, which look more like the practice of the wicked, then of
the godly; For, in so far his charge is ju^t, though it prove not Job to be
wicked. These practices godly men ought to avoid, considering that they are a
foul spot in a fair face, and so much the more ugly, as they are in them. Eccl.
10.1. And what will they leave the wicked to do, under trouble, when they carry
so ill?

3. Bitterness, murmuration, and discontent with our condition (whither
considered in it self, or as it is compared with the more quiet condition of
others) are usual distempers of heart under trouble; and the sparks which fly
from unrenewed nature, or from the godly in so far as nature prevails; For,
that, in particular is the distemper reprehended in Job here, that he had wrath
and envy, Such passions are more easily raised by afflictions, then repentance,
humility and submission are attained. The one need no Prayer to obtain them,
but are the product of our corruptions, but the other must come down from above.

4. To give way to those distempers is an evidence of great folly in men; As
not only proving that they are (in so far) ignorant of God, what he is, and of
themselves, that they are but creatures: But being a way very prejudicial and
hurtful. For to murmur and fret will not help nor ease a man of his trouble,
Chap. 18.4. Yea, it is the only way to slay him; his own bitterness and passion
being more grievous and crushing then the simple trouble in it self; and
provoking God also to destroy him for his presumption. Upon these
considerations, are men called foolish and silly, even because, by their wrath
and envy, they kill and slay themselves. And this is true, even of the godly,
in so far as they engage in those courses.

Verse. 3. I have seen the foolish taking root: but suddenly I cursed his
habitation.

4. His children are far from safety, and they are crushed in the gate, neither
is there any to deliver them.

5. Whose harvest the hungry eats up, and takes it even out of the thorns,
and the robber swalloweth up their substance.


In the next place, He asserts that Job is like the wicked, in his case and
outward condition. This is instanced in some experiences of the wickeds case,
very like unto Jobs, which Eliphaz had observed; That however they had
prospered for a time, yet their prosperity was but momentany, and ended in
visible judgments, as had befaln Job. It is not to be doubted but Eliphaz had
seen such passages of Providence in his time, as others also, before and after
him, may have seen the like: And consequently, a sound use may be made of this
doctrine. Yet it does not prove his Conclusion against Job; For neither do all
the wicked fall under these temporal rods, nor do they only drink of that cup,
as has been already cleared. With this caution, I proceed to the verses in
order.

The sudden ruin of the wicked is spoken to in general, ver. 3. That though
he saw the foolish, or, wicked, taking root, or, seeking to fix and settle
himself in his prosperity, and seeming to be settled, like a well planted tree;
(which is a similitude to which the Scripture frequently alludes, in speaking
of the prosperity of the wicked, Psalm. 37.35. Dan. 4.10, 11, etc.) yet
suddenly he cursed his habitation, or, state and family. Not that he prayed
for a curse upon him (though it be no less true, that he could not pray for a
blessing upon him, while he continued in that state, Psalm. 129.8. Which is no
small matter, how little soever men regard the Prayers of Saints.) But that
either in the height of the wickeds prosperity, he, without needing any great
deliberation pronounced him accursed; and therefore was not taken with his way,
nor would imitate him. Or, having seen a sudden curse come upon him, he
subscribed to it as just, abominating him and his way. This last Interpretation
is agreeable to that experience of the Psalmist, Psalm. 37.35, 36. and to his
own Commentary here, ver. 4, 5. though we are not to exclude the former, as a
conclusion gathered by him from experiences of the like kind. And though it be
not universally true, that the wicked are so suddenly cursed, Psalm. 73.3, 4, 5.
Yet that it is verified on some, may afford instruction to all.

Doct. 1. The wicked may be plagued with some prosperity, before they reap the
final reward of their wickedness; As here Eliphaz observed the foolish taking
root, or, somewhat settled, in appearance, in their prosperity. Hereby, the
Lord does try the godlies faith and patience, and does ripen the wicked for
sadder plagues, Psalm. 92.6, 7. Mic. 4 11, 12.

2. It is the property of the wicked, when they get any prosperity, to set up
their rest upon it, seeking to root and establish themselves on the earth;
Whereas the godly (being in a right frame) do labor to be strangers, in the
abundance of all things; Otherwise, they may surely expect to be shaken, Psalm.
30.6, 7. For it is an evidence of their folly, that they are taking root, and
settling themselves.

3. The Lord sees it, sometime, sit suddenly to over-turn the wicked and
their families; that he may vindicate his justice in the view of the world; may
give warning to all the wicked of what they deserve, that they abuse not his
forbearance, Romans 2.4. and may encourage the godly to keep his way, and trust
in him, whose Providence is not asleep in the world, Psalm. 58.10, 11. For, it
is true Eliphaz saw this verified on some, that their habitation was suddenly
cursed.

4. Albeit the Lord do not suddenly and visibly plague every wicked man; yet
there is still so much of divine displeasure lying upon all of them, even in
their prosperity, as may make godly men look upon their best estate as
detestable and not to be desired; For, in so far this is true of all the
wicked, that their habitation may be seen to be accursed, by right discerners.
And these instances of visible and sudden judgments, observed by Eliphaz are
evidences to discover how matters stand with all the rest. It is true, Saints
may be tempted to judge otherwise, when they look on their prosperity, Psalm.
73.2, 3, etc. Yet when they go to the Sanctuary, they will find that tentation
to flow from their own brutishness, Psalm. 73.16, 17, 21, 22. And though no
visible evidences of displeasure appear against every one of them; Yet there is
still a clear cause why their way should not be affected, but their condition
abominated, even because they fear not before God, Eccl. 8.11, 12, 13.

5. This is an evidence of the deplorable condition of the wicked, that
whatever their condition be, it is a curse to them; whether it be adversity, or
prosperity, Psalm. 69.22. and 106.15. For, that he saw of them suddenly cursed,
in their habitation, or, beautiful estate, as the word will bear, does,
evidence that all of them are under, and obnoxious to the curse; and that
visible curse is but a Declaration of what they are under before. And this
ought to be more adverted unto then any outward lot, seeing the curse of any
condition, whether it be prosperity or a cross, is worse then any thing beside.

6. As God does very suddenly plague some wicked men; So it becomes the godly
to be very clear in their judgment concerning the deserving of all, and in
their affections to be far from liking of their way; For, this sudden cursing,
as it relates to Eliphaz, imports that in his judgment there held no long
debate to conclude them miserable, and that his affections do no otherwise
relish their way and state, then as under a sad curse. And indeed, It is the
wisdom of the people of God not to hearken much to any debates and suggestions
concerning the prosperity of the wicked, nor to suffer their hearts to abate
any thing of holy zeal and abhorrency of their way, lest the abating of their
affection, and tampering with tentations, prove inductive to a snare.

Eliphaz proceeds to branch out the particulars of this ruin of the wicked;
which are like the plucking up of so many branches of their roots. In ver. 4.
he speaks of the condition of their Children, who bear the prints of Gods
judgments, in that they are left in an unsafe condition; being crushed and
burn down, without pity and relief from any. That they are crushed in the
gate, may import, either, that they are condemned by public Judicatories,
which usually met in the gates of the Cities, Ruth 4.1, 2, etc. Or further,
that their afflictions (whether immediately from God, or from men) were
seconded with public acclamations of all men (for in the Gates also were the
public concourses of people, Genesis 34.20.) as justly and righteously inflicted,
and deserved by them. Not to insist on the common defects of this branch of his
Argument; Nor how it may be the sad exercise of godly men, to have their trials
represented (by their own hearts, or others) in their blackest colors; As here
this reflection on Jobs Children could not but be sad and grievous to him: We
may further, Learn,

1. A chief part of a man wealth and prosperity, is, his Children, who are a
part of himself, in whom he lives after he is gone; and, they being pious, it
is his happiness to have been a parent to such heirs of glory: Therefore, does
Eliphaz begin at the ruin of Children, as the saddest of the wickeds stroke,
See Psalm. 127.3, etc. And this should teach Parents to esteem of Children, and
to improve that mercy, according as they are of worth in themselves.

2. Albeit none will perish eternally, but for their own sins, Ezekiel. 18.2, 3,
4. And albeit the Lord do punish none, even in this life (were they only
Infants) but such as are guilty of sin: Yet wicked Parents are, ordinarily,
great snares and Plagues to their Children: Partly, while the Lord is provoked
to punish Parents by afflicting their Children in their Bodies or Estates,
which they have from their Parents. So Exodus 20.5. Thus Gods quarrel for the
sins of Manasseh, continued in the days of good Josiah, 2 King. 23.26. Thus
also godly Children may bear in their bodies the fruits of their Parents
uncleanness or intemperance; and their Estates, which they had from their
Parents, may moulder away in their hands. Partly, while the Lord (who is debtor
to none) does leave their Children to themselves, to imitate their sins; and so
they serve themselves heirs to their Parents sin and punishments, Matthew.
23.31-35. For these causes, the Plagues that come upon Children are marked as
the fruit of wicked Parents sins. See Deuteronomy. 28.32. And this may teach Parents,
as they love their Children, to beware of leaving such sad debts upon the heads
of their posterity.

3. To be in an unsafe condition, oppressed and trod upon by every one, is, in
it self, a great affliction; and, being the lot of wicked men, it ought to be
looked on as the just fruit of their insolent spirit toward God and his Law,
and toward others, as they had power: For, this is the stroke drawn on by sin,
His children are far from safety, they are crushed. See Deuteronomy. 28.29, 33.

4. Albeit godly men, in a righteous cause, may be oppressed by Judicatories on
Earth; and, in that case, they are to look up to an higher Tribunal, Eccl. 5.8.
Yet in it self it is a sad ingredient in trouble, to be condemned by an
Assembly of Gods Vicegerents, (which should persuade all to pray much, that
Judicatories may be directed of God in judgment) and when such do pass a
sentence against wicked men for their crimes, they ought to look upon it as the
sentence of Him who sits among the Gods ( Psalm. 82.1.) pursuing them for
their sins, and who will pursue them further, if they repent not: For, this is
an addition to the stroke that they are crushed in the gate.

5. This ancient practice of meeting in the Gates for administration of
Justice, does oblige all ages in the moral equity thereof; Nam^ly, That Justice
be patent to all, and Courts of Justice easily accessible; and that the
proceedings of Courts be so just and impartial, as if every one of their
proceedings and actings were done in open view of all men: For, Judgment Seats
being in the Gate, strangers as well as others, and the poor as well as the
rich, had easy access, and the proceedings of the Judges were open in the view
of a concourse of people.

6. Albeit the truly godly, in their cleanly trials, may find all bowels of
compassion shut up from them, that their trial may be complete, and that they
may be stirred up to look the more to God; Yet not to meet with sympathy and
pity in straits, is a sore trial, Psalm. 142.4. and 88.18. and 38.11. And when
it is the lot of wicked men, whom men are ready to flatter and fawn upon in
their prosperity, they ought to look upon it as the fruit of their cruelty
toward others, and of their neglecting to seek to God, whose bowels being once
moved for them, would produce compassion even from enemies. Jer. 42.12 For,
this is an addition to their stroke, They are crushed in the Gate, neither is
there any to deliver them.

In ver. 5. Eliphaz declares the stroke of God that comes upon the wickeds
wealth and riches, spoken of under the name of their harvest or increase of the
ground, and, their substance or increase of cartel and their other wealth; for
the word here is more general, then to be restricted to cattle only. The means
of taking away this their wealth, is, The hungry (belike those who, through the
oppression of Tyrants, are impoverished and like to starve) shall eat up their
harvest, and take it from among the thorns. Not only shall they gather it up
exactly, not leaving so much as a stalk among thorns; but, rather, they shall
take it away, though it be never so well fenced with hedges, as it seems has
been a custom in those Countries, Exodus 22.6. To this is added, that the robber
swalloweth up their substance, where we are not to conceive that one sort of
people devour their harvest, and another, their other wealth; but both are the
same persons: Those, who by oppression, are so impoverished and hungry, and
thirsty (as some render this word) that they have no shift but to rob, and who
living wild, are overgrown with hair, (as the word also signifies) those
devour all the wickeds wealth. In this Discourse he reflects upon Jobs losses
by the Sabeans and Caldeans, a needy theeving people. And though this be a sore
trial in it self, Deuteronomy. 28.33. Job. 31.8. and it is a mercy to be delivered
from it, Isa. 62.8, 9. Yet it is no infallible evidence of wickedness to be
under such an affliction, as Eliphaz would infer against Job. However, it may
teach.

1. Albeit the wicked trust much to their riches, and, by reason thereof, do
stand out against God; Yet they have but an uncertain grip thereof, seeing they
may either be stripped of all, and so die beggars: or they may be taken from
their enjoyments, and then the great Question is, Whose these things are? Luke
12.20. For, so much did Eliphaz observe to be the lot of some wicked men, as an
evidence of the deserving of all, that their harvest is eaten, and their
substance swallowed up. And they are little better then those, who having
toiled for riches, yet are so far slave, to it, that they deprive themselves of
contentment, and want the lawful use of what they enjoy. Their riches being an
idol, which they adore, but dare not touch. Eccl. 6.2.

2. God is pleased, sometime, to affront (so to say) a wicked person, or
people, by the baseness, meanness or vileness, of the scourge employed to smite
them; As here, the hungry and the robber are employed to plague the wicked,
who, belike, had been oppressed by him, and others like him.

3. It is a sad plague upon many, that they are deprived of the sanctified use
of affliction, and given up to use sinful shifts to help themselves; As here
those impoverished, oppressed and hungry persons, turn robbers of others, and
break through all difficulties, thorns and impediments, to purchase their prey.

4. It is no easy trial to be delivered up into the hands and power of ungodly
men, who are insatiable in oppression and covetousness; For, so do the wicked
find, when their harvest is eaten, and their substance swallowed up, by these
hungry robbers. See, 2 Samuel 24.14.

Verse. 6. Although affliction comes not forth of the dust, neither does
trouble spring out of the ground:

7. Yet man is born unto trouble, as the sparks fly upward.


Follows, to ver. 17. Eliphaz his first Exhortation to Job; wherein,
supposing that, by his former reasonings, he has convinced him of wickedness
and hypocrisy; he persuades him to repent and turn to God, encouraging him
thereunto by diverse motives. In all which, there is sound Divinity, and much
affection toward Job; but his counsel is impertinently given to Job, as if he
were a man yet unconverted, and he presses temporal motives and encouragments
too hard, as we may hear in speaking to the particulars.

Before he mention his counsel, he does (in these verses) make way for it, by
leading Job to a serious consideration of the cause of trouble. Both the verses
in the original begin with, Because, which will clear the connection with the
following Exhortation. For because affliction comes not forth of the dust,
etc, or, by chance, ver. 6. Therefore, says he, ver. 8. I would seek unto God.
And it is clear that affliction comes not by chance, Because man is born to
trouble, and it is as native and usual for man to be afflicted as for the
sparks to fly upward ver. 7. In sum, It being so ordinary and usual for man to
be afflicted, as for a spark to fly upward; afflictions must not be thought
casual, or to come by accident, seeing they are so ordinary: But a cause of
this so constant a lot must be enquired into, which is God as the Supreme
efficient, and sin, (or, our nature as corrupted) which is the procuring cause,
and the fire out of which those sparks do fly, as the tongue sets the
course of nature on fire, Jam. 3.6. Upon all which the Exhortation does very
fitly follow, to seek to God, That man being in affliction, should turn to God
who smites, and that the conscience of sin, procuring trouble, should set him
on work to seek Reconciliation.

This is very sound doctrine, the same in substance with, Lam. 3.39, 40. etc.
That affliction is the fruit of sin, That every affliction should make us
sensible of sin, and, That our little sense of sin causes our miscarriage
under trouble. Yet we must guard against a mistake here; For albeit all men be
born to trouble for sin, nor does affliction enter but by sin; Yet it does not
follow that we ought to measure the greatness of a man's sins by the greatness
of his affliction; nor ought we to judge that God is still pursuing or
punishing sin, when he afflicts, far less that he is calling upon every one
whom he afflicts sadly, to be converted, as if he had never known God before.
These were Eliphaz's Principles, upon which he puts Job to this consideration,
which Job could never yield unto.

From the General Doctrine here propounded, Learn,

1. Fallen man is born unto trouble, and obnoxious to all the kinds thereof; For,
Man is born unto trouble, See Job 14.1. This, being well studied, might cure a
great error in many, who are ready to look upon themselves as privileged and
exempted persons, and who little apprehend that they come into the world to
bear crosses, but rather to spend their days in pleasure.

2. A naked sight, or sense, of trouble will never profit men, till they begin
wisely to ponder some lessons concerning the rise and cause thereof; Therefore
Eliphaz, before he press any counsel upon Job in reference to his carriage,
does first lead him up to study this lesson. To feel trouble is common to men
with beasts, and consequently, can produce no useful effects; but it becomes
rational men, and much more, godly persons, to read more in it.

3. Albeit, as wicked men have no will to let themselves feel the smart of a
Rod, so long as they can either hold it off, or cause themselves to forget it;
So, men in an evil way, have no will to see God their Par^y in trouble, even
when they are made to feel it, 1 Samuel 6 9. 2 Samuel 11.25. (as neither do wicked
men desire to see God against them in ^his Word, so long as they can avoid it,
Jer 5.12, 13*) yet it is a fixed truth, That no affliction comes casually, or
without a special hand of Providence, which dispenses it upon wise and holy
grounds: and the study of this is a mean to make trouble operative; For,
Eliphaz presses, That affliction comes not forth of the dust, neither does
trouble spring out of the ground, or, from common and casual accidents, but
from above, Amos 3.6. And because of this, he presses on Job to seek to God.
And indeed, when this Truth is studied and believed, not only will Saints see
themselves still in their Fathers hand, in the greatest of troubles; But it
will be men's chief care to see the hand of God in every affliction, how
unjustly soever inflicted by men, 2 Samuel 16.10. and to search out the mind of
God concerning the cause of every trouble, and their duty under it.

4. Albeit, that trouble is ordinary, proves, oft-times, a snare to men,
hiding a sight of Gods hand in it, 2 Samuel 11.25. yet even that it is ordinary,
is a document that it comes not by chance, but from God, and consequently,
that it should be better improved: For, Eliphaz proves, that affliction comes
not by chance, Because man is born to trouble, and what is so ordinary must
have some sure and ordinary cause. It is the great sin of men, that trouble is
so little improved, even because it is ordinary. And that either they foolishly
think to shift trouble, and spare not to make shipwreck of a good Conscience,
if they may reach their end; when yet they will find it unavoidable, turn where
they will: Or the custom of meeting with trouble, leads them to harden
themselves under it, neither eyeing God, nor minding duty.

5. Albeit the Lord be not pursuing sin, by every affliction which he sends;
but may be trying faith, and other graces, in his people: Yet trouble has its
rise from sin, and man's transgression is the door whereby trouble entered; For,
Man is born to trouble, as the sparks fly upward. There is somewhat in man's
nature, that renders him obnoxious to trouble, as there is a fire from which
sparks do fly, or as it is natural for a spark to fly upward: and this is
sin, or the corruption of man's nature. For if there had been no sin, there had
been no affliction. And as this proves very Infants to have sin, because they
are obnoxious to sickness and death; Romans 5.14. So it should teach all (even in
their most cleanly trials, and when their Consciences assoil them from
wickedness or hypocrisy; yet) to look upon afflictions as sent to make them
sensible of sin, especially of that fountain of Original sin.

Verse. 8. I would seek unto God, and unto God would I commit my cause:
Upon the back of this consideration, Eliphaz propounds his Exhortation and
counsel, To seek and turn in to God by repentance, and, in stead of quarrelling
with him, to stoop to him, and referr his whole case to his disposal. This is a
sweet counsel in it self, and very affectionately propounded, as a course he
would follow himself, were he in Jobs case. Yet it is laden with a double
prejudice, as it is propounded to Job.

1. That by this submission recommended by Eliphaz, he intends that Job should
quit his integrity, and pretend no more that he had been a godly man. For so
Job understands him, and their other discourses expound it so. This was an
unjust desire and Proposition, that a godly man should lie against his right,
though he did indeed fail in the way of maintaining his integrity.

2. Upon this it follows, that this Exhortation, to seek to God, imported (in
Eliphaz's sense) that Job should begin of new to seek God, not looking on any
thing he had before, as honest and sincere. This is, indeed, an usual tentation
of the people of God, either in great trials, or when they fall into guilt,
that they are ready to look on all they had before as hypocrisy; and that they
must begin of new, if they look ever to obtain saving grace. But such
tentations are to be rejected by sincere Saints, as keeping them still unfixed,
building and destroying again.

Laying aside these prejudices and mistakes, Learn,

1. It is the duty of godly friends not to content themselves with reproving
what they find amiss in others, in an upbraiding way; but to counsel them also
how to amend: For, so does Eliphaz proceed with Job, according to his
Principles. After (as he judged) he has condemned him, he does now advise him
how to do better. See Gal. 6.1. Jam. 2.50.

2. Seeking unto God is the only best course for men in trouble; To turn to him
who smites; to double diligence in his service, that they may be near him in
sad conditions; and, to renew their repentance according as their case
requires: For, this is a wholesome counsel to a man in trouble, to seek unto
God. When men have essayed all other remedies, they will find this most
profitable.

3. Such as do rightly seek to God in trouble, ought to be far from all
bitterness, and humbly submissive to what he shall dispense; For, this also is
found in a seeker unto God; that he commit his cause to God, or lay his words
and matters, (as the Original imports) before him, that he may do therein as
pleases him; and make his requests known to God, Phil. 4.6. let him give what
answer he will, See 2 Samuel 15.26. This submission imports.

1. That a Supplicant should be free of bitterness and anxiety, resting on God
by humble confidence. For the Prayers of anxiety are full of dross.

2. That he ought to submit to what dispensations it pleases God to allow, so
long as he finds grace to seek on, and is not driven from God, as that wicked
man was, 2 King. 6 33.

3. Though a godly man be not called to deny the truth of the grace of God in
him, or the Conscience of his integrity; yet he ought not to build his
expectations upon it, but to commit all to Gods mercy, from which he may expect
more then he can promise himself upon the account of his integrity, in it self
considered.

Doct. 4. Albeit sin be the cause of trouble, and we ought to be most sensible
of sin under trouble; yet no sight of God, nor of God as a party in trouble,
ought to discourage us from seeking in to Him: For, the contrary is argued;
Because of these considerations concerning the cause of trouble, ver. 6, 7. he
infers here, I would seek unto God, or, Surely I would seek unto God, as it is
in the Original. For whether else can a man go? or what amends can he make to
God, by his running away? See Chap. 7.20. Yea, Gods stroke is a call to come
with our bleeding wound, Hos. 6.1. and he strikes for sin, that we may bring
both our wound and our sin to be cured by him, Hos. 5.15.

5. Exhortations ought to be very tenderly and warily given to afflicted
persons, so as they may be cherished in duty; And particularly, Such as would
press duties effectually, ought to essay and commend them by their own
practice; As here Eliphaz recommends his counsel as a thing himself would
follow in the like case, I would seek to God, etc. Untender applications do,
oft-times, ^ar good doctrine; and it would be well remembered, that it is hard
to speak to afflicted broken minds; That so men may deal prudently and tenderly
with them; and they themselves may remember they are in a distemper, and
therefore ought not to reject every thing, as unwholesom, which is unpleasant
to their taste.

6. Men at ease do readily think it a more easy task then indeed it is, to
prescribe a rule to the afflicted, and that they would do far better under
trouble then the afflicted do: For, Eliphaz does here evidence his weakness (no
less then his tenderness) even as to what is found in his counsel. He thinks it
easy to seek to God; and calmly to submit, and not to fret as Job did. But had
his soul been in Jobs souls stead, and if these waves and billows, which
assaulted Job, had passed over him, he would not have found it so easy to
avoid bitterness, and submit to Gods dealing. See Chap. 16.4.

Verse. 9. Which does great things and unsearchable; mavelous things without
number.
This Exhortation is pressed by a motive taken from a due consideration of God,
as he is manifested in his works of Providence. He had insinuated that God is
the supreme cause of all trouble, ver. 6, 7. and had pressed Job to seek unto
God, ver. 8. Now he declares that God has so manifested himself, by his works
in the world, as may encourage men to seek to him, and may terrify them, if
they will not. For this end, he does first speak of Gods works in general, ver.
9. and then does instance this general, in some particulars; such as, Gods
common Providence in the earth, ver. 10.11. and his more special Providence
toward men, both wicked, ver. 12, 13, 14. and the poor who are oppressed, ver.
15, 16.

In this verse God is described by some general properties of his works. Such
as,

1. Greatness. His works of Creation, and many works of Providence, are great
in themselves, and so is his work of Redemption. Yea, the meanest thing that he
is about (as he is about all things) is great in this respect, that a great God
does it, and much of him may be seen in it.

2 Unsearchableness, A property of Gods works whereby God himself convinces
Job of ignorance and presumption, Chap. 38, etc. For not only is the nature of
things wrought by God unsearchable, but the manner also of working and bringing
many things about, Psalm. 92, 5, 6, 7. And the reason and end of doing them, as
Joh. 13.6.

3. Admirableness, or that they are mavelous things. As the former two
properties may be referred to the works of Nature, and the ordinary course of
Providence; which are great and unsearchable, because the power and wisdom of
God shine in them; Romans 1.20. So this third property may relate to those rare
and mavelous Providence, above, or contrary unto, the ordinary course of
nature, wherein God appears for his people; Such as those recorded, Dan. 3.27.
and 6.22. and many the like. Or it may rather be understood more generally,
that this is an effect of the other two, Because they are great and
unsearchable, therefore they are mavelous things.

4. That they are Innumerable, the whole earth being full of his glory and
riches, Isa. 6.3. Psalm. 104.24. and these kind of works being ordinary with
him. See further of these properties, Job 9.10. Psalm. 72.18. Rom ^1.33.

In general, we may, from these properties, Learn,

1. Such as would seriously draw near to God, ought to study what he is, that
so they may know how to approach, and what to believe and expect; Therefore
does he subjoyn this description of God, as necessary to be taken along with
his purpose of seeking to him. See Psalm 9 10. H^b. 11.6.

2. Albeit God can be fully taken up only by his Word; yet so much of him does
shine in his working, as may both invite sinners to come to him, and discover
their hazard who are rebellious: Therefore he presses him to seek unto God, by
an argument taken from his works, or, what he does. For here seekers of God
will find that there are as great wonders daily wrought, as any they shall need
to be done for them; and despisers of God may see, by what God daily works,
that he can easily reach them.

3. Gods works, even in ordinary, are so great and like himself, that we must
not expect to see through the riches of his glory shining in them, but should
look upon them as unsearchable; For, they are great and unsearchable. So that
when we see most in his working, we should be humbled that we see no more. And
if this be true, even of his ordinary works; how much less are we able to sound
the depth of his more special Providence about his people?

4. The greatness and unsearchableness of Gods works call us to admire them,
and his glory shining in them; not neglecting mavelous things because they
are ordinary, nor allowing our selves in our ordinary dispositions, when God is
doing great things, whether in mercy or in judgment; For, if his works be great
and unsearchable, they should be mavelous things, See Psalm. 126.2.3. and
118.23. Amos 3.8.

5. In studying the works of God, we ought not to confine our selves to any one
particular, but take such a view of the innumerable works done by him, as may
discover his infinite Glory and Majesty, and his Al-sufficiency, and may humble
us in the sense of our inability to comprehend that glory of God which shines
even in his works; For, his works are mavelous things without number.

In particular, If we consider that Eliphaz speaks this to Job, as a motive to
persuade him to seek unto God, we may take up a threefold account upon which he
thus describes God, which will afford sound general Doctrine, though not
seasonably applied to Job, as a man not yet converted.

1. That Job being under such an extraordinary dispensation of Providence, and
great and mavelous things being done toward and upon him and his family; He
should not look upon them as springing out of the ground, or to be slighted,
and so neglect to seek God; but should see the special hand of God, to excite
him to his duty. And indeed, This is the Lords usual method; When we regard not
God speaking in his Word, he begins with the rod; and when ordinary rods
prevail not, he will send judgments which will discover a finger of God; Isa.
26.11. And if these will not move us, we proclaim our selves incorrigible.

2. That, being under the hand of so great a Lord, whose working declares him
to he great and mavelous, He should not think to prevail by striving with
God, who can do so great and unsearchable things; But it was his safety to seek
to God, and stoop and commit his case to him. And indeed, None do know God
aright, but they who, under afflictions, look upon submission and yielding, as
their safety, and upon their coming to God, as the only way of out-gate. See
Chap. 9.9. And that men in trouble may be excited to this, they should
seriously ponder their case, (not as those Isa. 42 24, 25. Hos. 7.9.) and
should lay to heart the severity and displeasure of God manifested therein,
Psalm. 90.11. 1 Cor. 19.22.

3 That in seeking and stooping to God, he ought not to be discouraged by any
trouble that was upon him, considering what a God he is, and what his works
declare he can do for such as seek him. And here, all these properties of Gods
works are grounds of confidence to such as humbly seek his face.

1. God can do great things for his people, Joel 2.21. Psalm. 126.3. and 65.5.
If ordinary working cannot deliver them, he will magnify his work, ere his
Promise fail.

2. God also works unsearchable things for his people, things not seen in any
second cause, for even the eater will afford them meat, (to allude to that
phrase, Judge. 14.14) and things that they could little expect in outward
appearance, Genesis 16.13. Isa. 64.1, 2, 3.

3. He also works mavelous things, Not only things little expected, (that
forgetters of prosperity, Lam. 3.17. should be remembered, that tossed captives
should be restored and multiplied, Isa. 49.21.) and little believed, Zech. 8.6,
But things whereat the world will wonder, and wherewith themselves should be
affected, even to admiration, Psalm. 126.1, 2.

4. He can work those wonders without number. Hereby clearing, That he has not
one blessing only, but many, for his people; That he will be no less potent in
one trial, then in another; and, That former deliverances, though abused by us,
shall not exhaust his resolution and ability to do for those who seek to him,
Psalm. 106.43, 44. Judge. 10.13, -- 16. All those considerations may exceedingly
encourage the afflicted to seek to God. And though the Lord do not always
visibly appear for them that seek him, (and it was Eliphaz's error to strain
those encouragements too much, in temporal things) Yet not only is Piety and
seeking of God a reward to it self: But that the Lord has thus appeared at any
time, does sufficiently demonstrate what God can, and will, do for every one
that seeks him, if it be for their good.

Verse. 10. Who gives rain upon the earth, and sends waters upon the fields:

11. To set up on high those that be low; that those which mourn may be exalted
to safety.


This general Doctrine, concerning Gods working, is here instanced in his
common Providence in the earth, particularly in giving rain, ver. 10. which is
amplified, ver. 11. from Gods purpose therein, which is to encourage those who
are brought low, and are made to mourn under such a rod Whereby also God does
demonstrate that his scope in all his working, is, to encourage them humbly and
mournfully seek to him.

From ver. 10. Learn,

1. God is the Author of rain and other seasons, and of the effects thereof on
the Earth, whatever be the second causes; For, He gives Rain upon the Earth,
and sends Waters upon the Fields. See Acts 14.17. Jer. 14.22. Psalm. 65 9, 10.
and 68.9 Amos 4.7. It is our duty to see him more in those, and to employ him,
as we need them, Jam. 5.17, 18.

2. The very common works of God are full of his grace, and of rich treasures
for faith to feed upon; For, this of rain is a proof of that general, ver. 9.
that he does great things and unsearchable. Those works are set before us, that
(beside the benefit we reap thereby) we may, by the study of them, be raised in
our spirits to entertain high thoughts of God, Psalm 19.1, 2, etc. and induced
to seek him, Jer. 5.24.

3. Among all other works of common Providence, he instanceth in the matter of
rain: Partly, to press Job to his duty, by the study thereof; For, on the one
hand, Gods common kindness to all men, in sending them rain and food, Matthew
5.45. should lead them to seek God, Romans 2.4. and assure them of much kindness,
if they seek him, seeing he is so kind when they are Rebels, that they may seek
him. And, on the other hand, if they will not seek God, he can easily reach
them, and make them know how frail they are, and that the want ^^ shower of
rain in its season will be enough to ruin them. Partly, this instance is
pitched upon, rather then other great works, of the Heavens, Sun and Stars,
because those being constant, are less observed; whereas want of rain being,
oft-times, our exercise, we are made to see God in it. So little of God do we
observe in mercies which we ordinarily enjoy, unless we be sent often to God
about them. If we wanted vicissitudes and changes in our condition, we would be
in peril to turn Atheists. See Psalm. 55.19.

From ver. 11. Learn,

1. It is not enough we observe Gods works in themselves, unless we study his
end and purpose in them, that so we mistake not God, by reading his works
wrong; and may be quickened to wait on him, in his way, for the performing of
the gracious thoughts of his heart; Therefore does Eliphaz here subjoyn what is
Gods purpose in sending rain. See Deuteronomy. 8 14, 15, 16.

2. Whatever expectations men have, of reaping much advantage by deliverances
wrought by God; yet God purposes and sends out-gates, chiefly for the
comfort of those who are humble, and have mourned under affliction: For, God
sends rain for the good of those that be low and which mourn.

3. As man is a very base creature, seeing the want of a shower will undo him;
so it becomes man, in that and the like straits, to be humble and low in his
own eyes: For it is supposed here, that there are some who, in that strait, are
low.

4. Men, brought low by any rod, ought not to rest satisfied with dejection of
spirit under it; But should rouse up themselves to mourn and lament after God:
For, they that be low, must be also those which mourn.

5. Such as stoop and mourn under trouble, will find that their low condition
lies very near to exaltation and deliverance, 1 Samuel 2.7. Psalm. 113 7. And
however the Lord dispense temporal things, they are exalted in no less esteem
with God, then if they had affluence of all things, and in no less real safety,
from any hurt by their condition, then if they had no trial at all; For; in
that respect is this promise still fulfilled, that he sets up on high those
that be low, and those which mourn are exalted to safety. See Psalm. 136.23.

Verse. 12. He disappointeth the devices of the crafty, so that their hands
cannot perform their enterprise.

13. He takes the wise in their own craftiness: and the counsel of the froward
is carried headlong.

14. They meet with darkness in the day time, and grope in the noonday as in
the night.


Eliphaz proceeds to instance that general doctrine, ver. 9. in Gods special
Providence toward men, both good and bad. And hereby he would terrify Job, if
he should stand out, and by his crafty pretenses (as he judged) think to
maintain his integrity, and would comfort him, if he did humbly stoop to God.

His doctrine concerning Gods dealing with wicked men (in these verses) is
sound Doctrine, if we abstract from the application thereof to Job, and does
contain the sentence of the Law of God against the wicked, though not always
fully and visibly executed in this world, as Eliphaz thought. He describes the
wicked by such characters as he thought might reflect upon Job, whom he judged
to have been a politic crafty dissembler before, and to be now a stubborn
froward murmurer, who would stand it out against God. And he points out such
judgment to come upon these men, as might deterr Job from choosing their way,
as he supposed he did. And they are,

1. Disappointment of their designs, and marring of their well contrived plots,
ver. 12.

2. Ruin, by Gods overreaching them in their own designs, ver. 13. --

3. Overturning of their projects, through their own precipitancy, ver. -- 13.

4. Darkness and perplexity in clearest cases, especially after God has begun
to deal with them, as if a man were surrounded with darkness, and blind at
noonday, ver. 14.

From this Doctrine considered in it self, without the mis-application to Job,
we may learn.

1. The inclination of men's natural and unsanctified wit, is, only politic
craft and dissimulation; As here the wise are expounded to be the crafty. See
Jer. 4.22. Psalm. 12.2.

2. Men of greatest parts and wit, being unrenewed, have little whereof to
boast, being ordinarily the Devils greatest Agents, and having God most on
their tops; As Eliphaz does here teach, that they follow such courses as makes
God their party. Which should teach men to lean little to their own wit. 1 Cor.
3.18, 19.

3. It is an evidence of those who lean much to their own wit, that they are
froward and perverse, not only in choosing of sinful ways, but in being
irreclaimable by the word (to which they will not subject themselves) or by
crosses either, so long as they can stand it out; For, the wise, and crafty,
are here also froward.

4. Albeit, oftimes, a fit party cannot be found, to oppose to the froward
crafty wit of wicked men; Yet God will be seen against them, and what rubs they
meet with, he is much to be adored therein; For, what he does against those, is
a proof that he does great things and unsearchable, ver. 9. See Hab. 2.13.
Psalm. 9.16.

5. Such as, leaning to their own wit, and neglecting God and his Law, do drive
wicked designs, will meet with miserable reappointments; For, he disappointeth
the devices of the crafty, See Neh. 4.15. Psalm. 2.1. and 33.10. Isa. 8.10. and
59.6. Hab. 2.13.

6. Albeit crafty men seem to prevail much by their policies, and to get much
of their work done; Yet, all things being considered, they fail still of their
purpose and ultimate design; God permits things to succeed with them, so far as
may be subservient to his purposes, and then puts a stop to their proceedings,
Psalm. 76.10. For, he disappointeth them, that their hands cannot perform their
enterprise. The word is very emphatick, and imports that they cannot perform
any thing substantial, or, to purpose, or any thing that might evidence sound
wisdom (as the word elsewhere is rendered} to have been the Fountain of their
design, See Psalm. 7.14. and so enemies have been made to confess Ioh. 12.19.

7. Such as wait upon God need not to be anxious, nor afraid of the plots of
crafty men, seeing God can turn their deepest plots to their own ruin; And the
people of God are warranted to look upon Enemies, in their deepest
contrivances, as plotting their own ruin in the end; For, he takes the wise in
their own craftiness. Thus have the plots of oppressors of the Church tended
to the Plotters ruin. See 1 Cor. 3.19. Exodus 18.11. Mic. 4.11, 12. Psalm. 7.15,
16. and 9.15, 16. And thus fared it with Haman, and with Daniel's Enemies, Dan.
6.

8. As wicked men are given up to drive their designs furiously; so this is a
plague upon them; And as God defeats some of their counsels, by stopping and
driving them backward; so he over-turns others of them, by giving thctn up to
drive so precipitantly and furiously in their froward self-will, that they
involve, and confound and bemire themselves; For, the counsel of the froward is
carried headlong, or, hastened, and so precipitated. Such was Haman's haste to
have Mordecai hanged before the banke^, Esth. 5, and 6. and Pharaohs have at
the Red Sea, Exodus 15.9, 10. This may guard the hearts of the godly against the
resolute fury of Enemies. For even that is a judgment and a plague upon them,
that they are so. And may warn all, as not to be sleeping fools, so not to be
precipitant and rash, or given to a selfish will, in weighty affairs, but sober
and well advised.

9. There is nothing whereof men make an idol, but it is righteous with God to
stain them eminently in it; And particularly, trusted-in wit will leave men, in
a day of strait, in sad perplexities: As those crafty men have not the judgment
of ordinary men, when they meet with darkness in the day time, and grope in the
noonday, as in the night, or, are ignorant and want skill, in most obvious
things, in a day of distress. This is an usual judgment on wicked men (though
God may also humble his own Children with want of light, that they may learn to
depend upon him. 2 Chronicles. 20.12.) procured by sin, Deuteronomy. 28.29. Particularly,
by Apostasy from former righteous ways, Isa. 59.10-15. by formality, Isa.
29.13, 14. and, by men's carnal confidence in their own policy, that it will
bear them out in all straits.

Verse. 15. But he saves the poor from the sword, from their mouth, and from
the hand of the mighty.

16. So the poor has hope, and iniquity stops her mouth.


Follows an instance of Gods Providence in dealing with good men; whom he
delivers from injuries of every kind, from the slaying sword of wicked men,
their slanderous tongue, and oppressing hand, ver. 15. Unto which an inference
is subjoyned, ver. 16. drawn from the whole doctrine of Gods dealing with
wicked and godly men; That the truly poor man, by what he gets of performance
of what he hoped for, sees yet more ground of hope: and wicked men, their
oppressors, are put to amazement, confusion and silence. Thus he clears his
scope in all these instances to be, that Job might be encouraged humbly to
stoop, in hope of a good account of his trial; and might be deterred from stiff
standing out, lest he be put to confusion. Which doctrine may be admitted with
the cautions to be subjoyned in the Observations.

From ver. 15 Learn,

1. It is no unusual character of godly men to be in a low condition, and it is
Gods blessing on them, that their low condition contributes to humble them, and
make them poor in spirit; For, here godly men are called the poor, or, the
afflicted, or, oppressed ones, who are impoverished, and in daily hazard from
these crafty froward men, of whom he has been speaking; and they are the poor
in spirit also, such as he would, by this motive, persuade Job to be.

2. Such is the malice of wicked men, that they never want one project upon the
back of another, to drive on the ruin of the godly; And such is the need that
godly men have of exercise, that when they are brought low with affliction,
they may yet have many hazards, one upon the back of another, to meet with:
For, though they be the poor, yet behold what hazard they are in! The Sword is
ready to cut them off, and that is first named, because that is their
oppressors great and chief design; If that succeed not, there is a slanderous
detracting tongue, ready to blast their Profession and Integrity; and however
that succeed, there is an heavy hand, to oppress and bear them down all that
wicked men can.

3. Let the godly be obnoxious to never so many hazards, yet the poor will
never want a Patron to own them, nor the oppressed, one to avenge and deliver
them; For, he saves the poor from the Sword, from their mouth, from the hand
of the mighty See Eccl. 5.8. It is true, these promises concerning temporal
deliverances are conditional, and to be performed only in so far as is for the
souls good of the godly; and it was Eliphaz's mistake to understand them
otherwise: Yet that there is a Promise concerning these things, does teach.

1. Even these deliverances are a part of their Charter, put in a wise hand; So
that the nonperformance thereof flows not from any want of tender love to
them.

2. He who takes their cause in hand has salvation for his Prerogative-royal,
Psalm. 3.8. to save when he will, and by what means he will.

3. The various exercises of his people will not exhaust his power, patience or
care, but he will condescend to take notice, and give a good account, of all of
them, both greater and smaller, be it Sword, Mouth, or Hand.

4. Weakness is no disadvantage to them whom God takes in hand, nor strength
an advantage to their Enemies; For, he saves even the poor from the hand of the
mighty, See Amos 5.9.

5. What ever a godly man receive of these temporal mercies, he may be assured
that they come not for a snare, or in wrath, as they come to the wicked; for,
to the Godly, they are performance of promises.

From ver. 16. Learn,

1, Courses and conditions are nor to be judged of by the next, or, immediate
events; but men ought to try what they will prove in the issue, and at the long
run; For, so are we taught here to look on the way of the poor, and of wicked
men, by considering what is the result of both at last.

2. They who are truly poor will be content of hope in stead of enjoyments; and
in the midst of what enjoyments they have, their hope is still their great
treasure: For, that the poor has hope is much, and when God has done for
them, ver. 15. yet they look most to their hopes.

3. However the people of God do give too much way to despondency of spirit;
yet the truly poor have still solid ground of hope; For, it is a truth in all
times, The poor has hope. See Psalm 9.18.

4. Not only does the Lords Word afford ground of hope to the godly poor; But
it pleases God so far to own them by his dispensations for them, as may
encourage them to hope on for the future; For, upon the dispensation mentioned,
ver. 15. it follows, So the poor has hope, or, sees more ground still to
hope in God.

5. It is property of grossly wicked men, especially these who oppose the
godly, that they do so give up themselves to sin, as they become a very mass of
iniquity; As here they are called iniquity, in the abstract, because of their
universal pollution.

6. Albeit wicked men be very insolent in their course of opposition to the
godly; and be so slanderous in their reproaching of them, that neither have
they a check of Conscience to reclaim them, nor will the innocent carriage of
the godly silence them, 1 Pet. 2.15. Yet God, in his due time, shall so
confound them, by judgments upon themselves, and by causing them see his
eminent working in behalf of the godly poor, as shall put them to silence: For,
Iniquity stops her mouth, See Psalm. 107.42. and 31.18. Thus was it with the
Egyptians, Exodus 14.25. and a promise is made concerning it, Isa. 26.11.

7. Such as hold their standing, and draw their encouragement from the
afflicted condition of the godly poor, will find that they stand on slippery
places; For God will appear for his people, and then they are confounded: For,
so does the connection in port The poor has hope, and then iniquity stops
her mouth. Woe is to them who must needs mourn when the godly are encouraged.

8. It is a judgment upon wicked oppressors of tne godly poor, that, as they
are insolent, when at their h^ight, So, when God appears against them, they
may well be convinced and confounded, but are rarely converted thereby; For,
this, ordinarily, is all that follows, Iniquity stops her mouth; Whereas
it should open its mouth, to take shame unto it self, and to glorify God,

Verse. 17. Behold, happy is the man whom God corrects: therefore despise not
thou the chastening of the Almighty:
Fo^loweth to v. 27. the second branch of Eliphaz's Exhortation and Counsel,
which is pressed by diverse motives and encouragements. It is, in effect, a
farther Explication of that committing of his cause to God, which he had
mentioned, ver 8. and does now insist upon, as a necessary fruit of
repententance, under the name of Patience under the Rod, or, not despising of
Gods chastening. In all which, we will find very sweet General Doctrine, if he
had not rendered it unsavory by his rash censure of Job, and had not given Job
cause to suspect that he had judged that none were patient to whom the
following promises were not visibly performed. In th^s verse we have his
counsel unto patience, propounded negatively, by dissuading him from that
insolent sleighting of the hand of God, whereof he s^spected him guilty. Unto
which (beside the Arguments couched in the very counsel, that his affliction
will prove but a chastisement, if he improve it well, and being the chastening
of the Almighty, it ought to be well improved,) the first express Argument is
prem^tted, That there is mercy and happiness in being corrected, Namely, if it
be improved as a correction, and patiently borne, as the connection imports.

From the Exhortation and Motives insinuated therein, Learn,

1. Afflict^ons are sent upon men to reprove and convince of sin, and to argue
men out of their starting holes and defenses, which the word cannot persuade
them to abandon; And never to leave binding of them, till they be instructed
and rectified in their duty; For, so much do the words here expressing
affliction, import, which are, correction, or a reproving, and arguing, and
chastening, or, an inst^uction, a binding instruction, and consequently a
rectifying This should teach us, to let this messenger have its errand,
otherwise, we will protract our own trouble and disquiet.

2. That affliction may work its work, and we may get a good account of it, it
is requisite it be submitted unto with patience; For without that, we are not
in a right frame to improve afflictions, far less are we ripe to be delivered
from them; And though we think our case will be forgo^ten, if we do not still
bitterly resent it, yet the patient and meek will find their case left on God,
Psalm. 76.8, 9 and 147.6 and 149.4. Isa. 29.19. Therefore is patience here
pressed, as that which must be the first fruit of trouble, before it produce
any other good fruit, See Romans 5.3, 4. Jam. 1.3, 4.

3. It is not a contemplation of patience, when trouble is at distance, which
God approves; But it is required that patience appear when trouble is lying
on: For, now it is required that he despise not the chastening. See Prove. 24.10.

4. It is not easy to light upon the right and patient way of bearing
afflictions, there being so many ways of miscarrying by impatience; So much may
gathered by comparing this place with Prove. 3.11. and Heb. 12.5. when wearying,
or, fainting are forbidden, as well as this despising. We may conceive the
matter in this order,

1. There is a light esteeming of affliction, as that wherewith we will not be
troubled, nor driven off our course thereby: and to the Original word, Heb.
12.5. signifies to care little for trouble. See Isa. 9.9, 10. Hos. 7.9, 10.
Thus men receive not correction, Zeph. 3.2. when they will neither quit any
sinful pleasure, nor seek God, notwithstanding they are corrected. And this is
the first degree of despising.

2 If afflictions touch us so near, that we cannot get them ^hak^n off, but
must be molested and disquieted thereby, then there is a rejecting and raging
at them, with bitterness and proud murmuration that God should so deal with us,
so Jer. 31.18. This is it which is imported in the Original word, here, and
Prove. 3.11. Namely, to be unwilling to lie under, and to spurn at the rod: and
this Eliphaz suspected Job to be guilty of in his complaints.

3. Though trouble fit upon us, till it lay these tempests of humors which it
has raised; yet, with out the grace of God, it will be so far from working
true humility, that we will only run to another extremity, and, in stead of
despising, turn faint and weary. All which should teach us, what need there is
of depending on God for the right use of, and, a right behavior under trouble:
For it is a gift to bear and suffer aright, Phil. 1 29. And that we ought not
to please our selves with every thing that looks like exercise, under trouble;
For there may be much of that, when turning to God is yet to begin, Jer. 31.18.

Doct. 5. It may be a motive to persuade us to walk patiently and fruitfully
under trouble, if we consider the saddest strokes speak not our case desperate,
if we will improve them, and not slay our selves, by revolting and rebellion
when we are smitten: For, albeit Eliphaz in his Dispute, conclude Job a wicked
man and hypocrite; and so smitten in wrath, Chap. 4.9. Yet he allows him to
look on all his afflictions as no other then fatherly corrections, and
chastenings, if he will improve, and not despise them. No stroke speaks
irremediable displeasure (yea, some may speak tender love, Rev. 3.19.) unless
our miscarriage under it speak the incorrigibleness of our hearts.

6. As God is the Author of all afflictions; so a right sight of him may
contribute not a little to persuade us to patient stooping under his hand;
Therefore is he represented to Job as the Almighty, or Alsufficient, to
persuade him not to despise tne chastening: For, God, being the Almighty, is
too strong a party for man to contend with, by resisting and striving against
the rod: And being Alsufficient, the patient stooper may look to him who can
easily make up all wants. As high thoughts of God are always seasonable, Genesis
14.18, 19, 20, 22. so, especially, under trouble, to keep our hearts in aw of
him, and, being humbe, to encourage us in him.

From the express Argument premitted, Learn,

1. Right discerners will not look so much to their case in it self, as whether
there be a blessing in it; And they will not dislike any thing that may consist
with, or promote, their true happiness; For, Eliphaz judges it an argument to
press patient enduring of trouble, that we may be happy in it.

2. Albeit man since the fall be, in himself, a miserable creature; Yet this is
his mercy, that his misery does not tender him incapable of happiness; For, the
word here, in the Original, signifies, mortal man, (as it is rendered, Chap.
4.^7) or, frail and miserable man; and though he be such in himself, yet
Eliphaz asserteth that even such are capable of happiness. Yea, it is to be
remarked that, here and elsewhere, the various names given to man, from his
base original of red-earth, from his mortality, his strength or other virtues
and excellencies, are all mentioned in assertions or promises of man's
blessedness; (compare Psalm. 1.1. and 32.2. and 94 12. in the Original) To show,
that to be partaker of this happiness is man's glory and crown; when he is
considered in all his excellencies; and in his basest estate, this happiness
will stoop to reach him, in Gods way.

3. Not only is frail and mortal man made capable of happiness; But this
happiness is, oft-times, promoted in such a way, and by such means, as will not
be soon seen, (especially by a blind prejudged eye, that can mark what
displeases us, and forget to see our own mercy) and being seen, it may be
matter of wonder and admiration, and of praise to God who brings about such
mercies by so unlikely means; For, Behold, says he, happy is the man, etc. It
will require attention to see it, and should be wondered at, when we see it.

4. In particular, This is no less admirable, then it is difficultly discerned
by them who are concerned, That, however afflictions are bitter to our sense,
and seem to threaten ruin; Yet they are so far from secluding happiness, that
they may carry a blessing and much happiness in their bosom: For, this is the
wonder, Happy is the man whom God chasteneth. This is not to be understood of
afflictions in their own nature; For so they are the fruit of sin, and
consequently, are in themselves a curse. Nor yet does it import that
afflictions are chief causes of this happiness, but only means in Gods hand,
who brings about the happiness of his people thereby, And in particular, these
mercies and happinesses (as the word in the Original is in the plural number)
may be observed in this lot.

1. It is a great happiness, that those dispensations do not only consist with,
but flow from love, Heb. 12.5. Rev. 3.19.

2. It is a mercy to be corrected, and chastened only, when we might be
destroyed, if we got our deserving. Lam. 3 22.

3. It is a mercy that chastisements are sent to prevent judgments, if they be
well improved, 1 Cor. 11.32.

4 It is a mercy that corrections sent of God are seconded by Gods gracious
purpose, to do good th^reby to his own, Psalm 94.^2, 13. and accordingly, do
produce blessed effects, Psalm. 1^9.67, 71. Rev. 12.11. Psalm. 31.7. Provided
that we patiently endure, Jam. 1.12. and 5.11. And in a word, Be man what they
will, and be their stroke what it will, they may come to blessed advantages, by
improving and walking aright under it. S^ranger may find acquaintance made up,
Rebels and Wanderers may be reclaimed, Such as were under a cloud may find a
Joseph making himself known, etc. All which may teach us. As not to decline
afflictions, when called thereunto, as we would not deprive our selves of much
happiness; So to be much affected with the mercies we meet with in such lots,
and to learn from it, that the love of God is not a fond love, but respects our
profit rather then our humor.

Doct. 5 As the advantages of trouble are met with in our making ^^^t use of
them; So none do rightly believe, or prize, tho^^ advantages, but they who, in
the expectation thereof, are encouraged to patience: For, so does Eliphaz
argue, Happy is the man whom God corrects, therefore despise not thou the
chastening of the Almighty.

Verse. 18. For he makes sore, and binds up: he wounds, and his hands make
whole.
The second Argument, pressing the Exhortation, does confirm the former, and
point out one branch of this happiness reaped by Gods chastisements; Namely,
That God makes up all losses to the right improvers of affliction; which is
expressed in terms borrowed from Surgeons, who do lance and rip up
putrified sores and wounds, that they may heal and cure them perfectly, and for
that end, do tenderly bind up all those wounds. Learn,

1. Gods purpose of doing good by afflictions will not appear by the afflicteds
ease, and his want of pain and grief under them; For, even where be intends the
afflicteds happiness, yet he makes sore, and wounds. See Heb. 2.11.

2. Albeit God might exercise his absolute Sovereignty over all his creatures;
yet it is his kindness to his people, that in his greatest severity, he comes
not to them with the Soldiers Sword, but with the Surgeons Lancet; wounding
when it is for their health, chastening for their profit, to rip up unmortified
and deadly sores; For, so does the Metaphors import. See Heb. 12.10. And this
teaches us, As to be sensible of dangerous sores, when God falls thus to work;
So, also, to account it our happiness that they are not let alone, but we are
made sore, and to smart with them.

3. It is the afflicteds great encouragement to seek to God in afflictions, and
to bear them patiently, waiting on him; That as all strokes com^ from the hand
of God, so no wound given by himself is above his own cure, and no stroke too
hard for him to remedy, For, he makes sore, and binds up, he wounds, and
his hands make whole. Were it even a slaying stroke, he can cure it, Deuteronomy.
32.39. 1 Samuel 2.6.

4. Gods wounding of his people, who make right use thereof, not only does not
take away ground of hope of his help, but, on the contrary, does endear them to
his care, so that he will tenderly wait on them, till they be made up again:
For, whatever afflictions, or Gods afflicting, seem to say, yet to such, it is
an Argument, if he make sore, he will bind up, if he wound, his hands will make
whole See Hos. 6 1. Psalm. 147 2, 3. And therefore they miss much who either do
not see him, or not wait on him, in trouble.

5 Albeit afflicted Saints, when delivered, be only restored to their former
cond^tion, and so there seem to be no great advantage in it, but rather a
disadvantage that they have ^^amed it so long; yet right disce^ners will find
an happiness in trouble, even upon the account of thi^ issu^: For, they are
happy whom God corrects, for he makes sore and binds up, etc. It is an
happiness that they are not irrecoverably ruin, b^t restored after affliction;
Every restored mercy after we have been deprived of it, should be a double
mercy in our eyes, and sensible souls will esteem it so; It is an happiness
that what we enjoyed before, as a common favor, is returned as a gift of
special love, when we have profited by the rod: and, whereas we had thos^
mercy before, and provoked God to take them away, it is an happiness to have
them restored, and our selves taught by the rod to improve them better.

Verse. 19. He shall deliver thee in six troubles, yea in seven there shall no
evil touch thee.

20. In famine he shall redeem thee from death: and in war from the power of
the sword.

21. Thou shall be hid from the scourge of the tongue: neither shall thou be
afraid of destruction when it comes.

22. At destruction and famine thou shall laugh: neither shall thou be afraid of
the beasts of the earth.

23. For thou shall be in league with the stones of the field: and the beasts
of the field shall be at peace with thee.


The former general promise and encouragement, ver. 18 is (to ver 27.) branched
out with particular application to Jobs case, in many particular promises of
temporal mercies; Concerning which, it is to be adverted, in the general, that
we understand them aright, otherwise we will be ready to doubt of Gods presence
with us, if they be not fully performed to our mind, as Judge. 6.13. But we
ought to understand those and the like temporal promises (such as these, Psalm.
91. and 112.) according to those general rules and caveats, Romans 8.28. 1 Timothy
4.8. Psalm. 34.10. and the like. And it was Eliphaz's error, if he dreamed of
an absolute promise of these to every godly man.

Those particular Encouragements may be reduced to two Heads; whereof the first
(in these verses) may be thus summed up; That if Job will stoop to God, and be
patient, he shall have deliverance, preservation, prevention and security, in
and from troubles, however circumstantiated, for number, variety, singularity,
or being common. This is generally propounded, ver. 19. and enlarged and
instanced, ver. 20, 21, 22, 23. Where, by the various sorts of trials
mentioned, and the various promises concerning them, we may conceive that he
points not only at troubles already come upon Job, from which he should be
delivered, and, in the mean time, be hid from the evil thereof; but at further
troubles which he might procure by his impenitencie and impatience; and which,
if he did his duty, should be prevented; and at those general calamities which
might fall out in his time, and the common hazards to which all men are
obnoxious; in the midst of all which, he should possess an holy security.

In unfolding this encouragement, we may consider,

First, That concerning which he has the promise; and that is, in general,
troubles. Which are particularly circumstantiated,

1. From their number, six and seven ver. 19. Not that we should curiously seek
out the number of seven here, Famine, War, Calumnies, Destruction, hazards from
the Wild Beasts of the Earth, from the stones, and, from the tame Beasts of the
Field. But indefinitely, by six are meant many troubles, and by seven, yet more
troubles, even to a number of perfection, usually expressed by seven. See Lev.
26.28. Prove. 6.16.

2. In this number there is a variety of troubles; which are enumerated to be,
Famine and Sword, ver. 20. Calumnies, or other injuries of the tongue, and some
great havoc and destruction, flowing from some other cause then War or Famine
formerly mentioned, ver. 21.

3. Not only is there a variety of single trials, coming alone, but diverse of
them coming together and at once, as Famine and Destruction by some other mean,
ver. 22.

4. Beside extrordinary calamities, there are ordinary and common hazards,
whether from stones of the field (of which, See Psalm. 91.11, 12.) or Beasts,
wild or tame ver. -- 22, 23. Not to insist on every one of those particular
trials; Learn.

1. It is neither trial, nor want of trial, that is the mark of the godly man;
There is no blessing in being spared, nor evil in being corrected, but it is
the life of trial that makes the difference: As these suppositions of many
troubles do teach us.

2. From the multitude of troubles here mentioned, we may learn, Partly, That
man has many doors and inlets to admit trouble, and is obnoxious to to trouble
by many means; whether it be Sword, Famine, Calumnies of the tongue, or other
destruction, it is enough to afflict frail man; and partly, That the people of
God may need many troubles, whether to discover themselves, or to fit them for
multitudes of proofs of his love, which requires so many open doors to let it
in sensibly and comfortably. They are to look for many troubles, Psalm. 34.19.
and these, it may be, very frequent, six and seven, like so many waves and
billows coming so thick upon the back one of another till they want leisure to
draw their breath, Job 9.18. And, it may be also, a complete number of trials
(as the number of seven imports) as if none could be added. Lam. 2.22. All this
may be necessary for the ends mentioned, and to hold us in exercise. And it
teaches every child of God, in looking for troubles, to lay his account upon
the utmost that may befall him.

3. For this variety of sundry kinds of trouble, It is necessary, partly, To
keep us in exercise; when one trial becomes blunt, through long custom,
another let loose upon us will have an edge to make us feel; Partly, to prepare
us for variety of experiences of Gods kindness, shining one way in War, and
another way in Famine; etc. and, partly, to seek out variety of weaknesses and
corruptions in us, some trial working upon one lust, some on another. Hence it
is, that the scourge of the tongue is ranked up with sharpest judgments,
because it will work more on some spirits then a greater trial.

4. For this conjunction of diverse trials together, it affords a necessary
caution, That our being under one trial does not exempt us from another, if God
please to send it on, at the same time; For, where Famine is, God may send also
other destruction. Captivity will not hide from the Sword, Amos 9.4. though men
under some trouble are ready to become secure, as if they should meet with no
more, and to quarrel if it be otherwise.

5. The instances of common hazards, do teach, That albeit the Lord should keep
off extraordinary judgments, he can teach man by very common means. As all
things are enemies to man since the fall; So the very Stones of the Field, and
the Beasts, not only these which are wild, but the tame which converse with us
and serve us, are sufficient to bread us a trial and exercise. Angels are
appointed to guard Saints in these common hazards, Psalm. 91.11.12. and we ought
to observe much special care and providence in our preservation from them.

Secondly. The promise made in reference to these trials; which is branched out
in several expressions, relating to every one of those cases. Not that we are
to restrict every particular branch of the promise only to that particular
trial with which it is mentioned (though there may be some weight laid on some
particular promise here made to such a particular case, as we may hear) But all
those together do contain (in the opinion of Eliphaz) the sum of Gods gracious
purpose concerning his people in all their trials, that he will deliver, or,
hide, keep them from evil, make them laugh, etc. All which promises may be
admitted in a sound sense, though they contain not a perfect enumeration of all
the good things which God intends unto his afflicted people. We may take up
both the sense and the use of those promises, in these few lessons.

1. As the trials of the people of God are many and various: So every one of
those trials need a Promise and Cordial from God: For, here a word is added to
every one of them An ordinary hazard, as well as a singular calamity, has a
prom^se, and needs a promise; a new exercise, after we have essayed and gone
through many, even the seventh trouble, after we have gone through six, needs
new influence and furniture. The change of one trial for another needs a
promise from God. And as this points out the fullness of Gods allowance, who
answers all our cases; So it warns us, in every one of those, to be upon our
guard, lest we succumb when we least expect it. Least an ordinary exercise
drive us off our feet, through want of faith and dependence; while, through
faith, we prove victorious in sharper trials; and least multiplicity, variety,
or change of trials, prove a sharp trial, if in all these cases we do not eye
God in the promises.

2. In so far as is for the good of Gods people, they may expect, either that
their troubles shall be prevented, or they delivered from them, if it be
needful they be inflicted for time; For, those two are the main branches of
this promise. That of deliverance is expressed, ver. 19. and diverse of the
rest, being taken in their latitude and full of extent, may be so understood;
and that of prevention is held out in that promise, ver. 23. We ought to study
both those mercies; For our not observing of preventing mercies makes us need
delivering mercies; and preventing mercy ought to be studied, even in the midst
of trouble. Lam. 3.22.

3. Albeit the Lord neither prevent nor keep off troubles; Yet it is a mercy we
are not under the power or, hand, of trouble, but still in Gods hand. v. 20.

4. It is also a mercy that there is a deliverance in trouble, ver. 19. as well
as from trouble, when we succumb not, 2 Cor. 4.8, 9. and 16.9, 10. and when we
meet with much of God under trouble, to uphold our hearts. Psalm. 31.7.

5. It is a great evidence of deliverance in trouble, when God keeps men from
the evil of trouble, that it do not touch nor hurt them, nor prove deadly, or
to death, though they be in the midst of it; As is promised, ver. -- 19.20.
This was miraculously performed to the three Children, Dan. 3. and to Daniel
himself, Dan. 6. and is performed to every believer, who finds all things, even
troubles, work together for good. Romans 8.28.

6. Albeit God do not hide his people from the outward dint of trouble: yet
they are richly made up who are hid in the secret of Gods presence, that so
they may get no hurt by it; For, so is that promise, ver. 21. -- expounded,
Psalm. 31.20.

7. Though troubles do their worst, yet they are conquerours who are delivered
from the slavish fear of trouble, ver. -- 21 See Dan. 3.16, 17.

8. God is, sometime, pleased so far to support his people, in the midst of
trouble, as not only to deliver them from fear, but to make them triumph and
glory over them; For, it is here promised they shall laugh. Not that God allows
stupidity, or unseasonable carnal mirth; But they laugh and rejoice in trouble

1. As a mean of doing them much good, Romans 5.3, 4. 1 Pet. 4.14

2. As affording them many opportunities to act for God, and to give proof of
the grace of God in them, of their love, faith, self-denial, etc. and in this
they rejoice as the valiant soldier rejoices, and touzeth up his spirits in a
day of battle; so also the courageous horse, Job 40.19, 20, etc.

3. As being a forerunner of much good to follow, if trouble be well improved.
Heb. 12.11. Luke 21.26, 28.

4. As being, in their better part, and in their happiness, above the reach of
trouble, Romans 35.36, etc. 2 Cor. 4.16, 17.

Doct. 9. It does commend the great kindness of God to h^s people, that when
their trials are greatest, and doubled upon them, then he communicates most of
his refreshments and supporting grace unto them; For, this promise that he
shall laugh, is more particularly applied to the time when the sad strokes of
Destruction and Famine, and those both at once, are imminent or incumbent.
Hence Saints do not only rejoice, but even glory in pressing tribulations, Romans
5.3.

10. It is also, a special kindness, that in performing those promises, there
is a redemption of the godly, ver. 20. Either he delivers them by a strong
hand, as redemption is taken, Isa. 52.3. Or (if he do not that) he puts a
difference betwixt them and the wicked, though they be in one and the same
trouble; as the word redemption imports, Exodus 8.22, 23. in the Original. And
above all, whatever he do for them, it is a fruit of their redemption by the
blood of the Son of God.

And this last, (11.) is further cleared from that Promise, that they shall be
in league with the Stones of the Field, Or, that Covenant, which God has made
with them in Christ, shall be forth coming to them in less and more, even to
secure them against the Stones and Beasts. See Hos. 2.18, 19, 20. Matthew. 6.33.
As no mercy is sweet, to a right discerner, if it flow not from special love,
much less if it be sent in anger; So it is the advantage of the godly, that
their common mercies come to them by purchase, and as a reward promised in the
Covenant of Grace. As all the Creatures are Enemies to fallen Man, so, being
reconciled, all things become his, so far as may do him good, and so far as
they may not prejudge his true happiness, Romans 8.28. 1 Cor. 3.21, 22, 23. And
their confederate God and Father does concern himself in all their affairs,
both less and more. As all those particulars are very refreshful to the godly;
So this may crown all, That however they are put to acquiesce in one or more of
these Promises here mentioned, according as God is pleased to dispense, that he
may humble and exercise, and yet support them; Yet in the issue, they will see
a blessed end of all their troubles, Psalm. 34.19. and get their hand beyond all
their sorrows. Thus died old Jacob, Genesis 48.16. and David, 1 King. 1.29.

Verse. 24. And thou shall know that thy Tabernacle shall be in peace; and thou
shall visit thy habitation, and shall not sin.

25. Thou shall know also that thy seed shall be great, and thine off spring as
the grass of the earth.

26. Thou shall come to thy grave in a full age like as a shock of corn comes
in, in his season.


The other Head of Encouragement is, That he shall not only have deliverance
from trouble, but restitution to his former condition, instanced in these
particulars,

1. A peaceable Habitation, ver. 24. --

2. That he shall visit his Habitation, and not sin, ver. -- 24. whereby I do
not only understand, that in going about his affairs he shall not err (as the
word signifies, and is rendered, Judge. 20.16.) but shall succeed in his
enterprises; As godliness has the promise, etc. even of a gift of good thrift,
Psalm. 112.5. But, chiefly, this is the meaning, That he shall be taught a
better and more sinless way of going about his affairs.

3. That he shall have a great and numerous issue, ver. 25.

4. And fullness of days; He should not be cut off as he now apprehended, but
should continue to old age, and come ripe to his grave, as ripe Corn is brought
to the Barn, ver. 26.

These Promises relating to things temporal, must be understood with the usual
Scripture cautions, which assure us that all these things are put in the
Believers Charter, but the dispensing thereof left in the hand of their wise
and tender Father. With this caution, we may from this purpose, Learn,

1. Godly men, when in a right frame, are taught to look upon their most
prosperous condition as transitory, and not their true rest; For, he calls Jobs
house but a Tabernacle, not so much because he dwelt in a Tent (for his
Children had Houses, Chap. 1.13, 18, 19. and himself, Chap. 42.11.) as because
the godly accounted so of their fairest houses.

2. To a truly godly man the charge of a family is of great concernment; so
that the peace of it is a promise and great encouragement to him: As this
promise to Job imports.

3. As Prosperity and Family-peace and concord therewith, are a great blessing;
So Piety has the promise thereof, which is still fulfilled in so far as godly
families may have true peace, whatever befall them: So much may safely be
gathered from this promise, Thy Tabernacle shall be in peace.

4. It is no small mercy when the truth of a Promise is experimentally
confirmed to us; and much more, when we are made to discern that it is so, and
made to acquiesce and be satisfied therewith; So much is imported in this; Thou
shall know that thy Tabernacle shall be in peace, Thou shall discern the
accomplishment of this promise, and be refreshed therewith. So also, ver. 25.
To discern a mercy is a new mercy in the bosom of it, 1 Cor. 2.12. without
which, we may starve beside our food.

5. Such as expect Gods blessing upon their family and affairs, ought to wait
on him in the diligent use of means about them; For, Thou shall visit thine
Habitation, or, go about thine affairs.

6. So carnal are our hearts, and so entangling are wordly affairs, though
lawful, that without Gods special leading and assistance, we cannot avoid much
guilt in them; For, it needs a Promise, not to sin, when we visit our
habitation.,

7. A truly godly man is so tender, as he does not so much mind success in his
employments, as grace to keep the Conscience undefiled and in true peace. And
the obtaining of this will encourage him, whatever his success be: For, this
Promise is an encouragement to the godly man, Thou shall visit thy Habitation,
and (he says not, thou shall prosper, but) not sin.

8. None are in a nearer capacity to go about their employments in an holy,
spiritual, and sober manner, then those who have been bred in the School of
Afflictions, and to whom they have been blessed; and who so attain this, have
an evidence that they have profited by their trials; For, this Promise is made
to Job, upon supposition that Job will not despise the chastening of the
Almighty, ver, 17.

9. Albeit neither all the godly, nor only they, have the gift of posterity;
but some of them will need other promises, to make up that want, Isa. 56.4, 5.
Yet Children in themselves are a blessing, and the more of them the greater
blessing, Psalm. 127.3, 4, 5. and when they are given to the godly, they are the
reward of Piety, Psalm. 128.1, 2, 3, 4. and accordingly, should be improved as
blessings; Therefore is a promise made concerning those, Thou shall know also
that thy seed shall be great, and thy offspring as the grass of the Earth.

10. Whatever hazards we be exposed to in the world; yet our times are in Gods
hand, to lengthen or shorten them as he pleases; Therefore God undertakes to
determine, when man shall come to the grave, Psalm. 31.15.

11. Albeit, as death is certain, so, it matters not much how the godly be sent
away and liberate from their toil and warfare; yet in it self, it is a mercy to
die a peaceable death; For, it is a Promise, Thou shall come to thy grave,
which imports not only that he should get a grave, which is denied to many in
times of calamity, Psalm. 79.2. But that he should get his grave, and die at
home. And it is, indeed, a crowning mercy when, after the former mercies, a
peaceable and sweet close of all is granted.

12. Albeit the godly lose nothing, but gain much, when by dying soon, they are
sent the sooner to Heaven; yet as it is terrible to have our days shortened for
sin, Psalm. 55.23. so long life is in it self a blessing, and is given to the
godly for a blessing; that they may meet with many proofs of Gods love; may do
much service to him in their generation, and the many times that pass over
them; may sow liberally here, that they may reap liberally the reward of
free grace hereafter; and, may get leave to prepare for their dissolution, and
the pins of their Tabernacle be taken down insensibly and at leisure: For, it
is also a Promise, Thou shall come to thy Grave in a full age.

13. Albeit all the godly are not continued to old age in the world, yet they
are blessed with satisfaction in their days, and with ripeness and readiness to
die, anger being taken away, doubts cleared, Gods salvation seen, Luke 2.29,
30. and, it may be also, satisfaction given in some particulars which they
longed to see before their death, As Genesis 48.30. 1 King. 1.48. For, this being
the chief thing in the Promise, to die in a full age, like as a shock of Corn
comes in, in his season, the promise is performed to every Saint who is ripe
for death, let him die never so young.

All these Promises, as they intimate Gods condescendence to notice every
particular concernment of his people, and how easy it is for him to restore
them, if he please; So, they ought to persuade us to draw near, and keep near
God, that so we may be assured that the performing or not performing of them is
in mercy.

Verse. 27. Lo this, we have searched it, so it is, hear it, and know thou it
for thy good.
This verse contains the Conclusion of the whole Discourse; wherein he exhorts
Job to hear and notice what is said, Considering,

1. That it is not rashly uttered, but after serious search and grave
deliberation.

2. That it is true doctrine, as they had found both in reason and experience,
so it is; or, so the matter stands; and so is thy duty, as I have told.

3. That it would be Jobs good and profit to notice and apply it. All this he
speaks in name of all the Friends, who (it seems) had consulted about it, And
indeed, all of them, all along, speak to the same purpose. This way of
concluding, according as Eliphaz judged of the matter, and his mistake therein,
may teach,

1. Men should not publish anything in the Name of God, particularly to persons
in distress, but what is truth indeed and well grounded: So much does Eliphaz
import, while he has spoken nothing but what he apprehends is so certain; as
he may say, so it is.

2. Such as would find out truth, especially in the intricacies of Divine
Providence, ought to search painfully, and take all the assistance from others
they can have; For, says Eliphaz in name of all the rest, Lo this, we have
searched it.

3. The advantage of sound Doctrine, consists in the Application thereof made
by the hearers, which it is a pity it should be wanting, when men have spent
their time and strength to find it out; For, this is a general truth, If a
Doctrine be found sound upon search, then know thou it for thy good, or, for
thy self, is the duty of every particular hearer.

4. Such is the frailty of fallible men, especially when they are prepossessed
with prejudices and corrupt Principles, that after much search for truth, and
confidence that they have found it out, so that they dare recommend it to
others; yet they may still stick in the mire of Error; As here Eliphaz did,
after this search, and his confident Assertion, and serious Exhortation to Job.

CHAP. VI.
In this and the following Chapter we have Job's Reply to Eliphaz's large
Discourse, recorded in the two preceding Chapters. He does not succumb, nor
acquiesce in what was said; but finding his case much mistaken, and the cure
mis-applied, he replies at length, and with much Eloquence, in his own defense.
And that we may take up his scope in this Reply, we are to consider, that Job
(chap. 3.) had complained that ever he was born, or had a being, to meet with
so much misery; and closes that complaint with a desire to be now dead, and a
regret that he was not dead. In answer to which, the scope of Eliphaz's
Discourse was, To convince Job that it was a great fault, yea, an evidence of
hypocrisy, in him who had comforted others, to complain so much under trouble,
Chap. 4.3-6. and 5.2. and, his afflictions, proving him wicked, Chap. 4.7.,
etc. 5.3, etc. it were more fit for him to be seeking Reconciliation with God,
and studying patience under the hand of God, in hope of Restitution, then to be
thirsting after death, in such a condition, Chap. 5.6-26. Now Job, in answer to
all this, shows, 1. That his complaints were not causeless. 2. That, being
confident of his own integrity, and hopeless to get through that trouble, or to
attain that restitution he promised him upon condition of repentance, he did
well in desiring to die. The first of those is propounded, ver. 1. -- 7. The
second, ver. 8. -- 13. Afterward, he enlarges both of them; And he insists
upon the cause of his complaints, in a sad reproof of his friends, for their
inhumanity and unfaithfulness in dealing so harshly, when they should have
sympathized with him, and comforted him, Chap. 6.14. -- 30. And his desire of
death is very pathetically enlarged, Chap. 7. in a Speech directed to God
before his Friends, having declined them as no fit Judges.

So this Chapter (after an Historical Transition, ver. 1.) Contains, 1. Jobs
excusing of his own complaints, from the greatness of his trouble ver. 2, 3, 4.
and because his Friends afforded nothing that might ease him, ver. 5, 6, 7, 2.
His desire of death, not only pressed with great vehemence, ver. 8, 9. but
endeavored to be justified; From the comfort he expected in death, having the
testimony of a good Conscience, ver. 10. From his inability to endure this
trouble, ver. 11, 12. and from his own skill to discern what is best for him,
ver. 13. 3. His sharp reproof of Eliphaz and his other Friends, for their
inhumanity, ver. 14. and unfaithful disappointing of his expectation, ver. 15.
-- 21. which he aggravates from the smalness of the favor which he expected
from them, ver. 22, 23. From his readiness to take with wholesome Instruction,
ver. 24, 25. From their under-valuing of his condition, and what he said, ver.
26. and, in a word, From that eminent cruelty and unfaithfulness, that appeared
in their carriage, ver. 27.4. A Conclusion subjoyned to the former reproof,
which also is a Preface to what he has further to say; Wherein he desires
that, since they had so far mistaken and miscarried, they would give him
audience to speak for himself, ver. 28, 29, 30.

Verse. 1. But Job answered, and said,

2. Oh that my grief were thoroughly weighed, and my calamity laid in the
balances together.


THe scope of the first part of the Chapter is to prove that Job had cause to
complain as he did; as is darkly expressed, ver. 5. and is to be understood
throughout the rest of the verses. And his first Argument, ( ver. 2, 3, 4.)
from the greatness of his trouble, may be put in this form; He whose great
trouble presses him so hard, as he must seek some ease by complaining, ought
not to be censured as an impatient man or wicked. But such is my trouble, as
will be found by any who shall weigh it impartially; Therefore, etc. As for the
force of this Argument, in general, or, the first Proposition; This may be
granted,

1. That men should not bewray their own unsubduedness, by making too much
noise about ordinary and lesser troubles; But they should be put to it, before
they complain: For Job does not justify his complaints, if his trouble be not
great.

2. That Saints, under great trouble, are tenderly pitied by God, when they
pour forth their complaints, to seek ease to themselves; Provided they pour
them out in Gods own bosom; As we find Saints have laid their grievous
tentations before him, Isa 63.17. Jer. 15 18. But,

3. Albeit God do tenderly pity the bitterness of his Children, as pondering
their grievous tentations and great troubles, which extort those distempers and
passions from them, and will be far from judging them hypocrites, or wicked
men, because of these fits of passion, as Eliphaz did: Yet this is withal to be
considered; that no greatness of trouble can excuse any impertinent complaint
against God, or our birth day; but they ought to be mourned for, albeit God
look tenderly on them. And herein did Job fail, as God afterward lays to his
charge.

But to follow the words in order; Job, passing the first part of the Argument,
wherein the great error lay, does prove the greatness of his trouble, (or the
Second Proposition) by four instances and evidences thereof. Whereof the first
( ver. 2.) is taken from their not pondering and weighing of his trouble. This
is indeed but an extrinsecal addition to his trouble, yet he mentions it first,
as having at this time brought all the rest sadly to his remembrance, which
makes him begin so pathetically as a man overwhelmed, and bring in the other
evidences of his great trouble, only to prove that they had not pondered it.
For as their former silence, Chap. 2 13. occasioned (in part) that bitter sit,
Chap. 3. So now, having heard Eliphaz speak (with the approbation of all the
rest, Chap. 5.27.) and not ponder his great affliction, it rips up his wounds
so much the more. In sum, his regret imports, That if Eliphaz had weighed his
trouble, and felt it as he did, he would have found his complaints not equal to
his sorrow and trouble; But since he did not so, he could not be a fit Judge of
this case, nor be able to comfort him, but would rather increase his sorrow the
more. And this is very true, Though he saw Job in great trouble, yet not only
did he call it but a touch, Chap. 4.5. but he did not ponder the matter so, as
to deal compassionately and tenderly with a distressed godly man; but judging
him to be an ungodly and wicked man, did deal cruelly with him. As for the
words here, of grief, or indignation, or anger, (for it is the word used by
Eliphaz, Chap. 5.2.) and calamity, they may be thus distinguished; His grief
may signify his complaint, and his calamity, his trouble of which he
complained. And so his regret comes to this, That Eliphaz, who reflected upon
his complaint, did not lay that in the balance with the trouble and tentations
from which it flowed: For then he should have found that his stroke was greater
then his cry. And however Job did err, if this be his mind; (For no stroke upon
him did justify his complaints, already and afterward uttered) yet there is a
general truth in it, That if we look to the troubles of distempered souls, we
will find cause to pity many passions in them, which yet cannot be justified, 2
King. 4.27. But the following verse will not allow us to rest on this
distinction: For there both his grief and calamity must be understood to be
resumed, and declared insupportably weighty. Now it were contrary to Jobs scope
to assert that his complaints were such; For his aim is rather to extenuate,
then aggravate those. Therefore if we make a difference (for he speaks of them,
ver. 3. in the singular number) his grief may point out his inward vexations
and tentations of mind, and his calamity, his outward trouble, which (together
with Gods hiding of his face, and their unseasonable silence, and Eliphaz's
impertinent doctrine) did so disorder his mind. Both those may come under one
common name of trial (which changes the speech into the singular number, ver.
3.) and were the causes (mediate or immediate) of his complaint.

From this purpose, Learn,

1. It is the duty of godly men to maintain their own integrity; Nor is it any
evidence that a man does not stoop under Gods correcting hand, when he will not
yield to unjust accusations against him: For, albeit Job was now crushed under
the hand of God, yet when Eliphaz reflects upon his integrity, he courageously
replieth, But Job answered and said, etc.

2. When God permits Controversies to arise amongst his people, it may be
expected that they will not only contribute to the ^ul or clearing of Truth,
and further manifesting of Error; But that thereby also men's passions and
affections will be raised; yea, and even the weaknesses of the Friends of Truth
discovered: For, so appears in this Debate, Not only is Truth cleared, and a
gainer thereby, in the issue: But here, in the very entry, Jobs passion breaks
out in a sad regret. And though he spoke much truth concerning his great
trouble (though it cannot be denied that his passion and distemper did heighten
it, and make it more grievous) yet he stumbles in the very entry, while he
insinuates that his troubles did warrant him to complain as he did: which the
Lord does not sustain, as we heard in the Exposition.

3. It is the duty of such as would be useful, by their counsel to the
afflicted, seriously to ponder their case: Not to look superficially upon their
troubles, but seriously to weigh them, and that thoroughly, (or, in weighing to
weigh them) in all their ingredients, circumstances, aggravations,
concomitants, and effects; and together, in all the parts and branches thereof;
whether inward griefs and tentations, or outward calamities. Yea they ought to
put themselves in the afflicteds stead, before they resolve how to deal with
them: For, Job looks for no good at their hand, or that they could speak to his
case, who had not thoroughly weighed his grief, and laid his calamity in the
balance together. See Psalm. 41.1. Job 16.4.

4. It is very rare to find a tender consideration of the afflicteds case among
men, even when they profess friendship; yea, and are really pious: For, Job may
cry, O that my grief were thoroughly weighed, etc. when he finds few to do it;
Yea, his regret insinuat^s that his godly friend had not weighed it. A man's own
heart (and not a stranger) knows its bitterness, Prove. 14.10. Self-love and
present ease make the sad afflictions of others to be lightly regarded by many,
Job 12.5. Psalm 123.4. Corrupt Principles concerning afflictions make others
very cruel, as the practice of Jobs friends does teach. Yea it is not easy,
even for a Child of God, rightly principled, and who in his own experience has
known the sharpness of afflictions and tentations, but now does only remember
it as a thing long since past, to be so sensible of the same affliction in the
person of another, as when himself was under it. And therefore the Apostles,
who were to minister comfort to others, were kept under exercise themselves, 2
Cor. 1.3, 4, 5. This may teach Saints to lay their account that they may be
left desolate and solitary, in their troubles, like Owls and Pelicans, Psalm.
102.6, 7. that so they may make much use of Christ, who was a man of sorrows,
and acquainted with griefs, Isai 53 3. Heb. 4.15.

5. It is a great addition to Saints troubles, to miss sympathy from friends,
or any to give them so much ease and relief, as impartially to weigh their
condition; For, this is Jobs great regret, and this did waken all his other
troubles on him, that his grief was not thoroughly weighed by them. See Psalm.
69.26. Lam. 1.12. This may warn all who are concerned in the afflicted, that it
is no easy task to have to do with them; and that if they slight them and
their case, they must answer to God for causing all their other wounds to
bleed. And it may assure the godly, whose lot it is to be mis-regarded, that
God will ponder that addition to all their other troubles.

Verse. 3. For now it would be heavier then the sand of the sea, therefore my
words are swallowed up.
The Second Evidence of the greatness of his trouble (and a confirmation and
enlargement of the former) is, the incomparable weight and grievousness
thereof. If men look to his complaint, or, lamentation because of his sad
condition, somewhat may be found heavier then it, or to which they might
compare it: But had his trouble been weighed, it would be found incomparably
heavy, even heavier then the sand, and that not of rivers, but of the Sea,
which is more heavy then other; and heavier then the Sand of the Seas (as it is
in the Original) or, then all the Sand of all the Seas. If we shall narrowly
examine this aggravation of his trouble, it cannot be denied but God could have
made it heavier then it was, and that it was his own distemper of spirit which
added much to the weight of it. And if we urge this comparison hard, it may be
alleged that some small part of the Sand of the Sea would have smothered him,
whereas under all his troubles he was yet preserved in life; and though that
was a part of his trouble, that he was not cut off, yet it was his infirmity so
to judge of his case. Yet it is not to denied that his trouble was extreme and
unsupportable, if God had not interposed. And though it was his fault to
account death an ease, while he was under that cloud, and while it pleased God
to employ him in that service; Yet it is not to be questioned but death,
considered as the discharge of a godly man from his warfare and toil, had been
easier then his present lot. And so his sense of the weight of his trouble may
pass with a charitable and tender judger. And it teaches us,

1. Afflictions and troubles, especially those inward afflictions of spirit,
whether alone, or joined with other troubles, are very unsupportable, and the
heaviest burdens that can be laid upon men: For, so does Job complain of his
grief and calamity, ver. 2. It would be heavier then the Sand of the Sea. See
Prove. 18.14 Trouble of mind ought not to be slighted and undervalued by those
who would approve themselves before God as tender sympathizers.

2. Not only weak Saints, but even the strongest, will prove so frail under
trouble, if left to themselves, that the weight of troubles will over-charge
them; For, an eminent Job finds his troubles so incomparably heavy. The best of
men have need of more then inherent strength, if they would bear out under
great trials; They are injurious to God and themselves, who cast away what
strength they have, by impatience and bitterness, when they have so much need
of it: And weak Saints may be encouraged, notwithstanding their weaknesses,
when they see the strongest Cedars thus made to bow.

3. Not only when Saints are chastened for their faults, but even when God is
but trying their faith and other graces, They may expect to be pressed above
their own strength; that they may be humbled and tried indeed: For, Job is only
tried by God, and has the testimony of a good Conscience, and yet his trouble
is heavier than the Sand of the Sea. As God does measure out trials according
to men's growth and progress, and even the testimony of a good Conscience may be
put to the test by a greater degree of trial: so none ought to judge of their
sincerity before God by the greatness of their trouble. Only it would be
remembered, if trouble be so heavy upon a sincere Saint, when only tried; How
much more heavy must it be, when they are chastened for their sin and folly?
Psalm. 38.3, 4. and 39.11. and yet more heavy, if their stroke be the fruit of
gross wickedness, and of their not finding the burden of sin, nor caring to
burden God with it, Amos 2.13?

4. Whatever other ingredient contribute to make the trouble of Saints heavy;
Yet such as either bring on the trouble which gives a rise to their manifold
tentations, or who mis-regard them under trouble, will bear much of the guilt
of it: Therefore, says he so emphatically, Now it would be heavier, etc. Now,
when his Friends made all his troubles grievous and bitter, by their not
pondering of them, but rather adding to them.

5. This comparison, instituted betwixt his trouble, and the sand of the sea,
is very apposite; and may point out somewhat concerning this trouble of Job, or
the like trouble of other Saints. As,

1. Sand is very weighty, Prove. 27.3. so was his trouble and so may the
troubles of others be. And here it is remarkable, that though sand seem to be a
very light thing, driven with every wind; yet it proves very weighty: So that
which is light and easy, in contemplation, may prove very heavy, when it
comes to be our exercise, and that which seems easy in it self, will prove
a sad exercise, if God command it to be so.

2. Sand is made use of to point out what is innumerable, Heb. 11.12. So were
Jobs troubles and tentations many. And as it is impossible to enumerate all the
fears, tentations, and perplexities of a troubled soul; so, however every one
of those, by themselves, might be easy; Yet all of them, being put together,
and every one of them crowding upon the back of another, are very
unsupportable; as the small parcels of sand are of no weight by themselves yet,
being put together, are very weighty, especially if the sand of all the Seas
were gathered together.

3. Sand is also made use of to point out what is large and comprehensive, as
Solomon's wisdom, 1 King. 4 29. So Jobs troubles were not only very many of one
kind, but did extend to all that concerned him, to his body, mind, name, goods,
servants, children, friends, etc. so that he escaped only with his lips, or the
skin of his teeth, Job 19.20. A child of God may, possibly, bear out, even
under many troubles of one kind, be they inflicted on his name, body, goods,
children, or even on his mind. But when he can turn him no where to any
enjoyment, but he meets with a trial, and many trials in it, his case cannot
but be very sad, and much to be pitied.

Doct. 6. The Lord does so order the trials of his own children, as they may be
monuments of his glory, and much of him may shine in their support; For, here
in the entry of this trial, Job finds his trouble heavier then the sand of the
Seas (a little part thereof would crush and smother whole Armies) and yet when
it is much augmented, by its continuance, and renewed provocations from his
Friends, he is made to subsist under all of it.

The third evidence of the greatness of his trouble, is taken from an effect of
its weight that it swallowed up his words, or, it put him to silence, and he
wanted words, when he spoke, to express the greatness of his grief. This must
not be understood so as if Job could justify himself that he complained too
little; For how little soever he spoke, he complained too much. But in this
respect, it is true that his trouble went above his expression, though he ought
not to have reflected on God because of that. And the truth of this evidence
may appear, not only from his seven days silence with his Friends, before he
spoke, Chap. 2.13. with, 3.1. But, that when he spoke, his speech was
interrupted with sighs and groans, and what he said was far short of his case.
It is true, his own distemper and bitterness had no small hand in this; yet it
is no less true, that his real afflictions were so vast and great, that it was
nothing to be wondered at, if he could nor express them fully.

Doct. 7. It is a great ease to an afflicted person, to get liberty to express
and pour out his grievances; whether in the bosom of a confident tender friend,
or, especially, to God: For, so much does this regret import. Such as get their
heart poured forth (with Hannah, 1. Sam. 1.15) have reason to be thankful.

2. It is the great aggravation of some afflictions, that they are above all
complaints and expressions of sorrow; that silence is the best oratory that can
express them; and, that they who are under them, do sadly feel them, but cannot
utter them: For, so was it with Job, my words are swallowed up. They who are in
this case, ought to look much unto God, who not only hears what we lay, but
observes what we need; Hos. 14.8. and ought to believe that, when they are full
of confusion, he will see and ponder their affliction. Job 10.15.

Verse. 4. For the arrows of the Almighty are within me, the poison whereof
drinks up my spirit: the terrors of God do set themselves in array against me.
The fourth evidence of his great trouble (clearing and confirming all the
rest) is taken from the cause and kind of his trouble; That it was the Almighty
God with whom he had to do, and that in apparent severity. Whose dealing with
him he expresses in two Metaphors.

1. Of poisoned arrows (made use of by some Nations) which had not only given
him a piercing wound, but the poison of them had proceeded further, even to the
inflaming of his vital spirits, to the hazard of his life. By which poisoned
Arrows we must understand, not only his boils, the heat and inflammation
whereof had dried up his moisture, vigor and strength; but all his other
outward troubles also, which stuck fast in him; and his inward tentations and
sense of Gods wrath flowing therefrom, which, like the inward deep wound of
the arrow, had, by the furious poison thereof, so exhausted him that he was
ready to faint and give it over. See Psalm, 38.1, 2.

2. Of an Army set in Battel-aray. By which he understands the terrors of God,
showing that he had not only present tentations, but future fears mustered up
before him; and that not in a tumultuary way, but as in Battel-aray, so that he
could not think to escape.

In this sad description of his case, there want not some weaknesses and
mistakes. For he does apprehend God more terrible then he was, or intended to
be in his dealing toward him. Nor wanted he special proofs of Gods love (if it
were but that he had grace given still to cleave to God) which he ought to have
observed and ackowledged, amidst all his resentments. And albeit his case had
been really no less terrible then he apprehended; Yet it had been no argument
to justify his bitter complaint, Chap. 3. which is his scope in this
Narration. But, on the other hand, we ought to avoid the error of Eliphaz, in
censuring too rigidly the complaint of this deserted Saint; who does here
represent his case truly, as his present sense and deserted condition
represented it to be. For as he did well, in not noticing of Satan, but eying
of God, in all that befell him; So the multiplicity of his strokes on every
hand, and his inward desertion, could not but make him apprehend that his case
was thus deadly.

Hence Learn,

1. Though to quarrel and complain of God, in any case, be a great fault; Yet
it pleads for much compassion to Saints when they do not make a stir about
their lot, except when their trouble is extreme; For, so does Job prove the
former general evidences of his great trouble, by producing real instances
thereof, For the Arrows of the Almighty are within me, etc.

2. It is the duty of those in trouble, to turn their eyes off all Instruments,
that they may look to God; For, Job has not a word of Sabeans, Caldeans, or,
of Satan, but of the Almighty God. They who see and eye him little in trouble,
their trouble will do them the less good, or, rather, no good at all.

3. As it is our duty always to entertain high and reverent thoughts of God,
Genesis 14.19, 20, 22. So trouble will cause men to know his Almighty power;
Therefore is Job, in this particular, made to see him, the Almighty.

4. A sight of God, as a party, and of his great power put forth in trouble,
will make it very formidable; and this may be represented to the truly godly,
for their trial and exercise: For, this affects Job, that he has seen God as
the Almighty in his trouble.

5. It is an humbling sight of Gods Almighty power in trouble, when his strokes
are like Arrows, and do not only pierce deep, and come suddenly and swiftly
upon men, as an arrow does; But, especially do speak God angry at them, in that
he makes them his Butt at which he shoots, and God at a distance from them, in
smiting of them; as Arrows are shot by an Enemy at a distance: And all this may
a Child of God apprehend in his trouble; As Job here does, while he compares
his trouble to the Arrows of the Almighty.

6. In this case, the number of troubles does contribute much to afflict the
Child of God, every particular stroke adding to the weight; So Job resents that
there was, not one Arrow only, but, Arrows of the Almighty, shot at him.

7. When God, in his power and displeasure, appears to be the godlies party,
his strokes cannot but pierce deep, and wound even the soul; For, says he, the
Arrows of the Almighty do not only touch, or hurt and wound me, but, are within
me. As an Arrow shot by a strong hand makes a deep piercing wound, so do
strokes coming thus from Gods Almighty hand. For if it be a fearful thing to
fall unto the hands of the living God, Heb. 10.31. it is no wonder if it affect
the godly much, when they see that it is not man, but the great God, with whom
they have to do.

8. Albeit sharp troubles, inflicted by the hand of God, be very sad to the
people of God; Yet all that is easy in comparison of the apprehension of Gods
anger in the trouble, and perplexities of spirit, and tentations, arising upon
those troubles: For, this is the deep wound of the Arrow, and the venom of the
poisoned Arrow, which inflames the wound, and makes it deadly.

9. Tentations, and sense of divine displeasure under trouble, will soon
exhaust created strength, and make the spirits of men succumb; For, says he,
the venom thereof drinks up my spirit. See Prove. 18.14. And this is an
argument whereby we may plead with God for moderation. Isa. 57.16.

10 It is a great addition to the present troubles and tentations of Saints,
when terrors and fears for the future do assault and perplex them; especially
when they apprehend that God is pursuing them by those terrors: Therefore does
Job add, that the terrors of God were against him. See Psalm. 88.15. Jer.
17.17. And albeit, in these cases, we may safely repel them with this,
Sufficient for the day is the evil thereof, Matthew. 6.34. and many of those
fears prove, in the issue, to be but mere apprehensions, and not real: Yet
broken crushed spirits can hardly get them avoided.

11. When once a broken mind is haunted with terrors and fears, their wit and
fancy may multiply and aggravate them, far beyond what they are, or will be, in
reality; For, Job here does apprehend the terrors of God, acting against him
in an hostile manner, yea, so set in array against him, that he sees no way to
escape: and yet in all this he was mistaken.

Verse. 5. Does the wild ass bray when he has grass? or loweth the ox over his
fodder?

6. Can that which is unsavory, be eaten without salt? or is there any taste
in the white of an egg?

7. The things that my soul refused to touch, are as my sorrowful meat.


These verses may be taken up, as the same in substance with the former, thus;
It being natural for Beasts to complain when they are afflicted with the want
of food, why might not he also complain of his affliction? and his Friends
having enough, like Beasts well provided for, could not be sensible of his
desolate condition, ver. 5. For he could be content to bear his affliction, if
it were sweetened with any thing, But could not force his mind (more then a man
can force his appetite) to think that savoury and seasonable, which was nothing
so, ver. 6. For now he was made to feed upon these torments, the thoughts
whereof would formerly have affrighted him. ver. 7. This interpretation cannot
well be admitted; for albeit Job took but too much liberty to complain, yet we
cannot justly charge upon him, that he did so utterly abhor afflictions as this
interpretation would bear. Therefore, comparing it with ver. 24, 25. I take the
verses to contain a second Argument justifying his complaint; That he could not
but complain of his great trouble, seeing Eliphaz by his Discourse, had
ministered nothing which might have mitigated his sorrow, but rather contributed
to increase it. For, says he, (to give a brief sum of the words) I were worse
then the wild Ass, or Ox, yea and cruel to my self, if, in this straight, I
should not accept any counsel that would prove wholesome food to my mind. ver.
5. But your doctrine, which ye offer as food and medicine to my afflicted soul,
wanting the Salt of Prudence and Charity in application, and being (like the
white of an Egg) but frivolous and not substantial, cannot but be unsavory and
tastless unto me, ver. 6. Especially considering that those things ye now
suggest to me to feed upon, in my adversity, are such a^ he very thought of
them, in my greatest prosperity made me abhor and tremble at them, ver. 7. Or,
(as some read it, and it agrees as well with the Original) My soul refuses to
touch them, they are my sorrowful food. That is, I cannot now digest those
things, they being so sad and sorrowful food for a man in my case.

This censure passed by Job upon Eliphaz's doctrine cannot well be
contradicted. For albeit he spoke sound Doctrine in some (and but in some)
particulars; yet it was very impertinently applied to Job, and upon an unsound
Principle, that he had been a wicked man, and so behoved to begin of new to
seek God.

Hence Learn,

1. This Metaphor taken from the Beasts, ver. 5. shows, That even nature it
self teaches men, that they ought to be content when they have what may supply
nature: For, Does the wild Ass bray (out of discontent) when he has grass, or
loweth the Ox over his fodder? The question imports a Negative, that they will
not. And so men who are not thus content, do offer violence to Nature, See 1 Timothy 6.8. As men's anxieties are also thus refuted, Matthew. 6.26, 28.

2. As an afflicted soul ought to be sober; so it ought to be very hungry after
sound doctrine, and a seasonable word to it ought to be as food, which
refreshes and strengthens it; For, so the comparison imports, that sound
doctrine would be to him, as grass to the wild Ass, and fodder to the Ox, over
which, if he had it, he would not complain. It is an evidence of an
unsanctified trouble, when it makes not the word precious, Psalm. 119.71.

3. Every one is not fit to deal with a troubled spirit; For not only unsound
doctrine, but even misapplied truth, will be unsavory to such; Therefore does
be account his doctrine unsavory and without salt. See Isa. 50.4. Prove. 15.23.

4. These who would speak a right to souls in trouble, ought to propound
substantial doctrine; for whites of Eggs, and Moonshine, or empty airy
notions, will not then bear them up; as Job here asserts, Is there any taste in
the white of an Egg?

5. Though men speak truth, and substantial truth; yet that is not enough
(especially if the doctrine in it self be sharp to flesh and blood) unless they
prudently take up the afflicteds case, that they may speak to the point, and
unless there be much discretion and tenderness, much warmness and charity, in
applying it; For, through the want of these, the best of Eliphaz's doctrine was
but unsavory, and could not be eaten without that Salt.

6. Such may be the Revolutions of Divine Providence, that what men have
greatest antipathie against, may yet be made their sad exercise, and so
ordinary as their daily food: For so were those things charged on Job, to him;
his soul refused to touch them, and yet they were set before him as his
sorrowful food. This may befall the godly, both in their inward and outward
condition; Which may teach them to stoop to a Sovereign Lord, and to labor for
dispositions suitable to their condition, whatever it be.

Verse. 8. O that I might have my request! and that God would grant me the thing
that I long for!

9, Even that it would please God to destroy me, that he would let loose his
hand, and cut me off.


Follows to ver. 14. Jobs desire of death; which he labors to press and
justify by diverse Arguments. He brings it in upon the back of the former
debate, thus, That though they would not give him leave to complain, or desire
death; yet, he seeing no comfort within time, nor hope beside, would take
leave. His desire is propounded, ver. 9. That God, who is Sovereign Lord of
life, would be pleased to destroy him, and would not measure out affliction by
piecemeal, and with a bound up hand, but would let loose his hand and make an
end of him, which he might easily do: any death, so it were speedy, being
better (as he thought) then his present condition. This suit he ushers in, and
presses from the ardency of his desire, ver. 8. He had desired it before,
Chap. 3. and now, being the worse of their essays to cure him, and of more
hopeless of any comfortable issue in this life, his longing after death is
increased.

This desire has been spoken to, in part, Chap. 3.20. It argues great
presumption, in limiting of God, and doting on a remedy of his own
prescribing, as if it only could serve his turn. And albeit he had the
testimony of a good Conscience, so that he needed not fear death; yet many
desires had been more suitable, then that he should venture on any death from
Gods hand; and that (as it might seem) in justice, and when he is already lying
under so much of that kind. It teaches,

1. God is Lord of our life, who can take it away, when, where, and by what
means he will; For, so much does Job's desire import, that he can destroy and
cut off, at his pleasure.

2. An afflicted mind is a great strait and pressure, so that many sharp
dispensations would be a deliverance, if they made men rid of it; For, Job's
pressure of mind is such, that it makes him account a violent death, a
deliverance. They who enjoy peace and tranquillity of mind, in sad times, have
an easy part of it. And men would beware to make a breach upon their inward
peace, by shifting outward trouble. See Matthew. 10.28. Many by sinful shifting
of trouble, have been brought to that extremity, that many deaths would have
been easier.

3. A tentation, once fixed in a broken spirit, cannot easily be pulled out
again; For, Job cannot be driven from this desire, on which he has once fixed,
but he presses it over and over again. Men had need to beware of the first
rise of such distempers, and to crush them in the bud.

4. Albeit a Child of God may be pestered and haunted with many sinful passions
and desires in his trouble; yet it is his mercy to be kept from sinful actings,
in prosecution of those desires: For, in the midst of this heat of desire,
Job's honesty appears, in that he will not help God to take away his life, how
much soever he desire death; but will wait on him, if he may be pleased to
grant his desire in his own way. Some sparks of honesty may appear, even in the
greatest weakness of Saints.

As to his ardency and fervor in pressing his desire, it has been spoken to,
Chap. 3.21, 22. and that men in their distempers, are very earnest that God
would do what they desire, though yet it were, oft-times, a sad judgment if God
should grant it, seeing they may, in that case, be apt to desire that most
which is most prejudicial to them. Yea, our ardent desires after any outward
lot, are, often times, too great an evidence that we are wrong. To these add,

1. Job's practice holds forth a right pattern, though in a wrong instance, of
pursuing our lawful desires; By praying and requesting, for it, and a longing
expectation backing the Prayer, and so renewing the suit often, and walking
under the delay as they who are afflicted and affected thereby, Psalm. 88.11,
12, 13. This being Job's practice in so unwarrantable a desire, it may give a
check to our sluggishness in more honest desires.

2. When men give way to sinful tentations, they may, in Gods holy Providence,
meet with many occasions to entertain them; As Job here longing after death,
his Friends disappointing of him adds fuel to the fire, and makes it more
vehement, as thinking he was, hereby, confirmed in the equity of his desires.
Thus tempters of God fall in snares, Mal. 3.15. and hearkners also to false
Prophets, Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2, 3. This may terrify men who enter upon a way without
a rule and warrant, that they may meet with such snares: and every confirmation
they think they meet with, in their way, may humble them, if they consider that
God, thereby, gives them up to strong delusions.

Verse. 10. Then should I yet have comfort, yea I would harden my self in
sorrow; let him not spare, for I have not concealed the words of the holy One.
The first Argument whereby he labors to justify this desire, is taken from
the comfort he expected, having the testimony of a good Conscience. He
professes that, notwithstanding all that had befaln him, or could be in a
violent death, he should yet have comfort, if it were a coming, or already
come. And though it might be apprehended that he would repent and cool of that
courage, when it came to the push; He professes he would harden himself in
sorrow; he would harden and confirm his heart against that way of death, or any
sorrow attending it, yea, or any sorrow in the mean time, provided that death
were near, and the sorrow hastening it forward. And for a proof of this his
courage and resolution, he renews his request, and desires that God will not
spare; Not that he dares desire to be dealt with in justice, but it imports
only his desire not to be spared as to cutting of him off, but the sharper
usage, the better, so it made an end of him. And the ground of all this courage
was, that he had not concealed the words of the holy One; he had been a sincere
Professor of Gods Truth, and had spoken truth in this particular, that he was
an upright man; Or, he had not put out the light of Gods Truth in his mind, nor
cancelled the Seal of his Spirit in his heart, by sin, Romans 1.18. and had held
forth the Truth of God in his Profession and Practice, Psalm. 40.10. Phil. 2.15,
16. And all this he did, because God is the Holy One, not to be dallied with,
and who cannot approve of sin. By all which he clears that his desire of death
was not a desperate wish, but grounded upon the testimony of a good Conscience,
and his hope to be approved, when he should come to be judged by God, and not
by men.

In this Discourse, it flowed indeed from Jobs weakness that his good
Conscience could afford him no comfort, but in this out-gate of death, which
was of his own devising; whereas the testimony of his Conscience, had been
better employed in bearing patiently the present trouble. And, indeed, we are
ordinarily better, in our own conceit, at any thing then what is our present
work and duty, and do fancy that we could like any case but our present lot;
when yet it is the will of God we should take it as it is. Yet herein,

1. We may, with admiration behold the invincible power of a good Conscience,
that cannot only grapple with death, when it comes, but can run to meet it,
and that on any terms, and at greatest disadvantage, and can even then expect
comfort in and by it: So was it with Job here, I should yet have comfort, etc.
A good Conscience is neither afraid of death, nor of wrath (as it should seem)
cutting us off, nor even of destroying of foundations, Psalm. 11.3, 4. nor of
any trouble, Job 34.29. even which may shake others, Isai. 33.14, 15, 16. And
the reason of this is, every lot to the reconciled man has this in it from
God, fear not ye, Mat. 28.5. Which may invite men to be careful that their own
hearts do not condemn them, 1 John 3.21. Act. 24.16.

2. We may hence also gather, That no fortitude against death, or any trouble,
is worth the speaking of, but what is grounded on a good Conscience; For, Job
founds his resolution and comfort on this, I have not concealed the words of
the holy One. Natural Magnanimity is of little worth without this. Only, they
who would be resolute and magnanimous upon the account of a good Conscience,
ought not only to have a good Conscience in the particular cause and matter of
their trial, but in their other carriage also, the want whereof will weaken
their hands in most cleanly trials; and especially (wherein Job was somewhat
faulty) in the way of their deportment under trouble, which ought to be such,
as may witness that it is Conscience, and not their own spirits, that lead
them, Jam. 1.20.

3. Men, in trying their resolution and courage flowing from a good Conscience,
ought not to take themselves at the first word, but ought to search and search
again; For, so does Job repeat his confidence upon this ground, once and again,
I should yet have comfort, yea, I would harden my self in sorrow, let him not
spare. Our hearts are very deceitful in undertaking, and therefore godly
jealousy, fear, and su^pition, are oft-times antecedent to true courage, Hab.
3.16, 17, 18.

4. The testimony of a good Conscience, yielding hope of a blessed issue, will
make present trouble, to be tolerable and more easy; For, Job expecting to be
approved of God at death, would yet have comfort, and harden himself in sorrow,
in expectation of so great a good.

5. Such as would approve themselves to be sincere, ought to entertain right
thoughts of God, particularly, of his holiness: For, the rise of his upright
walk, was, that he looked on God as the holy One. This does not only evince
that God is not to be reflected upon, in any of his dealings, Psalm. 22.3. and
in this Job's Principles were sound, though his Passions did sometimes
over-drive him to complain; But does also teach, that none can have communion
with God, but such as study holiness, nor can the holy God endure wickedness,
Psalm. 5.5, 6, 7. Hab. 1.13. And they who want holiness, may come to him, the
Fountain of Holiness, to get it.

6. Such as do rightly improve the study of the holiness of God to press the
necessity of real holiness upon themselves, ought, with Job, not to conceal the
words of the holy One. Which imports,

1. God must be taken up, obeyed and acknowledged, according as he has
revealed himself and his will, in his Words; For, they had the words of God
among them, even in Jobs days, though not yet written; and to those he cleaves,
neither lying of God by Error contrary to his Word, nor taking up God and his
Will according to his own fancy and humor.

2. When God reveals his will in any particular, it is our duty not to smother
or put out our light, and so sin against God and his Deputy in our bosom; but
we ought to avow and profess it, in our station: For, he concealed not these
words.

3. Beside our Profession of Truth, we must be careful not to belie it in our
practice: For, thus also he concealed not the words of the holy One, as is
above explained.

Verse. 11: What is my strength that I should hope? and what is mine end, that I
should prolong my life?

12. Is my strength the strength of Stones? or is my flesh of Brass?


The second Argument (wherein he appeals to themselves) is taken from his
inability to subsist under this trouble; and, consequently, the improbability
of the restitution they promised him, upon his repentance. He had no strength
that might give him ground of hope to bear this trouble and avoid death, and
(upon his repentance) to be restored, as Eliphaz promised unto him. For he had
not flesh with sense only, as Beasts have, but with reason also, which
sharpeneth crosses; Far less was his flesh of stones or brass (which want both
sense and reason) to endure this; and therefore nothing was fitter for him then
to resolve for death. As for those words, What is mine end, etc? Some
understand them thus; For what end should I live? which is a very sinful
question, if God will have us live. Others thus; What evil is in mine end, that
I should be afraid to die? wherein can death prejudice me, that I should so
seek to avoid it? But it agrees best with the rest of the purpose thus; as if
Job had said, Seeing my strength is so disproportionable to my trouble, my end
by the ordinary course of nature (especially being so crushed) cannot be far
off: So that it were folly (suppose I should be delivered) to hope for any
continuance of time, wherein I might get reparation of these great evils? or,
what can I expect or design in the rest of my short time, that I should seek to
prolong it, and not presently desire to die? So does himself express it, Chap.
16.22. In sum, his Argument is this, He has neither strength to subsist under
these troubles, till he should repent and be restored, as Eliphaz had
prescribed; nor could he look for any thing in the declining part of his life,
the expectation whereof might encourage him to endure his present troubles,
till he attained it. But he had rather lose all the expected good, before he
endured the present troubles, waiting for it.

This Argument, thus explained, does insinuate these Truths,

1. God has made man's constitution such, as it is easily subduable by
afflictions; For, Jobs strength could afford him no hope of bearing through,
till he saw an issue on the back of troubles. Man is made weak and more infirm
then brass or stones, that he may need and get many proofs of God; and may be
afraid to make the strong God his party.

2. Man's time is also so short and uncertain, as he cannot be able to
effectuate and compass great things, especially in his declining days, and
after he is broken with troubles; For, Job sees nothing in his end, or to be
expected now in the latter part of his days, why he should desire to prolong
them. See Luke 12.19, 20. Isai. 2.22. Psalm. 49.11, 12. and 146.3.4.

3. It is a very sweet disposition, to comply with what we conceive to be Gods
will, by stooping to it, Jer. 10.19. As here Job professes to desire death,
because he judges, by his own weakness under trouble, that God is calling him
to it.

Beside those General Truths, here insinuated, Job's mistakes may afford us
further instruction in these particulars.

1. God may give his people many blessed disappointments of those sad things
which they certainly expect; For, Job expected death, considering his strength,
and yet he lived long after. He never expected restitution, and yet his former
prosperity was restored with advantage. See Isa. 51.12, 13, Lam. 3.18, 22. Jon.
2.4. Ezekiel. 37.11, 12. 2 Cor. 6.9.

2. Saints do reckon wrong, when they reckon only by their inherent strength;
As Job here did: For God can support them to bear much more then their strength
can undertake. 1 Cor. 10.13. Phil. 4.13. Their weakness may prove strength,
Heb. 11.34, 2 Cor. 12.10. and stronger then the vigor of others, Isa. 40.29,
30, 31. He can bring them out of a furnace without a singe of their garment
Dan. 3.27. and from among Lions, without a scratch. Dan. 6.23.

3. While Job undervalues his end, or any thing to be expected in it, as not
worth the waiting for; Albeit he do not speak of spiritual advantages, in order
to the Glory of God, the Edification of the Church in all Ages, and his own
profit in the School of Affliction; which are of so great excellency and worth,
that his troubles were not to be compared with his advantages; as is said to
the same purpose, Romans 8.18. Yet, even in reference to those advantages, of
Wealth, Honor, Children, etc. his reasoning is faulty. For even to be at work
under trouble is beautiful in its season; those outward mercies, given as
visible proofs of love after trouble, are singularly sweet, were it even but
for a short time, and though he should not continue long to enjoy them, as he
apprehended. All which may teach us, how unfit judges we, many times, are of
what is best for us, and how gracious the Lord is, who asks not our consent to
do that which will be for our good.

Verse. 13. Is not my help in me? and is wisdom driven quite from me?
This ver. contains his third Argument, wherein also he appeals to their
judgment. In explicating whereof, I shall not insist on the various tortured
readings of the words, but shall adhere to our Translation, and take help and
wisdom for the same thing; wisdom being a notable help to find out an expedient
for relief when we are perplexed and in straits; and so a special gift of God,
especially when it is sanctified. The force of the Argument runs thus, as if
Job had said; However I be otherwise afflicted, yet I am not so deprived of
judgment, but that I have better skill to judge of mine own condition, how it
is with me, and what is best for me, then you have. Therefore I will not
renounce my own light, and give up my self blindfold to your conduct and
guiding; But as I know I am innocent, so I (who can best judge in this case)
see nothing better for me then present death.

This Argument does contain those truths,

1. God does not take away all his mercies together from his people, but when
they are deprived of some, others are left for their incouragment; As here Job
marks somewhat that was not d^iven quite from him. See Lam. 3 18, 19.22.

2. It is the duty of men to be best acquainted with their own condition; As
here his argument supposes. See Prove. 20.27. and 27.21.

3. It is a choice and singular mercy, under overwhelming pressures, to be able
truly to discern our case, and to know our duty, and what is good for us; For,
in this case, Wisdom is substantial wisdom, as the word is, and a singular
help. They who rightly know their case and duty, are not much to be pitied. See
2 Chronicles. 20.12.

4. Men ought not rashly to quit their own light, at the persuasion of any
other; As Job here denies to do, and the doing whereof was so severely
punished in that Prophet who came from Judah, 1 King. 13.21, 22, 24

Yet these Truths, and especially the last, admit of these cautions here,

1. Men, in cleaving to their light, would take heed that wilfulness be not
cloaked under a pretense of wisdom, or, light. For will may seek shelter under
the wings of conscience and light; whereof Job was guilty, in part.

2. Albeit wisdom be not always quite driven from us by trouble; Yet it would
be remembered, that trouble may much confound and perplex the best judgments; 2
Chro. 12.20 So that others may discern our case and duty better then our
selves. And thus was it with Job (though not in the stated quarrel betwixt him
and his Friends, yet) in this desire of death.

3. Overtures propounded under tentation (such as this desire of Job was) ought
to be narrowly examined, ere they be assented unto; For tentations light is
ordinarily wildfire.

4. Men ought to guard, lest conceit cause them to magnify themselves. and
undervalue all others; (See Prove. 26.12.) In which regard (especially when men
are under tentation) sobriety is very necessary. Phil. 2.3. So was David in his
trouble, 2 Samuel 18.3, 4. And herein also Job's passion made him somewhat exceed.

5. Men ought also to guard, lest their interests and affections lead and beget
their light; (As Jobs affection and desire after death blinded his judgment;)
And that they do not raise and harbor prejudices against others (as Ahab did
against Micaiah, 1 King. 22.8.) that so they may more confidently slight their
judgment: Thus dealt wicked men with Prophets of old. Jer. 5.12, 13.

Verse. 14. To him that is afflicted, pity should be showed from his friend, but
he forsakes the fear of the Almighty.
Job having thus endeavored to justify his complaints and desire of death, he
proceeds, in the third part of the Chap. sharply to reprove his Friends, who,
instead of comforting him, had bitterly censured him and his complaints, and so
had disappointed him of that kindness he expected from them. This challenge he
sometime directs against Eliphaz, ver. 14. who had already spoken; and sometime
against all his Friends ver. 15. who concurred with him in opinion, as appears
from Chap 5.27.

In this verse he lays cruel inhumanity to the charge of Eliphaz, who had
added so much to his affliction. And

1. He propounds what was the duty he expected should have been performed to
him; Namely, that he who was afflicted should have met with pity and kindness
from a friend, and a godly friend* Especially when his affliction was not
ordinary, but a melting down (as the word is) or a wasting of his courage and
strength.

2. He charge him with the neglect of this duty, pointing at the cause of
this neglect, which was the abandoning of the fear of God, which would have
restrained him from this cruel and rigid way of proceeding; and withal, he
insinuates how dangerous it was to forsake this fear of God, who, being the
Almighty, could easily punish contemners of his Majesty. And so, whereas
Eliphaz charge on him, that his carriage spoke him to be destitute of the
fear of God, Chap. 4.4, 5, 6. he retorts the charge, asserting that his
inhumanity did much rather prove that to be his own case.

From this verse Learn,

1. Afflictions, especially if they be great and sharp, will soon exhaust
created strength, and cause it melt like wax before the fire; For, Job
insinuates that he was melted. See, Psalm. 22.14.

2. In a condition of sad affliction, albeit none can give complete case or
deliverance, but God alone; Yet sympathy and compassion from men will
contribute somewhat to sweeten and allay the bitterness of that cup: For, pity
from a friend would have afforded some ease to Job.

3. True friendship ought to show it self in times of affliction, were it but
in sympathy and pity, when men can do no more; and they ought so to
compassionate, as they may be stirred up to do all that they can for the
afflicteds relief. And especially it is required, when the greatness of the
affliction calls aloud for it, that not only men forbear to be cruel, but that
they be kind also: For, to him that is afflicted (or, melted) pity should be
showed from his friend. A brother is born for adversity, Prove. 17.17. and
trials are let forth, not only to try those who are touched with them, but to
try the tenderness and sympathy of others also. See Obad. ver. 11, 12.

4 Though sympathy with those in trouble be the duty of friends; yet godly men
may expect to be deprived of this, for the perfecting of their trial; For, Job
may well assert that this is their duty, but he finds no such thing among them.

5. The fear of God in the hearts of men is so effectual, to make them
charitable in judging of the state of others, Iam* 4.11.12. and compassionate
and tender toward these in troubles; Genesis 42.18. That where these are wanting,
men cannot sufficiently evidence that they have the fear of God, by their
Professions, Prayers, or other common practices: For, Job interprets this
want to be a forsaking of the fear of the Almighty. See Iam. 1.27. Col. 3.12,
13. 1 John 4.20. For true Piety, and Humanity flowing there from, do require
that men do not deny sympathy, and what help they can afford to the afflicted,
were it but a room in their heart, and a wise consideration of their case.
Psalm. 41.1. And therefore it cannot be Piety that prompts men to discourage the
godly under their afflictions, far less to be active in inflicting their
troubles.

6. As it is said to be altogether void of the fear of God, so it is a very
heinous sin when men, who pretend to the fear of God, do make apostasy and
relinquish that course; Or when they who really fear God do abandon it in part;
especially in these practices, and duties which are their present work and
exercise to which God calls them: For, this he charge upon Eliphaz, that he
forsakes the fear of the Almighty. Not that he peremptorily asserteth him to
be an hypocrite, or a total Apostate; but that he did abandon his present duty
of sympathy whereby God called him now to evidence his Piety.

7. It is a very dangerous thing to evidence the want of the fear of God, or to
give any proof of our forsaking thereof in particular exigents and trying
duties, he being the Almighty God with whom men have to do in that case;
Therefore does he point out this sin to be a forsaking of the fear of the
Almighty. See Jer. 5.20.

Verse. 15. My brethren have dealt deceitfully as a brook, and as the stream of
brooks they pass away.

16. Which are blackish by reason of the ice, and wherein the snow is hid,

17. What time they wax warm, they vanish: when it is hot, they are consumed
out of their place.

18. The paths of their way are turned aside; they go to nothing, and perish.

19. The troops of Tema looked, the companies of Sheba waited for them.

20. They were confounded because they had hoped; they came thither, and were
ashamed.

21. For now ye are nothing; ye see my casting down, and are afraid.


In these verses Job charge all his three Friends with deceitful and
unfaithful disappointing of his expectation. This charge is propounded in
proper terms, ver. 15. -- that his Brethren had dealt far otherwise with him
then he expected. And it is illustrated by a comparison, in the rest of the
verses. Wherein we are to consider,

1. The Proposition of the comparison, ver. -- 15 -- 20. It is taken from
Winter-brooks in those dry and hot Countries, ver. 15. which being full of
water, and locked up with black Ice and Snow, do seem to promise that they will
keep that store for another season, ver. 16. But in Summer, when the heat
comes, the Earth drinks, and the Sun dries up, these Brooks, so that they
vanish and come to nothing, and their current is not to be found, like a
passenger that is gone out of the way, ver. 17, 18. Whence it came to pass that
those Travelers (of the posterity of Abraham by Keturah, and Ishmael, Genesis
25.1, 2, 3, 13, 14, 15.) who, with other Easterlings, marched together in
troops with their Beasts for carriage, Genesis 37.25. Isai. 21.13. and so needed
much water, were pitifully disappointed. For seeing those Brooks so full in
Winter, when they traveled that way, they laid their account to lodge by them
in Summer, ver. 19. But not only did they miss of their expectation, but were
confounded and ashamed that ever they should have expected such a benefit by
them, ver. 20.

2. The Application of the comparison; Which is not only summarily hinted in
the entry, ver. -- 15. but more clearly put home, ver. 21. Wherein,

1. He asserts they are nothing, or, which is the same, ye are like to it,
nothing, as they are. Before, they seemed to be his great Friends, such as he
might have expected much kindness from in his affliction; and their unexpected
visit might have heightened his expectation: But now, in his strait, he finds
that they are nothing, or as good as nothing in respect of what they should
have been, and he expected from them, being unfit to play the friends in his
strait, as he asserteth, Chap. 13.4.

2. He gives an evidence and proof of this assertion, in part; Ye see my
casting down, and are afraid. Which some understand thus, as if Job had said;
Ye seeing me in want, and being afraid I should be a burden to you if ye were
kind, therefore ye estrange your selves from me. But whatever hint there be at
somewhat like that, ver. 22, 23. yet I take it not to be the scope here, or
that Job would be in direct terms, so bitter and salt. Others take it thus; Ye,
seeing me cast down by God, dare not comfort nor justify me, lest you should
seem to reflect on God. This he does lay to their charge, Chap. 13.7, 8. yet it
seems not to be so clearly expressed here, save in so far as it may be
comprehended under the following General Exposition. Therefore, by comparing
this with, Chap. 2.13. I conceive this to be the scope, as if Job had said;
Seeing me to be in so great trouble, ye are so astonished and terrified (as may
appear from your former silence) that ye have forgot to do your duty, and are
dried up in your Prudence and Charity. All ye speak now, flows from minds
distracted with terror and amazement, without considering what ye say.

From the Proposition of the challenge, ver. 15. -- Learn,

1. There is, and ought to be, an intimate relation and conjunction among the
Professors of Piety; For, Job calls them my Brethren, upon this account, though
they had not been otherwise (or possibly were not, at least all of them)
related to him by blood.

2. Where persons are thus related in friendship, it gives ground to expect
much kindness one from another, as their need shall require: For, Job expected
much from them, upon this account that they were Brethren.

3. Such is the vanity, emptiness and uncertainty of all things under the Sun,
that when God has a person to try, he may expect that all refuges will fail
him, and dearest friends will disappoint him; Yea, that no promising thing will
do much for him, but that all things will stand by, that the trial may seek him
out: For, says he, My Brethren have dealt deceitfully with me, They have not
performed what in reason might have been expected from their friendship and
intimacy, and from their kindness in visiting me. See Psalm. 88.18.

4. It is great cruelty, especially in Brethren and Friends, to fail the
afflicted in their need, and disappoint them of that help they might expect in
such a condition; For, he charge it upon them as a great crime, My Brethren
have dealt deceitfully with me. And the challenge has two aggravations and sad
ingredients in it.

1. It is sad when men meet with trials from Brethren and Friends, when these
who are friends in the flesh, or are Countr^y men, turn Enemies, Matthew. 10.35,
36. Much more, when familiar friends betray those that trusted them, Psalm.
55.12, 13, 14. And most of all, when truly godly friends turn opposites, as Job
found in experience. Those exercises the godly meet with, that they may learn
never to trust in creatures, but rely on Christ, who will prove a Brother
indeed: and that they may take good heed whom they choose for bosom friends,
Mic. 7.5, 6.

2. It is a trial when friends deal deceitfully, not only in not performing
what might justly be expected, considering their Bonds and Relations, Amos 1.9,
11. But especially if they proceed herein in a dissimulate way, covering cruel
designs with fair pretenses. In which case the godly ought to wait on God,
Psalm. 55.21, 22, 23.

Doct. 5. Albeit men, ordinarily, think little of a sin, when it is common; yet
in the sight of God, the more are engaged in it, it is the worse, and the more
hateful: For, Job aggravates the fault from this, that it was a common fault,
My Brethren have dealt deceitfully with me.

For the similitude here proposed, ver. -- 15. -- 20. I shall not insist on
what is implied in it; That man is an indigent creature, who stands in need of
many things, so that the very want of water may be a sad trial to him; And,
That we ought to acknowledge Gods mercy, in providing those common benefits for
us, which in those Countries were so often wanting. Now shall I anticipate the
Application of the similitude to the present purpose, made by Job himself, v.
21. Only, in general, the words, with an eye to that scope, may teach,

1. Favor in a strait is that which may, in reason be expected from a
professed friend; as they expected water from those Brooks. His profession
gives ground to expect this; and his profession binds the duty upon him with
his own consent; as waters are gathered in Brooks, to refesh Men and Beasts.
And therefore it were better not to engage in friendship, then to deceive them
that trust us. Yea, in some respect, open cruelty were better, as being more
ingenuous and fair dealing.

2. It is an evidence of unfaithful friends, that they fail friends when they
have most to do; As those brooks promised much in winter, and failed in Summer
when there was most need of them. So did not Jonathan, nor Hushai the Archite,
deal with David.

3. The reason of much unfaithful friendship, is, because it wants an inward
principle; being but like a winter Brook, and not a Spring: Many pretended
friends do fawn upon men's prosperity, when they do not respect themselves, or
that which is permanent in them. See Prove. 14 20. and 19 6, 7.

4. The more a man fix his trust, or build his expectation, on any thing beside
God, the more hurt and confusion may he expect from it; as they were confounded
because they had hoped, and when they came thither, were ashamed. See Isai.
1.29. and 20.5. and 30.5.

5. Unfaithful friends do not, ordinarily, resent the ill of their course,
according as it is sinful in it self, and grievous to the afflicted; Therefore
does Job insist upon it, and take pains to illustrate it, As the stream of
brooks they pass away, etc. that his Friends may notice and consider it more.

From the Application of the similitude, ver. 21. Learn,

1. A man may truly be said to be to be nothing, when he is not what he should
be; an useless man may be called a being less man: For, upon this account Job
says, For now ye are nothing. And this may be very sad to many who live for no
good use in the world, especially in hard times. See Isai. 50.16.

2. The more we expect from the creatures, and are disappointed, we are the
more ready to undervalue them; For, now they are nothing, who before did
signify much. Men do, ordinarily, either idolize, or under-value, their
friends, or lots.

3. God may so sharply afflict his own dear Children, as may affright others
even to behold and think upon it; For, his dealing with Job made them afraid.
Such also were David's trials, Psalm. 31.11.

4. Distracting fears and amazements are great impediments to men; hindering
and obstructing the use of their judgment, or their going about duty, in
reference to hard lots and trials: For, this was a root of their failing, Ye
see my casting down, and are afraid.

5. God may so support an afflicted Saint, as an on-looker on his trial may be
more affrighted therewith, then himself; For, Job here quarrels them that they
were afraid, and endeavors to infuse courage in those who ought to have
sympathized with him.

Verse. 22. Did I say, Bring unto me? or give a reward for me of your substance?

23. Or deliver me from the enemies hand, or redeem me from the hand of the
mighty?


Job having thus reprehended his Friends for their inhumanity and
unfaithfulness; He proceeds to aggravate those faults, and to charge them home
upon them, from several considerations. The first aggravation of their fault
(in those verses) is, That he expected but a small favor of them, and yet had
not obtained it. Whereas he, being poor, and oppressed by his Enemies, might
have called to them for supply of his necessities; and might, by the laws of
friendship, have desired that they would bestow of their means, or interpose
their power for recovering of his lost substance out of the hands of his mighty
Enemies, who had spoiled him: and they were bound to have done for him. Now
when (as would appear) he did not so much as expect their coming, and when they
came, did not desire any thing of them, and the most he expected was only their
good and comfortable counsel; they were much more bound to have been tender,
and not so cruel toward him.

In this challenge and aggravation of their fault, there may be this mistake,
That wholesome counsel, tendered in a prudent and fit way, (which is the favor
Job misseth among his Friend) is more difficult to give; then to expend either
our goods or our life for our friend; (a request wherewith Job had not charged
them:) Yet these things are considerable in it,

1. That godly and true friends owe much to one another in their troubles; Not
only to supply their necessities (For, he might have said, Bring unto me) and
to lay forth of their wealth, to allay the fury of their Enemies; (For he might
also have said, give a reward, or, bribe, or gift, to the Enemy, for me, of
your substance) But even to employ their power also, in a lawful way, for their
relief: as Abraham did for Lot; Genesis 14. For he might also have said, Deliver
me from the Enemies hand, or redeem me from the hand of the mighty. Love is a
large debt, Romans 13.8, 9, 10. See, 1 John* 3 16.

2. It is the property of godly and sober spirits, to stoop and acquiesce in a
mean condition, when God calls them to it, without burdening any, so far as may
be; For, whatever was the duty of Jobs Friends, and whatever was their practice
afterward, Chap. 42.11. yet, for his part, he did not say, Bring unto me, or
give a reward for me, etc. he would not burden them to uphold him in his former
pomp and grandeur.

3. Unto a right discerner, no outward trouble is any thing so sad as inward
exercise and disquiet of mind, For, Job could bear the one without troubling
his Friends, but he misseth comfort to his troubled spirit. We ought not to
carp too much at outward troubles, lest we meet with that which we will find
sorer.

4. It is very great inhumanity in men not to endeavor to be comfortable, by
their counsel, to the godly in affliction, when no more but that is called for
at their hands; For, this was the great fault of Jobs Friends. Jonathan dealt
otherwise with David, 1 Samuel 23.16. And herein even the poor, who can
contribute nothing else to the afflicted, may be very useful.

Verse. 24. Teach me, and I will hold my tongue: and cause me to understand
wherein I have erred.

25. How forcible are right words? but what does your arguing reprove?


Secondly, He aggravates their fault in dealing so cruelly with him, from his
readiness to take with wholesome counsel. It comes in by way of prevention of
an objection that might be moved against his former challenge. They might say,
we have not been wanting in giving wholesome counsel (as they allege they did,
Chap. 5.27.) and therefore he complains unjustly. Job replies, that it was
nothing so: For, ( ver. 24.) if they would solidly teach him, and convince him
of any error, he should soon take with it. For, ( ver. 25.) true and pertinent
discourses are very forcible. But as for their discourse, it was nothing such;
being full of untruths, or unseasonably and impertinently applied truths, and
so nothing to the purpose, but missing the scope, and therefore could not
convince him. For however they should endeavor to cry him down with arguing;
yet what does it reprove? what solid ground does it proceed upon? or how is it
to the purpose? or how could it take with him? Hence the aggravation of their
fault is; That had they to do with a stiff man, they might have pretended some
excuse for their way of dealing: But having to do with a man who would easily
be bound by truth, their neglect was the more culpable.

Not to insist how far Job might mistake his own disposition and tractableness,
in this hour of tentation, We may, from the General Doctrine, Learn,

1. True Piety disposes men to receive Instruction, and humbly to submit to
it; For, says he, Teach me, and I will hold my tongue, and thus was he easily
convinced by Elihu, and by God. Whereas men wanting Piety, even when their
Consciences are convinced and put to silence, their wit may be talkative, and
studious to invent somewhat to justify their way. See Prove. 30.32.

2. Grace leads a man to be docile, by convincing him that he is obnoxious to
Error, through Ignorance, Passion, Self-love, or the like distempers; For,
cause me to understand wherein I have erred, says he. Which, though it does
not imply that he did take with any Error in this Debate; yet it supposes
that he thought not himself above the reach of Error, and imports his aversion
from Error, and his love to Truth, and his willingness to take with any
Information that might draw him out of an Error. And who so, in the sense of
their own proness to err, do make use of means for prevention, or recovery out
of such a snare, they are in a fair way to be led in the paths of truth.

3. Challenges or reproofs ought not to be nakedly, and pro impe^io only,
charged upon any; but they ought to be pressed and put home upon solid and
convincing grounds, otherwise they will not readily take: For, Job will not be
convinced because they say he was wrong, unless they cause him to understand
wherein he has ^r^ed. It is true, some do shelter themselves here, when they
are challenged upon many suspicions, which cannot demonstratively be made
appear to be true: But that is their own great unhappiness, that they walk in
the dark with their wicked courses, and so are deprived of the mercy of being
discovered and convinced. Others also see not the clear grounds of reproofs
given to them, because they will not see them, or because their Consciences are
not awaked to notice them: yet this is a truth which generally holds, that
Doctrine should be joined with Reproof, 2 Timothy 4.2.

4. Naked truth, duly applied, is invincible; Truth will bind a rational man,
and much more will Divine Truth bind a tender Conscience; For how forcible are
right words? They may be bold who have Truth on their side, and they evidence a
wicked disposition, with whom it does not prevail.

5. Men may seem very acute in their Discourses, especially in speaking of the
depths of Divine Providence about Saints, who yet, upon an after-search, may
find that they do very far miss their mark: For, though their Discourses were
arguings, yet he appeals to themselves, What does your arguing reprove?

6. It is a very great sin in men, when they have to do with men of tractable
dispositions, and yet they are not faithful in giving them counsel or warning;
For, upon this account does Job aggravate the fault of his Friends. It is true,
those who have a Calling, must not omit their duty, be the disposition of
people what it will, Ezekiel. 2.6, 7 Yet when they meet with tractable people, it
is a notable encouragement, and an opportunity which cannot be neglected
without great sin.

Verse. 26. Do ye imagine to reprove words, and the speeches of one that is
desperate, which are as wind?
This verse as it is translated contains this third aggravation of their fault,
That they were too critical and censorious of what he said. And that it
evidenced want of charity and humanity in them* to ca^p at words spoken by him
in his desperate and hopeless condition. For such words were but as violent
bl^sts of wind, flowing from fits of tentation and passion. And therefore they
^ught to have looked to his distemper, from which these expressions flowed with
pity and compassion; and to have applied some fit remedy, rather then to have
been such Critics in scanning his words. This Interpretation does hold out
sound Doctrine, That as the Children of God, under tentation, do fall in many
Fevers, which cause ravings and impertinent expressions, which themselves will
not justify in cold blood: So God does look on those, rather with an eye of
pity, then of indignation; and he does not allow that any should rigidly
misconstruct them, because of those things. For the language of sadly afflicted
Saints (though it sound harshly at some times, yet) is not lightly or rashly to
be judged of; For it speaks much pressure of spirit within, as the Shunamites
practice did, 2 King. 4.27. And yet it is an usual fault, that such are
mistaken by those who are at ease Job 12.5. which warns the people of God to
prepare for this trial, among others; and to give God much employment, who will
understand and ponder their case.

But this seems not to be Jobs meaning in this place. For we find not that he
acknowledged he was one desperate, who had so much confidence in his greatest
extremity. And albeit he did acknowledge and assert it in a mild sense, that he
was without hope of being restored to this life; yet we find not that he
granted that this made him utter any thing in passion, that was not to be
justified, or which he accounted but as wind. It is true, he did indeed utter
such expressions, and Elihu and God do convince him of it; But for present, he
is so far from acknowledging any such weakness in his Discourses (as this
Interpretation would import) that in the next Chapter, he labors to justify
the most passionate of his desires; and so cannot be thought to extenuate or
acknowledge the weakness thereof, here.

Therefore I take this verse to contain this aggravation of their fault, That
they slighted and undervalued his condition and complaints, and therefore
dealt so cruelly and persidiously with him. Thus the words will run fair, if we
carry on that, do ye imagine to reprove? throughout the whole verse. As if Job
had said; Do ye imagine that they are only empty words, and the words of a
desperate man (or distracted by reason of my hopless condition) that are but as
wind, and not to be regarded, which ye are reproving? Nay, it is nothing so; my
words are the discourse of an afflicted man, who knows what he is doing; nor
do they proceed so lightly from me, as ye inconsiderately consider them, and by
your sleighting thereof, do bewray your cruelty against me. To this purpose
also aggreeth another reading of the latter part of the verse, Do ye repute the
words of the desperate (or, one who is hopeless of being restored to his former
prosperity, or, to live any longer) to be but wind? Albeit men who are
altogether, and every way desperate, may utter many things impertinent, yet a
man only hopless of life, yet trusting in Gods favor (which was his case)
would not speak so rashly, nor utter any thing, but that which had some weight
in it.

In all this, it cannot be denied but Job was too favorable a judge in his own
cause, and did entertain those thoughts of his own discourses which he durst
not justify when God appeared; and so this challenge is not sufficiently
convincing, It is true, in some respects, his words were more then words, or,
wind, considering the pressure of his spirit from which they flowed: Yet they
were so far from what he judged them to be, that had his Friends only insisted
to reprove them as empty, and the fruits of his passion, they had never been
reprehended therefore by God. However, those general truths may be marked here.

1. Whatever liberty men take in their thoughts and expressions, while they are
at ease; yet under trouble (especially, when it is extreme and desperate) they
ought to be very serious. For, so does Job insinuate, that in such a case they
ought to be about more then words, or, wind.

2. It is very great cruelty in friends, (and an addition to the trouble of the
afflicted) to mistake the carriage and expressions of those in distress, and to
account lightly of what is their sad and serious exercise: For, so much also
does Job's challeng of his Friends teach, in general, That it was their fault
to imagine they had to do only with the empty words of a desperate man, when he
spoke so seriously, and (as he thought) so advisedly. See Chap. 16.4.

3. Even godly and wise men, under tentation, are unfit judges of their own way
and carriage. That same power of tentation that drives them to miscarry, may
also induce them to justify their own way: As here Job justifies his own rash
words and speeches.

Verse. 27. Yea, ye overwhelm the fatherless, and you digg a pit for your
friend.
In this verse he sums up all the aggravations of their fault in this, That no
inhumanity or deceitfulness could go beyond their usage of him. Their cruelty
against him was no less then the cruelty of falling upon, and ruining poor
Orphans. And their disappointing of his expectation in trouble, and their
pernicious counsel to quit his integrity, was no less persidious, then if one
friend should dig a pit for another, to entrap him therein. Not to speak any
thing here of that crying sin, of wronging Orphans, which God will judge and
avenge, Psalm. 68.5. Or of that faithfulness which ought to be among friends; we
may, from the scope, Learn.

1. A person afflicted in spirit may compare with any for misery; For, Job
implies that such are fatherless, and helpless indeed: and therefore such,
going to God with their trouble, may expect pity.

2. It is great cruelty to wrong such afflicted ones, or to add to their
misery: Such dealing is to overwhelm the fatherless; No cruelty is beyond it,
See Psalm. 69.26.

3. Such as prove perfidious, or are ill counselors to Saints in trouble,
ought to consider what snares they do thereby lead them in; For, such do dig a
pit for their friend. And this was very sadly verified in Job, who, by his
Friends carriage, was driven into many snares, and fits of distemper and
passion against God and his dealing.

Verse. 28. Now therefore be content, look upon me, for it is evident unto you,
if I lie.

29. Return, I pray you, let it not be iniquity, yea return again: my
righteousness is in it.

30. Is there iniquity in my tongue? cannot my taste discern perverse things?


Follows a conclusion, by way of preface to what he is to say in the next
Chapter. Wherein he desires, that since they had so far mistaken him, and
miscarried in their discourses, they would give him audience to speak for
himself. Here, consider,

First, His Exhortation, consisting of two branches;

1. (Which is more principal) Now therefore be content, look upon me, ver. 28
--. As if Job had said; Seeing ye are so far wrong, I desire ye will lay aside
your prejudices, and with meekness take a view (not only of my countenance,
but) of my case, as I shall present it before you; or, hearken peaceably to my
discourse, which shall be a true and lively portraiture of my self.

2. (Which is subservient to the former) return again, which he presses very
seriously, by earnest entreaty, return I pray you, and by doubling the suit,
yea, return again, ver. 29 --. The sum and meaning of which desire, is, That
they might not precepitate in this business, nor be blinded and carried on by
reason of their being imbarqued in a debate; but that they should reflect, and
in calmness take a review of the business

Hence Learn.

1. Reproofs, when they are given upon just grounds, ought to be entertained,
and to produce some good fruit; Therefore, after the former sharp reproof, Job
comes to advise them to that duty which is the necessary fruit of it.

2. Such as would judge rightly of the case of others, ought to hear them
patiently and fully, before they give sentence; For, it is supposed, as their
duty, that before they be concluded as to their judgment concerning him, they
be content, and look on him. See Prove. 18.13.

3. Men ought to deal heartily and sincerely, in giving an account of their
condition, especially to friends who are apt to mistake them; For, says he,
look on me, intending by his discourse to give them a true Character of himself.

4. Much soberness and love to truth, and much diligence and painfulness, are
required in them who would find out the truth in dark cases; For, that they may
judge aright in this matter, Job requires that they be content, or patient to
hear, and willing to be informed: and though they had taken some view of his
condition before, yet he presses that yet again they will look on him, and
that they will return, yea, return again, before they determinately conclude.
Our light is of great concernment to us, and therefore had need to be found. It
is the Principle of all our motions, and actions, and as the eye, which if it
be dark, darkneth the whole body, And as sound light is necessary, so it is
difficult to attain; our natural darkness, lusts, negligence, interests, want
of love to the truth, and sleighting of it, being ready to hide it from us.
Withal, rashness and precipicancy, in our closing with light, or what seems to
be light, is very dangerous. For even though men, in such away, fall upon the
right, yet it does not commend them, because it is not any solid consideration
of the truth that persuades them. Rashness is a shrewd evidence that men are
wrong; For it is a principle that needs to be reformed, Isa. 32.4. and
conclusions are readily such as principles are. These who are rash do only
consider what is presently before them, without discerning the future
consequents of their way. And finally, When men once rashly engage in a wrong
way, they cast themselves upon a snare, that their pride will not suffer them
to retire; as here it needs many Exhortations to look, and return again Man's
credit is a very dangerous Idol; And Herod will not care to sacrifice John the
Baptists life to his credit, if it be engaged in the quarrel. These
considerations may teach men (and especially such as labor to impose their way
upon others) in looking toward principles and courses, and the snares of the
time to which they are exposed, to be very serious and deliberate; Considering
what a rare thing it is to find men examine their own way, or suspicious of the
inclinations of their heart, when once they are engaged.

5. What ever prevalency it has with our hearts, to continue in an evil way,
because we are engaged in it; Yet it will not bear any weight before God; nor
will it serve for a defense or excuse at the day of our accounts: Therefore
does Job press it as a necessary (though difficult) duty, return, I pray you,
yea, return again. And this may sadly rebuke those who resolve to go on in a
course, which they would never have entered upon, had they foreseen, ere they
embarked, what they now find.

Secondly, Consider the Arguments pressing this Exhortation; Which are,

1. For it is evident unto you (or, before your face) if it lie, ver. -- 28.
That is, I shall speak nothing but what is plain and distinct, as if it were
set before your face; and so ye will soon discern whether I speak truth or not:
And if ye will hear me, a sober debate will soon clear the matter. This
Argument presses the first branch of the Exhortation; And does indeed suppose
this truth, That not only can God easily manifest the folly of erroneous m^n, 2 Timothy 3 9. But a lie will not long hold ^oot, if it be well he^d t^^^ but truth
may be soon found out, through Gods blessing on sober debate and waiting on
him, if so be Conscience guided men, and they were s^eking truth for truths
sake. But the issue showed, both on their part and his, that there may be
somewhat that will obstruct the discovery of truth in debates. As,

1. The Friends being already engaged (as has been said) hindered the
discovery of their Error by any thing he said.

2. Job considered not that his necessity, furnishing him with Oratory and
Eloquence, might make a lie very plausible: as may be seen in his endeavor to
justify his desire of death. Parts and Passion, if Conscience do not
overruled, will manage a bad cause strangly; So that parts are a plague, when
men employ them in an ill cause.

3. Interest is very prevalent to hinder the fruit of Conference and debate. No
argument or debate could bring Jeroboam and his Successors to see the ill of
the Golden Calves, till the captivity discussed it. It had been powerful light
indeed which would have persuaded them to quit or hazard a Kingdom, which they
had usurped from the house of David. This, as it may teach us to lament the
perversity of men, who are ready to detain the truth in unrighteousness; So,
also, not to stu^ble, albeit debates do nor decide differences among men, till
God come and determine where the lie is; as he did in this debate.

2. Let it not be iniquity, ver. 29. Some read it; There shall be no iniquity,
That is, if ye will hear me, I freely forgive you all ye have wrongfully said
hitherto: Or, do not fear that your hearing of me speak in my own defense,
shall be your sin^ as if ye were faulty in not pleading for the holiness of
God, who afflicts me. Others thus, Let there be no iniquity; That is, when ye
hear me, let no iniquity, which ye can mark in my discourse, pass without a
challenge. But the Translation (to which I adhere) gives us this sense of the
Argument, That they should quit their prejudices and hear him, lest, as they
had sinned in what they had done already; So, continuing therein, it proved
iniquity, or, an heinous sin, and so it presses the second branch of the
Exhortation. This teaches,

1. That the same action which, in some respects, and considered in it self,
may be accounted an infirmity; yet being considered as vested with some
circumstances, is before God iniquity: Thus Job accounts their persisting to
oppose him, iniquity. This point may be true,

1. In respect of the Principles of a course. It is infirmity when men depart
from God, yet they do it not wickedly; Psalm 18.21. when they fall in a snare,
but through frailty; when they err, but it flows simply from tenderness of
the Conscience, though erring. But the same evils may be wickedness, when
followed wickedly, maliciously, with an high hand, to serve an interest and
reap advantage.

2. In respect of perseverance. An infirmity, persisted in, becomes iniquity:
it being incident to m^n to fall, but devilish to lie still, to fall and not
arise, to turn away and not return.

3. In respect of the consequences of persevering in sin: An infirmity fallen in,
and persevered in, does not only draw on new sins, but more obduration in the
same sin. A backslider turns an hater of such as persevere, yea, a persecuter
of them. Thus it was with Peter (though mercy prevented the worst) from denying
his Lord and Master, he comes to deny him with an Oath, there after with an
Oath and Curse. And thus also Jobs Friends afterward turn more bitter in the
debate, and do witness little tenderness by their frequent reflections on him.
This may dash the Idol of men's credit, and persuade them speedily to return
from an evil course; notwithstanding any disadvantage.

Doct. 2. Though men do, ordinarily, think light of sin, if it be not followed
with sad plagues; yet sin in it self is very grievous to a godly man: And if
even infirmity ought not to be tolerated, How much more will gross wickedness
be hateful to right discerners? For, this is a strong Argument in Jobs account,
Return, let it not be iniquity. And thus did David judge, when he esteemed so
much of the pardon of the iniquity of sin, Psalm. 32.5.

3. My righteousness is in it, v. -- 29. This presses both parts of the
Exhortation, That they should hear him, and consider the matter again and
again, notwithstanding their being engaged, Considering how much it concerned
him; his righteousness, which was his only prop and support, being at the stake
in the debate. We need not inquire, Whether Job speak here of the righteousness
of his person, by imputation of Christ's Righteousness, and of his way, by
Sanctification wherein he was Evangelically righteous; or of the righteousness
of his cause in debate betwixt them? For both these were conjoined here, it
being the very question debated betwixt them, whether he was a righteous and
godly man, or not? And for the strength and soundness of this Argument, albeit
Job looked so much to this his righteousness, as made him forget his
miscarriages in other particulars; yet in this he is assoiled by God, and
declared a righteous man, and being so, it was his duty to maintain it.

Hence Learn,

1. The Conscience of Integrity and Righteousness is a sovereign Cordial and
support to a man in trouble; For, Job speaks of it as a thing of so great
moment, as he may not quit it, My righteousness is in it. So did Hezekiah find
proof of its worth, when he was threatened with death, Isa. 38.1, 2, 3. and
David, in his trials and persecutions under Saul, as appears from several of
his Psalms. This helps men to hold on their way, Job 17.8, 9. For such do walk
surely, Prove. 10.9. and have the testimony of their Consciences, and
consequently, Gods approbation, to comfort them. Which should persuade us to a
frequent use of that Prayer, that integrity and uprightness may preserve us,
Psalm. 25.21.

2 When men are under trouble, they may expect that the testimony of their
Consciences, in the matter of their integrity, will be assaulted, whether by
inward tentation, or outward misconstruction, or both; For, Job, supposes his
righteousness is at the stake here. This may not only be expected from the
weakness of men's own spirits, being broken with trouble; from the malice of
Satan, who is not satisfied with any outward trouble upon Saints, unless he
disturb their peace, and weaken their faith thereby; and, from the weakness,
prejudices, and corrupt Principles of friends and observers: But even the Lord
has an holy hand in it, for the further trial and exercise of his Children, So
that every thing which is quarrelled in a Saint, under trouble, must not
therefore be cast as naught. But,

3. It is commendable in the people of God, to maintain and cleave to their
integrity, when it is called in question by tentation from within, and
opposition and dispensations from without; For, so does Job here,
notwithstanding he was afflicted by God, and mistaken by his Friends. It
argues great weakness, when men subscribe to the truth of every doubt that
tentation raises. And they may approve themselves to God, in defending their
righteousness and integrity, against tentation, and under greatest
disadvantages, Psalm. 44.17, 18, 19. For not only do they, in so doing, bear
testimony for God and his Truth, in that particular; but they retain that which
will be a strong Bulwark against many other assaults; which Job expresses
well, Chap. 10, 15. If I be wicked, woe were unto me.

For further clearing of this Point, It may be enquired,

1. What course shall we take to be clear off the truth of our integrity and
righteousness, when it is cried down by men, and sad dispensations seem to
condemn us?

Answ. In Job's case, where the only thing in question was his Piety, the
matter may be cleared by these many Characters of true godliness, recorded in
the Word. But for more general satisfaction in all cases, those rules would be
observed.

1. Men may be righteous, as to the state of their persons, being justified by
faith, when yet some of their actions may be faulty. Every thing that we ought
to mourn, for as a sin, does not alter the state of our persons; but our feet
may need to be washed, when our body is already clean. Joh. 13.9, 10. This
consideration may contribute to solve many doubts arising upon the sense of
guilt, and, if well improved, will advance, and not hinder, our repentance.

2. Men ought to beware of turning such Scepticks, as to question whether there
be righteousness and unrighteousness, a right and a wrong, in the courses of
men in the world; or to be so unsettled, as to quit and abandon every course,
as wrong, which is crossed and borne down. No dispensation of Providence
condemns any thing as sinful, which the word accounts integrity. It is a
woeful way of being above Scriptures, when Providence thrust the Bible out of
our hands, and do hinder us to go to the Law and the Testimony, thereby to
judge of our own and others cause and way.

3. Men may be heinously guilty of many sins before the Lord, and because of
them justly punished by him, immediately, or mediately; And yet may be
innocent, as to the instruments afflicting them, and as to the cause of their
trial by men. David, when he is lying in the dust before God, because of his
folly and sins of his youth, yet croweth over Saul, as an innocent man, in the
matter of his trial, and suffering. And when God sent Judah into captivity, yet
he pleads their cause against the Chaldeans. Thus the Church distinguishes
betwixt her case before God, and before men, in her suffering, Mic. 7.9. and we
ought not to confound them.

4. Men may be righteous, both before God and men, in the main point of their
trial; and yet may sin in many accessories, and in the way of managing that
which is right. As here, in this case, Job bears all the strokes, and God
pleads more against his carriage then the carriage of his Friends, and yet the
issue of all, is, Ye have not spoken of me the thing that is right, as my
servant Job has, Chap. 42.8. It may be enquired,

2. How they who, under sufferings, have a testimony of their integrity, in any
of the forementioned respects, shall improve it, or adhere to it in a right and
acceptable way?

Answ. Here, Job's error, who managed a good cause sinfully, may give us
warning that we are apt to miscarry in this. And therefore these rules are to
be observed,

1. Men are then right, and do in a right way adhere to their integrity, when
they are so fixed, as they are ready to suffer; and abide a storm, for their
adherence thereunto. It is a dangerous case when men are confirmed in their
way, merely because it prospers in their hand; (for what will they do when
that Argument fails them?) or when, let a cause be never so just, men cannot
suffer any thing for it. And when I speak of suffering, I do not only mean that
men, in a righteous cause, do act, in their stations, amidst many hazards, or
do resolve to endure trouble, from implacable men, who bring them at under: But
that they do not accept deliverance, albeit it were offered, upon their
forsaking what is right, Heb. 11.35.

2. Right maintainers of their integrity ought to be no less tender and zealous
for it, when sin would assault it within, and so wound the Conscience, then
when trials and outward dispensations would decry it.

3. In this case, also, the Conscience of our integrity ought not to imbitter
our spirits against God, who exercises and afflicts us; which was Jobs
fault, Chap. 40 8. For albeit the Conscience of uprightness may help a man to
courage and confidence in trouble; yet we ought to be humble before God, making
as good use of cross dispensations, as if we were unrighteous, and mourning for
any thing that God may have to say against us. And this seems to have been
Job's way at sometimes, Chap. 9.15. and 10.15. though his passion did, at other
times, ouer-drive him.

4. Is there iniquity in my tongue, etc? ver. 30 The sum whereof is, They ought
to hear him, for he will speak right things; and if it were otherwise, his
judgment and experience would ^s easily discern it, as his taste does discern
meat; and having a tender Conscience, he would abominate any unsound
Principles, as his taste would disrelish unsavory meats. In this matter he is
so confident, that he believes themselves are persuaded of it; and therefore
propounds it by way of question, posing them, if they judged otherwise of him.
And yet he did mistake himself, for, in some respects, there was iniquity (or
sin at best) in his tongue, nor did his taste discern the perversity, or,
sinfulness, that was in his passionate desire of death, upon which he insists
so much in the next Chapter.

Hence Learn,

1. It is duty of godly men, and their property when in a right frame, that
their Consciences are very tender touch-stones of their Principles and way;
either to prevent their engaging in an evil way, or to cause them relent it, if
they be engaged: For, so is here supposed, that there should not be iniquity in
their tongue, and that their taste should discern perverse things. Thus
Joseph's Conscience broke the snares laid by his Mistress, Genesis 39 9. Thus
David's reins did instruct him, Psalm. 16.7 and his heart smote him when he had
fallen in an appearance of evil, 1 Samuel 24 5. Hence it is a challenge, that men
are not ashamed when they do evil, Jer. 6 15. This may give a check to men who
bear down this light in themselves; the doing whereof may soon lead them to do
evils, which even Pagans would be ashamed of, Ezekiel. 16.27.

2. Whatever be the duty of Gods people, or their practice at sometimes, in
this particular; Yet there may be great hazard in the best of men their leaning
to their own discerning and spirits: For, Job missed his mark here, in
venturing too much on this. Our own light, spirits, or impulses, are dangerous
guides, seeing we have the Word wherewith we may consult in every thing; and
not only are all men liars, but many things may concur to corrupt the senses
of men in particular exigents. Prosperity may blunt their tenderness, and bribe
their light to allow them ease. Desertion (as befell David in the matter of
Bathsheba, and Hezekiah in the matter of the Ambassadors of the King of
Babylon) may draw forth proofs of weakness, and good men may miscarry under it,
especially, when they are not sensible that they are deserted, but the
refreshments of prosperity do supply the the room of spiritual life And
troubles do readily produce a feverish distemper of senses, especially, when
false Christ's appears in time of trouble, Matthew. 24 22, 23, 24. This may teach
us to walk in a continual jealousy of our selves, and not to lean to our own
understanding, Prove. 3.5.

CHAP. VII.
Job having, in the preceding Chapter, excused his own complaints, renewed his
desire of Death, and sharply rebuked his Friends for their inhumane cruelty,
and for their being deficient in that duty he might have expected from them in
his need; and withal, having exhorted them that, laying aside prejudices, they
would take a second look of his condition: He now, in this Chapter, for their
further Information, falls on a new Discourse concerning his case; wherein he
labors to justify his desire of death, desires pity and commiseration, and
complains he can find it at no hand.

So in this Chapter, 1. He studies to justify his desire of death; For, seeing
man's life was not perpetual, but had a prefixed period, ver. 1. and it being
lawful for all oppressed creatures to seek a lawful and attainable out-gate;
ver. 2. Why might not he seek that lawful out-gate, of death, who was afflicted
beyond others, ver. 3, 4. and so near unto death, that he expected not ease but
by it? ver. 5, 6. 2. He pleads for pity, in regard of his frailty, and his
miserable and hopeless condition, ver. 7, 8, 9, 10. 3. He complains sadly of
Gods dealing toward him; and (having resolved to ease himself that way, ver.
11.) regrets that his trouble was greater then he needed, to tame him, ver. 12.
that it was uncessant, ver. 13, 14. and put him to hard shifts, ver. 15, 16.
And, that God needed not deal so severely with him, either for trial, ver. 17,
18, 19. or, for punishment of his sin, ver. 20, 21.

Verse. 1. Is there not an appointed time to man upon earth? are not his days
also like the days of an hireling?
IN this Discourse concerning Job's desire of death, I need not debate whether
the discourse be directed to God, to move him to grant him that desired
out-gate; or to his Friends, to convince them of their error in the matter, as
he judged it: For both may be intended in the Discourse, as spoken in their
audience to God. His conclusion, or, particular desire of death, is no further
expressed here, then in that general Proposition, v. 2. and as it may be
gathered from the Arguments, and the account he gives of the causes pressing
him to seek after it; Only it is more expressly afterward poured out in the
complaint. His Arguments justifying this desire may be taken up in that one
sum, set down in the Analysis of the Chapter. But, for more clear unfolding of
the Text, I shall take up three Arguments in it; Whereof the first (in this
verse) is taken from the condition of man's life, which is not to be perpetual,
but limited by God to such a period, at which it shall end: as a Soldier has
a set time of his warfare and watching, and an hireling of working. And
therefore he thinks he may safely desire that end of his task and service on
which all men ought to be resolving. This argument he holds forth in a general
Proposition, and appeals to God, or his Friends Consciences (to which soever of
them we take the speech to be directed) if this were not a truth, That there is
an appointed time for man upon earth, it being prefixed by God, and man's
frailty (as his name here, in the Original imports) holding out that he cannot
be perpetual within time. The word rendered an appointed time, signifies also,
a warfare, which is very opposite to the purpose in hand; as not only pointing
at the condition of man's life, being a perpetual toil, and a condition of many
tentations and hazards, such as a soldier is exposed to in wars. See Chap.
10.17. But serving also illustrate the matter of prefixing a period to man's
life; man being like a Soldier, who has a prefixed age for his coming on
service, and for going off, as Miles emeritus: Or a certain time for which he
is conduced for such a service in war, and afterward disbanded and dismissed:
Or a prefixed time for standing on his Watch as Sentinel, after which he is
relieved. And to this purpose also serves that other similitude, of an
hirelings days, both pointing at their hard service and toil, and the prefixed
time for which they are hired.

This General Proposition holds forth these truths,

1. The time of our life is prefixed to us by God; There is an appointed time
to man upon earth, See Job 14.5. Which as it gives us no latitude for
unwarrantable hazarding of our life, (for we ought to live according to his
appointment, who has appointed our time) So it may teach us, not to live as
those who are Masters of their own time, Isa. 56.12. Luke 12.19, 20. To be
willing to die, when God declares we shall live no longer, for many are so far
from Job's temper here, that they come not the length of duty in this: and not
to fear them who threaten our life for his sake; for they will not get our life
till his time come, Psalm. 31, 13, 14, 15.

2. Man's life will end, his glass will run, and his course draw at last to a
period; For, there is but an appointed time for man upon earth. Let men think
to make themselves never so perpetual; yet they cannot avoid death, Psalm. 49.6,
etc. Which men ought seriously to think upon, Gal. 11.9. and not to be
excessively eager in seeking great things, seeing they must die and leave them
all.

3. Our life, till we come to the period of it, is like unto a warfare, wherein
(as good Soldiers) we are not to serve or please our selves, 2 Timothy 2.4. nor
to dispute our Generals Orders; and should resolve to be in perpetual motion,
and travail and watching, to ^un many hazards, and look for no issue, but
either absolute victory, or death, or to be led captives by Satan. And it is
also like the days of an hireling, who is bound to many hard services and much
toil. So much does the Text hold forth, and they who look otherwise on their
life, will be deceived. Yet in all this we have this encouragement, That we are
doing our Captain and Master service; that we are working our own work, as well
as his (for a Soldier earns pay, and an hireling wages, by his work) and, that
the worst of it will have an end.

As for the Inference that Job would draw from this Proposition; That, because
man's life has a prefixed period, therefore he might peremptorily desire to
attain this end of his toil; It is faulty in diverse respects, the observing
whereof may give light in the rest of his Discourse. And,

1. The condition of our life before God is not, in all respects, like the
condition of a Soldier or hireling. For our task and service is just debt, as
theirs is not always; it is not needed by God, as men need the assistance of
Soldiers and Servants; we have no skill of our selves to do our work, as they
have; nor do we know our term-day, as they do, and therefore cannot prescribe
it. Unless we take him up to be God, and our selves but creatures, we will
never steer a steady course, especially under trouble.

2. It is ill reasoning to say, that, because God has determined our time,
therefore we should fix the end of it when we will; For God has kept up that
from us, that we may be ready either to die, or honor him in the World, as he
shall please to order.

3. Because there is an end of our toil, it is ill argued that, when toil
comes, we should seek presently to be at the end of it; Whereas we should
rather bear it courageously, remembering the end of the Lord, and that it will
not be perpetual, Jam. 5.11.

4. It was unseasonable for Job to wish so eagerly for the end of his warfare
and toil, when such a dark cloud was betwixt God and him. Saints have
acknowledged ^t a mercy that death was kept off in such a condition, Lam. 3.22
Psalm. 27 13. But this was an evidence of his great distress, and of his
distemper of mind, which corrupted his sense, and discerning.

Verse. 2. As a servant earnestly desires the shadow, and as an hireling
looks for the reward of his work:

3, So am I made to possess months of vanity: and wearisome nights are
appointed me.

4. When I lie down, I say, When shall I arise, and the night be gone? and I am
full of tossings to and fro, unto the dawning of the day.


The second Argument (which presses the former, and clears it) is taken from
that common liberty allowed to all creatures in their strait, to press and long
for a possible and lawful out-gate; The sum of it is, as if Job had said; If
hirelings, being weary, do long after refreshment, and the end of their task
when they shall receive their wages; So may I, under my troubles, long after
death (which is the appointed end of my toil:) and that so much t^ rather, as
my task is sorer then any of theirs. In this Argument, Consider,

First, The Proposition of the Argument in a comparison, ver. 2. That as a
wearied servant o^ hireling longs after some cool shadow, or the shadow of
the night, wherein he may rest; and longs ^o^ the time wherein he may receive
his wages; (For to work, as it is in the Original, is taken, not ^o much o^ the
end of work, as for the reward of it, Psalm 10^, 20. Jer. 22.13) So might he
long for death, wh^^e he expected to find the only true e^se of his grievances,
and reward of his integrity. In this reasoning beside the former mistakes, we
may further add,

1. That b^^ng an hireling to so great and so good a Master, and so uncertain
of the length of his day, he ought so to long for the close o^ it, as yet he
prescribed not to God.

2. It was his fault to look on death as the only out-gate and shadow from this
^oil, ^^^pe^^ing that sufficient grace, and proofs of love in the midst of
trouble, might have rel^^she^ him.

3. It was also his fault to eye so much his own ease, and the reward of his
integrity and that he (...) rather condescend to what might honor God and
edify others, albeit it were grievous to himself: as was Paul's practice,
Phil. 1.22* 25. Every one of those mistakes and faults, may afford us
Instruction. But further, these Lessons may be observ^d in it

1. It pleases God to let some of Adam's posterity endure much toil in earning
their bread, that they may be sensible of sin, and that others may learn
thankfulness, who have an easier lot, though they be in the same guilt, and of
the same lump; For, so is held out in the instance of those wearied servants
and hirelings. Yea, it is to be marked, that, though many are not put to those
hard pinches, yet even the greatest of men want not their own toil.

2. It is ordinary for men not to find rest in their present condition, but
they are driven still to look after somewhat they want before them; For, so are
servants and hirelings put to desire and look for somewhat they want. And this
holds not only true of men in great misery, but generally of all men, while
they are within time. Contentment with every estate is a choice lesson, Phil.
4.11. Heb. 13.5. and would be more easily attained, if men remembered they are
within time, where complete satisfaction is not to be expected, and if they
were studying to get the right use of every lot as it comes.

3. The many tossings and vexations, wherewith the godly are essayed within
time, may allow them to look toward death, with submission to the will of God,
as a sweet issue, and to make it welcome when it comes; For, this comparison
imports that there is a lawful desire of death, as the servant desires the
shadow. See 2 Cor. 5.4. Rom 8.23. A spiritual mind finds many calls thither
(though with submission) and therefore do Saints find so many worms in their
go^^ds. Only it should be our care, that a desire to be freed from sin and a
body of death do, chiefly, prevail with us to look to that issue.

4. Death will never be a shadow to a man from his trouble, who has not so
walked as he may expect a reward of his integrity then also; For, so much also
does the similitude import; As the hireling looks both for the shadow and
reward of his work, so they who^ look comfortably on death, must see both these
in it. And therefore a desperate desire of death in wicked men, is abominable.

Secondly; we have to consider the amplification and further pressing of this
Argument, from his particular case, ver. 3, 4. Where, in stead of inferring
from that Proposition, ver. 2. that he might long for death as servants do for
the shadow, or more earnestly long for that issue then they do for their ease:
He only shows that he had greater cause so to long then they had, being more
hardly put to it. And to prove this, he holds out the dissimilitude betwixt his
case and an hirelings, in two.

1. The hirelings task is ordinarily for a day; but this was much longer, even
whole Months of vanity, (or, eminently vain, for any fruit of ease or comfort;
otherwise, in respect of perfection, all conditions of life are vanity, Gal.
1.2. Psalm. 39.5.) and he was made to possess them, as his patrimony and right,
as if no other portion were due to him.

2. The hireling, though he work sore in the day, yet he gets the nights rest,
Gal. 1.12. But he is troubled by night, as well as by day. For after he has
toiled all day long (which is here supposed) his nights were made so wearisome,
by Gods appointment, that when he lay down, he longed for daylight, that he
might arise, to see if that would bring him ease: and so was made to measure
out the evening (as it is in the Original) or, to reckon how long it was to
daylight. Yea, he was full of tossings to and fro, or perpetually tossed,
inwardly in his mind, and outwardly in his body, through pain and want of rest;
and that not for a part of the night only, but throughout the whole night, even
to the dawning of the day, so that he got not any sound sleep. See ver. 14, 15.
Upon all which this inference is to be repeated, that he might lawfully wish
for ease in death. Which, though it was his failing and mistake, as is before
marked, especially having to do with God, to whom all ought to stoop, and to be
content if they get strength to bear what he lays on; and it may be justly
suspected, that his giving way to distemper of spirit, added not a little to
his disquietness; yet his condition may afford us these Instructions,

1. The Lord can, when he will, make our life, which we think so sweet, a very
great burden to us; and our time, which, ordinarily, slips away insensibly,
very wearisome and tedious; For, Job is weary of his life, and his Months and
Nights are wearisome. Creature Comforts, of Bed and Board, will not ease us
when God has us to try; which should make us thankful when it is otherwise,
and teach us not to dote on time, or our life; For it is of God that all our
outward mercies prove not crosses.

2. The Lord is more absolute and sovereign over his Creatures, to exercise,
afflict, and continue troubles, then any man is over his servant and hireling:
For, here he made Job's lot more sad then the condition of any hireling is made
by man. He is astricted to no rule in those things, but his own will, to which
we ought to submit.

3. The coming on, or continuance, of trouble, is not a matter at man's
arbitrament; God can make us to possess them, and appoint them to us, whether
we will or not. See Psalm. 105.17, 18, 19, 20. Jer. 47.6, 7. Which may lead us
to eye God much, when troubles stick on, and to look to him alone for ease of
them, who can deliver without the consent of enemies, as well as afflict us
whether we consent or not. See Job 34.29. Isa. 49.24, 25, 26.

4. Albeit all men, in their best outward estate, are vanity, Psalm. 39.5. Yet
the Lord is pleased, sometime, to make some men exemplary instances of that
truth, of the vanity of all men and conditions; For, so was it with Job, his
months were months of vanity, being empty of all comfort, not having any such
issue as he waited for, and so disappointed his expectation, and he reaping no
benefit by all his toil, as Psalm. 78.33. All which vanity, as it may be read in
other conditions that look not so terrible like as Job's did; so they who are
under such a lot, may read this in it, that, because they see not the vanity
and emptiness of every condition; therefore it is made so legible to them.

5 Singular troubles do very deeply affect men, because they are singular; For,
Job regrets that he was tossed beyond all others. Yet Saints may read this in
it also, that they will be singularly regarded by God under their singular
trials.

6. Gods Providence is so condescending, that the trouble or quiet of every
night is appointed by him; For, so Job holds forth, Wearisom nights are
appointed to me, when I lie down, I say, When shall I arise, etc? Where he
understands God to be this appointer, though he do not expressly name him, till
afterward, that his heat grow more warm. It is an evidence of our carnal
mindedness, when we see little of God in ordinary Providence, Psalm. 139. were
it but in a nights sleep; And our negligence in this brings us to know, by the
want thereof, how much we enjoy when we do but little observe or acknowledge it.

7. As trouble makes any time promise more then the present; So changes of that
kind will not change our condition, till God come: For, though Job longed for
the day, being full of tossings to and fro, yet the daylight did not ease him.
See Deuteronomy. 28.67. It were our wisdom to make the best of our present lot, be it
never so hard; for changes (till we be fit for an issue) will but add to our
affliction.

Verse. 5. My flesh is clothed with worms and clods of dust, my skin is broken,
and become loathsome.

6. My days are swifter then a weavers shuttle, and are spent without hope.


The third Argument (wherein he yet insists to give an account of his trouble)
does more distinctly tend to conclude the lawfulness of his desire of death.
For, whereas it might be objected against his former reasoning; That his
trouble and disquiet might indeed warrant him to seek some ease, but not to
press so peremptorily for death: He answers, That his trouble being
irrecoverable, left him no door of hope open but in death; and therefore he
behoved to press after that only. The Argument runs thus, as if Job had
pleaded; I may lawfully desire that warrantable issue which I see, in the
Providence of God, approaching toward me, and which has already irrecoverably
seized on me: But I see death thus approaching, and it has already taken hold
on me; Therefore I may desire it. Now that death is thus approaching, he proves
two ways;

First, From the present condition of his body, v. 5. being in his
graves-cloaths, many worms breeding in his sores; his body being covered with
scabby clods of dust and ulcerous matter running from his sores; and his skin
being broken (as the earth is in a drought) in a loathsome manner. From all
which it is to be inferred, that he could expect nothing but death.

Here we may Learn,

1. Health and soundness of body is a great mercy, and does ease us of much
vexation and an heavy burden; As here appears from Job's resenting the want
of it.

2. Let men make never so much of their bodies, yet they carry a mass of
putrefaction and corruption about with them; and they will come at length to be
loathsome spectacles: For, here Job's body being touched by God, his flesh is
clothed with worms and clods of dust, etc.

3. Death and life are in the power of the Lord, and he can, when he pleases,
bring down to the grave and bring up again; 1 Samuel 2.6. For, so much does Job's
mistake in his reasoning teach us. It was his mistake to conclude that he would
shortly die, were the probabilities never so pregnant; since God, by his
sovereign Providence, might interpose, as afterward he did.

Secondly, He proves it from a general Proposition of his case, ver. 6. which
may relate especially to the days of his former prosperity (not secluding the
days of his whole life, which were, for most part, spent in prosperity) which
were more swiftly passed away then the Weavers shuttle crosses the breadth of
the Web; and were spent without hope of recovery. And therefore there was
nothing for him but death; and the fair encouragements they held out, to invite
him to repentance, were to no purpose. And so however he complained that days
of trouble were long, ver. 3, 4. yet here he complains that his days of
prosperity were soon over.

From this regret we may Learn,

1. As the days of our life are short, and, being over, are irrecoverable; so
men are ready, out of partiality and self-love, to think that good days end too
soon, and ill-days, (though indeed short of them) last too long; As Job here
regrets the speedy spending of his former days, while he looks on a short while
of trouble as intolerably long.

2. Our days of greatest prosperity, or our longest life in the world, will,
when it is over, seem but short and nothing; as here Job reckons. See Isa.
38.12. Psalm. 90.9. Which may discover the emptiness of time, and of the
enjoyments thereof, however we delude our selves therewith.

3. As hope is a man's last refuge in trouble; (as here Job, when his days are
spent, looks next if any hope remain:) So sense will soon lose hopes, when
there is no cause why it should do so: For, so does Job's sense conclude here,
that his days were spent without hope, whereas there was hope in his end. And
here men ought to guard, that they become not so effeminate and delicate,
through prosperity, as a blast of trouble will faint their spirits, and ruin
their hopes.

Verse. 7. O remember that my life is wind: mine eye shall no more see good,

8. The eye of him that has seen me, shall see me no more: thine eyes are upon
me, and I am not.

9. As the cloud is consumed and vanishes away: so he that goes down to the
grave, shall come up no more.

10. He shall return no more to his house: neither shall his place know him any
more.


The second part of the Chapter may be taken up as an Exhortation to his
Friends; and particularly, to Eliphaz, who spoke last, in name of all the rest,
(for the word is in the singular ^^mber) That, considering his case, that it
was irrecoverable, ver. 7, 8 -- (and he might see it was so, ver. -- 8.) and
that he was shortly to be cut off from all the comforts of time, ver. 9, 10;
they would deal more tenderly with him, and not crush him, or drive him from
his confidence in God, or feed him with false hopes (upon condition of his
repentance) which he never expected to see. But, considering that the following
complain^ is directed to God, we may rather take this also as a desire directed
to God, wherein he pleads for pity in regard of his sad case: and, apprehending
present death in its ugly shape, and reflecting upon God's dealing with him, he
is forced to cry unto God, that he would pity him, and moderate the extremity
of his afflictions; as David also pleads, Psalm. 39.13. In it we may consider,

First, His case; which he lays out before God in great variety of
expressions.

1. That his life is wind, v. 7 -- His former prosperity being passed away like
a puff of wind, and his life now hanging by a thread of breath, ready to pass
away, and never to return. See Psalm. 78.39. Jam 4.14.

2. That his eye shall see no more good, ver. -- 7. and the eye of him that
has seen him shall see him no more, ver. 8. -- That is; He should never enjoy
his former prosperity, nor others see him repossessed of it; or, being dead, he
should be deprived of all worldly comforts, and of any opportunity of
conversing with his former acquaintance.

3. That Gods eye being upon him, he is not. v. -- 8. That is, being once dead,
if God should relent, and desire to see him and do him good, he should not find
him; (of which, ver. 21.) or rather, That God thus fastening his eye upon him
in anger, would look him to nothing.

4. He illustrates the state of the dead (wherein he expected shortly to share)
by a similitude, ver. 9, 10. That as a cloud, being spent with pouring out of
rain, evanisheth, and does not return again; (to wit, the same cloud in number,
otherwise, clouds, the same in kind, do return, Eccl. 12.2.) so man, being once
spent by trouble, and sent to the grave, can no more return, or have to do with
his house and station, then if they had never known one another. In all which
Discourse we would not understand Job, as if he were denying the Resurrection
of the body, or the good things of heaven after death; For in those things he
is very clear, Chap. 19.25, 26, 27. But he is only asserting that, in ordinary,
there is no returning, after death, to this life, to enjoy the good things of
time, as Isa. 38.11.

Secondly, We are to consider his suit in reference to this his case; which is
comprehended in one earnest desire, that God, in afflicting him, would
remember, (as it is ver. 7.) this his frailty; and how soon he would be shaken
out of time. By Gods remembering (which is spoken of him after the manner of
men) we are to understand his pondering and weighing of his condition, and his
strength to bear it, as Psalm. 78.39. and his giving proof of his affection, by
helping, pitying and relenting toward him, as he found his need require: as the
desires of afflicted Saints are, elsewhere, summarily comprehended in this one
word, Psalm. 74.2.

From this whole purpose, thus explained, we may Learn,

1. The true means of getting ease in troubles and grievances, is, neither our
reasoning with men, or with our selves; but, our laying out of our case before
God; As is Job's practice here. Without this, our counsels in our own hearts
will not diminish our sorrow, Psalm. 13.2. See also Genesis 25.22.

2. Trouble, when sanctified, contributes not a little to make common truths be
well studied, and sensibly pondered: For, so does Job, in his trouble, speak so
sensibly of the frailty of his life, and his estate in death: Whereas want of
exercise makes nauseating and unfruitful hearers, even of the most precious
truths.

3. The things of time are indeed good things; as Job here call's them. See
also Luke 16.25. They supply many of man's defects, and prevent many of his
anxieties. They are evidences of the goodness of God, Matthew. 5.44, 45.
especially to those who are themselves pure, and to whom the use of those
things is sanctified by the Word and Prayer, 1 Timothy 4.4, 5. Tit. 1.15. Which
should teach us to esteem more of them, and of God for them; to look upon
straits and penury as sent to cause us see our sin, in under-valuing those
things; and to beware of abusing those good things.

4. Death cuts man short of all his earthly enjoyments, Relations, comforts,
etc. For, then man shall see no more good. The eye of him that has seen him,
shall see him no more. As the cloud is consumed, and vanishes away; so he that
goes down to the grave shall come up no more. He shall return no more to his
house, etc. The time will come when a man shall see none of those things, to
which his heart is now so much addicted. So that we do but weave the Spiders
Web, when we make such things our confidence and delight.

5. However the people of God have hope of eternal life; yet death is so
dreerie and dark a step, essayed but once for all, having vast Eternity at the
back of it, and shaking us loose of so much; that it cannot but be dreadful to
go through it under a cloud: For, so does Job reckon, while, upon this
consideration, he pleads for pity, and a moments quiet use of what he was so
soon to leave. To die is a lesson which we should early study and mind, Psalm.
90 12. Not only that we may make sure that we have true grace, (which may be
much questioned then) but may walk spiritually in the exercise of substantial
Piety, and depend on God for much sense, or much faith, at such a time.

6. God, dealing in anger, is so dreadful a party, that even a look of him will
destroy, and bring the creature to nothing; For, says Job, Thine eyes are upon
me, and I am not. See Psalm. 90.11. and 80.16. and 104.29. Therefore Gods anger
is that which ought chiefly to be deprecated in afflictions, Psalm. 6.1. Jer.
10.24. And they ought to consider how much they are obliged to him, who find
life in the light of his countenance, Psalm. 80.3.

7. Man's frailty, when he is sensible of it, is an Argument pleading for pity
before God; Nor is our weak, frail, and crushed condition any disadvantage,
when well improved; For, in the faith of this does Job plead with God, by
laying his frail condition before him. O remember that my life is wind, etc.
See Psalm. 78.38, 39. and 103.13, 14. Deuteronomy. 32.36. 2 King. 14.25, 26. Isa. 57.16.

8. The best way of praying for the ease of our griefs, is, to commit our case
to Gods affectionate considering of it, and to trust his wisdom and love with
the answer: For, so does Job sum up his desire, O remember, says he, that my
life is wind, etc. When we thus trust God, every necessity, which we cannot
overtake, has a mouth to plead with God, for a favorable and tender regard to
be had of us.

9. As the creatures do hold out much of God; so man may be minded of his
frailty by studying many of them; So much does Job mind us here, while he
points at the clouds, ver. 9. as so vive an Emblem of man's frailty; as we
find, also, the flowers and grass ( Isa. 40. Psalm. 103.) and other Creatures,
made use of to inculcate the same. We need not want matter or occasion for
spiritual thoughts, so long as we have the creatures about us, to look upon.

These are sound truths to b^ gathered from these words. Only these cautions
should be taken along in all this pleading.

1. We must not be so peremptory with God in any suit, as to fret and rage if
we get not our will; As we will find Job does in the sequel of this Discourse.
The Children of God ought so to pray for ease, comfort, or temporal mercies and
deliverances, as believing it will be well, whether they get their will or not,
and as resolving, if they get not what they desire, to study more humility, and
not to carp.

2. We ought, and may lawfully, with Job, plead our frailty before God; Yet so,
as that we refuse not to bear what he will support our frailty under. For, in
this he was faulty, that, though he was supported, yet, he was not satisfied.
Our laziness, or love to ease, or our want of spare strength, beyond what is
presently employed, must not furnish us with Oratory in our suits, or with
complaints, if we be more hardly put to it then we would. See 1 Cor. 10.13.

3. We ought not to make our burden insupportable, by apprehending that which
God does not intend in our trouble; as Job apprehends death here, in all its
outward disadvantages, when yet he was not to be essayed with it at this time.
Our own apprehensions are, very often, the life and sling of our crosses, Isa.
51.13.

4. We ought so to plead for Gods remembering of us in our low estate, Psalm
136.23. as yet our bitterness do not insinuate any complaint of his forgetting
or not noticing of us (wherein Job was sometimes faulty) but that these our
Prayers be joined with thanksgiving, Phil. 4.6.

Verse. 11. Therefore I will not refrain my mouth, I will speak in the anguish
of my spirit, I will complain in the bitterness of my soul.
Follows the third part of the Chapter, wherein Job apprehending himself to
be near unto death, and finding that God will not comfort or ease him by any
relenting of his hand; his griefs with recounting of them, do so exasperate
him, that he resolves to comfort himself, and seek ease in complaining. And
accordingly, he bu^sts forth in a bitter complaint, that God had smitten him,
and allowed him not comfort nor ease any way.

In this verse he expresses his resolution to complain, and that he will be so
far from bridling his tongue, or smothe^ing of his grievances (as he had done
before, Chap. 2-10.) that he will let loose the reins to his bitterness and
anguish of spirit, to express it self at liberty and without control, and so
seek ease to his mind by complaining.

Here we may Observe,

1. That which Job resolves to do, is, to speak, and (as he after expresses
it) to complain. Whence we may Learn; That complaints and quarrellings are one
of the poor shifts whereof men in trouble make use, for attaining ease thereby;
whereas, oft-times, they widen the wound, by awaking all their griefs, while
they are mused upon, without faith and submission; and, by provoking God
against that unsubdued humor that dare quarrel him or his dealing. Thus by
complaining, spirits have been overwhelmed: and by taking liberty to complain,
tentation has prevailed, ^sal. 77.3. Se^ Psalm 39 9.

Obs. 2. The manner how he resolves to complain, is, without putting any
restraint upon himself, but giving full and loose reins, to his own imbittered
spirit. Which teaches,

1. That what our spirits run upon without control, under trouble, ought to be
suspected: It not being probable that, when we are in a Fever and Dist^mper, we
can fall upon what is right, without a confl^ct; For, this was an evidence that
Job's course was wrong, seeing he came so easily by it, in his passion.

2. Albeit complaints against God be, in any case, unlawful; Yet this adds to
the sinfulness thereof, when we run voluntarily and without any restraint, upon
them; As Job professes to do here. Otherwise, it is an extenuation of the
fault, when our complaints run violently over the belly of our consent; as we
will find it befell Job afterward, Chap. 10. where he speaks more distinctly of
this exercise.

Obs. 3. The more remote ground and rise of this complaining, is, bitterness of
soul, and anguish, or, (as the word is) straitness of spirit, which cannot
contain his griefs. O^ this distemper of an imbittered spirit, See Chap. 3.20.

Only here we may further Learn,

1. However men's spirits, when at ease, do rove at large; yet trouble will soon
straiten them; It will hem them in from gadding abroad to seek imaginary
delights, and will soon over-charge them so, as they cannot contain or bear
their sorrows. For, Job here is put to anguish, or, straitness of spirit.

2. Bitterness and discontent, rather then humility, is the ordinary result of
a straightened spirit: For, upon anguish of spirit, follows bitterness of soul

3. Bitterness is a very unsuitable frame wherewith to go to God in trouble, and
will produce unbeseeming language to God; For, in this condition, all his
speaking, is, to complain. Thus we find the Prayer of the Disciples very
passionate in trouble, Mar. 4.38.

Obs. 4. The immediate rise of this his resolution is implied in the inference,
Therefore I will not refrain, etc As if he had said, Seeing my end is so near
at hand, when I will be deprived of all wor^dly enjoyments; and seeing I can
get no ease from God, by laying my case before him (as he had essayed to do,
ver. 7, 8, 9, 10.) I will now, rather then be overcharged with affliction,
ease my self by complaining.

This teaches,

1. It is a great snare upon afflicted spirits, when they think they have
reason for their distempered humors; As Job here speaks of his way and
resolution, as a rational infer^nce, drawn from the consideration of his case,
and what he had said formerly. Thus was it also with Jonah, Jo^. 4.9.

2. Long-continued trouble, and our seeing no relief nor ease under it, may
discover much boisterousness and untractableneness in us; For, in this case,
more of will appears in Job's resolutions then formerly.

3. Disappointment of help and relief, when we pray to God in trouble, will
readily inc^ease b^tterness, and heighten our distemper; For, Job, not speeding
in his former desire, ver. 7, etc does upon that, infert, that, therefore, he
will now complain. It is indeed, a sore trial, when Prayer to God in trouble
seems not to be successful, Job 3^.20 Psalm 80.4. And therefore we ought to
guard against stumbling at it; By believing a^ceptance in w^rrantable desires,
though we cannot discern it, 1 John 5 14 ^5. By humility, causing us think
little of our selv^s or of our Prayers; and this will prevent that quarrelling
unto which hypocrisy prompts men: Isa 58 3 Mal 3.14, ^5. By justifying and
commending of God, whatever our sense suggest against his dealing, Psalm 22.1,
2. with 3. and, By a fixed resolution to pray on, how unsuccessful soever it
seem to be, Psalm. 88.1, 13, 14.

Verse. 12. Am I a sea, or a whale, that thou set a watch over me?
Follows the complaint it self; where, the thing he complains of may be
gathered, from the whole Discourse, to be his great and insupportable trouble:
That, being arrested by affliction, ver. 12. without any rest or ease, ver. 14,
15. God would neither cut him off, ver. 16. nor mitigate his trouble, ver. 19.
nor be reconciled with him, and take away any quarrels he had against him, ver.
21. But left him under his burden, without relief one way or other.

Those particulars regrets may be considered as I go through the words; Here I
shall summarily take up the words as a complaint directed against God, that he
should be so sharply afflicted. This he presses upon four grounds, or,
Arguments; The first whereof (in this verse) is, That his trouble was
disproportionable, not only to his strength (of which see Chap. 6.12.) but to
any need he conceived he had of such a measure of trouble; seeing, in his
judgment, less might serve his turn. What he hints at, of the Sea, and Whale,
does point at what is more fully expressed, Job 38.8, 9, 10, 11. of the
boisterous nature of the Sea, if it were not hemmed in; and of the Lords
confining of the vast Whale to be kept within the Sea, Psalm. 104.25, 26. or,
Land-Dragons (as the word also signifies) to abide in Deserts, lest they
should hurt men; or, at their being chained by men, when they are taken. So the
meaning of the words, is, That he is neither so tumultuous and untameable, as
he must be hemmed in from sin and violence by those strong afflictions; nor so
terrible a delinquent, that he should need so strong a guard to keep him under
arrest, till he be tried and his cause judged. Of this arrest and enquiry we
find him complaining again, Chap. 10.6, 7. and Chap. 13.27.

This Argument and way of reasoning does point out those truths.

1. The Lords Providence extends it self to the ordering of all creatures; even
to the overruling of the most unruly; For, he has a watch over Seas, and
Whales, or Dragons, to bound and limit them. His hand can find men, even in the
uttermost parts of the Sea, and among Sea Monsters, as a proof that he is
there, Psalm. 139.9, 10. Amos 9.3. and there he can give proofs of love to his
people; as he did to Jonah in the Whales belly, in the midst of the Sea, and to
Daniel in the Lions den.

2. It is a great mercy, and brings much ease to men, when they are not
stubborn and untameable, and are not as a Sea, or Whale, that need a watch over
them. For stubborn mockers do procure strong bonds, Psalm. 68. -- 6. Lev. 26.21,
23, 24, 27, 28. Isa. 9.9, 10, 11. and Chap. 28.22. whereas the meek do dwell at
much ease. See Psalm. 32.9, 10. Hos. 10.11.

But (beside those general Truths) there are many mistakes and weaknesses in
this arguing. For,

First, It is man's weakness that he has too good an opinion of himself, and is
ready to think he has no need of Gods way of dealing with him; (Am I, says
he, a Sea, or a Whale, that thou set a watch over me?) Whereas man should
reckon he needs every thing that God makes his lot, and that it is but if need
be, that he is in any heaviness, 1 Pet. 1.6.

Secondly, Job's enquiry if he was a Sea, or Monster, needing such a guard,
does bewray his ignorance of man's nature, and even of himself (though gracious)
in particular. For,

(1.) Every man by nature is no less tumultuous and untameable then the raging
Sea, Isa. 57.20. which may be instanced, In his vast and boundless desires,
like the vast and spacious Ocean, Psalm. 104.25. Lam. 2.13. In his continual
instability, as the Sea is in continual motion; In the distempers to which his
lusts drive him, as the Sea is tossed and made to swell with winds, See Jam.
4.1. Jude ver. 12. In his raging most at the banks of Law prefixed to him, Romans
7.8. or of affliction restraining him from sin, Isa. 1.5. and 8.21. as the Sea
makes a great noise in beating upon the shore; And, In his continual casting
out of wickedness at all occasions, as the Sea casts out mire and dirt. See
Isa. 57.20. Jude, ver. 13.

(2.) Man by nature is, also, a menstruous creature, like a Whale, or Dragon,
for beastly cruelty, violence, and unreasonableness in his mad passions and
lusts. Hence it is that men are so frequently compared to those monsters; Psalm.
57.4. and 74.13, 14. Isa. 51.9. An unrenewed man is as g^e^t a monster as can
be imagined; which is made conspicuous in the behavior of some of them.

(3.) Albeit true grace make a change in godly men (such as Job was) yet even
renewed men have somewhat of that old violent temper in them; and may give a
proof of it in their fits of passion and tentation. So did Job himself,
sometime, discover how boisterous he was by nature. Even Saints should not
forget their natural disposition, when grace subdues and covers it, lest God
discover it for their humiliation. Hence

(4.) As Saints are boisterous by nature; So when they turn brutish and
violent, under any fit, it is most meet that God by force restrain them: If
they turn like a Sea, or a Whale (as even Job himself was too violent at
sometimes) Why should he not set a watch over them, to hem in their violence,
and bring them to an account for it? Psalm. 32.9.

Thirdly, However Job might plead that he needed not all this sore and sharp
usage; Yet he could not deny but God, in his absolute sovereignty, might
dispose of him at his pleasure. If the Lord do what he pleases in Heaven and
Earth, and in the Sea, Psalm. 135.6. why not also on his people? And why should
they only seek to carve their own lots, when all other creatures stoop, or are
made to stoop, to him, and even the insensible creatures do continue in their
obediential subjection to their Maker.

Verse. 13. When I say, My bed shall comfort me, my couch shall ease my
complaint:

14. Then thou skarest me with dreams, and terrifiest me through visions,


The second Argument, whereby he pleads against his being so sore afflicted, is
taken from the incessantness of his trouble; and that, when he expected but a
little ease in his Bed, his trouble was augmented by affrighting Dreams and
Visions. His expectation is set down, ver. 13. That, being wearied with sitting
up, he imagined to find some comfort, and ease of his complaint, by his Bed and
Couch; Either to ease his body and pain (which caused his complaints) by lying
there; or (as the following verse clears) to interrupt his complaints, by
sleeping a little while, which would have comforted him. Unto this is
subjoined, ver. 14. his disappointment; That when he lay down, not only was he
tossed with pain and want of rest (as he has regreted, ver. 3.4.) but when at
any time his eyes went together with sleep, God did terrify him with Dreams
and Apparitions; and so new trouble was added to what he had formerly. What
these Dreams and Visions were, it is not needful to enquire particularly. It
suffices to know that they were affrighting, and so added to his affliction.

What Job's failing^ were in this case, will come to be spoken to, on the
following verses.

Here we may Learn,

1. Leave to rest in our Bed is a very special mercy, and will be acknowledged
as such, by those who know how sad it is to want it; For, ^^b looks on it as a
great case, if his Bed should comfort him, and his Couch ease his complaint.
Sleep is acknowledged as Gods gift, Psalm. 127.2. and the want of it sadly
regreted, Psalm. 77.4.

2. Truly humble Saints will acknowledge the meannest mercy, were it but a
moments b^eathing under trouble, though it be not removed; For, Job would
account it a mercy to get his complaint a little sifted, by sleeping for a
little while, Albeit his bands would not thereby be loosed; yet breathings and
intermissions are looked on as a favor, Our pride, which repineth when we get
not full deliverance, does hide the mercy of a day of small things; which yet
(being observed and acknowledged) might prove the little cloud that brings the
plentiful rain.

3. Trouble makes men restless, expecting ease in every change, which yet only
one change can bring; For, so Job, being disquieted when he sat up, expected
and said, my Bed shall comfort me, etc. It is a mercy when our present case in
trouble is so moderated, as we can acquiesce and submit to bear it, without
seeking ease in changes, as persons in a Fever do by changing of Beds. And a
restless tossed mind is much to be pitied, and will be pitied by right
discerners. And those who are under that cross, ought to to study what is their
true ease, lest, forgetting their resting place, they seek rest where it is not
to be found.

4. Probable means will not ease troubled minds, till God give the command, and
their trial be perfected; And then even improbable means will do it: For, Job,
looking for ease, misseth it. So did Joseph's trouble go on, notwithstanding
his dealing with the chief Butler, till his word came, Psalm. 105.18, 19, 20. It
is God who commands deliverance to his people, Psalm. 44.4. and till that
command come forth, we may look for peace, and behold no good, etc. Jer. 14.19
and the harvest may pass, and the summer end, and we not be saved. Jer. 8.20.

5. There is no common favor we enjoy, were it but sleep and quiet rest, but
God is to be depended on, and acknowledged, in it; For, as he gives his
beloved sleep, Psalm. 127 2. So, says Job, Thou scarest me with dreams, etc.
that I cannot sleep. We little consider how far Gods bounty and care, in those
common mercies, does outstrip our Prayers and dependence; and how many crosses
he could let loose upon us in these common things. See Jer. 31.25, 26.

6. It is the duty, and advantage, of the Lords people, to take every lot they
meet with out of his hand; For, whatever hand Satan, or Job's sick temper and
melancholy spirit, had in these dream^ and visions; yet, says he, thou scarest
me with dreams, and terrifiest me through visions. Even when we find evid^nt
causes in nature for our distempers, we ought yet to look up to the God of
Nature. And we will never attain a spiritual use, or comfortable sight, of our
case, till we ascend thither.

7. It may be the lot of Gods people, not only to be exercised with incessant
trouble, Isa.. 38, 12. (in which case breathing times would be sweet;) But to
have new troubles added to the former, when they are expecting ease from them;
For, Job, expecting ease in his Bed and Couch, has affrighting dreams and
terrifying visions, super-added to his former sorrows. This may affright men
from being unruly under their present Rods, lest they get sharper rods added to
them.

8. The Lord may permit his people to add to their own trouble, by promising
themselves ease, that so their disappointments may heighten their afflictions;
For, Job's Dreams and Visions, are so much the more bitter, as he said, my Bed
shall comfort me, my Couch shall ease my complaint. Who so study sobriety, in
their expectations under trouble, do take away much fuel from the flame of
their own bitterness and discontentments.

Verse. 15. So that my soul chooses strangling: and death rather then my life.

16. I loath it, I would not live always: let me alone, for my days are vanity.


The third Argument, whereby he pleads against his being so afflicted, is taken
from the hard shifts to which his trouble did drive him. These are recorded
here as the result of his restlesness, of which he had complained, ver. 13.14.
That he was so incessantly tossed, sleeping and waking that he turned
desperate: So that, were the matter in his option, he had rather be strangled,
and die a violent and ignominious death, (yea, his soul choosed, and desired it
very earnestly, rather) then thus to live without any intermission of pain,
torture and vexation. And he had rather be dead then have his bones (as it is
in the Original) which only were now left him, the flesh being consumed away,
Job 16.8. and to which also the pain had reached. ver. 15. And although some
may so inordinately love life, as they would have an eternity of it; yet he
loathed his life, and would not live always, ver, 16 --. The meaning whereof is
not barely this, that he declined to continue always and eternally in this
life; (For to desire that, were to wish what is impossible; and to decline it,
would speak little of his haste to be gone:) But that he loathed to live any
longer at all; A moment of longer continuance being an eternity to him. O^, the
meaning is, (as the words will also read) That he was so full and weary of his
life, that it should never be, at any time, that he should desire to live;
nothing he could ever meet with in time, should make him enamoured of life.

This is, indeed, a fit of very great despair, yet so bridled, as he dare not
hasten death unto himself, though he would gladly be at it; as not casting off
hopes of the life to come.

And it teaches,

1. Much oppression will make wise men mad, and constant continued troubles,
and disappointments of all expectations of case, may drive serious and sober
men to hard shifts: For, Job gives this as the result of his former restless
condition, So that my soul chooses strangling, etc. A day of tentation will
discover strange things, and involve men in sad perplexities.

2. Even the breasts of the most godly, and the spirits of strong Believers,
have seeds of despair in them, which may break forth under trial; as here we
see in Job. Which may teach the godly to be humble in their walking, that they
be not led into tentation. And may affright the stout-hearted, who, when their
Consciences are wakened, may meet with this, or worse.

3. However there be an inclination in corrupt men, who have their portion in
this life, to have an eternity of time, and to live always in it; Yet God, when
he pleases, can make their being in the world their greatest burden: For, so
it was with Job, I choose strangling, and death rather then my life; I loath
it, I would not live always.

4. It is Gods way with his people, not to over-charge them with exercise; but
when they are overdriven, he will moderate his dealing: For, Job's scope in
laying before God this his desperate fit, is to plead that, since he was so
overcharged, therefore God may be pleased to pity, and not deal so severely
with him. See Isa. 57.16. Psalm. 99.4. Job 37.23, 24. Only, we would take heed
that, by our unbelief, misconstruction, impatience, etc. we do not make our lot
insupportable, when God has not made it so. For that will be no argument to
plead for pity, till first we be humbled for it, as our weakness. Psalm. 77.8,
9, 10.

5. The Lord so orders the tentations and conflicts of his people, as even when
they are in the height of their fits; his grace does, one way or other, appear
in them: For, when Job would most gladly be at death, yet he dare not cut off
himself. So, my God (which is the language of faith) is the doubters
designation of God, in the height of his diffidence and complaints. Psalm. 22.1.
Isa. 49.14.

Beside the sin of despair, in this discourse, these failings may further be
marked, which ought not to be justified, and may be drawn to our use.

1. That by expecting ease (as is marked on, ver. 13, 14.) and meeting with
disappointment, his heart swells at his condition, and so he falls in the
snare. Humility and sobriety would prevent much vexation and toil to us, and
cut off many tentations.

2. That he speaks his tentation so broadly, and without any reluctance, (as
appears from his doubled and fervent expressions) as his confirmed judgment. It
is too much that a rash word of diffidence and despondency escape us, although
faith and repentance presently follow after, to recall and correct it. But it is
more gross, when he spoke and abide by it, as if we had reason for it. See
Jonah. 4.8, 9.

3. That he contemns his life, and any moderation in his affliction, calling
all that was left him, his BONES: when yet God (in whom we live and move, and
have our being,) had great glory in preserving such an exhausted man, amidst so
many pressures and perplexities. Much of Gods glory may shine in many of our
lots, wherewith, notwithstanding, our peevish hearts are not satisfied.

4. That he was so peremptory in his own opinion, that death was his only
desirable issue; as if he were wiser then God, who had carved out another lot
for him. It is our duty to believe, That God has innumerable issues, for his
people, in his hand; That he can make any thing he pleases an issue to them;
and, That issues prescribed by our selves (particularly, that of death) when we
are in perplexity, are, ordinarily, none of the best.

5. That he measures all things by his present humor; as if, because he now
loathed life, therefore, he would never hereafter, in any case, desire it.
Little do Saints know what changes God may work (as in other things, so) in
their dispositions and inclinations; and cause them see and acknowledge mercy,
where they could find nothing but bitterness.

Upon this his desperate resolution and choice, he infers a suit, ver. -- 16.
That, seeing his days were vanity, therefore, God would let him alone. The
meaning whereof is not so much this; That, considering how eminently vain his
days were made by trouble (which he regrets, ver. 3.) the Lord would let him
alone, or, forbear to afflict him so sore, and let him find some moderation.
But we are to understand it rather thus (which agrees best with his humor,
expressed in the words preceding;) That, since it was in vain, and to no
purpose, that he should live any longer, or his days be prolonged; therefore,
God would let alone and forbear to take any more care of him, that so his
miseries might put an end to his life.

Whence Learn,

1. Tentations may come to that height, that men dare utter them as their
Prayers to God; and they will cause them undervalue, and pray against, gracious
Providence; For, Job here makes a Prayer of his tentations, and prays
against Gods preserving of him, which elsewhere he commends, Job 10.11, 12, 13,
as it is commended also and acknowledged by David, Psalm. 139. We have need to
take heed to our spirits in Prayer, and not to lean to our own ^kill in our
desires, especially under tentation; lest we decline our own mercies. And to
assure us that we are in a right frame for Prayer, we ought still to join
Praise with our Prayer, Phil. 4.6.

2. Men's life and being depends so on God, that if he but withdraw his hand,
they are gone; and so long as he is pleased to preserve and uphold, they
subsist: For, Job reasons that there needs no more to cut him off, but that God
will let him alone, See Act. 17.27, 28.

3. It is not a sufficient reason why God should take away the life of any,
because they think their days are vanity, and that they live to no good
purpose; seeing God may have wise reasons for continuing them, when they see
them not: Herein Job's arguing was faulty, Let me alone, says he, for my days
are vanity. For Job was never more useful to the world and the Church in it,
then when he thought his days were vanity. Many in all ages, have blessed God
for the edification they reaped by what befell him in these his vain days.

4. Men's selfishness, and their not studying of subjection to Gods sovereignty,
do breed them much toil, and occasion many distempers; For, albeit, it were
true, (as Job thought, and the Church complains of her case, Psalm. 89.47) that
his days were vanity, yet there is no reason why therefore he should be let
alone, and permitted to die. For,

1. God sends trouble that he may discover to us that we are but vanity, Psalm.
39.5, 6, 11. and why should we decline to learn that lesson, because of toil?

2. Man's days are, oft-times, no less vain, in respect of sin and want of true
happiness, Psalm. 39.6. then they are made vain by trouble; and yet we complain
not of the vanity of the former, because it is without toil. And therefore why
should we murmur, if God make us sensible of it, by this super-added discovery
of vanity in our days?

3. When God pleases to single out any of his people, to make them eminent
examples of vanity, for the instruction of all others; (as the Church, or
Jeremy in her name, complains of singular afflictions, Lam. 3.1.) why should
the clay decline to be disposed of as the Potter pleases?

Verse. 17. What is man, that thou should magnify him? and that thou
should set thine heart upon him?

18. And that thou should visit him every morning, and try him every moment?

19. How long will thou not depart from me? nor let me alone till I swallow
down my spittle?


Some do understand what is spoken, ver. 17, 18. as depending upon the former
suit, ver. -- 16. As if Job had said; Why will thou not withdraw thine hand,
and suffer me to perish? For of what worth is man, ^or wherein can he be useful
to thee, that thou should put so much respect upon him, as thus constantly
to visit and preserve him; and that, though thou tryest him, to bring out what
is in his heart, yet thou will not cut him off; as if he were worth thy care?
If this were the interpretation, it might hold out those sound truths which are
agreeable to the tenor of the Scriptures.

1. Man is so low and base, that he can claim or crave no respect from God;
What is man, that thou should magnify him?

2. Though man be thus base, yet God does indeed respect him, and by his
greatness make him great; For, God does magnify man, and set his heart upon
him, and does visit him every morning, etc. Beside his redeeming, regenerating,
and saving of some men; he does magnify all, by creating of them, by setting
them above the rest of the creatures, and bestowing acts of constant favor
upon them, and giving proofs of his care of them. Lam. 3.23. All which are no
less beseeming his fullness to give, then they are unlike us to receive them.

3. The right study of this magnifying mercy of God will contribute to abase
man yet more; For, then it should be, What is man, that thou should magnify
him, etc? See Psalm. 8.4. and 144.3.

4. Self-love in men is a great undervaluer of special mercies; so that they
will esteem of nothing they enjoy, if they be not satisfied in whatsoever they
desire: For, it was Job's fault, if all those mercies were now bitter to him,
since he was not taken away from his present toil.

5. No unworthiness in us ought to hinder ou^ closing with freely bestowed
mercies; For, it had been ill argued, That, because of man's baseness, (What is
man?) therefore, God should cast away his care of him, and not magnify and set
his heart upon him, etc.

But this Interpretation will not be found to be the genuine sense of these
words, if we consider that Job's scope in this complaint, i^, to regret his
eminent troubles, and not to commend magnifying and singular favors: and that
what he speaks in general, ver. 17, 18 -- of Gods magnifying, setting his heart
upon man, and visiting him, is instanced particularly, in his trying man every
moment ver. -- 18. and in visiting himself, in particular, so assiduously, and
not departing from him, so that he could not get leisure to swallow down his
spittle. Therefore I take up those three verses (with the other two that
follow, to the end of the Chapter) as Job's fourth Argument against Gods
afflicting him so sore; It consists of two branches, the sum whereof is; That
he could conceive no reason why God so afflicted him, if it were not either to
try him, by the exercise of fatherly correction; and so better him and bring
him nearer to himself: Or else to punish him for sin, not as a Child, but as a
Malefactor. Now Job conceives that neither of these were sufficient reasons
for afflicting of him thus. Neither were these afflictions needful to try him,
ver. 17, 18, 19. nor the fit way of pursuing a quarrel for sin, ver. 20, 21.

For the first branch of the Argument, it is spoken of man in general, ver. 17,
18. and applied to his own case in particular, ver. 19. The meaning of the
words may be taken up diversely.

1. Thus, As if Job had said; Of what worth is man, that thou should put so
much honor on him, and evidence so much of thy affection to him ( v. 17.) as
to take constant notice and care of him, and trouble thy self with him, to be
still trying and bringing him nearer to thee? ( ver. 18.) Therefore, in my
particular, do not vex thy self with me, so as to hold me constantly going with
trouble, that I cannot so much as get leave to breath, or swallow down my
spittle, ver. 19.

2. Thus, If Job had said; Man is not so eminent or terrible a party, that thou
need magnify him so far, as to enter the lists to strive with him as an
equal party to thee, (as David said, in another case, 1 Samuel 24.14.) Nor
need thou set thine heart upon him, or be so resolved to contend with him,
or make such a great and serious business about him (See Job 34.14.) as to be
constantly and momently visiting him with afflictions and trials; For, in my
own particular expei^ience, I find it insupportable, that thou will not so much
as take thy hand from off me, till I draw my breath; nor is it needful that
thou should so hotly pursue me.

This last I take to be the most genuine sense of the words. However, both tend
to one purpose, though differing in the Explication of particular words.

Therefore, from the whole, Learn,

1. Gods taking pains upon man to try him, is indeed an honor and respect put
upon him; For, whatever Job's meaning be, it is certain God does magnify man,
and set his heart upon him, by way of honoring of him, when he visits and
tries him. For hereby he says that he counts him of worth that pains should be
taken upon him; Man's trials do discover and bring forth his graces, if there be
any in him, that they may be commended; And, whether he have grace or not, or
his graces be eminent, or not; yet trial tends to the good of those who improve
it aright: And to the godly, it is a token and evidence of love, Rev. 3.19. And
this is the right way of looking upon trial.

2. As at all times men should be humble; so, especially, trouble should
discover unto man his unworthiness to be dignified by any favor, and his
weakness to contend with God: For, in both these respects, Job in affliction
cries out, What is man that thou should magnify him, etc? Neither is he
worthy of that honor, nor a party for thee to make such a business about him.
And he speaks the more sensibly of this in general, ver. 17, 18. knowing so
much of affliction in his own experience, ver. 19. If favors will not humble
man, and discover his impotency and indigency to him, which needs such frequent
supplies of favor; God will make trouble abase him, and, by putting him in
fear, cause him know himself to be but man, Psalm. 9.20.

3. Though man be thus weak and worthless, yet God is pleased to take notice
of, and pains upon him; For, though it may truly be said, What is man? yet God
does magnify, and visit, and try man. Beside what man may need, of Gods
contending with him, though he be weak; (of which after) His worthlesness
commends God; who takes pains on him; his being precious in Gods eyes makes him
honorable, Isa. 43.4. and God, by taking pains on him, makes him of worth, and
excellent.

4. The Lord, if he please, needs not take much pains, nor make much ado, to
try man and bring him down; For, What is man that thou should magnify him,
etc. and try him every moment? Less then that will serve his turn.

5. Any breathing under trouble is a great mercy, and engages them to patience
who get it; For, Job's complaint is founded on this, that he had not so much as
a breathing time, and that God would not depart from him, nor let him alone, as
to trying and vexing of him, even till he swallowed down his spittle; which may
either point out a short time, so much as he might draw his breath in, as Job
9.18. Or, it points at the nature of his disease, which so infested his throat,
that he could not well swallow down his spittle or any thing else; Or, at the
case of one in an affrightment or perplexity of heart (such as his case was)
which, for the time, will hinder them from so much as swallowing down their
spittle. However, when many do unreasonably complain on far less ground then
Job had, such a disposition and practice calls for more trouble, to tame them.

6. A short time under trouble is very tedious to the afflicted, especially if
his trial be sharp; In this case, he is made to cry, How long will thou not
depart, etc? Every moments continuance of the trouble of such, is an addition
to it; and God, in due time, will take notice of the continuance, as well as of
the greatness, of their trouble, Zech. 1.12.

But beside these truths, insinuated in this pleading, we ought to beware of
these failings and mistakes.

1. The whole Argument, in its branches, is defective. For though God needed
neither afflict Job thus, for trial, nor for punishment; yet he might afflict
him upon another account; not only to give a proof of his power in supporting
him under all these pressures; but to manifest also his Sovereign Dominion over
him; as God himself does plead his own cause, toward the close of the Book. So
that our not seeing a reason of Gods dealing, does not prove his dealing
unjust; and our not remembering of this makes many a needless quarrel

2. Whiles he thus declines and pleads against his sore trouble, he does,
withal, decline that searching trial and exercise, which is an evidence of
blessedness, Psalm. 94.12. which puts so much honor upon the tried man,
evidenceth so much love to him, and does him so much good, being well improved.
We are, ordinarily, so addicted to sense, that we can relish nothing but what
is pleasant. But our leaning to our own wills and inclinations will, readily
cause us forsake our own mercy. For the most refreshing proofs we get are,
ordinarily, brought about by these means and lots which we like worst.

3. Though Job plead that all this sharp usage was not needful for his trial;
yet the Lord found it necessary. Yea, the event cleared, that had not Job been
so sharply tried, neither had he discovered so much of his weakness, nor had
the strength of grace appeared so eminently in him. Man may need more searching
afflictions then he himself will condescend unto; whether for discovering of
graces, or for purging out of corruptions, which he would have spared.

4. His passionate Expostulation, ver. 19. How long will thou not depart from
me, etc? though it was extorted from him by the violence of his affliction; yet
it savours too much of disrespect toward God. And when men are passionate and
disrespective in their addresses to God, it evidenceth the sinfulness of their
way whatever reason they seem to themselves to have for what they say.

Verse. 20. I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of men?
why have thou set me as mark against thee, so that I am a burden to my self?

21. And why do thou not pardon my transgression, and take away mine
iniquity? for now shall I sleep in the dust, and thou shall seek me in the
worning, but I shall not be.


Follows the Second Branch of the Argument, wherein Job pleads against Gods
afflicting of him thus, by way of punishment for sin. His naming of guilt and
sin calms his spirit, and makes him argue very sweetly. The sum of his plea may
be taken up thus, as if Job had said; If thou be pursuing me for sin; Then
either thou do so, to convince me of it; and I do humbly take with it that I
have sinned: Or to have satisfaction from me for my fault, otherwise, thou will
destroy me? Now thou know I cannot make an amends: And withal, it cannot
stand with thy goodness, who art the Preserver of men, to destroy a Penitent,
taking with his sin and inability to satisfy justice. And therefore, why
dealest thou so hardly with me, and do not rather make up the friendship by a
free pardon? For, otherwise, I will soon be undone and cut off by thine hand,
and then thou will have missing of me. In all this reasoning, there is a very
Evangelical strain, only his Expostulation is grounded upon a mistake, that he
would be cut off and die, i^ God did not take off his hand presently; whereas,
however he was kept under it for a while longer, yet he did not sleep in the
dust by it, but escaped safe. And withal, though the way of reasoning be sweet,
yet it was, also, a mistake, that God was pursuing his sin by this stroke.

In this Argument, Consider,

First, Job's carriage in reference to his sin; consisting of a confession of
it, I have sinned; and a disclaiming of any ability to make an amends for his
fault to God; What shall I do unto thee?

Whence Learn,

2. No man's uprightness, who is a mere man, does, in this life, consist in
sinlessness; But the most sincere have sin in them, and days of affliction will
discover their sinfulness yet more: For, in this distress, Job takes with it, I
have sinned.

2. A man may very well maintain his integrity before God, and against the
imputations of men, though yet he find sin in himself; For, so did Job, he
maintains he is an honest man, though he grant also, I have sinned. For a right
discovery of sin is an evidence of our sincerity and integrity. Only we would
take heed that our failings be not such as are not the spot of hi^ people,
Deuteronomy. 32.5. Or, such* blots as (however they may be where grace is, yet) are
not consistent with upright walking; Nor failings flowing from a wicked
principle and disposition, Psalm. 18.21 Nor even infirmities fallen in without
contradiction from the renewed part within us, which we own as our self,
disclaiming our corrupt part, Romans 7.18, 25.

3. Such as are indeed sincere, notwithstanding the^r sinfulness, will not only
find and know their sin; Isai, 59.12. but will make Conscience of confessing it
to God in such a way as may speak their sense of it: For so does Job here, I
have sinned. And albeit the confession be general; yet, flowing from a deep
sense, it speaks more emphatically then particular expressions, as testifying
the sense of sin to be above words, See Jer. 14.20. Luke 18.13. This confession
is necessary and required, not for the informing of God, who knows our thoughts
afar off; But, That the sinners own heart may be the more affected with his own
sin, while he dwells upon the thoughts thereof, when he confesses it, and
shames himself before God for it; That free grace may be honored, by the
sinners proclaiming of his unworthiness, and that he has no refuge but grace;
That way may be made for pardon, according to the tenor of the Promise, and
the sinner may hereby find ease, See Psalm. 32.3, 4, 5. Jer. 3.12, 13. 1 John
1.9.

4. When sin is taken with and confessed, by a sincere man; he will not judge
it a matter to be dallied with; nor his confession a sufficient exoneration:
But he will look upon sin as a matter of great consequence, and account it a
very serious case, how to find a remedy of that woeful snare wherein he has
brought himself; For, unto his Confession, it is subjoyned; what shall I do? as
being willing and ready to do any thing he could, to ease himself of that
burden. See Acts 2.37. and though men at ease do, ordinarily, pass this matter
of guilt lightly, as thinking to satisfy God with a general and ^^perficial
confession; yet a condition of trouble (such as Job was in) and a tender
wakened Conscience, meeting together, will drive them to other thoughts.

5. It is an evidence that a man is truly affected with sin, when he is ready
to submit to any terms God shall put upon him, for removal of his sin, if it be
within his power to perform: For, this Question, What shall I do? imports, he
will prescribe nothing to God, but if God enjoin, and he be a^le, it shall he
sweet to him to be about any thing, so be he may be rid of sin and guilt. So
much also is imported in these Questions, Act. 2.37. and 6.30.

6. Albeit men be bound, and able also, to do somewhat to their neighbors for
reparation of any wrong done to them by their sin; and albeit they be bound to
do somewhat about their sin toward God, in repenting for it, Act. 2.38. being
thankful, when they are pardoned, and watchful, that they fall not in new
provocations, Joh 5.14. Yet they can do nothing, by way of price of
satisfaction, to God for their sin; For, this Question What shall I do unto
thee? imports this, that he can do nothing to rep^^^ the ^^ju^y done to God by
his sin. Hence, Serious conviction for sin will put a man from all conceit of
his own merit; and sensible confession of sin must be joined with sen^e of
inability to make any satisfaction, I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee?
which is far from the practice of those hypocritical pretenders, Mic. 6.6, 7.

Secondly, Job's apprehensions of God; whereupon, notwithstanding his sin and
inability, he grounds his plea. This is imported in his pleading with God under
the name of, the Preserver of men. This is true of God, in respect of his
gen^ral Providence, that he preserves man and beast, Psalm. 36 6. And as he is
the Savior, or, Conservatour of all men, so especially of them that believe, 1 Timothy 4.10. His scope, in this compellation of God, is to plead, that since, by
his efficacious Providence, he preserves mankind, therefore he would not
destroy him who takes with his guiltiness. Where we may observe a double
mistake in this pleading: For neither was he destroyed (as he supposed and
feared) but continued a monument of Gods wonderful care and preservation; Nor
yet does it follow that, because God is the Preserver of men, therefore, he may
not destroy any of them when he pleases; For his preserving of them is an act
of his Sovereign good pleasure.

From all which we may Learn,

1. As all Creatures, having a dependant Being, do need continual preservation;
^o man (beside the consideration of his being) is so weak a creature, and so
obnoxious to many hazards, that he could not subsist in the world without a
continual preserving hand about him: As here is supposed.

2. As God alone must be the continuer of that being which he has given; so he
is most sit for that undertaking: Having infinite power to support and guard
men; wisdom to prevent and ward off inconveniences; Patience, to suffer their
peevish humors, which might provoke him to cast off care of them, etc. beside
his special love and interest in his own people. Therefore is he called, the
Preserver of men.

3. It is useful and necessary, especially in a time of trial, that Saints do
know God, what he is, and do retain right thoughts of his properties and
operations; Therefore Job, in his trial, fixes on this, that he is the
Preserver of men.

4. Even those more general and common notions of God, taken from his common
works of Providence in the world, are of great use to be studied by the people
of God in an hour of trial; As here Job studieth his being the Preserver of
men. For not only are these comfortable to the godly, as flowing from special
love to them: But even when, at any time, they are driven from more special
grounds of love, whereupon faith might build, (as is not seldom the lot of
godly, when the foundations seem to be destroyed;) it is their wisdom to make
use of those, and, upon the account thereof, clame and cleave to him, till more
comfortable grounds appear to them; As David clames, in his d^sertions, to Gods
taking him out of the womb, and his care of him from his Mothers belly, Psalm.
22.9, 10. And here there will be need that we guard against our pride, which
will be ready to rej^ct all these grounds of faith, because we can get no other.

5. The people of God, through their weakness and mistakes, are, oft-times,
ready to look upon Gods dealing as inconsistent with his properties, or what is
recorded of him; For, Job brings in this designation of God as a ground of his
following plea, that God, being the Preserver of men, should not deal so
severely with him.

6. Whatever God do to his people, or whatever their sense judge of his
dealing; yet faith in the penitent is allowed to have comfortable thoughts and
looks of God, and to feed on his sweetest Attributes under sadd^st
d^spensations; And to believe that, even when God seems to destroy, he is the
Preserver of men, though they cannot reconcile this with the sense of his
present dealing: As Job here does in his plea. And indeed there is not only
ground to believe the preservation and safety of a sinner, taking with his
sinfulness and desperate of a remedy in him self (which was Job's present
condition) by virtue of that other righteousness, Romans 3.20, 21, 22. the Gospel
coming to intercept and prevent the execution of the Law-sentence; whereby the
sinner becomes most safe, by being thus undone: But, even when the Lord seems
to pursue such a Penitent, it is to be believed that he delights not in their
destruction or prejudice, Lam. 3.33. nor intends it always, when they apprehend
it, as the Church pleads. Hab. 1.12. Nor will he destroy such, though it may
seem good to him to take them out of the world.

Thirdly, His Inferences upon these grounds; wherein he pleads against his sore
afflictions, and for some other issue of the matter then yet he had found.

His first Inference, ver. -- 20. is by way of pleading against Gods present
dealing with him, making him the Butt of his indignation; (alluding to what be
said, Chap. 6.4. See also Job 16.12. Lam. 3.12.) by reason whereof he was
become a burden to himself, or weary of his life, as ver. 15, 16. and Chap
10.1. and left to himself, and on his own hand. The sum of this Inference, is,
as if Job had said; Lord! since thou delightest in friendship with thy people,
and to manifest thy self to be a Preserver; Why do thou thus pursue thy own
penitent servant, to destroy me? For thou know that thou will sooner destroy
me by this usage (as already I am become an insupportable burden upon mine own
back) then bring me to make any amends for my faults. And therefore why do
thou take this course, which seems so contrary to thy Name and Titles, and
which is not the way to reconciliation and friendship, but to ruin me?

Hence Learn,

1. As for this way of pleading, by challenging and questioning of God, Why
have thou set me, etc? Albeit it be not suitable that dust should speak in such
terms to God; yet herein he is not only to be pitied, as being under a
tentation; but his vehemence is not to be too rigidly censured, as flowing from
love seeking friendship with God. Love has much boldness, and is allowed to be
very importunare.

2. Gods being a party in anger is a very insupportable bu^den to a sensible
and tender soul; For, that is the sad regret here, Why have thou set me as a
mark against thee, to spend the Arrows of thy wrath upon me? See Job 13.24.
This is a stroke sadder, to a right discerner, then all strokes beside, or then
if all the world beside were against a man, Psalm. 3.5, 6. and 109.28. Happy are
they who are affected with this as their burden; for many never mind it, who
have best cause. And (if I may add this also) it is sad addition to this
(already) insupportable burden, when tentations, and apprehensions of Gods
displeasure, drive us to bitterness against God. When we are not only a mark
against him, pierced by his Arrows; but our spirits turn also to be against
him, by our b^tter resentments of his dealing, Zech. 11 8 Job 15.13. It would
be more easy to tender souls, that God seemed to be against them, if they
could love him for all that. But this crowns their misery, when, apprehending
God a Party, they turn head again, and become bitter. It is a mark of Saints
honesty to bewail this, when they can do no more, Job 9.18. Lam 3.15. And the
humble may, from this consideration, plead for a relenting of Gods hand, seeing
the friendship will never be made up, till he be first kind.

3. Tentation and weakness, in a time of trial, will raise and bring up many
false reports of God; For, however Job's afflictions were eminently sharp; yet
God was not so far against him in wrath, as he apprehended. See Isa. 40 27, 28,
etc. and 49.13, 14, 15. It is a special mercy to find wisdom, whereby to
discern our case without mistakes We will, ere all be done, see much cause to
complain of our infirmity, that mistook God when he was good, Psalm. 77.8, 9,
10. And they are happy who cannot but believe love, and have sweet thoughts of
God, in every lot; and do not, by their own mistakes, imbitter their own
crosses, but do reckon that the harshest of dispensations may consist with
love, and flow from it.

4. As tentations will soon make a man's life his burden; So a man's self when he
seems to be rejected of God, is a very heavy burden; to have himself to answer
and care for, in all things. In both these respects, this is the consequent of
Job's sad apprehensions, so that I am a burden to my self, wearied of my life,
and left by thee, to take charge of my self. This may teach us, as not to dote
upon our life, so to be sensible of what burdens God holds daily of us, and to
study dependence on God in all things, not provoking him to let us feel our own
weight.

His Second inference, ver. 21. -- is, That, since God was a Preserver; and
neither his satisfaction, nor Gods stroke for sin, could make up the
friendship; Therefore he desires that God would put an end to the quarrel; by
pardoning his guilt, and taking away his sin, in its pollution and sad effects.

Whence Learn,

1. The only way for making up of peace betwixt God and sinners, is, by free
pardon, and the Lords passing from the quarrel, when men are sensible of their
sin and inability; For, Job finds no issue, unless God pardon his
transgression. See also, Psalm. 32.1, 2. And this affords us great
encouragement, that when neither any thing we can do, nor any stroke inflicted
by God, can make up the friendship, there is yet another way of attaining it,
by Gods free pardon.

2. The grossness and heinousness of sin will not hinder Gods pardoning of them
who come to him, in the due order, to obtain it; For, Job supposes here, that
he pardons even transgression, or, rebellion, and iniquity, or, crook^d
perversnese. See Isa. 1.18.

3. Albeit pardon cannot be merited by us, but is the free gift of God through
Jesus Christ; yet only those sinners are pardoned, who, coming to God through
Christ for pardon, are sensible of their sin and inability to rid themselves of
that burden; as Job declares he is, ver. 20. and who do so esteem of pardon,
that they cannot want it, and are most solicitous about it, as a privilege
without which they are undone: So much does Job's pathetick question impart,
And why do thou not pardon? By such God will be looked on as singular,
because he pardons iniquity, Mic. 7.18.

4. As the filth and pollution of sin must be abhorred, and pursued, by every
pardoned man; so it is the power of God alone that can effectually remove it:
For, so much is imported in what is subjoyned to pardon, of taking away
iniquity, not only by pardon but by renovation, which he seeks with the former;
and seeks it to be done by God, who alone can remove it. If we do not employ
the power of Christ's death, for Renovation and Mortification of sin, as well as
the price of it for pardon; Law-convictions and discoveries will but make sin
more alive, Romans 7.8, 9. and our pollution will continue and grow,
notwithstanding our diligence and pains.

5. When Sin is pardoned, and Renovation endeavored, it does not only bring
peace with God, but ease also (if not an out-gate) of all afflictions for sin;
For, so much also is imported here, when he pardons transgression, he also
takes (or, makes to pass) away iniquity, in its sad effects and punishments
inflicted for it. So iniquity is taken for the punishment of sin, Genesis 19.15.
Psalm. 31.10. and 49.5. It is true, pardoned men are not always freed from
afflictions; yet, being pardoned, the sting and bitterness is taken out of
them, 1 Cor. 15.55, 56. Isa. 33.24. A pardoned man may sing of blessedness in
the midst of his troubles, Psalm. 32.1, 2. and 144 15. For then troubles come
for necessary profit, so that it were a prejudice to want them, how humbling
soever they be. Heb. 1^.10. They are fraught with love, sweetened with the hope
of glory, Romans 5.2, 3. and do occasion many gracious visits from God, Psalm.
31.7 It is a plague upon men that they follow not this method in their
troubles, of pressing, first and chiefly, after pardon of sin, which would turn
saddest storms into Summer days; whereas they seek unto many refuges in their
difficulties, forgetting their resting place.

Job shuts up these his Inferences, with this confirmation of his plea, ( ver.
-- 21.) That if God did not grant his desire, but would still proceed in a
course of severity; he would indeed be crushed and cut off thereby, but the
Lord (so to say) would himself repent it, and would miss poor Job, when he had
destroyed him, and seek him early to do him good, but should not find him; and
so (speaking after the manner of men, and upon an impossible supposition) he
should repent that he had dealt so severely with his poor servant.

In this pleading, Learn,

1. Job's mistake, that he would presently die, if God withdrew not his hand;
does tell us, That our apprehensions do breed us many crosses; wherewith we
will never really meet.

2. His mistake, that, in the case wherein he is, he will die, if God relent
not, is yet grounded on this general verity; That however we think lightly of
sin, yet a wakened Conscience, wanting pardon of sin and reconciliation, and
pursued with strokes and wrath, will soon over-charge a frail creature, even to
the cutting off of his life, if God interpose not; For Job being in the
condition himself describes, convinced of sin, pursued by wrath, and not
pardoned, it was only the power of God that prevented this consequent of all
this, Now shall I sleep in the dust. And God is pleased oft-times, to put his
people to those pinches, that they may think seriously on death, and provide
furniture for it.

3. It is the duty and property of faith to keep the Covenant-style, and take a
Covenant-look of all their lots, how terrible soever they be; For, though Job
be dreadfully tossed, now when he apprehends he is passing over the Bar of
death; yet he takes a Gospel look of it, and gives it the Gospel-name, a sleep.

4. Faith in the truly sincere will not, and ought not, quit its grip, although
it obtain none of its desires; But, though strokes and wrath pursue even to the
death, and sense, Friends and all outward probabilities, say, God has cast
off: yet, faith will believe love, and that God will own them, although he
should seek them after death, and show wonders to the dead; as that question,
Psalm. 88.10. imports. For, so does Job reckon; If I (says he) shall sleep in
the dust, thou shall seek me in the morning, to do me good, and make good thy
Promises to me: His scope in which arguing, is, That, since God must be
faithful in his Promises to his people, though he should seem even to destroy
them; and seeing it is not his ordinary way to show wonders to the dead, in
bringing them back to life again, that he may be kind to them: Therefore, he
pleads that God would relent in time, before he should destroy, and then miss
him. And as this instance repoves them who do not believe in lesser
d^fficulties; So it may encourage them who, in deadly extremities, are thus
bold and hazard fair on God.

5. This arguing, that it shall be (speaking after the manner of men) matter of
grief to God, when he shall seek him in the morning, and he shall not be; does
teach, That Christ is not a little concerned how it fare with afflicted humble
sinners, fleeing to him. Though they seem to bear their burdens all alone; yet
he is deeply concerned in his glory, and by his promise, to be the refuge of
such oppressed ones. They are so dear to him, by reason of his purchase, and
his office and charge, whereof he must give an account; that if it were
possible they should perish, he would be a loser, and that irreparably. And
however they may outwardly perish; yet they shall go to ruin with his
affection, and their dry and scattered bones shall have a room in his heart.
This may remove all jealousy from them who love him, and yet seem not to be
beloved of him. For a pursuer is upheld, Psalm. 63.8. otherwise he could not
pursue. Only his love is not fond, as creatures love is; but the expressions
thereof are ordered by Infinite Wisdom. His love to us will not withhold what
may try us, how unpleasing soever it be; He delights to make such discoveries
of his grace in us (such as Job manifests here) by his hiding of his face; He
can let us apprehend what may make our trial complete, and yet knows how to
hinder it from taking effect, and give us a blessed disappointment; and, He can
let a Believer essay the dark passage of death in his exercise, and yet bring
him back from the gates thereof.

CHAP. VIII.
Job, having thus answered Eliphaz, does not yet satisfy his Friends; But gets
as little rest in disputing, as formerly he had (Chap. 1.) when Messengers of
sad news came upon him, one after another. And therefore Bildad, another Friend
(employed after Eliphaz to confound him with their joint opposition) being
wearied ere Job had ended his long Discourse, (if not interrupting him) makes a
second assault upon him. Wherein, nothing that he says, ver. 5, 6, 20, 21.
gives any ground to think that he differed in his Principles from Eliphaz; as
if he judged not, with Eliphaz, that simply to be under outward afflictions,
especially great afflictions, did prove a man to be wicked: But supposes that
the godly may be in trouble, for the trial and exercise of their graces; and
only asserteth that they lie not long under it, but so soon as they call, God
helps: otherwise, if men continue long in trouble, it is an evidence of their
wickedness. For neither does Job (who understood his mind well enough) give any
hint of such a thing in his answer; nor does his own doctrine, ver. 11-19.
taken from Antiquity, come any thing of Eliphaz his Assertions. And what he
says by way of mitigation, is only to invite him to seek God and begin of new,
in hope of restitution; wherein Eliphaz had also dealt. And so, their
Principles being the same, the mistakes in his doctrine maybe cleared, by what
has been observed in Eliphaz his discourse.

In the Chapter we have, 1. A General Refutation of all that Job had said in
his own defense, ver. 1, 2. 2. An asserting of the justice of God, which he
supposes Job had wronged in his discourse and complaints, ver. 3. wishing him
to adore this justice in the stroke inflicted on his Children, ver. 4. and make
right use of it in his own stroke, upon hope of favor, ver. 5, 6, 7. 3. A
confirmation, taken from the doctrine and consent of Antiquity, ver. 8, 9, 10.
of the certain destruction of wicked hypocrites, ver. 11-19. 4. A Conclusion
subjoyned to this Doctrine, wherein he invites Job to Repentance, ver. 20, 21,
22.

Verse. 1. Then answered Bildad the Shuhite, and said,

2. How long will thou speak these things? and how long shall the words of thy
mouth be like a strong wind?


IN the very entry, Bildad contradicts and repels all Job's defenses as empty
and vain; challenging him that he should think to bear down his Friends, and
the truth they maintained, with abundance and vehemence of idle discourse,
like a strong wind hurrying all before it that comes in its way: and wondering
how Job can insist so long on that which he was weary to hear, and which, it
seems, his anger and indignation forced him to interrupt. Thus does he judge of
all that the holy man had said in his great distress and perplexity. And if we
look upon this Doctrine in general, abstracting from his mis-application, it
will teach,

1. Opposition unto truth, though it may be very violent, and make a great
noise; yet, it will be but in vain and ineffectual, like a strong wind, which
breaks it self upon a Rock, but does not overthrow the Rock: So much does his
general Assertion, though erring in the Application, import.

2. As it is a sin to engage in Error and an ill course; So to persist therein
is intolerable, and zeal against them who do so, is very laudable: For, had
Bildad been right and Job in the wrong, it had been a commendable evidence of
his zeal, to expostulate, How long will thou speak these things? and the words
of thy mouth be like a strong wind?

But if we look upon this challenge as coming from a man, who himself was in
the error; and as reflecting upon a afflicted Saint, and his serious
Discourses, though mixed with some passion and frailty; It teaches,

1. Afflicted Saints ought not to limit or prescribe any end to their own
trials; but to resolve that they will have one assault upon the back of
another, till their trial be perfected: For, no greatness of affliction on Job,
no sharp usage by Eliphaz, and no Apology on his own hehalf, can hinder Bildad
from answering, and setting sorrowful meat before him of new. Such new assaults
should tell us that God has yet more to discover and try in us.

2. Every renewed assault upon Saints will have something in it to give it an
edge, and add to the bitterness of what they lay under former^y; For, albeit,
Bildad repeat only what was said b^^ore by Eliphaz, yet it has this to sharpen
it, that it is spoken by another then Eliphaz, and so Job must ^mo^^ of his
Friends against him. This sharpning and quickening of our renewed trials is
ordered by God, to keep us from formality and carelessness under them.

3. The Children of God, in their trials, may expect not only hard usage from
God himself; but to be hardly allowed audience by others in their complaints,
or get a good construction in what they say, that so they may be fully tried on
all hands: For, so does Bildad carry toward Job and his discourses; How long
will thou speak these things? and the words of thy mouth be like a strong wind,
full of violent impetuous passion, but without any thing of reason? Not only
are the godly to lay their account to be mocked by the wicked in their
troubles, Psalm. 69.10. but to be a fear to their acquaintance, Psalm. 31.11. and
to have their godly friends, not only mistaking, but, very angry at them; as
here. This the Lord does, That he may wean his people from applause; That he
alone may have the glory of supporting them under all those loads superadded to
their burdens; And, That by such examples as these, we may be armed for such a
trial, to have many godly friends on our tops, and condemning us, not only in a
particular cause and debate, but even in our personal state; As here they dealt
with Job.

4. Passion, prejudice and mistakes, will breed ill constructions and
misrepresentations of things, which would appear otherwise to the impartial
observer; For, from these causes it flowed that Bildad so judges of Job's
discourses, which were true and serious, though mixed with frailty. Prejudices
do indeed hinder the sight of truth, and our right estimation of things. And
while we charge every consequence that may follow upon a principle, upon the
maintainer of the principle, as if that consequence were expressly intended by
him; while we charge every thing as a design, upon a man, that his way leads
to; and, while we judge that such and such persons, or persons so and so dealt
with by God, cannot have a good cause, we will never judge right. And therefore
jealousy over our selves, and love and calmness in reference to others, are
requisite, if we would judge righteous judgment.

Verse. 3. Does God pervert judgment? or does the Almighty pervert justice?
In this verse (which begins the second part of the Chapter) he asserts the
justice of God, which he thought Job reflected upon, and so taxes his doctrine
more particularly. And for confirmation of this Assertion; he appeals to Job's
own conscience, if it be right to assert that God, who is Omnipotent, does not
walk according to the title of justice, in his procedure with men? As for the
two words here used, Judgment and Justice, they may be taken indifferently as
expressing one and the same thing. Or, if we distinguish them, sometime one of
them serves to express Gods righteous procedure in punishing the wicked; and
the other, his procedure in vindicating the righteous, when they are oppressed;
Yet so, as both these words are indifferently used in Scripture, to express the
one, or other, of these. Or, they may be differenced thus; judgment, points at
the accurate trial of the cause (speaking after the manner of men) before he
proceed to sentence; and justice* at his sentencing according as the cause
requires. Or, they may be more exactly differenced thus; justice is between
two, the Judge and the Party; judgment, is betwixt three, the Judge and two
Parties. And accordingly, the meaning of Bildad's assertion may be thus
extended; That Job had no cause to impeach Gods justice, neither in what he had
inflicted upon him immediately by his own hand, or in punishing him for his
sins against himself; nor yet in what he inflicted mediately by instruments, or
for his sins against his neighbors.

This is a true Assertion; but Job is unjustly charged with the denial and
quarrelling of it, in their sense; and accordingly, he vindicates himself Chap.
9.2. For,

1. Job's maintaining of his own righteousness is not a quarrelling of Gods
righteousness who afflicted him: Job held both to be true, though he could not
reconcile Gods de^ling with the testimony of his own Conscience that did
evidence his weakness, but not charge God with unrighteousness.

2. As for his complaints of Gods dealing, he was indeed more culpable therein
(and convinced to be so by God) then he would at first see and acknowledge; Yet
therein he intended no direct accusation against Gods righteousness. But they
only show that the weight of trouble, and frailty of the flesh, will put Saints
so hard (...) it, that there will be a conflict betwixt Faith and Sense about
Gods dealing; in which case, there is a liberty of laying out their perplexity
before God, as a mean to break and weaken their tentations. This was Job's way
(though sometime his sense prevailed too much in it) which, because Bildad
understood not, through want of experience, therefore he mistook him.

From this purpose we may Learn,

1. The Justice of God is so uncontrovertedly clear in all his proceeding,
whether he act immediately, or mediately by instruments, that the Conscience of
the greatest complainer, when put to it seriously, must subscribe to it; and
all are bound to the defense of it, as witnesses for God: So much does Bildad's
way of propounding this doctrine import. He is not content nakedly to assert it
that God is righteous, but by way of interrogation, puts it home to Job's
Conscience, as a truth he could not deny; Does God pervert judgment, etc? And
by his vehemence in asserting this, he witnesses his own bounden duty
zealously to stand for the maintenance thereof. And therefore they do sin
egregiously, who do indeed quarrel God, Psalm 73.10. Mal. 2.17. and 3.13, 14,
15. And Saints ought to be very careful of justifying God, even in his hardest
dispensations, Neh. 9.32, 33. Psalm. 22.3. and 51.4. and to be very wary of
giving any occasion to others, to misconstruct them, as if they were
quarrelling God; as Job did to Bildad, by his passionate complaints.

2. Such as know God, in his perfect and holy nature and Attributes, will see
clear cause to justify God in his proceeding; and particularly, they who look
upon his Omnipotent Power and All sufficiency, will see that he can neither be
moved to injustice, by hope of any reward, nor hindered to be just, by the fear
of the greatness of any, or any other by-respect; and therefore must be
unquestionably just: This confirmation of Gods righteousness is insinuated in
that he calls him, God, who is infinitely pure and holy, and the Almighty, or,
All-sufficient. And this does teach us, partly, that the right way to judge of
Gods dealing, and his righteousness therein, is not only to look downward, upon
his sharp dispensations, wherein passion and sense may be ready to bemist us;
but to look upward, to God the worker, believing that his work is like himself,
whatever our sense say to the contrary. And, partly, that such as quarrel Gods
dealing, do indeed reflect upon himself, and do (in so far) call in question
his holy and perfect Nature and Attributes.

3. Though God be unquestionably righteous; Yet his dispensations may, at
sometimes, be such toward his people, as they cannot easily reconcile his
justice in his dealing, with the testimony of their own Consciences, concerning
their own integrity: For, as Job could not reconcile these two, and therefore
complained so often that the righteous God dealt so with him, who was a
righteous man; So this gave the rise to Bildad's stumbling and mistake of him,
who judged that Job could not but deny Gods righteousness, so long as he
pleaded his own integrity, being so sore afflicted by God. This, as it bewrayes
our blindness, who are soon bemisted; So it points out a great trial of a man's
integrity, when it should seem the righteousness of God in afflicting him does
contradict any thing he can say for himself, and yet he dare not quit his plea.

4. The study of Gods sovereignty will solve many difficulties, in the sad lots
and sufferings of Saints; For, this it was which Job forgot in his complaints,
and which Bildad did not mind in his challenge against Job. Otherways, the
studying of Gods sovereignty in afflicting will leave to the afflicted
righteous man the testimony of his good Conscience, and yet take away all
ground of quarrelling Gods sharpest dealing toward him.

Verse. 4. If thy children have sinned against him, and he have cast them away
for their transgressions:
Bildad makes Application, of this Assertion, concerning the justice of God,
first (in this verse) to the case of Job's Children, wishing him to adore Gods
justice in dealing with them according to their desert, and not to prove
himself wicked, by complaining of so just an act, He only propounds the case,
and that very softly and by way of supposition, that his Children were cut off
for their sins; and leaves the conclusion to be gathered by himself, that
therefore he should not quarrel Gods justice in this stroke. This he does,
partly, out of tenderness toward Job, who was so sadly afflicted in the loss of
his Children, of whose restoration there was no hope; and, partly, because, in
the following verses, he infers the conclusion in a contrary direction
concerning his carriage in reference to what had befaln him or his Children.

In this doctrine, concerning Job's Children we may observe these mistakes and
failings,

1. It was his error to assert that none are suddenly cut off, as Job's
Children were, but flagitious men, sinners against God and transgressors. For
God may exercise, even his dearest Children, that way (as Job asserts, Chap.
9.22. and is abundantly instanced in Scripture) and yet put a difference
betwixt them and the wicked in the life to come. Outward dispensations of
Providence have been, of old, made use of to plead against truth.

2. It was his failing to judge so uncharitably of Job's Children, merely upon
the account of their affl^ctions, when yet we find not that he had remarked any
scandal in their lives. Uncharitableness toward others, whether without ground,
or on light ground, is a great sin, and an evidence that we are but little
sensible of our own failings. See Luke 13.1, -- 5.

3. It was his fault to be so cruel to afflicted Job, as that he will not
suffer him to regret so sad a loss, or to bemoan his wants; but he will charge
that upon him as wickedness, and a charging of God with injustice; as the
dependence of this verse, upon the preceding clears that to be his scope
here. Many grain-weights of allowance must be given, and will be given by God,
to afflicted and broken spirits.

Yet this General Doctrine, abstracting from his mistakes and failings, may
teach us,

1. Real guiltiness, not repented of, will pursue the sinner, till it bring him
under the lash of vengeance; For, this is of truth, If men sin against him, he
will cast them away (or, send them away) by the hand of their transgression, as
it is in the Original. Their sin will be the Executioner, by whose hand God
will send them to the pit. Thus sin will find sinners out, Numb. 32.23. and it
will pursue them at the heels, till at last it overtake them, and compass them
about. Psalm. 49.5. So that a man is never secure, be his condition what it
will, so long as he is under unrepented sin.

2. The Conscience of sin and guilt should stop the afflicteds mouth, and
leaves them nothing to say, by way of quarrelling of Gods dealing; For, Bildad
supposes that, if his assertion concerning Job's Children be true, Job should
have no more to say against Gods stroke; and therefore he passes over the
conclusion with silence, putting Job in mind to be silent also. They are indeed
not sensible enough of sin, who quarrel their afflictions much, Lam. 1.18.
Hence it is, that quarrellers are, oftimes, left to themselves, to fall in sin,
or get their Consciences wakened upon them, to make them sober. See Psalm. 15.4.

3. Just and irremediable strokes should be digested with silence; nor should
our affection keep up quarrels about what we cannot remedy: For, Job's Children
(who were deer to him) being now gone, and that (not only justly, as Bildad
thought, but) irrecoverably, there was no reason, nor was it to any purpose, to
continue his quarrelling and complaints. Thus was Aaron silenced, Lev. 10.3. In
such a case, the next remedy and victory, is, to bear our cross, Jer. 10.19.
and not to lose our selves by impatience, Luke 21.19. when we have lost our
beloved mercies by the hand of God.

4. The Lord may so order the trials of his people, that what is their own
tentation and fear, others may make it an accusation and challenge against
them; For, what Job feared of his Children in their feasting, Job 1.5. (which
was the time when they were cut off, Job 1.18, 19.) Bildad does now charge upon
them. This is made our lot, that it may touch and try us nearly, when our own
tentations and the accusations of others do so concur together. And as,
sometime, the Lord hereby tries our humility and ingenuity, if we will take a
challenge from others, for what we can be content to charge upon our selves;
So, oft-times, God makes use of this as a mean to drive his people from some
tentations, wherewith they are much vexed, till by such challenges they be
rouzed up to examine better the truth of those fears, which do so much haunt
and perplex them.

Verse. 5. If thou would seek unto God betimes, and make thy supplication to
the Almighty:

6. If thou were pure and upright, surely now he would awake for thee, and make
the habitation of thy righteousness prosperous.

7. Though thy beginning was small, yet thy latter end should greatly increase.


In these verses, Bildad (in the second place) makes application of this
Doctrine, concerning Gods justice, to Job's own case; And exhorts him that, in
stead of quarrelling what was inflicted on his sons or himself, he would seek
the right use of it, in hope of restitution of himself who was not yet cut off.
The meaning of the words shortly, is; That, as if he had been a seeker of God,
and an upright man, God would have preserved him from troubles, So, if yet he
would seek God timously and humbly, ver. 5, and would endeavor a suitable
disposition and carriage, beseeming a seeker of God, ver. 6. -- God would not
lie by from helping of him, as he seemed to do; but would appear, and make his
estate and family, (wherein he walked righteously) to prosper, ver. -- 6. Yea,
for as small and low as now he was, God would make his latter estate increase
above his former prosperity, ver. 7.

This Doctrine is leavened with the common error of all those Friends; That
true Piety will either keep off affliction, when God has a man to try; or take
off the affliction, before the trial be perfected. Yet, laying aside his
mistakes, useful things may be gathered from this Doctrine. As.

1. Quarelling, ordinarily, hinders men's use-making and improving of their sad
lots; Therefore does Bildad wisely (upon his own supposition and principles)
call Job from quarrelling justice, in what was done to himself or to his sons,
to seek unto God.

2. Seeking of God and Piety should not be laid aside, or cast off as useless,
notwithstanding any lot that may befall us; For, notwithstanding all that God
had done to Job, or his family, Bildad still exhorts him to seek unto God. This
is Satan's great design in all troubles, to drive us to disrelish Piety, 2 King.
6.33. Psalm. 73.13, 14. from which if we be preserved, we are more then
conquerours. And it ought to be our care, under such lots, to try, not only if
we be following Piety, but if we be accounting it good so to do, Psalm. 73.28.

3. Such as are truly pious and penitent, and so lie nearest a comfortable
issue from troubles, are here described by very genuine characters.

1. They seek unto God, as their chief refuge in all distresses; So that
nothing presses them, but they take it as a call to go to God with it, and
they will not let their work lie upon their own hand, so long as there is
relief, ease and clearing of their case, to be had in God, or from God, as Genesis
^5.22.

2. They seek unto God, betimes, especially under affliction. They make haste
and delay not to do their duty, as Psalm 119.60. And they are instant and
diligent with God, according as their necessities press them. For afflictions
are sent not only to call us to seek God, but to be diligent in it, and to rouz
us up from laziness and formality.

3. They are taught to have high and reverent thoughts of God, whom they are
ready to forget and slight when they are at ease; For, then, God is the
Almighty.

4. They become humble under Gods hand, not swelling in pride because they are
afflicted, but stooping to the dust before so great a party; For, they make
supplication (which is the way of the poor, Prove. 18.23.) to the Almighty. See
Jam 4.10.

5. Whatever testimony they have of their integrity; yet free grace is only
their claim in all their addresses to God; For, they make supplication, which,
in the Original, further imports, an employing of, and having recourse to,
grace alone, in their distresses.

6. They ought also to make Conscience of joining a personal upright frame, and
walk, with their addresses to God; For, they must be pure and upright; Pure, as
to the sincerity of their heart and disposition, and upright in their
conversation. See 2 Timothy 2.19. Psalm. 66.18. Where these are, they not only
presuppose and evidence personal reconciliation, which portendeth good to the
person, whatever his lot be, But they testify that the man is seeking God
sincerely for a right end, and will improve the returns he gets, to the best
advantage, and not consume them upon his lusts, Jam. 4.3. As also, that his
afflictions have been blessed to him, to draw him to this purity and sincerity,
if at any time he have formerly swarved from them.

7. As they ought to be holy in all manner of conversation, 1 Pet. 1.15. So
especially in their behavior in reference to their domestical affairs, for the
advancing whereof, men are most ready to take sinistruous courses; and among
their domestic and intimate relations, where, usually, men take greatest
liberty: For, their habitation must be the habitation of their righteousness,
an house which they do not build up by iniquity or unrighteousness, Hab. 2.12.
and wherein they walk righteously, Psalm. 101.2.

Doct. 4. When men are brought sincerely to seek God, they ought to manage
their saddest lots with hope in God; For, upon condition that Job will follow
his counsel, he allows him hope, notwithstanding all that had befaln him. See 1 Samuel 30.6. Psalm. 42.5, 11. Job 35.14. And this hope is most necessary, not only
to the honoring of God, but to prevent the blasting of our diligence, and
crushing of our endeavors, through discouragement.

5. Albeit sincere seekers of God are not allowed to expect that all that is
promised here shall be always performed within time; For, it is not to be
expected that God will always make their habitation prosperous in the world,
nor yet that he will, from the small beginnings and appearances to which they
may be redacted by affliction, raise them up to a prosperous condition, beyond
whatever they formerly enjoyed: (both which seem to be employed in that
comparison, v. 7.) Yet thus far the true seeker of God may lay hold on these
encouragements.

1. That seekers of God have the promise of all these, to assure them, that
what they receive of them, is in love, and that none of them shall be withheld,
in so far as is for their good, Psalm. 34.10. See 1 Timothy 4.8. 1 Cor. 3.21, 22,
23.

2. That, however sense may say, God is asleep, and does not regard them, Psalm.
44.23, 24. Yet he is really awake for them that seek him, and careful to cause
all things work together for their good, Romans 8.28.

3. When the Consciences of the godly are calmed, and they have a testimony
that they are seeking God and approved of him; so soon does their dark sky
clear up, and all their lots (how hard soever) do look amiably upon them; For,
then they will discern that God, who seemed not to notice them, is doing them
good, and that they are in a way of prospering, though continued under trouble.
And as opened eyes will make the godly discern much advantage, in that very
lot, wherein, before, they saw nothing but terror (as it befell Hagar. Genesis
22.15, 16, -- 19. and Elisha's servant, 2 King. 6.15, 16, 17) So neerness unto
God is the way to come by this comfortable sight.

4. God is pleased, sometimes, to single out some of his people, and make good
all these promises, concerning temporal deliverances, unto them; Not that all
should expect the like, but that, hereby, they may perceive that neither power
nor good will are wanting in God, to bestow these blessings upon them, if it
were for his honor, and their good, to receive them. And as the Lord does
eminently plague some in the world, making them an example to all them who live
ungodly, though yet all be not plagued as those are, 2 Pet. 2.5. So his
fulfilling of those temporal promises to some is for the encouragement of all
the godly, though yet they may be straitened in these allowances. And thus we
will find that, for those ends, Job himself had all verified unto him that is
here promised, Chap. 42. though not (as Bildad propounded it) upon the account
of taking with his being an hypocrite, and beginning of new to seek God
sincerely; nor yet as an ordinary favor, and common to all.

5. If God have a purpose to deliver his people in this world, his power can
make wonderful alterations in their condition; So that from very small
beginnings (which are not to be despised) he can wonderfully raise them up, and
repair their losses with advantage; as is held out in that promise, v. 7. which
was made good to Job in due time. See Ezekiel. 36.11. And therefore, albeit Saints
may not always expect temporal deliverances; yet their lying low needs not cut
off their hopes, Ezekiel. 37.11, 12. Psalm. 68.13. For God can raise the dead, Isa.
26.19. can work wonders on their behalf, Exodus 15.11. and restore them with
wonderful advantage.

6. Whatever any Saint finds wanting in the performance of any of those
temporal Promises, within time, shall, once for all, be richly made up at the
end of time, when both wicked and godly shall receive the full and final reward
of their way, and when all the Promises, as well as all the Threatenings, shall
be exactly accomplished.

Doct. 6. Among other trials, Gods dispensations may be a sharp trial to the
godly, and seem to write bitter things against them, and to give advantage and
occasion to those who judge hardly of them; For, here, Gods sharp
dispensations, and the not fulfilling of those Promises to Job, gives Bildad
occasion to judge him not to be a seeker of God. And though it was his mistake;
yet it puts Job to sharp exercise, and sometime alarmed his passion, Job 19.5,
6, etc. And as the Lord has promised that undoubtedly there shall be a
discussion and clearing of this question, Mal. 3.18. So men's stumbling at those
sad lots of the godly flows from their ignorance,

1. Of Gods wise love, who will affl^ct, most sharply, those whom he affects
most tenderly, Revel. 3.19.

2. Of his deep counsels and purposes, who will conveigh special proofs of love
to his people, even by those means, giving meat out of the eater.

3. Of his holy justice, in laying those stumbling blocks (of the afflictions
of the godly,) before the world, that all those may justly break their necks,
who judge of a way, not by a rule but by events and success.

Verse. 8. For enquire, I pray thee, of the former age, and prepare thy self to
the search of their fathers.

9. (For we are but of yesterday, and know nothing, because our days upon earth
are a shadow.)

10. Shall not they teach thee, and tell thee, and utter words out of their
heart?


To make the former Exhortation more effectual, Bildad proceeds (in the third
part of the Chapter) to prove their common Ten^t, That calamities do prove a
man to be wicked, or, an hypocrite; and so endeavors yet more to refute Job's
doctrine; In th^se verses, we have his way of probation, which is from the
testimony and content of Antiquity. They living much about Moses time (who has
such expressions concerning man's lif^, Psalm. 90.10. a^ Bildad has h^r^, ver.
9) he den^^s Job to search into Antiquity in all generations, for finding light
in this matter; who will affi^m (^s he holds o^t in his following Doctrine,
ver. 1, etc.) that God punishes none, as he did him, but wicked men and
hypocrites, v. 8. And to ex^it^ him to this sear^h, he subjoyn; two Reasons to
the Exhortation.

1. That Job's life and theirs being so short and transitory, like one day, or
a passing shadow (See Psalm. 102.11. and 144 4.) they could not attain to so
much knowledge as their Fathers, who lived long, no^ c^uld they know
experimental conclusions otherwi^e, th^n by consulting with their experience
also who had lived before them, ver. 9. Here it is to be rememb^ed, that while
he calls his own days, and the days of his Contemporaries but a shadow, and
that in opposition to the days of their Fathers; it is not so to be understood,
as if the life of their Fathers, considered in it self, had not been, in many
respects, as a shadow. But that, as to continuance, their days were but as a
passing shadow, being compared with the days of their Progenitors; and that
their life, how long soever, was but a moment, as to an opportunity of
gathering knowledge; being compared with all ages before them, and the remarks
and experiences of all the godly who lived in these times.

2. That, if Job will enter upon this search, his labor shall not be in vain;
For however he might suspect them of ignorance, and that they spoke to him out
of passion; yet these Fathers (if he did consult all the experiences in their
own time, and of those who went before them, which they had observed, and all
the Records and Traditions which they had transmitted thereof) would solidly,
and without passion, out of the monuments of their observation and experience,
instruct him in the point in debate, ver. 10. Namely, (as is cleared in the
Doctrine subjoyned) That no godly man was dealt with as he is; But, on the
contrary, that his lot was such as uses to befall hypocrites.

The weakness of this Argument, from Antiquity* and Experience, bath been
discovered on Chap. 4 7. and 5.1. For albeit it be true, that Gods common way
of dealing with Saints may prove a great tentation to the man who is singularly
dealt with, yet he ought not therefore to be condemned, so long as his state
and condition are agreeable to the rule of the Word. Nor can this argument of
Bildad conclude any thing against Job; seeing neither could he instruct that
all truths were known to these Fathers; or that all was faithfully recorded and
transmitted which they knew; or that himself had exactly observed all that they
had transmitted. For even that one instance of Cain and Abel might have refuted
all they said, as has been marked before. This may discover unto us the mercy
of the sure written Word, which makes this uncertain enquiry less needful, and
as a Touchstone whereby to try which are genuine and sound Observations, and
which counterfeit, when m^n do collect them from their own or others
experience. But, leaving what has been before observed on this subject; we may
hence observe some sound general Instructions.

From ver. 8. Learn,

1. It is not sa^e to take truth on trust from any; but every one ought to
study to get light themselves from God^, in the use of lawful means, which will
prove both sweetest and surest: Therefore he puts Job himself to search for
light in what he had told him; For enquire, I pray thee. I^ is a danger^us
snare, when the consideration of persons, to who^^ light and honesty we lean,
sways us in the matter of opinion. This cost that Prophet d^ar, when he
suffered himself to be seduced by the Old Prophet, contrary to the light
himself had received from the Lord, 1 King. 13. And all men being liars, they
cannot ^e i^fallible guides; yea, become an Idol o^ jealousy, and God is
provoked to leave them to miscarry, when any dote upon them, as i^ they could
not go wrong.

2. Albeit experience cannot make a Role, to the prejudice of the word; yet the
(...) of many generations, if well and truly observed, is a great mercy to
posterity; whereof they should make u^e for attaining knowledge, when they may
h^ve it upon the expense of others, and at so ea^^^ a (...) to th^mselves.
Hereby they may be consumed in many truths, which are so constantly and
universally verified; and hereby, if they study and improve them well, they may
be no less wise, then if they had lived in all ages that have gone before. For,
here there is the former age, or, their immediate and ne^rer progenitors, and
their fathers, or, the ages before those, to whom Bildad remits Job, to enquire
of them, and seek resolution from them. And, indeed, the longer the world
continues, ignorance and instability, especially in some frequently verified
truths, will be the greater sin.

3. Truth will not be, savingly and to purpose, found out, without diligence
and painfulness; For, albeit Bildad account this a common known truth in all
ages, yet he bids Job inquire and search. For (beside that their way of coming
by knowledge, in those days, called for much pains, to remark all the passages
of Providence, and experiences of others, so as to gather general rules from
them, when as yet the Word was not written) Hereby men testify their
estimation of truth, when they will be at pains for it, Prove. 2.3, 4, 5. Hereby
they are enabled to discern any delusion that they may insinuate it self under
the mask of Truth; And, hereby, what they learn, takes impression upon them,
when they do not take a superficial view of it, but do labor painfully to
digest it.

4. Truth will not be found out, even by such as search after it, without
fixedness and prep^^^tion; For, says he, prepare, or, fix thy self to the
search. A man that would find out truth, must be fixed in love to truth, and in
making it his work to know it, Prove. 18, 1. and must prepare himself for
speeding in that enqui^y, by humility, by denying of himself, his interests and
passions, by Prayer, by submitting, in his practice and affections, to the
truths he already knows, etc. Otherwise he may take much pains, and yet speed
ill.

From ver. 9. Learn,

1. As the time of man on earth is short, like an unconstant and declining
shadow; so, by reason hereof, he is able to attain to little experimental
knowledge, but is ready to go out of the world as great a fool as he came into
it: For, therefore does Bildad remit Job to the search of the fathers, for we
are but of yesterday and know nothing, etc. We ought to be sensible of this
disadvantage, of our short time, that we may not trifle away the moment we have
of it.

2. It is the duty of persons of age to know much, and of those who are
younger, to be sensible of their ignorance; For, so does Bildad suppose, that
the former age, and their fathers, ver. 8. knew much, whereas, says he, We
know nothing, or know not, but are ignorants, in comparison of them, as being
but of yesterday, and our days upon earth as a shadow.

3. Though God alone be true, and every man a liar; yet it becomes those who
are younger, to reverence age and experience, being sensible of their own
ignorance, rashness and precipitancy; For, so does Bildad infer that,
considering their own disadvantages, they should consult with their Fathers.
And it was a sound counsel, provided Antiquity were not mistaken, nor any
experience of men allowed to prescribe unto truth.

4. It is a commendable property in men, when they have a low estimation of
themselves and their abilities, and do highly esteem of others; For, so much is
commendable in Bildad, that he debaseth himself and others in the present time,
in comparison of those who went before. See 1 Cor. 8.2. Phil. 2.3.

5. Error may not only be maintained by a godly man, such as Bildad was; and
with much confidence, as he bids Job himself search into Antiquity upon this
subject: but with much humility also; as here Bildad is so humble, when he is
asserting an error. Delusion may not only be admitted where there is much
good; but Satan may fasten tentations unto errors upon tenderness, love to
holiness, and other good inclinations in man. Which may teach us, not to glory
in men, and to be upon our guard, that in our best things Satan do not
overreach us.

From, ver. 10. Learn,

1. No sincere endeavor for knowledge, in the due use of lawful means, shall
be without success; For shall they not teach thee, and tell thee, says he? or,
by speaking to thee (as the word is) and communicating their experience, in the
following doctrine, they shall teach and instruct thee. Where their
forefathers, who were dead and gone, are said to speak to the present
generation, by the instructions transmitted by them. And this far this doctrine
is true, that such endeavors shall not be in vain, if it were but to discover
our ignorance to us. Prove. 30.2, 3.

2. Teachers ought solidly to digest what they are to teach and communicate to
others; and gravely, and without passion and prejudice, to utter it; so as it
may appear they speak from the heart; For, this is commendable in these
Teachers to whom he remits Job, they will utter words out of their heart, or,
the experiences they transmit will be found to be gravely and seriously
digested by them, and laid up for the use of others, as truths of great moment.
See 2 Cor 4 13.

3. Much and long experience is little enough for rooting of the knowledge of
divine truths in our hearts and for making of us serious in them; For, it is
from those of former ages, who lived long and observed much, that he would have
Job expecting this, that they will not hide, but communicate their light, and
will utter words out of their heart.

4. A child of God may meet with this sharp trial, that when his condition is
agreeable to the word, yet the experiences of many ages may seem to be against
him, and condemn him; For, so was it with Job here: Bildad would assure him
that grave serious men, in all ages, would witness against him, when yet he was
a godly man, approved of God.

Verse. 11. Can the rush grow up without mire? Can the flag grow without water?

12. Whilst it is yet in his greenness, and not cut down, it withers before
any other herb.

13. So are the paths of all that forget God; and the hypocrites hope shall
perish.


Bildad having commended the way of probation, proceeds to the thing to be
proved; And holds forth the Doctrine of the Ancients, concerning the case of
Hypocrites, in three similitudes. The first whereof (in these verses) is taken
from the rush, or, flag. And it is,

1. Propounded, ver. 11, 12. That a bulrush, or, reed, cannot grow without mire
and water; Yea, and when it flourishes, it withers, without any violence or
cutting down, sooner then any herb that is not so flourishing-like.

2. It is applied, That forgetters of God, and hypocrites, and all their hopes
(both things expected, and their expectation of them) do so perish, ver. 13.
Where the similitude seems to hold in these two.

1. That an hypocrite cannot hold up without prosperity, more then a reed can
grow without water.

2. That as reeds and bulrushes have their fits of sudden withering, even when
they are most green; which demonstrates their want of substance: So hypocrites
get sudddain strokes from God, that he may declare them to be such: And he
blasts their outward condition and prosperity, that their profession may be
seen to be blasted, by their abandoning thereof in trouble; as Chap. 4.4, 5, 6.

This Doctrine is full of the error formely taxed; For,

1. If this be understood of the prosperity and outward condition of
hypocrites, it is not true that all of them, or only they, are thus made to
wither, within time.

2. If it be understood of their inward condition, or spiritual and gracious
frame, to which they pretend; Though it be true, that great troubles will
discover hypocrisy, Mat. 13.20, 21. Isa. 33.14. Yet every trouble will not
make that discovery. And on the other hand, it is to be considered, that even
real Saints may have their own fits of blasting and withering, notwithstanding
the truth of their grace. For the Bride, Cant. 5.2. and the wise Virgins, Mat,
25.5. may fall a sleep. And particularly, under calamities, many of the
Superfluities of Saints, and some hypocrisy in their profession, may be blown
away. Yea, judgments may abate much of their life and vigor in Piety, though
they have not only true grace still, but some measure of liveliness also. And
therefore Saints are not to b^ judged, as to the truth of their grace, by their
sits and swoundings under sharp and discouraging afflictions; in which
condition, these who are least sensible may seem to have most vigor in their
profession, though it be otherwise,

With these Cautions, this Doctrine may teach.

1. The holding forth of this Doctrine under similitudes, by Bildad, and those
Ancients, to whose judgments he refers Job, does point out their desire to
speak plainly, and to the capacity of people; which is, indeed, a necessary
duty, and an evidence of honesty. For notional Religion and high-flown
conceptions about it, are an evidence of emptiness, See 1 Timothy 1.4, 5, 6, 7.
And though many do account men spiritual in their Doctrine, because of their
sublimated and refined notions and expressions; Yet Christ condescended to
preach in Parables, and Paul laid aside the wisdom of words, 1 Cor. 1.17 And,
indeed, many of those fine conceptions are nothing else but those enticing
words, and that philosophy and vain deceit, whereby the simplicity of the
Gospel is corrupted, and the spirits of professors are spoiled and taken off
the substance of Religion. Colos. 2.4, 8.

2. This their way of teaching does, also, point out their spiritual
mindedness; In that, as it was their care to imprint heavenly truths, in their
own and others minds, by the consideration of those common objects. So,
habituating themselves, and others who would hearken to their Doctrine, with
meditation upon spiritual things, every common object, represented to their
senses, did put them in mind thereof, and furnish some memento for that end.
And this is a pattern most worthy of imitation.

3. Whereas Eliphaz, in his Doctrine, spoke much of the wicked; Bildad deals
chiefly with the hypocrite, such as he conceived Job to be; and declares them
to lie under the same lash and vengeance which Eliphaz declared to be the
portion of the wicked. Hereby this may be pointed out (which is a truth,
whatever particular mistake be in his Doctrine) That hypocrites, especially
gross dissemblers in the mattter of Religion, are in no less woeful case then
the very wicked and openly profane. Their show of godliness will help them
nothing, but only contribute to make up their dittay; and to render their sin
the more odious, and their judgment the more sad, that they have done wickedly
under a mask of Piety, and so profaned the holy name of God.

4. Here, also, some Characters of wicked and gross hypocrites may be found;
They are forgetters of God: He is not much in their hearts, nor before their
eyes, in their walking, how near soever he seem to be in their mouths, Isa.
29.13. Jer. 12.2. He is not owned and acknowledged in the good things they get,
nor his Providence adored and submitted to, in what they want; Nor is he
esteemed of, and delighted in continually, as their portion, but slighted,
neglected and forgotten. And notwithstanding all this their wickedness, yet
they are full of hope and presumptuous expectations. They are seldom (if at
all) vexed with diffidence, as the godly (who are allowed to hope in God) are
in their confidence; Nor is their confidence any thing weakened or questioned
by reason of their guilt, till God, by his stroke, crush it altogether, and
make it perish.

5. It is an undeniable mark of t^^e grace, to keep green and lively when we
want prosperity, and when the cross does not cause our Profession to wither;
but we grow up like the Palm Tree under the burden. Psalm. 92.12. For, so much
would Bildad himself grant, while he makes it an evidence of the hypocrite,
that he withers when God smites him. See Job 17.8, 9.

6. God does not look chiefly to outward shows or appearances in men, nor are
we so much to regard those; but to look chiefly to our solid ^00^, and that we
be substantial in our way: For, in this, other herbs are preferred to the rush,
and slag, that they endure longer then they, though yet they do not flourish so
fair.

7. Whatever be the Lords way and dispensations, within time; yet this will be
the issue of all ^^al hypocrites; Their greatest flourishing shall not hinder a
remarkable stroke and the pulling off of the mask of their rotten Profession;
and all their hopes and expectations will end in disappointments: In this
sense, Bildads Doctrine is sound, though he intended more in it. See Job 11.20.
and 18.14. Prove. 10.28.

Verse. 14. Whose hope shall be cut off, and whose trust shall be a spiders web.

15. He shall lean upon his house, but it shall not stand: he shall hold it
fast, but it shall not endure,


The second similitude, holding forth the Doctrine of the Ancients concerning
hypocrites, is taken from a Spiders web. To this the hope and confidence of an
hypocrite is compared, not only because it is a frail thing, like that web; or
because it is wrought out of his own bowels, and all built upon himself and
other things, as the Spider spins its web; or because he deceives the simple
with this his show of hope, as the spider catches Flies with its web: But
especially (as it is in the Text) because it shall easily be cut off, as a
Spiders web is swept away, v. 14. The word may be read, His hope shall
abominate him, and abandon him with detestation; and he shall be made to loath
and abominate himself, for his hoping so much that way. This is further
enlarged and illustrated, v. 15. That when he thinks his family and estate so
firm, that he may lean his weight upon it, it shall shake; and when he thinks
to underprop and perpetuate it, notwithstanding any of these shakings, it shall
come to speedy ruin.

Not to insist upon the common error in this doctrine, and his mistake of Job
and his hopes, (which may be cleared from what has been said on the preceding
verses) we may here Learn those general Doctrines.

1. No endeavors of men, no promising good condition, will hold up what God
has a m^nd to pull down, nor repair where he ruins: Then all presumptuous
hopes will be like the Spiders web; an house leaned upon shall not stand, and
though it be holden fast shall not endure. And this, in due time, will be the
case of hypocrites, that nothing shall preserve them from ^uine.

2. It is plague upon hypocrites, that they are given up to false confidences,
to imbitter their stroke when they come to ruin. For, so it is a plague, that
he has hope, which will be cut off, that he has an house to lean upon, and
thoughts to hold it fast. Delusion at any time is sad, but in a time of
calamity, it is the cap^^^t^ne of mi^ery, leading men upon the (...)
disappointments.

3. I^ is an undeniable evidence of hypocrisy, when men (...) and trust to any
outward thing, o^ any thing beside God; For, (though as Bildad erred in (...)
men's estate by their outward visible (...), h^ mistook Job, who made not his
house, (...) his confidence, Job 3.24, 25. Yet) this is of ge^ (...) ve^^ty,
that who so l^^ns upon his house, and ho^ (...) ^ast, as his stay and
confidence, is, in so far (i^ not altogether) an hypocrite and unsound
P^^^^ssour. And it is an unquestionable evidence of delusion, and a presage of
approaching misery, when a man's outward flourishing condition is the pillar he
leans to, and the pillow he rests upon, Psalm. 30.6, 7. or, when our selves, and
all things beside, are not found to be empty, that we may rely on God, or when
any condition wherein we are (though lawful in it self, and given to us in
favor) hinders or retards our needy dependence on God; or when any
dispensations of Providence toward us take us off from looking to the Word, to
judge of our case thereby, and to walk according to the prescript thereof.

Verse. 16. He is green before the Sun, and his branch shoots forth in his
garden.

17. His roots are wrapped about the heap, and sees the place of stones.

18. If he destroy him from his place, then it shall deny him, saying, I have
not seen thee.

19. Behold, this is the joy of his way, and out of the earth shall others grow.


As for the third similitude (in these verses) holding forth the doctrine of
these Ancients, I shall not insist upon the Application which same make of it
to the case of a righteous man, in opposition to what has been said of the
hypocrite; and for that end, do supply this word in the Text, The righteous is
green before the Sun. For seeing Job (as was said in the entry) finds no
principle in his discourse concerning the righteous and wicked, different from
the rest; it is needless to put the Text upon the rack, to search after it. But
applying this similitude, of a tree, to the hypocrite, we have here,

1. H^s height of prosperity, ver. 16. As a Tree, in a close Garden,
flourishes before a warm Sun, and spreads abroad its branch^s; So the
hypocrite, sometime, abo^nds in flourishes of Profession, and in riches and
prospe^ity, as Job had done.

2. In h^ se^ming security, ver. 17. As a Tree takes deep root where there is
any earth; yea, will even shoot out its roots among the very heaps of stones
about it; whereby it is so fastened, as if no wind could blow it over: So may
the hypocrite seem to be settled, by his using of all endeavors, and his
seeking to all props whereby he may secure himself, and by his success therein;
As Job seemed also to have been*

3. His total ruin, ver. 18. As such a Tree may, notwithstanding all its
rooting and flourishing, be so plucked up as if it had never been there: So
when God begins to cut off hypocrites, they come to ruin, root and branch, (as
Bildad thought it had befaln Job) so that it shall not be known that such a
crew had dwelt in such a place.

4. A conclusion, ver. 19. That all the joy of an hypocrites way comes to this
issue, and this is all the joy he has of it at last: And when he is gone,
others do enjoy his possessions, and heirs, whom he never dreamt of, enjoy his
estate and wealth; as a new Tree is planted and grows up in the room of that
which was plucked up.

In this Doctrine, Bildad does not only persist in his former error,
concerning the certain calamity of wicked hypocrites in this life; but does
also bitterly refl^ct upon Job and his family, speaking of the prosperity and
ruin of hypocrites in such terms as might point out to the life Job's former
and present condition. This could not but sadly afflict the spirit of the
crushed man; and yet God, in his Providence, will have him to meet with it,
that he might be the more narrowly sifted: and to warn all the godly, that they
must not presume to set limits to their own trials. Withal, he judges rashly
even of Job's outward condition, as if himself had been no less irrecoverably
destroyed then his Children and Family were. For the issue cleared that he was
reserved that he might flourish again, even in this world. Which may warn us to
judge sparingly and soberly, even of the desperate-like calamities of the
godly; as little knowing what wonderful issues God may give from them.

If we guard against these mistakes, we may, from ver. 16. Learn, An hypocrite,
during the time of Gods patience and forbearance, may flourish fair; as this
similitude points out. He may flourish,

1. In the respect of the broad leaves of his profession, and some practice,
also, seeming to answer to his profession, Matthew. 13.5, 20, 21. -- And no
wonder; For Satan has the surest grip of a man, when he gets him to be wicked
under the mask of a Profession. Then he has somewhat whereby to deceive others
and himself also, and to ward off many blows from the Word, which are directed
against the wicked. Withal, hereby Satan prevails most effectually, especially
with weaker Christians, when he is transformed into an Angel of light, in the
person of an hypocritical professor, 2 Cor. 11.13, 14. By this mean he may
prevail with many, who would abominate Satan in his own colors, or acting in,
or by, the openly profane.

2. He may flourish in respect of outward prosperity; He may be in a close
Garden, and not in a common open field; He may stand in the warm Sun of much
success of his affairs, and not be made to endure chill colds, or to abide in
darkness or discomfort: And he may abound in branches of all sorts, Children,
variety of wealth, etc. And in a word, he may be in such a condition, that if
success be an evidence of divine approbation, he may argue from that, as well
as any other, for the approbation of himself and his way. And no wonder it be
so; For hereby God tries his people, Psalm. 73.2, 3, etc. and in his holy
Providence, ensnareth the hypocrite himself, Hos. 12.7, 8. This should warn us
not to be deluded with shows; neither resting contented with the deceitfulness
of riches and prosperity, while we want those better and surer evidences of
Gods love, Psalm. 4.6, 7. Nor pleasing our selves with the leaves and branches
of a Profession, wanting the power, 1 Cor. 4.19. and solid fruit in the hidden
parts, Psalm. 51.6. or contenting our selves that we have Jacob's voice, while
yet our hands and actings are the rough hands of Esau. Withal, In times when
hypocrites thus flourish in their profession and success, and our afflictions
come as a snare, not only in respect of their suddenness, Luke 21.34, 35. but
because our tentations are busked up with the specious shows, of great
successes and fair professions of men in an evil way, Matthew. 24.22, 23, 24. In
such times, it warns us to look out what such snares and tentations do point at
and teach. And it will be found to be the Lords mind, not that we should
abandon all Piety, because of the prosperity and professions of such
hypocrites; But that, because of our security and carnal dispositions, and
because we study not reality in Piety, but rest upon external shows, therefore
the Lord gives us up to be tried by the prosperity of flourishing hypocrites.

From v. 17. Learn, As the hypocrite may flourish for a time; so he may also
seem to be so firmly rooted in his condition, that it is a wonder he is ever
shaken; He may be as the Tree that stretches its roots through the earth, till
it come to fasten about the very Rocks and Stones. He may be so fixed in his
Profession, that every revolution and trial will not shake him off, so long as
his Idol is not touched. A Judas may continue with Christ, when many Disciples
fall off, because he had the Bag still, Job 6.66, 67, 68. And he may seem to be
immovable in his prosperity; for hereby the Lord brings a snare upon him, when
at any time he is surprised with unexpected calamity, Psalm. 10.5, 6, 12, 13,
14. and does yet further try the godly, when hypocrites do not only prosper in
an evil way, but seem to be so settled, as they see no hope of issue for the
future, Jer. 12.1, 2. This warns men not to be confident of their own honesty,
because they have gone a great length, and endured diverse assaults. If they
entertain a bosom Idol, it will drawn them away at last. Further, it warns us,
not to walk by sense, in judging of men's stability and good condition; for that
is full of snares. But we must go into the Sanctuary, Psalm. 73.16, 17. Withal,
when wicked hypocrites seem thus settled, that there is no hope of their ruin,
we should look upon it as a call to mind Eternity more, when all those
intricacies will be fully cleared.

From ver. 18. Learn,

1. God can, when he pleases, destroy the most flourishing hypocrites; For,
this supposition, if he destroy him, implies so much. None are so fixed as
they dare bid a defiance to God, (as that man did in another case, 2 King.
7.2.) He is a party against the arrogant and insolent, and their ar^og^ncy
mak^s him an enemy, when there is none else to bring them down, Obad. v. 3, 4.
And the godly should know that what is impossible with men, is yet within the
reach of his power, Zech. 8.6. Matthew. 19.26.

2. When strokes are to come upon flourishing hypocrites, usually they are
reserved for Gods own hand, to inflict them; For, so much also does this
supposition, If he destroy him, imply, that God ^ill be eminently seen in it.
This is especially tru^ of such wicked men, or hypocrites, as are troubles ^f
the Church, Isa. 31.8. Dan. 8 25. Revel. 20.9. and may be a Commentary whereby
to read Gods mind, in his laying by those means which are used to bring them
down, and that he does so, because himself has a purpose to appear in that
work.

3. When God, at any time, calls hypocrites to an account in this life,
ordinarily he takes hold of them* and destroys them in the height of their
prosperity; For, when he is thus flourishing and rooted. v. 16, 17. he gets not
leave to wither and decay through age, but is destroyed from his place, when he
is green. As every step of the affliction of Saints, is a step toward th^^r
deliverance, Mic. 4.10. So every step of the wicked and hypocrites prosperity,
is a step toward their ruin.

4. The destruction of wicked hypocrites, when God reckons with them, proves,
oft-time^, total* and without hope of recovery; For, his place shall deny him,
saying, I have not seen thee. The godly have hope in their calamities, Jer.
31.17. Mic. 7.8. But wicked hypocrites are permitted to flourish and grow so
high, that they may fall irrecoverably, and they get prosperity, that it may
imbitter their calamities, Rev. 18.7. They had need to look to their standing,
the best they can, for if they come to stagger, God will be owing them nothing
for all their pride and loftiness* Esth. 6.13.

From ver. 19. Learn,

1. Hypocrites have, ordinarily, too much joy in their way, and in their
prosperity: For, the joy of their way, is that against which God has much to
say. They have too much joy in their way o^ Religion; like the stony ground,
Matthew. 13.20. and the temporary, Heb. 6.4, 5. and all their joy is unsure in
its ground (for if he get the joy, he cares not how it comes, or how he had it)
it is ill in respect of the object, Psalm. 4.6. Luke 10.17, 20. and sinful in
the measure, being without sobriety, and not seasoned with needful sorrow.

2. The joy of hypocrites will end in sorrow, and such laughers will weep; For,
Behold, it shall be remarked, this is the joy of his way, all of it has come
to this sad issue.

3. Whatever joy a hypocrite has in his prosperous condition; yet it will be
far to seek in his adversity, when his Idols are gone: For, this, then, is the
joy of his way, that it is gone. See Isa. 10.3. Psalm. 49.17. Whereas the godly
man though he may have his fits of discomfort in trouble, yet, he is allowed
joy in God, and in the testimony of a good Conscience, when he is over-thrown
with difficulties. Hab. 3.17, 18. 1 Samuel 30.6. Romans 5.2, 3, And it is an
undeniable evidence that a man is no hypocrite, when he can make use of this
privilege.

4. The issue of the hypocrites way and condition will so clear all, as they
will become the object of de^ision; and Gods dealing with them will be found
worth the marking; Therefore a behold is prefixed to this, that all may observe
his ridiculous folly, and Gods holy Providence in bringing him down. See Psalm.
52.6, 7. and 58.10, 11. and 64.8, 9. Though the godly do, oft-times, wonder at
the prosperity of the wicked and hypocrites, Psalm. 73.11, 12, 13. yet the
issue, in due time, will clear all, Psalm. 73.35, 36, 37. and make them see that
their former wondering was their weakness, Psalm. 73.16, 17, 18, 19, 22.

5. Wicked men and hypocrites may promise great things to their posterity,
which yet they shall never possess; being either cut off with their Parents, or
thrust out of their possessions by others; For so much do these words, (out of
the Earth shall others grow) import, as they have been explained. See Psalm.
49.11, 13. -- Unjust purchase is the ready way to make an unsure conquest.

Verse. 20. Behold, God will not cast away a perfect man, neither will he help
the evil doers;
Bildad having given this account of the doctrine of the Ancients, does now
subjoyn a conciusion to his own and their doctrine, to invite Job to
repentance. This conclusion is propounded in general, in this verse to this
purpose, That it may appear from what he has said, of his own and others
opinions, That God will no more reject the humble, sincere and righteous man,
than he will help and have pity upon the proud presumptuous sinner and
hypocrite. The first of these is deduced from his own Doctrine, ver. 5, 6, 7.
and the second from the Doctrine of the Ancients, ver. 11, 12, etc. And though
this do not hold universally true, as to every outward dispensation; (For all
evil doers are upheld and helped by common Providence, and, sometime, God may
assist some of them in special service, for executing of his wrath, Isa. 10.5.
And the godly may seem for a time to be left under the power of trouble.) Yet
those sound truths may be gathered from it,

1. It becomes men to take especial notice of the actings of Providence in the
world; As here, a behold is prefixed to this conclusion, to excite Job to
attention.

2. Albeit most of men do little mind God in their way, if so be they can get
other things to their mind; yet it should be our great enquiry, in every course
we follow, what God thinks of us, and will do to us, for us or against us, in
our way: For, this is the point to be marked, whom God will cast away, and whom
he will help.

3. It is a great encouragement to men, whatever their condition be, if God do
not cast them off, as those he does not regard, and of whose condition he will
not undertake to give a comfortable account; For, this is a great mercy, if God
cast not away a man, nor reprobate and reject him (as the word is) as one whom
he affects not, nor will care for.

4. Albeit most of men do not mind Gods help and assistance; yet it is
specially needed by them, and the time may come wherein they will find how sad
it is to be left to themselves, to bear their own burden; As here it is
mentioned, as a special disadvantage to wicked men, that God will not help
them, nor take them by the hand (as the word is) to lead, support, and
extricate them from their difficulties.

5. As a godly man must be a perfect and sincere man, in his disposition and
practice; So wicked men are to be judged such by their practice; not by a
particular escape, though gross, but by their habitual practice, giving them
the designation of evil doers: For, so are here both described.

6. No dispensation of Providence does prove Gods love to the wicked (whatever
he think of himself, Psalm. 49.18.) nor his hatred against the godly, though he
may have a quarrel at their sin, and their sense may take occasion to complain
that they are cast off: In this sense it is true, God casts not away a perfect
man, neither helps, or, favors, he evil doers.

7. This is also true in it, That no dispensation shall tend to the utter
rejection or ruin of the godly, or to the carrying on of the wicked, till he
accomplish his full and final design; Thus he neither casts away the one, nor
helps the other, whatever may be his dealing for the time. See Isa. 3.10, 11.

8. This is also true, That, under trouble, the godly man is never left to
himself, however he think so, but his soul is still known in adversity, Psalm.
31.7. and so he is not cast away, but if he be not always delivered from the
evil (as sometimes Saints are, Psalm. 40.2, 3.) yet he is delivered from the
hurt of it. 1 Chronicles. 4.10. But for the wicked, he is an helpless man in his
trouble. Sometime he comes to irreparable ruin by it, and though he escape it,
yet ^e wants the help of grace, to call on God sincerely under it, of Gods
favor, to sweeten it to him, and* of Gods blessing, to sweeten his
deliverance. (...) these senses, we may acknowledge the truth of Bildad's
conclusion, though we do not acquiesce in all that intended in it.

Verse. 21: Till he fill thy mouth with laughing, and thy lips with rejoicing.

22. They that hate thee shall be clothed with shame, and the dwelling place
of the wicked shall come to naught.


Bildad proceeds in his conclusion, and further explains what he means by Gods
not casting away a perfect man, and not helping evil doers, by making a
particular application of what he had said in general, to Job. And insinuating
upon him, and supposing that he will take that counsel, ver. 5. to begin of new
to seek God; He forbears to explain Gods not helping evil doers in reference to
him. But (in prosecution of the former branch of his conclusion) he promises
that, if he will follow his advice, God will not cast him away, nor leave him,
till he have full joy for his sorrow, ver. 21. He says, He will not cast away
a perfect man, till he fill thy mouth, etc. not that God will leave him after,
but that assuredly he will bring his sorrow to that issue, not secluding his
care and kindness afterward. And for the latter branch of his conclusion,
concerning evil doers, he promises that, when Job is turned to God, it shall
be verified on his enemies, ver. 22. For then his ill willers shall be ashamed,
when they see their desires against him are not effectuated. And they shall be
dealt with as wicked men, whose families shall come in his stead, when he is
brought out of his ruined condition. Some do understand the latter part of this
verse as directed against Job; and that as the former promises, of his joy and
the confusion of his enemies, do explain how God will not cast him away (ver.
20.) if he become a perfect man: So this does explain that of, not helping him,
if he continue an evil doer. And so he would assure him that, if he repent not,
he shall not recover; but, as his family is come to naught, or, is not, so it
shall continue so. This, is indeed, a truth; That, however men in afflictions
may dream of deliverance, and that God will pity them, and regard their
afflictions, though they neglect their duty; yet only the penitent have solid
ground of hope, that they are in Gods way for attaining an issue. Though yet it
be as true, That neither should godly men conclude themselves impenitent and
wicked, under afflictions, because others would have them believe so, as was
Job's case: Nor does Gods requiring of afflicted wicked men to repent, that so
they may have hope, allow us to set any limits to the Sovereignty of God, who
may even deliver those who make ill use of their afflictions, Isa. 57.17, 18.
that he may magnify his grace, and overcome their evil with his goodness, and
invite them by his goodness to repentance. Far less ought it to discourage them
who, the more Conscience they make of their duty under the rod, do apprehend
they come the worse speed, and see the less ground of hope from any thing in
themselves. But I shall not insist on this, for it seems more agreeable to
Bildad's scope here (which is to encourage Job to repent, and insinuate upon
his affection) to understand this whole verse as spoken against his enemies, if
himself would repent.

This encouragement, as it proceeds upon a wrong supposition, that Job was to
take with former hypocrisy, and begin now to seek God, before God did thus for
him; So, it does not hold universally true, that such as turn to God in
trouble, will be comforted, and their Enemies confounded and ruined. For God
who sees it fit, sometime, to cause his Children weep a while, may see it fit
also to make them weep all their days. Only, they shall have joy in their
sorrow, which the world knows no^ of; as the wicked have sorrow in their
laughter. However, this may be gathered from his Doctrine.

1. Mercy and loving kindness is an effectual mean to draw souls in to God;
Therefore does Bildad essay Job with that, as a special mean to work upon him,
Jer. 31.3. Whereas hopelesness, jealousy, and distance-keeping, is ready to
keep away from him, Zech. 11.8. Jer. 2.25.

2. Whatever God be pleased to do for his people within time; yet this is their
comfort, that he can, when he will, raise them up from the lowest step of
misery, to the highest degree of joy and comfort, Psalm. 126 1, 2. and that he
will do so at last to them all, Isa. 35.10. Rev. 7.14, 15, 16, 17. Their sowing
in tears will make an harvest of joy, Psalm. 126.5. and all their sorrows
travail in birth of joy, to be brought forth in due time. And, in the mean
time, they continue in Gods hand, all their wants lie on him, and they have a
room in his heart, till he accomplish all this: So much may we safely gather
from his Doctrine concerning the perfect man, which he applies to Job, upon
condition he will set about his duty, That God will not cast away the perfect
man, ver. 20. Till he fill thy mouth with laughing, and thy lips with
rejoicing; Or, give such full joy, that it cannot be got kept within doors, but
it must burst forth in outward expressions.

3. It is the duty of Gods people to rejoice when God is kind to them, though
soberly and spiritually; and not to be still seeking and starting new quarrels
and matter of discouragement; Therefore is Job's promised deliverance expressed
by his laughing and rejoicing, as the effect that ought follow upon it. See
Deuteronomy. 28.47, 48. Neh. 9.24, 25.

4. Truly godly men must resolve to have Enemies, and to meet with hatred and
opposition from them in the world; For, so is supposed that Job will have those
that hate him. See Joh. 15.19.

5. Such as hate the godly, upon the account of their godliness, are wicked, at
least, in so far; and this may encourage godly men, that their Enemies do make
God, as well as them, their party; For, so they that hate him, are expounded to
be, the wicked. See Gal. 4 29.

6. Whatever satisfaction haters of the godly seem to reap, in their miseries;
yet they will be disappointed and confounded in end, who take pleasure in the
godlies calamity, for God will be kind to them Psalm. 112.10. Mic. 7.10. There
is a time wherein this shall be accomplished, They that hate thee shall be
clothed with shame. They shall have shame, in stead of their impudency in
their own sin, Phil. 3.19. Jer. 6.15 and shame, in stead of their former
insolency, and high-flown expectations of the utter ruin of the godly, which
shall be disappointed.

7. Wicked men, and, particularly, haters and opposers of the godly, are great
enemies to their own families, upon which they do not only procure lesser
strokes, but utter ruin; For, the dwelling place of the wicked, who hate thee,
shall come to naught, or, shall not be. See Isa. 14. -- 20, 21, 22, 23.

8. It is righteous with God to serve Enemies to his people, for their sins, as
his people have been dealt with for their trial; For, whereas Job's family had
been ruined, now he promises that, if Job will take his counsel, the case
shall alter, and it shall be the dwelling place of the wicked, who hates him,
that shall come to naught. See Prove. 11.8. Psalm. 137.8. In this respect it is
the godlies advantage that they are first in trouble, and leave the dregs of
the cup to the wicked, Psalm. 75.8. Jer. 25.17, 18. -- 26. 1 Pet. 4.17, 18. And
when the wicked do afflict the godly, they are but prognosticating what will be
repayed to themselves with interest. Psalm. 27.7. and 33.1.

CHAP. IX.
In this and the following Chapter, we have Job's Reply, chiefly to Bildad's
last Discourse, which may be reduced to those heads. 1. Whereas Bildad had
advised him to think more reverently of Gods Righteousness then to quarrel with
him, Chapter 8.3. Job answers to this, till, v. 22. 2. Whereas he had advised him,
by way of Inference from the former, that considering the Righteousness, of
God, who afflicted him and his Family; he would think less of his own or his
Childrens righteousness who were afflicted: Chap. 8.4, 6, 11, 12, 13, etc. he
makes a return to this, from ver. 22. till the end of the Chapter. 3. Whereas
both those would conclude that he should give over complaining, and essay
another course, of studying Piety, in hopes of favor, Chap. 8.5, 20, 21. To
this he answers chiefly, Chap. 10.

In the first part of the Reply, Job not only grants what Bildad had asserted,
but out-strips him far in commending the Righteousness of God; Granting that no
man can be so righteous as to be blameless before God, or to have cause of
contending with God, as unrighteous in his afflicting of him; though that did
no way deprive a man of the testimony of his Conscience concerning his own
integrity, as he clears in the next part of the Reply. This Assertion he
confirms, partly, in general, showing that no man can thus plead his own
righteousness, to the prejudice of Gods righteousness, Considering what is man's
sinfulness and misery, ver. 2, 3. the power and wisdom of God, ver. 4. -- 11.
and his Sovereignty, ver. 12. And partly, in particular, Showing that he
resolved not thus to contend. For if no created power can stand out against
God; how much less dare he essay it? ver. 13.14. Since he hoped to come better
speed another way, he would never betake himself to that desperate and
presumptuous shift, ver. 15. Since God had so sharply afflicted him, when he
was not contending; what might he expect if he should so wickedly provoke him?
ver. 16, 17, 18. It were a madness to strive with him who cannot be matched in
strength, nor has a Superior Judge, to whom one might appeal ver. 19. His
very proud attempt to justify himself, to the prejudice of Gods Righteousness,
were enough to refute and condemn him, ver. 20. And his pleading of perfection
and righteousness would but proclaim his ignorance, and madly hazard himself,
ver. 21.

In the Second Part of the Reply, Job, asserteth that, notwithstanding God is
righteous, and not to be quarrelled; yet he was a righteous man, nor could his
afflictions prove the contrary. For which end, he sets down the true state of
the controversy betwixt them; Namely, That afflictions come alike to all, and
so do not prove men to be either godly or wicked, ver. 22. And confirms this
Assertion, From common experience of the godlies sharing in calamities, ver.
23. From the power given to the wicked over others, on the earth, ver. 24. And,
from what had befaln himself; who was sadly afflicted (as was evident from the
speedy passing away of his days of prosperity, ver. 25, 26. and his present
afflictions sticking so closely to him, ver. 27, 28.) And yet was a righteous
man; being neither wicked, ver. 29. nor filled with a conceit of his own
purity, ver. 30, 31. And being willing humbly to plead his own integrity before
God; if it might be granted him, ver. 32, 33, 34, 35. -- as it was not, ver. --
35.

Verse. 1. Then Job answered and said,

2. I know it is so of a truth; but how should man be just with God?

3. If he will contend with him, he cannot answer him one of a thousand.


IN the beginning of this Reply, Job yields what had been asserted concerning
Gods Righteousness, not only by Bildad, Chap. 8.3. but by Eliphaz before him,
Chap. 4.17. And does himself assert that no man can plead righteousness before
God, to the prejudice of his righteousness; or so as to contend with God for
afflicting him who is righteous. The first reason of this Assertion is implied
in the very name given to man here, which signifies, misery, frailty, and
mortality, and so presupposes sin, the Conscience whereof will hinder a man
that he dare not plead his righteousness with God, by way of quarrel or
contest. And the Argument is enlarged, ver. 3. That if man should seek to
contend with God, and God would enter the lists with him, his innumerable
failings would condemn him as often as he were challenged.

In the first verse which is but an Historical Transition, showing that Job did
reply to what Bildad had said, we may Observe, That albeit Job was in great
pain and trouble, when his Friends thus reflected upon him; yet the truth which
he defends furnishes him with ability and answers. And it teaches, That how
lightly soever a Pilate may esteem of truth, Joh. 18.38. or how little soever
many regard it, when the Profession thereof brings them in hazard; yet Truth is
a notable Second to its Champion. It will maintain it self and its defender
both; it will furnish Replies, and strength to manage them; and, in end, will
set its Champion free. Joh. 8.32. For, it made Job to answer, when he is thus
hardly assaulted.

In the Second verse, We have,

1. His concession of what they, and especially Bildad, had said; to wit,
concerning the righteousness of God, which he concedes as a firm truth, and
afterward soars high in commendation of it. I know it is so of a truth.

2. His own Assertion, wherein he concurreth with them, and enlarges that
subject, and hints an Argument from man's sinfulness before God, evidenced by
his misery: But (I would rather read it, with the Original, And, as instancing
and explaining what it is in their discourse he had yielded) How should frail
mortal man be just with God? Eliphaz, in that Vision; had received it in a
comparison only, Job 4.17. that mortal man cannot be more just than God; Job
here asserts that there is no comparison to be instituted at all in this
matter. And, by a vehement Interrogation, How should man be just, etc? he
implies that it is impossible for any to clear how frail sinful man,
considered as before the great and mighty God, (as the name here signifies) can
think to plead such a righteousness, as may warrant him, without adding to his
own sinfulness, to contend with God, as unjust, if he afflict him.

In the first part of the verse, Observe,

1. Bildad and the rest of the Friends did look upon Job as a man denying and
challenging the Righteousness of God; and therefore do commend it to him. And
yet Job concedes it, as a truth he had never denied; as it was true he did not
deny it in their sense, of which afterward. This Teaches, That it is not
unusual for a godly man to be mistaken, even by godly men; and to be charged
with that which he never minded nor intended. Passion, prejudices, and want of
sense of the case and tentations one of another, will hide not only truth, but
men's way, one from another. Which calls for much humiliation and
sobermindedness, when such distempers are let loose among Professors.

Obs. 2. Notwithstanding Job's Friends had provoked and grieved him; yet he
concedes and yields to what truth they had delivered; I know it is so. Which
Teaches, That a godly man is not only of a condescending spirit, when he is in
a right frame; but is strongly bound by truth, and made to submit to it, though
coming from an Adversary. Truth is the truly godly man's Jewel on any terms, and
delusion is among his greatest terrors; and therefore no prejudice at persons,
nor love to contention, will make him to reject that, when he is in such a
frame as he ought to be.

Obs. 3. He professes not only to know, but to know it of a truth, so firmly
as he is not shaken from it by his trouble or any other distemper. It Teaches,
That notional knowledge of Truths is not sufficient, unless men be serious in
them, and their hearts take such an impression of them, that they are ready to
live and die with them. Many have, indeed, so loose a grip of Truth, that
either troubles or new lights from without, or tentations from within, will
shake them, because they are not rooted in the Truth. But when men have fixed
their anchor, and have found God in received Truths, it will not be so easy to
unfix and cause them reel and change. As the Apostle argues, Gal. 3 2, 4.

Obs. 4. Albeit Job was free of their imputations, of direct and wicked
questioning of the righteousness of God, as inconsistent with the testimony of
his Conscience; and does here justly close with that truth they had asserted:
Yet, it cannot be denied but his impatient bearing of trouble, because he could
not reconcile the testimony of his own Conscience with Gods dealing, did
indirectly reflect upon Gods Righteousness, as is challenged by Elihu, Chap. 35
2, 3. and by God himself, Chap. 40.8. It Teaches, That Saints, in their
weakness and fits of tentation, may do things which, if they saw whether they
tended, themselves would abhor more then any. Job cannot endure that he should
be thought to challenge Gods Righteousness, when yet he is not altogether free
of it. Few do discern, especially in an hour of tentation, how deep many things
draw which they do act. Distrusters of God do not consider how near their way
draws to blasphemy. And questioners of Gods dealing, and prescribers unto him,
do not consider that they would make him Man, and not God, etc. This calls for
Charity to Saints, that they do not design or intend all that evil which
judicious observers may, sometime, see in their way. And it teaches the godly
themselves, that they be jealous over themselves, and do not trust their own
hearts; for they may be doing those things unawares, which yet they abhor.

In the latter part of the verse,

Obs. 1. While he contents not himself with an assenting to the truth they
asserted, concerning Gods righteousness; but labors to outstrip them in
asserting and commending of it: It teaches,

1. It is the duty of Saints to come behind with none in commending of God and
his Attributes, and to be quickened thereunto, even by their example who do so
for a bad end: As Job is excited to commend God by the practice of his Friends,
who commended Gods Righteousness, that they might crush and discourage him
thereby. We should reckon our selves most obliged to God of any, and should
prove that it is so, by setting him on high in our praise.

2. In difficulties and tentations, the best way, either to refute others, who
think we have hard thoughts of God, or to refute any misconstructing thoughts
that arise in our own hearts, is, not only nakedly to acknowledge, but to sing
forth the praise and commendation of those Attributes which fall most under
debate at such a time: As Job here clears that he is not challenging Gods
Righteousness, and suppresseth any such tentation within his own breast, by
commending his righteousness. See Psalm. 22.1, 2, with 3.

Obs. 2. The Assertion it self, laid down here, Teaches; That it is impossible
a man can bring out, or plead any righteousness of his own before God, and it
is a very great folly to attempt it; For, says he, by way of Interrogation,
How should a man be just with God? or, before God? This is not so to be
understood as if there were no righteousness at all, by which a man could stand
before God. But,

1. That there is no such righteousness by his own works, Romans 3.20.

2. Though men, being renewed, may attain to be sincere, (to which Job lays
claim all along;) yet men have no begun inherent righteousness which is perfect
and without defects, Romans 7.18, 19, 21. And,

(3.) Consequently, Man, how sincere soever, has no righteousness which may
warrant him to plead with God, as dealing unjustly in afflicting him an
innocent; and so contend with God, as if he were more righteous then he. This
is the righteousness that is here denied to Man, as is clear from the tenor o^
the discourse. And as this shows the mercy of imputed righteousness, when
there was no other way of righteousness whereby we could stand before God; and
for which we are fitted by being brought to see that there is no other safety
or shelter for us: So it warns us to take heed of reflecting on God, upon any
account of our righteousness, by a c^nceit of our own worth, by complaints,
jealousies, impatient bearing o^ crosses, etc.

Obs. 3. He sets God as man's party in this debate, to bring down his pride and
conceit; How should a man be just with God? To Teach, That a man will never get
a right look of his own righteousness nor stoop to God afflicting him, till he
look to God and his pure eyes, and till, by comparing his righteousness with
Gods perfect purity, he discern the infinite disproportion that is betwixt them
Till a man study this, he will be proud of his own righteousness, 2 Cor. 10.12.
1 Cor. ^4.4. And whoever is a proud quarreller, he declares himself igno^ant of
God

Obs. 4. From his insinuated Argument (taken from man's frailty and mortality,
which presupposes his sinfulness, and which may hea^ down all thoughts of h^s
own righteousness, or of Gods unrighteousness in affl^cting him) Learn,

1 No faith o^ assurance of Justification, nor Conscience of integrity, ought
to hide the sight and sense of sin and mise^y from a justified man, but should
rather increase it, and make him become more vile in his own eyes, For, Job,
though justified, and persuaded of his own integrity, yet is sensible that man
is Enosh, a frail mortal creature, because of sin. And Pau^, Rom 7 makes more
noise about remaining corruptions than the wicked do about reigning lusts.

2. That the Lord may bring down man's pride, and keep him in mind of his sin
daily, he has made him Enosh, and environed him with many frailties and
mortality; as this name, here given him in this debate, imports. Man has, in
ordinary, sufficient Monitors concerning his baseness and sinfulness; which his
formality should not turn barren and fruitless to him, lest he get singular
documents, to cause him know himself.

3. No man can free himself from being quarreller of Gods Righteousness, except
the man who is sensible of sinfulness and misery under afflictions, though he
cannot condescend upon a particular cause for which God afflicts him; Thus Job
takes up man to be a frail sinful creature (though he knew not, in particular,
wherefore God contended with him, Chap. 10.2.) that he may witness that he is
not quarrelling.

4. Sense of sin is an especial mean to make a man carry right before God,
under trouble; Therefore Job begins with this, as his chief Argument why he
would not quarrel with God; For trouble and terror may crush and silence the
spirits of men, but sense of sin bows them, and makes them stoop to God.

In ver. 3. Job (as has been said) amplifieth that Argument, formerly
insinuated, taken from man's sinfulness. We need not enquire who this He is,
that will contend, and with whom? For, it may be understood both of God, and of
the man that dare offer to quarrel with him. And, in sum, it comes to this;
Man is so environed with so innumerable infirmities and sins, that if he should
attempt to enter the lists with God, and Gold undertake to contend with him; he
could not clear himself of one among never so many challenges, but should be as
often condemned as accused.

Hence Learn,

1. Man is naturally a contentious striving creature; As here is implied, he
would be at contending. Not only is he apt to be contentious with men, 1 Cor.
11.16 Romans 2.8. Hab. 1.3. (which is a fruit of flesh, Gal. 5.19, 20.) but he is
even ready to quarrel with God; in the matter of his deep counsels, Romans 9.20.
of his Law and Directions, Romans 8.7. Joh. 6.60. of his Providence and
dispensations, Psalm. 73. Jer. 12.1. Isa. 45.9. and 58.3. and particularly, in
the matter of denying his own righteousness, Romans 10.3. This we should look
upon as the result of our pride, and the ordinary root and rise of much of our
vexing exercise, whereby we obstruct the use and profit we might reap by our
condition.

2. Nothing will subdue this proud contentious humor in man, but sin
discovered and charged home, putting man to answer; Either the Lord awaking the
Consciences of contenders with him (or with men either) and so putting other
work in their hand, and curing their idleness, which causes contention: or,
permitting them to fall in some sin, to recover them from conceit and security,
which make them so quarrelsome.

3. The best of the Children of God are environed with innumerable evils and
frailties, which may humble them; For, there are thousands of them here. See
Jam. 3.2. These should be seriously laid to heart, Psalm. 40 11, 12. lest we
prove them to be, not infirmities, but presumptuous sins. They should, also, be
watched over, and observed, in every step of our way; and when this is
remembered, it will call for charity one toward another, and to bear one
another burdens.

4. Our unrighteousness and multitude of failings must be of Gods discovering,
when he comes to contend; For, he must make the challenge, and put them to
answer. This is not only true of the wicked, Psalm. 50.21. and of refined
Formalists, Romans 7.9. But even of Saints, who, with David, may lie over for a
time in sin, without discerning it, either in the Glass of the Law, or checks
of their own Conscience, till God come and put the Conscience to it. So little
cause have we to lean to our inherent grace! And when we are most tender and
vigilant in observing our own escapes, yet how little are we able to pry into
the Law or our own Consciences? Who knows the perfection of the Law, the
depth of his own heart, and all his escapes? See 1 John 3.20. This teaches us,
to be mindful what strangers we are to our own errors, Psalm. 19 12. and that,
therefore, we ought not to lean to our own verdict of our selves, 1 Cor. 4.4.
Psalm. 139 23, 24.

5. Albeit a spirit of bondage, under tentation, may cause Saints restore what
they took not away, and subscribe to every accusation of Satan, as a true
challenge; yet* all Gods challenges are true, whether we see it, or the
conscience take with it, or not; And they are challenges which no man can ward
off, or answer, but in a Mediator, Every challenge of God, is in it self, a
sentence of condemnation; as often as we are challenged by him, so often are we
condemned; For, Man cannot answer him, even one of a thousand. He can neither
deny them, nor defend himself, but must succumb in that debate. See Romans 3 4.
Psalm. 130.3. and and 143.2. This may demonstrate their folly who will not be
concluded by the verdict of God in his Word, concerning them, but do stand out
against it; or, who, being convinced, do not flee to a mediator, in whom alone
they are able to answer to their dittay.

Verse. 4. He is wise in heart, and mighty in strength: who has hardened
himself against him, and has prospered?
The Second Argument, confirming this Assertion concerning the Righteousness of
God, and that he is not to be contended with as unrighteous, is taken from the
consideration of his power and wisdom. This is propounded, in this verse, and
amplified and enlarged in the several branches thereof; His power especially
(though not secluding his wisdom) ver. 5. -- 10. and his wisdom especially. ver
11.

In this verse God is asserted to be wise and mighty; where he is said to be
wise in heart, which is an expression borrowed from what the Scripture speaks
of men's wisdom, where the heart is taken not only for the seat of wisdom, Prove
2 10. but for wisdom it self, a man of heart is a wise man, Job 34 34. Prove.
6.3^. and 19 8. in the Original So the meaning here is that God is singularly
and infinitely wise and powerful. And in this,

1. There is a proof of Gods Righteousness supposed. For he neither wants
wisdom, which might cause him err or mistake in any thing; nor wants he power
for execution, to cause him fail and come short in any of his purposes; as we
see men of best integrity may miscarry, or come short, through want of either
of those.

2. There is proposed an express argument wherefore God should not be contended
with. He being so wise and powerful, none will offer to contend with him but
fools; seeing they are not able to prosecute a controversy with him, either by
skill or power. And this is confirmed from experience; that never any who yet
essayed this course, found it thrive in their hand.

Hence Learn,

1. A right study of the Attributes of God will prove a solid ground for
religious dispositions toward God; it will help faith to judge what he is doing
and will do, and teach us to expect that his operations, according to his Word,
will be like himself, and that our behavior before him should be suitable to
such a One; Therefore does Job rec^^r to this study, when he would vindicate
Gods Righteousness, and guard against contending with him We are ap^ to judge
of his working by our sense, which we should rather read according as his
Attributes represent it: And if we were more mindful what he is, our behavior
before him would be more reverent, Eccl 5 1, 2.

2. As the Lords being wise and powerful may teach them who would not miscarry,
to lean to him for direction and strength; so it may ass^^e us that he is
righteous in all his works, and does not wrong to any; As has been explained.

3. As the wisdom and power of God do prove his righteousness; So, also, that
there is no dealing with him in a way of contradiction, whether by policy or by
force, but he will be infinitely above the contradicter; Therefore is he
asserted to be wise in heart, and mighty in strength, in op^^sition to them who
harden themselves. See Exodus 18.11. Job 5.13. Psalm. 5.10. Prove. 21.30. Isa.
43.13. This may comfort the godly over all their fears of politic and powerful
Enemies; and may teach them humble submission in bearing their own lots; to
stoop being their only safety, and way to prevail.

4. Among many others who, not only walk contrary to God, but harden themselves
in their opposition; (as namely, Those who engage themselves in gross and
crying sins; Those who resolve to sin, let God lay what he will, and so deny
the truth of his Word, or slight his justice, Jer. 5.12, 13. and 17.^5. Those
who are incorr^gible under judgments, Lev. 26.18 21, 23, etc. Isa. 26.11. and
1.5. Jer. 5.3. Those who ^et themselves in opposition to Gods people, Jer.
48.26, 27. and many the like) Even those f^ll under some degree of ob^u^^tion,
and bidding a defiance to Gods power and wisdom, who do so contend for their
own righteousness, as they quarrel Gods dealing about them and his
righteousness in it, and who are not so satisfied with what God does, as to
give him glory in it: For, it is of such that the scope leads us to understand
Job's s^^ech, that they harden themselves against God. And, indeed, such words
and complaints are sai^ to b^ stout against God, Mal. 3.13, 14. and ^very man
that wants the sense of his own unrighteousness and of the righteousness of
God, is, in so far, an hardened man. This they have need to consider wh^,
because of the righteousness of their person or cause, will not humbly stoop
under affl^ctions; but have so much stout-heartedness, as to dare to quarrel,
even when the rod is upon their back, and not tremble when the Lion is roaring,
Job 36.18 Such have reason to bless God that he gives them not an humbling
proof of himself, when they so put him to it.

5. Albeit obdured sinners may prosper, during the time of Gods patience and
forbearance, Psalm. 73, 3, 4, etc. Mal. 3, 14, 15. Yet never man helped his
affliction by struggling with it, and with God because of it: And as Gods
Children, so miscarrying, will not escape a temporal correction, if they
prevent it not by repentance; So the wicked will sma^t for it in hell, if not
here also. For, such hardeners of themselves do not prosper; as has been
verified by experience in all ages; Who has hardened himself against him, and
has prospered? And though the wicked may escape for a time, yet their
prosperity is dear bought, and it will be sound so, when they shall smart for
ever in Hell.

6. Examples of Gods judgments upon obdured sinners, should warn others not to
follow their steps; For, Job will not contend against God, for Who has
hardened himself against him, and has prospered? And it must be the height of
madness, to run on courses which have been essayed before us, and had such sad
effects.

7. Albeit Job do here argue from his experience, that since none prospered by
contending, therefore he would not essay it; And it is true, he was much under
the power and command of his light in his calm days, so that he durst not do
that which his light condemned, and discovered to be dangerous, Job 31.1, 2,
23. Yet it would also be remembered, That, not only unrenewed men will not be
convinced by their own or others experience, discovering the evil or folly of
their way, Psalm. 49.13. But, even the light and experience of godly men will
not command them, in (...) fi^s of tentation. For, Job might, and did som^^h^^
miscarry in his passion, by contending with God; though his light and
experience tell him it is (...), and to no good purpose. We have need to take
(...) that we take it not for granted, that we closely follow all that our
light approves as good; nor are we to lean to sound Principles, as if our
practice were always conform thereunto. See Romans 7.15.

Verse. 5. Which removes the mountains, and they know not: which overturneth
them in his anger:

6. Which shakes her place out of the earth, and the pillars thereof tremble:


Follows, to ver. 11. a confirmation of this Argument, as it relates to the
power of God especially (though not secluding his wisdom) which is illustrated
and cleared by several instances and proofs thereof, in the Earth and Heaven,
in the Seas, Sun and Sta^^s, ver. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. and then all is summed up in a
general and comprehensive Commendation of this his power, ver. 10.

From all which, in general, we may Learn,

1. It is the duty of the people of God, to be well versed in the Book of
Nature, and in the study of the Works of Creation and Providence; For, so was
Job here. So also was David, Psalm 8. and 104. and elsewhere* if the very
Heathen may learn so much of God by this study, as leaves them without excuse,
Romans 1.20. How much more may we profit thereby, seeing we are helped to read
these works, by the Scriptures? This study is a notable help to sweet
meditation and joy, Psalm. 104.34. to lead us to understand Gods loving
kindness, (shining, especially in his works of Providence) Psalm. 107.43 and to
entertain spiritual mindedness, Psalm. 139.15, 16, 17, 18.

2 There is no right study of the Works of Creation and Providence, except
when, (without resting on the works themselves) the power and wisdom of God is
seen to shine in them; and we learn a lesson, of humility and self-abasement
before God, in them. For, so much does Job's scope, in this his study, teach
us; which is to demonstrate, thereby that God is wise and mighty, and that to
contend with him, and not to stoop before him, will never prosper in any man's
hand, ver. 4. See Psalm. 8.1.3, 4. This condemns the proud conceit that men have
of their own contemplations and speculations about these things, when yet they
are neither helped to know God, nor themselves, thereby.

3. Here both ordinary and extraordinary works of God are recorded; To show,
that much of God may be seen in both: and some extraordinary works are first
spoken of, To show that our little seeing, or, observing of God in his ordinary
working, does speak out the Atheism of our hearts, and provokes God to appear
extraordinarily. I come now to the Particulars.

In these verses he begins with Earthquakes, whereby God, when he is angry,
overthrows and overturns very Mountains; and that so suddenly and unexpectedly,
as if man were carried in his sleep from one place to another, ver. 5. And not
only shakes particular parcels of the earth, near the superfice thereof, out of
their place, but makes the very lower places thereof, which seem, as Pillars,
to support the rest, to tremble. Thus are we to understand those Pillars; For,
otherwise, the whole globe of Earth and Water hangs on nothing, Job 26.7. and
is supported and upheld only by the Word of Gods power, Heb. 1.3.

From hence we may Learn,

1. In this dispensation of an Earthquake, we may read Gods mercy, in making
the Earth, in ordinary, a settled habitation for Men and Beasts; and in not
making frequent use of the shaking of it, to witness how unworthy we are to
live upon it, and to spew us out, or swallow us up, as Numb. 16.31, 32, 33.

2. This does also demonstrate the power of Gods Word, which alone upholds the
Earth, Heb. 1.3. So that it shakes not, except when he is pleased to work some
extraordinary thing thereby: And it should teach us, to lean to this Word,
Psalm. 119, 89. -- 92.

3. There is nothing so stable that can be fixed, if God pleased to shake it;
He can remove and overturn Mountains, and make plains of them, Zech. 4.7. He
can shake the Earth out of her place, and cause the Pillars thereof tremble.
The study of this is a special antidote against presumption and security, Psalm.
30.6, 7. if men consider that God, who shakes the Mountains, Earth, and Pillars
thereof, can easily over-turn their settled like prosperity, can shake their
inward peace and quiet, yea, can shake the very life out of them.

4. God needs not any deliberation, means, or time, to overthrow what is most
fixed; nor needs faith look to probabilities, in closing with the Promise; For,
He removes the Mountains, and they know not, ere ever they be aware, So Dan.
5.4, 5. Isa. 17.14.

5. Extraordinary alterations wrought upon the the creatures are tokens of Gods
anger; not against these creatures themselves, Hab. 3.8. but against sinners,
and particularly, against the Enemies of his people, Psalm. 18.7, 8, etc. For,
when he shakes Mountains, and the Earth, he over-turneth them in his anger.
Hence, Earthquakes are either a scourge unto sinners, while they are swallowed
up thereby (though it should not be doubted but the godly may share in that, at
in other calamities) Numb. 16. or presages of other approaching judgments, Luke
21.11, 12.

6. The shaking and trembling of insensible creatures, when God is angry,
serves to condemn men, who are not sensible of it, nor will stoop under his
hand; For, this is also Job's scope to show that, if God, shake the Earth, and
the Pillars thereof tremble, then men should be afraid to contend, and should
not think to prosper by hardening of themselves. See Jer. 5.22.

7. When we look upon this shaking of the Earth and Mountains, it may serve to
comfort Believers, and to put them in mind that (however they have their own
shaking and needful tostings, yet) their state and happiness in God is more
fixed then the very Earth and Hills; as this work of God is commented upon,
Psalm. 46.1, 2, 3.

Verse. 7. Which commands the Sun, and it rises not: and seals up the
stars:
The next instance of the power of God, is, in commanding the Sun that it rise
not, and in sealing up the Stars. This may be understood (as it relates to the
Sun) that God, when he pleases, by his Word of command causes the Sun to
stand still ( Josh. 10.) and to go back, ( Isa. 39.8.) so that it keeps not its
ordinary course of rising and setting. Or, it may be understood of his common
Providence, that he keeps the Sun from rising and shining upon us in the
night; and withholds the stars from our sight in the day time; as if they
were shut up under seals. But it seems rather to point at this; That though the
Sun keep its course; yet at Gods command it rises not to us as to our seeing
of it, or the light thereof, when it is wrapped up in clouds of darkness; as
when darkness came for a plague on Egypt, Exodus 10.21, 22. So also in Paul's
voyage, Act. 27.20. and in Eclipses: and that the stars are sealed up in the
day time with the light of the Sun, and sometime in the night, with clouds.

Hence Learn,

1. It is our duty to observe the comely order which God has placed in the
world, of a vicissitude of day and night; and of the Sun, Moon and Stars to
rule and shine in those, in their courses; As here Job instanceth in the Sun
and Stars, and their shining, or being sealed up. This vicissitude is not only
needful for ordering the time of our labor and rest, Psalm. 104.19. -- 23. and
for renewing our dispositions, by the renewed sight of the creatures,
represented to us every morning, Job 38.12, 13, 14. But it serves to be a
document of the vicissitudes of all lots within time; so that neither in
prosperity ought we to be secure, considering that time is still in motion and
changing, Psalm. 30.6, 7. Nor in adversity ought we to be discouraged, as if it
would be perpetual. Hence the Psalmist, pleading for a relief to the Church in
trouble; argues from those changes and vicissitudes, that the Churches sad
condition must not be still the same, Psalm. 74.10, 11, 16, 17. And as for the
lights that shine by night and by day, mercy is observed to shine in them.
Psalm. 136. Yea, the very mercy of the sight of the Sun and Stars, in their
time, ought to be observed as a proof of Gods kindness to all men, which should
be imitated by his Children, Mat. 5.44, 45.

2. All the excellency that is in the creature comes from God, and all the
comfort we receive thereby, comes from him; For, as he made the Light before
he made the Sun; So, the Sun, for all its brightness, or the Stars will not
shine, if he command them not, or, if he cast a vail upon them. God has a
negative voice in all the motions and influences of the creatures, whether
Enemies, Psalm. 76.10. Isa. 8.9, 10. Lam. 3.37, 38. or means of comfort. Bread
will not feed us, if he take away the blessing, Deuteronomy. 8.3. nor hurtful things
annoy us, if he prohibit, Act. 28.3, 4, 5, 6. Isa. 43.2. Dan. 3.27. and 6.20,
22.

3. The Lord needs no more, to order or overturn any of his creatures, their
motions and influences; or to bring about his purposes by them, but a word of
command; For, he commands the Sun, and it rises not, and seals up the
Stars. See Psalm. 147.15, 16. and 148.4. and 44.4. Matthew. 8.8. 2 Cor. 4.6. So
that his naked Word is not lightly to be regarded, whether it be for a man, or
against him.

4. The obediential subjection of insensible creatures, to the command of God,
will be a witness against proud contentious men, who, being endued with reason,
ought to be more pliable to his will; For, so may this instance be referred to
Job's principal scope, which is to reprove contenders and qu^^rellers with God,
ver. 3, 4. And indeed, if those creatures be obedientially subject, to be
ordered so as may be for the honor and service of their Maker; and if it be
the Suns splendor not to shine, at Gods command, and the brightness of the
Stars, to be sealed up, when he pleases; how guilty must men be, who seek only
to please themselves, and to have their interests and humors served in every
thing, without submission to what may glorify God?

Verse. 8. Which alone spreads out the heavens, and treads upon the waves of
the Sea:
The power of God is here further instanced,

1. In the Heavens, which as God, when at first he created them, spread out as
a stately curtain, Psalm. 104.2. So, when he pleases, he again (as it were)
spreads them out in their serenity, by drawing off the vail of clouds that were
upon them.

2. In the Sea; which he has under his power (as this phrase of treading,
imports, Psalm. 91.13.) and can settle the waves thereof, and pave it as a flour
upon which one walks.

Hence Learn,

1. The Heaven, or Firmament, in its extension, and serenity and brightness, is
a stately document of the Power, Majesty, and wisdom of God; as here we are
taught, and, Psalm. 8.3. and 19.1. This gloriously imbroidered Canopy does
demonstrate what stately works God can produce of nothing, and should put us in
mind of the glory of our invisible Country, which is above.

2. The Lord (as he made the Heavens his alone, and needs not the help of
Angels to rule the motions; So) can do greatest works his alone, without the
help of our strength or counsel; as in this instance we are taught. Which is
the more to be heeded, that hereby the Lord has given a standing pledge and
document of his mercy, which endures for ever toward his people, Psalm. 136.4,
5. See Job 37.18. Isa. 59.16. 2 Timothy 4.16, 17.

3. The Sea also is a Theater, upon which many of Gods wonders are to be seen.
Psalm. 107.23, 24. both for variety of creatures fed there, Psalm. 104.25, 27.
His bounding of its fury against the Land, Job 38.8. -- 11, and compescing of
the tempests that arise there, Psalm. 107.29, 30. and 89.9. This is it, whereby
his power is commended here, He treads upon the waves, or heights, and
risings, of the Sea. And hereby does he demonstrate his power to compesce the
tumults of men; whether, when they assault his people, Psalm. 65.7. and 93.3, 4.
or let loose their corruptions like a troubled Sea, Isa. 57.20. or are mad upon
Errors, Jude ver. 13. or do rise and swell against Gods dispensations, to
contend with him because of them, which is the particular Job is upon. In all
which cases, God can either calm, or, if they will not be calm, crush them.

Verse. 9. Which makes Arcturus, Orion and Pleiades, and the chambers of the
South:
A further instance of Gods power, and of his wisdom also, is, That not only
he made the glorious Constellations: but has ordered some of them, by their
rising and appearing, to distinguish, and, by their influences, to moderate the
seasons of the year. As Arcturus for the Harvest (at which time of old they
began the year; and therefore it is first mentioned here,) Orion, the Winter;
Pleiades, the Spring, and the Chambers of the South, the Summer; whereby (it is
most like) the Stars of the Constellation called Canis Major, (in which the
Dog Star is most conspicuous) are designed. For they arise with the Sun in
Summer, and may be called, the inward parts, (as some read it) or, Chambers of
the South, because they are so far inward to the South, beyond the Aequinoctial
line, much further then Orion is (and so more remote from those who live on
this side the Line, and near the North Pole) and because they arise in the time
of great heat, as if they came out of some warm chambers. I shall not enter to
speak of these Constellations, nor dip on their names in the Hebrew, and the
signification thereof.

Only we may hence Learn,

1. The wisdom and power of God is to be seen and adored, in ordering the
seasons of the year; wherein there are such changes, as are useful for man, for
the Earth and Creatures living on it; and in the fixing whereof, the fidelity
of God is to be remarked, Genesis 8.22. and he is to be eyed in any variations we
find in those, as rendering himself conspicuous therein, when we will not
notice him in his ordinary way.

2. As Gods glorious power and wisdom shine in making and ordering the Stars,
and their influences, Job 38.31, 32. (whereby he invites men to seek him, Amos
5.8 and to believe his Universal Providence, and particular care of all his
people, Psalm. 147.3, 4, 5. So it is very commendable to be versed in that
study; as Job here has been. No^ so, as to seek to draw the foreknowledge of
particular contingent events (were it but even the temper of the weather on
such and such particular days) from them, Jer. 10.2. Isa. 47.13. But that we
may be led to see and acknowledge God in them.

Verse. 10. Which does great things past finding out, yea, and wonders without
number.
All these Particular instances are, here, shut up in a General; That God does
great and incomprehensible, things which can neither be searched out nor
reckoned. Of this, See further, Chap. 5.9.

Here Learn,

1. The documents of Gods power and glory are so many, that who so would essay
to recount them, he will weary before he be well begun; For, Job is forced to
give over here, Gods works being past finding out, and without number. And no
wonder, for the whole Earth is full of his glory, Isa. 6.3.

2. Every one of those works of God are great and mavelous; even the least of
Gods creatures will over-charge the best wits, to consider the power and wisdom
of God in making of it; For, they are all great things, and wonders.

3. The number and gloriousness of Gods works should contribute to humble man
before him, and put him from quarrelling Gods work about himself, whose works
speaks his praise in Heaven and in Earth, in so great frequency and variety:
For, this tends also to his scope of silencing man's contending with God, that
He does great things past finding out, and wonders without number.

Verse. 11. Lo, he goes by me, and I see him not: he passes on also, but I
perceive him not.
In this verse that Argument, ver. 4. is confirmed, as to the point of wisdom,
especially. In that God (as Job had observed in his experience) daily
presents himself to view, in his works of Providence; and that not only by a
sudden glance, but so as he may be viewed at leisure, (as a man going by, and
passing on before another:) and yet he could not take him up, even in those:
And how much less could he comprehend the depth of Gods Wisdom and Justice
(which his eyes saw not) so as to contend about it?

Hence Learn,

1. The Lord does present himself before man, from day to day, in his works; so
as himself may be seen in them; For, He goes by me, and passes on also. See
Acts 14.17. and 17.27, 28.

2. God, manifesting himself thus in his works, is but little seen or perceived
by the best of men; For, He passes by me, and I see him not; he passes on
also, but I perceive him not. Not only are men not aware, but surprised, in
extraordinary manifestations; Genesis 28.16. But even in common things, either we
see not his hand in them, or but in few of them; and wherein we see most, we
see but little of what of him shines in them. So it appears by these
Questions, Chap. 38. and 39. that we are but ignorant of what is to be seen in
the very course of Nature, and revolutions of seasons, and humane affairs.
Providence are a dark Book, which men will not easily learn to read aright.

3. It is not enough that men have notional contemplations of man's ignorance,
but they must experimentally know it in themselves; as Job here instanceth in
his own person, I see him not, I perceive him not.

4. Such as come experimentally to know their ignorance of God in common
things, will be affected therewith, and excited thereby to admire him, who is
so incomprehensible, even in such things: Therefore he premits a note of
attention and admiration to this, Lo, he goes by me, etc.

5. Our ignorance and inadvertency in most common things, ought not only to
humble us; but, especially, ought to guard us against quarrelling of the depth
of the Wisdom and Righteousness of God, in more singular dispensations; For,
that is the scope here, That if Job saw not God, as he ought, in common things,
how could he think to pry so into his dealing about him, as to contend with
him? The study of this would teach us, that when we look on things unbeseeming
(as we conceive) the wisdom, righteousness, and holiness of God, we should
complain of our own weakness, and not challenge God. And, instead of
quarrelling, we ought to admire his goodness, who will employ such an
unsearchable depth and mystery of wisdom about us, and do that good to us, and
for us, which we so often mistake and quarrel.

Verse. 12. Behold, he takes away, who can hinder him? who will say unto himn,
What do thou?
The third General Argument, confirming this Assertion concerning the
Righteousness of God, and that he is not to be contended with; is taken from
his power attended with Sovereignty. If God come to deprive a man of any
enjoyment he has; there is no resisting of him by force, seeing he is
Omnipotent; not ought there to be any question made of the justice of the fact,
seeing he has absolute dominion, and is not accomptable to any. And therefore
it may well be concluded, that it is folly to contend with him as unrighteous
in his dealing.

Hence Learn,

1. The creatures enjoyments are in Gods hand, to dispose of them as he
pleases, and he does, sometime, see it fitting to take them away, even in a
violent manner, and so as may most affect the creature: For, it is an evidence
of his dominion, to be marked and adored; Behold, he takes away, even as a
Lion takes his prey, as the word imports. This may warn men to be fitted for
wanting more then ever they wanted, even so long as they have any thing to be
taken away: and it teaches them not to fix their hearts upon any enjoyment;
For that is the ready way to make the righteous owner claim it, when it
becomes an idol, and to make the removal and loss of it more violent and
bitter to them.

2. When God is pleased thus to strip a man, there is no standing out against
him, nor any victory attainable, but by submission, the want whereof augments
crosses; For, Behold, he takes away, who can hinder him? or turn him away,
from prosecuting his purpose^? See Lev. 10.3.

3. It is not sufficient submission, when men simply quit what is taken from
them, because they cannot help it; unless also they give over quarrelling of
God in their minds, as being Sovereign Lord, and proprietary of all they enjoy,
and he from whom no reason of actions ought to be required: Therefore, unto
that, Who can hinder him? is added, Who will say (or, dare and ought say) unto
him, What do thou? And here our subjection unto God must begin, till he
please to give some further account of his dealing, as seems good unto him.
See Isa. 45.9. Jer. 18.6. Romans 9.20.

Verse. 13. If God will not withdraw his anger, the proud helpers do stoop under
him.

14. How much less shall I answer him, and choose out my words to reason with
him?


After these more General Arguments, Job brings the dispute home to his own
case, and produces several special grounds and reasons why he is not resolved
to contend with God. The first whereof (in these verses) is founded upon his
comparing of himself with others? He had observed, and was persuaded, that if
God should let out his anger against contenders, neither they, nor the stoutest
help of created power, or proud nature, could resist him; but would certainly
succumb, unless himself remitted of his anger, and quit the plea, ver. 13. And
therefore it were folly in him to enter the lists with God, either as a
Defendant, to answer him; or as a Plaintiff, to choose out my words to reason
with him, or my words with him, (as it is in the Original) that is, words
wherewith to manage my plea in the contest with him. In general it may be
Observed, That it is not enough that men have sound general Principles, unless
they do improve them in practice, in their own particular cases and exigents;
wherein many, who have sound light in General Truths, do come short, through
the prevalency of tentation, passion and distempers: For, Job is not contented
with the former general Arguments, but brings them home to press his own duty,
in his particular trial. And albeit Job cannot be assoiled from acting contrary
to all those Principles, in his contending with God; yet his method in his
discourse does clearly point out our duty; which, is, to endeavor to walk, in
particular exigents and trials, according to that sound light which we have of
general Truths, and to fix our selves in resolutions of patience and
submission, upon solid grounds and principles. More particularly,

From ver. 13. Learn,

1. There is in man much unsubdued pride, ready to break forth, even against
God, by contending with him about his dealing and dispensations; For, so is
here supposed, that there is much that is proud to be crushed by him, and is
clearly instanced, ver. 14.

2. This pride, especially, provokes God to anger, and so draws on more
trouble; For, so is also supposed, that God has anger against such. While we
continue proud under trouble, we will hardly get any sight of Gods love in it.

3. This pride in contending with God, appears, yet more, in that, when God
has entered the lists with proud man, and he finds himself too weak a party,
he will rather essay any other course for relief, than stoop to God; For, he
will run to proud helpers. He will muster up all his stout-heartedness, to
endure what he cannot avoid; and if God contend by outward trouble, he will run
to any refuge, rather than to God, Isa. 9 9, 10, 13.

4. Gods anger is too sore a party for proud man, and all created strength;
For, when he persists in his anger, the proud helpers do stoop under him. All
the power of Egypt (to which the word rendered, pride, alludes here) could not
hold a Lowse off Pharaoh, nor a Frog out of his Chamber, See Mal 1.4.

5. As utter undoing and ruin will be the issue of Gods anger against proud
man, unless himself pass from it, (proud helpers will even stoop under him, if
he withdraw not his anger:) So God, who has made man and knows his mould and
frame, sees it fit, oft-times, to quit the plea, and put a close to the
controversy, and give over to contend with a worm: For, this is supposed as a
reserved case wherein proud man is not crush^d, if God will withdraw his anger.
And it is only if God will not withdraw his anger, that the proud helpers do
stoop under him; which, implies that sometime he will withdraw it. And albeit
the speech be absolute in the first language, God will not withdraw, etc. yet
the context and coherence thereof with the rest of the purpose, does evince
that it must be understood by way of supposition, That, God not withdrawing his
anger, (as some do well render it) the proud helpers do stoop etc. God is
pleased thus to put an end to his controversy with his stubborn people,
partly, upon the intercession of some among them, Amos 7.1. -- 6. partly to
manifest his sovereignty in grace, Isa. 57.17, 18. and to witness his tender
regard to their frailty whom he has chosen, Psalm. 78.38, 39. Yea, he is
pleased, sometime, to removes this plagues from off the wicked, when yet they
submit not, or are but feigned in it; as he dealt with Pharaoh. And all this he
does to invite sinners to him, who is so long suffering, even toward the
wicked, and quitteth many a plea to impenitent and stubborn man; and that he
may encourage his people to intercede with him, even when matters are very
desperate, and when men's disposition and way toward him, pleading a
controversy, portends little good.

From ver. 14. Learn,

1. A godly man thinks little of all the world, and least of himself,
especially when he is under the hand and rod of God; For, so does Job here,
comparing himself with all others, when he is now in such an afflicted and low
condition. If proud helpers do stoop, How much less shall I answer him?

2. True humility does, especially, appear in a man's stooping under Gods hand,
without quarrelling; For, so does Job here evidence it, that he will not
answer, nor choose out words with God. A murmuring spirit cannot, in so far as
it gives place to murmuring, pretend to humility.

3. Who so dare enter the lists with God, and reason with him about any of his
dealings, as Plaintiffs, they do provoke him to give them a sad challenge in
other things, and put them to defend and answer for themselves; For, both are
here conjoined, to show that they will be put to answer, who dare attempt to
reason with him. This may discover the folly of complaining and murmuring, and
may warn such as give way to it, to look for some other humbling work from God,
then to get leave to persist in that.

4. It is an evidence of true humility, and of spiritual wisdom also, when men
are made wise upon the expense of others, and do not presume to stand out where
others have slidden; for, so does Job argue here, The proud helpers do stoop,
How much less shall I answer him, etc?

Verse. 15. Whom though I were righteous, yet would I not answer, but I would
make supplication to my Judge.
The second ground of Job's resolution, not to contend with God, is, taken from
his hope to speed better another way. He would not plead the righteousness of
his cause, or of his person in begun sanctification, against God; nor turn a
defender to answer all that God could except against him; but would hope to
come better speed by humble supplication. Whatever was Job's weakness, in
quitting this course here resolved upon, for which he is rebuked by God; Yet
his doctrine does teach,

1. There is a righteousness attainable by fallen and sinful man; not a perfect,
personal and inherent righteousness, according to the tenor of the Covenant of
Works; but (beside imputed righteousness) a righteousness of sincerity in begun
sanctification, Luke 1.6. and a righteousness in respect of their cause, or,
the matter of their trial from God or men, or both: For, Job supposes that
here, (though I were righteous) as a thing attainable; where he speaks of his
righteous cause, and sincerity in holiness and true piety.

2. When men have attained to this righteousness, and are so assured of it that
they can plead it before and against men; and may humbly own it before God,
through a Mediator; yet they have need to be humble, when they consider that,
before the Tribunal of God, only the Righteousness of Christ can bear them out:
For, whom (to wit, God) though I were righteous, yet would I not answer. Though
he suppose his being righteous, yet he will carry humbly before God.

3. Whatever encouragement the Conscience of men's righteousness and integrity
may, otherwise, afford them, in going to God; yet there is no pleading of this
righteousness against God as a party, or to the prejudice of his righteousness:
For, this is it which he declines in particular, to answer God, when he turns
challenger, to maintain his righteousness against his complaints. When God
appears as a party, he can find many faults, which men either will not, or
cannot find. And albeit he do, in Christ, accept of our sincerity in begun
sanctification; yet he can soon find it imperfect and poluted in it self. And
if it be so with the righteous; How much more with the ungodly? 1 Pet. 4.18.

4. Humble supplication, by a man who shelters himself under the wings of
Christ and his imputed Righteousness, and lays claim to free grace in him, is
the best way of prevailing with God, when he lets loose his hand; and it will
be so successful, that contending is needless; For, says he, I would make
supplication, and implore grace and mercy (as the word imports) and therefore
need not, and will not answer.

5. The Lords being a Judge, whose Tribunal none can shun nor decline, whose
examination is most accurate and searching; whose sentence, and the execution
thereof, are most effectual; and whose severity in correcting, does point out
his dreadfulness; I say, the Lord's being such a Judge, should deter men from
pleading their righteousness against him as a party, and invite them to humble
themselves by supplication before him: For, says he, I would not answer, but I
would make supplication to my Judge.

Verse. 16. If I had called, and he had answered me: yet would I not believe
that he had hearkened unto my voice:

17. For he ^reaketh me with a tempest, and multiplieth my wounds without cause.

18. He will not suffer me to take my breath, but fills me with bitterness.


The words contain a third ground of Job's resolution not to contend with God;
The scope and meaning whereof are made difficult and obscure, by reason of the
different acceptions of the words, calling, and answering, ver. 16. Which, at
first veiw, seem to be meant of Prayer, and Gods answer thereunto. And so the
sense is given diverse ways. As

(1.) That though God were hearing his Prayers, yet he could hardly believe it
were so, v. 16. seeing he did so afflict him with breaches upon his body, mind,
family and goods, and did uncessantly vex his spirit therewith, v. 17, 18. And
it is indeed true; That, however men may be dear to God, and their Prayers
heard by him, when yet sad afflictions are not removed Psalm. 10.17. Dan. 10.12,
13. Yet great afflictions may so toss and confound them, that they cannot
discern audience and respect. But I see not how this comes up to Job's scope,
to persuade him to plead for Gods Righteousness, and not to contend against
him. It is true, the greatness of his trouble might affright him, though
innocent, from contending, as well as hinder him to discern audience; and, upon
that account, it may be looked on as a ground of this his resolution. But that
does not so fully exhaust the scope, nor so clearly reach it. Therefore,

(2.) Some leave out the word, yet, v. 16. which is not in the Original, and
changing the time a little, do read the latter part of the verse by way of
question, thus; If I have called, and he have answered, would I not believe
that he had hearkened to my voice? And so the sense is given to this purpose;
as if Job had said; I dare not complain, or quarrel God; For, if I have prayed
to him, and have found him answering my Prayers; might not I expect he would
hear the voice of worse language, in my complaints and quarrellings, and answer
it accordingly? This Interpretation holds out this truth, That such as find
Communion with God in Prayer, will get the clearest sight of his presence and
watchful Providence over all their ways; and will be most afraid to provoke
him, or put him to it, to give a proof of his Providence against them, by their
miscarriages. But however this be a sound truth, and may seem to be grounded on
what is said, v. 16. yet it cannot be the meaning of this place: For it takes
not in the rest of the verses, which confirm what is said there, and therefore
are connected with it by the particle, For,

3. Some understand the words thus, as if Job had said; Though God should hear
my Prayers, yet would I not believe that he had hearkened to my voice, that is,
I would not believe he had hearkened thereunto out of any respect to my voice,
or, to the worth of my Prayers; but merely of his own goodness; as may appear
by his smiting of me, being innocent and free of gross wickedness: And how much
less durst I think to be accepted in contending? This is also a truth, That
such as are most real supplicants, and speed best at it, will be most humble,
and see most of free grace in the answers they get; and this humility will keep
them from quarrelling, and other sinful attempts. Yet neither is this
Interpretation so clear or full, and it seems to place the emphasis and force
of the Argument where it is not, only upon his voice as not regarded in the
answer.

Therefore, passing that acception of the words, calling, and, answering, I
conceive it safer to understand them, more especially of Job's calling, or,
provoking and challenging of God, to enter the lists and debate with him; and
of Gods answering, or, undertaking and being ready to abide the challenge. Thus
calling and answering are frequently taken in this Book, and even in this
Chapter. And so the sense is, as if Job had said; I will not contend with God
about his righteousness, nor plead my righteousness to the prejudice of his.
For if I should call God to debate the matter with me, and he declared himself
ready to defend against me; yet I would not believe that either he would endure
my contentious discourse, or judge me to be righteous, v. 16. For, if now, when
I am not contending, but walking in my integrity, he has so violently
afflicted me, v. 17, 18. What would he do, if I should wickedly provoke him?
Thus the sense runs clear.

Though Job kept not at his resolution, not to contend, but frequently calls on
God to answer him in that dispute; and though in his complaints and challenges,
both in this speech and elsewhere, he do reflect upon the Righteousness of God,
and cry up his own righteousness too much, for which he is checked by God; yet
his general grounds are good, that, upon the grounds mentioned, it is not to be
expected that contending will gain any thing at Gods hand.

And from all this we may Learn,

1. Whatever be the endeavors, attempts, or desires, of men, or how much
soever God seem to condescend to them, or homologate their will; yet it is not
to be thought, that he will do; or approve any thing, but what is right: For,
so much does Job's assertion, v. 16. teach in general, That though Job should
presume to call, and God should condescend to an^wer yet he does still right,
and will not patiently hearken to his voice of contention, and justify him.

2 Whatever the Lord do with any of his people, it is not to be expecte^ that
he will approve of quarrelling, or justify quarrellers; For, that is it, in
par^^cular, that Job will not believe. It is true, when Job so often called,
God at last in so far hearkened to his voice, as to pu^ him to answer for
himself; But in so doing, he was ^o far from hearkening to, and applauding the
voic^ (...) h^s complaints, that he put him to humble himself in the dust for
them. And who so believe or expect any other of him, they do but delude
themselves, and will be disappointed in end.

3. In Job's experience and lot we are here taught, what Saints may expect to
meet with in the world, and what they ought to submit unto, if it be made their
lo^. As,

1. When they are in a settled estate, and all things go smoothly with them,
they may meet with a breach and wound; For, he breaks me, and there are
wounds.

2. This breach may be made suddenly, and violently, as if it were in great
displeasure; He break^th me with a tempest This may teach us to digest
breach^s, and find them more sweet, when come on in a more mild and calm way.

3. This breach may be made by many strokes, reaching u^ in many of our
concerns, in body, mind, goods, f^^^nds etc. and reaching each of them by
stroke after stroke. He multiplieth my wounds This may teach us, when we are
under calamity, rather to be looking and preparing for more, then quarrelling
what is lying upon us; and to account it a mercy to want any trial which in
probability, might befall us, and that one way of trouble is not following upon
the back of another.

4. These multiplied breaches and wounds may come upon us inc^ssantly, not
suffering us to take our breath; that we learn to acknowledge the mercy of
breat^^ng times. See also Chap 7.19.

5. Upon all these s^d ingredients in the Saints cup, there may follow the sad
affliction of being imbitter^d, yea, filled with bitterness, at and because of
them. See King. 4.27. Hereby the Lord discovers his mercy to those who possess
a quiet mind under trouble, and calls them to be humbled, whose bitter
dispositions he permits to break loose, and so discovers what is in their
hearts.

Doct. 4 In all these sad tossings of Saints, it is their duty and advantage
not to lose the sight of Providence, but to see an hand of God doing all these
things, that they may be humbled before him, who puts them in the furnace to
discover their dross, and may be comforted, when they know they are in his
hand, who is infinitely wise, compassionate and faithful: Therefore does Job
ascribe all this to God, He breaks me, etc. Yea, even his bitterness, he
looks upon it as his weakness, which God will have, for wise ends, discovered.
See Lam. 3.15.

5. Saints are also bound to believe that all their sad lots from God may
consist with their being righteous, and approved of him: For, notwithstanding
all Gods terrible dispensations toward him, yet he asserts God did them without
cause. This is Gods own verdict concerning Job and his trials, Chap. 2 3. The
meaning whereof is not, that God had no cause nor end in doing all this; nor
yet that Job wanted sin to deserve all of it (if that were his meaning, it were
a most passionate and unjust complaint, even when he is declining to complain
or contend) But that he was not guilty of gross wickedness and hypocrisy,
which are the evils which God pursues with his wrath. This Job was not
convinced nor guilty of, and therefore refuses to take with it. And this
teaches godly men not to mistake, as if sad afflictions did prove them wicked,
and were sent to cause them renounce the testimony of their own Consciences.
And it may warn the wicked, who may expect sad things, when such things as
these are done even to the righteous.

6. The strokes which are inflicted upon Saints, walking in their integrity,
should humble them, and make them afraid of gross provocations; for, so much
does the scope of all this argument teach; He who was so afflicted, being
innocent, could not expect that contending with God would prosper in his hand.
It is a very sweet frame of spirit, when men's good Conscience under trouble
makes them the more tender and afraid to sin, though, oft-times, their
corruptions and weakness over-drive them to do otherwise.

Verse. 19. If I speak of strength, lo, he is strong: and if of Judgment, who
shall set me a time to plead?
The fourth ground of Job's resolution not to contend, is the same in substance
with that general Argument, v. 12. taken from the power and dominion of God,
which he repeats and acknowledges to be of force in his case, to keep him from
contending. The sum is, as if Job had said; It were madness in me to offer to
strive with God. For if I presume to do it by the strong hand, he is strongest
and invincible, and I am lying on a dunghill, like a filthy Leper. And if I
offer to plead by way of argument and law, there is no Superior Judge, to set
a day for pleading betwixt him and me; to cause parties compeere; to give
security to me in pleading; and, to execute the sentence: But he is Supreme
Judge, who can do no wrong, and from whom there is no appeal.

Hence Learn,

1. God is the Omnipotent and strong Lord, for whom nothing is too hard, and
with whom no creature can grapple; for, If a speak of strength, lo, he is
strong. This may teach Saints to trust in him, in greatest difficulties, and
when he makes use of weak means of help, 1 Cor. 1.25. and to stoop before him,
1 Cor. 10.22.

2. As God is Omnipotent and invincible in power; so he is, also, supreme and
sovereign Judge, accountable to none, and before whom none can stand in
judgment, by the help of any creature; For, If I speak of judgment, who shall
set me a time? to wit, to plead, as is well added in the Translation. For, the
word imports, an appointing of a solemn time for any affair, and here, for
judgment and pleading in judgment, as the context makes clear.

3. God is then rightly known and acknowledged, in his power and sovereignty,
when it humbles us, and makes us stand in awe to sin before him; for, Job
brings in those as an argument, here, why he will not contend with God.

Verse. 20. If I justify my self, mine own mouth shall condemn me: If I say, I
am perfect, it shall also prove me perverse.
The fifth ground of his resolution is taken from the prejudice that would
redound to himself, by his pleading himself to be righteous and perfect before
God. Which is not to be understood (as has been marked before) of his
righteousness by justification, nor of his sincerity and integrity in begun
renovation and sanctification; For these (and even this last, particularly,) he
pleads before his friends, and before God also, according to the tenor of the
Covenant of Grace. But it is to be understood of perfect righteousness and
sinlesness before God, and according to the Law and Covenant of Works; and of
his pleading of this, or any other righteousness, to the prejudice of the
Righteousness of God who afflicted him. And so the meaning is, as if Job had
said; If I should presume thus to plead my righteousness, He could not only put
my Conscience to it, to make me condemn my self with my own mouth; but that
same very proud speech, in justifying my self, were sufficient to condemn me;
not only by reason of the many failings which God would find in the way of my
managing my defense; but because, in the very substance of the defense, I
should be a contradict^r of God, who has concluded and delared all men to be
unrighteous, and under sin, and even the regenerate not to be perfect, or such
as God cannot afflict them without injustice: And if notwithstanding all this,
I persist in such an Apology, and say still that I am perfect, that should not
only prove me sinful, but perverse and stubborn in my sin.

Hence Learn,

1. There is no pleading of men's righteousness by their own works, or their
sinlesness, but God can easily improve and refute it all; For, If I justify my
self, God has a way to condemn me.

2. Men's very pleading for their righteousness, to the prejudice of Gods
Righteousness, is cause and evidence sufficient that they are to be condemned
as wicked and naughty, who dare contradict and quarrel God; For, if I justify
my self, my own mouth (in speaking to my own justification) shall condemn me.
Such a disputer is self-condemned, and refuted by his very debate for himself;
and the more a man esteem and prize his own Righteousness, he is thereby the
worse in effect, and in the sight of God.

3. As men are very prone to persist in their high swelling thoughts of
themselves; So this does but heighten the quarrel and prove them to be not only
sinners, but wicked and perverse; For, if I say I am perfect, or, persist in
justifying my self, and say it over and over again, It shall also prove me
perverse.

Verse. 21. Though I were perfect, yet would I not know my soul, I would despise
my life.
The scope and meaning of this verse is rendered obscure and difficult, by
reason of the conciseness of the Original phrase. which runs thus; I perfect, I
know not (or shall not know) my soul, I despise my life. And so some make it an
assertion, beginning the second part of the Chapter, as if Job had said: though
I be in such danger and grief, that I know not, or regard not my soul, or my
life (for so it is in the latter part of the verse) but do despise it, and
wou^d gladly die; yet I am perfect, and no hypocrite, though not sinless. But
seeing that part of the Chapter begins clearly at the next verse, where we have
the express assertion which he maintains against his Friends; Therefore here we
are to repeat, though, or rather, if, from the beginning of v. 20. as is also
done in the latter part of the same v. 20. where the words are the same in the
Original that are here, I perfect, and yet the sense and coherence of the
purpose leads us to repeat; from the beginning of the verse, If I say, I am
perfect, or, If I be perfect, to wit, in mine own eyes. The Text, being thus
read, will afford a new ground of his resolution against contending; and the
sense will be, either,

1. (According to the Translation, Though I were, or, be perfect, etc.) as if
Job had said; Though I be sincere, and not an hypocrite, and do plead so before
you; yea, were I never so perfect; yet would I not plead the matter before and
against God, to the prejudice of his Righteousness. But, on the contrary, my
not regarding of my life, and my despising of, and yielding it up to God, as a
sinful man, testifies for me, that I mind no such thing. For my voluntary
quitting and resigning up of my life witnesses that I judge my self a sinner.
As, indeed, sense of sin will make humble submitting to afflictions; and
stooping and submitting to Gods afflicting hand, particularly in death, proves
a man to be sensible of sin, and no pleader of his own perfection. Or,

2. If we read these words, as in the former verse, (which seems most
favorable) If I say, I am perfect, etc. or, If I be perfect, in mine own eyes,
I would not know my soul, etc. The sense will be this, as if Job had said; as
my pleading my perfection before God were enough to condemn me, and prove me
perverse, v. 20. So it were but my ignorance, and not knowing of my own soul,
or, condition, that would make me plead so. And coming before such a Majesty
with that plea, he might justly so terrify me, as to make me despise my very
life, as well as my righteousness, before him, and a fight of his perfect
purity would make me abhor such thoughts, and my self for them. Thus the ground
of his resolution, and the Argument moving him not to contend, is, That he will
not, by contending, bewray his ignorance of himself, nor madly run upon his own
ruin, or do such things as might afterward make his life a burden to him.

Hence Learn,

1. It is men's ignorance, or their being, in a sort, out of their wits, that
makes them boast of their own worth or righteousness; For, If I say, I am
perfect, I know not my soul, It is an horrid crime, proclaiming a man's
ignorance of what he should know best, even himself, or his soul; and his
madness, that he regards not his own soul, or what become of him.

2. A sight of God in his Majesty and Purity, as a party to the self-justifier,
will soon lay him low; and not only make his righteousness, but his very life,
abominable and a burden to him; For, in that case, says he, If I say, I am
perfect, I would despise my life. Not only would the Majesty of God crush such
a proud contender, and consequently, such a one does despise his life, when he
enters on such a course, as Job himself observes, Chap. 13.14. But if a man be
honest, when he comes to consider in cold blood, after his fit is over, with
what a holy God he has contended, it will make him abhor high thoughts of
himself, and himself because of them, and make him love his righteousness the
worse, that he swelled so much with the conceit of it.

Verse. 22. This is one thing, therefore I said it; he destroys the perfect
and the wicked.
Follows, unto the end of this Chapter the second part of Job's Reply to what
Bildad had spoken. Wherein he proves that, notwithstanding God was righteous
and not to be quarrelled; yet, himself was a righteous man, in opposition to
hypocrisy or gross wickedness: nor could the afflictions that were come upon
him prove the contrary. And this is the very point in controversy among them.

In this verse we have him stating the Controversy, and holding forth the
Truth which he asserts and maintains; This is one thing, etc. The meaning
whereof, is, as if Job had said; I agree with you (as you may perceive from
what I have already spoken) in all you have said, concerning Gods
Righteousness, and Man's Sinfulness; yet this is one thing wherein I differ from
you, and which (without any derogation to the Righteousness of God) I have
maintained, and will maintain, That my afflictions do not prove me wicked; but
calamities, even to destruction and rooting out of the world, come alike upon
all, whether godly or wicked, from God. And so he contradicts what Bildad had
said, Chap. 8.20. and does assert nothing but what is the undoubted Truth of
God.

Hence Learn,

1. Matters of Truth and Error are not things of light or small importance;
but Truth is to be cleaved unto, oppose it who will, and Error in judgment is
to be looked upon as more dangerous then simple ill practice; as not only
corrupting the Truth of God, and the rational understanding of Man, which is
the most noble of his faculties; but leading also the sinner to sin securely,
and to defend it obstinately. Therefore is Job so resolute in this matter, I
have said it, and will stand to it.

2. Controversies ought to be well stated, that it may be seen where the stress
and weight of them is, and that men do not father more upon a man's opinion,
than is meet; For, they so managed the debate, as if this assertion of Job had
been injurious to God, which it was not, save in so far as he did not maintain
it calmly and soberly. And therefore, having yielded to all they could say on
Gods behalf, he draws the state of the question to this one thing, whether
afflictions do prove men wicked?

3. One Truth does not contradict, nor interfere with another, though men's
weakness do not always discern how it can be so; And, particularly, it is no
prejudice to the Righteousness of God in afflicting, that an honest man humbly
plead his sincerity and integrity before him, though afflicted by him; nor is
it humility, or a glorifying of God, to quit the testimony of his sincerity,
because of sharp afflictions: For, Job, having acknowledged the Righteousness
of God, in the former part of the Chapter does also maintain this one thing, as
nothing contrary to it.

4. Men are not to quit Truth, or to be driven from it, upon any specious
pretenses, or extrinsecol considerations, or odious aspersions cast upon it, or
the adherers to it; For, they pressed Job to abandon this truth, as injurious
to God, etc. when yet they could not refute what he said for it But Job still
adheres to it, This is one thing, therefore I said it. It is Satan's great
design to make Truths odious in the world upon some such extrinsick accounts
and imputations; But Truth is Truth still, for all that; and who so are led by
their affections, respect to parties or interests, etc. and not by a sound
judgment, in judging of Truth or Error, they are a ready prey for Satan, whom
he will soon ensnare in an Error.

5. In particular, it is a fixed truth, to be received by all, and
particularly, by godly men, That outward lots come alike to all; that so
neither their own afflictions, nor the prosperity of others, do shake them;
This is the great Truth, which God in his Providence has cleared in Job's
experience, and the debates recorded in this Book. A truth to which the
Scriptures ( Eccles. 9.1, 2. Ezekiel. 21 3. and frequently elsewhere) bear
witness. And therefore men would be very sincere, would by faith grip to Gods
love in every lot, and would mortify their own lusts, l^st, otherwise,
tentations contrary to this truth does shake them; as we find in some cases,
cross Providence have occasioned (though not a denial, yet) low thoughts of
Piety, even in godly men, because they were afflicted, Psalm. 73.10. -- 14. Much
more will it do so in hypocrites, Mal. 3.13, 14, 15. Only this truth should be
understood aright, That all things come alike, as to the outward lot and
dispensation. For, otherwise, if we look to Gods love toward a godly man,
whatever his case be; to his blessing upon his lot, and to the fruit given him
of his humbling trials; and, sometime, even to the sense of Gods love and
favor shed abroad in the godlies hearts under trial; (though, at other times,
they may be inwardly deserted, and outwardly afflicted, borh at once) I say, in
these respects, the case of the godly and wicked may differ very far; but yet
the outward lot is the same.

6. Saints ought to resolve that they may be like the wicked, not in some
lesser calamities only; but even in being destroyed and sent out of the world
by a sad stroke; that so they may learn not to dote on time, or those temporal
issues that are given to men while they are continued in it: For, even to this
does Job extend the general assertion, He destroys the perfect and the
wicked. He smites the one and the other indifferently, as it pleases him, even
till he destroy him and cut him off.

Verse. 23. If the scourge sl^y suddenly, he will laugh at the trial of the
innocent.
Follow the Arguments confirming this Assertion; Whereof the first (in this
verse) is taken from experience of sc^urges, or common calamities in the world.
When God sends out a scourge, of Sword, Famine, or Pestilence, suddenly to
overthrow and cut people off, not only are the wicked reached thereby, (which
is h^^e supposed) but even the innocent, that is, such as are righteous and
free of gross provocations; for, in any other sense, none are innocent, or free
of sin, in this life. Yea, further, in trying of the innocent by these
scourges, the Lord seems to act as one delighted with it, and little resenting
the great extremities wherewith they are pressed.

Hence Learn,

1. While he calls any of these common calamities, a scourge, which imports a
correction for a fault, it teaches, That, whatever may be Gods end in cleanly
trials and sufferings; yet, National calamities are punishments for sin. They
are the result of Gods accurate searching out, and noticing of sin, and should
drive men to search into their own ways, Lam. 3.39, 40. For the root, in the
Original, from whence the word in the Text rises, which is rendered a scourge,
signifies, diligently to run up and down (which may also point at the
commonness of these scourges, as God pleases to direct them, even as a whip is
moved to and fro, according as he pleases who makes use of it) and, to
consider and try.

2. Though God may, sometime, threaten, when yet he forbeareth, Amos 7 1, 2, 3,
etc. and sometime, may inflict lesser calamities, when yet he preserves the
afflicted alive: yet it should be remembered that God has deadly Arrows in his
Q^iver, especially, in National calamities, or when lesser rods have not
profited a people: For, this is a scourge which slays.

3. God is pleased, sometimes, to send scourges very unexpectedly, when nothing
like that is dreamed of, but the contrary seems most probable; that he may
surprise the wilfully secure and presumptuous, may warn all to be continually
upon their guard, and, may teach men to improve the mercy of warning before
hand; For, here the scourge slays suddenly.

4. Albeit, when God sends common calamities upon a people, his quarrel be
chiefly against the wicked and profane; yet, as the godly have so much sin, as
does deserve a share in that cup, so, it may please the Lord, for wise ends, to
cause them also drink of it: For, If the scourge slay suddenly, the innocent
have a trial. God may, indeed, give exemption to some particular Saints, in a
common calamity, Jer. 15.11. and 39.16, 17, 18. and 45 5. But it is not to be
expected that all of them will be so dealt with.

5. While he calls the stroke, a scourge, and that which befalls the
innocent a trial, this last word is by some rendered, a melting away, or,
dissolution, which is the same with slaying, and so the seeming difference will
be removed. But the word properly signifies trial, or, tentation, and
therefore there must be somewhat in the change of the word. I do not think that
it is Job's purpose, by the change of the speech, to aggravate the sharpness of
the innocents lot, above that of the wicked, as if the wicked were, for most
part, suddenly cut off and put out of pain, whereas the innocent got a
lingering and longsome trial of it (which is sharper then speedy death, Lam
4.6.) as had befallen himself. Job had sharp expressions too many (and we may
happily find one in this same verse) and some expressions to that same purpose,
Chap. 7.13, 14, 15. and elsewhere, though we do not fasten that upon him as his
meaning in this phrase. Nor do I think the Job's purpose, by these different
words, is (...) out the difference betwixt his Childrens lo^^ (...) were cut
off suddenly, and his own, who was kept under a long trial, by that stroke on
them, and other afflictions upon himself. But the true use of the different
words, is, to point out some difference betwixt the wicked and godly, even in
the calamities wherein they outwardly share alike. And so to teach us, That a
common scourge does change its nature to ^he innocent and godly man. What is a
scourge in it self, and a plague to the wicked, is but a trial to him, and
should be so looked upon and improved by him.

6. While he says, God will laugh at the trial of the innocent, as if it were
but a sport in his eyes; there may be some favorable construction put on the
harsh expression. As,

1. Gods outward dispensation toward the innocent man is the same with the
stroke on the wicked, at whose calamity he does laugh and mock, Prove. 1.26.

2. Though God take no pleasure in the trouble of innocent men, as it is a
trouble and vexation to them; yet he takes pleasure, and may laugh at the trial
and proof of their graces, which appear under trouble; and as knowing that it
will tend to their eternal happiness. And in this respect, also, the godly
themselves should not think too much of their trials; and when he is merry,
their heart^ should not be sad, Jam. 1.2. 1 Pet. 1.6, 7.

3. God will laugh and (so to say) scorn it, that any man should plead that
exception before him; That, because he innocent, therefore he should not be
tried. But however we may thus mollify his speech; yet certainly the phrase is
too harsh, being spoken of God who is compassionate in trouble, Jer. 31.20. and
who does not afflict or grieve willingly, Lam. 3.33. And therefore this
expression may come in among those which he repented of, Chap. 40.5. and 42.3.
For as his Friends pertinaciously defended their Error; so he asserted truth
with too much vehemence and passion. And though the Conscience of his integrity
led him to look on his affliction but as a trial; yet his passion cannot
forbear, in asserting a truth, indirectly to charge God with too little
compassion, in inflicting and continuing of that trial. And so it may teach us,

1. Contention, and debating of Controversies, is a very distempering exercise,
breeding much distemper of spirit, and many rash and precipitant expressions;
as here befell Job in his dispute. And this may warn all, not to start
Controversies and Debates needlessly, and to mourn over them, when they are
started, as a very humbling exercise.

2. Such as maintain Truth in a Controversy should guard against irritations,
by the absurdity of Error and its Patrons; and should study watchfulness and
sobriety, that, through heat of contradiction, they run not to the other
extreme of what they do oppose: For, thus Job refuting their Error, wherein he
found them so absurd, does himself stumble through passion.

3. In all debates, men ought to take heed, especially, that no irritation,
distemper or trouble, beget hard thoughts, or irreverent expressions, of God;
particularly, that they question not his tender respects to his own in trouble:
For, herein it was that Job failed, in saving that God will laugh at the trial
of the innocent. See Isa 40.27.

4. When Saints are in trouble, and meet with tentations, it is not to be
expected that serious resolutions and sound principles will always bear them
out, without constant dependence upon God, and new influences of his grace;
For, Job had resolved and said ^ell* in the former part of the Chapter as to
not cont^nding with God, and yet fits of his passion break forth in sinful
reflections upon God, in this and other passages of his speech.

Verse. 24. The earth is given into the hand of the wicked: he covers the
faces of the Judges thereof: if not where, and who is he?
The second Argument, confirming his Assertion, is taken from the power which
wicked men get over the world, to rule in it madly at their pleasure. And so
the Argument does prove, partly, that the wicked may prosper; partly, that the
godly may be put to suffering by the oppression of Tyrants, beside what some of
them may suffer by common calamities; of which he has spoken, v. 23. This
power of wicked men is held forth in two expressions.

1. That the Earth, or Grandeur in it, and power over those who dwell upon it,
is sometime put by God into the hands of the wicked; which they manage as if
all were put in their hands, and themselves subject to the controulment of none.

2. That God covers the faces of the Judges thereof. Where, if we take
covering of the face, as a sign of condemnation, (as Esth. 7.8.) we must by,
Judges, understand, not these wicked men who bear rule in the world; but such
as, for wisdom, courage, integrity, etc. are worthy to bear rule in it; as some
understand that passage also, Eccl. 10.7. of Princes walking as servants. And
so the meaning will be, that God permits those wicked men to oppress and
condemn righteous and just men. But this sense of the word, Judges, being
unusual and not so clear; we may more safely understand this whole sentence of
Gods giving up wicked Judges to be hood winked (with fury and passion, or with
bribes, as Exodus 23.8. Deuteronomy. 16.19.) and, as blinded men, to do unjustly and
oppress: And all this is consumed to be Gods holy act, who permits the
wicked thus to be exalted, and governs their success, and the oppression of
the godly. For if any will not ascribe it to God, he bids them find another
Author, and make it appear who, and where he is: Hereby intimating that to deny
this, is to deny Gods Providence in the world, and to ascribe the Government
thereof to some other, which were absurd and blasphemous.

Hence Learn,

1. The Earth, and riches and power in it, are no such dainties in Gods
account, but he will let them fall in wicked men's hands; to teach his people
not to place their happiness in that which he casts abroad as common: For, The
Earth is given into the hand of the wicked. See Psalm. 17.14.

2. Wicked men, when they get power, are ready to think all is put in their
hand, to dispose of as they please, and that they need not acknowledge any Lord
over them, Psalm. 12.4. but may employ all their power to be subservient to
their own ends and designs, little remembering that they ought to judge for the
Lord, 2 Chronicles. 19.6. For, thus also is the Earth given into the hand of the
wicked; when God puts them in power, they act as if all were devolved into
their hands, to do as they lift, and this is the root of oppression.

3. Oppression and injustice do prove men to be mad and blind, not knowing what
they do, or whether they go, nor looking about them, to ponder their way and
the issue thereof; For, here they are said to be as men, walking with their
faces covered; He covers the faces of the Judges thereof. And, indeed, if
they considered God, who is Supreme above them, and to whom they must give an
account, and if they did meditate seriously upon the vanity of humane power and
grandeur, they would not act as they do. But, in effect, Oppressors are no
less mad than those that are bound with chains and fetters.

4. It is the duty and great advantage, of the people of God, to see and adore
the Providence of God in the most confused administrations of the sons of men,
and in oppressors success; For, He covers their face, says Job. This will
let us see that God can make use of their service for holy and wise ends,
whatever their design or work be.

5. As oppressors themselves do little mind or acknowledge Gods Providence or
Dominion over them; so it may be little seen by others, in their oppressions.
Even the godly may question Providence, because such do prosper, Psalm. 73.11,
12. much more may others question it, Mal. 2.17. and generally all men are apt
to be so taken up with the cruelty of oppressors, that they forget to look up
to Providence, and what God may intend by their oppressions; For, Job is not
only put to assert that God does this, but to dispute it. And that supposition,
if not, or, if it be not so that God does this, implies it may be questioned,
and is questioned by many.

6. Not to see God and his Providence, in the oppressions of men, is injurious
to him, as denying his Providence, and puts the denyer to find out another
Author, and Supreme Governor, of those affairs; For, says he, If not, where
and who is he? See Amos 3 6

7. Albeit odious consequences ought not to be fastened upon Truth, to render
it suspected to such as cannot well discern; Yet maintainers of Error ought to
consider how much, even a plausible-like Error, may encroach upon the
Prerogatives of God: For, whereas they pretended to plead in behalf of Gods
Holiness and Righteousness, in denying the prosperity of the wicked; Job lets
them see, that, as they contradicted common experience, if they denied the
matter of fact, that they did prosper; so, it were a denial of Providence, not
to ascribe this to God.

Verse. 25. Now my days are swifter then a Post: they flee away, they see no
good.

26. They are passed away as the swift ships: as the Eagle that hastes to the
prey.


The third Argument confirming his Assertion (to the end of the Chapter) is
taken from his own experience; wherein he propounds his own case, as a
sufficient proof of this truth, That afflictions do not prove men to be wicked,
he being sharply afflicted, v. 25. -- 28. and yet righteous, v. 29, etc. This
Argument albeit it may seem very weak and faulty, and a beging of that which
was in question and debate among them; yet it is convincingly strong,
considering the evidences whereby he proves his integrity and righteousness.
And withal, it points out the invincible power and evidence of faith and a good
Conscience, that it will stand on its own feet, against all opposition, without
props of the experience of others.

This Argument has two branches,

1. That he was afflicted.

2. That he is righteous, notwithstanding his afflictions. As for the first;
Albeit none doubted of the truth and sharpnese of his sad case; yet his sense
of it, and his desire to ease himself by speaking of it, leads him to prove and
instance it in two particulars. Whereof the first (in these verses) is, That
his days pass away swiftly without seeing any good. Of this, see on Chap. 7.6,
7. It may be understood, in general, of his whole transitory life, but more
especially (as may be gathered from what he subjoyns, v. 27, 28. by way of
Antithesis or opposition) of the days of his former prosperity, which had
passed quickly over, without seeing or enjoying good in them. This he
illustrates by three similitudes, in a gradation.

1. His days were swifter, (or, lighter, which is the cause of swiftness) then
a Post, or a Runner. A Post, indeed, ought to make such quick dispatch as,
whatever he see, he may not stay to enjoy it; yet he may see good things upon
the way as he runs. But he complains that himself had scarce time to see, or
take a view, of his prosperity.

2. His days were yet more swift, and passed away as the swift ships; which are
more swift then any runner on the Land; or, ships of desire, which are lovely
and pleasant, when under sail and going swiftly before the wind; or, which
sailing before the wind do flee as if they had a longing desire (an improper
and borrowed expression) to be at the Harbor; or, which being fraught with
precious commodities (some say Apples, which do easily rot) the Merchants and
Mariners do earnestly desire to have them home in time, lest the commodities be
spoiled by the way, or they lose the opportunity of selling them. Some do
retain the Hebrew word, and render the Text, Ships of Ebeh, whereby they
understand, either some Seaport, famous for the swiftness of the ships which
resorted thither, or some rapid River in Arabia, the current whereof added to
the swiftness of the ships motion which sailed therein. But Geographers make no
mention of any such Seaport.

3. His days were yet more swift, like the motion of a fleeing Eagle, who
flees more swiftly then any other Fowl, and will far outstrip the swiftest
Ships, especially, when, being pressed with hunge^, he hastes to be at a prey.

Not to insist upon the use to be made of common and obvious things, for
imprinting of Divine Truths upon our hearts; as Job makes use of those
similitudes, for illustrating of this instruction, concerning the fugacity of
man's life, which is very necessary that it be seriously studied: The truths and
mistakes in these verses may be summed up in these few lessons.

1. The World and all the Prosperity it affords, is but passing and empty; For,
Job found that it was most swift, and fled away. See Eccl 5.10, 11. Psalm. 39.5,
6. and 144.4. 1 Cor. 7.31. Our best condition in the world is attended with so
many thorns and troubles, obnoxious to so frequent and unexpected changes, and
so little able to satisfy that which is the better part of man; that it is no
great matter whether we have or want it, so we be carried through our several
lots in Gods favor. And at the end of our life, it will not be judged worthy
our serious thoughts, to regard much what has been our outward lot in getting
through it.

2. Whatever men may think of prosperity, while they are in a fools dream
enjoying it; yet when ever it is over, it will appear to be empty and nothing;
For, now a few, days of adversity have drowned all sweet thoughts of his former
prosperity, as if he had not so much as seen good. Afflictions are s^nt to
discover the worlds vanity, which, otherwise, we will not see; and it is well
if they produce that effect. For, in so far Job is right in this his regret.

3. It is yet further an evidence of the worlds vanity, that though, sometime,
men may think much of prosperity, even when it is gone; yet they will find
nothing in it whereby to bear out a present trouble: For, in that respect,
also, Job thus reflects upon his former prosperity, that it was swiftly gone,
without seeing any good. Not only because he found it now to be nothing, but,
especially, because it had left nothing behind it, to support him under his
present pressures. These lean Kine of Adversity, will soon eat up the fat Kine
of Prosperity, unless men have some other encouragement whereunto they may
look; which they should be seriously thinking upon, Isa. 10.3.

4. Sense of incumbent affliction will make men very eloquent in painting out
their distresses; as Job here illustrates the swiftness of his days by so many
similitudes. We have need, under trouble, to beware of self-love, and not to
pore too much, or only, upon our afflictions, which may draw us to exceed in
aggravating our difficulties; Especially, Because,

(5.) Too much poring on present afflictions does, ordinarily, produce
ingratitude for former mercies; For, this was Job's fault here, that, by reason
of present pressures, he accounts his former days so swiftly passed, that he
saw no good, which is contrary to his own former doctrine, when he was in a
better frame, Chap. 2.10.

Verse. 27. If I say, I will forget my complaint, I will leave of my heaviness,
and comfort my self;

28. I am afraid of all my sorrows, I know that thou will not hold me innocent.


The second Instance, whereby he proves the greatness of his afflictions, is,
That however his prosperity was quickly gone, ( v. 25, 26) yet, his afflictions
stu^k better by him, and could not be shaken off, though he resolved and
endeavored to do it. His resolution ( v. 27.) was, to forget his complaining,
and shake off his heaviness, or sad countenance (as the word is;) that so he
might comfort and refresh himself, or breath a little. But in this attempt he
was disappointed, v. 28. For his sorrows would not quit him so, but his
endeavor to lay them aside did, rather, awake them all upon him. The terror
whereof, and the fear of their recurring, though they should be got laid aside
for a time, together with his apprehension (grounded upon former experience)
that God would deal with him outwardly as a guilty man, and not let him escape
correction and trial, marred all his endeavors and expectations.

From his resolution, v. 27. Learn,

1. It is the duty of Gods people, as not to walk lightly under affl^ctions, so
to make them as comfortable to themselves as lawfully they may, and not to add
thereto by discouragement; For, this does Job endeavor as his duty. See Jer.
29.4, 5, 6.

2. Gods people ought not to ly by in discouragement, till God come and bear in
encouragement upon them, but they ought to be active in comforting themselves
in God; as Job endeavors here to forget complaints, leave off heaviness, and
comfort himself. See 1 Samuel 30.6. Psalm. 42.5, 11.

3. A special mean to make encouragements and refreshments prove effectual, is,
to look upon them but as breathings, as the word imports, after which we must
return to our toil again; thanking God that we get leave if it were but to
breath a while. But we do, ordinarily, therefore quarrel and undervalue those,
because we know they are not lasting; and so deprive ourselves of the case we
might have by them.

4. One lawful mean of case in trouble, is, to shake off, and study to forget,
our complaints; For, so Job resolved here, I will forget my complaint.
Afflicted souls must begin at this; when they cannot get the cause of their
complaints, nor their inward grief removed, yet they must shake off, and
forget, their external complaints, if it were but by diversion. Not that it is
lawful to forget our guilt procuring trouble, or to be stupid under Gods
afflicting hand: Far less that we should, with Saul, run only to an H^rp, or
carnal delights, to cry down the noise of trouble: But when our distress
swells up to overwhelming anxiety, it is far better to take up our minds, for
a time, even with the affairs of our lawful calling, and, much more, to divert
our selves in other exercises of Gods service, then still to pore on our
troubles, and dwell on our complaints, when we cannot, for that time, manage
them, and not be crushed. Whereas, after these diversions, we may return again
with better success.

5. It is also our duty, under overwhelming discouragements, not to content our
selves with leaving off our complaints only, unless we study to remove that
inward heaviness that causes and feeds them; and, in order to that, as even
to leave off complaining may diminish our heaviness, which is but fed thereby;
So it is our duty to shake off, if it were but, our sad countenance and
carriage, and to look well, and say well of Gods dealing toward us, as a mean
to made it indeed well inwardly, Psalm 42.5, 11. For, after forgetting of his
complaint; he resolves to endeavor to leave off, or, forsake his heaviness,
or, his face (as it is in the Original) and sad countenance.

From his disappointment, v. 28. Learn,

1. Trouble having once broken a mind, it will not easily be got shaken off,
but the broken spirit will be a rod to it self, and will keep afflictions and
fears upon us, notwithstanding all our endeavors to the contrary, till Gods
time come; For, when Job said, I will forget my complaint, it would not
succeed, but he was afraid of all his sorrows. See Psalm. 42.5, 6.

2. Unto a broken mind, the very thinking on trouble, though to forget it, will
awake and increase it, and debating with it, will fortify it, unless God
interpose; as the launcing and ripping up of a wound will cast the Patient in a
swound: For, upon this did his trouble now arise and increase, If I say I will
forget my complaint, -- I am afraid of all my sorrows. His very thinking how
many and how sore grievances he had to shake off, did rankle his wounds, and
hold on. See Jer. 8 18.

3. An afflicted mind is vexed and tortured with fears and terrors; while it
represents present grievances as dreadful and terrible, and while its looking
to future, and only feared consequents of present pressures, does not only mar
present refreshment (not letting the day and its evil come together, Matthew.
6.34.) but by fearing of them, begets them; For, says he, I am afraid of my
sorrows. He looked on them as formidable, and feared the issue of his sorrows
for the future, which marred his present endeavors to ease himself; and his
fear created them, and made them real and present upon him.

4. It is the fault of discouraged Saints, that they make their troubles
insupportable, by looking still upon them in their blackest aspect; For, he
looked upon his lot as only sorrows, as if there had been no other thing to be
seen in his afflictions; whereas faith will give another sight of very humbling
trials, Romans 5.3, 4, 5. Jam. 1.2, 3. Heb. 12.11.

5. It is the fault of Saints, also, that they multiply their sorrows, through
fear, as if there were an all of them; For, though he had many, yet he wanted
many to make up an all of sorrows, or, to render a man completely sorrowful and
miserable. And even when a solemn Assembly of sorrows and terrors are gathered
against us round about, Lam 2.22. we are still bound bound to remark what may
be wanting.

6. When Saints are under many pressures and sorrows, it may be their great
weakness to dwell upon the thoughts of them all at once; whereas, ordinarily,
they are not inflicted all at once, nor do they all press them alike hard at
the same time; but God s^^yeth his rough wind in the day of his East wind, Isa.
27.8. For, thus did Job also weaken his own spirit, by being afraid of all his
sorrows together. And yet (however they were inflicted one upon the back of
another) he could not say that they a^^aulted him all at once, if his fear had
not set them on.

7. As the most righteous have sin and are not innocent before God, and so have
no promise of exemption from these common miseries which follow upon sin; So,
their fears, under affliction, are ready to prompt them with terrifying
thoughts of God and his dealing, to put the cape-stone upon their other
distresses: For, thus does Job expound his future fears, I know that thou will
not hold me innocent. He apprehended that God would still deal with him, in his
outward dispensations, as with a guilty man, and this a^frighted him. Had he
looked on himself as obnoxious to trouble, by reason of sin in him, or had he
been preparing for more, since God had already made those breaches upon him, he
had been about his duty. But as his expression, that God will not hold him
innocent is an indirect reflect^on, that God dealt not with him as with a
righteous man, but as with one guilty of some gross provocation; so his
peremptory conclusion, that God would do so still, was the result of his fear
and tentation, to the heightening of his trouble, and frustrating of his
endeavors to refresh himself: wherein yet he was disappointed, for God did, in
due time, absolve and liberate him.

All this tends to point out,

1. That, whatever ought to be our endeavors, yet, it is God alone who must
heal and comfort broken spirits, Isa 51.12. Psalm. 147 3.

2. That, in times of affliction, we ought to study much for attaining, and
keeping, a sound and peaceable composed frame of spirit; not only by being at
peace with God, but by not poring on our trouble, or walking too sadly under
it. Otherwise, we may repent the crushing of our own spirits, when we cannot
help it by any of our endeavors, as Job found here.

3. That it is our duty to avoid anxious, faithless and trouble-creating fears,
to let the day and its evil, and Gods help against it, come together, and to
see more in trouble then what is only sorrowful and bitter; For, by these Job
was kept under, when he would have lift his head above his pressures.

Verse. 29. If I be wicked, why then labor I in vain?

30. If I wash my self with snow water, and make my hands never so clean:

31. Yet shall thou plunge me in the ditch, and mine own clothes shall abhor me.


Job having thus confirmed the first branch of his Argument, that he was
afflicted; he proceeds now to the other branch of it, to evidence that he is
righteous; though thus afflicted. Of this he gives two proofs; whereof the
first (in these verses) is by removing from himself the two extremes of true
righteousness which are, wickedness, v. 29. and a conceit of purity* o^,
sinlesness, v. 30, 31. From whence he leaves it to be infe^^ed, that he, being
neither wicked, nor a proud conce^ter of his own purity, must certainly be a
righteous man, and a walker in the way of righteousness.

As for the first extreme, wickedness, Job proves he is free of it, v. 29. If I
be wicked, why then labor I in vain? In the Original it is only, I am, or,
shall be wicked, to wit, in your esteem, let me say what I will. But it implies
a supposition, that if it were so as they judged, Why would he labor in vain?
As if he had said; If I were wicked, as ye judge, then all my former life,
wherein I studied and labored to be pious and righteous, yea, my very cleaving
to God with so much difficulty, in my trouble, and my earnest desire to be at
rest with him in death, were all in vain and to no purpose. But that cannot be,
( Why labor I in vain? imports an indignation at such a thought, as absurd)
Therefore, seeing I have labored, and still do labor to please God, and
cleave to him (which cannot be in vain, Isa. 45.19) I am not a wicked man.

Hence Learn,

1. The best way of proving a man's integrity, and to refute calumnies and
tentations against it, is, by practice and his carriage; For, Job proves he is
not wicked, by his Labor.

2. Fruits and works whereby a man would prove his integrity, ought to be
laborious and painful; as being a task wherein he will find difficulties and
opposition from Satan and his own flesh, all which honesty will lead him to
wrestle with till he get through them, a^^ not sit up by the way: For, Job's
evidence, here, is not simply his work, but his labor, or his diligence, even
till he weary again, as the word imports; though indeed there be no weariness
in this labor, but to the flesh, which is not to be spared. So that as it is
no good evidence that men are sincere, when they meet with few difficulties in
their way, (which is an evidence Satan is not much afraid of their diligence)
So they do obscure the evidences of their own integrity who do ly by, and
wrestle not through their difficulties, when they meet with them. Though yet it
be true, that all our wrestling will not avail us, without faith in Christ, and
encouragement through faith; and we must chiefly wrestle to hold fast our
confidence (as Job did) that thereby we may be enabled to labor in other duties

3. Whosoever engage themselves seriously to labor in seeking God, will find
that it shall not be in vain: For, this question, Why labor I in vain? is a
strong denial that it shall be in vain. See Isa. 45.19. God, who is pleased to
reward, even hypocrites their seeking of him, with temporal favors, or with
suspending of judgments, 1 King. 21.27, 28, 29. will not fail to reward them
who sincerely labor in his service. And the hopes of this ought to be
cherished, for our encouragement, Psalm. 73.28. For Job looks on it as a sad
case, if his labor were in vain. Only it savours too much of hypocrisy, too
much to eye advantages of Piety within time, and will readily breed a quarrel,
Job 21.15. Isa. 58, 3. Mal. 3.13, 14.15. And there will be some found to fear
God, when such have stumbled, Mal. 3.16.

4. It is an unquestionable evidence that a man is not wicked, when he
seriously exercises himself in godliness; (for that scrapes a man's name out of
the roll of the wicked, Isa. 55.6, 7.) particularly, when he will not give up
with God, but comes to him as to a Father, even when he seems to deal with him
like a foe, and cleaves to God, and calls upon him with hope, under trouble;
For, thus Job proves he is not wicked, since he is exercised in that labor
which will not be in vain. It is true, it is a sad case when the friendship
seems thus to be kept up only on our part, yet it is an unquestionable proof
that a man is not an hypocrite; for such will not always call upon God, Job
27.8.10. See Psalm. 88.13, 14, 15.

As to the second extreme of Integrity, a conceit of purity, or, sinlesness; He
professes ( v. 30, 31.) that if he should pretend to that, either as to
himself, or person, or to his hands, or, actions; and should take up a fond
conceit of his own righteousness, and his earnest study of sanctification: God,
by plunging him in a ditch, or, pit of calamities, if not also permitting him
to fall in sin, would refute that fancy; and his own clothes would abhor him,
or, let him see himself worthy to be abhorred for such a thought. That is, his
bodily affliction and boils fowling all his clothes, (as a man cast into a fowl
ditch) or his very Apparel (which was given to man after the fall) would prove
him a sinner, and consequently, would refute him in his pretensions to
perfection, as an abominable liar. He expresses his pretending to purity under
the borrowed term, of washing, with an eye to those washings of old, which did
signify and point out purity. Of which the Scriptures (especially in the Old
Testament) speak so frequently. See Deuteronomy. 21.6, 7. Psalm. 26.6. Ezekiel. 36.25.
Heb. 10.22. with many other places. And he expresses his pretending to
perfection in purity, by washing himself, and making his hands never so clean,
with Snow-water; whereby we may understand, a washing with water so pure in
itself, and making what is washed therewith so pure, as Snow is white. Or it
may be, he alludes to some custom among them of making use of Snow-water (or,
Water made of Snow, by melting of it) in their religious Purifications, because
it was purer then their other water, and had less of Earth in it. And so,
whether there were any such custom among them, or not, the phrase may simply
import his taking the most effectual way of setting forth his purity, as such
Snow-water is more pure then other water, and of greater exfficacy to purge
uncleanness. And, the phrase is not a diminishing expression of his endeavors,
as if his own justification of himself would fowl him the more; as we see
Snow-water, after it has fallen upon the Earth and melted upon it, does rather
defile then wash, because of the Earth which is mixed with it. But it is made
use of to point out an exact washing, or, at least, a pretending to it, like
that phrase, Jer. 2.22.

Hence Learn,

1. A man's avoiding of open and gross wickedness is not enough to prove him
righteous, unless he avoid conceit also especially of his perfection and
sinlesness; For, as Job declined that he was wicked, so also he did not wash
himself with Snow-water, nor made his hands so very clean, or pretended not to
justify himself, as if he had no spots. Both of those are alike contrary to
the truth of grace, and ought to be avoided as such. And here a child of God,
whose faith is much shaken by reason of his infirmities, may see that a man may
be not wicked, or unregenerate, who yet is not sinless. And that he may safely
take with his faults, which are incident to all the Sons of Adam, in this life;
when yet he will not hearken to the tentations of Satan, bringing his integrity
and grace in question.

2. Men's conceit of their own purity renders them yet more impure in Gods sight
( Luke 18.11. -- 14.) And (because proud Pharisees will not notice and believe
that) provokes God to convince them of it: For, If I wash my self -- yet shall
thou plunge me in the ditch.

3. God has afflictions whereby to refute proud self-conceit; whereby he does
discover men to be sinners, and gives them other work, then to do^t upon their
own supposed perfection: And if that prevail not, he can leave them to
themselves, to fall into such gross sins, as may discover how vile they are;
For, this is the ditch, wherein he will plunge such. Yea, if he but set the
Consciences of such on work, they will see themselves no less vile, then a man
will be foul, if plunged in a ditch. Haughtiness of spirit goes before a fall,
in one (or, it may be, all) of these respects.

4. As all things may justly prove Enemies to a self justifier; So, in
particular, men's very Apparel which they wear (however they glory in it) is a
badge of sin, and a witness against their conceit of themselves: For, says he,
my own clothes shall abhor me.

5. Men will be then most serious in the thoughts of their own imperfection,
when they have most present thoughts of God; For, Job, in this passage, speaks
to God, thou shall plunge me, whereas, before, and after, he is speaking to his
Friends.

Verse. 32. For he is not a man as I am, that I should answer him, and we should
come together in judgment.

33. Neither is there any days-man betwixt us, that might lay his hand upon us
both.

34. Let him take his rod away from me, and let not his fear terrify me;

35. Then would I speak, and not fear him, but it is not so with me.


Job's second proof that he is righteous, is, his humble offering (if he might)
to justify himself before God, that he was sincere, and free of that
hypocrisy wherewith his Friends charged him. In this discourse, he both gives
a further reason of his declining to pretend to sinlesness (and therefore it is
connected with what precedes, by the particles, For,) by showing that as the
matter stood, he could not, no^ durst debate the matter with God, considering
the inequality of the parties in themselves, v. 32. and that there was no
superior Judge, to whom recourse might be had, v. 33. And yet he proves his
sincerity, by offering to plead his cause on more equal terms, v. 34, 35 --. In
sum, the purpose, and his offer, may be thus conceived; That albeit there can
be no pleading against God as unrighteous, nor any contending with him
according to the strict rule of justice. For God is Supreme Lord, and he, being
but a poor creature, could not answer nor defend himself against his
challenges, who knew him better then himself did; nor were they equal parties,
to engage in a debate, v 32. Nor yet is there any Superior Judge (or a^guer,
or reprover, that is, to reprove him who did wrong his party ^n pleading, and
by his sentence reprove him that had the wrong cause) who might lay his hand
upon them both or, use his power, to bring both parties together to judgment,
to ordain a Law, and enforce the parties to stand to the sentence: But God is
Supreme, having dominion over him at his pleasure, and by the rigor of the Law
might condemn him, v. 33. Yet if God would take away the present rod that was
upon him, and remove his terror which confounded him; he would plead his cause
without fear, and maintain that he was sincere, according to the tenor of the
Covenant of Grace, and no hypocrite, v. 34, 35 --. This reasoning (whatever
sound truths be in it) is not handsomely expressed. For it speaks an indirect
challenge, that he was put to a disadvantage in maintaining of his integrity.
Nor can it be denied but this way of offering to maintain his integrity savours
of too much height of spirit, though he ha^ a good cause. And as this began his
ill humor of complaining, which breaks out, Chap. 10. So it is at this, and
the like speech, Job 13.20, 21, 22. which Elihu hin^s in his off^r, Job 33.6, 7
And God himself gives him the check for these and the like speeches, when he
calls him to d^bate with him, Job 38.3. and 40 7 Hence we may be warned, how
hard it is to keep a right frame of spirit toward God under trouble, and to
bear and manage a good Conscience, when we are afflicted, so as it may be a
support to us, and not an occasion of challenge against God, that such as we
are afflicted.

But laying aside this weakness in his discourse, we may Observe these Truths
in it.

1. However vain man swell high in his own eyes, and do carry so as if he had
no equal, or Superior and Lord over him; yet there is an infinite distance
betwixt God and Man: For, says he, He is not a man as I am, but the great
Lord. See Eccl. 6.10. Jer. 49.19. This distance, both in respect of his
dreadful Majesty, and blessed perfections, we should mind in all our ways, when
we are presumptuous in sinning, Psalm. 50.21. when we approach to God, Eccl.
5.1.2. when we expect good things from him, according to his promise, Hos.
11.8, 9. Number. 23.19 etc.

2. When God is rightly taken up, in his Majesty and Holiness, man will see
that he cannot answer God, nor defend himself before him, or abide his strict
enquiry and judgment; who sees more of man then he can see of himself, and who
judges not only on words and actions, but on a man's nature and inclinations;
For, He is not a man as I am, that I should answer him. See 1 Cor. 4.4 Psalm.
143.2.

3. As the man who knows God, will see that he cannot abide his strict
judgment; So, far less, will he dare to quarrel so Supreme, so Holy and
All-seeing a Party, or deal with him as if he were his equal; For, He is not a
man as I am, that we should come together in judgment, as equal Parties, who
have liberty of mutual accusations. Every quarreller would make God but his
equal, but they dare not attempt that, who know that all they have is of him.

4. God ought also to be acknowledged to have supreme and absolute dominion,
and to be accountable to none; For, neither is there any days m^^ betwixt us,
that might lay his hand upon us both. And the study of his Sovereignty is
enough to silence all our reasonings against him.

5. Afflictions may give a sore da^h to m^ns c^urage, in maintaining their
integrity, even according to the tenor of the Covenant of Grace; For, says
he, let him take his rod away from me, before I dispute my honesty. Saints
ought not to st^mble, albeit sor^ afflictions shake their confidence and
courage not a little.

6. That which makes trouble so apt to shake Saints, is, their apprehending God
as terrible and dreadful, through that Perspective of (...); Therefore he
adds, being under the rod, and let not his fear terrify me. God may seem to
be terrible to them whom he loves dearly; And albei^ it be the Saints weakness
^ot to s^e love under that; yet it i^ an evidence of their tenderness, that
they are apprehensive of i^, when afflicted, and can bear it wo^^t of any other
ingredient in their cup.

7. Integrity, as it has s^^ll to do with God, as its Judge and Witness; So,
it will not decline his Judgment on a Mercy-seat, and looks f^^ best quarters
at his hand: As knowing that he s^eth infirmities in his sincere servants, to
cover and ^mend them, Psalm. 139.23, 24. For, on these terms formerly mentioned,
Then would I speak, says he, and (...) fea^ him. Where, though the height of
his spirit in this offer cannot be justified, yet, he seems ^o mean no other
thing by this, not fearing, but that he would speak without fear of
perturbation, not without fear of reverence.

8. Whatever disadvantage integrity meet with, yet it will never quit its
claim; For, then would I speak, says he. He is ready to dispute, though* as
m^^^ers stand, he dare not. So that they who have a good Conscience, and want
these disadvantages, may be bold.

As for that which is subjoyned, in the end of v 35. by way of regret, But it
is not so with me. Some read it as a reason of his offer, Because, I am not so
with my self; as if he had said; I would debate my cause with God upon the
terms propounded, because I am nothing such in my own Conscience as your
misapprehensions and a^^ersions would represent me, which yet do not move me,
s^^ce I have a witness in my self to the contrary. But the best reading
according to the Original, is, But (or, because) not so I; with my self. And so
it contains both a regret and a resolution; As if he had said; seeing I am not
so as I desire to be, that I might plead my cause; I have not that advantage,
to be delivered from Gods rod and terror, that I might get such an hea^ing of
my cause; Therefore I will give over to propound or make the offer, and will do
the best I can to digest all my grievances with my self in my own bosom. A
further account of which resolution is subjoyned in the next Chapter.

Whence Learn,

1. Saints may be under disadvantages, which God will not remove when they
please; and yet may remove them, when they look upon them as past remedy: For,
says he, But not so I. He obtained not now his desired liberty to plead his
cause, though afterward he did, (both with Elihu, and God himself) albeit the
issue was not altogether such as he expected.

2. Silent submission under hard dispensations is better then any disputation
and quarrelling; For, so does he resolve, Because, not so I; with my self.

CHAP. X.
Job having hitherto answered to what Bildad had said; Partly, concerning Gods
Righteousness, by acknowledging and magnifying of it; Partly, concerning his
own righteousness, by asserting and proving that (without any prejudice to the
Righteousness of God who had afflicted him) he was a righteous man: He comes
now to obviate what was insinuated in Bildad's discourse; Namely, That Job,
considering Gods Righteousness who had afflicted him, and his own
unrighteousness, should seek to God, and give over his complaints. To this Job
answers by his practice, falling upon, and renewing his wonted complaints. Yet
so as he indirectly labors to justify his practice before his Friends, in
that he was so hard put to it before he began, ver. 1. And he more directly
labors to justify it, in that he quits them as unfit Judges, and dare go to
God with his complaints; and in that he presses them home (in his own
judgment) upon so strong and convincings grounds: Some of which grounds are
indeed sound Truths, and clearly and positively asserted by him; yet not
sufficient to bottom his Conclusions, or his Inferences from them proceed upon
a mistake. Others of them discover him to be brought to a great conflict
betwixt faith and his tentation and present sense, wherein he owns Truth, but
with a great debate; And others of them declare him to be overpowred with his
passion, though he calm a little toward close of his discourse.

The Chapter may be taken up in two Parts. In the first whereof (to v. 20.) we
have his complaint, or his endeavor to ease his sorrows by complaining. This
might be taken up, in the rise of his complaint, v. 1. The Proposition of it,
v. 2. and the prosecution of it, v. 3, etc. But I shall sum it up thus; There
is a complaint carried on in this Discourse, which may be summed up in an
expostulation with God that he did so sharply afflict him; breaking him with
present trouble, and threatening him with more trouble, yea even to cut him off
with trouble. This sum of his Expostulation may be gathered from ver. 2, 3, 8,
9, 16, 17. And his expostulating about this, does imply a request, that God
would not deal so with him. This being scope of Job's Discourse, the whole of
it may be taken up in so many Arguments, tending not only to justify his
complaints before his Friends, (as has been said) but, chiefly, to enforce his
complaint, and press his desire, before God. For, (as he judges) there was no
reason why his Friends should censure his complaint, and much reason why God
should regard it, and change his dealing toward him: Considering, that he was
put hard to it before he did complain, ver. 1. That it is hard measure, if he
be condemned, before he be convinced of the cause and crime, ver. 2. That it
does not beseem God (by dealing so hardly with him) to oppress and slight his
own creature and servant, and to seem to favor the wicked, ver. 3. That Good
needs not this way of torturing him, to find out what he is, ver. 4, 5, 6. That
God knew he was not wicked, and yet that would not avail him, unless himself
withdrew his hand, ver. 7. That God had made and preserved him, and therefore
he cannot but regret that he should so violently destroy his own workmanship,
ver. 8.9, 10, 11, 12, 13. That he can see no cause of Gods dealing thus, nor
what God meant, or intended, by all this severity, ver. 14, 15. -- That his
trouble had put him in great confusion, and therefore he thinks God should look
to the greatness of his trouble, which so confounded him, ver. -- 15, 16, 17.
And, that his trouble was so great, it made him repent his being born, and wish
he had died from the womb, ver. 18, 19. In the second part of ^he Chapter, Job
calming a little, does su^joyn to his former Expostulation, a short Petition
for respite and leave to breath a while, before he died, ver. 20, 21, 22.

Verse. 1. My soul is weary of my life, I will leave my complaint upon my self;
I will speak in the bitterness of my soul.
THis verse contains an account of the rise of Job's Expostulation and
complaint, which is the first Argument pressing his Friends not to misconstruct
him, and pleading with God, that he would regard it, and not deal so sharply
with him. For when he had resolved to smother his griefs, Chap. 9.35. yet he
could not: but they made his life a burden to him. And when again he labored
to suppress his complaints because of such a case, yet he could not prevail.
But at last, after many resolutions to the contrary, his bitterness, by reason
of much affliction, burst forth in a complaint, and made him ^ry if he could
find ease by so eloquent a way of pouring out his sorrows before God. From
which he leaves it to be inferred, That it beseemed God to respect such a
complaint, and the afflictions which pressed it out of him; which were so
great, that he could not refrain from that way of it, which was so contrary to
his frequent resolutions and desires: And, That it was his Friends duty not to
judge hardly of him, though he complained when he was so pressed and put to it.

In general,

Obs. 1. Gods Children, while they are within time, are made up of Flesh and
Spirit, Nature and Grace, which, under trouble, will have strong wrestlings one
with another, taking resolutions time about; yea, sometime, in a fit, Nature
getting the upper hand: As here, Corruption and Grace wrestle for it, and at
last Sense and Corruption carry it. Afterward we will hear more of this
conflict betwixt his Faith and Sense, in this complaint. And we find it was
Paul's exercise to be tossed betwixt the law of his members and the law of his
mind, Romans 7. This may teach us, to have a jealous eye over our selves, even in
our best frame. For trouble may discover much dross which does not then appear.
And it teaches us, not to stumble, when we find dross in trouble, not only
with our good, but overflowing it for a time. We have as little reason,
because of that, to say we have no good in us, as we have to say we have no
corruptions, when they are borne down and disappear, in our good condition.

Obs. 2. As for the strength of his Argument, That not only his Friends ought
not to censure, but it beseemed God to respect his extorted complaint, and give
him ease; we may consider,

1. God may justly take a proof of what is in man, and how weak any inherent
grace he has is to resist tentation; as it proved here in Job. And therefore
the Argument is faulty, as to concluding that God should altogether forbear to
put him to it, to give this proof of himself, which was so needful for him.

2. Were Saints never so pressed with tentation, and over-powred with
infirmity, in their failings (as Job here was not malicious nor wicked in his
complaints, but forced to them through weakness and tentations) yet even those
their failings, which flow merely from infirmity and tentation, are real sins,
which need a Mediator to expiate them, and a pardon for his sake, upon their
closing with him by faith and their renewing of their repentance. And therefore
his Argument cannot at all conclude that God, or his Friends, should look upon
it as no fault in him thus to complain, when he is put to it. Yet,

3. There is somewhat of an Argument in it, both in reference to God and to his
Friends. In reference to God; Albeit he may try what is in Saints, and they
ought to flee to Christ for the pardon of their infirmities: Yet, it is an
Argument pressing that God should pity them, when they do not run wilfully to
sin, but are driven out of the way, through the power of tentation; and they
are sensible of their failings in such a case. For God is a tender considerer
of a willing spirit, even when it is under the power of weak flesh, Matthew.
26.41. It is, also, an Argument pleading for pardon in a Mediator; and such
infirmities will more easily obtain it, then other sins, Romans 7.24. with 25.
And further, such a condition does also plead for moderation of Gods dealing
(which yet ought to be pressed with much sobriety and submission) and staying
of his rough wind in the day of his East wind, Isa. 27.8. seeing God is a
tender Shepherd, who (^as Jacob, Genesis 33.13.) will not over-drive his flock,
Isa. 40.11. 1 Cor. 10.13* and who is tender in preventing his peoples being
driven to sin, Psalm. 125.3. In reference to his Friends, the Argument may hold
out this great truth; That it is not just to be too rigid in judging of Saints,
or to judge of them and the state of their person (though of their condition
they may) by their violent fits, to which they are driven through affliction
and tentation, and wherein there is a conflict betwixt the flesh and the
spirit, and the whole man consents not. For, however Job's Friends might have
censured his complaints as passionate (which yet in his weakness he would not
admit) yet there was no reason they should judge by his complaints, which he
could not suppress, that he was a wicked man.

In particular, If we look to the several parts acted by the flesh and the
spirit in him, in the rise of his complaints, each of them may afford us useful
instructions and cautions. And,

1. The flesh, or his present sense, speaks first, My soul is weary, (or I am
heartily or very weary) of my life, or my soul is cut off, with wearying of my
life, or is cut off, that it is in life. All those readings come to one
purpose; That he did very earnestly and affectionately with his soul) weary of
his life, he would very gladly be rid of it, and was even killed that he was
alive. To this issue came his resolution, Chap. 9.35. When he had resolved to
smother his griefs, they did so press and overcharge him, that he was not only
wearied of them, but even of his very life, because of them; desiring to get an
end of these miseries by the end of his life. And this he must speak out before
them.

Whence Learn,

1. Gods people will not be always Masters of their own passions and
resolutions under trouble; For, Job, Chap. 9.35. had thought to digest all his
sorrows with silence, but now he is forced to speak them out, My soul is weary,
or, cut off. And, especially, when men do digest their grievances, but with a
grudge (as Job grudged and regreted that he could not be heard to plead his
cause, Chap. 9. -- 35.) it will prove a boil that will break out at last.

2. Albeit life be Gods gift and benefit, and men do, oft-times, dote much upon
it; yet God, when he pleases, can make it one of their greatest burdens; For,
says he, My soul is weary of my life. It ought to be acknowledged, as a mercy
of God, when he makes our life tolerable, or in any measure comfortable to us.

3. Men, in their desires after death under trouble, do oft-times discover much
weakness; as Job does here. For albeit it be men's duty to be ripening daily for
death, and the duty of Saints, to eye and long much for that end of their
course; considering the glory and happiness that abides them after death, Phil.
1.23. 2 Cor. 5.1, 2. and considering their own sinfulness, to which they are
obnoxious in this life, and the sins of the time wherein they live, which may
make them many a sad heart, 1 King 19.14. 2 Pet. 2 7, 8. yet it is a sin, even
in those cases, to weary and not submit to Gods pleasure (as Elijah was faulty
in his desires of death, 1 King. 19.) Far more is it a sin, when men, out of
desperation, rush upon death, or even when, because of trouble or
coffeehouse, or di^^idence of Gods help, they weary, and are not conten^ to
have their graces exercised as God pleases, or when they look on death as
their only issue from present trouble. And here Job failed, both in his
aversion from the real advantages of his being tried, and in his fixing of his
expectations too much upon death.

2. Grace steps in to correct sense, and what had flowed from his weak flesh, I
will leave my complaint upon my self. The meaning whereof is not, that he will
complain at his own peril, and take his hazard of what may ensue upon it, as he
elsewhere resolves, Chap. 13.13. But the meaning, is, That when his weariness
was like to make him complain and cry out; grace and submission would (as
formerly, Chap. 9.35.) yet have smothered it, and rather have sunk under the
pressure, then utter any thing of his passion to God, or against his dealing.

Whence Learn,

1. Much trouble affords occasion and matter of many lamentations and
complaints; and it is a demonstration of man's frailty that, when he is hardly
pressed, he can do no more for his own relief, but complain and lament, Psalm.
102. in the Title: For, here it is supposed that Job's hard case pressed him to
a complaint.

2. Men do not a little feed and increase their complaints, under trouble, by
their own wearying, and so making their burden uneasy; For, it is when he is
weary of his life, that he has a complaint. But formerly, till his spirit
wearyed, he got it borne down. Chap. ^.10.

3. Albeit afflicted and grieved Saints may find great ease by pouring out
their case to God; yet the ill and bitter frame of their spirits is better
suppressed than vented: For, says he, I will leave my complaint upon my self.
Thus did he labor not to sin with his lips, Chap. 2.10. as not knowing but his
passion, if once it b^^ke loose, might utter worse language then simple
complaints.

4. Albeit men be driven from their good resolutions, through the violence of
their tentations; yet it is their duty to essay them again: For, after his
endeavors to ease himself, Chap. 9.27, 28. and to smother his grievances, are
overturned, he will yet again essay to leave his complaint upon himself.

3. Flesh, at last, over powers all his good resolutions, I will speak in the
bitterness of my soul; or, I am so put to it with grief and bitterness, that I
must give my self a vent.

Whence Learn,

1. Saints may be put from their resolutions over and over again; For, here,
after he has again resolved to bury his complaint, he is put from it, and he
must speak, and his passion, for this time carries all before it. This may
teach Saints not to mistake such humblings in the matter of their resolutions,
and such violent fits in themselves.

2. Saints resolutions of submission and patience, will not hold, when they
only smother their sorrows, and do not labor to cure that, inwardly and at the
root, which they endeavor to suppress outwardly; For, therefore comes he at
last to this, I will speak, notwithstanding all his former resolutions, because
he did not labor to remove the cause of his complaint, by reading Gods dealing
aright, and seeking patience, but did only leave it upon himself.

3. Resolutions, also, will not hold when men take their burdens upon
themselves, and do not roll the grievanc^s they would suppress, over on God:
For, in this also his resolution was defective, that he will leave his
complaint upon himself, or, smother it, and take all the weight of it upon his
own spirit, and therefore it came to this issue, I will speak.

4. Much trouble and perplexity is apt to breed much soul-bitterness,
especially when nature and corruptions are let loose, to read our lots, and
grapple with our difficulties; For, Job here confesses his trouble had
produced bitterness of soul.

5. Bitterness of soul is not only a fountain of complaints and resentments
against Gods dealing; but it is very boisterous, carrying down all good
resolutions, and a very bad Orator before God: For, says he, I will speak in
the bitterness of my soul. Which imports, that it was his bitterness that
furnished those complaints, which before he would have suppressed; that it was
bitterness, also that overturned his former resolutions to be silent, and drove
him to this, I will speak: and, that all the faults in his following Discourse
slowed from this Fountain of bitterness, which prompts a man to speak, not what
he ought, but whatever it suggests, were it such as the Disciples Prayer was,
Mar. 4.38.

Verse. 2, I will say unto God, Do not condemn me; show me wherefore thou
contendest with me.
In this verse we have Job's Proposition of his complaint, which contains the
second Argument justifying and pressing it. He not only insinuates that his
Friends should not censure those complaints, which he dare propound to God,
leaving them as unfit Judges; (though this do not conclude strongly, seeing men
in passion may dare to speak that to God which is not meet.) But in the very
Proposition of his case, he insinuates this Argument against Gods present
dealing, and why he should deal more tenderly with him; That it was very hard
measure thus to condemn him before he be convinced of his crime. The meaning
is, as if Job had said; Lord, by this way of Procedure, thou seem to deal
with me as with a wicked man, whom thou have condemned to be thus consumed and
cut off as such. Now in this I request for a just procedure, that I may
understand the quarrel thou have against me (who am a righteous man) before
thou give me such hard measure; and I expostulate that it is not so, that
either thou will not cease to proceed against me as a guilty and wicked man
(for so the word to condemn, is, in the Original, to make wicked, or, to
declare one to be such by the sentence and stroke of a Judge) or else show me
the cause and quarrel.

In this reasoning, we may observe th^se Truths, for our Instruction.

1. Whatever distemper be in our spirits, which we cannot get suppressed and
calmed, it is better to go to God with it, then to m^^^^ur and complain of him
(as it were) behind back; and albeit there may be much failing and dross in the
way of such address^s, yet it is faith that goes God with them, and it
evidenceth a man to be given to Prayer, when even his very complaints run in
that channel: For, albeit this address be full of distemper and passion, as we
may observe all along, yet in so far Job is right, that when he must speak, v.
1. I will say it unto God, says he.

2. To be condemned, as a wicked man, is sad to a Saint; Any dispensation will
be tolerable but that, seeing therein a sight of men's own wickedness hides a
sight of Gods favor and love in their lot: Therefore Job deprecates his being
condemned as a wicked man, (as the word imports) when it is suggested by sense
that it was so with him.

3. A justified man, whose sin is pardoned, and who walks with God, may plead
against condemnation, as a lot he cannot in reason expect, seeing there is no
condemnation to any that are in Christ, Romans 8.1. Therefore does Job plead
against that, when suggested by sense and tentation, as a thing that could not
be, and for which there was no cause, according to the tenor of the Covenant
of Grace. Do not condemn me; show me wherefore thou contendest with me, as such
a one, and in such a way.

4. No rod is so sad to a Child of God, as a dumb rod; when he can know nothing
of the cause, end, or use of it, that he might walk accordingly, and justify
God; For, this makes God seeming to condemn Job ^ad unto him, when he knew not
wherefore he contended with him.

5. Men's afflictions may be so involved and intricate, (through their own
mistakes, or otherwise) that even Saints, when they are under trouble, may feel
the stroke but see no more, till God teach them; who, when he has inflicted a
stroke, must give light, to discern his mind in it, and grace, to make use of
it; For, when Job is sadly afflicted, he is yet left in the dark, till God show
him wherefore he contended with him. Where his ignorance did not slow, so much,
from his present desertion and confusion, as, from this false Principle, that
God was condemning him as a wicked man. In which case, it was no wonder if he
could see no cause for that, having the testimony of a good Conscience.
However, Saints in trouble may expect to have other perplexities beside this,
and that when they have taken up the nature of their trouble aright, only as a
trial or chastisement, they may yet be kept in the dark about the particular
cause of it, or the special use they should make of it.

Beside those Truths, we may here, also, observe some failings and weaknesses
in Job and his reasonings, which may serve for caution and instruction to us,

1. It was but his mistake, while he judged, by his present sense, that God was
condemning him, and this raised the tempest in his soul. It is our weakness to
fasten mistakes upon Gods dealing, and by so doing make our lot more
unsupportable then really it is. Likewise, It should seriously be looked upon
as a mistake, That even saddest afflictions do always speak Gods condemning of
the afflicted. For he may chastise them most sharply, whom he approves.

2. Albeit God were (not condemning him to perish eternally with the wicked,
for neither could that be, nor did Job believe it was so, but) dealing with
him, in outward corrections, as he uses to deal the wicked, when he plagues
them for their wickedness; yet it was his fault not to see sufficient cause of
all this within himself, but he will put God to it, to show wherefore he
contended. For the best of Saints have sins which deserve more then all this,
Psalm. 130.3. and 143.2. and even Original sin in man does justify God, in
inflicting saddest corrections. For the wages thereof is death, Rom 5 12, 14.

3. Though he had never so much integrity, and could see no procuring cause of
his afflictions; yet there was cause enough why God should exercise even an
innocent, and much more, why he should try him, to draw forth what, either of
weakness, or of grace, was in him.

4. Though he could neither see a procuring cause, nor the final cause of Gods
dealing; yet it became not him to quarrel with God, as if his dealing were
unjust. For absolute sovereignty in God might silence him, and God is not bound
to give a reason of his ways, as himself acknowledged, Chap 9.12.

Verse. 3. Is it good unto thee, that thou should oppress? that thou
should despise the work of thine hands, and shine upon the counsel of the
wicked?
Follows Job's Prosecution of the complaint which he had propounded, v. 2.
wherein he presses his Expostulation and desire by several other Arguments,
beside those formerly insinuated, in the Rise and Proposition of his complaint.
In all which he leaves to his Friends to judge of the relevancy and justness
of his complaint, by the strength of his reasons propounded to God, to whom
alone he makes his address. So the third Argument pressing his expostulation
and desire, (in this verse) does prosecute what he had propounded, v. 2. and
give some general hints of what is further enlarged in the ^est of his
discourse. In it he points out his apprehension of what was in Gods severe
dealing, in condemning him, and dealing with him as a wicked man.

1. That it seemed to be an oppression of a righteous man.

2. That it seemed to speak Gods despising of him who was the work of his
hands, both by Creation and by Grace; for so it may be interpreted by what he
subjoyns in this discourse, both of Gods creating of him, and of his grace in
him.

3. That God, by his dealing toward him, seemed to give favorable countenance
to the plots, projects and courses of the wicked. Partly, while the wicked (as
well as his Friends) were ready to judge him to be a wicked man, because
afflicted. Partly, while God seemed to concur with, and approve, the deeds of
the Sabeans and Chaldeans, who robbed him; and to give occasion to other wicked
men to insult over him, and abuse him, now when he had afflicted him, as Chap.
30.1. -- 14. But chiefly, while the wickeds prosperity and his adversity
confirmed them (who measure all things by outward advantages) in this opinion,
that piety is of no worth. Thus, the counsel of the wicked, is expounded of
their sleighting of Piety because of their own prosperity, Chapter 21.7. -- 15.
with 16. See Eccl. 8.11. Mal. 2.17. and 3.14, 15. Upon these apprehensions Job
founds his Argument, which he propounds by way of question to God; Is it good
unto thee, that thou should oppress, etc? The meaning whereof is, as if he
had said; Lord! does it beseem thy Nature and Goodness, or can it be any
pleasure or profit to thee, thus to oppress and slight thy own creature and
servant, and to seem as if thou would confirm and harden the wicked in their
evil way?

The sense and use of this Argument and Expostulation may be reduced to these
three General Heads.

First, As to the way of propounding this Argument, (as also some that follow)
it is by way of question to God; Is it good to thee, that thou should
oppress, etc? Wherein we have the language of two parties within him, his sense
and his faith. His sense would absolutely have concluded all this to be true of
God, that he delighted to oppress and despise him, and shine upon the counsel
of the wicked. But faith could not subscribe to all these conclusions, and not
being able to refute them, yet it stands (as it were a great stone in an
impetuous River) to stop the current of tentation, if it were but with a
question, Can it be as sense says? as Psalm. 77.7, 8, 9. And here faith goes
further, and propounds the matter to God, wherein, as sense lays out its
apprehensions of Gods dealing, so faith propounds those apprehensions as
questions, to be resolved and cleared by God.

From this way of pleading, in general, Learn,

1. Tentations may fly very high under trouble, even against God himself; For,
all that is here questioned was suggested to Job. So also those apprehensions,
Psalm. 77. We are not to think it strange. if a storm raise much mud, and such
gross tentations and fiery darts be cast in.

2. Sense will soon weary under trouble, and be ready to subscribe to the worst
that tentation can say or suggest; For, the positive Assertions, implied in
these Questions, were the language of Sense, and it is Faith only that can so
much as question them. See Psalm. 31.22. Lam. 3.18, 19. Isa. 38.11. and
frequently Saints bewray their weakness in this. Sense must still be bribed ere
it will speak good of God; and hence it proves our greatest enemy in ill times.
And this may also suggest to us, that our first thoughts of our case, and of
Gods dealing, under trouble, are not readily the truth; they are but our sense,
faintness and have, taking the first start of us, till faith follow after and
correct them, Psalm. 31.22. and 116.11, 12. Jonah 2.4.

3. In times of greatest tentations and faintings, some small sparkles of faith
and honesty will still appear in Gods people; For, here, when tentation and
sense are uppermost, and faith is very far from triumphing over difficulties,
yet it appears in those questions. Thus Saints in the midst of their saddest
complaints, call God their God, Isa. 40.27. and 49.14. This may encourage
wrestlers, considering that God marks their weak endeavors, as the fruits of
true faith, though themselves judge not so. Yea, he will esteem more of these
wrestlings, then when we are fairest before the wind in our believing, it being
most eminent and cleanly faith, when there is least of sense going along with
it, to help it. And albeit the Lord do reprove weak faith, and will, much more,
be angry at those mistakes which do so overcharge faith; yea, albeit weakness
of faith may obstruct Believers in their doing of eminent service, Matthew.
17.19, 20. yet God never refused to do the weak Believers business, Mar. 4.39,
40. and 9.22, 24, 25. and the Psalmist, even by such wrestlings under
tentation, came to prevail at length, Psalm. 77.7, 8, 9, with 10.

4. It is the duty of the people of God, and an evidence of grace and faith in
them, that they do not willingly admit of an ill report of God; and that they
are not prone to misbelieve; or to set their seal to what Tentation and Sense
say, and to close with every report that their own hearts would bring up of
God; For, when Job's sense not only thought these things, but will needs utter
them in a complaint to God, that he oppressed and despised him, faith makes a
question of them, when it can do no more: As it is our fault that we are slow
of heart to believe, Luke 24.45, so also that there is in us a willingness to
misbelieve, and cast away our confidence, which is forbidden, Heb. 10.35. and
was the fault of that wicked King, 2 King. 6.33. And albeit, whenever we
distrust, and do not believe, there is much of will in it, Joh. 5.40. yet, then
especially are we guilty of wilfulness in that sin, when we look not upon faith
as a commanded duty, and so mourn not for the want of it, as for other sins;
but, it may be, plead for it, ^s Jonah did for his passion, Jon. 4.9. When we
are not as careful (yea, more careful) to study what may strengthen faith, as
we are to study what may discourage us; when we will not employ the little
faith we have, in wrestling and debating with sense and tentations, because we
have not that faith which might easily carry us over all our tentations; and,
when we will not simply, at Gods command, cast out the net of believing, but
will turn judges of the Promises, and of the profit of believing, 2 King. 6.33.
and when we find things hard or improbable, in our bitterness we cast all our
confidence away. This is an evil we should be careful to avoid, Considering,
That faith, how weak soever, is most commendable, when we are most unwilling to
part with it in great difficulties; That the sin of unbelief is heinous enough,
(in disobeying God, reproaching him, forsaking our own mercy, etc.) even when
it flows from our infirmity and weakness, albeit we do not make it our wilful
iniquity, by giving up our selves to it, without any appearing of the grace of
God to witness against it; That zeal for God should cause us not be taken alive
(as the word will read, 2 Timothy 2.26.) by his Enemy, unbelief, far less will it
allow us voluntarily to turn to his Enemies party; That wilful misbelievers do
cast away that shield which should cover them and all their armor, Ephesians. 6.6.
And what can be the issue of that, but deadly wounds, one upon the back of
another? and what will they do next, when they have cast away their confidence?
or, will any condition bring an issue, till they return to believe again? as
the Psalmist found, Psalm 77.7, 8, 9, with 10. And, That God may be provoked to
make unbelief the punishment of the wilful distruster, when he would gladly be
rid of it (as finding how it crusheth and sinketh him) but cannot.

5. Weak and willing believers may be excited, and and notably strengthened to
resist tentation, and the suggestions of Sense, by studying the Nature of God,
how unsuitable that is to him which Sense suggesteth, what a wrong is done to
him by its conclusions, and how absurd it were to judge so of God, as it would
represent him; For, so does Job's faith here militate against the suggestions
of his sense, Is it good unto thee that thou should oppress, etc? As if he
had said, Can this be said of thee, without a notable injury done to thy
holiness, goodness, etc.

6. Those suggestions of sense, which faith questioneth as absurd, and yet
cannot answer nor repel them, must be propounded and laid out before God, that
he may clear them; For, so does Job here speak the matter to God, Is it good
unto thee, etc? Where, as the matter questioned, which he utters, is the
language of sense, for which Job is afterward reprehended; So, his propounding
of it by way of question unto God, imports (beside his infirmity and weakness
in the thing) a complaint of it to God, and a calling upon him to resolve the
difficulty. And this is a more profitable way of discussing tentations, then to
take counsel about them in our own hearts, the result whereof will be sorrow,
Psalm. 13.2. See also Psalm. 73.15, 16, 17.

Secondly, Having spoken in general to the way of pleading, and to faith and
senses part in it; I come, in the next place, to consider what is Faith and
Graces part in this Argument. For all those apprehensions of sense being
questioned by faith, it imports not only that they are not true (of which I
shall make further use on the next Head) but that they were grievous to his
spirit, to apprehend such things in Gods dealing.

Hence we may gather those sound Truths here,

1. Though the Lord be Sovereign and Absolute; yet he is an holy and righteous
God, who takes no pleasure in oppression, especially of his own people. He will
not employ his great power, to crush his own people; Job 23.6. and 37.23. but
his strength loves judgment, Psalm. 99.4. Nor does he afflict willingly, or
deny unto men their just claims and defenses, Lam. 3.33, 34, 35, 36. Therefore
Job questions this as not to be yielded, that it is good, or pleasing unto God,
to oppress.

2. An interest in God (whether more general, as we are his creatures, or more
specially, as we are renewed and made of new to him) as it calls for our
reverence and respect to him, Psalm. 100.2, 3. So it is a ground of confidence
that he will deal favorably, and tenderly; For, Job pleads aganst the evils
apprehended by his sense, upon this accout, that he is the work, or, labor of
Gods hand. And albeit this conclude more strongly upon the account of his being
a new creature, renewed by God; yet even his being one of his creatures, has
its own weight in the plea, as he afterward distinctly urges it, ver. 8, 9.
etc.

3. One of the saddest sights a Saint gets of his trouble is, when he misseth
Gods affection in it, and it seems to speak wrath; For, Job cannot digest
this, that his stroke seemed to be such as if it were good and pleasant to God,
to oppress him, and as if he despised him. See, Job 13.24. Others will not
much miss this, if their lot be otherwise tolerable; But Saints will resent
this in most easy trials.

4. Zeal to the honor of God, when it seems to be reflected upon by his
afflicting of Saints, will not a little grieve their spirits; For, this also
affects Job, that the counsel of the wicked should seem to be shined upon, or,
get a favorable aspect. See Josh. 7.8, 9. Our forgetting of this is the cause
why we speed so ill in our particulars, before God.

5. It is the property of real and lively Saints to love Piety so well, that it
will exceedingly afflict them, when Gods dealing to his people seems to harden
men in impiety, and to introduce Atheism and open ungodliness; For, this also
was his affliction, when he apprehended the counsel of the wicked to be thus
shined upon, as has been explained. See also, Mal. 3 14, 15. Eccl. 8.11. This
afflicted David, and put him to his Prayers, Psalm. 7.6, 7. and 69 6.

Thirdly, I come, in the last place, to consider Job's mistakes, his weakness
and reckoning by sense, which are most predominant in this Argument. Wherein,
as his speech implies that he was so far over powered, as not only to think,
but even to utter, those apprehensions of God, though with some reluctance and
opposition made by faith; So his questions about them imply that they were
false, and not to be yielded unto, but the contrary maintained. Hence, from his
failing and weakness, we may learn these Cautions for our Instruction.

1. It is an ill way of pleading our righteousness under trouble, to reflect
upon the Righteousness of God who afflicts us; as Job's sense suggested to him,
that he being a righteous man, Gods afflicting of him could be nothing else but
oppression.

2. It is a great fault to censure Gods sharp dispensations toward his people,
as oppression; seeing he is Sovereign Lord of our being, not accountable to any
for what he does, and does, by no affliction, deprive them of their
righteousness, nor of any benefit they can claim by it; Therefore Job was in a
mistake when he complained of oppression.

3. It is injurious to God, when his people think he respects any profit
(whereof he reaps none) or pleasure, without an eye and respect to their good;
For, Job did mistake, when his sense judged that it was good unto God to
oppress, or, ruin him.

4. It is, also, a wrong to judge of Gods affection by our sense of his
external dispensations; As if, because he afflicted his people therefore he
thought it good, or took pleasure in it, and despised, and contemned them.
Whereas, when God does afflict them, he proceeds (so to say) with much
aversion, if their good could be otherwise promoted, Jer. 9 7. Lam. 3.33. he
does affectionately remember them under it, Jer. 31.20. yea, he honors them,
by taking so much pains upon them, and setting them upon such a stage, whence
his grace in them may eminently shine and appear.

5. It is an act of rash judgment to think that God despises his creatures,
because he tries and exercises them; or, despises his own work in his
people, when he gives it a shake, that it may stand more firm, and casts
dust upon it, that he may scour it better, Job 23.10. For, Job failed in
thinking God despised the work of his hands.

6. It is not only weakness, but wickedness, if persisted in, to think, That
God approves of wickedness, as Mal. 2.17. See Eccl. 8.11, 12, 13. That his
favorable and smiling Providence do import any approbation of wicked men, and
not rather a snare upon them, Psalm. 11.6. Or, That God cannot take ways to
vindicate his own honor, and commend Piety, though he do not take our way, but
let our trials (whereby the wicked may take occasion to stumble, and be
hardened) go on. For, herein Job failed exceedingly, in thinking God shined
upon the counsel of the wicked, in any of these respects formerly mentioned in
the Explication. And particularly, in thinking there was no way to
discountenance the wicked in their impiety, but by delivering of him; whereas
the wicked had some knowledge of Gods will, as it was then made known (and we
have it more clearly in the written Word) whereby they might judge of Gods
thoughts of their way; and God should, in due time, manifest his mind yet
further to them, though Job's trial continued for a while.

Verse. 4. Have thou eyes of flesh? or see thou as man sees?

5. Are thy days as the days of man? are thy years as man's days,

6. That thou inquire after mine iniquity, and searchest after my sin?


The fourth Argument (wherein he enlarges that apprehension of oppression, v.
3.) is taken from this, That there was no necessity why God should thus torture
him, to find out or pursue his sin, but it looked rather like ignorant and
passionate man, then the Holy and Omniscient God, to keep this way of
procedure. Here eyes, and days, and years, are attributed to God, to express
his knowledge and eternal duration, in terms borrowed from among men, because
of our incapacity. And the meaning of the Argument is, as if Job had said;
Lord! thou art not like a man, that thou should need thus to put me upon the
rack. A man might possibly do thus to an innocent man, in regard his eyes see
but what is outward, and he is often times led with suspicions, passions and
malice, and therefore he may be induced to torture an innocent man, that he may
draw out a confession of what he suspects he is guilty of, v. 4. And man is
born to learn somewhat every day, in the vicissitudes of his time, and
therefore he may put a man upon the rack that he may search him out; or being
short-lived, he may heap plagues upon the man with whom he is angry, lest he
should not live to overtake him at another time, v 5. But thou art nothing so;
thou art neither subject to ignorance, error nor passion, like a man, that
thou needs thus torment me as a malefactor, to find out, and make me take
with, sin ( v. 6.) whom thou know not to be wicked, (as it is subjoyned, v
7.) Nor art thou subject to the vicissitudes of time, as man is. And therefore
I expostulate that thou should thus proceed with me.

Here I shall not insist to speak of the hard thoughts suggested of God, which
his faith repels the best it can, by starting questions about them, of which
see, on v. 3 Only I shall consider,

First, What is supposed of man, in this arguing; That he is a creature, full
of infirmities, and obnoxious to many miscarriages, because of them. He has
eyes of flesh, he sees but as man, his days and years are but of a man. This
may be branched out in those particulars.

1. Man is an ignorant creature, his eyes are of flesh, made of flesh, and so
can see nothing but what is fleshy, or the outside and appearances only of
things. Things are not to be tried by such a sight, and yet man can go no
further, 1 Samuel 16.7.

2. Man's sight and knowledge is also fleshy, and he sees but as a man, in this
respect, that his knowledge is infirm and corrupt, the little light he has is,
oft-times, blinded with prejudices, suspicions, affection, and self-love,
passion and malice, interest, etc. whereby he bemists and darkens what,
otherwise, might be clear unto him. These are infirmities which men, and
especially those who have power over others (which is the case Job reflects
upon here) should be sensible of, and mourn for.

3. Man in his knowledge is subject to vicissitudes, his life being measured by
days and years, which being in a perpetual motion, argue that man has not yet
attained to a state of perfection, in his knowledge, nor in other things. Upon
this account, as man ought, and needs, to be learning and grow in knowledge,
every day and year; So he may be of one mind to day, and of another to morrow.
A new day may discover the folly of his former thoughts. He may know to day,
and forget to morrow, and in his enquiries, it may be a long time (even days
and years) ere he attain to truth; as the instance in hand implies, that he
may need a long time to try out what is in others. All this, if it were well
considered, might teach vain man to be very sober.

4. Man's infirmity in the matter of knowledge does, oft-times, breed himself
and others much trouble. As here is implied, that man may need to take this
pains in his enqui^y, which yet God needed not. From this fountain it flows
that malefactors are put to torture (which yet, oft-times, makes but an unsure
discovery) and men meet with so many difficulties in finding out the truth, in
accusations and crimes, and other inquiries; which should humble men in their
administration of justice, and best undertakings. Hence also it flows, that
men, through passion blinding their judgment, do put the most innocent to
unjust sufferings, when they have power; of which they must give a sad account.
Hence, also, men are put to much toil in over-turning their resolutions which
they had formerly so closely followed, when a new day discovers the folly of
them, or their passion, prejudices and interests, make them loath them, how
right soever they have been. And hence it is, that man's short life makes him
violent in following his passion and revenge, as in following his other Idols.
He makes this ill use of his short life, that in stead of sobriety, 1 Cor.
7.29, 30, 31. he is more violent. Isa. 22.13.

Secondly, As all these are supposed of man; So they are all denied to be true
of God. For Job's questions import, that, however Gods dealing seemed to speak
him to act rather like a frail man, th^n like God; yet, he could not believe
any such thing of God. And therefore he not only questions it, and propounds it
to God for resolution (of which I spoke on v. 3.) but upon this very
supposition, that this way of proceeding is like man, he founds his
expostulation about Gods dispensations, of which afterward

Hence we may gather these Lessons,

1. Afflictions will lead tender men to remember and eye sin; They, taking up
Gods eye, when he afflicts, to be upon sin, do set themselves also to eye and
search out what God may find of that in them; For, so Job supposes here, that
God is looking after iniquity and sin See Lam. 3.39, 40.

2. Tender walkers will mind that God judges not of men by their outside,
wherein Hypocrites and Civilians may go along with them, yea, outstrip them;
nor will any outward appearances of good, quiet their Consciences, as knowing
there must be an enquiry and search in this matter, to see what is beyond that;
as Job here supposes.

3. The right knowledge of Gods Nature and Perfections is of special use in
trouble; Therefore Job pleads from this ground, that God has not eyes of
flesh, etc. This study will support in believing, Psalm. 9.10. encourage in
suffering, 2 Timothy 1.12. and give us ground to expect nothing from him, but what
will declare him to be God, and not man, Hos. 11.9. As Job's arguing, in
general, does imply.

4. The Lord needs take no pains, nor busy himself, to search out man, whom he
knows before he try him; nor is he led by passion, prejudices or mistakes, in
his dealing with him; nor needs he take advantage of any time against man, who
is for ever in his reverence; All this is implied in this, that God has not
eyes of flesh, nor sees as man sees, nor are his days and years as of a man,
that he should enquire after iniquity, and search after sin. This ought to be
seriously minded by us, That Gods eye sees through us, even to what is most
inward; That his judgment of us is according to righteousness, (being neither
subject to ignorance, nor blinded with prejudice, nor needing any after-review
to make it better) and therefore it ought to be submitted unto, and rested
upon, whatever apprehensions we have to the contrary; And, That God can still
overtake us, when he pleases, let us escape other hazards as we will.

Thirdly, If we consider Job's grounding of his Expostulation upon this, as an
Argument that, since God was not like man, therefore he should not deal thus
severely with him: we will find that it was his weakness and mistake to look
upon any thing God did as inconsistent with his Nature and Properties, though
he could not reconcile the one with the other: Yea it was an indirect
reflection upon God, suggested by his sense, that Gods way of proceeding looked
rather like an ignorant frail man, than God; and for this he is afterward
reprehended by God. And, in particular, this was his mistake, That albeit God
needed not take all this pains, to come to the knowledge of him; yet himself
needed it, to make him know himself, and to know that God knew him better then
he knew himself; what weakness was in him, notwithstanding his integrity; what
the grace of God in him would bear, how it would shine in trouble, etc.

Hence we may observe two chief causes of our mistake of Gods dealing,

1. Because we do, oft-times mistake his end in his work, even when it seems
most cross and bitter; which is not (as Job supposed) to inform him, but our
selves; not to find out wickedness, but to discover grace, or weakness, where
it is; not to crush, but to give comfortable experiences and proofs of his
love. These being often not observed, we are ready to quarrel, even when God is
doing us good. See Deuteronomy. 8.14, 15, 16. Joh. 13.7.

2. Because we mistake his means which le^d to this end, that by an eater he
gives us meat, that he puts us to sharpest trials, not because he minds to
prove us wicked or reject us, but that he may humble us, and discover our
graces for our comfort, etc.

Verse. 7. Thou know that I am not wicked, and there is none that can deliver
out of thine hand,
The Fifth Argument (which follows upon the former, and confirms it) is
taken from the hand case to which he was redacted, on every hand, by this way
of procedure with him. For if God, by these troubles, were seeking to convince
and condemn him as a wicked man (as he apprehends, v. 6.) this was hard
measure: For God knew well enough, and he appeals to his knowledge, that he was
not wicked; nor (as the word also will bear) will he be found to be wicked,
after the most exact trial. And yet, upon the other hand, all this integrity
could not avail him; But if God please thus to proceed in severity, there is no
remedy but he must be ruined, neither himself, nor any other could help him
against so great a Party. The sum of the Argument may be thus conceived, as if
Job had said; A righteous man, being oppressed by men, may have his recourse to
a Superior (in Heaven or Earth) who will do him right: But though I be really
a godly man and not wicked, yet none can secure me against thy Sovereignty and
infinite Power, if thou please to proceed thus against me. Therefore I
expostulate this with thee, and that thou do not walk by a rule, whereby thy
creature, and thy righteous servant may subsist.

If we consider the truths that are insinuated in this reasoning, we may
Observe,

1. Albeit all men, while they are within time, be sinners; yet, some do obtain
mercy not to be wicked: being implanted in Christ, and covered by his
righteousness, having a real and through change wrought upon their nature and
dispositions, and not having only run from one extreme to another; and, being
real and serious in their endeavors against the remainders of sin, Romans 7.24.
For, Job here was not wicked.

2. God is the Sovereign Judge of men's state and condition; it must be remitted
to his decision what we are, and we mu^^ rest only upon his approbation,
otherwise, we do but deceive our selves, 2 Cor. 10.18. Rev. 3 17 For, says he,
Thou know, or, it is upon thy knowledge, that I am not wicked; otherwise he
could not have satisfied himself.

3. Albeit such as are truly godly may be exercised and humbled with
uncertainties and doubts about their state, yet, a godly man may attain to that
certainty; as to know that he is a godly man, and not wicked, and that God
knows him to be such: For, says Job, Thou know that I am not wicked. See
2 Cor. 13.5. 2 Pet. 1.10.

4. No trial should cause a man quit the testimony of his integrity, and of
Gods approbation; for, Job cleaves to it, here.

5. The comfort of a good Conscience consists in this, that not only will it
support a man under mistakes from Friends, Chap. 16.20. but that he may avow
it, and appeal to God about it, even when his dispensations seem to speak
otherwise: For, so does Job support himself by it, now when God appears so
terrible to him.

6. God is Soveragn Lord over the most holy man, to dispose of him at his
pleasure; and is so infinitely powerful and absolute, that none can, by right,
or force, interpose to hinder him: For, so does Job subjoyn, that though he is
not wicked, yet there is none that can deliver out of thy hand. This Dominion
of God ought to be submitted unto, in bearing trouble, notwithstanding any
testimony we have in our Consciences.

Yet in this reasoning, Job's weakness does appear,

1. In that he looks on God as dealing with him as with a wicked man; regreting
that there was no remedy for an upright man, but God would crush him, were he
never so upright; and yet God ^as not dealing so with him. Our own mistak^s of
Gods mind and ends in trouble breed us much needless vexation. Right thoughts
of God, and of his dealing, would bring us much ease.

2. In that, albeit he acknowledge Gods Sovereignty in this matter; yet, he
su^mits to it with a grudge, and because he could not help it, nor was there
any remedy or help in his Integrity, having to do with such a Party. Submission
pretended unto, with a secret grudge, is not acceptable to God; especially,
when any testimony of a good Conscience begets, or entertains, this grudge; as
Job, because he was not wicked, grudges that he cannot help himself; or be free
of Gods Sovereign hand. It is more beseeming (if in any respect it can be
seemly) that unrenewed men, having an evil Conscience, do thus grudge and
repine, than that a good Conscience, which is so much obliged to free grace,
should minister any occasion to it.

Verse. 8. Thine hands have made me, and fashioned me together round about; yet
thou do destroy me.

9. Remember, I beseech thee, that thou have made me as the clay, and will thou
bring me into dust again?

10. Have thou not poured me out as milk, and crudled me like cheese?

11. Thou have clothed me with skin and flesh, and have fenced me with bones
and sinews.

12. Thou have granted me life, and favor, and thy visitation has preserved
my spirit.

13. And these things have thou hid in thine heart, I know that this is with
thee.


The sixth Argument is taken from Gods framing and preserving of him, and
explains that, v. 3. of Gods despising the work of his hands. This Argument and
Expostulation,

1. He propounds, That God having taken so much pains to make a curious
structure of him (for, so the word is, to take pains, and be at toil, alluding
to the manner of men, who cannot do rare things without much pains) should now
destroy his own workmanship, v 8. and that having formed such a curious piece
out of brittle clay, (in his Primitive Original, Adam) o^, as the Potter
forms Vessels out of clay; he will now bring him to dust again, v. 9. which
is not to be understood, simply, of death, as if he declined that; but of God*
over-throwing thus violently his own work; and cutting off a godly man, in
anger.

2. To press this Expostulation, he insists, more particularly, on Gods framing
of him; partly, in his body, where (in a modest similitude) he declares how the
seed (the matter of his body) was brought to some consistence, as Milk is
cruddled, that it may be Cheese, v. 10. and how, out of that matter, God made
bones to grow, to be as Pillars to this Structure; also sinews, to unite the
bones and direct the motions; flesh, to bolster and fill up this Structure, and
a skin, to cover and protect it, v. 11. Partly, in his soul; granting him life,
and a reasonable soul, to animate this Fabric; v. 12 --. To which he adds Gods
care of him since he framed him, v. -- 12. granting him favor, in caring for
him in the womb, at his birth, and since; and his visitation preserving his
spirit. Which, however it be true, in it self, if we understand it of gracious
manifestations; yet, here it seems to be meant only (by way of Explication of
that favor) of Gods care and inspection, to preserve his Spirit, life, or
being, by his Providence.

3. That he may more confidently found his Expostulation upon this kindness of
God; he asserts ( v. 13) that Gods present severity cannot persuade him that
all this care is forgotten, but he believes it is hid in Gods heart, though it
be not visible to his sense. And therefore it is that he has expostulated that
God should destroy him, toward whom he has showed so much kindness, in making
and preserving of him; which he cannot believe is yet forgotten.

In this Argument, Observe these Truths.

1. Man in his frame is an excellent Structure, and a little world, in his body
and soul, wherein God is much to be seen; Therefore does Job insist here to
point out that excellent work, and makes use of words which do express
diligence and pains; Not that God needs, or is put, to take pains in it; but
to show that the effect and work is such, as if he had taken all pains about
it. See Genesis 1.26. Psalm. 139.14, 15. And when men do not mind this, but are
Atheists (though their very frame be an Argument proving a Deity) and when they
do not dwell upon the meditation of it (as Job does here) till it affect them,
nor study to look like it in their walk, but become brutish, or liker to Devils
then to God in whose Image they were created; it is no wonder they be
destroyed, and that this Argument have no force, to plead for their
preservation.

2. As Gods part in framing of Man does set out his glory; so man's Original, in
it self, is such as may abase him; being but as clay and milk.

3. God can, of very mean things, make out somewhat very excellent; as he made
Man, his skin, flesh, bones and sinews, of this clay and milk.

4. The favor of life, especially of a reasonable life, is a mercy much to be
esteemed; For, Job esteems of it, Thou have granted me life. See Job 35.11.

5. That same power, care and love of God, which gives being, does preserve it,
in the womb and afterward, by a continued Creation; For, when he granted life,
he did grant favor also, and his visitation (as a Parent overseeth his Child,
that the Nurse neglect it not) preserves the spirit, or, breath, and life.

6. It is the duty of Believers, when they are in trouble, and evidences of
special love are over-clouded, to take hold by faith of very common grounds and
evidences of love, that they may come to God with them; As Job pleads from his
Creation, and being formed in the womb, against Gods present severity. See
also, Psalm. 22.9, 10. Albeit the strongest Arguments for discouragement ought
not to drive us away from God; yet we may make use of more remote and common
Arguments, to come to God and get better.

7. It is one good Argument in pleading with God, that he will be tender of his
own work of mercy and favor (be what it will) wherein his hand has been
eminently seen; For, in the general, Job's Argument is good, that God would
respect him, whom he has so curiously formed, though it will not bear all that
weight he lays upon it, as I shall clear afterward.

8. It is also a good argument and plea before God, when we are sensible, that
we are of a weak and frail mould and constitution, not able to endure God's
strokes, nor needing much to undo us; For, this is a plea which he desires God
will remember, that he is made as clay, and therefore will soon be brought to
dust again.

9. To strengthen our faith in this plea, it would be remembered. That albeit
Gods people be driven from the sense of what they have found, and be not able
to reconcile his present dispensations with their former experience; yet faith
is bound not to quit its grip, but to see that which is hid in Gods heart, and
comfort it self in concealed favor and mercy: For, so does Job reckon, These
things have thou hid in thine heart, I know that this is with thee.

10. When mercies are not visible or obvious to sense, faith should look upon
them, not only as sure, and with God, but as hid in his heart, or affection;
That his love is not withdrawn, though his dispensations, which speak love, be
gone; and that his affection is the dispenser of our lots, either in granting,
or, with holding, of mercies. For, so does Job here argue.

In Job's arguing from this against Gods present dealing with him, we may also
observe those mistakes, which will afford us needful Caution and Instruction.

1. Whatever respect or obligation God have to his creatures, especially those
whom he has made of new, and regenerated by his grace; yet they should not
take ill with change of dealing, but resolve upon it; For, herein Job argued
weakly, that, because God had made and preserved him, therefore, he should
still preserve him from trouble, or any change in his condition. See Psalm.
102.10. We should be ready to study the mutability of time, and of the things
thereof, which will make us look for a day after a night; and that will keep us
from quarrelling, that we have had a night after a day. See Zech. 8 14, 15.

2. Especially, we should guard that Gods former kindness, and tender care, do
not make us so ill bred, as to bear a trouble the worse; which should rather be
borne the better for that: As Job argues, when he is in a right frame, Chap.
2.10. though now he take it ill to be thus broken, after such tender kindness.

3. We may so plead our weakness (as Job does, v. 9.) as yet, if God give
strength, or perfect strength in weakness, we must not seek to shift trouble:
nor decline exercise upon his charges, under pretense of weakness.

4, We do, oft-times, breed our selves much disquiet, by being more affrighted
then we are really hurt; as Job here was apprehensive that God would destroy
him, his sense suggesting that it was so. See Isa. 38.12, 13. with Isa. 51.12,
13.

5. Whatever be the gracious condescendence of God, in his dealing with men;
yet, there is no cause that we should plead, by way of quarrel and
expostulation, against Gods doing what he will with his own creature, and the
being which he has given. For why may not the Potter make and mar his own
vessel, at his pleasure? Romans 9.21. Jer. 18.6. And albeit Piety have the
Promises; yet we should beware to plead absolutely against any outward
dispensation.

6. When men, by faith grounded upon the Word, do see Gods affection toward
them, as Job did, v. 13. they should not be too eager upon outward
manifestations and proofs of his love; but should bless God for that, and
acquiesce in it; which were the way to get more.

Verse. 14. If I sin, then thou markest me, and thou will not acquit me from
mine iniquity.

15. If I be wicked, woe unto me, and if I be righteous, yet will I not lift up
my head: --


The seventh Argument is taken from his condition and state who was afflicted,
and from his searching out what might be the Lords end in afflicting him; The
meaning is, as if Job had said; Lord! What means all this severity? For either
thou look upon me as guilty of unrepented sin, for which thou do chasten
me; and if it be so, thou have thy will, thou markest me, and do not spare
me; v. 14. (where he does not deny but he might be guilty of some such failing,
and withal, does submit to Gods pursuing of it, if that were the quarrel; yet
there is a secret grudge that nothing but destruction could end that
controversy) or thou look upon me as a wicked and unrenewed man, and so
these afflictions are the effects of vindicative wrath, broken forth upon me;
and if it were so, woe unto me, with my own consent, I will never grant that,
but my abhorrence of the wickeds estate, and lot, will witness the contrary for
me. Or thou look upon me as a righteous man, whom thou would humble and keep
low, by these rods; and I stoop, nor shall I insolently lift up my head and
boast of it, so as thou should need to toss me thus. Therefore why dealest thou
thus with me?

In this Argument, those Truths may be observed.

1. Trouble should make men inquisitive to know Gods mind and end in it, and to
be inquisitive and distinct in their own case, whether they be wicked or
regenerate; what sin they have, and in what degree and measure it is in them;
For, so is Job put to search, whether he has sinned (as the word is) or, what
infirmities may have prevailed over him in the course of his life, and whether
he be wicked, or righteous.

2. A difference must still be made, not only betwixt a man's frailty, or, his
sinful nature, and his state by grace; but even betwixt his grosser failings
and his being wicked. Albeit it be Saints duties to watch over the very
remainders of sin, much more ought they to keep themselves from their iniquity,
or, predominant evils, Psalm. 18.23. Yet, they may, sometime, fall in these
evils, and yet not take with wickedness, as to the state of their person. For,
Job puts a difference here betwixt his having sinned, or, his being overtaken
with any predominant infirmity, and his being wicked.

3. God is a strict marker of sin, even in his own people; and albeit he will
not cast them off, yet he will not pass over their unrepented guilt: For, says
he, If I have sinned, then thou markest me, and thou will not acquit me (or,
deal with me as innocent) from mine iniquity. Thus did God pursue David's sin,
2 Samuel 12.9, 10, 11, etc. And thus the Lord proclaims his own Name, Exodus 34.6,
7. And therefore Saints should see how they acquit themselves of their daily
contracted guilt, lest the rod pursue them.

4. Wicked men are undoubtedly and evidently (to a right discerner) under a woe
and curse; whatever their outward lot be, their inward condition and state
assures them of it: For, says he, If I be wicked, woe unto me; there needs no
further proof of it, if it once be clear that I am wicked. See Isa. 3.11.
Eccles. 8.12, 13.

5. It is a mark of honesty, when a man abhors the state of the wicked as
woeful, because he is wicked; For, by this supposition, If I be wicked, etc. Job
does noth question his own integrity (for he maintains it all along) but he
gives this proof of it, that he could not think of the wickeds estate, without
horror and abhorrency of it. Compare, Chap. 9.29. See Psalm. 141.4.

6. Albeit the ornament of righteous men be humility and sobriety; yet they
have a natural inclination to be puffed up because of it, and to trust in their
own beauty; Ezekiel. 16.15. For, he looks upon it, as an evil to be avoided, if he
be righteous, that he lift not up his head.

7. Albeit godly and righteous men be prone, not only to entertain a conceit of
themselves, when they are at ease, but, especially, to take it ill, if God
afflict them; yet, Gods sends the rod to hide pride from them; and when they
stoop to reap that profit by it, they give the rod less to do about them: For,
so does Job's reasoning imply, that since, though he were righteous, yet, would
he not lift up his head, therefore there was no necessity thus to pursue him.

Beside those truths, we may, in this arguing, Observe some defects also, for
our Instruction.

1. Though Job think he has searched into all the causes and ends of Gods work
about him, that so he might implead his procedure; yet Gods counsels are very
deep, and man's judgment shallow and confused, as himself confesses in the very
next words, and as Zophar's speech ( Chap. 11.7, 8, 12.) may well be applied to
this purpose, whatever was his own scope in it. And even in this arguing,
albeit God had none of these ends before him, in afflicting Job; yet, it was
enough if he had a purpose, to demonstrate his own absolute dominion over man,
and the power of his own grace in a weak creature. This may warn us not to
think that we can comprehend all Gods ends in his working, or can discern all
the wheels which he moves at once.

2. Though it be true, that God will not utterly destroy, or cast off his
people, for their sins; (and Job did mistake, if he apprehended otherwise, when
he says, God marketh, and will not acquit him) yet it is but a distemper that
makes men grudge at Gods dealing, as too severe and sharp: For, such a grudge
has Job here, Thou markest me, and thou will not acquit me. Whereas it is an
evidence of an interest, that God takes so much pains, Amos 3.2. and moderation
may be seen in the sharpest of it, Ezra 9.13. and that God does not always
chide, Psalm. 103.9.

3. Though Job, while he abhors the state of the wicked, and supposes
himself to be righteous, do yet stoop before God; yet there may be more pride
in righteous men then they are aware of, and Gods after-proceedure proved it
was so in Job. Corruption may lurk under much good, and our own Testimony
concerning our humility deserves but little credit, which were better proved
by our jealousy and exercise, and our opposition to pride within us.

Verse. 15. -- I am full of confusion, therefore see thou mine affliction:

16. For it increases: thou huntest me as a fierce Lion: and again thou
show thy self mervellous upon me.

17. Thou renewest thy witnesses against me, and increasest thine indignation
upon me; Changes and war are against me.


The Eight Argument is taken from his great confusion of mind, and his great
trouble which drove him to it, or, from his great trouble, causing great
confusion in him. So the greatness of his trouble is pointed out in the effects
of it, that it filled him with confusion of mind (whereof the former Argument
was an instance, in that he knew not how to judge of Gods dealing with him) and
therefore he desires God to consider of his case, and not deal so with him, v.
15. And for this end, he aggravateth this confusing trouble, by laying it cut
before God, in its parts and sad ingredients.

1. That it was increasing and growing.

2. That God was his party, who, in a fierce and mavelous manner, did again
and again pursue him, v. 16.

3. That his growing afflictions were sent of God, as so many witnesses
pleading against him, and witnessing Gods indignation.

4. That the hosts of his troubles succeeded one another, as new Armies, there
being variety, and that of strong difficulties, which assaulted him, v. 17.

5. All those aggravations of his misery, as they are proper and pressing
Arguments pleading for pity and moderation, in Gods time and way; So Job, in
laying those before God, is not to be too sharply censured, save in so far as
his discouragement, weakness, and present sense, did make his apprehensions of
them sadder, then what God purposed by them; and in so far as, by poring upon
them, he falls into a sit of distemper, v. 18, 19.

Doct. 1. The Lord, by afflictions, may not only fill his people with contempt
and ignominy, and by debasing and making them vile; fill them with shame and
confusion of face; But may also (as a fruit of that) fill them with perplexity
and confusion of mind, and make them void of judgment, light or discerning of
their case, or what they should do: For, says he, I am full (and that to
satiety^, as the word is) of confusion. The word confusion, properly signifies
an eminent degree of shame and blushing, or being vile and contemptible, which
makes men to be ashamed. And so it may point out Job's low and vile condition
to which he is redacted, and his being ashamed of it, and reproached for it.
But seeing, though Job, oft-times, resented, and was reproached for, his vile
condition, yet we find not that he was ashamed of it, and any way disproving
his Piety; the context (wherein it follows upon his uncertainty about Gods
mind in afflicting of him, and is premitted to his suit, that God would see his
affliction) may lead us further to understand it, here, of the effect of such a
degree of shame; that it confounds a man (and so that degree of shame is often
called confusion, Psalm. 44.15. Ezra 9.7. though the word be different in the
Original from what is here) that he is not able distinctly to consider his
case, or, duty. And this effect seems to be that which Job resents here,
whatever was the cause of it in him. And, indeed, it is an humbling rod, to be
smitten and left in the dark; which should warn men to beware of delighting in
confusion, through security; and to beware of too much restlessness, and want
of submission under trouble; for, it seems, Job's complaining wakened his
sorrow, and drew on this confusion.

2. The proper remedy for confusion, is, Prayer, and an appealing to Gods pity,
and it is sanctified, when it tends to that; Thus Job, being full of confusion,
prays, therefore see thou mine affliction.

3. As God will not regard Prayer, but where sense of need instructs our
seriousness in it; so a confused sensible soul, looking to God, may expect that
he he will regard its distress, and that he will read those suits in its case,
which it self cannot express; For, so runs the plea, I am full of confusion,
therefore see thou mine affliction, and what it call^ for at thy hand, which I
cannot utter.

4. Trouble may be growing, when Saints are already under much of it; and as
this is sad, when trouble seems to grow insolent (as the word also signifies)
and swell upon a man, who is already trampled upon, or whose courage and
resolution fails him; So it pleads for pity, and the disadvantage is our
advantage, when we go to God with it: For, it is both Job's complaint, that his
affliction increases, or, lifts up it self, and acts proudly; and it is an
argument of pity, See thou mine affliction, for it increases.

5. As God should be seen to have the chief hand in trouble; so a sight of him
in distress may seem very terrible and affrighting, even to a Child of God;
For, it is Job's complaint, Thou huntest me as a fierce Lion. Though indeed it
be comfortable to faith, in trouble (especially in cleanly trials) to know that
we are in Gods hand; yet sense will readily be affrighted to see him an
adversary, especially in great and sharp troubles, such as Job's were, wherein
his sense suggested that God was armed with cruelty and indignation again him,
as a fierce Lion roaring for his prey. This, as it warns the godly not to judge
of Gods heart by his stroke; So, it points out that, if God may seem so
terrible, even to his own Children, in their afflictions, how much more will he
appear to be so, in his plagues upon the wicked, who do lightly regard him,
when he is a party against them, in his Word?

6. God has an exquisite way of afflicting and pursuing the Sons of men, when
he is pleased to show his power; For, Thou huntest me, says he, so that I can
have no hiding place, wherein I may be sheltered from thee, or get leave to
take my breath. And albeit Job's own mind contributed much to this his disquiet
and restlesness; yet, it is still true, that when God pursues his Children,
they will find no true comfort, nor safe shelter, but in fleeing to him. Nor
need any expect that, when he is to afflict them, they will find any hiding for
their weakness, which he is to discover, or security to any enjoyment, whereof
he is to strip them Thus does he threaten the wicked, that he will overtake and
reach them, notwithstanding all their vain subterfugies, Isa. 30.16, 17. Amos 9
1, 2, 3, 4. See Jer. 16.16.

7. As mavelous and extraordinary afflictions are sad, Lam. 1.12. So even
those who have been looking and preparing for trouble (as Job was, Chap. 3.25,
26.) may yet be surprised and astonished at so much trouble as they may meet
with; For, he laments, Thou show thy self mavelous upon me, by singular
and wonderful afflictions. Only it is to be remembered, that these are sent
upon Saints, to make way for mavelous loving kindness, Psalm. 17.7. and
singular proofs of God love.

8. Gods renewing of singular afflictions, again and again, upon broken and
half dead men, will readily affect and astonish them; For, he regrets that God
did, again, by renewed trials, show himself mavelous upon him, who was
already undone. But God deals thus, That he may refute discouragement, and let
Saints see they may bear yet more, though they be discouraged under lesser
burdens, and may make it another wonder and marvel, that they are supported;
That he may prevent security, wherein we might fall, even under trouble, if we
were not still held going with renewed trials, when those we are under become
any way blunt; And, That, by sending afflictions thus thick and threefold, he
may post us through our trial, that we may come the sooner to a desired issue
of them.

9. Saints faith in Gods favor, and the testimony of their integrity, will not
want sense and other witnesses, to plead against them, and tell them that God
is angry at them; For, there are renewed witnesses against him, seeming to side
with his Friends, and to speak Gods increased indignation. We are not to expect
that our confidence, in a time of trouble, shall be without debate.

10. Rods are very strong proofs for sense against faith, as being very sharp
and pressing, and seeming to speak from God; For, those were the witnesses,
renewed by God against him. And yet faith must stand out, even against those,
as Job does, v. 7. nor ought dispensations to shake it.

11. Gods indignation is sad to bear in it self, and Saints do look upon it,
when they apprehend it to be in their lot, as the saddest ingredient in the
cup; For, says he, Thou increasest thine indignation upon me, as a sad matter
of his regret. Such as are really under that lash, are to be pitied, and who so
groan under it as a sad burden, and are afflicted with it, and with every
degree and increase of it (which is Job's practice here) it is an evidence they
are free of it (as he was) whatever their apprehensions be.

12. Saints, in their trials, may be environed on all hands, and in every
condition, with opposition and difficulties; For, says he, changes and war
(or, an Army) are against me. He was assaulted with a multitude of trials (his
Friends, his outward afflictions and inward trials, etc.) like a numerous Army;
and those not a Rout, but an ordered Army, which assaulted him fiercely, and
could not be overcome but by fighting. And till his trial was perfected, all
his changes were but from one war to another, his troubles coming on, sometime,
in one kind, sometime, in another, sometime (as it were) in parties, sometime,
in a full body. And thus will it also be with other Saints in their trials,
till they be perfected; they may change one trial for another, and, wherever
they turn them, may look for a fresh assault.

Verse. 18. Wherefore then have thou brought me forth out of the womb? Oh that I
had given up the ghost, and no eye had seen me?

19. I should have been as though I had not been, I should have been carried
from the womb to the grave.


The last Argument, pressing his Expostulation and desire, is but a new
aggravation, and the result of all the former aggravations of his troubles;
That they put him so to it, that, through the violence of tentation, he was
displeased at his birth, and wished he had died from the womb, v. 18. Which
last he insists upon, and thinks it had been a notable advantage; for then
there had been no more of him, then if he had never been born; but he had
slipped from the womb into his grave, v. 19 From all which his conclusion may
be inferred; which is, to expostulate with God who did so hardly press him, as
made him to break forth into these wishes.

This is nothing else but his old fit, Chap 3.11, 12. recurring upon him And
albeit somewhat like this that he wishes may be said of the wicked, Eccles.
6.3, 4, 5. yet the complaint and wish is very faulty in him, who was a godly
man. Only, though it prove him to be in a distemper, yet it does not alter his
state; and he is to be pitied (though not justified) in so far as his great
extremity of trouble, and inward tentations, drove him upon it.

Doct. 1. Oppression will make wise men mad, and we need to pray that we be not
led into tentation; For as the strongest have weakness, so they may stagger;
and seldom do they, in trials, come off the Stage, without some blot, or some
halt, to humble them: As Jacob found his in wrestling, and Job here experienced
in his trials, which drove him so far out of course.

2. The people of Gods ill humors in trouble are not easily driven away, but
they will recurre again and again upon them; For, albeit he was often calmed of
his fits, and do speak highly and reverently of God and his dealing; yet now
again he breaks out, as Jonah did after his correction and repentance. Much
evil in us may be quieted that is not mortified, and calmed with diversion,
that is not cured; and much may be mortified which, unless we be watchful, will
revive again.

3. Much poring upon trouble, and upon it only, does, ordinarily, breed much
ill blood; For, his dwelling so much upon thoughts of his trouble, v. 15.16,
17. does give the immediate rise to this complaint. We should beware of
dwelling still only upon thoughts of our distresses, or of looking upon them
through a multiplying glass.

4. In this we may, more particularly, observe some distempers that flow from
passion; As,

1. When men do weary and take ill with their being, and life, because of
troubles only, how much service soever God get by their being alive; or that
they should impatiently desire to die: For, in this Job failed here. Trouble
should, indeed, loose our hearts from time, but not make us impatient, or weary
to be in it. And more sense of sin and subjection to God, will ease us of much
toil about our troubles and foolish desires.

2. When all the mercies men have enjoyed, and sometime esteemed of, are,
under-valued and bitter to sense, because they have not what they would: For,
he sometime esteemed of Gods forming and preserving of him, v. 10, 11, 12.
which now he wishes had never been. Ingratitude is an heinous sin in it self,
and will produce ill humors.

3. When any condition, how empty and poor soever, seems better to men, th^n
what they have, and what God has sweetened with many proofs of his love; For,
he dwells upon his dying from the womb, as a sweet condition, v. 19. which yet
would have deprived him of many proofs of Gods love which he had found in his
life. God is better and kinder to his people, then they, many times, wish to
themselves.

4. When men are so devoted to themselves and their own will, that they will
quarrel all that God does, if it fit not their mind, as if all things were to
be for them, and subservient to their humor; For, he complains that he was not
carried from the womb to his grave, only because it would have prevented his
great trouble, and kept him at great case. Selfishness is an ill toot of much
distemper.

5. When men's passions having, distempered them, they lay the blame upon
Providence; As he urges this as an argument against Gods dealing, that it made
him thus discontent with his life. Whereas if he had been more sober, and borne
his trouble, and the testimony of his Conscience, with more calmness, it would
have prevented those distempers. See Prove. 19.3.

Verse. 20. Are not my days few? cease then, and let me alone, that I may take
comfort a little,

21. Before I go whence I shall not return, even to the land of darkness, and
the shadow of death:

22. A land of darkness, as darkness it self, and of the shadow of death,
without any order, and where the light is as darkness.


In the close (which is the second part) of the Chapter Job begins to calm a
little, and in stead of his former expostulating with God, and his last great
fit of discontent, v. 18, 19. he tacitly submits to Gods will that he is alive,
and in what he has done. And, seeing death in its own colors, he will not
rashly hazard upon it; but craves this only, that he may have some respite and
breathing, and a little ease in his life. For,

1. His days were short, and he was not like to live long; Therefore he would
have some speedy help, that he might draw his breath a little, and have
opportunity to show that he was not the man, that his Friends esteemed him, or
his passion seemed to prove him to be, v. 20.

2. Albeit he believed a Resurrection, and believed never to go to Hell, and
knew what it was to die in Christ, who is the destroyer of death, (for he
speaks to none of those here, nor are his words to be taken in any sense
relating to those) yet death in it self is ugly, being without restitution in
this life, being a dark and d^^^ry estate, without any order of variety, or
vicissitude of light and darkness; (wherein much of this worlds beauty
consists) but whereas light comes in its turn here, it is still darkness there,
even most dark, as darkness it self, as it beseems those shadows of death and
the grave to be. Therefore he would have some change of his condition here,
before he go to that unchangeable state, and some blink of light and comfort,
before he entered into that dark passage and habitation, ver. 21, 22, with 20.

This Doctrine (laying aside his mistake of speedy death by this trouble) may
safely be admitted with little caution, as containing only a desire of that
which God afterward granted to him, though yet it was not necessary he should
be peremptory in such a suit.

It teaches,

1. Saints highest sits of passion will not last, but mercy will reclaim them,
and give them a cool of that Fever; As Job found here.

2. As the Fevers and distempers of Saints may come to a very great height;
So, ordina^^ly, that height or excess of them proves the step next to their
cool; As Job here calms after that ^^^^ly of passion, v. 18, 19. As God pitieth
them in the^^ ^xtremities, so their very rising to an height and extre^^ty
(...) ^^use themselves relent; wherea^ they would have thought less of their
passion^, if they continued mo^^ (...).

3. Humble sober Prayer is a notable (...) and mean in calming distempered
spirits, it is as the shower to allay that boisterous wind; For, Job f^lls a
praying (in stead of quarrelling) when he calms. See Phil. 4.6.

4. As man's life is but uncertain and short; so the thoughts of this should
make men employ their time well, and to be very needy and pressing after God,
and proofs of him; and where it is thus improved, it is an argument of pity and
help: For, so much may be gathered, in general, from Job's arguing, Are not my
days few? cease then, etc. though he mistook in his particular case, that
himself was shortly to die. See Psalm. 39.13. and 89.47.

5. Such as are exercised with much trouble, and have their exercises blessed
to them, will be sober and esteem much of little case; to get leave to breath,
or to comfort and refresh themselves a little, with a sight of God, or of his
grace in them, and not their own passions which they ought to abhor; For, this
is his suit, when calmed, to get comfort a little, not only liberty to breath
from sore trouble, but especially to get his spirit calmed from these passions
which he now abhors in himself. They who are indeed humble, will not despise
small things, Zech. 4, 10. and a victory over their own spirit will be their
greatest deliverance.

6. The least ease, breathing, or comfort, under trouble, cannot be had but of
Gods indulgence; He must cease, and let him alone from vexing of him, before he
take comfort a little. See Joh 34.29.

7. It is the duty of men to acquaint themselves with death beforehand; and,
especially, in times of trouble, they should study it in its true colors: For,
Job in his trouble is so acquainted with it, that he can here very pathetically
describe it. This is Moses study, when God is making havoc of the Rebels in
the Wilderness, Psalm. 90.

8. Death and the Grave, in themselves, and when Christ's victory over them is
not studied, and men are hurried away to them in a tempest of trouble, are very
terrible, and an ugly sight; as bringing an irreparable loss, as to any
restitution in this life, and being so dark and disconsolate an estate, that
the very common favor of a vicissitude of day and night, light and darkness,
is a mercy, when compared with it: For, so does Job describe that estate here,
as it may appear to an afflicted Saint, (as he was) or to one at a distance
from God; much more may it appear so to men in an unrenewed state or nature.
And, indeed death is, in it self, a curse, and if any find a beauty in it, or
get a sweeter sight of it, it is by the special gift of God. And withal, it
cuts the thread of our life, upon which all our temporal enjoyments and
contentments do hinge, and to deprives us of them irrecoverably and without
hope of restitution (which other st^^kes do not) and leaves us in an
unchangeable estate. And therefore if men have not some cordial for it, and
somewhat provided which it cannot reach, it is no wonder if it affright them.

9. The consideration of the ugliness of death, and the grave, does call upon
all to provide somewhat before they lie down in that cold bed, wherein they
will continue so long, and somewhat that may light them through that dark
passage; and especially to be careful that they be not deserted, or distempered
by then passions, when they are to grapple with death: For, so does Job desire,
that he may take comfort a little, before he go, etc. Whatever thoughts men may
have of death, yet none do ^ightly mind it, but such as are thus employed.
Only, we must take this caution along, That if God see it fit to suffer our Sun
to go down in a cloud, and send us out of the world in a violent tempest, we
ought to submit, and reckon that our Sun is not out of the Firmament, though it
be over-clouded. For this was one of Job's mistakes, if he did reckon it as
absolutely necessary that he must have a breathing, and some comfort, before he
die.

CHAP. XI.
Job having answered to the Discourses of two of his Friends, Zophar, the third
of them, does now set upon him. And albeit he might have had much to say
against his distempers and fits of passion, for which Elihu and God himself do
condemn him; yet he chooses rather to fall in with his Friends opinion, and
take their way of condemning Job. Which he prosecuteth with very bitter and
sharp language, though he take other Arguments to prove their common
Conclusion, that Job was neither sound in judgment nor in practice.

In the Chapter we have, 1. A Preface, wherein he does, in general, condemn Job
and his Discourses, and points out the necessity he conceived there was of
replying to what he had said, v. 1, 2, 3. 2. A more express endeavor to refute
his Principles and Assertions. For whereas Job had asserted his own soundness
of judgment, and his purity in conversation, v. 4. He wishes that God would
discover the mysteries of wisdom to him, which would let him see more of his
own ill deservings, v. 5* 6. And insists to commend the wisdom of God, v. 7, 8,
9. his Irresistibleness, v. 10. and his Holiness and Justice, accompanying his
Wisdom and Knowledge, v. 11. giving a check to brutish man's proud folly, who
dare presume to compete with God in the point of wisdom, v. 12. 3. He seasons
this harsh usage with an Exhortation to repent and turn to God, v. 13, 14.
subjoyning ample ground of encouragement, if he obeyed, v. 15, -- 19. and of
terror if he continued obstinate, v. 20.

Verse. 1. Then answered Zophar the Naamathite, and said,

2. Should not the multitude of words be answered? and should a man full of
talk be justified?

3. Should thy lies make men hold their peace? and when thou mockest, shall no
man make thee ashamed?


IN this Preface Zophar passes a general censure upon all Job's Discourses;
accusing him of much idle talk, as if he were a man of lips, (or, all made of
lips) as it is in the Original; of being a liar, or, a contriver of witty
devices, to make his cause seem plausible and probable; and of mocking in his
discourses, or, being one who contemned all admonitions, and those who would
reprove him, and who spoke in his own defense as if he would insult, both over
God, who refuted him by afflictions, and over men, who advised him for his own
good. Upon this he infers, that as all those would not prove his cause good,
but rather make it worse; so it could not hinder men to answer and refute him:
lest they should be accessory to his guilt in his idle empty discourses, and
should wrong belyed truth, and fail in their duty, in not laboring to bear
down his proud and scornful insolency. This he propounds to Job himself, by way
of question, both to testify his vehement detestation of these supposed faults
in Job, and to show that he thought his duty to reply was so evidently
necessary, that Job himself might see it.

As for this Discourse, it is in Thesi, or taken abstractly and in the general,
true and sound, and will afford as useful Instructions, But in the application
of it to Job and his Discourses, there is a double fault.

1. That he erred in his judgment concerning Job. For whatever fault was in his
discourses, for which the Lord and Elihu do reprehend him (and particularly he
is reprehended for scorning, Chap. 34.7. either in the preceding, or some
following Discourse) yet in what Zophar and his other Friends do reprehend, he
was right and they wrong. And particularly, whatever faults are to be
reprehended in Job's way of discourse (which are neither few nor light, as may
be gathered from the remarks upon them) yet it was great want of charity to
count him a babbler, who (though he spoke more then they, yet) fought only to
lay out his distress for his own ease, and whose grief was above expression,
Chap. 6.3. Or, to account him a liar, who had resolved the contrary, Chap.
6.28. and who, whatever untruths he asserted in justifying his passionate
desire of death, and his other arguings with God; yet, spoke truth in the
controversy betwixt him and his Friends. Nor was it just he should account him
a mocker, who not only was now so afflicted, that he is thinking only on death;
but did not insolently reject any sound counsel of theirs; and whatever height
of spirit appeared in his managing of his just cause, yet none of those prove
him wicked, which is the conclusion his Friends do infer against him.

2. Whatever might have been justly charged upon Job's discourses, yet it was
Zophar's fault to reprove him so hotly and bitterly, without any charity,
meekness or moderation.

So this Doctrine, considered together with the misapplication thereof,
Teaches,

1. Gods people, when they are put in the furnace, must expect not to have soon
done with it; but that one trial will follow another, and that it will be the
longer the hotter: For, so Job, after he has refuted two of his friends, is
assaulted by a third, more b^^tel and sharp then they.

2. It is one sharp trial of Saints to lie under misconstructions, and
mistakes; and never to be seen in their true colors, but through the
Perspective of Prejudices and Passion, and that even by good men: so that
either untruths are charged upon them, or these weaknesses, which they are
driven upon in extremities, are misconstructed. For such is Job's lot from his
Friends. See Psalm. 56.5. and 69.10. This should teach men to guard against
taking of prejudices; and even godly men should beware of judging others who
are afflicted and tempted, when themselves have no experience of their case.
Likewise, it warns men not to dote or test upon the approbation of others, even
of the best; for that will fail them if they lean to it, and does readily fail
them when they have most to do.

3. The heat of contention does very soon distemper men; For, this makes Zophar
(though he came to comfort Job) not only to misconstruct him, but rail and
reflect upon him. Contention should neither be needlessly starred, nor
entertained when it is begun; for, it is a fruit of pride, which will break
forth in insolency.

But if we leave the misapplication, and look upon this Doctrine abstractly,
and in general, we will find useful Instructions in it. As,

1. Men use to take many strange-ways to defend an untruth and wrong cause; so
Zophar's allegiance imports, in general. One of their great engines, is, to
make use of a multitude of words, as if they were all made of lips and talk.
They will say so much as might weary any to hear it, And will study to bear
down their opposites with clamours, and other assiduous activity. And because
this is not enough, but would soon be discovered, if it were only empty talk;
therefore (as untruth gets not always men of the worst parts to own it) they
will guild over their cause, and their discourses about it, with lies, and
specious pretexts and fine devices, to make them appear plausible, that so men
may be taken with them. And, to fortify all those their devices, they will
mock, or contemn, and affront and vilify all those that oppose them, and
discover the cheat. These are some of the pranks of men embarked in an ill
cause, which should excite others to be much more active for the truth.

2. All those endeavors of men will not avail to make an untruth prove true;
They are only the washing of a Blakmore, who will never be white: For, so does
Zophar here, also, insinuate. Let men act what part they please, yet truth is
still one thing, and busked-up discourses and cunning conveyances are another.
And albeit there be many simple fools, who think they are rightest who speak
most, who measure and judge of men by their tongues, and are ready to take
Counters for Gold, and Impudence for Confidence; yet Wisdom will be justified
of her Children, and wise discerners will judge otherwise.

3 These sinistrous courses do not only no^ assoil an Error, but will add to
his sin who thus labors to justify it; For, this question, Should a man full
of talk be justified? imports that it shall not justify, but condemn him. For,
if it be true, in general, that in the multitude of words there wants not sin,
Prove. 10.19. How much more must it be true in this case? Yea, lying and
insolency in maintaining an untruth does justly meet with shame and ignominy
atlast (as Zophar insinuates) if not repented of.

4. It is the duty of the friends of Truth not to abandon it, but to stand to
the defense thereof, whatever be the strenuous and witty endeavors of these
who oppose; For, so does Zophar reckon, that the multitude of words should be
answered, and lies should not make men hold their peace, etc. Even a fool
should be answered in his folly, though not according to it, Prove. 26.4, 5.
Truth is to be striven and contended for, in opposition to Error, Phil. 1.27.
Jude v. 3. and even mocked and despised Truth must not be abandoned. And here
the Text furnishes us with Arguments to press this,

1. That it is an accession to men's guilt, and a justifying of them, if we hear
them babble, and do not answer.

2. That our obligation to Truth should make us bold, and not hold our peace,
when lies would bear it down.

3. That it is a neglect of duty and kindness to men, not to make them ashamed,
and bear them down, when they are insolent and mockers. The Text does also
insinuate means to help us to set about this duty.

1. That we be not simple, or taken with shows and fair pretenses and
discourses; as Zophar declares he was not.

2. That we love Truth well, as our best friend, to be preferred to all other
friends; As Zophar will be for it, and against a supposed lie, even in the
mouth of his dear friend Job.

3. That we be self-denyed, that so the stream of insolent opposition may not
deterr nor drive us from our duty to God, to Truth, and to the souls of others
seduced, or seducers; For, Zophar, when he supposes Job not only to be in an
error, but an insolent mocker, will not be deterred from making him ashamed.

Verse. 4. For thou have said, My doctrine is pure, and I am clean in thine
eyes.
In the second part of the Chapter we have a more particular and express
endeavor to refute what Job had said. And, in the first place (in this v.) he
states the question, and gathers from Job's former discourses a Thesis, or,
proposition, which he intends to refute. Namely; That Job had asserted that
himself was sound and orthodox in his judgment, particularly, in asserting that
God did aflict both good and bad men as it pleased him (which it seems Zophar
gathered from Chap. 6. -- 10. and 9.22.) And that he was upright in Gods sight,
though afflicted; which it seems he gathered from Chap 10.7. Now in this, as
Zophar does Job right, in clear stating of the controversy, and charging
nothing upon him but what might be gathered from his discourse; So this sum of
Job's discourse is no untruth, nor chargeable with any fault, except his
maintaining of it too stiffely before God. And Zophar erred in challenging this
as an untruth, and looking on Job not as clean, but as a wicked man; as appears
from the refutation, and especially from his counsel to Job, to repent of his
wickedness, ver. 13, 14. It may be, also, Zophar erred further, in taking Job's
expression of his own cleanness in this sense (as it appears from the
refutation he did) that Job meant that he was sinless, Which he never intended
to assert; though his expressions were not cautious nor sober enough.

Hence Learn,

1. A completely good man is he who is both found in point of Doctrine and
Religion, and upright in his Conversation, whose Doctrine is pure, and who is
clean in his Conversation. Ill Principles are a great defect (whatever men's
Conversation be) and will draw on loose practices; And such as walk loosly
ought not to please themselves with their soundness in their Religion, but
ought rather to search out and abandon those bad Principles, from which their
loose walking does flow.

2. Uprightness and purity of life is truly, and only, such, when it is so in
Gods sight; For, so did Job judge that he was a blameless man, when he was
clean in Gods eyes. Not spotless, but sincre, Not clean, so as to boast of it
before God, but so as to abide his trial in a Mediator. Without this, neither
our own nor others approbation should satisfy us 1. Cor. 4.4. 2. Cor. 10.18.
And being clean in his eyes, or having his approbation, we ought not much to
regard misconstructions from men. Psalm. 35.11, 12, 13. Job 16.20.

3. Men, even good men, may be so far blinded; as to judge Truth to be Error;
either simply mistaking the one for the other, or misconstructing men's true
expressions and charging more upon their speeches then they meant by them: For,
so does Zophar quarrel, and intend to refute, this true assertion of Job: In
the first branch thereof, condemning his pure Doctrine as unsound; and in the
second, relating to his Conversation and purity of life, reckoning it unsound
that he, who was so afflicted, should reckon himself a regenerate and purified
man; or, at least, judging him an insolent liar, in asserting that he was
without sin. This should warn godly and Orthodox men to be guarded against such
exercises as these.

4. As men ought not to quit the testimony of their integrity; so they ought to
speak very soberly and humbly of it before God: Not only that they may avoid
guilt and sin, which they contract by pride and insobriety, but that they may
also prevent the misconstructions of others. For, herein Job failed (as God
afterward marketh) and by his way of managing his good cause, in bitter
Complaints and Expostulations with God, gave some occasion of this challenge
and misconstruction, as if he had thought and spoken too highly of his own
purity.

Verse. 5. But, O that God would speak, and open his lips against thee:

6. And that he would show thee the secrets of wisdom, that they are double to
that which is! know therefore that God exacteth of thee less then thine
iniquity deserves.


In the second place, Zophar (in these verses) subjoyns his intended Refutation
of this Assertion of Job: wherein (for the more distinct understanding of the
words) we are to consider,

First, The way he takes to refute Job. Which (in stead of arguing with him
himself) is, by wishing and desiring that God would take him in hand, to
dispute with him (according to his own desire, Chap. 9.34, 35.) and refute and
convince him, v. 5. He speaks of God in terms taken from among men, and wishes
that God would not only speak, or, make him know his mind, (which might be done
by inward Inspiration;) but that he would open his lips against him, or speak
with an audible voice to him, and convince him in the hearing of all of them.
Consider,

Secondly, That whereby he expects God could convince him (and wishes he could
do it) is, by showing him the secrets of wisdom that they are double to that
which is, v. 6. -- For understanding whereof, we are to remark,

1. This wisdom, the secrets whereof he desires may be showed, is, the wisdom
and knowledge of God; which though it be, in it self, a great depth, and be
unsearchable in his Providence and Dispensations in the world, Romans 11.33. and
is commended as such in general, v. 7, 8, 9. to confirm his particular
conclusion intended here; yet, in this place it is only to be understood of his
secret or infinite wisdom in knowing of men, and what their faults are, as may
be gathered from the Inference in the end of the verse. And what is more
expressly asserted, v. 11.

2. These secrets of wisdom are said to be double to that which is; which is
not to be understood of any exact Proportion, as if they were only double, and
no more, to it; but, generally, the meaning is, that those secrets of wisdom
are much more then that which is, so Isa. 40.2.

3. But the great obscurity in these words is occasioned by the word rendered
here, that which is. It signifies sound wisdom, a law, and that which has an
essence, or being, and really exists, or is, as here. All those agree, and come
to one purpose here, That the secrets of Gods wisdom, in knowing man and his
faults, according to the strict rule of the spiritual law (which was then
imprinted in their hearts, and otherwise revealed to them, though not as yet
written) were double, or, much more then any thing man can know of himself, or
then what exists in man's soundest judgment and knowledge of himself, or he can
see and take up in that law: And that therefore God knew that of man which
deserves double to any trouble that is, or exists and lies upon him. This last
clearly follows upon the former, considering the demerit of sin, and does
suit well with his Inference (which is the Third thing to be considered, and a
Key to open the former words) v. -- 6. wherein he would have Job know and
consider that (notwithstanding all the afflictions had befaln him, yet) God did
exact less then his iniquity deserved, or, God (so to say) forgets of his
iniquity, and does not remember all of it, when he chastises him; Or, he lends
out of his iniquity (as the word will also bear) upon interest, or to a day,
when he afflicts him; that is, he o^eth God more then he has yet paid, and is
obliged, by reason of his sin, to greater punishments then he yet f^lt. Thus
the meaning of this whole purpose, in short, is, That if God would interpose to
debate this cause with Job, and let him know how spiritual the Law is, how much
he knows of man, according to that Law, above what man knows of himself,
and how much man sins according to the sentence of that Law, deserve, above
what is inflicted upon him in this life; Job would not have spoken so much as
he did of his own purity, but would have looked upon his sufferings as far
short of his deservings.

This is sound General Doctrine; That Gods Law is most spiritual and perfect;
That his Wisdom and Knowledge of Man is above what he can know of himself; That
man's sins transcends his own knowledge, and even godlies men's deservings are
above their saddest calamities. But all this proves nothing against Job, who
(whatever his failings were in the heat of the debate) never pleaded perfection
according to the strict rigor of the Law, nor sinlesness; but only that he was
sincere according to the tenor and condescendance of the Covenant of Grace. Nor
did he deny his own ill deservings; but only pleaded that he was not wicked,
notwithstanding his afflictions; and his afflictions, being very sharp, he
resented that they should have been inflicted upon him a reconciled man, as if
God were about to destroy and cut him off in anger.

In this purpose, considered abstractly and in general, we may observe those
sounds Truths and Instructions.

1. Errors are such bewitching and intangling evils, that whatever be men's
duty to oppose them, yet the rooting out thereof is above their reach:
Therefore does Zophar quit this task, of refuting Job's supposed Errors, as
too hard for him, and prays that God will interpose in it. Man is neither
able to hold out clear grounds of light for every thing he knows and
believes to be a truth; nor (though he had clear light) is he able to make it
convincing to others; nor (though his light were convincing, as to that point
of Truth) is he able to search out and discover all these idols and lusts which
imbarque men in ways of Error, and against Truth: And though he could discover
all these, yet he is not able to overawe man, nor put him from his pride,
which will not suffer him to be convinced, or to retract what he is engaged in,
for another man. All this lets us see what a Tyrant E^^our is, when men once
give up themselves slaves to it; And how much need there is of humble
self-denial, and humble dependence on God, in those who would effectually
oppose it, Job 32.13. 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. 2 Timothy 2.25, 26.

2. God is able to convince and argue a man out of his Errors, were he,
otherwise, never so stiff and obstinate in them; For, he puts it upon God to
speak and open his lips against him, as knowing he could effectually convince.
He can hold out light clearly, and make it convincing; He can turn men's idols
and lusts, which do engage them, into d^ttays which their Consciences cannot
refuse; and he can cause his terror drive men from their Errors. This shows
that matters are not hopeless, in times when Error prevails, though men's
abilities and diligence prove ineffectual: And it warns these who will not be
convinced of their Errors by others, to beware of making God their party.

3. The wisdom of the Lord is a secret, a great and unsearchable depth, and his
footsteps in his proceedings are not easily traced; For, there are the secrets
of wisdom. See Psalm. 147.5. This calls for sobriety in our inquiries about the
counsels of God, and that we avoid presumption and conceit of our knowledge and
wisdom.

4. God himself is the only discoverer of his deep counsels to men, in so far
as is for their good and behoof; For, He must show the secrets of wisdom. He
must not only give us his Word, whereby we may understand so much as is needful
of his working, but must open our eyes to take up what is revealed there, Psalm.
119.18. And therefore we must not go about this search in our own strength.

5. It is, in particular, one secret of the wisdom of God, that he knows much
more of us then we can know of our selves; For, in this the secrets of wisdom
are double, according to the Law, to that which consists in our own soundest
judgment and knowledge, as has been explained. His Law is spiritual, Romans
7.14. And the best sight of our selves cannot bring us up to know the truth of
our selves, according to the sentence of the Law, beside that we are,
oft-times, blinded with tentation, desertions, lusts, self-love, etc. and so
cannot discern what, otherwise, might be obvious enough unto us. This tells us,
that, in our best estate within time, we should be far from any conceit of
perfection, 1 Cor. 4.4. And that we should rather (beside our laying to heart
our known failings) be bewailing our hid and secret Errors which we cannot
comprehend, Psalm. 19.12.

6 God can do no wrong in afflicting the most righteous man. For (beside that
God may, by reason of his absolute Dominion, afflict the most innocent) every
son of Adam, though regenerate, has sin in this life, which deserves all his
afflictions, and much more, according to the rule of strict justice, Ezra 9.13.
And therefore, in stead of quarrelling what God does, when he afflicts him, he
is bound to admire that God does not prosecute him with greater severity,
considering his deserving, Lam. 3.22. Therefore, says he, Know therefore that
God exacteth of thee less then thine iniquity deserves.

Besides these Truths, Zophar's mistakes in this way of Re^utation, are useful
to be observed. And,

1. He is earnest in his wishes that God would appear in this cause, expecting
certainly that God would approve of his sentence and opinion; And yet he was
deceived; for God condemned him, among the rest, when he determined in the
Controversy. It teaches, That even godly men should be sober and cautious in
their appealing to God in the matter of their opinions; And should take heed
that their self-love do not blind them, and cause them dream of Gods approving
of that which indeed he abhors. So also tentation may represent God as a p^^ty
(as Zophar suggests to Job here) when he is none.

2. He does here assault Job by laying before him such found Truths (of Gods
knowledge of man, man's ill deservings, etc.) which, had they been as pertinent
as they are true in themselves, the debate had been at an end; yet Job is not
convinced by them, as concluding nothing against him, to prove him wicked. It
teaches, That a sincere man, who has fled to Christ for refuge, may, in his
affliction, look upon, and acknowledge the Omniscience of God, the perfection
of his Law, his Justice in afflicting, the desert of sin, and his own impurity,
and yet all those not discourage him, nor prove him wicked because afflicted.
For,

1. Albeit all that be true; yet such a man has fled to Christ, in whom he is
hid and his sins covered: And so God deals not with him according to all these
faults, which he, by his Omniscience, finds in him; nor according to strict
Justice, or, the rigor of the Law (which are satisfied in Christ) but
according to the tenor of the Covenant of Grace.

2. Albeit there be sin in godly men, beyond what they know of themselves; yet
all their afflictions are not chastisements for sin, but some are sent only for
the trial of their faith, patience, and other graces.

3. Albeit God be pursuing sin in his Saints, by afflictions, and might pursue
them yet more; yet it follows not that they are wicked: For, he pursued
David, for his further humiliation, and for the vindication of his own glory,
whom yet he had pardoned. 2 Samuel 12.9. -- 14. Thus ought we to join the Law and
the Gospel, acknowledging the just sentence of the Law, and yet having recourse
to Christ in the Gospel, to be secured against the execution thereof.
Otherwise, such as make not use of Christ, must be at the poor shift, to turn
Atheists, Psalm. 14.1, 2. to pervert the sense of the spritual Law, and mince
their own sins, to procure to themselves security and stupidity, in stead of
true peace.

Verse. 7. Can thou by searching find out God? can thou find out the
Almighty unto perfection?

8. It is as high as heaven, what can thou do? deeper then hell, what can
thou know?

9. The measure thereof is longer then the earth, and broader then the sea.


In the third place, that he may inculcate this Doctrine, of the Wisdom and
Justice of God, upon Job, he subjoyns (to v. 12.) several amplifications and
considerations concerning God and his Attributes. And,

First, (in these verses) he commends the unsearchable wisdom of God; showing
that although he had wished God might show Job so much of it as might convince
him that God knew him better then he knew himself; Yet, it is indeed
incomprehensible, nor is man capable to find it out by any search of his. For
he could sooner scale Heaven, and dive to Hell, or the depths of the Earth, and
search through, and measure, all the Earth and Sea, (which yet are an
impossible task for man) then comprehend this Wisdom, which infinitely
surmounts all those. Albeit the Text speaks only of searching to find out God,
and the Almighty; And it is true, that his Nature and every one of his
Attributes are unsearchable; Yet, the Context, and what he has spoken before,
of the secrets of Wisdom, v. 6. -- lead us to understand it, chiefly, of the
Wisdom of God, the secrets whereof cannot be dived into by men, nor can they
ascend into the heights thereof, nor fathom it, as being Infinite and
Incomprehensible. The Original Text favors this Interpretation; for not only
may, v. 7. be rendered (as diverse also do read it) Can thou find out the
searchings of God? or his Wisdom whereby (speaking after the manner of men) he
searches and knows all things; But in the rest of the verses, that which he
says cannot be comprehended of God, is expressed by words in the Feminine
Gender, which have a reference to that Attribute of Wisdom, which is expressed
by a word of the same Gender, v. 6. It is further to be marked (as was also
hinted, v. 6) that albeit Zophar do only speak of the secrets of Gods Wisdom (
v. 6.) in that one particular of knowing man and his faults; Yet, here he
commends his Wisdom, in general, as it shines in all his counsels and
purposes, his Providence and proceedings in the world; in all which it is
unsearchable and incomprehensible, and therefore must be so also in that
particular upon which he insists.

Were this Doctrine, concerning the unsearchable Wisdom of God, made use of by
Zophar only to check Job for thinking that either he behoved to see such causes
of Gods dispensations toward him as he thought reasonable, or, otherwise, he
had just cause to challenge and complain of Gods proceedings; there would be no
cause to censure him for any thing here spoken. Only, Job's miscarriage in that
could prove no more but that he was in a fit of passion, and under the power of
tentation; And, therefore, could not conclude against his state, that he was
wicked. Or, were this Doctrine only made use of to convince Job that God saw
more in him, then he could discern in himself; there were no cause to quarrel
it, as has been hinted on v. 6. See 1 Job. 3.20. Jer. 17.9, 10. But when it is
made use of to prove that God knew him to be wicked, and plagued him as such
for his iniquity, or sins which use to reign in the unregenerate (as may be
gathered from v. 6. and from his counsel, v. 13, 14.) this cannot be granted.
For, the matter of our state is none of those depths which are hid up in the
unsearchable wisdom of God, but is revealed from the Word for our comfort, Romans
5.1, 2. and 8.15, 16.

From all this Learn,

1. The Counsels and Wisdom of God are deep and unsearchable; For, so is here
held out: And men's Consciences may tell them that they are so; Therefore he
poseth Job with it, by way of question, to show that his Conscience cannot deny
it, See Romans 11.33. This should teach us to be sober in our thoughts of our
knowledge, 1 Cor. 8.2. especially, in this particular; wherein, though we may
know somewhat, yet, we should be sensible of our shortcoming, and that we are
far from finding it out to perfection. See Job 26.14. and 42.4, 5. We should
also be sober in prying into Gods deep counsels, in his ordering the affairs of
the World; and whatever we believe we know of them, yet, we should beware of
laying weight upon our own searching, and should lean only to Divine
Revelation. Likewise, we should adore (and not quarrel) God in his Providence,
when we cannot see through the wisdom that is in them; blessing him that we are
allowed to believe that deep and unsearchable Wisdom is employed about us and
our affairs.

2. As Gods Al-sufficiency and Infinite fullness proves his Wisdom, in
particular, to be Infinite; so he is Almighty, to crush all those who
obstinately oppose him, And all those who dare to pry too curiously and
presumptuously into his deep Counsels; Therefore gets he the Name of Almighty,
or, Alsufficient, here; To demonstrate that it is no wonder if such a One be
deep in his wisdom and counsels, And to deter Job from his supposed opposition
to God, and his presumption in judging of his counsels.

3. All that large vastness that is in the creatures, for height and depth,
length and breadth, is short of the infinite depth that is in the wisdom of
God; For, so is here held out, that the heights of Heaven, the depth of Hell,
the length of the Earth, and breadth of the Sea, are nothing to this wisdom.
See Chap. 28. throughout.

4. Man's inability to reach the knowledge of the perfection of the creatures,
and to travel through them all for that effect; and his ignorance of things
near and about him (much more of things far from him) may humble him for his
conceit of his knowledge of the deep counsels of God, and his presumptuous
essays to p^ie into them: For, if man cannot get up to the height of Heaven,
nor dig down to Hell, etc. How much less can he reach this? He can do nothing,
nor undertake any thing whereby to find it out, nor can he know it, if he
should essay it.

5. It is man's great mercy, that his being in a state of grace is not hid up in
a mystery, but may be known from the Word, by the help of the Spirit, 1 Cor.
2.12. And so the thoughts of the Infinite Wisdom of God needs not drive a godly
man from any assurance of this; nor ought he suffer any thoughts of the
perfections of God to discourage him in it; For, this was Zophar's mistake,
that the Infinite Wisdom of God was enough to prove Job to be wicked; which
failing to be true, his whole Argument prove^ naught. To which add,

6. If there be such a depth here, from the search whereof he would deter Job,
and from the consideration whereof he would have Job concluding that he was not
righteous; How comes it that he himself is so bold, and so little sober in
judging of Job's state, merely because God, who is infinitely wise, had
afflicted him? Might it not as safely be concluded, that Gods Infinite Wisdom
might see causes wherefore to afflict Job, though righteous, which none of them
could comprehend? But self-love is so blind* that it will see a mote in
another eye, and pass over a beam in a man's own eye; and pre judged Opinions
shut men's eyes against most obvious and clear Truths.

Verse. 10. If he cut off, and shut up, or gather together, then who can hinder
him?
The second amplification of this Doctrine, is, That God is unsearchably wise,
to know what man is, better then he knows himself; so he is absolute and
irresistile to do what he pleases against men, upon his knowledge of them. The
terms here seem to be borrowed from Reapers, who cut down the Corn, then bind
it, and gather it together in heaps; And the meaning is, If God shall pass
through among men, or, change his dealing toward them (for the first word,
rendered, cut off, will also imply these two) and cut them off, or shut them up
under the power of destruction, yea, and gather many of them together to the
Congregation of the dead, (as he did Job's family) yet none could quarrel, or
resist and impede him, by law or force. Whence Zophar would infer (for all this
discourse tends to prove that Job needed to repent of his wickedness, and not
pretend to any purity, v. 4. with 13.) that, as Job was wicked, whom God thus
plague upon his knowing of him; So, it was needless to attempt to resist God in
this; and (which further strengthens the former proofs) his resisting all he
could, by complaining and quarrelling, was a further evidence of his wickedness.

This amplification does contain found Doctrine, concerning Gods absolute and
irresistible power; and does Teach,

1. Men, by reason of sin, are obnoxious to miseries and calamities; to be cut
off, and shut up, etc.

2. Albeit God, in his indulgence and long-suffering, be pleased, oft-times, to
forbear and spare the sons of men; yet, he is not obliged still to do so; For,
he may change his way of procedure with men, as the word, rendered, to cut off,
also signifies.

3. When God is pleased to change his way of procedure, he is able, without any
difficulty, to reach his creature with what stroke he pleases; For, he can cut
off, and that, passing by, as the word also signifies.

4. As there is no escaping of Gods stroke, nor deliverance to be had from it,
but of his own indulgence; so he does man no wrong, if he cut him off, and
conclude him, irrecoverably, under the power of destruction; For he can cut off
and shut up, so that man cannot rid himself out of his hand.

5. God can no less easily reach many of the sons of men, than he can reach a
few, or any one of them; For, he can gather together, or, make an Assembly of
them (as the word imports) in the Congregation of the dead. See Ezekiel. 32.17. --
32. This shows that God can reach a man, or never so many men, and bring them
down.

6. As God has a Supreme Hand in afflictions, who is to be seen in them, and
without whom they could not come, Deuteronomy. 32.30. Amos 3.6. (For, he cuts off and
shuts up, etc.) So he is irresistible and uncontrollable in his proceeding
therein; And none can hinder or challenge him: For, says he, Who can hinder,
or, turn him away? So that opposition is but lost labor, and the strengthening
of our own bonds.

Yet it is, also, to be remarked, that Zophar, in applying this Doctrine to
Job's case, is in a double mistake.

First, In his making use of this Doctrine to prove Job wicked, because
afflicted by this Sovereign Lord, who knew him better then he knew himself:
For, God, being sovereign and absolute, does indeed, always right in what he
does; and therefore ought not to be quarrelled; but does not always afflict men
upon the account of sin and wickedness, but for other wise ends. And so, his
urging of this as Job's lot, to prove him wicked, and his mistake in it
(pressing this his lot, as a fruit of Gods knowing of his sinfulness, v. 6. and
an evidence that he could not be pure and clean, v. 4. but behoved to begin to
seek God, v. 13, 14.) Teaches,

1. God may do that, as to the outward dispensation, to a godly man, which is
most like the lot that befalls the wicked; For, it was Zophar's error to judge
otherwise of Job, than as of a godly man; who, together with his family, was so
dealt with as uses to befall the wicked. Thus the Lord is pleased to dispense,
That we may esteem of the Word, whereby we are infallibly informed concerning
Gods thoughts of men, whatever their lot be; That godly men may be brought to
know the advantage of inward peace of Conscience, which will support under
these tempestuous blasts, Romans 8.35, etc. And, To warn all men, not to take
their evidences of Gods love toward them, only by his dispensations in the
things of time.

2. Neither the strangest of dispensations, nor the Sovereignty, Power, and
Righteousness of God in afflicting, do necessarily prove those who are
afflicted to be wicked; as Zophar here argues against Job. For,

1. That God is Sovereign and absolute in his proceeding, will rather prove
that he may afflict without looking to any procuring cause in us (as he may
afflict the most innocent) then lead us to see that our wickedness is,
necessarily, the cause of all our afflictions, and a quarrel, which he is
pursuing by them. Thus tentations, which seem most terrible, may, if well
searched into, be found to have somewhat in them for the encouragement of
Saints; as Zophar's argument might with more advantage be turned against
himself.

2. Albeit Gods Power be irresistible and uncontrollable, as to the inflicting
or keeping on of an outward affliction; Yet God makes no use of that power to
drive men from their right, and from the testimony of their Consciences. There
can, indeed, be no resistance made by men, as to preventing or removing of the
affliction; nor ought there to be any resisting, by way of quarrelling of the
affliction, or of God the Author of it: Yet, in all this, there is no force
used, nor power put forth, to pluck away men's confidence when afflicted, except
what is done by the power of tentation.

Secondly, He mistakes also, in reflecting upon Job's complaints, as proving
him wicked; because thereby he would (as he was able, or had power) hinder and
oppose Gods proceeding against him: For, though it was Job's fault thus to
complain: yet, it did prove only his weakness, not his wickedness.

It Teaches,

1. Murmuring and fretting, under the hand of an absolute God, are not
beseeming: For, in so far his reflection is just. See Lev. 10.3. 1 Samuel 3.18.
Psalm. 39.9. And especially those do not beseem godly men, so much the rather as
they have the testimony of their Consciences in the matter of their integrity;
which therefore they ought to cherish, that they may not suspect the love of
God because of afflictions, and so they will not quarrel.

2. To prevent the snares into which self-love may draw men, they ought to
study the folly of opposition or resisting of God, in the experiences of
others; Therefore, whatever reflection Zophar intend here, yet, he propounds
the matter in general; Who can hinder him? that Job, from the experience of
others, may learn to beware.

3. Godly men ought not be judged by their fits of passion in an hour of
tentation; which, though they are not to be approved, yet, do not alter their
state; For, herein Zophar wronged Job, judging of his state by his passionate
fits of complaining.

Verse. 11. For he knows vain men: he sees wickedness also, will he not then
consider it?
The last amplification of this Doctrine, and a confirmation of the former (as
appears by the particle, For,) is, That God knowing more of man's sinfulness
then he knows of himself, does therefore (upon his knowledge) put forth his
absolute and irresistible power to punish him, because his Knowledge is
accompanied with Justice, Holiness, and Purity, which cannot away with sin. For
(says Zophar) seeing God sees and knows the vanity and wickedness of man,
which, possibly, man himself or others see not, it is not to be expected but so
holy and just a God ( Hab. 1.13. Psalm. 5.4, 5.) will consider it, to punish it.
This is sound General Doctrine, to be admitted with little caution, though ill
applied to Job's case.

It teaches,

1. Many attributes of God do shine, and ought to be seen and observed, in his
works in the world: For, beside his wisdom and irresistible power, formerly
commended, here his Holiness and Justice (which consider sin, to punish it) are
also commended.

2. Man, both in his dispositions and actions, is naught before God, by nature:
For, he is both vain, and has wickedness; which may be thus distinguished; Man
is vain and sinful in his condition and state by nature, and wicked, in his
actions; vain in his hypocrisy, and wicked, in his prophanity. Those two
Characters take up the most of men in the world: And we should not be satisfied
because we want gross wickedness, if yet we be plagued with this vanity.

3. More particularly, Man is vain by nature; his best perfections by nature
are but vanity and naught before God, and as to attaining happiness thereby. He
is addicted to vain and empty shows, and, though he be a frail and mortal
creature (as his name here imports) yet, he vainly glories in those, as if he
were somewhat, and as if they added to his excellency and worth; He is rash and
inconsiderate, vain, and not solid, in his judgment, little considering what he
does, or whether his course tends, so it please his present humor and fancy;
And, though man little consider all this, yet the vanity of his outward
condition (being a miserable mortal creature) declares what he is. All this
does testify how little cause man has to glory in himself.

4. Man is also wicked; For, he supposes both those to be in Job, whom he
looks upon as a grossly wicked man, or, at the best, an hypocrite. As man's
inward vain disposition is wicked in it self; so it produces wicked effects:
His very vain hypocrisy (such as he suspected to be in Job) is wickedness; and
that so much the more abominable, as he would cover his naughtiness with that
vail: And, his hypocrisy will at last be discovered and plagued, by his being
given up to open wickedness; as he supposes it was now with Job, and that by
his wicked complaints, he was taking off the mask of hypocrisy, which formerly
he had put on. This warns men not only to look to their own courses, but to
aggravate them, by considering the wickedness that may be in them.

5. God knows man in his disposition and practice, his vanity and wickedness;
as here we are taught. God is not ignorant what man is, but knows him better
then himself does: His knowledge is certain and infallible; For he not only
knows, but sees, which in men is an act of sense, and of the most certain
and sure sense, far beyond hearing, Genesis 45.12. Here it imports, that Gods
knowledge, even of that which is most secret and hid in men, is no less sure
and exact, then a man is sure of what he sees with his eyes. And for further
proof hereof, His knowing and seeing imports that he sees what men are,
notwithstanding all their fair pretexts; He sees vanity under a fair show, and
wickedness under vanity and hypocrisy. This calls on men to trust Gods verdict
of them, and to tremble when they consider what God may know of them. Jer.
17.9, 10. 1 John 3.20.

6. Such as consider Gods Omniscience, Holiness, and Justice, will see that he
cannot in justice but punish sin, in his own time and way; For, so does Zophar
conclude, that if he see wickedness, he will consider it, or, so seriously lay
it to heart, as to punish it; As this consideration, and seeing of sin is held
out as previous to punishment, 2 King. 9.26. Psalm. 10.13, 14.

7. His propounding of this by way of question, Will he not consider it?
imports,

1. Man would gladly shift all thoughts of Gods Knowledge and Justice; For, it
must be put home, in a serious way of questioning with man about it, as being a
thought the would gladly shif^, or deny. So poor shifts are sinners put unto,
to keep themselves from vexation? See Psalm. 10.11, 13. Ezekiel 9.9.

2. Whatever shifts sinful man make; yet he has a witness within himself
against all these vain refuge^, and his own Conscience can tell him they are
but vain: Therefore it is put to a man's own Conscience, by this question, as a
thing man will not get denied. And withal, it intimates that the wickeds own
Consciences will, in due time, suggest those things more effectually and
dreadfully to them, then any other creature can do.

Notwithstanding these Truths in this Discourse; We must admit it with some
caution, and must remember that there is a mistake in the Application of it to
Job, who was neither vain nor wicked (though he had seeds of both in him by
nature): Nor was God considering, or pursuing either of them by those
afflictions. Therefore, to clear the mistake, and add a needful caution to this
Doctrine; Consider,

1. Though man be vain and wicked by nature; yet God does not see them to be
such who are hid in Christ, as Job was. See Numb. 23.21. Isa. 38.17. Micah 7.9.

2. Though God, by his Rod, says to the wicked and impenitent, that he sees
him to be wicked, and is requiring it; Yet the godly reconciled man is allowed
by the Word to judge otherwise, whatever his lot be.

3. Albeit God were seeing vanity and some wickedness in his own Children, and
by chastisements were requiring it, or, correcting for it, that he might
reclaim them; or vindicate his own honor, 2 Samuel 12.13, 14. (which yet was not
Job's case), yet that would not prove them to be wicked as to their state,
which is the thing he intends to conclude against Job, See Psalm. 89.30, 31, 32,
33.

4. Though Gods perfect knowledge of sin in wicked men, his holy indignation
against it, and his strict justice, do, indeed, prove that he will, in due
time, require sin, and punish it, in all these who flee not to Christ for
refuge; Yet, neither does this prove that the godly may not undergo the same
out-outward afflictions, which are punishments of sin, when inflicted on the
wicked; Nor yet that it is inconsistent with the Holiness and Justice of God,
to seem to look on, and spare the wicked for a while; For the contrary is
insinuated, Hab. 1.13. And (beside other purposes which God brings about by
this indulgence) he does most sadly require wickedness, when he gives up
sinners to harden themselves by reason of his indulgence, Eccles. 8.11. And
therefore, this question, Will he not then require it? though it import a
Truth, that God will do so in his time and way; Yet, It does not import that he
will afflict only such wicked men; or, that he will presently, or always in
this life, afflict them.

Verse. 12. For vain man would be wise, though man be born like a wild asses
colt.
In the last place, Zophar concludes this part of his Discourse, and
particularly, the former Amplifications of his Doctrine concerning God and his
Attributes, with a check to man's folly; Who, although God be infinitely wise,
irresistibly powerful, and holy and just, and proves that he is so by his
dispensations; And albeit, himself, by nature and birth, be a furious fool, and
no less brutish to take up these proceedings of God, then a wild Asses Colt,
one of the most brutish and senseless of creatures, and do grow up vain and
empty, and without heart, and judgment: Yet (as the word rendered, for,
signifies here) he will still presume to be wise, and to tax and quarrel God,
as if he knew himself well enough, whatever God say to the contrary by his
dispensations.

In this conclusion, those Truths are to be observed,

1. Man by nature is an empty thing; For, so the word rendered, vain,
signifies both vain and empty, to signify that he is empty of all good, and
blown up with vanity, which fills the room of it. This warns us to guard
against emptiness, which is a natural defect cleaving to our best performances;
For which end, we should avoid selfishness, Hos. 9.1. and pleasing of our
selves with shows and appearances only of things.

2. Notwithstanding this emptiness, Man is not only ignorant of this defect,
but filled with a conceit of the contrary perfection; For, vain, empty, man
would be wise, or aspires to be somewhat, and thinks he has attained it. The
emptiest are ordinarily the proudest (as empty barrels makes the greatest
noise) And that is the height of their misery.

3. There is nothing whereof empty man presumes more then of his own wisdom;
wherein he is, ofttimes, so foolishly conceited, as to take upon him to
prescribe unto God, and to quarrel his way of proceeding; For, this is the
particular here, wherein vain man would be somewhat; He would be wise, or,
presumes so far of his own wisdom, as to quarrel God and his dispensations: as
he supposed Job did reflect upon the infinite Wisdom, irresistible Power, and
holy Justice of God, by his complaints. Thus are they all presumptuous, who
lean to their own understanding, neglecting the counsel of God; who dare dip
into the reasons of God dispensations, so as to censure them, when yet they
cannot comprehend them; or who presume so of their knowledge of their own
goodness (which is the particular he has been upon, v. 6.) that they will not
submit to the verdict of God concerning them, though never so clearly revealed
in the Word, or verified in his dispensations according to the Word. These are
follies and madnesses, to be thought upon with abhorrence.

4. Man is not easily driven from this conceit of his own wisdom; but when God
has made him see his folly, he will yet presume to be wise; For, when he
supposes God has manifested his infinite Wisdom, irresistible Power, and holy
Justice, to Job's dear expense; yet, says he, vain man would be wise. Wherein,
though he mistook Job, yet the thing is generally true, that sharpest rods
without the grace of God, will not humble man, nor drive him from his conceit
of himself.

5. Man's presumptuous conceit of himself (especially when continued in, after
means used to humble him) renders him the more vile and abominable in Gods
esteem, and provokes him to discover more of his naughtiness to him; For, not
only is he called vain and empty man, upon that very account, but this his
presumption draws out a discovery of his brutishness by nature, and that he is
born like a wild Asses Colt, to intimate, that God is provoked to discover more
of the original of that presumption, to the man who persists in it.

6. Man's vain and presumptuous disposition comes not from God (who is the
Author of no evil of sin) except by way of judicial punishment; nor has he it
only by example and imitation of others, but by nature and from the original
fountain of evil wherein he is born; For, Man is born like a wild Asses Colt,
and that ill disposition grows up with him, and breaks forth in his actual
miscarriages, which will never be cured till this fountain be first taken
notice of, and a cure of it endeavored.

7. That men are born in a corrupt estate is no new doctrine, but what has
been received by the godly of old; For, here it has been a received Truth in
Zophar's days, And we will also find Job pointing at it, in his debates.

8. A part of man's original pravity consists in his stupid folly, that he
cannot discern his way, or what is right or wrong; being a stupid Asses Colt.
See Psalm. 49.20. and 73.22. Man is such in his stubborn wantonness, and
following a course of lawless liberty (which is the way of the wild Ass, and
consequently of its Colt, Job 39.5. -- 8. Jer. 2.24) And, in his proud conceit
of his own excellencies, for all this; and that, though man be born a wild
Asses Colt, (or, like unto one, as is supplied in the Translation) yet he would
be wise.

Yet here also we are to mark, that Zophar erred in applying this to Job. For,

1. Job was not presuming to be wise, though he maintained his integrity upon
revealed and clear grounds.

2. Whatever he was by nature, or as to that state wherein he was born; Yet
grace and the second birth had made a change. And therefore he was not to be
judged now by what he was in his first birth.

3. Though some sparkles of rebellion and presumption proved that he had still
some remainders of his original corruption; Yet that did not alter his state,
nor prove him to be a wicked and unregenerate man.

All which do teach, That men had need of great wisdom, in making application
of general Rules, or sound Truths; For, wanting this, Zophar did not speak to
any purpose to Job's case, though sometime his doctrine, otherwise were ^ound,
and might be admitted with some cautions. And, in particular, It is to be
considered,

1. That that one Error, concerning the prospering of the godly, and the ruin
of the wicked, does so poison all the rest of his Discourse, that either it was
not sound, or not seasonable.

2. His want of experience of what Job endured makes him destitute of
tenderness, in seeking to cure the afflicted man's infirmities. Both which
should be adverted unto by those who would, to any purpose, deal with godly men
who are under affliction.

Verse. 13. If thou prepare thine heart, and stretch out thine hands toward him.

14. If iniquity be in thine hand, put it far away, and let not wickedness
dwell in thy Tabernacles.


Zophar, s^pposing he has convinc^d Job that he was grossly wicked, or else an
hypocrite; proceeds now (in the third part of the Chapter) to mollify and
sweeten his former Doctrine with an Exhortation ^ repent and t^ke anoth^r
c^urse then hitherto he had done; which he presses by encouragements, if he
obey, and threatenings, if he will not. The Exhortation (in these verses) is,
That he would prepare, or fix and mak^ straight, his heart for that duty of
repentance; and that he would express it in fervent Prayer, and in purging out
of personal and family-sins.

This (presupposing a closing with Christ, who must enable man for those
duties) is a description of sound repentance; and may be made use of, for out
direction in that work, and for examination and trial of what we attain. But
this counsel and doctrine is ill applied to Job's case (who, whatever need he
had of repentance daily renewed, yet) being a truly godly man, needed not to
begin the work of repentance, as if he had never repented o^ been converted
before. Job would never yield to this, and that upon just grounds: For though
it be Satan's usual policy, when godly men are under troubles, or convictions,
to tempt them to cast all loose that they have received; yet, that is injurious
to God, and his grace in them, and keeps themselves still unfixed. And
therefore it is their wisdom to hold fast their grip of any good they have
received, which will enable them to amend the faults for which they may be
challenged.

From this Exhortation, considered abstractly and in general, Learn,

1. In times of trouble, it is men's duty to look that all stand right betwixt
God and them; and if they find matters wrong, that they turn to God by
repentance: For, so much does this Exhortation import. And it is a sound Truth
in General, that our first work, especially under sad lots, should be to try
how we stand in Gods favor. For that will bring us peace, if we be right,
Psalm. 109.28. Jer. 17.17. and we can take no true comfort till first this be
noticed.

2. Whatever men have been, or whatever severity God has used toward them;
yet, they ought not to be discouraged from repenting and turning to God; For,
albeit Zophar suppose Job has been wicked, or an hypocrite, and though he
judge him to be sadly plagued for the same; Yet, he exhorts him to repent. Very
rods for sin are messengers sent to bring us to God, otherwise, we will do
worse, and augment our guilt, if we turn not. See Jer 3 1. 1 Samuel 12.20, 21.

3. True Conversion and Repentance begins at the heart, which makes a sound and
stable work of it, and keeps men from resting upon external shows; For, his
first counsel is to do somewhat about his heart.

4. Such as are seriously engaged with their own h^arts, to bring them to
repent and turn to God, will find them far out of frame; as being pestered with
lusts and idols, and so unfit for duty till they be prepared; as being biased
with hypocrisy, till they be made straight; and, as being unstable and
fleeting, till they be fixed. For, the word here, signifies, to prepare, to
make straight, and to fix the heart.

5. Albeit God only can remedy and cure these evils in our heart; yet men must
s^t about it as their duty, that so they may see need of employing God, and may
prove instruments in his hand to work that cure: For, he presses it upon Job
as his duty, prepare thine heart. Activity in duty is comm^ndable, and when men
are active, the sense of their inability gives them an errand to God.

6. When hearts are seriously wrought upon, men will be put much to Prayer and
dealing with God; For, it is subjoyned, stretch out thine hands toward him,
which was the gesture of supplicants, 1 King 8.22. Such will find much need,
which God only can supply, and much inability, which he only can remove; which
is a good evidence of an heart engaged in turning to God. Here he names not
God, but only expresses that he should stretch out his hands toward him, of
whom he has been speaking, v 5.6, 7. For in those days there was no hazard of
mistaking the object of religious Worship and Invocation, which was only the
true God, and no creature, among those who professed the true Religion. And for
that gesture of stretching out, and lifting up hands, in Prayer, (see Ezra 9 5.
Psalm 44 20 and 63.4. and 141.2. 1 Timothy 2.8. which was also the preacher o^
those who were in much sorrow, Jer. 4.31.) It is an exercise of the body,
witnessing much earnestness, and resignation to God, as depending only upon
him. And so it implies, That our whole man (even the outward man, whereof the
hands are a part, as well as the inward) should be employed in Prayer; That we
should be fervent and earnest in Prayer, not setting about it as a work in the
by; That in Prayer we should resign and give up our selves to God, to be at his
disposal, without murmuring or disputing; and, That we should have all out hope
and expectation fixed upon him in our Prayers.

7. Prayer will not be accepted, nor can it be proved to be sincere, unless men
who pray reform their lives, and put away ill practices, and what they have of
ill purchase: Therefore it is subjoyned to Prayer, If iniquity be in thine
hand, (either ill practices, or things purchased by iniquity, yet in thy hand
o^ possession) put it away. See Psalm. 66.18. 1 Timothy 2.8. Isa. 1.15.

8. Men in purging of sin, should be so jealous as to put it far away, not
trusting their present lies of Mortification, but avoiding all tentations to
relapses, and shunning evils with such detestation and abhorrence, that they
cannot endure the sight of them; For, he bids him put iniquity far away. See
Isa. 30.22.

9. True Penitents ought, and will, not only purge sin in their own persons,
but will be for God, and study to suppress sin, in their places and stations,
particularly in their Families; Therefore, he subjoyns further, Let not
wickedness dwell in thy Tabernacle. See Psalm. 101. Josh. 24.15. Genesis 18.19. He
calls his house, a Tabernacle, not so much because in these parts they dwelt
much in Tents; But, upon the one hand, to show that the consideration of the
transitory state of his family, being like a moveable Tabernacle, and his own
mortified frame, being a penitent, looking upon his Family as a Tabernacle only
wherein he sojourns, might excite him to reform abuses in his Family; And, upon
the other hand, if he would not reform, to show that no state or grandeur could
secure him, as he had found by experience. Though, as being a great man, he had
many Tabernacles, or, a stately Tabernacle of many rooms, they were but
Tabernacles still, and could be reached by God.

Verse. 15. For then shall thou lift up thy face without spot, yea thou shall be
steadfast and shall not fear:
Zophar's first Argument pressing this Exhortation (to v. 20.) is taken from
promises and encouragements if he will obey. Those are in this verse propounded
in general, That sin and all the sad effects of it being purged away, he shall
be freed from confusion of Conscience, And shall come boldly to God, to call
upon him and contemplate him, and shall shine among men; And that he shall be
established (as a firm thing compacted by melting, as the word is) in his
outward good condition, and shall not fear the continuance or return of his
troubles.

For further clearing of the words, Consider,

1. As for this spot, whereof he promises Job shall be free, and upon removal
whereof, he shall lift up his face; It does, indeed, include the removal of all
those spots of trouble, wherewith he had been defiled, being plunged in the
ditch of calamity, and those defilements of disgrace and ignominy which his
Friends had cast upon him by reason of his troubles. For the rest of the
temporal promises do suppose his afflictions removed, and therefore that must
be employed here. Yet it does also imply (as a cause of all the rest) the
removal of the spot of sin, by a pardon, upon repentance, to which he had
exhorted him; and the removal of that shame, wherewith Zophar supposes Job
might be overwhelmed because of his sin.

2. As for lifting up of the face, We find in Scripture that bowing down of the
face imports the Conscience of guilt, Ezra 9.6. perturbation and distemper of
mind, Genesis 4.5, 6. and fear, Dan. 10.9, 15. so that to lift up the face is to
be free of confusion of Conscience through guilt, and of fear and perturbation,
that we may, with calmness of mind and boldness, go to God as one reconciled
and at peace with us (as the phrase is used among men, 2 Samuel 2.22.) Job 22.26.
and may look cheerfully among men, Psalm. 42.11.

3. As for the promise of Job's being free of fear in his outward condition;
Zophar does not understand it of any stability, or freedom from fear, which
Saints may attain even in the midst of their troubles; but of an assurance of
the removal of trouble, and his being established and without fear of its
return, as the following promises do evidence.

As for the spiritual part of this promise, that the godly man shall lift up
his face without spot of sin, or shame; If we take it in general, abstracting
from his mistake of Job, it may be admitted with two cautions.

1. That this is the allowance of penitent Saints (whom he has formerly
described in his Exhortation) though for their exercise, and by reason of their
own weakness, the use and comfort of it may, oft-times, be suspended; and they
who are washed from the spot of sin may yet be afraid to look up to God, and
dare not look cheerfully among men.

2. It is Zophar's mistake to think that Saints lifting up of their faces
depends upon the removal of all their spots, even of trouble also; For when sin
is pardoned, and they make use of their privileges, they will be confident,
and glory and lift up their face in the midst of trouble, Romans 5.1, 2, 3. and
8.35, etc.

Hence learn,

1. Unreconciled and impenitent men are obnoxious to shame and confusion of
Conscience; which however they do not notice it, yet, before God, and in a day
of trouble, it will not hide; For, so is imported in that this promise of
lifting up the face* is made only to the penitent Convert. The wicked man may
seem to want this confusion, but he does but steal by his terrors, and he has
perturbation, fear and guilt, ready to break forth upon him, whenever he comes
into a strait, Isai. 33.14. and when he considers God, who is greater th^n his
heart, 1 John 3.20.

2. It is the penitents allowance, and great mercy, that he may be cheerful,
and may come boldly to God, and call upon him familiarly, with calmness and
serenity of mind, Job 22.26, 27. Psalm. 67.6, 7. 1 John 3.21. For, herein he
differs from the impenitent, that he shall lift up his face. His humility may
put him to the Publicans posture, Luke 18.13. But faith allows him to look up;
and when it is not so, he makes not use of his allowance. And when a penitent
does not attain unto this; As he should consider how he thereby wrongs God, as
well as himself; and that it is his own weakness that keeps him so at under;
Psalm. 77 10. So he may look also to Gods hand and mind in it, who, hereby, does
humble and exercise him; does correct him for former abused and ill guided
allowances, when they were enjoyed; and does discover how much he must be seen
in our mercies, who must first give ground of comfort, and then apply it, and
make it comfortable.

3. It is the reconciled penitents allowance, also, to be confident and
cheerful among men; not bringing up an ill report upon the way of God, nor
being confounded by enemies or difficulties; For; thus also may the lifting up
of the face be understood. And it is our duty to give proof of our
encouragement in God, in our ordinary walking, and especially in difficulties;
and this is the way to obtain, or continue, the use of our allowance before God.

4. Albeit some wicked and impenitent sinners be so impudent, as to lift up
their face, and hold out their cauterized Consciences and whores forehead,
before God and men; Yet, that is but a proclaiming of their spots and
pollutions, whereof the penitent are free in their cheerful confidence: For,
herein also the wicked and the penitent differ, that the one may lift up their
face, without spot, His sins being repented of and pardoned, are not seen, nor
will they stand up to challenge his confidence, and oppugn it; Jer. 50.20. But
the others confidence is refuted by his sin and spots, which appear in his face
when he lifts it up; yea, this aggravates his pollution, that, notwithstanding
his uncleanness; yet, he is so impudent as to lift up his face.

As for the temporal part of this Promise, relating to the removal of the spots
of trouble from the penitent, together with his confidence and security for the
future; It is certain,

1. That Penitents have the promise of these things, 1 Timothy 4.8. whereof the
wicked have no assurance by any promise, however they come to their hands.

2. That they are given to Penitents, in so far as they need them, and the love
and wisdom of God see them to be fit for them, and that they will do them good;
And they are given to them in mercy, whereas the wicked get them for plagues
and snares, Yet,

3. Notwithstanding all these Promises, The Lord may (to witness his
Sovereignty, and for other reasons) exercise his people with dispensations
contrary to what is held out in these Promises, and that even to martyrdom and
the height of torments and sufferings: Nor is his goodness and love to his
people to be measured by the things of time, And therefore to understand these
Promises absolutely, and as if they were always to be fulfilled to the
penitent, is an Error, and a point which Job controverts with his Friends,
upon good ground.

However, according to the tenor of Scripture-Rules and Cautions concerning
these Promises, We may here Learn,

1. Where God has washed away the sinful spots of his penitent people; He can
also, and, when it is for his glory, and their good, will wash off those spots,
of trouble, ignominy, and sorrow, which followed upon their sin: For, here it
is put in their Charter, Thou shall lift up thy face without spot, as also,
Ezekiel. 36.15. Isa. 25.8. that they may not doubt of it, if it be for their good;
and however, they may be assured of it at last. See Rev. 7.17. and 21.4.

2. Penitents are allowed stability and freedom from fear about their outward
condition; For, says he, Yea, thou shall be steadfast, and shall not fear. Not
that they are allowed (as Zophar understood it) to be always steadfast, and
securely and without fear, to expect, either the removal of their trouble upon
their repentance; or, (which seems to be the meaning here, for after it is
supposed that his spot are taken away, this is added with the copulative, and,)
that their removed troubles shall never recurre; But,

1. That a Penitent has the surest hold, even of temporal prosperity (as
having it by promise) either to be brought to enjoy it, or kept in it: And in
the faith thereof, he may despise those morsels which are cast to the wicked in
their sinful way, Psalm. 141.4.

2. He may be settled and secure that there is no wrath in any thing befalls
him, when these Promises seem not to be accomplished, Psalm. 112.7, 8.

3. He may be fearless of any real harm his sad lots can do him, however they
exercise him.

4. Whereas the impenitent may lose heart and hand in trouble, especially when
Conscience is wakened, which will make him apprehend that God is about to undo
him; the Penitent will bear that which might crush many, and is magnanimous
through God, Psalm. 23.4. and 46.1, 2. All which shows that, albeit Zophar did
not urge these Promises in a sound sense; yet, Piety, and Repentance for sin,
and turning to God, are the surest guard in all our outward lots.

Doct. 3. When God has given ground of stability and stedfastness, it is his
gift also to make us close with it and not fear; otherwise, we might starve
beside our enjoyments: Therefore, when it is promised that he shall be
steadfast, or, in a solid settled condition, it must be added, and thou shall
not fear. Thus God schooleth and exercises his Children, that every mercy may
be twice a mercy, in his gifting of it to be their allowance, and his making
that their allowance forth coming for their refreshment, as they need it. And
they should not suspect that a mercy is not their allowance, because they must
yet depend for the use and comfort of it.

Verse. 16. Because thou shall forget thy misery, and remember it as waters that
pass away.
This promise of Temporal Mercy (especially as to the latter part of it,
concerning the Penitents security and freedom from fear, when he is delivered)
is branched out, enlarged and confirmed in diverse particular Promises. And,

First, (in this verse) He confirms that he shall not fear, because he should
get so complete, and so long continued a deliverance, that he should forget his
trouble, and not a scar or print of it should be left: His remembrance of by
past misery shall be but (...) of waters that pass away; that is, as running
waters, which pass by, never to return again; or, as floods and inundations,
which swell fast, but run as fast away; and, especially, as Winter-Brooks,
which passed away in Summer, in those Countries, Chap. 6.15. -- 18.

From this, according to the grounds and cautions laid down, v. 15. we may
learn,

1. The Lord cannot only give sufficient ground of encouragement against
trouble, or the fear of it, though the trouble be continued; But when he s^^^h
it sit, he can refute our fears by actual deliverance from the trouble: For, so
is here held out, Thou shall not fear, v. 15. Because thou shall forget thy
misery, etc. See Zech. 4.10. Only we should not press God too hard to do this
for us, by resisting to be comforted under trouble; lest our deliverance make
us ashamed that we have not patiently waited for it, as Isai. 25.9. But that
God is able to do this, should make us content with less, Dan. 3.17, 18.

2. Afflictions and calamities are misery, or, toil; as here they are called.
They are so to the wicked (such as he supposed Job to be) and a declaration of
their miserable estate by sin, which, they would not, otherwise, see nor lay to
heart. They are also such in themselves; and if the godly find any other thing
in them, they ought to acknowledge Gods love in it: As sad lots are sent to put
them to study and find out proofs of love, and make them sweet unto them. And
whatever mercy the godly find in trouble, they will also find much toil,
vexation, and weariness in it (as the word signifies;) Partly, to put them in
mind of sin, and of the remainders thereof in themselves; And, partly, to make
way for the Consolations of God, whereof, otherwise, they could not be so
capable. So that even to be vexed with trouble is no mark of an ungodly man, or
that God will do no good by that trouble to those who are under it. But, on the
contrary, a cross that does not exercise will never prove a profitable cross,
Heb. 12.11.

3. How great soever the afflictions of the godly be, yet they may be got over,
and they may see an end of them; As this promise holds out, Thou shall even
forget thy misery, etc. Saints have seen a strange end of many great troubles
and fears, and they have been carried through, and made to survive, many of
them, Isai. 51.12, 13. Jam. 5.11. Those troubles which they have thought to
perish under, 1 Samuel 27.1. have been got through. And albeit they may die and
be cut off by some of them, yet they shall certainly have an issue of all of
them, Psalm. 34.19. Rev. 7.14, etc.

4. Saints may not only be delivered from trouble, but their deliverance may be
so complete and satisfactory, as they shall be made to forget, or but slightly
to remember, their sorrow and misery; For, says he, Thou shall forget thy
misery, and remember it as waters that pass away. For further understanding
whereof, Consider, That a total oblivion of bygone troubles is not be allowed,
nor is it ordinarily attainable; nor does Zophar deny but there will be some
kind of remembering of it. Troubles must be remembered: to stir us up to praise
for our deliverance; they must also be remembered that we may prepare for new
trials, not forgetting that we are still in the world, to forget which, were a
sad plague upon us, from which God uses to preserve his people. But the sound
meaning, whatever was Zophar's scope, is, That sometime a deliverance from a
particular trouble may be so complete, as to leave no print behind hind it, to
keep up a bitter remembrance of it, as the contrary is threatened, Genesis 41.30.
Sometime, also, there may be so long a time of freedom, as shall blot out the
remembrance of sorrow; And, sometime, the change of their condition may be
attended with such sweetness and mercy, as shall give them little time to think
on former sorrows, as Job. 16.21. All which, with the similitude of waters that
pass away, illustrating the promise, does hold out,

1. That deliverance may sometime come very sucedily to Penitents, and the more
speedily that their troubles have been violent; they may pass away quickly, as
running waters, Or, as an inundation, which violently over-flows all, yet soon
runs out. God sends troubles, oft-times, thick on, that he may have them over.
See Isai. 17.14.

2. Deliverances from violent troubles may be, not only speedy, but very
eminent and remarkable, in themselves and in their continuance; As waters
leaving no print of their path, so they may be complete, and not leave a scar
behind them, but have a cure of all our griefs and sorrows; And as waters
passing away do not return, so they may be of long continuance, Psalm. 90.15.

3. Deliverance may be eminent and singular, not only in it self, and its
continuance, but in the consolations following upon, and attending it; Psalm.
90.15. 2 Cor. 1.5. so that men shall not get leisure to think upon their passed
troubles, as is said of Wine and strong Drink, Prove. 31.6, 7.

4. Deliverance may be such, as to make any thoughts of passed troubles easy
and comfortable: As a deluge is fearful in the time of it, but remembered with
delight and refreshment when it is gone; So delivered-Saints may find it no
grief of heart to them that they have been in trouble, and when they reflect
upon the greatest difficulties they have passed, they will see them so easy,
that they will be ready to cry out, Where was our faith, hope and confidence,
that could not see this end of the Lord?

These are the mercies employed in this Promise, and put in the Penitents
Charter. Yet in the Application thereof, we must remember,

1. Though Piety has the Promise, and lies nearest to all this; yet, the
dispensing thereof is in the hand of one more tender and wise then our selves,
who will let it out, not as we fancy or desire, but as is for our good.

2. If God see it fit not to deliver, but to afford us all this sweetness, even
in the midst of trouble, we are no losers.

3. Let us not be unruly or murmurers under our troubles, lest that provoke God
to be sparing in affording us comfort or deliverance.

Verse. 17. And thine age shall be clearer then the noonday: thou shall shine
forth, thou shall be as the morning.
Secondly, The former Promise is further confirmed by a new Promise. The
meaning whereof is not, that God shall clear his righteousness and innocence,
which Psalm. 37.6. is illustrated by the similitude of light, and the noonday,
here also made use of. For, Zophar did not judge Job righteous or innocent, but
a wicked guilty person; But the meaning is, That his age, and the rest of his
life which he gave for lost, should prove the very prime time of his life, and
as a noonday, for mercies, comfort, and honor; And his case, by his
restitution, should be as the bright morning, and the shining of a rising Sun,
after a dark night; and should be growing, as the morning shines on more and
more to the perfect day, Prove. 4.18.

From this we may (observing the former cautions) Learn,

1. Old age is a time that will need many proofs of God; and the Penitent godly
man lies in Gods way to get them; For, upon supposition of his repentance, a
promise is made concerning his age. See Eccl. 12.1. Psalm. 71.9, 17, 18.

2. Such as have quit hope, and laid their account to die in trouble, may not
only be delivered, but may have mercies heaped upon them before they die; For,
so is the Promise, Thine age shall be clearer then the noonday, etc. And Job
found it so, but not upon Zophar's terms or principles, as if it held
universally true, to all Penitents, and only to them.

3. The best days that ever the Child of God saw may be waiting for him after
trouble, to make up his losses, and comfort him over his sorrows; For, his age,
after that, may be like a noonday, yea clearer then the noonday, or, may
arise, in the height of glory and splendor and comfort, above the noonday.
See Isai. 49.21.

4 No one similitude is able sufficiently to express the rich allowanc^s of
Saints. The noonday is bright, but upon the next point to decline; the morning
shines clear, but it may clearer. Therefore both are conjoined in this Promise,
Thine age shall be clearer then the noonday, thou shall shine forth, thou
shall be as the morning.

5. It helps to sweeten Saints mercies, that

(1.) They are seasoned with former cross dispensations, as a morning is sweet
after a dark night, Isa. 58.8.

(2.) That they are but growing; even their noonday is but a morning, in that
respect. And how well soever they be within time (and they may be so well, that
the bright light of the noonday comes short of their serenity, and they are
clearer then the noon day) yet they shall be better, Cant. 6.10.

Only it must still be remembered, that if God be not pleased thus to make us
shine in our outward condition, it is enough if he shine upon us by his favor
and spiritual consolations shining through thick clouds; and, by his
approbation, clear the dark cloud of misconstructions, which the world put upon
us; and so cause us to shine, in our humble, tender, exercised, and confident
behavior under trouble.

Verse. 18 And thou shall be secure, because there is hope, yea thou shall dig
about thee, and thou shall take thy rest in safety:

19. Also thou shall lie down, and none shall make thee afraid; yea many shall
make suit unto thee.


Thirdly, He explains, further, how the rest of his life should be thus
comfortable; namely, both for security and respect. Albeit in former times,
notwithstanding all his power, he had been robbed and spoiled; Yet now, having
a more sure ground of hope (being a penitent) he should be in a great security;
And should be no less safe in an house of digged-up mud (or, in his Tent, about
which the Arabians used to dig holes for fastening of the stakes, or some earth,
to make the bottom of the Tent close, Or made a ditch to receive the water
which in a shower of rain might run down from the Tent, that so it might not
run into the Tent) then in a walled City; nor should he need to keep a Watch or
Guard about him, but might sleep quietly. And (which further confirms the
security of his condition) whereas he is now contemned, and all seek advantage
against him, then, many men (or, as the Word does also signify, even great
men) should respect him, and make humble and earnest suits to him, or (as it is
in the Original) should entreat his face, or, countenance and protection, to
get counsel, help, justice, or preferment by him.

In this (if we guard against the understanding of temporal Promises in an
absolute sense) we may Observe,

1. Great and wonderful may the vicissitudes of time, and men's lot within time,
be: And when God pleases to interpose, he can make a man's case differ
wonderfully from what it has been; For, so does this Promise imply (and it is
indeed possible, and Job afterward found it true) that he who had been spoiled
should be secure.

Obs. 2. The Penitents allowance is, security, or, quiet confidence. Which is
not to be understood of secure neglect of duty, or neglect of seeking God. Not
yet (however Zophar understood it) of a secure neglecting to foresee and
prepare for difficulties, Job 3.25, 26. For neither of those are our duty, and
so cannot be our mercy. But the true security allowed to Penitents, is, to be
confident as to events; Not that they shall certainly avoid dangers from men,
or otherwise; But that they shall be free of aniety about them, either as to
their coming upon them, or their getting through under them. This is indeed
their allowance, And it is their duty to study to be rid of vexing anxiety,
which flows from insobriety and diffidence, and impedes duty. See Phil. 4.6.
Psalm. 127.1, 2. For it cannot avail any thing, as Matthew. 6.27. It oft-times,
creates us needless troubles; Isai. 51.11, 13. It antedates our real trials,
and makes them a cross before they come, Matthew. 6.34. It draws us upon snares
when we are anxiously fearful of men; Prove. 29.25. It is not beseeming the
peace of a good Conscience; Rom 5.1, 2, 3. and should rather be left to the
wicked, Deuteronomy. 28.66. It gives God little to do, but takes his work off his
hand, 1 Pet. 5.7. and therefore crusheth us, because none but God can bear that
burden of caring for events; And, it looks not like faith in his Providence,
who can cause troublers do us good, Jer. 15.11. who can restrain them, as he
did Laban, Genesis 31.24. can fill them with terror, Genesis 35.5. can plague them,
as he did Sennacherib; and, can bring good out of what he suffers them to do.
This being Saints allowance, they should press after it, and account it service
to God, and not carnal security, to seek to be rid of this anxiety.

Obs. 3. The ground of this security, is, because there is hope. Whereby we are
to understand, not only the grace of hope which the true Penitent has, but
daily new favors strengthening this grace. His troubles not returning, and
proofs of love being given him, do strengthen his hope, and possess him with
holy confidence and security, This (passing his mistakes) Teaches,

1. A reconciled Penitent has still ground of hope, Ezra 10.2. After his
repentance, if he have been a godly man before, his evidences are renewed, and
his hopes revive; so that he cannot be desperate, unless he will cast away his
hope, Heb. 10.35.

2. As whatever good a penitent man has, he must quit it all, and go out of
himself, to hope in God; so hope is enough to secure a man, though there be no
more: For, Thou shall be secure, because there is hope. Here we should beware
of pride, which will be ready to undervalue this; whereas humility will grip
too little

3. Albeit we should not ground our hope on what is seen, Romans 8.24. or upon
any thing beside the word: Yet, when God further confirms us by proofs of his
love, it should make us ashamed to be diffident; For when thus there is hope,
as has been explained, then we should be secure. It is a sin and shame to be
diffident, after many experiences. Psalm. 78.19, 20. And as our not hoping, when
we have but the naked Word, obstructs those proofs of love; so our ill
improvement of them, and our quarrelling still, provokes God to send us back
again to the naked Word.

Obs. 4. The amplification of this security, is, That he shall dig about him,
and take his rest in safety, etc. or, in a poor Cottage, or Tent, he shall be
safe enough. This Teaches, That hope in God must not rest upon, nor judge by,
outward probabilities; But should give glory to God, so much the more as
probabilities are few: So much may safely be gathered from this. Otherwise, it
is not always true that Saints are safe, in Zophar's sense. But as God can
secure in a most unsafe condition; So, extremity of troubles, and all
disadvantages, should but raise the spirits of a Penitents hope; as Psalm.
142.4, 5.

Obs. 5. The public evidence of this his security, is, sleeping safely, and
without fear. This holds not true in this sense, that a reconciled man may not
be surprised in his sleep; but this is true in it, that it is his allowance to
sleep confidently, when he is called to it, under Gods protection, as Psalm. 3.5.

However, It Teaches,

1. Reconciliation with God makes common mercies to be double mercies; Even
very sleep comes by promise and by gift to a reconciled man. His dinner of
green herbs is a sweet feast, if he could discern the mercies in it.

2. The Providence of God is over and about the reconciled man, in all the
turns of his life; were it even in watching over him when he sleeps.

3. Gods help is nothing the further off from a reconciled man, that he can be
little active to procure it, or do for himself; For when we sleep, and cannot
do for our selves, he will do for us.

4. Quiet and safe rest, without affrightments, is a mercy, as here is
supposed. And it is put in the godlies Charter; as the rest, of temporal
promises, to be forth coming for him as may be for his good. And when a people
are deprived of it, by Fires, Invasions, or other Alarms in the night; As it is
a trial to the godly; so it may put all to search, how they have been thankful
for ordinary preservation and rest; And how they mind judgment, wherein, it is
said the the Lord will come as a theif in the night.

Obs. 6. The confirmation of this his security and safety, is, that he shall be
in honor and respect, and many (and even great men) shall make suit to him, or
entreat his face.

It Teaches,

1. A reconciled man gets all his losses made up, one way or other; As here is
supposed, that he will be restored to his dignity again. And, indeed, that is
not lost which is in Gods hand; but (however we may not limit God in these
temporal things) a good account may be made of it, upon our repentance.

2. Albeit contempt be a sad lot, and, oft-times the fruit of our own or others
idolizing of us; Yet, if such as are under it be reconciled to God, or study to
be so, they may expect a good account of it; For, so much may safely be
gathered from this Promise.

3. Albeit God do not free every godly man from contempt in the world (for this
promise is not made visibly out to all), And albeit he do not raise every godly
man, whom he vindicates from contempt, to honor and state; (For this Promise
is made to Job, who was before a Magistrate,) Yet thus far it holds true, in
general, That (as men, and particularly, great men, do respect or vilify godly
men, only as may contribute to advance their own interests; For, as they
slight them in their low condition, so they will fawn upon them in their
prosperity: So, whatever men's esteem be) true Piety is indeed honorable, and
would be more respected if it were more known: And it is the duty of godly men,
so to walk as they may conciliate respect to their Profession, and not cause
the world stumble at it: And if they walk so, God may so eminently do for them,
and advance them, as even great men, yea their very enemies, may be glad to sue
for their favor.

Verse. 20. But the eyes of the wicked shall fail, and they shall not escape,
and their hope shall be as the giving up of the ghost.
Zophar's Second Argument, pressing his Exhortation, is held out in a
threatening, If Job hearken not to his counsel, but think to be delive^ed
without repentance. He propounds it in general terms, without applying it to
Job, as he had done by the Promises: And denounces, that a wicked man may long
look for an issue, and wear his eyes expecting it, ere it come; that he shall
not escape Gods rods and vengeance any other way then by repentance; and any
hope he has, shall evanish and die, and give him no ground to lean upon, but
rather end in despair.

In this Argument, as he mistakes Job, accounting him a wicked man; So his
doctrine concerning plagues upon the wicked is no more sound then what he had
said in the matter of temporal Promises to the godly. For a man may get
expected favors, escape rods, and be satisfied in his hopes, and yet be a
wicked man still. Only he deserves all that is here threatened, and he may,
sometime, meet with it in this life, and, however, will meet with it at last.

Hence Learn,

1. Both Law and Gospel, terrors and allurements, are necessary to stir up men
to the duties of Repentance; We need terrors to break, as well as
encouragements to melt, our hard hearts, Therefore, he makes use of both here;
And of threatenings last; Not because that is the order constantly to be
observed, For the Law should make way for Promises: But because he judged him
obstinate, by reason of his former replies, and possibly perceived by some
evidences that Job was not taken with what he said; which makes him give over
to encourage him any more, and leave him with this sad word.

2. When men are called to threaten such as they suppose to be wicked; as they
should not dally with sin, so in their greatest sharpness, they should witness
some tenderness to their persons; Therefore, he only propounds the Doctrine in
general, Not only to show that he thought it the lot of all the wicked, which
therefore Job (whom he judged to be wicked) needed not think to decline; But to
witness his tenderness, in that he leaves it to Job to apply it himself.

3. General Doctrine ought to be applied by every hearer, albeit he who
delivers it do not, or for some reasons, find it not fit, to apply it: For,
here he judges it to be Job's duty to apply what he speaks in general.

4. Albeit wicked men, oft-times, have enough; yet, seeing they place their
happiness in it, they cannot be sati^fied, but are plagued with the lust of the
eye, expecting and desiring more; For, It is supposed they have their eye upon
somewhat they expect. Not only are they put to look for deliverance, when God
plagues them (which is the thing principally implied here, relative to Job's
present condition) but even in their best condition, they are still looking for
more.

5. As Believers may have much humbling exercise about their hope, Psalm.
119.82. (either when they expect that for which they have no ground in the
Word, at least, not in their present condition, Lam. 4.17. Jer. 14.19. Or, when
God would humble and try them, Psalm. 69.3.) and about their faintings, which
yet they will be forced to recall and abandon, Lam. 3.18.22. Psalm. 31.22. Also,
whatever particular good thing, expected by the wicked, may be given them; Yet
they will never meet with all they gape for, Deuteronomy. 28.32. And in the issue,
they will be sadly disappointed; For, thus the eyes of the wicked shall fail.

6. Albeit wicked men be fugitives from the Word, and (so far as they can) from
corrections, as is employed, Zech. 1.6. Jer. 5.3. And albeit they may escape
some particular dangers, and get terrors of Conscience shaken off; Yet all
they fear and seek to shun will unavoidably meet them at last, without a
possibility of declining it; For, they shall not escape.

7. Wicked men are not easily put from their hopes and carnal confidences,
whatever threatenings or disappointments they meet with; For, though their eyes
fail, and it be threatened that they shall not escape; Yet, it is supposed that
they will yet hope for other things.

8. Wicked men's hope is but a cold coal, and evanishing thing; It is but like a
sob or two of a dying man, and then he is gone: For, their hope shall be as the
giving up of the Ghost, or, as a puff of breath, of a dying man. Whether we
look to their hope, or their enjoyment of what they hope for, they get but a
laughter or two of it, and a little whiles sport with their own deceivings, and
then they see the folly of their hope, and what they got of what they hoped
for, does evanish, And so their hope (as it is in the Original) is the giving
up of the Ghost, or, gives up the Ghost, and puffs out its breath, and
perishes.

CHAP. XII.
In this and the two following Chapters, we have a new Discourse of Job's;
wherein he replies to what Zophar or his other Friends had said. For he speaks
to them in the plural number, and still joins them together in his replies to
any one of them, because they agreed all in one opinion, to condemn him, and,
it may be, the rest of the Friends gave some signs of their approbation of what
any one of them spoke. In this Discourse he, partly, debates the matter in
controversy, with themselves, to Chap. 13.20. And, partly, expostulates and
pleads his cause with God, from thence to the end of Chap. 14. The whole
Discourse may be be summed up in these Heads. 1. Having insinuated, in his
Preface, that the godly may be in adversity, ver. 1. -- 5. he proves also that
the wicked may prosper, ver. 6. -- 12. 2. He clears himself of the imputation
of ignorance of Gods Power and Wisdom, by commending thereof, ver. 13. -- 25.
3. He makes use of this Doctrine, not only to prove that he was not ignorant,
but also that he had just cause to decline them who had wronged him, and
pleaded so poorly for God, Chap. 13.1. -- 12. 4. Having quit them, he applies
himself to make his moan to God. He justifies his own practice in it, Chap.
13.13. mdash; 19. And then falls about his complaint, from Chap. 13.20. to the
end of Chap. 14.

So in this Chapter we have those particulars. 1. A Preface, wherein he
accuses them of an arrogant conceit of their own wisdom, ver. 1, 2. when yet
himself was their equal, and the things they propounded were but obvious, ver.
3. And of inhumanity toward him a godly man, now under affliction, ver. 4, 5.
Whereby also he contradicts them in one branch of the Controversy betwixt
them, concerning the prosperity of the godly, which Zophar had so strongly
asserted, Chap. 11.13, 14, 15, etc. as the rest before him had done. 2. He
prosecutes the debate further, concerning the lot of the wicked; asserting
(contrary to Zophar's doctrine, Chap. 11.20. wherein the rest also had gone
before him) that the worst of them may prosper, and that God, in his
Providence, did order it to be so, v. 6. and proves that they may prosper, from
what is obvious among the creatures, ver. 7, 8. and that God does it, because
nothing can be done without him, ver. 9, 10. To which he subjoyns a conclusion,
that he could not receive their doctrine upon trust, having so much to say
against it, ver. 11. And that they, who were men of age, and gloried so much in
Antiquity, should be more wise then rashly to condemn him, ver. 12. 3. Whereas
Zophar had cried him down with a discourse of Gods Wisdom and Power, Chap.
11.5, 6, 7, etc. and had reflected upon him, as if he were but a wild Asses
Colt; Chap. 11, 12. He clears himself of that imputation of ignorance, and
highly commends those Attributes of God: He asserts the Wisdom and Power of
God, ver. 13. giving some instances thereof in the various dispensations of
Providence, in the affairs and concernments of Men, and in things natural, ver.
14, 15. And again repeats his assertion, ver. 16. -- Commending those
Attributes as they shine in ordering the deceits that are among men, ver. --
16. in overthrowing and overturning most eminent persons for power and policy,
ver. 17. -- 21. in discovering most dark and hidden things, ver. 22. in
increasing and destroying Nations, at his pleasure, ver. 23. and (in order to
the destruction of Nations) in taking away of wisdom from the Heads and Rulers
of a people, ver. 24, 25.

Ver. 1. And Job answered, and said, 2. No doubt but ye are the people, and
wisdom shall die with you.
JOB minding to reply, before he enter upon the cause, he does in the entry,
give them a check for their miscarriages, in the debate; in the prosecution
whereof he insensibly falls in upon the question agitated betwixt him and them.
His first challenge (in these verses) is chiefly personal, wherein he reproves
them that they had an arrogant conceit of their own wisdom, as if they had been
the only wits in the world; and as if wisdom had been born with them, and would
die with them; so that if they were gone, there would be no more wit in the
world. No doubt (says he) ye are the people, or, the only people, for wisdom
(as he after adds) in the world; ye are as good for that as many people, or a
whole Nation; o^, (as the word usually signifies, when opposed to Heathen
Nations without the Church) ye are as able as all the Church, or the select
people, to whom God imparts his counsels; ye are ingenuous and well bred, and
I, and such as I, but slaves, fools and beasts, as Zophar had insinuated, Chap.
11.2, 12. This challenge he propounds by way of bitter taunt, or, Ironie, No
doubt but ye are the people, to check them for their conceiting so of
themselves, that they disputed so acutely, and that they cried him down as an
ignorant, while it was nothing so, as he clears, v. 3.

From this challenge we may Learn,

1. Arrogance, and a conceit of being singular, particularly, in the matter of
wisdom and knowledge, is an ordinary and vile sin; For, Job supposes them (as
indeed in part they were) guilty of it, and speaks to it as an abominable sin,
worthy to be derided. Albeit it be our duty to be best acquainted with our
infirmities; Yet, man, naturally, affects a singularity, and to be a non such
above others. And there is nothing wherein this humor appears more then in a
man's conceit of his own wisdom above others, when he esteems too much of his
own judgment, notions, and opinions. And this his conceit does especially
appear in his insolency in maintaining of an ill cause, when he has many (as
they were many against Job) on his side. All those are employed in the Text. And
it warns men, who would be kept from the snare, to study more their own
infirmities; to see the excellencies which God has conferred upon every member
of the body, that some are able for light, and can say well, others do well,
some do well, but others suffer better; and that they be not self-willed, and
such as will not be advised in their opinions, nor insolent in debates.

2. Men's conceit deserves to be sharply dealt with, and checked; So much does
this Ironie teach us, No doubt but ye are the people, etc. So are Idolaters
taunted, 1 King. 18.27. the arrogantly proud, Isa. 14.9, 10. and such as
conceit of their own singular excellencies, 1 Cor. 4.8, 9, 10. and 14.36, 37.
God will deal with it as an intolerable sin, and men ought not to cherish it in
any. Yet,

3. Debates and contention are, ordinarily, attended with passion and
reflections; For, how faulty soever they were, yet Job's passion is up in this
bitter reflection, accounting them but fools, contrary to Christ's rule, Matthew.
5.22. It is true, men who maintain a right cause may have strongest tentations
to passion and reflect^ons, when they meet with unreasonable, and insolent
opposition; Yet they ought to be upon their guards Not only that they start not
debates needlessly, but (when they are started, and they are in the height of
their zeal for truth) that they do not over d^ive themselves, nor wrong Gods
cause, by mingling of their spirits and passions with zeal in managing it.

4. It is arrogant folly to think that God has granted a Monopoly of wisdom to
any; But as wisdom has been before we were, so it will live after us: For, Job
refutes such a conceit with a taunt, No doubt wisdom will die with you This
(beside what is already marked) gives ground of confidence that God can supply
his Church with sit Instruments, when such as have been eminent in their
generation are taken away.

Verse. 3. But I have understanding as well as you, I am not inferior to you:
yea, who knows not such things as these?
Here Job refutes their conceit of wisdom, by showing,

1. That he had wisdom as well as they, and that for the measure of it, he was
equal to them in knowing that which they boasted of as singular, and whereof
they judged him ignorant, Chap. 11.6, 12. Nor will he yield, or (as it is in
the Original) fall beneath them, in knowing and adoring the Providence of God,
and his Wisdom and Power shining therein. For that is it wherein he does here
compare with them, as appears from v. 13, etc. with Chap. 13.1, 2.

2. That what they propounded and boasted of, a rare and singular notions,
were, in effect, but obvious and common, and known to men of weakest
capacities, who had any sense or knowledge of God.

Hence Learn,

1. Whatever be the seat of knowledge or understanding, according to the
Principles of Naturalists; Yet knowledge of things divine ought to be in, and
make an impression upon, the heart of a man; For, understanding, here, is
called an heart, in the Original. And sanctified knowledge gets the name of an
heart, to point out, that it must be solid, and not fleeting in the brain or
fancy; that it must be joined with prudence to draw it into practice; and,
that it must be accompanied with affection, warmth and tenderness.

2. Albeit self-commending be, ordinarily, sinful, and of no use or advantage,
2 Cor. 10.18. Prove. 27.2. And albeit men are bound to prefer one another in
love, Phil. 2.3. Yet, in some cases, it is lawful to commend our selves, and
compare our selves with others: As Job does here, I have understanding as well
as you, I am not inferior to you. See also, 1 Cor. 15.10. 2 Cor. 11.5. and
12.11. Men ought not to lift up and exalt themselves by vain boasting, yet they
may lawfully study to prevent that the honor of God, and his Truth which they
maintain, do not suffer through any imputation cast upon them; and they may let
it be seen that Sophistry will not drive them from the Truth, nor will they let
Truth suffer, by men's crying up of themselves, and decrying of others, without
cause. See Phil. 3.4, etc. Thus albeit men ought not to cry up themselves
before God, but even in their thankfulness for mercies to them (which is their
duty) they ought to beware of the Pharisees arrogance, Luke 18.11, etc. Yet,
before men they may vindicate their integrity, and wipe off imputations and
reflections, which might tend to the prejudice of Truth which they own. Only
this ought to be gone about with needful caution. Not only ought men to be
humble, and even nothing before God, Ephesians. 3.8. 2 Cor. 12.11. But they ought
to perform this task, of commending themselves, with a loathing of it, if it
could be helped, and they were not put to it, as Paul calls himself a fool in
glorying, 2 Cor. 11.11. And they should season it with modesty and humility;
For, Job here does not prefer, but only make himself equal to his Friends, and
that but in obvious and common things.

3. Arrogant self-conceited men are really but silly, And do prove themselves
to be such, by their conceit; For, Job tells them that, whereas they conceited
that they were singular, the things they brought forth were but common.

4. As there are common Principles and plain Truths in Religion, which it were
a shame for any to be ignorant of, Heb. 5.12, 14. with 6.1. So, in particular,
even in Job's days, the knowledge of the Wisdom and Power of God, shining in
his works of Providence, was obvious and common to them who had any Religion:
For, says he, Who (that has any the least saving knowledge of God) knows
not such things as those? which you have made so great a noise of, about the
Wisdom, Irresistibleness, and Power of God.

Verse. 4. I am as one m^cked of his neighbor, who calls upon God, and he
answers him: the just upright man is laughed to scorn.
The second challenge respects, chi^fly, their carriage; Wherein he accuses
them that they were very inhumane toward him. And in this verse.

First, He asserts their inhumanity, I am as one (or, I am one) mocked of his
neighbor, or; I am he that is a scorn, or, laughter to his neighbor; That is,
if ever a man was mocked by his neighbor, I am he: I am as much mocked, as
ever man was, by his neighbor. And in this challenge, Job reflecteth upon
their vilipending of all his defenses, and their decrying of himself and his
confidence, when they should have comforted him.

It Teaches,

1. Affl^ctions are sent, not only to try the afflicted, but their Friends,
Relations, Neighbors, etc. also; For, so Job supposes, when he reflects upon
their neglect of duty to him in his distress: This warns men to look to their
carriage toward others in affliction; and the more nere their relation to the
afflicted be, by kindred, acquaintance, or other obligations, their account will
be the sadder, if they fail in their duty, See Psalm 38.11. and 55.12, 13, 14.
and 88.18.

2. Scorn and contempt is a sharp trial, especially when coming from friends,
and when trysting with other afflictions upon the party suffering: For, so Job
regreteth it, and challenges for it, I am as one mocked of his neighbor. See
Psalm. 69.20. and 123 4. Heb. 11.36.

3. The people of God being once broken with trouble, are very easily hurt, and
a little addition of trouble will pierce very deep: For, Job in his afflicted
condition, accounts their sleighting speeches to be a very mocking of him.

Secondly, He amplifieth this assertion, Who calls upon God and he answers
him. The relative, who, may be referred, either to the neighbor who mocks, or
to him that is mocked. In the first sense it relates to his Friends, who,
though they mocked him, were answered of God in the wishes of their heart (as
is said of the wicked, Psalm. 73.7. and is insinuated of his Friends, v. 5.) or,
were godly men, calle^s upon God and answered by him, and yet did not pity him
in his trouble. This was indeed true of his Friends (whatever be the meaning of
this place) that they were pious men, and yet not tender of Job's afflicted
condition, because they had no experience of it themselves, by reason of their
prosperity. And it points out,

1. Men's getting much of their will, in their own lots, makes them prove
untender to those who are afflicted; (of which, see v. 5.) which oft-times
provokes God to send troubles upon themselves.

2. It may be the lot of a child of God to be hardly dealt with by many others,
who are also no less deer to God then himself, and who are speeding at his hand
in Prayer. This is, indeed, a sad trial; yet it must be endured, when it is our
lot.

3. Whatever men's carriage be, yet their piety and access to God, and the
answers they receive from him, should make them tender toward others; and it is
their fault when it is not so: Men calling on God, and answered by him, should
not be mockers of their neighbor. But I incline rather to understand this of
Job, who was mocked, and yet was truly godly, and that because of the general
assertion that follows in this verse, The just upright man is laughed to
scorn. And if any object that Job would hardly assert that God answered him
when he called upon him, seeing he, elsewhere, regrets that God did not answer
him; (see Chap. 30.20.) The answer is easy, That his sense did indeed suggest
that God did not hear him, and when his Friends did let him alone, or when he
is engaged in his complaints, he regrets that it was so: But now their
opposition drove him to his Thrift, to assert it by faith, whatever his sense
suggested to the contrary. And so the people of God are, oft-times, put to it,
by great extremities, to quit their complaints, and to learn to speak the
language of faith, unless they will resolve presently to sink and succumb under
their burden.

It Teaches,

1. A godly man, meeting with opposition from others, should not therefore quit
his integrity, nor give over Prayer; but should rather essay it, to see what
speed he may come that way: For, Job, when he is mocked of his neighbor,
calls upon God. See Psalm. 109.4.

2. Godly men will not lose their labor in seeking of God; neither will God
reject all those whom, even godly men, scorn; nor should godly men doubt of
Gods acceptance, though men mock and scorn them: For, though he was mocked of
his neighbor, Yet, his faith concludes that when he calls upon God, he
answers him. See Chap. 13.16. and 16.20.

3. Eminency in Piety will not hold off trials, not only trials from the
profane (as 2 Samuel 6.16, 20.) but even from godly men; For, Job is mocked by
his godly Friends, though thus favored of God, as to be drawn to call upon
him, and be answered by him. Men must look upon Piety, not as a shelter to keep
off any trial, but, rather, as fitting them to bear trial.

4. Though men be answered by God, and get his approbation; yet it is a sharp
trial to them when they are mocked by men: As Job here regrets. It is not only
a dangerous sin in those who thus wrong them, and do mock, and would shame
their counsel; Psalm. 14.6. But it gives them a sore wound, who (though they
hold fast their confidence) may be easily disturbed in their spirits, and who
do not love to live in the heat of such distempers and irritations.

Thirdly, He sums up what he has said of this own case, in a general
assertion, The just upright man is laughed to scorn, (or mocked, for it is the
same word with that in the beginning of the verse.) Where, from his own
experience, he contradicts their assertion, concerning the prosperity of the
godly, Chap. 11.13, 14, 15, etc. And proves that a godly man may be in trouble.

It teaches,

1. Faith will stand without a visible supporter, and a man's hold by faith
(though God will not let it want a battle and exercise) is enough against all
the world; For, Job confidently refutes them from his own experience, and by
the testimony of his own integrity; concluding from what he knew himself was,
and what he suffered (though there were no other evidence) that the just
upright man might be laughed to scorn, and, consequently, might suffer other
things also.

2. Particular debates are best cleared when they are drawn to general heads
and assertions; As Job draws what he had said of his own ill usage and piety,
into a general Proposition, that an upright man is mocked: Otherwise, we may be
so bemisted, through passion or interests, as to condemn that, in particular
cases, which we would approve, if looked upon abstractly, and in general; or,
contrariwise, would approve that in the one case, which we would condemn in the
other.

3. Such as would approve themselves as honest, notwithstanding their
afflictions, ought to be just by imputed righteousness, and upright in their
conversation; or, any righteous or just course they undertake, they should
follow it sincerely and uprightly, without by-ends or hypocrisy: So much may
be gathered from this character, a just upright man

4. Proud insolency in debates is disapproved of God, and is the evidence of an
ill cause; As here he checks them for it, as an evidence they were wrong, that
they laughed him to scorn.

Verse. 5. He that is ready to slip with his feet, is as a lamp despised in the
thought of him that is at ease.
In this verse Job prosecutes the challenge of inhumanity, and the general
assertion in the end of the former verse. And illustrates the whole matter from
a similitude taken from the snuff of a Lamp. The meaning whereof is, as if Job
had said; However I shined brightly, like a burning Lamp, in any prosperity;
Yet, now, being in trouble and like to sink under it, and you being so much at
ease that I appear useless, ye despise me like the snuff of a Lamp when it is
a dying or extinguishing, which is so unprofitable, and has so noisome a
smell, that it cannot be endured, but must be trod upon. By this, also, he
contradicts Zophar, who spoke of the bright and shining condition of all the
godly Chap. 11.17.

Hence Learn,

1. Godly men may not only be under present sad afflictions, but under
tentations of further and worse to come upon them; even ready (as they think)
to slip with their feet. Either to slip by si^ning, as Psalm 73.2.^0, to sink
through discouragements under affliction, or, to be really crushed and cut off
by trouble, Psalm. 38.16, 17.

2. God may keep his people, and support them that they fall not, even when
they are ready to slip, ^or persuaded, to their sense, that they will fall; And
so (as it were) bear them up by a very thread. For, thus did he support Job,
who in his own eyes was ready to slip.

3. When a child of God is in this great hazard, he ought yet to be prepared
for further trial; As here Job tells, that, in this sad plight, he was as a
Lamp despi^ed, and loaded with contempt and ignominy.

4. Friendship is often times, chang^able, And few friends do give proof that
they are born for adversity; For, Job, formerly a shining Lamp, Chap. 29.3. is
now a Lamp despised in their thoughts.

5. ^^^le is, oft-times, a great snare to them who enjoy it, particularly, in
that it deprives them of sympathy and compassion toward others; For, he is as a
Lamp despised in the thought of him that is at ease. See Amos 6.1.and6. Psalm.
55.19. Jer. 48.11.

6. It is an addition to the sorrows of godly men, when they miss sympathy,
especially from their friends; For, Job regrets that he is as a Lamp despised.
See Lam 1.9, 12. And when this is the lot of the godly, It tends to purge away
their dross; and to exercise their faith and submission; and should put them to
endeavor to find more tenderness and compassion in God.

Verse. 6. Tabernacles of robbers prosper, and they that provoke God are secure;
into whose hand God brings abundantly.
In the preceding verses Job has proved, from his own experience, that godly
men might be afflicted. Now in the second part of the Chapter (to v. 13.) ^e
enters upon a formal debate, tending to prove that the wicked may prosper,
which is the other branch of the controversy that was betwixt them. In this
verse we have his Thesis, or Assertion, which he resolves to maintain. And it
has two branches.

1. Whereas Zophar had said that calamities did come upon the wicked; Chap.
11.20. He asserts that even Robbers, and such as do, thereby, and by the like
heinous sins, provoke God, do yet prosper in their affairs and families, and
are in a secure condition.

2. Whereas Zophar had extolled Gods wisdom, and other Attributes; shining in
his works, to decry this Assertion, and to prove that Job was wicked because
afflicted, Chap. 11.5, 6, etc. Job asserts that God in his holy Providence,
brings this prosperity into the hands of Robbers Some do indeed read the latter
part of the verse thus, That they make a God with their hand who thus prosper;
and so it would hold out, That not only Robbers, and such as break the second
Table of the Law, but, even Idolaters may prosper. But the Original does not
favor that reading, and the following probation of this branch of the
Assertion confirms the former interpretation.

From this Assertion, Learn,

1. The prospering condition of the wicked does add to the tentation and trial
of the godly, when they are in adversity; Therefore, Job having spoken of his
own affliction, v. 4, 5. does here subjoyn how the wicked did prosper; not only
that he might contradict and refute their erroneous opinions, but that he
insinuate what a tentation it was, that he, a godly man, should be afflicted,
while even robbers did prosper. See Psalm. 73.2, 3, etc. But godly men must
learn not to stumble at this, nor even at the prosperity of other godly men,
who will get heaven at last, as well as themselves. And if their lot be
singular, and they become wonders in the world, they should remember that all
this will make way for singular proofs of Gods love to them, James 5.10.

2. It is an high degree of sin, when men do not content themselves to be
otherwise loose walkers and profane, but do come to that height, as to be
robbers and oppressors. This is a wickedness of so deep a die, that men must
have taken on many other colors, before they come to have this crimson and
scarlet-colored sin. Therefore Job instanceth robbers, and these who thus
provoke God, as those who are guilty of an high degree of sin, and as a clear
refutation of their opinion, if even such do prosper. And such as would be kept
from this evil, ought to be content with what they have, Heb. 13.5. and should
use no unlawful means to increase their Portion, nor employ their power (had
they never so much power) to do any thing but what is right, as was the
practice of Joseph, Genesis 42.17, 18. and of Nehemiah, Neh. 5.15.

3. It is not to be expected that robbery and oppression, and other the like
heinous wickednesses, which provoke God and call for the manifestation of
divine Justice, should always be visibly punished; But God may bear long (and
even all the days of their life) with them who so provoke him: For, even
Robbers, and they that provoke God, prosper. See Hab. 1. -- 13. God is indeed
concerned to redress oppression, which he is so infinitely holy and pure as to
abhor, Hab. 1.13. -- Nor is his zeal to be suspected, as if his love to his
oppressed people were to be questioned, though he do not presently avenge them;
But God hereby (among other wise ends) tries his people, whether they will
stumble at Piety, or rather be excited to it, Mal. 3.14, 15. with 16.

4. Such wicked oppressors may not only be preserved and prosper in their
persons, but their affairs and families may so prosper, and they may seem to
have so many confidences, as do invite them to rest securely; For, the
Tabernacles (or Houses, and Families, which dwelt in those Countries, for most
part, in Tents) prosper, and they that provoke God are secure, or, have
confidences. We ought not to stumble at the height of their prosperity, and
that, not only for the present, but for the future also, they seem to be
immovable. For, hereby,

1. They have occasion to discover themselves what they are. Uzziah had never
been so well known, if he had not prospered, 2 Chronicles. 26.4, 5. with 16. And
might may go out of the world, having the reputation of sober-men, if their
prosperity and confidences had not emboldened them to discover the naughtiness
of their hearts.

2. God does witness his goodness, and that he gives them no provocation nor
tentation to sin against him; so that they are inexcusable.

3. God does hereby try his people, and teaches them not to dote upon that
which is cast to the wicked, but to mind the day of final Judgment, wherein all
those odds will be made equal.

4. As it is a mark of the wicked to be secure, notwithstanding their
provocations, because of their prosperity; So the Lord gives them up to it, for
a snare upon them, that judgment, when it comes, may surprise them.

Doct. 5. It is to be firmly believed and studied, especially in times of
oppression, that God has a holy Providence in the prosperity of wicked men;
and this ought to be adored and emproved by all those who seek the blessing of
God upon their sad lots from oppressors; Therefore Job expressly subjoyns,
that those robbers and provokers of God, are they into whose hand God brings
abundantly, or, brings, to wit, all that prosperity they enjoy, and all those
confidences which make them secure; All those God brings, and (as it were)
casts to their hand, without any great trouble on their part. It is true, the
profane may lose sight of a Providence in oppressing times, Mal. 2.17. and the
godly may, also, have some tentations that God is but a spectatour in those
oppressions, which yet they cannot yield to; as that question imports, Hab. 1.
-- 13, 14. But it is our duty to hold that Principle fast, Otherwise, we loose
the reins to all impiety; Whereas a sight of God and his Providence will help
us to reckon that there are other purposes in all those; dispensations then we
have yet seen.

6. Men's prosperity, (...) Gods eminent hand in giving of it, or men's seeming
to see an hand of God in it, is no evidence of divine approbation: For, God
brings abundantly into the hand, even of those Robbers. Not only do they
prosper, but Gods hand may be eminently seen in heaping those favors upon
them; And they may seem to acknowledge it, as Zech. 11.5. who yet are
notoriously wicked and abhorred of God. Every good turn done by God to us, and
every acknowledgment thereof by us, will neither witness his special love, nor
our honesty.

Verse. 7. But ask now the beasts, and they shall teach thee; and the souls of
the air, and they shall tell thee.

8. Or speak to the earth, and it shall teach thee; and the fishes of the sea
shall declare unto thee.


In these verses, Job proves the first branch of his Assertion, that wicked men
may prosper, from the consideration of what is obvious among all the creatures,
if it were observed. Though here he direct his speech, in the singular number,
to Zophar, who spoke last; yet it is intended to them all. That if they look
upon all the creatures, wild and tame, the earth and commodities thereof, they
will not only find, that those do most frequently serve the wicked (which may
be the meaning in part) and they enjoy greatest plenty of the good things of
this life, wild Beasts, Fowls, Fishes, and the tame Herds and Flocks, and other
increase of the Earth, being, ordinarily, heaped upon them: But (which I take
to be the most proper meaning here) their study of the creatures would yet
further confirm his assertion, thus; Among Beasts (save in so far as they are
tamed by men) and Fowls of the Air, and Fishes in the Sea, nothing is more
ordinary, then to see the greater of them devour the lesser, Hab. 1.13, 14. and
the ravenous devouring the harmless; yea, the most tame of them are most
frequently destroyed for the use of man. And therefore it is no wonder if God
permit it to be so also among men, that wicked men oppress the righteous. As
for his sending them to the earth (beside those creatures formerly mentioned)
to be taught by it; it may be understood of men on the earth (as it is cleared,
v. 10. That man is in Gods hand, as well as other creatures) among whom they
might ordinarily have seen the most wicked, most cruel, and prevalent over
others, as was usual among these Arabians. Or, of the very earth it self, and
other things upon it (beside the Beasts formerly mentioned) where it is obvious
to be seen that the best earth is most frequently manured, and torn up with
tilling, whereas the barren places are suffered to continue as they were; the
greater Trees wear out the lesser, by hindering them to take root, withholding
the Sun from them, dropping upon them, and intercepting the moisture that
should nourish them: And the best fruits are cut down, ground, and prepared for
man's use, whereas noisome weeds and useless things are let alone. All which
tend to prove Job's conclusion, That oppressors may prosper, and best men may
suffer.

From this Argument, thus explained, Learn,

1. All the creatures, and the various lots that befall them, do preach much of
God and his Providence; As here Job proves his point, concerning Gods
Providence toward Man, from what is obvious in the world, and the creatures
that are therein. See Psalm. 19.1, 2. Psalm. 148. throughout, Where every
creature has somewhat to say to Gods praise, and Romans 1.19, 20. So that men do
sinfully neglect an opportunity, if they do not ask at them, or, learn some
lessons, which they teach and declare, by meditating upon them.

2. Hence, it is man's great neglect, that there is much to be learned, even
among his feet, and from things daily in his view, which yet he does not see
nor observe; For, Job insinuates that the Truth maintained by him was obvious
everywhere, and yet Zophar had not noticed it. See Prove. 6.6. Isai. 1.3.

3. God, by all the passages of his Providence, would have this Truth
inculcated, That afflictions follow upon Piety, and wickedness may enjoy the
advantages of this present world For, that is the Lesson which Job propounds as
obvious, and taught by all the creatures. Mistaking and stumbling at this
breeds many a plea with God, and renders afflictions intolerable; whereas to be
familiarly acquainted with this Principle, breaks the snare.

Verse. 9. Who knows not in all these, that the hand of the LORD has wrought
this?

10 In whose hand is the soul of every living thing, and the breath of all
mankind.


Here Job proves the second branch of his Assertion, that God does all this:
And holds it for a truth that none can be ignorant of, That nothing can be
disposed of without the good pleasure and Providence of God, v. 9. who has the
life and breath of all creatures, men as well as others in his hand, v. 10.

Hence Learn,

1. A Providence is not seen and adored in dispensations which do not please
us; Therefore, this Truth, that the hand of the Lord has wrought this, must be
not only asserted, but proved. See Mal. 2.17. As it is Satan's great design to
shake us loose in this; So when we do not distinctly see and adore Providence
in ordinary, we meet with intricate and thorny questions about it, in strange
dispensations.

2. Though men, in their firs, presume to debate and question the matter of
Gods Providence; yet they will not get it shifted nor deny^d; Therefore he puts
it home with a question, who knows not in all these (or, by what may be
gathered from these instances) that the hand of the Lord has wrought this?
intimating that they could not but know it, and that when they take greatest
pains to be Atheists, yet they will be far enough from their point. And when
the fool would say in his heart, there is no God; yet it may be questioned, if
he be altogether destitute of knowledge, and his very terrors will witness
against him, that he cannot be rid of some apprehensions of a Deity, Psalm.
14.1, 4, 5.

3. When men turn Atheists, and fall a questioning the Providence of God, they
ought to be sharply dealt with and refuted; For, this question imports also
Job's indignation against any wrong thoughts about the Providence of God. It is
the common interests of Saints not to let the Providence of God be denied, in
the faith whereof they are so often comforted in dark cases; And zeal for God
should cause them abhor any thoughts prejudicial to his glory.

4. As God has a dominion over all his creatures, particularly, over living
things, and man in special; So the study of this dominion will help to open our
eyes, to see him, and his Providence, and to clear his Providence, in every
particular; For, this is the proof that God does this, because in his hand is
the soul (or, life) of every living thing, and the breath of all mankind. This
serves not only to excite us to study his Providence in every thing, even in
numbering the hairs of our head, and in a Sparrows falling to the ground;
Matthew. 10.29, 30. Lest forgetting him in little, we forget him in more also:
But it serves notably to confirm the Assertion; That there is an holy
Providence in all these events, which befall men or other creatures: For, if
their life be in Gods hand, then it cannot be taken away, nor prejudged without
him, how casually soever it seem to fall out, Exodus 21.13. And if man may
dispose of many creatures, even to the taking away of their lives, without
control; How much less cause is there to carp at Gods afflicting of his own
creature, how righteous soever, who is man's Superior, and has his breath in
his hand? None who acknowledge man's unquestionable power, given him by God over
his fellow creatures, can have any pretense to quarrel Gods dealing with his
own creatures as he will.

5. As Gods dominion over every living thing; so, particularly, his dominion
over man, is to be studied and improved; Therefore, is it particularly
instanced here, that the breath of all mankind is in his hand. This is a
necessary study, partly, because man is bound to study and adore the Providence
of God in all things, and therefore should not forget that which relates
especially to himself; Partly, because Man, studying his own excellency above
other of the creatures, is most averse to acknowledge a Lord over him, till it
be inculcate upon him; but is ready to kick against the pricks, and to repine
at that exercise of Gods dominion, to which other creatures are obedientially
subject: And, partly, that men, considering their dominion over the creatures
(whether other men, or other creatures) may remember that their life is but a
breath, Psalm. 146.3, 4, Isai. 2.22. and that they are but frail flesh of man
(as it is in the Original) and have a Lord over them, Eccl. 5.8. Job 31.13, 14,
15.

6. Gods dominion over man (as over other living things also) reaches even to
his life, and no less: For, as the life of every living thing, so the breath of
all mankind, is in his hand. The study of this invites us, To stand in awe of
God, Dan. 5.23. To trust him in difficulties, Psalm 31.15. To look upon our
selves, not as made for our selves, but, to be subservient to his dominion; so
that if he call for our life, and he be glorified in his disposing of it, we
ought not presumptuously to seek satisfaction to our selves, seeing he, who
gives and preserves our life, may dispose of it, and exercise us as he
pleases. It teaches us, al^o, That we ought not to carp at lesser trials,
seeing our very life and breath are at his disposal; Heb. 12.4. That we ought
to look upon our life as not only given at first, but continually preserved, by
him, and therefore should be continually devoted to him: And, That when we thus
submit to, and acknowledge, his absolute dominion, we should be without
anxiety, as knowing in whose hand we and our concernments are; and should leave
it on him to give a good account of every thing he does, and believe that his
actings will be like the worker, like the work of him who is God, and our God,
though we cannot discern it for the present. For though he have the absolute
disposal of his peoples very lives, yet he will be tender to lose the very
hairs of their head, but when it is to good purpose, Matthew. 10.29, 30. And he
will, in due time, give a good account of what they understand not for the
present, Joh. 13.7.

Verse. 11. Does not the ear try words? and the mouth taste his meat?

12. With the Ancient is wisdom, and in length of days, understanding.


These verses contain a conclusion subjoyned to the former debate, which also
(especially, v. 12.) is an Introduction, or, Transition to the following
purpose. The sense of the words is clear and obvious; That (as is further
explained, Chap. 34.3. where the copulative, and, is translated, as, to show
that use is made of a similitude) as a man's mouth, or, palate, is endowed with
the sense of tasting his meat, that so he may receive or reject it, according
as he finds it pleasant or unsavory: So God has given to man an ear, or
discretion, to try and judge of what is spoken to him, v. 11. And that men
being come to age, should have wisdom and understanding, and have attained it,
in some measure, if they have employed their time well, v. 12. And for the
Application of this to Job's scope, both of these verses may be understood of
himself, thus; That he could not rashly, and without examination, admit of all
they said, having so much Truth on his side, and so much to produce against
their unsavory and unsound Assertions. Nor could he implicitly admit their
dictats, seeing he was come to years, and so was a man who should be wise. They
may also be understood of his Friends, thus; That they ought to have more
discerning, then lightly to entertain opinions prejudicial to the Truth he had
asserted, or to condemn him, and being men of age and experience, they ought
impartially to examine what he had to say for himself. But I incline to refer
what is spoken, v. 11. to Job himself; That going upon such solid and clear
grounds, and being a man of discerning (as he speaks to this same purpose,
Chap. 6.30.) he could not admit of their doctrine, And that, v. 12. may be
referred to his Friends; That they, remembering what their age called for, wuold
learn to be more wise. And this gives a tacit check to their glorying in
Antiquity for confirmation of their Assertions, Chap. 8.8, etc. and 15.10.
However we apply it, yet the Truths held out are clear.

From v. 11. Learn,

1. God has excellently framed man with outward guards of Senses, for the good
both of Soul and Body; For, here is an ear, to try words, and a mouth, or
palate, to taste meats. Here our guards must be set, if we resolve not to be
entangled, Job 31.1.

2. Sound doctrine should be, and in it self is, that to the soul, which food
is to the body; so this comparison, instituted betwixt the ear, taking in
doctrine, and the mouth, tasting meat, imports. See also Job 23.12. Amos
8.11.12. Hence corrupt doctrine ought to be looked upon as poison and wind.

3. Men must not be averse from hearing, who would get souls food; as they must
not forbear to eat, who desire to be fed and nourished: So much also does this
comparison teach us. Hearing is the mean to beget faith, Romans 10.17. and brings
us notable advantages, when we are serious in it, Isai. 50.4. Job 33.16.

4. As men's taste tries their meat; So God has given an ear and discerning to
men, whereby they should try doctrine, that they may embrace Truth and reject
Error; so does Job here teach. It is said, the ear tries words, not that
organ, or sense, its alone; but as it is accompanied with discerning; and so
the hearing of the ear is, oft-times, taken for serious affectionate hearing:
See Isa. 50.4. Job 33.16. Luke 9.44. Here the ear is put for discerning; See
Act. 17.11. And that we may be approved hearers and discerners, we ought to
follow these Cautions and Rules.

1. We ought not to be full souls, which will make us to loath the Honey-combe,
and hunt after fancies and novelties, 2 Timothy 4.3, 4. But we ought to be the
hungry, to whom every bitter thing (provided it be food) is sweet, Prove. 27.7.

2. We should beware of Fevers, and Distempers, of Passion, Prejudice,
Interest, etc. Lest these corrupt our taste.

3. We should beware of childishness, in judging of all things simply by our
taste, whereas we should be rational in our tasting, to relish bitter things,
if profitable, and reject noisome things, though sweet. See Heb. 5.13, 14. Prove.
14.15.

4. We should not tempt God, by being in a constant fluctuation and uncertainty
in the matter of Truth and Error; still tasting and never feeding, and still
proving and trying, but never fixing.

5. We should admit of nothing upon the account of applause, novelty, fair
pretenses, etc. but should cleave close to the Word.

From v. 12. Learn,

1. Men are, of themselves, so foolish, and apt to be blinded and misled, that
readily they are old and decrepit e^e they attain any true and solid wisdom;
For, so is here employed, that till men be ancient and come to length of days,
it is rare to find much wisdom and understanding among them, though some may
attain it sooner.

2. Albeit men be not always wise, who have lived long to acquire wisdom: And
albeit men, when they would find out Truth in various Opinions, must take off
all buskings, of the age of men, or antiquity of Opinions, that they may be
seen in their native colors: Yet it is a great shame for old men, and men who
boast of their own judgment because of their age, not to be wise indeed; For,
this Assertion, applied to his Friends, does rather point out the duty of old
men, then yield that they are always wise. Yea, It rather reflects upon them,
that they boasted of their antiquity and age, while yet they were in an Error.

3. As for those two words, Wisdom and Understanding, although any of them
taken apart, may import what is meant by both; yet being conjoined, they may be
thus differenced; Wisdom imports that old men ought to have much knowledge of
Truths and things, gathered out of many experiences; And having this wisdom to
know things, Understanding (which, added to Wisdom, may be the same with
Prudence) imports that they should be able, out of what they have observed and
known, to gather other things for their use and instruction, in other cases and
exigents. And so these words hold out,

1. True and solid wisdom will be but ill learned by contemplation, unless it
be also inculcated upon us by experience, and by Gods writing of those lessons,
by Providence about our selves or others.

2. These experiences, how frequent and obvious soever, will not teach us
wisdom, without much and serious observation on our part.

3. All this knowledge and observation is not enough to prove men wise, unless
hereby they be made wise in other things, and for the future also. Otherwise,
they may seem very wise in contemplation, who prove but fools, when they should
reduce what they know, to practice.

Verse. 13. With him is wisdom and strength, he has counsel and understanding.
Upon occasion of what Job had said, v. 12. He enters upon the third part of
his Discourse; wherein he commends and asserts the wisdom and power of God,
which he asserts, v. 13, 16. -- and then does illustrate his assertion by
several instances of the wisdom and power of God shining in his works, to the
end of the Chapter. His scope in all which is, partly, to show that he is not
ignorant, nor behind with any of them, in knowing and commending of God (as
Zophar had insinuated, Chap. 11.6. where he had cried up those Attributes of
God, that he might vilify Job) and would be no less afraid, then themselves,
to wrong God in the matter of his glory; and so he explains his own mind, Chap.
13.1, 2. Partly, also, his scope is, to insinuate that, in the point debated
among them, and the lots that had befaln him, they ought rather to adore some
hid reasons of the dispensations of so infinitely wise, and absolutely powerful
a Lord (and it had been a proof of that wisdom to which they pretended, and
ought indeed to have learned, v. 12. rather to judge thus of his lot) then only
to fix on this, that God afflicted none but wicked men, which was all the use
Zophar made of his study and acknowledgment of Gods incomprehensible wisdom,
Chap. 11.6.

In this verse we have Job's Assertion, which contains but this one Principal
Doctrine; That God (for so the relative, him, looks back to v. 9, 10) is indeed
wise and powerful, and, consequently, ab^olute and irresistible; which Zophar
had also asserted of him. As for the several names expressing the Wisdom and
Knowledge of God, they may be looked on as a collection of every word
signifying any perfection of that kind, because of the emptiness of any one
word to express this as it is in God. Or they may be thus distinguished, and
the whole verse thus taken up; God has Understanding, to comprehend all
mysteries, and take up all right ends; he has Counsel to know fit means,
whereby to compass his ends; Wisdom, to order these means aright, for attaining
of his ends; and Strength, to execute his purposes effectually. Or thus, Beside
Wisdom, to know all things, and Counsel, to devise all things, he has
Understanding to rule all, and Strength to bear out his purposes.

However we take these several words (and all that we can conceive or express
by them is infinitely short of what they signify in God) yet this doctrine and
commendation of God serves for good use to us. And,

First, We are hence taught to adore the infinite perfection and complete
blessedness of God; which is here instanced in these Attributes which shine in
his ordering of humane affairs, though he be infinite also in every other
Perfection and Attribute. And here his Perfection appears,

1. In the concurrence of all that is requisite for any enterprise. Many men
have knowledge, and can see things afar off, who yet are not prudent, but come
as short in that, as they are eminent in the other. Many having somewhat of
both those, do yet come short in power. And, in a word, men's greatest
excellencies are clouded with defects and blemishes. But all perfections
concur in God, and he needs not borrow from any what is needful for carrying
on his blessed purposes.

2. God has all those excellencies perfectly. For they are not only infinite
in him, and the same with his blessed Nature and Essence; but, as they are in
him, they are free of those imperfections and blemishes that accompany them in
the creatures. And albeit he express his perfections, to our capacity, by such
names, of Wisdom, Counsel, etc. which are taken from among men, because we
cannot otherwise take them up, and because, indeed, God does his affairs better
then men can do their businesses, even when they have consulted and deliberated
most, and when they have attained to greatest experience: Yet none of these
imperfections, which clog men's wisdom, are to be found in him: His Counsels are
without consultation; his Wisdom and Understanding are not learned by
experience; and, his decrees are without deliberation.

3. All those Perfections are in God eternally and unchangeably. Others may
want wisdom, from whom it might be expected; (as Job insinuates, v. 12.) And
strong men may prove weak in some undertakings; But though all Cisterns should
run dry, though wise men should turn fools, and strong men become like women;
he has an infinite immutable fullness.

4. Not only has he those perfections, and they are with him; but they are
His, and belong to him, as the last word in the Text signifies; He has
counsel, etc. is, His is Counsel, or, to him it belongs. What creatures have,
is but borrowed, and may be over-clouded, or taken away when they abuse, or
boast of it as their own: But all those perfections are Gods, originally and
independently. Yea, those do so properly belong to God, that what is in the
creatures, like unto any of them, are not worthy of that name, when compared
with what is in God. Such as are accounted Oracles for wisdom, are but very
fools in comparison of the infinitely wise God: Sampson's strength is but
weakness, and nothing, in comparison of his Omnipotency. What is worthy of the
name of wisdom and strength (in such a comparison) is proper and peculiar to
God.

Secondly, This serves also (as to daunt and repress the pride of wicked men,
of which in the following instances; So) to give notable instructions to the
people of God, both in reference to their duty, and to their lots. And,

1. It points out their great happiness who have this God to be their portion,
who when they look upon all this fullness, may account it their own, and that it
will be forth coming to them, as they need. See Psalm. 146.5, 6, etc.

2. It serves to assure them that there is more deep wisdom employed about
them, and in carving of their lots, then they can comprehend: For, the God who
guides them has Wisdom, Counsel, and Understanding.

3. It teaches, that his verdict concerning things is surest; For, he is
infinitely wise, who judges righteous judgment, and not according to
appearance. And all wisdom, contrary to his, is folly.

4. His means are only best for attaining of right ends: For, they are
prescribed by Wisdom, Counsel, and Understanding.

5. His Wisdom is still to be leaned unto, albeit our following of his means do
not soon bring us to the desired and approved end, but rather seem to lend us
further from it; For, his infinite wisdom can work by contraries, and can bring
good out of disappointments and delays.

6. There is no good issue, nor mercy, which his people need, withheld through
want of power; His strength can bring it to pass, when it is for their good.

7. Till God see it fit to send an issue, he has strength and power to uphold
his people in greatest distresses* Isai. 40.29, 30, 31.

Verse. 14. Behold, he breaks down, and it cannot be built again: he shuts
up a man, and there can be no opening.

15. Behold, he withholdeth the waters, and they dry up: also he sends them
out, and they overturn the earth.


In these verses this Assertion is proved and instanced,

1. In the affairs and concernments of men, v. 14 such as, the ruin of Houses,
Cities, Countries, etc. and the shutting up of men under difficulties, such as
Prisons, Diseases, or Perplexities of mind. All which, as God does them; so the
ruins he makes, are irreparable, and the difficulties and perplexities he
sends, are inextricable; to wit, if he purpose utterly to destroy, or, till
himself command an issue; For, otherwise, ruins have been repaired again,
which were made by his hand.

2. In things natural; such as, waters, which he withholdeth in drought, when
he pleases, and again sends them out in Deluges, till they overflow the
earth, v. 15.

From v. 14. Learn,

1. It is not enough we acknowledge Gods Wisdom and Power in general, unless we
be acquainted with the passages and instances thereof in particular; and unless
we be diligent observers thereof, with elevated and spiritual hearts, avoiding
formality: Therefore, Joh instanceth and gives proofs of those Attributes of
God, not only to show that, since the Word prevails not to make us know what
God is, he will manifest what he is, by such dispensations; but to direct us to
observe those Attributes of God in his works: And a, behold, is prefixed to
this, to intimate that our hearts should be quickened and raised to attend
these things.

2. God sees it oft-times, meet to fall in upon men's enjoyments on earth, with
many breaches and ruins; that thereby he may prove his own dominion; may shake
his own people out of their nests, which they would build for themselves, if
they got leave; and, may disappoint the wicked, who seek to be established in
the earth: For, he breaks down, and that is one of his works whereby he is
known in the world.

3. Beside ruins upon men's enjoyments, God sees it meet oft-times, to make a
breach upon their persons, by outward distresses, or inward perplexities; For,
he shuts up a man, or shuts upon a man, Puts him, as it were, in a Grave,
or, Prison, or Pit, and closes the mouth of it upon him, that he cannot get
out. No less then this, ordinarily, will, humble, rowze up, or discover what is
in man, Job 2.4, 5. and the bad improvement of other exercises, ordinarily,
draws on personal trials.

4. When God has a purpose to exercise men in their persons or concernments,
he can easily reach either, at his pleasure; For, that is uncontroverted here,
he breaks down, and shuts up. So that none can build their nest so high, or
secure, but God can reach them, Obad. v. 3, 4.

5. Albeit, God can, and, oft-times, has made much out of the ruins and
distresses and perplexities of his people; Isai. 49.21. yet no endeavor of our
own, or of others, can recover us out of trouble, till God say the word: For,
He breaks down, and it cannot be built again, he shuts up a man, and there
is no opening; where the Lord does not limit himself, that he will never repair
a ruin, nor deliver a shut-up person; But he assures men that without him they
will not be able to extricate themselves. Therefore, men should begin at
seeking of him in all distresses. See Hos. 6.1. Job 34.29. Rev. 3 7. Mal. 1.4.
Isai. 9.9, 10, 11.

6. In all those dispensations, not only God and his power ought to be seen,
but his wisdom and counsel also, which is to be submitted unto without
quarrelling; For, this is a proof of the whole Assertion, v. 13. not only that
God has strength, but that he has wisdom and counsel also. Yea, the more
irreparable the stroke seem to be, Gods people ought to look the more to deep
wisdom in it, which may assure them of a good account of it.

From v. 15. Learn,

1. Men should observe the power and wisdom of God in ordinary and natural
things, not passing them lightly, because they are ordinary; For, Job proves
his assertion, here, by drought and inundations, he with-heldeth the waters,
and they dry up; also he sends them out, and they over turn the earth, by the
violence of their current. And he prefixeth a, behold, to this also, to show
that those works should not be lightly passed over. If we studied these well,
it might prevent extraordinary proofs of Gods power upon us, and help us to see
more in them, when they come.

2. Albeit God have established a course of Nature; Yet, not only is he Supreme
Agent in it, and has all those things at his command, But he is absolute above
it, and not bound to it; so that man cannot have any security from it, when God
has him to try: For, he can withhold waters, or rain. and send them, above
measure.

3. Variety and a change of outward lots do set out Gods glory, and do all of
them contribute to exercise men, when God pleases; For, the power and wisdom
of God shine both in drought and rain, and in the vicissitudes of them; and as
drought, so also sending of rain and waters after drought, may be man's
affliction. Even mercies, and a deliverance from one scourge, may become a new
trial and scourge.

4. The great blessing of outward mercies consists in their being dispensed
moderately, and in measure; For, either drought, or, rain, being violent and
immoderate, proves a scourge. See Prove. 30.7, 8, 9. Joel 2.23.

5. In droughts or deluges, and the like things of nature, God not only gives
proof of his power and dominion, but of his wisdom also; For, this proves the
assertion, as to the wisdom of God also. As we ought not to be Atheists and
forgetters of God in the works of common Providence, and things of nature, Jer.
14.22. So it is not enough we see the power of God in those, unless we study
his wisdom also, whereby we may be led to some serious and solid improvement of
what God does, not rashly, but in deep wisdom.

Verse. 16. With him is strength and wisdom: the deceived, and the deceiver are
his.
The former Assertion, v. 13. is again repeated, to which some more remarkable
proofs and instances are subjoyned, to the end of the Chapter. In all which
both wisdom and power do shine, though wisdom seem to shine more conspicuously
in some, and power in others. As for the repeated Assertion, Job finds out new
words, different from those, v. 13. to express the strength and wisdom of God,
because all words put together are too l^ttle to express these perfections of
God. As some conceive, the word rendered, strength, v. 13. signifies
establishing power; and the word, here, signifies Imperial Power that cannot
be resisted. Likewise, the word rendered, wisdom, here, signifies substantial,
sublime and pure wisdom. Those are not much to be insisted on, but the
Assertion, and the repetition of it, Teaches,

1. Frequent and repeated thoughts of God and his Attributes are needful, to
inculcate them upon our hearts, which can take in those things but by little
and little; and which are ready to become slack in minding of God, while we
study his works, unless they be again and again excited to mind him: Therefore
is this Assertion repeated, to make this lesson take impression, and to keep us
at it.

2. When we fall a studying of great transactions and revolutions in humane
affairs, it is needful we have frequent and renewed thoughts of Gods Wisdom,
Power and Providence, in them: lest, losing sight of this, we be tossed as on a
tempestuous Sea: Therefore, being to enter upon these instances that follow,
which give an account of strange overturnings in the world, he again repeats
and premits this, that the Power and Wisdom of God shine therein.

3. The more we study Gods works in the world, with an eye to him, the more and
still the better thoughts will we have of him; For, Job, after his first
Assertion, v. 13. having but entered upon the proofs of it in Gods works, v.
14, 15. must break out with this repeated assertion, in the midst of his
discourse, that he may show how himself was affected with that study, to the
end he might affect others. And he seeks out new names, to set out these
infinite Attributes of God. Such a study needs but a serious beginning, and
then it will feed it self.

4. Whatever right conceptions men can have of strength or wisdom, they are all
(and infinitely more) to be found in God. For, he ascribes unto God, strength
and wisdom, by whatsoever name they can be expressed. He is infinite in both,
and we are to conceive them to he infinitely in him, as we are able.

5. The conjunction of these perfections in God is still to be remembered and
adored; For, he still joins strength and wisdom. To show, not only that God can
do all, and infinitely more then that which man can do by force or policy, and
wherein they deal proudly (either of these ways) he is above them; Exodus 18.11.
But, that his great power is not rash nor furious, but ordered by wisdom; And,
that what his wisdom sees fit to be done, will not fail in execution.

The first proof and instance of this repeated Assertion, (in the end of this
verse) is; That God has a sinless hand in men's deceiving of others, and being
deceived by others; whether in Political Truths, or, specially, in Religious
matters. This Teaches, That as there are deceivers in the world, and many
deceived by them; So both these are not only Gods creatures (for though that be
a truth, yet it is not the meaning here) but are subject to his authority,
under his dominion, at his disposal, sent out by him for his use and service,
or given up to be entangled; both in evil deceits, political tricks, and
religious cheats. So deceivers are sent out by him, 1 King. 22.23. Deuteronomy. 13.1,
2, 3, etc. Isai. 19.14. Ezekiel. 14.9, 10. 2 These. 2.11. Deceivers in the matters
of Religion are disposed of, and ordered by him, wh^^ they shall deceive,
Matthew. 24.24. when they shall deceive, Rev. 20.1, etc. Zech. 13.2, etc. and how
far they shall proceed, 2 Timothy 3 9. They also, and their success, are his, for
special use and service. For by letting men loose to deceive, He makes the
Truth shine more brightly, that it is scowred by opposition; He exercises men's
graces, and quickens the godlies zeal for Truth, Jude, v. 3. and he tries what
men are, Deuteronomy. 13.3. what their souls condition is, their knowledge and love to
the Truth, their zeal for it, and stability in it; their sincerity in their
principles and ends in embracing of Truth, etc. 1 Cor. 11.19. and by giving up
of others to be deceived, he does punish their ambition, want of love to the
Truth, and other sins, 2 These. 2.10, 11.

This Truth, in reference to common deceits, or political tricks, warns men
to beware of this sin of juggling, which is a judgment and plague upon them who
make it their Trade; and that they should not lean to their own wit and policy,
wherein God (in whose hand they are) can easily overreach them, and make fools
of them. And such as are apt to be deceived, by the nimble tricks and
conveyances of others with whom they deal, ought to look up to God, in whose
hand they also are, and who can order all that to his own glory and their good.
See Exodus 1.10, 12. with Psalm. 105.25, etc. And in the matter of religious
deceits, This truth leads us,

1. To acknowledge that there are deceits, and Error, as well as Truth, in the
world, That we do not turn Scepticks, and such as doubt of all matters
religious.

2. To look on this, when it becomes a peoples exercise and trial, as no light
matter, but a great transaction of God in the world, wherein his glorious
Attributes do shine. Yea, and a sad judgment, to be trembled at.

3. To judge that, as to be deceived is sufficiently evil, and it does not
excuse men, that they are but deceived; so men ought, especially, to beware of
being deceivers, and active promoters of delusions.

4. To look to all Gods ends in such a dispensation, and study to improve them.

5. To see all these transactions in Gods hand, and that they are his, to bless
them for our good, and put an end to them, when he pleases.

Verse. 17. He leads counselors away spoiled, and makes the Judges fools.

18. He loses the bond of Kings, and girdeth their loins with a girdle.

19. He leads princes away spoiled, and overthrows the mighty.

20. He removes away the speech of the trusty, and takes away the
understanding of the aged.

21. He pours contempt upon princes, and weakeneth the strength of the mighty.


The second instance, or proof of the assertion, is, Gods overthrowing of
persons who are most eminent for power and policy in the world, and who are the
very Pillars of States and Kingdoms, such as Kings and Rulers, and wise
Counselors. God, when he pleases, makes wise Counselors a prey; and Judges,
who ruled all, prove fools, v. 17. as befell Achitophel, and the Princes of
Zoan, Isai. 19.11. He who subdueth people under Kings, Psalm. 18.47. and 144.2.
loses, when he pleases, the bonds and cords of their Authority, whereby they
kept Subjects in subj^ction (see Psalm. 2.2, 3.) and brings themselves under the
bonds of servitude, slavery and restraint, so that they must gird themselves
and serve others, v. 18 See Luk 17.8. Joh. 13.4, 13, 14. He also captivates and
spoils inferior Princes (or, Priests, for both have one name, and both offices
were, for most part, in one person, till Moses time) defeats mighty warriors,
makes useless the powerful Oratory of trusty servants, or these who have gained
great credit and trust in the world, and makes aged people fools,
notwithstanding all their experiences, v. 19, 20. And again he pours contempt
upon honorable Princes, who had been in great esteem, and weakeneth the
strength, even of the most mighty; or, loses their girdle, whereby their
loins were strengthened, v. 21. See Am. 2.14, 15, 16.

All these instances tend to one purpose, and do teach,

1. States, Kingdoms, and Princes, are in Gods hand; He can reach the greatest,
nor will they stand any longer then his hand is about them: As those instances
teach. He disposes of the wisest and greatest as well as others.

2. God gives proof of his Wisdom and Power on such eminent persons, because
they are left on his hand, and none else can reach them, when they do wrong;
and because we will not see his hand in Providence toward meaner persons;
Therefore, does he instance Gods Power and Wisdom in his over-turning of those,
to show that the greatest cannot escape God, and to lead us to see his Hand
(and not second causes only) in such dispensations.

3. God, often times, proves his Power and Wisdom on eminent persons, by pulling
them down (as all those instances hold forth) because he is but little seen in
his mercies, raising them up and upholding them.

4. Many things must concur to the settlement and right ordering of a State;
As here is employed, that there must not only be Kings, and Bonds of Authority
keeping people in subjection, but inferior Judges, and men of Valor and
Courage, Wisdom, Counsel and Eloquence: For, all those are supposed here in a
State. This may give men a check, who think it an easy task to manage Public
affairs; whereas indeed, eminency lifts men up upon a Stage, where their
emptiness will soon appear, if they be not well qualified. And it serves to
commend God, who gifts those variety of endowments for Public Employments,
without which, Nations and Kingdoms would be but dens of Confusion.

5. When God is about to bring ruin, no Wisdom, Authority, Eloquence,
Experience, Honor, nor strength in men, will be able to prevent it; as those
instances do teach. Authority may be contemned, Wisdom, prove folly, and
Strength weakness. Men will not be Masters of their own Tongues, or Parts; but
either they will prove false to them, or they will prove vain, and frustrate
their expectations of any probable issue or success. Thus it happened to
Adonibezek, Judge. 1. to great Nebuchadnezzar, to the Princes of Zoan, Isa. 19.
and many others. And such as rightly improve this,

1. Ought to see much of God in such great Revolutions: and that much conceit
and abuse of Wisdom, Power, and Authority, provokes God so eminently to appear
against them.

2. They ought not to cry up men's Abilities, their Power or Policy, in their
successes; For those endowments are able to effectuate any purpose, only in so
far as God imployeth them, in mercy or in judgment.

3. Other Rulers should learn to improve such documents of their own frailty,
as here are set before them, Dan. 5.18. -- 22.23.

4. Meaner persons should much more fear, when such tall Cedars are shaken and
overthrown.

5. Gods people may here see what God can make of all those, when they are
employed against them. Wit, Strength, Counsel, etc. so employed, can easily be
blasted.

Verse. 22. He discov^reth the deep things out of darkness, and brings out to
light the shadow of death.
The third proof of the Assertion, wherein Wisdom (though not secluding Power)
chiefly shines, is, Gods discovering of things which lie buried in deep
darkness, and his bringing those things to light which lie hid, as it were, in
eternal darkness. This is applicable to many things; such as, new discoveries
of Arts, Minerals, parts of the World, etc. Gods bringing out of things
unexpected, and never dreamt of, by prophecy; His bringing out of great and
strange things out of dark and intricate conditions; His discovering of men's
way, whether for integrity or unsoundness; And, his discovering of plots and
projects, which are deeply and closely contrived by men. This last does suit
best with the subject in hand, where he is speaking of State Affairs. But the
sentence being general, I shall not restrict it; And from it we may Learn,

1. Most part of things in the world are much darkened and hid up from men in
it, and a vail is cast over things in the world to many men; For, there are
deep things in darkness, and in the shadow of death. Beside many secrets in
Nature, and things in the world not found out; Gods Counsels about humane
affairs are very deep, Mic. 4.11, 12, 13. Psalm. 92.5, 6, 7. Men's integrity is,
often, covered with a very thick cloud, Psalm. 37.6. Though the unsoundness of
some be open before hand, yet in others it is hid, and follows after to
judgment, 1 Timothy 5.24. Men's conditions are, often times, very intricate, that
they know not what to make of them. And men's designs are, oft-times, so hid and
close, and there is so little ingenuity, and so many pretenses, in the world,
that it is difficult to see through them. This may humble men for their conceit
of knowledge; And may let them see that they are unfit Judges, oft-times, of
things in the world (which is but as a Stage full of masked persons) or of
their own conditions, or of Gods purposes. And it calls for much wisdom and
discerning, that we be not deceived through simplicity, taking every person, or
thing, to be really that which they appear to be at first view.

2. All those things, which are most dark and hid, are known and open to God;
For, so does his discovering of them import See Heb. 4.13. He knows his own
thoughts and counsels, when we know them not; Jer. 29.11. He is a witness to
means integrity, when it is hid under cloud; and he knows their unsoundness who
seek to cover it with many masks. See Rev. 2.2, 9, 13. and throughout those
Epistles. He knows what to make of the intricate and perplexed conditions of
his people, Ezekiel. 37.3. And he knows all men's designs, Isai. 37.28. This
warns men, that it is not enough that they are seen of none, since God sees
through their masks and pretenses; And it teaches Gods people to rely much upon
him, and to trust his verdict concerning ill courses, which are carried on in a
plausible way, Romans 16.17, 18.

3. The Lord not only knows all those hidden things, but can, and, when he
will, does, discover them; As the Text holds out to us. He will not always keep
his own way in the dark, and in deep waters, but will discover it when need
requires He will bring out men's integrity and righteousness, Psalm. 37.5, 6.
Mic. 7.9. He will decipher unsoundness, 2 Timothy 3.9. Will cause men bring out
what is in their hearts, by adversity or prosperity, 2 Chronicles. 32.31. See Mat.
10.26. And he will bring plots to light when he pleases, as he did by Elisha,
2 King. 6.9, 12. and may bring them out by as unlikely a mean, as if a Bird
should tell it, Eccl. 10.20. or make the plotters own Consciences press them to
lay their designs open, or by a rash word give occasion to find them out. This
warns men, in all conditions, to look upon themselves as on a Stage, and in
open view, before God; that so they may not please themselves with a mask
wherewith to blind men; For God can, and is provoked to pluck it off, when they
care not what they are before him, so they be hid from men. And it warns them
not to make God their party, against whom there is no counsel, nor cunning
conveyance; and who has such a power over our Tongues and Consciences, that we
may be afraid of our own selves (were there no other that could discover us)
when we do evil.

Ver. 23. He increases the nations, and destroys them: he enlarges the
nations, and straiteneth them again.
The fourth proof and instance of the assertion is taken from what God does to
whole Nations; whom he exercises with contrary lots, as he pleases. Sometime
he increases them, in number, wealth, or reputation (for the word may be
applied to any of these) and then destroys them. And again, he enlarges
them, or makes them spread through the world, and then cuts them short. This
was verified on the old World, which being destroyed by the Flood, people did
afterward fill the Earth, who are, from time to time, cut off, when God
pleases. See also Psalm. 107.38, 39.

Hence Learn,

1. Whatever great and mighty Nations think of th^mselves; yet it is all one
with God to exercise them, as any particular person; For, so this instance,
subjoyned to the former, does teach. See Isai. 40 15.

2. Persons or people have all these enjoyments, first from God, which
afterward are cut shor^ by troubles: For, they must be made to increase, and be
Na^ions, before they can be destroyed as such. God does inflict no trial but
upon the Being which himself has first given, and therefore it is not to be
quarrelled.

3. No former mercies will secure a Nation, when God has a quarrel against
them; but mercies ill used will draw on ruin: For, though he increase the
Nations, yet he destroys them again, See Deuteronomy. 28.47, 48.

4. Former mercies will but contribute to imbitter sad lots, to those who abuse
them, For, it heightens the affl^ction, that he increases, and then
destroys. See Psalm. 102.10.

5. Such as have found their condition sadly changed to the worse, may yet be
raised up again and enlarged; and as former increase will not hinder
destruction, when God is provoked, Josh. 23.14, 15. So sad dispensations will
not hinder enlargement, when God is pleased to do them good, Zech. 8.14, 15.
For; after destroying, he enlarges the Nations. This is, especially, true of
the Church, Mic 7.8. upon whose ruins it is not safe for any to rise.

6. The world is but a reeling unsettled thing, that cannot continue long in
one condition; For, yet again straitening (or leading them back to their old
bounds and channel) follows upon enlargement after former destruction. It is
but folly to seek to settle upon earth, or to expect any thing but sweet and
sour interwoven; or to be much affected either with the flattery or frowns of
time.

Verse. 24. He takes away the heart of the chief of the people of the earth,
and causes them to wander in a wilderness where there is no way.

25. They grope in the dark without light, and he makes them to stagger like a
drunken man.


The last proof and instance of the Assertion, is, Gods taking away of wisdom
from the chief persons in Nations (or, from their Heads, or, Rulers, Numb.
1.16. Judge. 11.8.) upon which follows perplexity and irresolution, like the
case of men who have lost their way in a Wilderness, or like those who must
grope in the dark, wanting light, or like drunken men who stagger hither and
thither. See Psalm. 107.4, 27 Isai. 59.10.

This is again repeated and inculcated, beside what is already said of Rules;
Not only because great men will not readily believe this certain Truth, but
will trust to their own understandings; but to show that the ruin of Nations,
formerly mentioned, com^ ordinarily to pass through the infatuation of their
Rulers.

Whence Learn,

1. Plagues and ruin come upon Nations, as by other means, so particularly, by
Gods Plagues upon their Rulers, giving them up to misgovernment; as the
dependence of this upon the former verses teaches. See, Eccl. 10.16, 17. This
informs people that they are not a little concerned in the matter of their
Rulers, but ought to hold them up to God, as those that will prove means and
occasions of much good or evil to them.

2. A special stroke upon Rulers, and a mean of peoples ruin, is, their want
of wisdom and counsel; without which the people perish: Prove. 11.14. For, such
is the stroke here, he takes away the heart of the chief of the people of the
Earth. Where by heart, we are not only, or so much, to understand magnanimity,
as wisdom; as the following discourse makes clear.

3. Let men have never so much wit, and never so much of the spirit of their
calling; Yet, it is in Gods power to deprive them of it, when he pleases; For,
He takes away the heart, etc. See Isai. 19.13.14.

4. When God deserts men, and blasts their wit, they will prove wonderful
silly, and will be filled with perplexities; uncertain of their way, void of
light and counsel, and staggering and irresolute: So much do all these three
similitudes (of wanderers in a Wilderness, gropers in the dark, and drunken
staggerers) teach. See Isai. 51.20. Those considerations do warn men, That they
lean not to their wit; That they suffer not their wit and policy to drive them
out of Gods way, lest that draw on perplexities; That they do not abuse nor
slight divine light, lest they miss it and feel the want of it, in a day of
perplexity; And, That they be sober-spirited, lest they get drunkenness and
reeling of their judgments to the full, for their plague.

CHAP. XIII.
In this Chapter, Job goes on with his Reply; wherein (as was marked in the
entry to Chap. 12.) he, first, makes use of his former Doctrine, Chap. 12, 13,
etc. to show his knowledge, and what cause he had to decline them; to ver. 13.
2. He quits them, and addresses himself to complain to God, ver. 13-20. 3. He
enters upon his complaint, ver. 21-28. But I shall follow it in this order. 1.
He concludes his former discourse, clearing himself from the imputation of
ignorance, ver. 1.2. 2. He appeals from them to God, or, quits them and betakes
himself to God, to have his cause debated; which he avowes to be his desire,
ver. 3. and gives reasons for it. Some whereof are taken from their carriage in
the debate with him; Namely, That they were ignorant, erroneous, and unskilful,
in their dealing with him ver. 4. and so had, to better purpose, held their
peace, ver. 5. And, That (which he wishes they would remark, ver. 6.) they
were sinfully partial in their discourses upon the matter debated betwixt God
and him, ver. 7.8. Which was nothing else but a mocking of God, as they might
feel to their hurt, ver. 9. For God would certainly reprove them for their
partiality; ver. 10. And as God was too excellent, to be thus injured by them;
so they were too weak a party, to endure the just displeasure of so excellent
a Lord, ver. 11.12. Other Reasons are taken from the thing it self, or from the
lawfullness of debating his cause with God. For he professes that, if they
would let him alone, he will plead his cause with God at his peril, ver. 13.
Seeing this his attempt flowed not from despair, ver. 14, but from grounds of
confidence and the conscience of his integrity, befall him what will, ver. 15.
being assured that God will be his salvation, which is far from the condition
of the hypocrite, ver. 16. and therefore he desires they would let him speak,
being confident that God would approve of him. ver. 17.18. And as he is
confident of his cause; So his grief would crush him, if he got not ease by
speaking, ver. 19. 3. Having thus pleaded in defense of his resolution, he
enters upon his complaint and debating of the matter with God. And, having
premitted a caution concerning what he desires of God, previous to the debate,
ver. 20, 21, 22. He expostulates that God should deal so sharply with him, an
innocent and righteous man, ver. 23.24. and should thus crush a weak creature,
ver. 25, as he pursued him, ver. 26.27. till he was unable to subsist under his
hand, ver. 28.

Verse. 1. Lo, mine eye has seen all this, mine ear has heard and understood
it.

2. What ye know, the same do I know also, I am not inferior unto you.


IN these verses Job draws a conclusion from his former discourse, concerning
Gods Power and Wisdom; whereby he vindicates himself from the imputation of
ignorance which had been cast upon him, Chap. 11.6, 12. He declares that he had
been a diligent student of Gods ways (not limiting him to one way of dealing,
as they did) by observation and hearing; and a digester, of what was presented
to him, in his understanding, by meditation; and that he was not inferior to
them in knowledge, that is, in those things which they spoke of God, their
skill was not singular, as themselves judged. Otherwise, by this comparison
bewixt himself and them, he does not own all they said for sound knowledge, but
only what they spoke concerning the Power and Wisdom of God. Of this last, see
Chap. 12.3.

In General,

Obs. 1. How digested and well rooted Job is in what he has formerly spoken,
having observed, and meditated upon it; and having them concurring with him in
it, which might witness that it was not his singular fancy. It were good if
men were thus careful to be sure of their Opinions, before they brought them
forth, to inculcate them upon others.

Obs. 2. He prefixeth a, Lo, or, Behold, to this conclusion and inference, that
they might notice how far they had mistaken him, and be ashamed of their rash
judgment. It is men's duty to be well advised, and examine matters well, before
they condemn any: For, rash judgment proves, ordinarily, false, and reflects
upon the Judger, rather than upon thoe who are judged by him.

More particularly, Learn,

1. Men that would attain to sound and approved knowledge, ought to be very
accurate observers of Gods works and ways of Providence; Isa. 5.12. Psalm. 28.5.
Such was Job's practice here, mine eye has seen (or, observed) all this, or,
all these works of Providence formerly recorded; He has a treasury of those
Observations. This was the practice of the godly, especially before the Word
was written; and much more ought we to study those, and profit by them, now
when we have the written Word, by which we may read them. One eye upon
Providence without us, and another upon our heart and condition within, will
make wise men, if we look upon them through the Perspective of the Scriptures.

2. Approved Students of Gods works will not grow proud of their own
Observations; but, knowing how short their time is, and how much they may be
blinded in present things and times, they will take the help of others, either
in their Discourses or Writings to better their knowledge: For, Job not only
saw this, but he took help of hearing, mine ear has heard. whosoever know any
thing, as they ought to know it, they will be far from conceit of their own
knowledge, or from neglecting means, whereby they may be helped to make
proficiency.

3. Such as are right Students of those excellent things, will not content
themselves with bare observation and hearing of them (as many go no further)
but will be careful to digest them in their understandings, and to ponder them;
that so they may become practicable, and be solidly rooted in their hearts:
For, Job also understood it: Notional men, who have some Thoughts of Divine
Truths only fleeting in their brain, are, upon the matter, but fools.

4. The example of others should stir up men to know God and his works, and not
to come behind with any in those necessary things; For, says, Job, What ye
know, the same do I know also, as being excited, by what they spoke on this
subject, to give proof that he had known the same things also.

5. This comparison betwixt him and them (beside what is already marked, Chap.
12.3. That it is necessary to vindicate and commend our selves, not out of
contention, or from any contempt of others, but when Truth and a good cause
suffers through our sides) may Teach, That it is needful to see what God has
done to us, or, in us, even for our own comfort, when others would decry us: it
being very comfortable, when we find our selves to be in a better condition
then others judge us to be. As Job finds it was with him, when they undervalued
him as an ignorant.

Verse. 3. Surely I would speak to the Almighty, and I desire to reason with
God.
Follows to v. 20. Job's appealing from them, and his betaking himself to
debate his cause with God; which here he propounds as his professed desire,
yea, and delight, to set about it. Zophar. Chap. 11.5, 6. had wished that God
would take him in hand, and then he was sure Job would be made to see his own
ignorance of the Wisdom and Power of God, and God would condemn him, and pass
sentence against him in his cause. Now Job, as formerly he has declared and
proved that he is not so ignorant as they took him to be; So, here, he declines
not Zophar's overture, but does himself also wish and desire to reason his
cause with God; as not fearing to compeer before him as a Father in Christ,
according to the tenor of the Covenant of Grace. He says, he desires (or, as
it is in the Original, it would be his delight) to reason with God; whereby he
not only signifies his eagerness to be at it, but implies, also, that there
were disadvantages and discouragements in his way (such as, sharp rods,
humbling desertions, and apprehensions of Gods terror) which he would gladly
have removed out of the way, that he might deal with more freedom and boldness
in defense of his cause. And so his meaning, in desiring to reason with God,
will be, that he would gladly set about it, if he durst. And albeit afterward
he both resolves, v. 13. and actually enters upon the debate, v 23, etc. upon
all hazards; Yet he still retains the sense of those disadvantages, and his
desire to have them taken away, that he might go about it more confidently, v.
20, 21, 22.

What faults were in Job's actual reasoning with God, will come to be
considered in their own place. Only, while he desires to reason, or, argue with
God, we are not to conceive that he resolves to plead his own sinlesness, Or to
accuse God, or to justify his own boisterous fits, in debating with God; But
only humbly to maintain that he is righteous, notwithstanding his afflictions;
which was a true and just plea, though his passion did over-drive him in the
prosecution thereof. And in this he is not to be justified.

It Teaches,

1. Men should debate Controversies as in the sight of God, and not dare to
maintain that before men, which they dare not avow in the presence of God; For,
Job dare speak that to the Almighty, which he has spoken before them. When men
forget thus to mind God, their Parts, Interest, and Reputation, may bear them
out, and not only make them stiff in their own way, but afford them much to
say for themselves, which yet would be found empty and vain before God.

2. Albeit Honesty and a good Cause may be borne down, and so traduced, as if
it were but lies and men's humors, that it will get no entainment in the world;
Yet it is enough if God approve of it: And men should satisfy themselves with
that, not being discouraged that they are left upon God alone for h^s
approbation. For, notwithstanding all the mistakes of his Friends, Job is
satisfied that he may reason with God, and hopes for his approbation. It is
good that men be, sometime, thus mistaken in the world, that they may try, how
matters stand betwixt God and them; how they will be satisfied with divine
approbation, when other testimonies are denied them; and, how they have taken
with former applause in the world. And this is needful to be well adverted
unto; for those who are much affected with applause in a right way, may readily
take a wrong course to retain it, or, to recover it, if it be lost.

3. M^intainers of a good Cause may not only be deserted by all, and l^ft on
God; but in coming to him for his approbation, they may have sad
discouragements, desertions, tentations, afflictions, etc. to weaken their
hands, though they be right in their cause. For, so Job can but desire to
reason with God, if he durst, as has been explained. See Job 19.5, 6. and
23.3. -- 10. Psalm. 80.4. The right cause must go against all winds and tides,
and the maintainers thereof must be thoroughly tried. Their desertions,
tentations, discouragements, and cross lots, ought not to be misconstructed, as
if thereby God intended to condemn them.

4. Uprightness has boldness, and nothing in God will be terrible to honesty,
and to the man reconciled through Christ; For, though God be the Almighty, yet
Job declines not to speak to him. See Job 23.6. Psalm* 99.4.

5. It is not men's passions and humors (which ordinarily are aloft in trouble)
that will prevail with God, or be approved in their addresses to him; but when,
having solid grounds of confidence, they do humbly and soberly plead them
before him: For, thus (as has been explained) Job desired to reason with God,
or humbly to plead his innocence and integrity upon solid grounds; as Job 23.4.
And though in his practice he miscarried (as many good resolutions are
overpowered by tentation) especially in his expostulating about his
afflictions; yet this was his resolution.

Verse. 4. But ye are forgers of lies, ye are all Physicians of no value.

5. O that you would altogether hold your peace, and it should be your wisdom.


The first reason justifying this his desire and resolution, and taken from
their carriage, is, that they were unskilful in their way of dealing with him.
This is propounded, v. 4. That they were (all of them) ignorant, erroneous, and
unskilful in their dealing with him; Forging false principles, setting them
forth with fine language, and bearing him down with Truths that were
impertinent. Thus they alleged that either he behoved to be a grossly wicked
man, or a close hypocrite, or else God could not be just who afflicted him;
seeing he punished none so as he did him, but only wicked men. As also, that
Gods Majesty was so great, that he could not maintain his innocence before him.
And so while they dealt with him as a wicked man, and exhorted him to
repentance upon that account, they proved unskilful and hurtful Physicians, who
either made use of Error, or misapplyed Truth, to cure him; and therefore he
did justly quit them, and betake himself to God. Unto this he subjoyns a wish,
v. 5. showing that, however they thought they behoved to speak, Chap 11.3. yet
he could save them a labor, and would be obliged to them if they would
continue silent (as they had been at the beginning, Chap ^.13.) and let him
debate his cause with God. And as, by so doing, they should do him a kindness;
so they should evidence more wisdom by their silence, then by babbling thus, to
spoil his cure.

From v. 4. Learn,

1. As there are lies and unsound doctrine, oft-times, hatched and vented in
the Church; so these may be very well busked; For they may be forged, or
dressed up, Psalm. 119.69. The word imports that they may be patched up so (as
the word is rendered, to sow up, Chap. 14.17.) like so many old rags, till they
become some kind of garment; or patched over with Fig tree leaves of pretence^,
or fair shows, that they may be taking. Error usually goes not abroad without
some such Mask; and as forgers or inventers of them are worse then those whose
simplicity and credulity is imposed upon, to own them; so those fine pretenses
do heighten the sin of the course. See 1 Timothy 4.2.

2. Where D^ctrinal Lies and Untruths are discerned, it is no ill manners to
call them so in debate; as Job says his Friends were forgers of Lies. To
charge the maintainers of E^rour with speaking against their mind and light
(which is a moral vice) may be injurious and uncivil; but they may lawfully be
charged with untruth in the thing which they maintain. And thus erroneous
persons should be sharply dea^t withal, Tit. 1.13. though with some difference
and respect had to their condition, Jude, v 22, 23.

3. A troubled affl^cted person is under a Souls-sickness, that needs the
tender and skilful Physician; as Job here insinuates concerning himself.

4. Sound Doctrine is Souls-medicine, in such an affl^cted condition; For, so
would Job have accounted of it, if they had ministered it. It is an unsanctified
affl^ction, where that medicine is not sou^ht after, but loathed; and the godly
should beware that their afflictions do not out-grow Scripture-comforts and
relief.

5. False Doctrine, or true Doctrine mis applied, will never give true comfort;
and a needy soul will soon find busked words and lies to be empty: For, thus
does Job account them Physicians of no value.

6. It is not easy to apply spiritual Physic to a troubled Soul, but even
godly men, who are well-affected to the Patient, may prove Physicians of no
value, if they do not put themselves in Gods hand, and deal soundly, and
prudently, in their applications: For, thus did it prove with Job's Friends.

7. When godly men in affliction are disappointed of their expectations, and
friends prove uselss or hurtful, or forge lies against them, their case is not
desperate, seeing they may go to God: For, so does Job resolve to help himself,
v. 3. seeing they were forgers of lies, and Physicians of no value.

From v. 5. Learn,

1. A bad cause may have abundance of language to set it off; As Job insinuates
they had said enough, and too much.

2. Much empty talk will not ease the afflicted, nor commend a cause to
rational men; For, Job would be free of it, O that you would altogether hold
your peace.

3 Men do not only not profit their bad cause, but they bring no credit to
themselves, by their much speaking in it, or for it; and they would evidence
more wit, or, at least, hide their folly better, by their silence: For, says
he, O that you would altogether hold your peace, and it should be your wisdom.
See Prove. 17.28. James 1.19.

Verse. 6. Hear now my reasoning, and hearken to the pleadings of my lips.

7 Will you speak wickedly for God? and talk deceitfully for him?

8. Will ye accept his person? will ye contend for God?


The second reason, taken also from their carriage, is, that they were sinfully
partial in their judgments. This he ushers in with a Preface, v. 6. wherein, as
he had desired them to be silent, v. 5. so now he desires they would hearken
to his impleading of their lies, that they might be instructed. And then he
propounds his argument, v 7, 8. (which is further pressed in the following
verses) wherein he does not lay it to their charge as a sin, simply, that they
pleaded, or, contended, for God (as the words would seem to bear, v. -- 8.)
seeing God needed not (as Baal) to be pleaded for, as being God, who could
plead for himself, Judge. 6.31. For it is unquestionably lawful, and a duty, to
plead for God, and his interests. But that which he challenges, is, that, in
their contending for Gods righteousness, they dealt partially, in condemning
him. And this he poseth them with, by way of question, both in testimony of his
indignation at their way, and to evidence that their own Consciences could not
justify their procedure.

For clearing of this purpose, Consider,

1. This challenge will be clear if we remember what is the partiality and
accepting of persons condemned among men; with an eye to which Job speaks in
this matter. Partiality, among men, is, when corrupt Lawyers and Judges, having
to do with a potent Client, or party before them, do not ponder nor respect his
cause, but only his person, whose favor they desire to conciliate or keep; and
therefore they do say, plead, or pronounce, what may please him, or be for his
interest, without respect to Truth or Justice. And thus did Job's Friends in
this debate; They did not search out, nor pronounce according to the truth and
justice of the cause, but spoke only what they thought was for God, and against
him, in this matter.

2. Job says of their thus accepting Gods person, in their contending for him,
that it was a wicked and deceitful talking for God: and that both in respect of
himself, whom wickedly, and with deceitful and cunning discourses, they did
condemn, that they might justify God who had afflicted him: And in repect of
God; For it wronged him, and put a lie and trick upon him (as Job after clears)
to say his justice, in afflicting Job, could not otherwise be maintained, then
by their lies and deceits, or, false Doctrine. Yea, (whatever were their
intentions) it reflected wickedly upon God and his Providence. For, under a
pretense of giving him glory, they said, upon the matter, that God could not be
just, if he afflicted and exercised godly men with the same outward calamities
that befell the wicked.

3. That we may yet further understand Job's mind in this challenge, we are not
to conceive that he does challenge them for condemning him against their Light
and Conscience; For it is not to be doubted but their principles led them thus
to judge of him, whatever charity they had for him (that he was a godly man)
before; which made them astonished when at first they came to him and saw him
so afflicted, Chap 2.12, 13. Far less is it his mind to challenge them that
they would not pronounce that he was in the right, and God in the wrong, in
this cause, or in what he done to him. Nor does he at all quarrel them that
they justified and commended God, as holy and righteous in all his works and
ways: For himself labors to outstrip them in such commendations of God. But
the true fault which he challenges may thus be conceived; Upon the one hand,
they, judg^ng that God afflicted none, as he did Job, but only wicked men, did
conclude that God, who had afflicted him, could not be just, if he, who was
afflicted, were righteous, as himself alleged he was: And therefore, judging
themselves bound to stand for Gods Righteousness (as was indeed their duty, if
they had done it by lawful means, and upon sound Principles) they studied by
all means to condemn him (never regarding his defenses, or the evidences of his
grace) that God might be glorified as just. Upon the other hand, Job maintained
both that himself was righteous, and that God was just who afflicted him,
though neither he nor they could reconcile these two; And that therefore they
were sinfully partial on Gods behalf, who could find no other way to justify
God, but by condemning him, which God neither allowed nor needed. And so in
this challenge Job charge them with a true fault, though as they were
culpable on the one hand, he was also faulty on the other hand, in his bitter
complaints about Gods dispensations, because he could not see a reason why the
righteous God should thus deal with him who was a reconciled man.

Having cleared the words; From v. 6. Learn,

1. Men are naturally impatient of contradiction; and a plausible wrong cause
begets such prejudices against Opponents, that men will hardly hear them; For,
he must exhort them, in the very midst of his Discourse, to bear and hearken.
It is no good symptom, when men are irritated, because any thing they do or
say is spoken against.

2. Albeit many personal wrongs and injuries be best answered and refuted by
silence; And albeit a fool should never be answered according to his folly, or
in his own terms, Prove. 26.4. Yet when men do wrong God, his Truth, and
themselves, they ought to be opposed, take it as they will, and not suffered to
live in an opinion that they only are in the right; Prove. 26.5. For, Job will
have them hear his reasoning, and hearken to the pleadings of his lips.

From v. 7, 8. Learn,

1. Even the worst of courses and ways are, ordinarily, masked with the fairest
pretenses, and particularly, that they are for God; For, so they pretended
that, by their erroneous doctrine, they were pleading and contending for God
and his Righteousness. So, oft-times, oppression is commended as a following
and acknowledgement of Providence, Zech. 11.5. and an executing of his
righteous judgments, Jer. 50 7. Persecution is accounted good service to God,
Joh. 16.2. and a glorifying of him, Isai. 66.5. And every Error flees to some
such cloak and pretense: Some entertain unworthy thoughts of Gods Providence,
pretending to free him from being the Author of sin: Some will have Christ's
Body everywhere, pretending his glory, against the Arian Error; Some plead for
Universal Redemption, pretending to exalt Christ's Sufferings, which yet they
enervate in the efficacy of it, by making him die for those who never get
benefit thereby; Some cry up man's Free Will, pretending that, thereby, they
vindicate the Justice of God, in punishing sin; Some decry the obligation of
the Law, as to Believers, pretending to exalt Christ and Free Grace, etc. In a
word, it may very generally be averred, Totus mundus exercet Histrioniam; The
world of men, who go wrong, study nothing more then the art of Stage Players,
that they may appear to be any thing rather then what indeed they are. And
though this be a great trial to honest and sincere hearts; yet this may
encourage them, that such do so much the more make God their Party, as they
pretend to be for him, when, indeed, they are nothing so, but against him.

2. Such pretexts will not justify Error, nor should they hide it from men,
nor deterr them from appearing against it, and from detecting the falsehood of
those pretexts; For, though they pretend to speak, talk, and contend, for God,
yet Job will not admit of their opinion, but tells them it is an accepting of
his person, an injury to God, and to him also. So Robbery will not be
justified, because men pretend to make a burnt-offering of it, Isai. 61.8.

This General Doctrine may be branched out in several Rules and Instances,
wherein it is to be observed,

1. In matters controverted, we ought not to be swayed with what seems at first
view to be most for God, (as his Friends gave out their opinion was;) but
opinions are to be thoroughly searched, to the very bottom, till we find what
really is, and what only appears to be, for God; as Job does here search and
find out the cheat.

2. If even Gods person ought not to be accepted (when men pretend his glory in
their Doctrine) to wrong that Truth which he has revealed, and we are
commanded to embrace, by his Word; (as Job here argues against them) Then
Truth must not be prejudged by any consideration of the greatest, or best, of
men, who oppose it; but the consideration of their person must be laid aside,
till it be impartially tried, what is Truth, and what is Error.

3. God will have no honor nor service tendered to him, but by lawful and
approved means. He will not have his person accepted, nor an attempt made to
give him glory, unless it be upon allowed and approved grounds. He will not
have an ill turn justified by this, that it tends to his honor and service,
Romans 3.8. nor will he allow that a pretense of being for the Righteousness of
God, should be a cloak to hide the wrath of man, Jam. 1.20.

4. Zeal and good intentions will never justify unlawful actions, in Gods
sight; For, his Friends wanted none of these, when Job tells them they
miscarried most grossly.

5. God does not allow that we should devise opinions or worship, thereby to
serve and honor him; but we must cleave to his own prescribed Rule; For,
otherwise he will not be honored by our worship and service, Matthew. 15.9.

6 The Consideration of Gods righteousness, in afflicting of a person or
people, must not be urged to prove them wicked, unless the Word prove they are
so. This is the very instance in the Text.

Doct. 3. Whosoever do not walk according to those Rules, but will study to set
off Error by specious pretenses, they deal both wickedly and deceitfully; They
wrong men (whom they would falsely condemn) of their right, by employing their
wit to overthrow it craftily; and they do insinuate i^l things of God^, by
their pretending for him in their Errors: Yea, their course being wicked in it
self, their handsome and deceitful conveyance adds to the sin thereof;
Therefore, Job says that in all this they spoke wickedly and deceitfully,
cheating him of his righteousness, upon a pretense of Gods glory, and sinfully
implying that Gods Righteousness was gone, and could not be defended, if he
were not wicked. So far different may men in reality be from what they pretend
to be, that they may be acting wickedly, even while they pretend to honor God
in a singular way.

4. His charging home this guilt upon them, by way of question, Teaches,

1. True zeal will not be blunted by the fair face put upon a bad cause, but
rather set on edge to oppose it so much the more; For, the questions import his
indignation at their sinful and unhandsome way.

2. Consciences are not easily convinced of the ill of a plausible and well
masked course and Error; For, he must put their Consciences to it, to see the
ill of their way, before they put themselves to it.

3. However Conscience be deluded for a time; yet at last it will see and
condemn the evil of a course, notwithstanding all its pretenses and fair shows;
For, he puts the matter to their Consciences, as a judge that would speak out
impartially at last.

Verse. 9. Is it good that he should search you out? or as one man mocketh
another, do ye so m^ck him?
In this and the following verses, to v. 13. Job insists to press and inculcate
the former argument upon them, that they may see the evil of their way. And,
First (in this v) he points it out both in the sinfulness and hazard of it. As
to its sinfulness, he tells them, that their pleading to God was as really a
mocking of him, as ever one man mocked another; And a reproach^ng of him and
his righteousness, as if he needed their lies, and had a bad cause, for which
there were no better arguments then they brought. And therefore (as to the
hazard of it) he wishes them to consider how little it would b^ for their
good, or, advantage, that he should search them out, or discover, by effects,
that he looked upon them as mockers of him.

Doct. 1. God sees things nakedly as they are, notwithstanding all the
specious p^etences wherewith they are adorned; And when men will not so see
them, he is provoked to let then know them as indeed they are: For, in this
sense is searching out attributed to God, who knows all things. He searches
out men and their way, when he looks upon them nakedly as they are, (as men do
see things best after search.) And when he causes men know that he so looks
upon them.

2. Men are so shallow, and so easily deluded, that they may think they are
eminently for God, when, in effect, they are but sco^ning him: And,
particularly, they mock God, when they seek the patrociny of his glory to a
wrong cause, or when they defend his cause wi^h false arguments; For, (says
he, of their pl^ading) as one man mocketh another, so do ye mock him Men will
be judged by their actions, whatever their intentions be.

3. Such deluded pretenders serve a thankless Master, for God will not be
mocked upon any account; Gal 6.7. And their Consciences can tell them it will
be little to their advantage, when God shall discover them and their way:
Therefore he propounds it by way of question, Is it good that he should search
you out? Do ye mock him?

Verse. 10. He will surely reprove you, if ye do secretly accept persons.
Secondly, He confirms the hazard of this way, by telling them that God, who is
the Truth, will surely reprove and punish their partiality and respect of
persons He propounds it in general, of accepting of persons, to show that if
God abhor all partiality, much more this, wherein, beside the fault of
partiality, he is wronged in his glory. He propounds also their fault b^ way of
supposition, If ye do accept persons, which is not a ba^e supposition (for Job
had positively charged it on them before) but it supposes the fault to be
real, and the challenge true, and insinuates that if they go on, God (though he
had hitherto spared) will surely punish. He adds, if they do it, secretly, not
against the light of their Consciences, but with cunning discourses, and under
the covert of good intentions, which hid it even from themselves. The
punishment threatened, if they persist in this fault, is, God will surely
reprove them, that is, he will make them know they are in the wrong, either by
his Word and appearing to speak himself, (as he afterward did,) or, (if that
will not do it) by Rod^.

From this, beside what is formerly marked, Learn,

1. Sin may be so masked, with plausible and fair pretenses, and good
intentions, that even the act is cannot well discern the evil of it; For, this
fault was acted secretly, not only cunningly as to others, but even so as it
was hid from themselves

2. All this ignorance and inadvertency of men will not excuse their fault,
considering they are bound to know right and wrong, and that they are accessory
to the involving of themselves in mistakes; For, God reproves secret accepting
of persons.

3. God is most impartial, and does hate, and will discover and punish,
partiality in others, were it committed in favors of good people, or the poor,
Exodus 23.3. Lev. 19.15. or pretended to be for himself: For, in general, it is
said, he will surely reprove them who accept persons.

4 Gods design, in discovering or punishing of sin, is, to convince m^n of it,
and cause them take with it; Psalm 50.21. and were reproofs for sin taken from
the Word, there would be less need of Rods; and when God is provoked to s^ite,
it is not enough men feel the smart of the Rod, unless it be acc^mpanied with
instruct^^n and conviction for sin: Therefore is Gods dea^^^g with partial men
called a reproving of them. See Psalm. 94.22. Prove 29 15.

Verse, 11. Shall not his excellency m^k^ you afraid? and his dread fall upon
you?

12. Your remembrances are like unto ashes, your bodies to bodi^s of clay.


Thirdly, He affrights them yet more from making God their party, from the
consideration of his excellency and their baseness; which might discover both
the sin and hazard of their course. For God is so excellent, that it is a
wonder they should offer to stain his excellency, by endeavoring to help him
with sinful and base shifts, and not dread and fear the vengeance of so
excellent a Lo^d, v 11. Esp^cially considering how base they are; all that is
memorable in them is but like ashes, to wit, in comparison of him; being base
and fit to be trodden under foot, as ashes are, Mal. 4 3. being ready to be
scattered (like ashes) into every wind, and to be turned into dust and ashes:
And to witness all this baseness, their bodies are made up but of brittle clay,
v. 12. All this might tell them how unable they were to resist, if the
excellent Lord should punish them for their foolish attempt.

J^b, by thus vilifying of them, and showing that not only their bodies are
clay, but what is most excellent and memorable in them is but like ashes, or
the basest of things, does not deny that true worth and excellency which grace
and free love in God (which puts a value upon the worthless) had put upon them;
but he only tells them (for their humiliation, and to deterr them from an ill
course) what they are in themselves, especially what they are, being compared
with God, who is so excellent.

And it teaches,

1. God is an excellent Lord, in his Being, Attributes and Works, and ought to
be acknowledged as such; For, Job speaks of his excellency.

2. Such as rightly study and improve the excellency of God, ought to join
therewith a study of their own b^seness; For, that is subjoyned here. And they
are frequently held out as inseparable, Psalm 8.3, 4. Job 42.5, 6. Isai. 6.5.
Genesis 18.27 Eccl. 5.2.

3. Albeit man be but base, yet he is naturally proud and inadvertent, po^ing
upon his own excellencies, before he notice it; For, he must tell them what
they are.

4. Whatever be man's conceit of himself, yet his choice excellencies are but
base before God; all his worth can soon be blasted, and all memorials of his
excellency, written in the dust: For, your remembrances are like unto ashes.

5. The constitution of men's frail bodies should help them to know themselves,
and keep them in mind how base they are; Therefore, it is added, and your
bodies to bodies of clay, As they are really made of clay, how b^autiful soever
they are; so they ar^ like clay-fabricks, in respect of brittleness and frailty.

6. It is not enough men contemplate Gods excellency and their own frailty, and
have notional conceptions the^eof, unless they improve them in practice; For,
these Truths are here brought forth for use, to convince them of sin and hazard.

7. Whoever rightly study Gods excellency, and their own baseness, it will
beget an holy reverence and aw^ of God in them, For, so much may this import in
general, his excell^ncy should make you afraid.

3. This holy awe and reverence, arising from those considerations, should keep
men from taking sinful shifts to help God; For, so thi^ fe^r also is to be
understood that they should fear to disgrace his excellent Righteousness, by
this pleading for it as they did. I^ we look to Gods excellency, it tells u^
that it is but ignorance thereof, and men's undue ap^rehensions of him, that
makes them too hol^ in his matters, and which produce undue actings or sp^aking
for him. And if we reflect u^^n men's frailty, if the sense of that have made
some afra^^ (...) speak in terms (...) ^^mble supplication, Genesis 18 27 h^^ much
mo^^ should base man be afraid to ^^ak of God (...) ^t becomes not?

9. If men will not thus evidence their reveren^^ toward God, and the sense o^
their o^n basene^^ their Consciences may tell them they ought to fea^ his
vengeance, whom they have not feared to off^nd: For, so runs the question,
wherewith he poseth them, Shall not his excellency make you afraid? and his
dread fall upon you? especially when ye consider that your remembrances are
like unto ashes, etc. And this is sad, when Gods excellency, which commends his
condescendence to the humble, Isa. 57.15. and man's baseness and frailty, which
pleads for pity to the lowly, Psalm. 103.13, 14. becomes matter of terror to
the stubborn and obstinate.

Verse. 13. Hold your peace, let me alone that I may speak, and let come on me
what will.
Follows, to v. 20. Job's prosecuting of his appeal, and his confirming of
his resolution by Arguments taken from the thing it self, or justifying his
boldness in reference to God, before whom he was to come. So that, as in the
former Discourse he gave reasons why he declined them, so here he produces his
grounds upon which he dare betake himself to God. In this verse he repeats his
resolution to speak to God, desiring them (who, it seems, began to interrupt
him again) to let him alone and hea^ him. And, albeit as, upon the one hand,
they seemed to plead much for God, so, upon the other hand, they desired to
interrupt him, lest his speaking passionately should provoke God against him;
Yet he wishes them not to be so solicitous, but let him speak at his own
peril; For he is resolved to speak in defense of his own innocence, and to ease
his own grief, Let God do to him what seems good to him.

As for this peremptory language, though it cannot be excused, as free of
weakness and passion; and it seems Job, by speaking, is become more hot, then
when he professed it was his desire to speak, if he durst, v. 3. Yet we are not
to conceive that it is the language of despair, of which he clears himself, v.
14. But partly, as to his Friends, and their apprehension of Gods dealing with
him as a wicked man, he does hereby tell them that he will take his hazard of
any such evil as they apprehended, as indeed not fearing it: Partly, as to God,
it is the language of confidence (though mixed with some passion) that is not
afraid of any hazard from God, as to his eternal happiness; and the language of
submission to what the Lord shall be pleased to do otherwise. And so it hints
at that Argument which is more fully prosecuted in the following verses.

Hence Learn,

1. It is the duty of Saints, when any thing grieves them, not to smother it
within them, but to speak it out to God; as here Job resolves, See Genesis 25.22.
This is the way to ease our spirits by laying our pressures upon him, 1 Samuel
1.15. 1 Pet. 5 7. And it is sad* when our anxieties and pressures do out-grow
our diligence, Dan 9.13. Ezekiel. 24.23

2. It is a great sin to be an hinderance and dis^^^^gem^nt to oppressed minds,
in pouring out their (...) God; Therefore, when they, who came to c^^fo^t him
would have terrified him from this, Hold your p^ace, let me alone, says he,
that I may speak Had they advised him to be more sober and meek in his
address^s, it had been his fault not to have hearkened unto them: But when they
will not at all (...) him come to God as a sincere man, they had better (...)
nothing. And hereof not only those are guilty, who hinder others by their own
example, or dissuade them by their counsel, from going to God in trouble; but
they also who discourage men in their approaches unto God under trouble, by
aspersions on themselves, or on their way, without cause.

3. Job's peremptory resolution to speak, come on him what will, laying aside
his passion, shows, That honest hearts will not stay away from God, for any
hazard: For,

1. They will not readily suspect any evil at his hand, having his Promises to
the contrary.

2. Be the consequents what they will, they will hazard upon them, rather then
stay away from God, and rather then bear what they suffer, in staying away,
under pressures. In such a case, men's Lot may appear to them to be sad enough,
whatever they do; and therefore they will hazard on God, as the Lepers did upon
the Camp of the Syrians, 2 King. 7.3, 4.

3. They will have much submission to what befalls them in the way of their
duty; so that if they cannot reckon that they will get no hurt, they will study
to submit to it, and see love in it, if it come.

Verse. 14. Wherefore do I take my flesh in my teeth, and put my life in mine
hand?
Job's Arguments, further confirming and justifying his resolution, may be
reduced to two; The first whereof (which is largely prosecuted, to v. -- 19.)
may be taken up in this short sum; His going to God with his complaint flowed
from no despair, but from the Conscience of his integrity, and his confidence
in God, and assurance that he could be approved; and therefore he might
lawfully set about it, nor was there any hazard in it, as they feared. This
Argument does indeed evidently conclude, both the principal point in
controversy, that he was not a wicked man; as also, that he might lawfully go
to God with his case, though it justify none of his imperfections in the way
of his address, which himself did also condemn, when God laid them to his
charge.

In this verse, he proves, Negatively, that it was not despair that drove him
upon this course. He looks upon such a desperate course no otherwise then as if
a man should tear his own flesh with his teeth, and expose his life to a
manifest danger, as a thing in a man's hand which is ready to fall out, or,
which he has there, ready to resign and deliver it up. See Psalm. 119.109. Now,
says he (as the words should be read) Wherefore would I take my flesh in my
teeth, etc. He would not have them think he is so mad, as to slay himself, or
to run upon his own ruin, by coming so confidently to God without a ground.
And so his very hazarding to come to God proves his integrity.

Hence Learn,

1. Men are very ready to add to their own great troubles, by miscarriage and
distemper under them, especially by heartless and wicked despair; when by
discouragements they break their own spirits, and lay them on as a load above
their burden; when they weary of their life, and suspect Gods love and favor
to them; when they cast away confidence as useless, Heb. 10.35. 2 King. 6.33.
or let their spirits fly out against God in passion: Rev. 16.9. For, this was
the evil whereof they suspected Job, that he took his flesh in his teeth, etc.
in this his way.

2. Such distempers are madness and folly, if examined by the Principles of
right Reason; For, Wherefore, says he, would I be so mad, as take my flesh in
my teeth, etc? And, indeed, such a course helps us nothing; it speaks us rather
irritated, then humbled, by our afflictions; it hinders better exercise; Lam.
3.39, 40. it provokes God to add to our trouble; and (as it is in the Text) it
eats our flesh (and wastes our bodies, as if we did eat them with our teeth) and
hazardeth our life before God.

3. Faith in a strait may seem to venture so much, as to be full of
presumption, when yet it has a sure ground: For, he disclaimeth that his faith
was desperate presumption, as they judged it to be, and reckoned that he was
running upon his ruin, when he was bold in his addresses to God. Faith, in a
strait, must not stand upon misconstruction from on lookers. So also, in other
things, Mordecai must not bow to Haman, nor Daniel shut his window, nor Moses
leave a hoof, however others look upon them for it.

4. Albeit men can give no other convincing grounds of their faith in a strait;
yet their very confident going to God with their distress, proves their honesty
and that there is a ground for their faith; For, so does Job argue from his own
practice; He will go to God, and if there were not a ground to go upon, he
would not be so mad. Thus ought Saints to refute their tentations, and prove
they have grounds of confidence (though themselves or others cannot see them)
by their going to God.

Verse. 15. Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him: but I will maintain mine
own ways before him.
In this verse he proves, Positively, that he went upon grounds of confidence,
and the testimony of his integrity, when he adventured thus to go to God. For,
albeit the Lord should not only afflict him, as hitherto he had done, but
should even slay and cut him off; yet he would not quit his adherence to him,
nor the maintenance of his own integrity.

For clearing of the words, Consider,

1. His Assertion, I will trust in him, may be read by way of question, Shall I
not trust, or hope? To intimate his firm resolution that certainly he will
trust and hope, and That they (if they would open their eyes) might see it was
his duty.

2. As for this trust, or, hope, whether we read it affirmatively, I will
trust, or hope in him, that is in God; or by way of question, Shall I not hope?
the thing that is fixed upon, is God, from whom he expects approbation and
eternal salvation (as is cleared in the following verse) even though he slay
him.

3. He joins his maintenance of his integrity with his confidence, by the
adversative particle, but, or, by way of exception only, (or, yet) I will
maintain, etc. Not that there is any opposition betwixt those, or any real
exception from his confidence in his maintaining of his integrity; seeing that
proved the strength of his faith, that he would, in such a condition, maintain
his integrity: as it proved his self-denial, that, notwithstanding the
testimony of his integrity, yet, trust in God is the course he follows. But,
whereas they could allow him to trust in God on their terms, and to expect, not
only eternal salvation, but temporal deliverance, if he would be converted and
turn to God; He professes that he will so trust in God, as he will not
renounce his former integrity. Or, it may be understood thus, by way of
conjunction with his resolution to trust, that though God slay him, yet he will
trust, and yet also he will maintain his own ways before him.

4. This is a strong proof of Job's honesty, and that he may boldly go to God,
to lay his case before him, seeing none but an honest man would keep his grip
in such a difficulty, as he clears, v. 16.

Doct. 1. It is the duty of godly men to lay their account for the saddest of
dispensations, and sadder then, possibly, yet has befaln them; that so they
may not stumble at such when they come, and may bear more easy lots patiently:
For, Job supposes, here, that God may slay him. It is true, when we are in a
sad condition, we are apt to make it worse by our apprehensions and fears; Yet
it is our duty to be resolved for the hardest of lots: not looking upon them as
inconsistent with love, nor yet stumbling if they befall us, nor quarrelling
because others have a more easy task.

2. Saints must resolve, that faith, and only faith, must support them under
these pressures; without limiting of God to give them much joy and sense at
such times; For, here Job lays his account only to trust. As Faith is surer
then Sense, and will afford us necessary help in distress, Psalm. 28.7. and does
so support us, as yet we want not the exercise of our trials, for our use and
behoof; So, readily, we could not well bear any more then it, in our troubles,
nor would our troubles discover us to ourselves, nor should we be able to
discern Gods wonderful supporting of us in our faintings, if our bitter lots
were still sweetened with sense.

3. Satan's great design in troubles and tentations, is to crush our confidence;
wherein when he prevails, he gets his will of us, and drives us into all
inconveniences: For, Job looks upon it as his greatest task, in the saddest
lots, that he trust, and quit not his confidence, See Luke 22.31, 32. They who
cast away their confidence in trouble, do themselves as ill a turn as Satan
could wish them. For what can they do next, but either grip to it again, or
else resolve to turn out of Gods way, if that can bring them case, or lay their
account to be crushed and swallowed up? Therefore it should be our chief care
to keep faith, and if we do not undervalue it because we have no more, we will
not cast it away; and if we cast it not away, Satan will not easily get us
driven from it.

4. Albeit many do think that they do well when they cast away their
confidence; yet no trouble, how great soever, is a warrant to quit it; For,
even though God slay, it is a duty to trust. Saints ought to fix this as a
Principle, that, be their trouble what it will, or let it say what it will to
them by way of reproof, or whatever they think they ought to read in it; Yet,
it does not say that they should quit their confidence. Psalm. 46.1, 2. For
faith is given us for such times and lots, to bear us through; Prove. 24.10.
Heb. 10.38. Great troubles are a call to believe, and a mean to excite us to
that duty; Psalm. 56.3. And it is service and obedience to God, as at all times,
Psalm. 62.8. so, especially, at such a time, 1 Samuel 30.6. And therefore should
be set about with an eye to his command, whatever our apprehensions be of the
success of it.

5. As no trouble of it self, so neither the seeing of God as our party in
trouble, should mar confidence; For, says Job, Though he slay me, yet will I
trust. Faith must not quit God, when he seems to quit it, but must take him for
a friend, and put a good construction upon his dealing, when he seems even to
deal like an enemy. In such a case, (beside the faith of a better life; ver.
16.) the trust and confidence of a Child of God should appear, In his adhereing
to God and his way, as his only safety, and way to an issue; Psalm. 44.17, 18,
19. In trusting his Power, that he is able to deliver, but with much submission
to his good will and pleasure; Dan. 3.17, 18. In giving him credit, that his
dispensations (whatever sense, have, carnal reason, etc. seem to find in them)
will never give his Word the lie; but whom his Word approves, they are
approved, do to them what he will; And (consequently) In believing that there
is more good will in his heart, then is seen in his dealing.

6. Not only has faith a warrant thus to adhere to God, but faith has been
attained in such exigents: Believers have essayed it, and been victorious; As
we see here in Job's experience. And albeit the experience of one be much, yet
we may be the more encouraged, that we have a cloud of witnesses, bearing
witness to this truth, that faith is attainable, and has carried men through,
in saddest trials and assaults. See Romans 8.38, 39. 2 Cor. 12.7, -- 10. Jonah
2.4. 1 Samuel 30.6. Psalm. 46.1, 2, etc. and many the like instances.

7. Not only ought Saints not to quit their grips by faith and adherence, but
not to renounce their integrity, whatever befall them; even albeit, not only
troubles come, but God himself appear an eminent party in them; For, he adds, I
will maintain, or, argue mine own ways before him. It is Satan's great policy,
to drive us to renounce what evidences of grace we have, either as an evidence
of our tenderness under trouble, or upon a pretense that we may begin of new
upon better grounds: But to hearken to this, were both injurious to God and his
grace, and would still shake us loose at every new difficulty.

8. The testimony of our integrity is not therefore to be quit, because we have
difficulty to keep it, and much seems to speak against it, or, because we have
many steps in our walk, which are real faults; For, Jobs arguing implies he
had difficulties and objections about it, to answer; and his arguing only his
ways, or more general course and tenor of his life, implies that he would not
undertake to maintain every particular step of his walk.

Verse. 16. He also shall be my salvation: for an hypocrite shall not come
before him.
In the verse Job proceeds to illustrate and commend his confidence,

1. From the measure and greatness of it; his trust is not only a simple
adherence to God upon all hazards, but it is full of confidence, also, that,
whatever God do to him in this life, yet, he will be his eternal salvation.

2. From a consideration of the contrary state of the hypocrite (which both
commends his confidence, and proves his integrity) wherein he shows that such
dare not venture to come to God in such a strait, as he does, nor durst he
venture if he were one.

From the first part of the verse Learn.

1. Albeit the Children of God may have enough to do, to get adhering to God in
trouble; Yet assurance of his favor is also attainable. Those may expect much
good, who adhere to him in all hazards, and they should study to attain the
assurance of it; For, Job, to his trusting, v. 15. adds, he also shall be my
salvation. Such as take Ester's resolution, in cleaving to God, Est. 4.16. may
confidently add what Job says here, and ought to expect good things of God.
Isai. 32.8.

2. Adherers unto God have ground to expect that their eternal salvation will
be the worst of it, in sad times; They are allowed to lift up their heads above
a particular issue, as below them; and to expect that, if they get not that,
they will, once for all, get complete redemption from all their troubles, and
eternal salvation to the advantage: For, this Job expects, even though God
should slay him, he shall be my salvation. It may appear sad, when godly men
are taken away in a cloud, and before they see an issue of some particular
trials, as Psalm. 27.13. (wherein God will always do what he knows to be best)
yet we should reckon that we are not behind, if we get salvation, how dark
soever our passage to it be.

3. A Child of God may not only expect salvation, but that God will be
salvation to him; As Job here has it, He shall be my Salvation, or, Salvation
to me, or, for salvation to me.

This imports,

1. That God is the Purchaser and Procurer of Salvation, to any of lost mankind
who are saved, and we must look to his purpose and purchase, in expecting it,
not to any thing in our selves.

2. That God is the Securer of his Peoples salvation, when all means fail.

3. That it is Gods Prerogative to save, when all things seem to speak and
threaten destruction, Psalm. 3.8.

4. That he gives himself to his People, with salvation, that so their
salvation and happiness may be complete, as Isai. 42.16.

From the Second Part of the Verse,

Obs. 1. Job compares himself with the hypocrite, not with other wicked men;
not only because his former profession made his Friends suspect that he was one
of these, rather then an openly wicked man; and therefore, as they had
insinuated that he was such a one, Chap. 4.6. and 8.13. So, here, he vindicates
himself: But further, it tends to show, That whatever evil, or scandal, there
be in gross prophanity, Yet hypocrisy is one of the most dangerous conditions;
Not only because it offers to mock and scorn God; but because it goes the
greatest length in deceiving men themselves, and never suffers them to know
themselves, till, ordinarily, matters be past remedy. Therefore, Job parallels
his case with that of the hypocrite, especially, as being the most dangerous
condition, if he were such a one.

Obs. 2. Job's practice, in making this parallel, does, also, teach, That it is
the duty of a Child of God, not only to avoid conformity to the profane world,
but to clear marches betwixt himself and masked Hypocrites; And as he should
not undervalue what is good, because an Hypocrite has it; so he should labor
to have somewhat that an Hypocrite has not; which is to Job an evidence of his
sincerity, that an hypocrite shall not come before God, as he does.

Obs. 3. While he makes it the mark of an hypocrite, and an evidence of his
miserable state (in opposition to his own honesty and confidence in trouble)
that he shall not come before God, or, to his face;

1. The meaning is not, that an hypocrite shall not see the face of God in
glory, as the godly do; Psalm. 17.5. For, though that be a truth, yet Job is
here differencing himself from the hypocrite, by somewhat within time, which
tends to prepare for that full and final difference in the world to come. But
the meaning, is, of coming to God by confident addresses in Prayer, which is
the work Job is now minding to set about.

2. This is not the meaning, that the hypocrite has no right to come to God in
trouble; For, though that be true, yet that is not visible to men, if they come
at all; and therefore cannot be Job's meaning, whose scope is visibly to
difference himself from an hypocrite.

3. Not is it the meaning, that they shall not have access to God, but find a
shut door, if they do come; For, Saints may be exercised with that, to their
own sense, Psalm. 22 1, 2. But the meaning is, that an hypocrite will not come
to cry to God in his troubles, is Job 36.13. Yet,

4. The meaning is not, that the godly may not, for a time, be discouraged in
their Prayers, and even driven from them; and that the hypocrite may not cry to
God in some troubles: For neither the godly nor the hypocrite must be tried by
what they are at fits. But the meaning is, That trouble coming to an height,
(such an height as Job felt, and further supposes here, even that may slay
him, v. 15.) will find out and discover the hypocrite, by his not coming to
God, and the godly man, by his cleaving still to him.

Hence Learn,

1. Albeit the glory of hypocrites consist, chiefly, in their show of seeking
God; yet there are cases, and some times of trouble, wherein this mask will be
pulled off them, and they shall not come before him. Either they will have so
slender an estimation of God, and his way, that they will think it little worth
the waiting upon; and so long as they have another shift, they will not prize
Prayer, nor dependence on God in his way. Thus did Achaz in his distress,
having his expectation fixed upon the friendship of his Confederates, Isai.
7.11, 12. and 8.12 Or if other means fail, and their expectations be delayed in
waiting upon God, they will weary, as was the practice of that King, who put on
Sackcloth for a time, 2 King. 6.30, 33. Or great troubles will terrify them,
and drive them into despair, that they dare no more dally with God and his
service, as Isai. 33.14.

2. From this it follows, That they prove themselves honest men, who, in the
height of trouble, will abide by it, and go to God and keep his way; and will
not cast away confidence and dependence, come what will: For, this is Job's
proof of his honesty, that he will come before God, which an Hypocrite will not
do. Thus honesty is proved in troubles, by waiting and desires, Isai. 26.8. by
cleaving to Gods way, Psalm. 44.17, etc. by persevering in Prayer, Psalm 88.13,
14, 15. and by confidence in these Prayers, expecting wonders to be showed to
the dead, ere the honest seeker of God be utterly forsaken; Psalm. 88.10, 11. In
a word, when Saints blush and are ashamed to come to God, Ezra 9.6. when they
are affrighted with trouble, or whatever their disadvantages be; yet to come to
God, and cleave to him, is good, and a proof of honesty.

Verse. 17. Hear diligently my speech, and my declaration with your ears.

18. Behold now, I have ordered my cause, I know that I shall be justified.


Unto all these commendations of his confidence, and evidences of his
sincerity, Job subjoyns an inference and conclusion; wherein he wishes they
would diligently attend to what he was to say to God, both by way of
declaration of his sorrow, to plead for pity, and, especially, by way of
pleading his own integrity; being confident (as one who had considered and
examined his own cause exactly) that God would justify and absolve him: not
approving every escape in him, especially, in the way of managing the debate,
but declaring him a righteous man in a Mediator, and that he had better cause
in this debate betwixt him and them.

Hence Learn,

1. Men in trouble should have much liberty and allowance to speak their mind,
and what they say should be well attended to, as not being rashly spoken, but
from real pressure of mind; For, says he, hear diligently my speech, and my
declaration (either of my sorrows, or integrity, or both) with your ears. This
he presses, that so they might see what Truth is in what he said, and what his
case was, that made him speak as he did. Men get pressures to teach them to
speak solidly, and not at random; and what such speak, should not be slighted;
but, albeit all they say cannot be justified, yet, their pressures should plead
for much allowance and compassion; as in another case, 2 King. 4.27.

2. Even good men, when themselves are unconcerned, are, ordinarily, but little
sensible of the condition of others, and do little regard their complaints;
Therefore he must double Exhortation, that they would hear, and hear
diligently, and, with their (...) The neglect of this duty is an ordinary
presage ^f trouble to come upon our selves, as Reuben observed, Genesis 42.21, 22.
And the Disciples, who were little tender of the multitude, who crowded after
Christ to enjoy his company which themselves had without interruption, are sent
away to Sea without him, that they might learn to pity others, who could not at
all times be with him, Matthew. 14.15, 22, etc.

3. Saints may attain to assurance of Gods approbation; As here, Job knows he
shall be justified. This assurance has been attained, even in sad distresses,
Romans 8.35, 38. And for godly men to doubt of it, is their sin, though every
doubting be not inconsistent with faith, nor even with some degree of
assurance. And therefore such ought not to habituate themselves to unbelief and
doubtings, which may have sad fruits; But they should study to attain
assurance, that they may manage their approaches to God with hope and
confidence.

4. Such as would maintain their confidence, assurance, and integrity, ought to
try and examine their own estate well; For says he, Behold now I have ordered
my causes, or taken notice of all I have to say for my self. Not only is a
delusion in the main matter dangerous, but even in every particular evidence of
our sincerity, and ground of confidence. For if we build upon any unsure
Principle, the discovery of that may, readily, cast all loose, when yet there
is no cause why we should do so; seeing one may be truly honest, who yet may be
mistaken of some evidences of it. And therefore we ought to be very exact and
cautious.

5. Albeit men, having searched themselves never so exactly, cannot conclude
that they can abide Gods search and judgment, as he is a severe Judge; nor yet
that they are perfect according to the tenor of the Covenant of Works; (which
is the meaning of Paul's words, 1 Cor. 4.4.) Yet it is of Gods great mercy,
that, upon men's impartial search of themselves, and finding things right, they
may believe God will absolve them, and approve them as sincere, according to
the tenor of the Covenant of Grace: For, so Job, having ordered his cause,
knows that he shall be justified. If our hearts do condemn us (upon just
grounds, and not upon a mistake) the thoughts of Gods Omniscience may indeed
affright us, 1 John 3.20. But if our hearts (upon solid grounds) condemn us
not, thoughts of his Al-seeing eye need not weaken our confidence, 1 John 3.21.

Verse. 19. Who is he that will plead with me? for now if I hold my tongue I
shall give up the ghost.
In this verse Job concludes his first Argument (upon which he has so long
insisted) taken from his confidence; professing that since he know of such a
Judge as God was, and had so studied his cause, he would gladly know his party,
being ready to enter the lists with any of them in this quarrel. Unto wh^h
(...) subjoyns the Second Argument confirming and (...) his resolution to plead
his c^use with (...) is taken from his great pressure and dis^ (...). He
d^clares that, as his assurance to be (...) (of which he has already spoken)
is not ^mall; so, his p^nt pressure to speak was not little. (...) if he should
hold his peace (as they judged was his duty) it would cost him his life. Not
only was he to d^e shortly, h^ng in such a wea^ condition, and so, if he spoke
not in time, he would leave his integrity unclear'd under all the blo^s they
had cast upon him, and Gods severe dispensations seemed to charge him with: But
unless he got a vent to his grief, by speaking and complaining, it would crush
him and hasten his death. And this Argument is so pressing (upon Job's own
spirit) that having once named it, without more ado he betakes himself to God,
and begins his address to him, in the following verses.

Doct. 1. Saints must resolve that they will not always get their assurance
held up in confident assertions, not contradicted by any person or thing; but
must lay their account to have it questioned with pleadings and fightings; As
Job here supposes.

2. They must not resolve to cast away their assurance, when it is ooposed, not
only by temptations from within, but by misconstructers from without; But they
ought valiantly and resolutely engage against whatsoever opposition in this
quarrel: For, says he, Tho is he that will plead with me? See Romans 8.35, etc.
Such wrestlings of faith will hold our gri^^; will encourage and enable us to
purge out any dross which tentations do discover to weaken confidence; and will
bring many proofs of Gods love. And wherefore is faith given to us, but that it
may stand in such assaults*

3 Saints are, oft-times, hard put to it with trouble, so that not only they
are weary, but like to be crushed thereby; For Job is at giving up the ghost,
with it. This should not be mistaken by godly men, when it is their lot; and as
they should labor to avoid this extremity, of being crushed, and not complain
that they want exercise, which (it may be) God knows they could not bear; so
they should be careful not to be secure and at ease, when God is calling them
to be exercised.

4. When Saints are most hardly put to it by trouble, there are still some
means appointed, which, being essayed, will bring some case; As h^r^ Job
supposes there is somewhat to be done which may prevent his giving up the
ghost.

5. Albeit we should not make too much noise of our exercises, (and we are not
truly exercised, if we be proud of it) yet even to vent our grievances by
speech will be some ease to a troubled mind; and when we are under any
distress, we ought not to be Satan's Secretaries, to conceal it, but should vent
it to God, and (if need require) to others also; For, this is Job's way of
ease, to tell his ^ase. If I hold my tongue, I shall give up the Ghost. To
smother our condition is ill, not only when God furnishes us with good matter,
Job 32.18, 19, 20. or when we would keep up guilt, Psalm. 32.3, 4. But even
under distress of mind, our grief will grow by not telling it to God; Yea, many
time, we may conceal and hide our condition as singular, which others have
experienced as well as we, and would clear unto us, if it were communicate unto
them. Only we ought so to manage our expression of our distresses, whether to
God or men, as our griefs be not augmented thereby, as, Psalm. 77.3. If we open
those wounds, without some exercise of faith; if we do only complain,
forgetting thankfulness; or, if we complain only to others, without pouring out
most of our complaint in Gods own bosom; Ezekiel. 24.23. the essay of this Remedy
will but augment the Disease.

6. It is an evidence of humility (at least, of one in a low and pitiful
condition) when any lawful mean of ease is much thought of: when men are
willing to be at pains to refresh themselves; and, when ease of grief, by
venting of it, is looked on as some out-gate; For, so was it with Job here, who
was willing to speak, lest if he held his tongue, he should give up the ghost.
Such as despise any lawful mean of comfort, or the least measure of lawful
ease, or will not be active to take off what they can of the weight of their
own pressures, they are not sick enough, at least, not humbled under their
afflictions and exercises.

7. The expressions of afflicted Saints ought to be tenderly constructed, as
being forced upon them through the vehemence of their distress; For, thus was
Job driven upon his complaint, lest silence should hazard his life. Men that
would censure Saints expressions under trouble, ought not only to consider what
they say, but whether they say it willingly and maliciously, or whether it be
extorted from them through the violence of tentation.

Verse. 20. Only do not two things unto me: then will I not hide my self from
thee.

21. Withdraw thine hand far from me: and let not thy dread m^ke me afraid.

22. Then call thou, and I will answer: or let me speak, and answer thou me.


After all these reasons justifying Resolution, Job proceeds (in the third part
of the Chapter) to his actual reasoning with God, which continues till the end
of his Discourse. To which (in these verses) he premits a desire, by way of
Caution, that God would grant him two suits, and then he would confidently
compete, and not hide himself, as one afraid to enter the lists, v. 20. Namely,
That God would ease him of his present trouble, and, That he would not confound
him with h^ dreadful Majesty, v. 21. Upon which terms, he offers unto God his
choice of the weapons, either to propound or answer, as being ready himself to
turn either Plaintiff or Defendant, as God pleased, v 22.

This his desire is the same, in substance, with what he formerly propounded,
Chap. 9 34, and almost in words also. Only, his Hands here, is put for his Rod,
there, And he would have this not only taken away, but, far away, that he might
not only not smart under it, but might not be terrified with the fear of its
return. And though upon the one hand, both his desire, and his offer, that God
may pursue or defend as he pleases, cannot be excused as free of passion, and
therefore he is challenged for those, both by Elihu and by God himself. For, in
his desire to God, v. 20, 21. he does indirectly reflect upon God, who had put
him to such disadvantages in maintaining his integrity, and he attempts to
limit God to such a way of dealing with him, when he should rather have sought
patience, and submission to his lot, such as it was: His offer also, verse. 22.
is too bold and presumptuous, as if he could either defend or pursue in
maintaining all he says; when (though it be true he was an honest man) yet
neither his desire of death, no^ yet his way of managing the defense of his
integrity, were justifiable. Yet, upon the other hand he is not to be too
strictly censured, (as his Friends did) seeing all these bold offers do witness
his confidence and great honesty, though mi^ed with much perturbation and
passion. Nor does he thus challenge and offer to debate with God, considered as
a severe Judge; nor yet does he intend to plead perfection before him, but only
to plead his sincerity, in his sight, as a Father in a Mediator.

From the words, thus cleared, Learn,

1. It is the duty and commendation of Saints, especially under trouble, to be
well acquainted with their own condition, how things are with them, and what
they would be at; For, Job's so frequent repeating of this desire tells so
much, and that he was not fleeting, but knew where he was pinched.

2. When Saints are left on God in their troubles, they may have many humbling
impediments in their approaches to him, which will make them ready to hide
themselves; For, so was it with Job here, v. 20. See, on, v. 3. Godly men are
not to mistake, as if their case were desperate, when they are undone without
Gods immediate help, and yet many things are in their way, to deterr them from
approaching to him.

3. Whoever be the Instruments of the Saints troubles, yet it is God only to
whom they go for ease of them; For, though Satan had an hand in Job's
afflictions, yet his recourse is to God for ease.

4. As troubles lying on may give a sore dash to confidence, and to men's
courage in maintaining of their integrity; (See on Chap. 9.34.) So trouble may
so crush their spirits, that when it is removed, the very fear of its returning
will dash confidence, and discourage; For, Job would have Gods hand removed far
from him. We should beware to give way to crushing, lest that be a cros^, when
other crosses are gone.

5. As God may seem terrible to his own in trouble, (much more is he so to the
wicked;) So this, being too much dwelt upon, may add to their disadvantages in
coming to God; For, he propounds this as another caution, let not thy dread
make me afraid. This calls upon them who would comfortably come to God in
trouble, to pray that God may not be a terror, Jer. 17.17. and not to
entertain only terrifying apprehensions of God, as a party to their honesty
(which he is not; and Job mistook, in thinking Gods terror would not allow him
to avow his integrity) though it be one blessed fruit of trouble, to be made so
sensible of his dreadfulness, as to be afraid to offend him, Psalm. 90.11. Neh.
9.32.

6. Whatever discouragements afflicted Saints find in their approaches to God;
Yet the more humble they are, they will find the fewer: For, Job premits all
those cautions to his speaking to God, only when he is to plead with him in a
contentious way, as a Plaintiff, or Defendant; whereas, had he been more
patient and submissive, he needed not have apprehended either Rods or Terror,
to affright him in his humble addresses.

7. Faith, and the Testimony of integrity, will make a man very bold in great
hazards; For, in this offer, Call thou, and I will answer, or let me speak, and
answer thou me, albeit his spirit did overdrive him; Yet, herein the greatness
of his faith and courage appears, that, being sure of his own honesty, he fears
not guilt, so he be secured against Gods Power; and, that he will debate his
cause on any terms. In this, his miscarriage is not to be imitated; yet it may
teach men to be serious, and to know what they are doing, in the matter of
Piety, that so they may stand it out in a storm.

8. Saints are very ready to miscarry in their dealing with God under trouble;
As here Job did. For it is difficult under trouble to speak aright to God,
humbly and without reflection, Mark. 4.38. And as Satan may make a snare of
men's real honesty, to cause them miscarry in evil times, by deceiving them with
fair shows of good things, or by their own presumption that they must be right,
because truly honest and godly: So the testimony of a good Conscience may be
ill to guide under cross-dispensations; and the man that has it, being hard
put to it, may be so much the more unruly under the cross, that his own
Conscience does not condemn him; as Job was here. And albeit it be their sin
and folly so to do, seeing the advantage of a good Conscience might sweeten all
their trouble, and it were a bitter ingredient in their cup, to have an ill
Conscience; Yet, such is men's weakn^ss in tentation, that they cannot esteem
aright their own mercies.

Verse. 23. How many are mine iniquities and sins? make me to know my
transgression, and my sin.

24. Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and hold me for thine enemy?


Follows his complaint and actual reasoning with God; wherein he discovers
the greatness of his distress and passion, in that, albeit his former desires
and cautions be not granted, yet, upon any terms, he proceeds to complain and
expostulate with God. And since God does not call, to make him Defendant (as
afterward he did) he turns Plaintiff, and argues against Gods proceedings.

The scope of this Discourse (as may be gathered from, v. 24, 25, 26, 27. Chap
14 3, 6. and elsewhere) is, humbly to expostulate with God about his severe
dealing with him, to propound his tentations arising upon his condition, and to
offer reasons why he thought God should not so sharply afflict and exercise
him. His first Argument (in these verses) is taken from his innocence and
integrity; The Antecedent whereof we have, v. 23. And the consequent, v. 24.
The meaning, in sum, is; That being conscious to himself of no gross
provocation, or reigning sin, which might provoke God to deal thus with him; he
desires God would show him, if there were any such, whether more of them, or
any gross one (for he alters the number, from the plural to the singular) verse.
23. And supposing there was none such to be found; he humbly argues against
Gods deserting of him, and (by his deserting of him, and the sad strokes
inflicted upon him) dealing with him as with an Enemy; seeing this was not
agreeable to his way of proceeding with justified persons, v. 24.

For further clearing of this Argument, Consider,

1. Job is not here simply denying that he was a sinner; for so he should lie,
and contradict his own Profession, Chap 7.20. But he only denies that he was
guilty of gross wickedness, or reigning sin, and particularly of hypocrisy,
wherewith they had charged him. And this question is, in substance, the same
with that Assertion, Chap. 10.7. Thou know that I am not wicked. Only the
way of propounding it may be conceived with some reference to what Zophar had
said. Whereas he ( Chap. 11.5, 6.) had asserted that, if God would speak to
Job, he would convince him that he had much more sin then himself knew; Here
Job puts the matter to God, that he would determine that point debated betwixt
them; not whether he had more sin then himself knew; (for Job was too honest
deny that) but whether he had more, or any, of those gross wickednesses, for
which God uses to plague men as he did him.

2. Job's Inference and Expostulation ( v. 24.) upon the Supposition that he
was no such man, does not import that he thought the sins whereof he was
guilty, though a Saint, did not deserve all the afflictions that were upon him,
if God should proceed as a severe Judge, according to the rigor of the Law.
But his scope may be thus conceived; Partly, He looks on God here as a Father,
who uses not to pursue such failings in his people, in severe indignation and
wrath; and he looks upon his own sins as pardoned, and therefore not to be
remembered; and therefore expostulates that God dealt otherwise. Partly, it may
be conceived that Job did indeed fail in this reasoning: For as he usually
maintained against his Friends, that God might afflict a godly man as he did
him, without any imputation to his holiness and righteousness, and yet he
expostulates with God about it here; So he is indeed so hot in justifying
himself against their imputations, that he fails (through weakness) in
complaining of God that he should thus deal with a righteous man. And being
clean of these evils whereof they accused him, he not only tak^s the less
notice of his ordinary infirmities and their desrvings; but even of Gods
Sovereignty and Dominion over his Creatures, which he elsewhere asserts against
his Friends, and which, had he remembered it, might have made him submit to
Gods afflicting of him, had he not only been righteous, but even sinless. And
therefore we find this same discourse (with other^) repeated, in substance, and
censured by Elihu, Chap. 33.8-12. So that here we must not only look to what is
sound, but to his failings, in this Discourse.

From what is sound in his speech, Learn,

1. Men, in judging of their own estate that they are not wicked, should take
special heed to the nature of their sin; lest, when they find gross faults in
themselves, they yet delude themselves with this pretense, that all have
sinned, and even the godly have failings: Therefore Job makes choice of fit
expressions and names of sin, when he is upon the search whether he was a
wicked man, or hypocrite, as they judged. It is true, in both parts of the
verse he makes use of the word rendered sin, which is applicable to all
violations of the Law, under this general notion, that thereby a man declines
and erreth from the mark at which he should level and aim; and he makes use of
this word to point out that a true Saint, who would approve himself to God,
must have an eye upon all sin, the least as well as the greatest, to study to
prevent it, or to repent, for it if he be overtaken in it: Yet the other words,
transgression and iniquity, are added as aggravations and special
qualifications of the sin that he is denying to be in himself; and so the
meaning of these conjoined phrases is, as if Job had said, The transgression
and iniquity of my sin, which is David's phrase, Psalm. 32.5. And thus Elihu
understands him as cleansing himself (not of all sin, but) of transgression and
iniquity, Chap. 33.9. And for the signification of these two words, I need not
be very critical; only the first word rendered iniquity, may denote such a
perverse and crooked deviating from what is right, as is in men who seek
another chief good, beside God, wherein to acquiesce; and the other, rendered,
transgression, (as following upon the former) may import an open rebellion and
defection from God, when men refuse to be reclaimed. Those two cannot be in a
regenerate Child of God, at least he will not persist in them, whatever a sit
of tentation may drive him to do for a time. And when men do wallow in such
sort of sins, their spots are not the spots of Gods people, Deuteronomy. 32.5.

2. As men ought not to deceive themselves, in looking to the nature of their
sin; So neither ought they to deceive themselves with this, that their sins are
few; seeing one gross sin reigning in them may prove them wicked: Therefore he
makes inquiry, not only about inquities and sins, in the plural number, but
about transgression and sin, in the singular number. It is true, one gross
fa^ling (and sometime more then one) may be found in a real Saint, as Adultery
and Murder in David; Yet, as all their good things should not hide the sight of
those from them; So, they do not ab^olutely reign in them, nor do they persist
in them, as the wicked do. And therefore, albeit the concurrence of many gross
evils does he^ghten the guilt of the unrenewed man; yet one reigning sin is
enough to prove him wicked, whatever he seem to be in other things.

3. Honesty and a good Conscience will bear out a man against all imputations;
will look upon a cross as not sent to pursue for sin; and will came a man put a
difference betwixt infirmities and reigning sins; For, in ^o fa^ Job acquits
himself warrantably in these questions propound^d, as has been explained.
Though they charge him with wickedness and hypocrisy, he will not take with
it; and though he will not deny sin, yet he will not take with transgression
and iniquity in his sin (see Psalm. 18.21, 23.) nor can he believe that God is
pursuing his infirmities with this severity.

4. Sincerity and true honesty will make men be content to take with sin, if
God shall discover it and convince them of it; So much also does those
questions and desires import, How many are my iniquities? make me to know, etc.
Such Questions and Proposals to God, in honest men, may flow, sometime, from a
desire that their Rods be not dumb Rods, but they may know what they say, and,
if there be any quarrel, the discovery of it may help them to justify God who
has afflicted; which was the fruit of David's sight of his sin, Psalm. 51.4.
See, also, Neh. 9.33. Sometime, from a conviction and persuasion that God
knows them better than they know themselves, 1 Cor. 4 4. And therefore,
albeit they could not endure, not be able to bear, an exact sight of
themselves; yet they desire not to be deluded, but to have such discoveries as
may help them to grow daily in humiliation and self-abhorrence. Sometime, from
their being jealous of themselves in the matter of their sincerity; and
therefore they would have his verdict upon it, nor will they be satisfied
(though their hearts not condemning of them be enough; 1 John 3.21.) unless he
say so too, and do assure them, by his Spirit, of his approbation. See Psalm.
17.3. with 139.23, 24. These are all good properties in Saints; Yet, if we
consider Job's present temper, that he is persuaded of his honesty, and though
he deny not sinfulness, yet it is not his present work to study it, but rather
to maintain his integrity; we will find that (beside his passionate reflection,
and desire not to be condemned unheard, of which af^erward) the only thing
commendable, and intended by him in these Proposals, is, that however he will
not take with challenges from prejudicate men, yet he will plead guilty, if God
(which yet he looks not for) shall convince him of those evils. And this is,
indeed, a duty, that men give proof of sincerity, by submitting daily to Gods
verdict in his Word.

5. A justified and reconciled man has right to Gods favor, and to friendly
usage; For, if he cannot be convinced of transgression and iniquity, v. 23. he
inferrs, v. 24. that it is strange God should hide his face and hold him for
his enemy. Whatever be Gods dispensations toward a righteous man, yet his
right to those Privileges stands, Romans 5.1, 2, 3. Jer. 31.20. And when his own
weakness, or tentations, deprive him of the use of them, he may complain that
he wants his allowance, as is said in another case, Jer. 2.14.

6. It is an undoubted evidence of a man's sincerity, when Gods hiding of his
face is the bitterest ingredient in his lot; For, this is his first complaint,
Thou hidest thy face. He would not so much have resented the pain of his body,
and other sorrows, if this had not been, as we find at first he bare his
afflictions with singular moderation. And since the favor of God is the
godlies choice, Psalm. 4.6, 7. and their life, Psalm. 30.5. They cannot but be
most affected with the sense of the want of it. And men may discern their own
sincerity or unsoundness, by reflecting upon what they miss most in trouble.

7. As desertion is sad in it self, so also in this respect, that men in that
condition are apt to put a sad construction upon dispensations, and to look
upon God as an Enemy, in what he does to them; Therefore, unto that, Thou
hidest thy face, it is added, and hold me for thine Enemy. As guilt, so also
desertion, is a sad Perspective through which to look upon God and his
dispensations. And we should study to keep near God, lest distance and
desertion breed many tentations.

8. As desertion is thus sad in it self, and in its effects; so it is yet
sadder when men are lying under such a burden, and are in the dark as to the
cause of it, or Gods mind in it; Wherefore, says he, hidest thou thy face,
etc? implying (beside his passion and failing, of which after) that if God
would tell him the reason and cause of all this, if would ease him much; for
then he would know what to do for recovering of his lost allowance; whereas
now, being bemisted, he knew not what to do, but groan and lament under his
pressure. It is true, men may pretend darkness when the cause of their trouble
is legible enough; yet, in it self, it is a great mercy to know the cause of
Gods dispensations, and a double mercy, if we improve that knowledge.

As those things are found in this Discourse; so Job's very mistakes and
failings, in thus arguing, may afford us useful Cautions and Instructions. As,

First, That the righteousness of his cause and person did let him see so
little of the desert of his ordinary infirmities and failings; which if he had
considered, as the Psalmist does, Psalm. 130.3. and 143.2. he had not been so
bitter in his complaints and resentments under affliction. A fair warning to
godly men, That they let not their confidence, as to the justification of their
persons, nor their innocence in some particulars, hide the humbling sight of
their infirmities, or the desert thereof; lest God be provoked to leave them to
fall in foul miscarriages.

Secondly, That, because he was free of that gross wickedness, or hypocrisy,
wherewith his Friends charged him, therefore he is so peremptory in putting God
to give a reason of his dealing with him; as if no reason could be given,
seeing the reason they gave was false. This was ill argued, and did witness his
distemper. For,

1. Gods Sovereign and absolute Dominion over Man did vindicate him from all
imputations of Injustice, as Elihu does answer this same challenge, Chap. 33.9.
-- 12, 13.

2. God by those Rods might chasten and humble him, even for his daily
failings, as Elihu also tells him in his Discourses.

3. God might put him, by those afflictions, to a trial and proof of his
honesty and graces; and therefore he had greater cause to lament that he proved
so weak, then to quarrel that he was put into the Furnace.

4. Though Job were guilty of no gross sins, yet God might send those
afflictions to prevent his falling into sin, as well as to humble and chasten
for sin already committed.

5. God may inflict sad trouble, even when he has pardoned sin, for
vindicating of his honor, and for making men more cautions in avoiding sin for
the future, So 2 Samuel 12.9, 10, 13, 14.

6. God may afflict and desert his own Children, that they may prize friendship
more, and improve it better, when they recover it; as was the practice of the
Spouse, Cant. 3.1, 2, 3. with 4 5. In a word, The most upright men have nothing
to plead against Gods afflicting and exercising of them, if he please. And if
they can see no reason of Gods dealing, it is because they are ignorant, and
because God is pleased to be unsearchable in his ways, that the more of himself
may be seen in bringing such dispensations to a good issue.

Thirdly, Albeit it be true that God did, in some measure, desert him; yet he
did help it on, and augment it, by his own distemper and passion. Gods Children
may be deserted in their afflictions (and it is a wonder if great afflictions
do not draw it on) Isai. 57.17. And It is an evidence of their honesty to be
afflicted with it; Psalm. 30.7. But it is their weakness to augment it by their
own affectionate resentments, and ill management of such a trial; and to make
unto themselves a spirit of Bondage, when God allows them the Spirit of
Adoption, Romans 8.15.

Fourthly, It flowed also from his weakness, that, because God hid his face,
therefore he suspects God, in all his dealing, to be an Enemy. For frowns and
desertions, and afflictions also, may consist with friendship, Jer. 30.10, 11,
14. Matthew. 15.22, -- 28. yea and flow from it, Rev. 3.19.

Verse. 25. Will thou break a leaf driven to and fro? and will thou pursue the
dry stubble?
Job's second Argument, whereby he pleads against Gods dealing thus with him,
is taken from his weakness. It is propounded in this verse in general terms,
and then prosecuted by parts, with an express application to himself; wherein
he shows, how severely God dealt with him, v. 26, 27. and how weak he was to
endure it, v. 28.

The Argument in this verse may be thus taken up: That he was but a weak leaf
before the wind, (easily shaken and moved upon the Tree, Isai. 7.2. and easily
cast off the Tree and driven to and fro) and like dry stubble before the wind,
or fire: Yea, he was already parched, shaken and tossed with trouble. From all
which he argues, that he was a weak and unmeet party for God, to crush and
break, and pursue him, as he did.

Hence Learn,

1. However man conceit of himself, yet he is but a weak frail thing; like a
leaf driven to and fro, and like the day stubble. See Isai 2.22.

2. Since Man by Contemplation will not be serious in studying of h^s own
frailty; God sends afflictions to give him a clear sight of himself, and to
abase him; For, it is in trouble that Job has this impression of himself. We
ought not to mistake if God put us to learn such lessons, though we think we
know them well enough before. And when they are solidly imprinted upon our
hearts, then trouble has done pair of its work.

3. Weakness is our advantage, and a good plea, when we have to do with God,
and are sensible of our frailty; For, it is his argument here, Will thou break
a leaf, etc? Will thou pursue the dry stubble? God will account it no honor to
run down a base worm, as David pleads with Saul, 1 Samuel 24.14. and when we
are humbled and laid low, Rods have the less to do.

4. We must not so plead our weakness, as to prescribe to God the measure of
our trial, if he will support us; nor the measure of our humility, but that
when we are humbl^d by Rods, he may let them continue, to produce yet more of
that good fruit: For, since God did pursue Job, notwithstanding his weakness,
therefore his Argument must be allowed only with those needful cautions, that
when we plead weakness and sense of frailty, yet God must not be quarrelled,
though he seem not presently to notice it, by taking away his Rods.

Verse. 26. For thou writest bitter things against me, and make me to possess
the iniquities of my youth.

27. Thou put my feet also in the stocks, and look narrowly unto all my
paths; thou set a print upon the heels of my feet.


Here Job insists upon one branch of his Argument, that God did pursue him
sharply as one not justified. And so he begins first to enlarge the Consequent
of the Argument (that God should not deal so with him) because it affected him
most. He alludes, in his complaint, to a Judges proceeding with a Malefactor,
And complains,

1. That God seemed to give out, and to purpose to execute, a sad sentence
against him; as Judges write their Decrees against Delinquents.

2. That (to make up the Dittay and Process) God dealt with him as if he had
not forgotten his sins, even committed in youth, but will make them cleave to
him as a possession and abiding heritage, of which he cannot be rid.

3. That (which, with that which follows, points out these dispensations of
God which begot those suspicions and fears) as malefactors, especially after
they are condemned, are put under an Arrest and in Prison, till the sentence be
executed; So is he arrested by afflictions, as if his feet were put in the
Stocks.

4. That he is narrowly marked and traced (as Hunters do with wild Beasts) as
if God trod all his footsteps, and set a print upon the heels of his feet, or
every step of his motions. This may be thus understood, that God, by afflicting
him, put him upon the Rack, to find out, and cause him confess, his crimes, or
marks accurately all the imperfections of his life, that he might punish him.
Or it may be thus understood, That being under Arrest, he is watched wherever
he turn him, that he may not escape.

This gives us an humbling sight of Job's present condition; and albeit many
things here represented themselves to his sense, which God did not purpose in
his afflictions, yet the whole of it may afford us useful Lessons.

From v. 26. Learn,

1. Godly men are most affected with what God seems to say in and by their
Rods; For, this is the sad look Job takes of his lot; Thou writest bitter
things, etc. Of this after.

2. Gods Dispensations may seem to speak very sad and bitter things to Saints,
or, things which are very unpleasant to them, as bitter things are to the
taste, and which make their lives bitter; For, says he, Thou writest bitter
things against me. This apprehension flows, partly, from self-love, that cannot
endure to be in trouble; Pa^tly, from our corrupted taste and discerning in
trouble, which judges of Gods dealing, not according as it is, but as our
present distemper apprehends it; Partly, from Gods purpose to make Afflictions
medicinal, by discovering the bitter fruit of sin, Jer. 2.19. And whatever
encouragements God allows in troubles; yet, for good ends, they must be also
grievous, Heb. 12.11. Partly, from our mistakes, and false conclusions gathered
from Gods afflicting of us; For, the Rod it self, here, is not bitter, but what
he thinks God writes thereby. These may be of use to us to reflect upon, when
we find our lots bitter. Only we ought to beware of making them bitter to our
selves by self-love and mistakes; and if we correct the distempers of our
spirits, the real bitterness that is in them will do us good, and no evil.

3. It may be the sad tentation of Saints, that Gods dispensations do not speak
only his present purpose to try them; but an unchangeable purpose to ruin
them; For, he thinks those bitter things, are, written, as the concluded
determination and sentence of his Judge. This is the usual distemper of
exercised Saints, that they judge of their case for ever, by what it is at
present; whereas they should remember the changes of the Right Hand of the most
High, as that Text may be rendered, Psalm. 77.10.

4. A sight of guilt is that which affects Saints most, and will make their
apprehensions sad in trouble; Therefore he subjoyns the mention of iniquities,
as that which made him apprehend those bitter things. As Saints, in a right
frame, would not be so much affected with trouble, if they saw guilt out of it;
so the apprehensions of guilt will be very sad, when it is seen in the Mirror
of sad trouble pursuing it.

5. Reconciled Saints, whose sins are pardoned, may yet, to their sense, have
their guilt ^aked out of its grave, and laid to their charge in trouble; For,
so Job apprehends that even the iniquities of his youth, which were long since
pardoned, he is made to possess, or, inherit them, and cannot be rid of them.
This is nothing else but Satan's calumny and tentation, and their own mistake;
seeing pardoned sin is remembered no more, Jer. 31.34. Nor will be found, Jer.
50.20. See Isa. 38.17. Micah. 7.19. Yet it is a frequent tentation in
affliction, as, 1 King. 17.18. And herein may be seen, Partly, The tenderness
of Saints (though clogged with a mistake) in that, when God smites, all the
wounds of an healed Conscience do bleed afresh, and are apt to suspect all is
wrong. And, indeed, we have need to make sure work against such an assault; for
trouble will sift and search us narrowly. Partly, an hand of God my be here
seen also; who, albeit he will not really recall a sentence of pardon; yet, upon
new provocations (when we walk not humbly and cautiously. Joh. 5.14 when we
cherish not love to God, Luke 7.47. nor walk tenderly toward others, Matthew.
18.23-35. Tit. 3.2, 3.) he may affright us with the opening of that rotten
grave, that so he may humble us with the sight of what we were, and may
convince us of our ingratitude and folly, in daring to provoke him again.

6 He mentions the iniquities of his youth, as that which troubled him most; It
may be, because he was converted when young, and so had no gross miscarriages
after, but only the former follies of his youth, to trouble him. As, indeed, it
is a mercy to be early prevented by grace, that so many foul miscarriages may
be prevented. But seeing David had his gross miscarriages after Conversion, who
yet is exercised about the sins of his youth, Psalm. 25.7. and seeing the sins
of the wicked's youth are particularly marked, Job 20.11. who yet have
abominations enough in the rest of their life; Therefore I take this to import
here, That as youth is very obnoxious to miscarriages, 2 Timothy 2.22. and that in
all the periods of that age, (for it is, youths, in the plural number, taking
in all the periods of it, till he came to manly-age.) So, however men do
lightly pass these evils, as thinking youth may excuse them; Yet, a tender
heart will be much affected with them, as Job was here.

From v. 27. Learn,

1. God may seem to deal very severely with his own Children, and to give them
ground of sad complaints; For, Job does here produce (as he apprehended) those
sad evidences of Gods writing bitter things, and of his pursuing his
iniquities. It must be remembered, that God will heat the furnace to every one
of his own Children, according to the measure of good metal he has put into
them, and according as he purposes to make them shine bright, by their being
tried.

2. There are some particular severities which Saints cannot well bear or
digest; and which Job here complains of; Such as,

1. When Gods dealing seems to speak them wicked, and he puts their feet in the
stocks, as Malefactors.

2. When he most narrowly marks all their ways, as desiring to find faults for
which to punish; and is not like a Father, pitying, and not chiding, Psalm.
103.9, 13. nor lets forth his pardoning mercy, with-which they cannot stand,
Psalm. 130.3, 4. For, of this Job complains here.

3. When they can have no breathing, or way to escape, on any hand; but are
kept in the stocks, and watched over.

4. When all severity seems to be but a reserving of them for more evils to
come; as a condemned Malefactor is kept in Prison.

5. When God is seen to do all this; as Job here regrets. For, albeit it be
good to be in his hand, yet his being a party in such severity, is very sharp
and sad.

Doct. 3. As Saints may be under all those sad apprehensions and afflictions;
So, in such a case, it is not easy, even for eminent Saints and reconciled
men, to keep their grip; For, this is a reason why Job had such apprehensions
of Gods purpose about him, v. 26. and could not but think they were true. We
had need to have our evidences very sure and strong against such assaults; And
Saints ought not to mistake, albeit strong troubles shake them very sore.

4. When Saints condition is at the worst, and they have represented it as ill
as they can; yet it is consistent with love; For, so was it in Job's case,
which he represents to be sad. And when they judge otherwise of their case, it
is, either because they mistake it as worse then it is, or, because they are
ignorant that love can continue toward those who are sadly afflicted, and can
carve out, and order their sad lots.

Verse. 28. And he as a rotten thing consumes, as a garment that is moth-eaten.
Here Job confirms the other branch of his Argument, concerning his weakness;
which he proves by effects, that he was undone by his afflictions, and no more
able to subsist under them, then a rotten stick is fit to be employed in any
work, or a moth-eaten garment to be worn

Hence (beside what is marked on, v. 25.) Learn,

1. He speaks of himself in the third Person, He, not only by way of contempt,
as, indeed, trouble should put men out of conceit with themselves; or, to point
out that this frailty is common to him with all men; as Chap. 14.1. or, because
he points here at that similitude of the leaf, and dry stubble, v. 25. and so
the word should be rendered, it: But, chiefly, he expresses it thus, To show,
that he could not but pity such a case, whosoever^ it was; and hereby, Teaches
us, That self-love should not dictate our complaints, and cause us think much
of that, when our own Lot, which we would but little regard, if it were
another.

2. Men who would prevail with God, ought to be real in what they say, not
pretend^ng to what they are not; For, Job pleading his weakness, intimates that
it was not said only, but might be seen in effects, in that he was consumed
with his troubles.

3. Whatever men may think of themselves in a time of ease; Yet trouble will
bring out their frailty and weakness, as some seasons do discover weak and
unwholesom constitutions; For, then man appears to be a rotten thing, and a
garment that is moth-eaten, which may continue long enough, if they he
unimployed, but they are no sooner made use of, then they appear to be what
they are.

4. Albeit the Lord see it not meet to respect the afflictions of all; nor yet
to notice every clamor of his own, when they make too much noise of the least
trials and exercise; Yet it pleads for pity, and help to a Child, when he is in
present peril of perishing; For, so does the Argument run, That since he was a
consuming, therefore God would not so press him. See Psalm. 94 18, 19. Only
(b^side that it was his duty to remove his mistakes of Gods dealing, which did
consume him most) these Cautions must be added,

1. That Saints mistake not, though they be consumed and cut off in greatest
outward trouble.

2. They must be content so expect Gods pity and help, as yet to resolve to
bear trouble so long as he gives strength to bear it: For, so dealt he with
Job; though he judged himself already consumed, yet God kept the trouble on,
and, when all was done, brought him safe through it.

CHAP. XIV.
In this Chapter Job prosecutes that same Complaint to God which he had begun
in the end of the former Chapter. And by several Arguments (wherein the former
two Arguments, and especially that taken from his misery, are amplified and
enlarged) presses that God would not deal so hardly with him. And, 1. He
pleads from the common condition of all men (as well as of himself,) that
being of short and evil days, and their life and enjoyments but transient, ver.
1, 2. he thinks God should not deal strictly with such a worthless nothing,
ver. 3. 2. He pleads from man's Original Corruption; that if God purposed to
pursue him for the remainders sin, it was impossible for him, or any mere men,
to be free of it in this life, ver. 4. 3. He urges that, seeing his life was
bounded, and its period determined, therefore God would spare him now, ver. 5,
6. Considering that, being once cut off and dead, he would not (as it is with
other things in the world) return again so long as time endures, ver. 7-12. 4.
He pleads that God would pity him, Considering that his afflictions drove him
to strange and perplexed wishes to be rid of them, which he must correct and
retract, so far as tentation will suffer him, ver. 13, 14, 15. And no wonder he
was driven to those perplexities, considering how strictly God had marked his
ways, and took an account of his sins, ver. 16, 17. and how unable he was to
abide that. For if the most fixed and solid things cannot endure continual
assaults, especially from the hand of God, how much more easily can he
over-turn man's hopes? ver. 18, 19. and get a complete Victory over him,
especially by cutting him off, ver. 20. and in the mean time so exercise him
with his own afflictions, that he cannot be affected with the good or ill
condition of his nearest relations, ver. 21, 22.

Verse. 1. Man that is born of a woman, is of few days and full of trouble.
JOb's first Argument, ( v. 1, 2, 3.) whereby he pleads against Gods severe
dealing toward him, is taken from the condition and misery of all Men by
Nature; Wherein he propounds that they have but a short life, and that
obnoxious to many troubles, and all their enjoyments are but transient and
passing: And from thence inferrs (as to his own particular) that, seeing he
would certainly die, and had trouble enough otherwise, though God dealt not
thus extraordinarily with him; he could not but wonder that God should notice
him, as if he were a fit party to be thus afflicted and exercised by him.

In this verse we have Job's Proposition of Man's misery; wherein he evidenceth
himself to be well versed (by reason of his own trouble) in the knowledge of
man's vanity and misery: which he describes.

First, in its Universality, It is common to Man, or, to all that are come of
Adam, which is the name here given to Man. He speaks thus of men in general
(though with an eye to his own condition, as appears from his inference, v. 3,)
Because this is Man's common condition which is after mentioned. And it
Teaches, That whatever may be the particular and various dispensations of God
toward men, yet to be miserable by Nature is common to Adam and all his
Posterity who come of him. A^l the sons of men are attended with some of the
common miseries of mankind; and though some want the peculiar cross-lots of
others, yet, they may have some of another kind, no less sad, and all of them
(whatever their condition be, yet) if their eyes be opened, will find
themselves but in a state of misery. This teaches men not to weary of their
particular lots and trials; For did they shift never so often, they will find
that they are still, Man, whom misery attends. It Teaches, also, That we have
no cause to complain, so long as our trial is but common, 1 Cor. 10.13. and our
self-love should not get place to persuade us to aggravate our sorrows, that
we may have some pretense to complain of their singularity (as Job oft-times
does) for they will still be proportioned to what our case requires, and to
what strength God will give his own people.

Secondly, Man's misery is described from its ^ise, which is insinuated in man's
Original, that he is born of a woman. This he mentions, rather then that he is
begotten of a man,

1. Because the Woman was first in the transgression, 1. Tim. 2.14. whence is
the rise of all sin, and of a defiled issue, which produces trouble. So Job
15.14.

2. Because the Woman is the weaker vessel, 1 Pet. 3.7. And,

3. Because a peculiar threatening and s^ntence is past against her in the
matter of Conception and Birth, Genesis 3 16. and so her issue must be weak and
wretched like her self.

Hence Learn,

A sight of Man's original may humble him, and make him see his misery; when he
considers what a sinful womb he comes from, how ugly he comes out of it, and
how he begins his life with crying and weeping. This is a lesson should stick
by us, as a document of our misery, in all our mirth and jollity.

Thirdly, This common misery of mankind is described in its parts; That man is
of short days, and those full of trouble; as Jacob also professes, Genesis 47.9.

Doct. 1. Man's life is but short, and it is a part of his misery that it is so;
For Job brings this as a proof of man's misery, that he is of few days, or,
short of days; his time is but short. That man's life is but short is evident
from Scripture, and from daily experience. And it is to be accounted short
(especially now, and ^ven in Job's time also, though then they lived much
longer then men do now) both in respect of eternity, and in respect of the
continuance of Man's life, if he had not sinned; and even in respect of the age
until which men lived of old. For as men now live but short while, in
comparison of the times about which Job lived; so in those days their age was
far short of the Patriarchs before the Flood. And as man's days are thus few,
so, for the misery that is in this shortness of his life, though it be true,
that it is a mercy to the Godly, that their days, being ill, are few and
shortened (see, Math. 24.22.) and that thereby they are hastened to glory; Yet,
the shortness of man's life is, in many respects, a misery,

1. If we consider it in the root and rise of it, Mortality is the fruit of
sin, and therefore whatever beauty God put upon it, yet, in it self, it is
bitter, and a misery.

2. If we look upon it, and consider what it is to natural men, it must be
concluded a great misery: For, whatever be their portion within time, yet they
must die, and, being dead, sink into the pit eternally. And in the mean time,
their life is so short and uncertain, that it can hardly be measured even by
days; and they are exposed to so many hazards, that they know not at what turn
death may take hold of them, and hurry them away.

3. There is a misery in our few days, in regard of the ill improvement of
them. We are for a while in the state of infancy, before we know what it is to
live; After that, many spend along time of youth before they settle, and before
they know how to number their days, even as Rational Men: And when we come to
be more composed, business, sickness, and distractions, do impede and interrupt
us, and old age disables us to spend our time to any purpose. In those
inconveniences even the Godly do so much and frequently share, that, in that
respect, their short time is a misery.

4. There is this misery, also, incident to us in our short time, that both
godly men and others are pulled away by death, before they see many of those
things, which they desire, accomplished. So did Job apprehend to be hurried
away in a cloud; such also was David's exercise; Psalm. 39.13. And this made
Jacob complain of his days, that they were few and evil, Genesis 47.9. The study
of this Point affords many useful Lessons; That we do not dote on long life,
or, an Eternity here, as, Luke 12.19, 20. for we will be disappointed, and sin
will help to shorten our days, Psalm. 55.23. Prove. 10 27. And that we make not
that use of the shortness of our life which is the practice of profane men;
Jsai. 22.12, 13. 1. Cor. 15.32. But we should study a right use of it, such as
Moses prayed for, Psalm 90.12. Now the right use of this, is, when it excites
us, to seek after, and ensure, another life; To be sober and moderate; 1 Cor
7.29, 30. And, not to be too sparing of our life, in times of trial: For let us
have never so much care to preserve it, it will not continue long, and God can
take it away as soon as any Persecuter can reach it. And if Man's short life be
a misery, we need not stumble at the Prosperity of Gods Enemies in this world,
Psalm. 73.17-20. and 146.3, 4. Jsai. 51.12, 13. Nor ought men (meet with what
they will) look for any complete happiness in time: for it will be misery still:

Doct. 2. It adds to the misery of man's life, that in a short time he has
many troubles to endure and go through: For Man is of few days and full of
trouble, His lot is trouble, or, commotion (as the word will read;) such
trouble as does toss and commove him, even in his outward condition, and
imbitter and vex his spirit. And there is a fill of this trouble, even to
satiety, as the word signifies. There are many of them, and these either
ordinary or extraordinary (as some distinguish those two expressions Psalm.
73.5.) either inward troubles on the mind, occasioned by the terrors of God,
the tentations of Satan, a spirit of bondage, and the impetuousness of lusts
and corruptions, James 4.1. Or outward troubles, common to us with others, or
personal and peculiar, on our Body, Goods, Name, or Friends and Relations,
where our compassion and sympathy makes their affliction become ours, 2 Cor.
11.28, 29. Heb. 10.33. And all these various troubles, as they are, sometime
divided, and come severally, so, at other times, they may come, all, or many of
them, together, Lam. 2.22. This should teach us to be versed in this study,
that not only we may acknowledge the truth of this in our judgments, but may
not be surprised, nor startle at it, when it comes to be our Lot; And if we
study this as we ought, we will rather be thankful for any moderation in our
lot; then complain for what we suffer; And as we will not stumble that we are
afflicted, so neither will we quarrel that trouble does toss and shake us every
way.

Verse. 2. He comes forth like a flower, and is cut down: he flees also as a
shadow, and continues not.
In this verse Job illustrates his Proposition by two similitudes, which point
out the transitory condition of Man and his enjoyments, by reason of his short
and troublesome life.

First, He resembles Man to a Flower, which buds fair, but is soon cut down,
or, cropped and circumcised; either men pluck it, or its leaves fall off of
themselves. So Man is a fair nothing, who either decays of himself, or is
violently cut off by others. Next, He resembles Man to a shadow, either to a
shadow upon a Dyal, which posteth on in its course, and the Sun being
over-clouded, or set, it appears no more, (See Psalm. 102.11.); or to some
flying shadows, which pass quickly over in fair days, wherein are some clouds,
which for a little hide the Sun, and make a shadow on earth, but do quickly
pass and continue not. Thus Man is an empty thing, in a perpetual
unsettledness, and either violently (as when the Sun is over-clouded) or by the
course of nature (as when, the Sun being set, the shadow on the Dyal cease)
is quickly gone.

Hence Learn,

1. Nothing is so empty and obnoxious to ruin, but it may be a fit Emblem of
Man, who in his best estate is altogether vanity, Psalm. 39 5. so much do those
similitudes; and Man's being compared with thos^ things, in general, teach.

2. Man in his best estate is but a fair nothing, obnoxious to speedy ruin,
and born to die; For, He comes forth like a Flower, and is cut down. See Psalm.
103 15, 16.

3. Man's best outward estate is but a show without substance; like a shadow,
which is caused only by privation of light. See Psalm. 39.6.

4. Man's conditions is in a perpetual motion (like a fleeing shadow) and still
moves (even when he seems to be in his Ascendant) toward corruption, till he
cease to be; For, he flees also as a shadow, and continues not. We should
judge thus of our selves, and of our enjoyments, according to the Scriptures
verdict, that we be not deceived with false shows and appearances.

Verse. 3. And do thou open thine eyes upon such an one, and bring^st me into
judgment with thee?
In this verse we have Job's Inference upon his Proposition; wherein he
concludes and presses his Argument. And as he supposes that himself was
sensible of his own large sh^e in that misery of Man, whereof he had spoken in
general; So be propounded^ to God, whether he thought it fit to deal so
severely with so miserable and weak a creature: whether he needed to open his
eyes upon such a worm, or, take notice of him as a considerable party, and
narrowly mark all his failings; And thought it fit to bring him into judgment
with him, or, strictly punish him for all his infirmities, and deal with him in
such rigor, not granting those cautions and conditions he had propounded,
Chap. 13.20, 21.

In this plea, whatever sound truth there be, yet Job does fail, both in his
apprehensions of Gods proceeding, as if he were dealing like a severe Judge;
and in his reasoning against his proceed^ng whatever it was, to which he ought
patiently to have submitted.

So the sound Truths, together with his mistakes, in this Argument, may Teach
us,

1. Though man be a frail wretched creature, yet ordinary misery must not
exempt him from extraordinary trials; For, notwithstanding what Job has said
of Man's common misery, yet he supposes also that God did open his eyes, and
enter in judgment even with such a one. And albeit he mistook Gods scope in it,
as if he were marking and strictly censuring all his faults; yet his exercise
was an extraordinary trial added to his common misery. Man, for as miserable as
he is, is ready to forget what he is: And albeit he know that Man is miserable,
yet he is not sensible of all that he knows; And albeit he have ordinary
evidences of his misery, yet, those are, oft-times, not much noticed, even
because ordinary, till God send some singular documents, to tell him what he is.

2. Gods end, in the singular trials wh^rewith he exercises men, is, (among
other things) to teach them to know God to be great, and themselves to be base
and wretched; For, such is the use Job gets of his trouble, that he is become a
Student of Man's misery, and sees the vast distance betwixt God and himself,
and that he is an unmeet party to grapple with God. And this he propounds
before God, to witness how he had profited, and that if God meant to humble
him, his trouble had already produced that effect. Peculiar trials are sent to
make us think more upon our common misery; and we should look, not so much to
what we suffer, or how long, as to what we learn thereby.

3. Sanctified affliction will help men to apply, and find particular
experiences of, the general Truths concerning Man's misery; Therefore does Job,
in this School of affliction, bring home what he had spoken of Man in general,
to such a one, and me. This tells us, that even imbittering and tossing trouble
may be blessed to produce good effects, so he wrought in the very heat of our
Fever and trouble, and more to follow after. See Romans 5.3, 4.

4 When men, under trouble, have learned this Lesson well, and have abased
themselves before God; they have a ground of plea before Him, that he will
moderate his dispensations toward them; For, Job being this sensible of his
misery (not miserable only, for till we have sense of it, we cannot plead pity,
but do proclaim stupidity) does plead, Do thou open thine eyes upon such a
one, etc? When we reckon with our selves, it is the ready way to prevent Gods
reckoning with us, 1 Cor 11.31. nor will God employ his great power to ruin
such. And when men, being sensible of their own mi^ery, do stoop to the dust,
and entertain high thoughts of God, they may sit safe in a storm. And they are
fools who, being in trouble, do not thus improve it to their own advantage, but
do rather heighten their own misery, by their pride and stubborness. Only,

5. This caution must be taken along in this plea, that we prescribe not unto
God the measure of our sense of misery; But when trouble has brought us to
some sense, he may yet let it lie on, to produce more: For, in this Job's plea
was weak for the removal of the trial; for as he had no ground to implead Gods
proceeding till he came to this sense, so ought he not now to quarrel, if God
should make use of that mean to produce more of it.

Verse. 4. Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not one.
Job's second Argument is taken from his original Corruption. It is an
enlargement of that Argument, Chap. 13.23. wherein he had cleansed himself of
gross wickedness, and supposed that he was a Penitent and reconciled Man, whom
God would not condemn. Now he stretches the Argument further; And whereas he
had Original Sin, for which, and the ordinary emanations thereof, God might
condemn him, he argues against that here: Showing that if God, in severe
justice, should seek to find him absolutely pure, that was not attainable in
this life. For he being come of sinful and unclean Parents, not one could come
clean thence, in the ordinary way of generation; and he could bring out nothing
but what savoured of his unclean Original, in part. And consequently, if the
Lord should prosecute this Original Corruption with such afflictions as he
suffered, none could subsist.

Hence Learn,

1. Such as are well studied in the point of misery, and to whom afflictions
are blessed, they will search sin, even into the very root of it; For, Job in
his trouble, after he has given proof how he has acquainted himself with man's
misery, does now subjoyn his sense of Original Sin.

2. There are here some Truths wherewith Job was acquainted in his time, and
which are at all times needful to be studied.

1. That there is Original Sin in men; As he supposes himself brought out
unclean. See Psalm. 51.5. Genesis 6.5. and 8.21.

2. That this is universal and common to all the Posterity of Adam; Not one can
bring out a clean thing out of that unclean Fountain, None can do it in the way
of ordinary generation; Otherwise, Christ was sanctified by the Holy Ghost in
the womb of the Virgin. See Romans 3.23. and 5.12.

3. That it is an uncleaness, and filth; and consequently renders a man
obnoxious to death and condemnation, Romans 5.12, 14.

4. That it comes by Propagation, and is brought out from Parent to Child:
Psalm. 51.5. Genesis 5.3.

5. That it remains even in the Regenerate, such as Joh was; Romans 7.24. and
breaks out in polluting their best actions; as his Concession here implies,
that being come unclean of his Parents, that which came from him behoved to
have some tincture of it, Psalm. 51.3, 4. with 5.

6. That the Power of Free Will cannot cure nor remedy this evil; For, Who can
being a clean thing out of an unclean? nor one.

Doct. 3. As for his reasoning upon this ground, against Gods proceeding with
him, there is somewhat in it that may sustain; Namely, That whatever be the
d^sert of Original Sin, yet when a man has fled to Christ, the second Adam,
and keeps himself from gross sin and wickedness, repents for, and is careful to
suppress his sins of infirmity, and is sensible of, and labors daily to
mortify the root of sin; God will not with rigor pursue the roots of Original
Sin in such; but in Christ will pardon it. And though it must not be accounted
a venial sin, yet, through Christ, he will look upon it with pity and
compassion, in these whose are thus exercised. See Genesis 8.20, 21. Psalm. 130.3,
4. Yet somewhat may be observed that is faulty in this plea; As,

1. That he does not enough consider that even Original Sin, in its own nature,
deserves the greatest of punishments; and therefore the consideration thereof
should persuade him not to quarrel this temporary affliction.

2. Whatever be the Lords indulgence, through a Mediator, in not pursuing it
in his people; yet we are obnoxious because of it: and God has freedom and
liberty (even upon that account, to ex^rcise as he will, and when he will, and
we ought not to murmur, since he has not limited himself, that he will not
exercise even his dearest Saints. His indulgence is matter of praise, when he
is pleased to manifest it; but gives no ground of quarrel, when he is pleased
to exercise his dominion.

3. That all were guilty of Original Sin, and of the ordinary effects thereof,
as well as he, was no just ground, upon which he might challenge God for
dealing singularly with him, suppose he had been pursuing that common ill in
him. For (Beside that it could not ease him, though others were dealt with, as
he was) we must not pry into Gods dealing with others, to make his dealing to
our selves the more bitter, but should submit to our lot. See Joh 21.18. -- 22.

4. Gods Children should be careful not to challenge that they are singularly
exercised, seeing it speaks his special love, that he takes so much pains upon
them, Rev. 3.19. Heb. 12.6, 7, 8.

5. Albeit this reason had not been relevant, why God should thus afflict him;
Yet God had reasons enough for it, as being sovereign and absolute, infinitely
wise, etc. When we are put to out wits end for a reason of Gods dealing, and
can find none; Yet, this does only argue our blindness, for he cannot be
unreasonable in what he does.

Verse. 5. Seeing his days are determined, the number of months are with thee,
thou have appointed his bounds that he cannot pass.

6. Turn from him that he may rest, till he shall accomplish, as an hireling,
his day.


The third Argument (enlarging the first,) is taken from the certainty of his
death at the time appointed by God; He shows that his life is bounded by God,
even how many days and months he shall live; that he must die at the time
appointed by God, and cannot pass those bounds and limits which are set to him;
and that, in the mean time, his life was but short and troublesome, like the
time of an hireling. Whence he argues, That seeing death is the appointed
punishment of sin (which he had acknowledged to be in himself, v. 4.) Genesis
2.17. And seeing God had fixed the time of that at his pleasure, and had made
life short and troublesome; he thinks that God needs not add a new sent^nce to
the former, and bring man into judgment of new; And therefore he pleads that
God would (not abandon him, by turning altogether from him, but) forbear to
pursue him with such rigor, and let him take some breathing and respite from
these extraordinary afflictions, till he accomplish his course in his ordinary
toil and labor, whereof he will be content to see an end, whenever God will,
as the word imports.

The substance of the grounds of this Argument being made use of, Chap. 7.1, 2,
etc. to prove another conclusion, that he might lawfully desire death; I shall
here shortly,

Obs. 1. Man's life and days are bounded, so that Man must come to a period, and
must quit life, whether it be sweet or sour, bitter or comfortable; For, so is
here held out, His days are determined, he has bounds that he cannot pass. See
Psalm. 49.10. Eccl. 2.16. Heb. 9.27.

Obs. 2. God is the infallible and irresistible bounder of man's life, even to
months and days; For, his days are determined, the number of his months are
with thee, thou have appointed his bounds, etc. See Act. 17.26. This Truth,

1. Does not contradict other Scriptures, which speak of the lengthening and
shortening of men's days, 2 King. 20.1, 6. Eccl. 7.16, 17. Psalm. 55.23. For
these speak of shortening or lengthening the days of Man, in respect of what,
otherwise, they might be, according to probability, or considering the course
of Nature and second Causes; but speak nothing of Gods altering the periods of
Man's life, which are set by himself. Nor,

2. Does this warrant men to neglect lawful means, which God has appointed in
order to his end; as Paul reasons, Act. 27.22, 23, 24. with 31. But it teaches
us,

1. To adore the Universal Providence of God, which extends it self to all
persons and things. See Matthew. 10.24, 30. Our not observing of this in common
things makes us so Atheistical in greater matters.

2. It teaches us to submit to his will in all those turns and lots that befall
us, and in the use of all means of life; to submit to live long in trouble, or
short while in ease, as he pleases.

3. It teaches his people to rest confidently on him who has Times and
Seasons in his hand, both of particular persons, Psalm. 31.15. and of Nations
also, Gen 15.13, 14. Jer. 29.10.

Obs. 3. Man's life, till he come to his appointed end, is but like a hirelings
day: For, so is held forth, v. 6. that he must accomplish, as an hireling his
day. Not only is his life short, like a day, wherein the hireling is conduced
to work; But,

1. Man ought not to be his own, nor at his own work, but his Masters; For, so
it is with the hireling. And if Man will not voluntarily do duty, and what is
commanded him; Yet he shall be made to serve Providence whether he will or not;
And his most irregular enterprises shall be made subservient to Gods holy
purposes, Psalm. 76.10.

2. Man is but an indigent empty creature, standing in need of continual
uninterrupted supply from God; As an hireling must have wages (if not meat
also) from his Master, to maintain him at his work.

3. Man must resolve to have much toil in the service of his Generation; For,
he is like a toiled servant, or, hireling. And this is the lot, even of
greatest Undertakers and Conquerours in the world, Hab. 2.12, 13.

4. Man is a servant who must be accountable for his work, that he may be
rewarded accordingly; as it is with hirelings. All this may teach men not to
stumble, if they find their life to be such as is here described. And since it
is thus, they who sell Heaven for a Portion in this life, make but a poor
bargain, and will get but sober cheer for it.

Obs. 4. Job's plea and desire in this Argument, v. 6. has somethings in it
very commendable and imitable; As,

1. Turn, says he, that is, take away thy hand and displeasure, evidenced by
these severe afflictions. Which Teaches, That it is only God who gives a
being, or puts an end, to affl^ctions; As this desire supposes. Also; That
as God appears, to the afflicted, to be angry, when trouble is on; So this
affects a godly man most, and the removal of this is more to him then the
taking away of the affliction; For, he desires the cross to be removed under
that notion of Gods turning from him, and ceasing to pursue him in anger.

2. Turn, says he, from him, in the third Person, with an eye to what he has
spoken of all men's life and toil, v. 5. and to show that he would be content of
the common lot of hirelings of Adam's posterity. It Teaches, That it is an
evidence of a subdued spirit, when men do not seek to be singular in their lots
and allowances, but are content patiently to bear the common lots that befall
mankind.

3. Turn, says he, that he may rest, or have a cessation (...) righteous and
the wicked, Christ will be glorified and admired in them 2 These. 1.10. all
clouds and mistakes will be cleared, and when he raises their bodies he will
raise their good Name also.

Verse, 13. O that thou would hide me in the grave, that thou would keep
me secret, until thy wrath be past, that thou would appoint me a set time,
and remember me!

14. If a man die, shall he live again? All the days of my appointed time will
I wait, till my change c^m^.

15. Thou shall call, and I will answer thee: thou will have a desire to the
work of thine hands.


The fourth Argument (propounded in these verses, and amplified and enlarged to
the end of the Chapter) is taken from the great perplexities and strange wishes
to which his trouble drove him; in so much that, though he see somewhat of a
black cloud in death in the foregoing verses, yet, here, he would be content of
something like it for a time. The sum of the Argument (whereof the Antecedent
is expressed in his strange with and conflicts about it, from whence the
Consequent may be drawn from the scope of the whole discourse) i^, He thinks
God should pity him under his affl^ctions, considering how hardly they pinched
him, and did put him upon strange and irregular desires, which he could hardly
wrestle against, or get suppressed.

For clearing of the words, wherein this Argument is contained; if we put, v.
14. in a Parenthesis, and read, v 15. thus; (which the Original will bear, as
well as the present Translation) Thou should call, and I would answer; Thou
should have a desire to the work of thine hands. If (I say) we thus read
the words, the sense will run very clear and smooth. For the words contain
these three.

1. The wish to which his trouble did drive him, v. 13. The meaning whereof is,
in sum; The apprehension of Gods displeasure at this time was so dreadful to
him; that it would be sweet unto him, and was his earnest desire, he might he
hid even in the grave, till it were past, and till a set time should come,
wherein God would remember him with favor, and bring him out again.

2. The correction of this wish (interjected, v. 14) as being absurd that a man
should expect after death to return to this life again; And therefore he not
only condemns that wish in his judgment, but in his practice resolves
submissively and patiently to wait for his ordinary change by death.

3. The resuming and prosecuting of his wish again, v. 15. For albeit the
words; as they are translated, may be understood of his expectation of favor
at the Resurrection, after that change by death, v. 14. Yet considering that he
does not abide by that submission v. 14. but returns to his complaint, v. 16.
where he regrets what God does now, in opposition to what he desired: I incline
(according to the other reading) to join it with, v. 13. as being a prosecution
of what he had there propounded, which his reflection upon the absurdity thereof
had made him reject; v. 14. and now his present distress makes him resume it
again. In the proposal of his wish, v. 13. as he had insinuated the greatness
of his trouble, and his sad apprehension of Gods displeasure, in that it made
him wish to be hid from it for a time, in the grave: So, he had insinuated his
faith, in that he could not but wish and expect that his hiding should be but
for a set time, after which God would remember him. Now here he prosecutes this
his confidence, and dwells upon the thoughts of his sweet and comfortable
condition, if his desire were granted. For whereas now his steps were numbered,
and his sin watched over, v. 16. if he were hid till that tempest were over, it
would be far otherwise. Then God would certainly respect him as his own
workmanship (not only by Creation, but especially, by grace) and consequently,
would miss and desire after him, and seek and call for him to do him good; And
he should come out of his grave and answer, and partake of the sweet fruits of
that reconciliation. Compare Chap. 7.21. where we have some expressions of his
confidence like unto those, though uttered to another purpose.

In his wish and desire, v. 13. it cannot be denied that there is much passion,
and distemper and weakness yet much honesty, and that which is sound, appears
in it also. And therefore I shall remark both what is commendable, and worthy of
imitation in it; and what may be gathered, for instruction and caution, from
his weakn^ss and failings;

And so we may Learn,

1. Wrath from the Lord is very terrible, especially to them who have tasted of
his love, and do feel and know the power of his anger; Psalm 90.11. For, Job
reckons, That to be hid in the grave and keept secret there, till wrath were
past, were a sweet lot. See, Psalm. 6.1, 2, etc. and 38.1, 2, etc. And if wrath
be thus sad to Saints, what shall be the condition of the wicked, who are Trees
dried to be fuel to the fire? See Isai. 2 19. Rev. 6.15, 16, 17, It is our
duty to fear the displeasure of God, and it is a good evidence of honesty in
men to attain it, provided it be done in time, and they do so fear and
apprehended it, as they endeavor to get out of its way.

2. Such as have obtained grace to believe that God is not dealing, in wrath,
when he afflicts them, may yet be driven, by sense and extremity of trouble, to
fear it again; For, notwithstanding Job's confidence, Chap. 13.16, 17. and
elsewhere, he is now driven upon the apprehension of wrath. Then, he would
appear, now, he would be hid, We should not stumble, though we be thus tossed
after believing; and, from his example, we should learn to beware of
complaining which wakened his tentations and apprehensions.

3. Trouble, and apprehensions of Gods displeasure, will bring out great
weaknesses; and will much distemper Saints in their Prayers, and draw them to
very passionate and irregular desires: As here Job is driven to press an absurd
desire, that he might be hid and keept secret in the grave, till a set time. We
have have need of much caution and sobriety in our Prayers and Desires, when we
are in trouble. And particularly, those weaknesses may be observed, in Job's
propounding of this desire, for our admonition.

1. It distempered him that he apprehended God angry, when he was not; As,
ordinarily, it is our fault that our own spirits become a spirit of bondage to
us, when the Spirit of Adoption is our allowance.

2. It was his weakness to think that any condition, even the granting of this
strange wish, were better, and more fit, for him then his present lot, which
was carved out by God. It is our presumption ordinarily, to reflect upon Gods
guiding of us, and to reckon that any thing were better then what he does.

3. It was his mistake to think that such a change of his condition was
needful, to bring him ease and relief; seeing a change of his condition within,
(like that, v. 14.) would afford him more certain and speedy help. We often
toil our selves, seeking ease in the change of our outward lots, when it might
be found nearer at hand, in getting our spirits in a right frame.

4. It was his fault to wish this out-gate, which was impossible by the
ordinary course of Nature established by God (as himself judges of it, v. 14.)
and that ordinary appointed comforts will not satisfy him. It is a sure
evidence that we are in a distemper, when the Consolations of God are small
with us, and we cannot be satisfied, unless God do some extraordinary and
singular thing for us.

Doct. 4. In the saddest confl^cts of tentation and sense, faith and honesty
will still kyth, in some measure, in Saints; As appears from this very wish of
Job: wherein,

1. All his apprehensions of wrath make him not quit his confidence that it
shall not be thus for ever, but that a set time will put an end to it. Thus
also does the Psalmist rowze up his confidence under tentations, Psalm. 77.8, 9,
10. which is worthy of imitation.

2. He desires not death desperately, as it is only a backdoor to shun present
trouble; but he propounds this extraordinary desire in a way of believing, and
bodeing well of God in the issue. This many do forget in their passionate
desires, when they cast away all confidence.

3. It flowed from his desire of Gods favor, and to have it cleared toward
him, for encouragement to all others to walk in the ways of holiness, that he
declines to go away for ever in a cloud, and would be remembered and appear
again, when wrath is passed, that others, seeing the end of the Lord, might be
encouraged, as well as himself would be refreshed. And here (whatever his
failings were) his general scope is good, to desire to enjoy Gods favor above
all things, Psalm. 4.6, 7. and that others be not stumbled nor discouraged,
Psalm. 69.6.

4. As he does not proudly think he is able to stand out this storm; So neither
does he flee from God, or to Hills and Mountains ( Rev. 6.15, 16, 17.) to be
hid from this apprehended wrath: But, knowing that God alone can hide a man
from his own indignation, he flees to him for that effect, O that thou
would hide me, etc. Which is a practice well beseeming Saints, that
(whatever anger they apprehend in God) they still flee to himself for succor.

Doct. 5. The perplexities and hard shifts to which Gods people are put, is an
argument of help, especially, when somewhat of sincerity appears in the midst
of them; For, as Job's particular scope in this wish, is, that he may be
satisfied in this desire; so, his general scope, in propounding the whole
matter to God, by way of Plea and Argument, in this debate and complaint, is,
to plead for pity and moderation toward a man who was thus perplexed. And
though it be a man's fault and weakness to be thus distempered, yet if we take
with it, and lay it before God as our weakness (as Job does here, v. 14.) it
will plead pity, Isai. 57.16, 17, 18. Namely, in so far as is for our good,
though yet he will humble us, that we may know our weakness, and will not
suffer us to want needful exercise.

In his correcting of his wish, v. 14. (wherein, as has been said,

1. He corrects it in point of judgment, as thinking it absurd to expect that a
man, once dead, should return to this life again.

2. He corrects it in his practice, resolving to wait submissively and
patiently, till his great and final change by death shall come.)

We may Learn,

1. Such is the Lords mercy toward his tossed Children, that their hottest
fits of distemper will have sweet cools and abatements; As here Job retracts
and condemns his former wish.

2. A special mean to calm distempered spirits, is, when they do not persist
rashly in their passionate apprehensions and humors, as Jonah 4.4, 9. but do
reflect upon, and examine, their own frame and desires; and when (finding that
they are wrong) they make use of their light and judgment, to argue and reason
themselves out of their distempers, however their affections be pestered. Thus
does Job reflect, and make use of his light to argue against his own wish, If a
man die, shall he live again? See Psalm. 42.5.

3. It is not to be approved in our selves, that Gods means and comforts will
not satifie us, unless impossibilities and wonders be showed for us, and to us;
For, Job finding his desire impossible, does reject it with indignation, as his
Question imports.

4. When our imagined issues fail us, there is a nearer and surer issue to be
found, in Patience, Submission and Hope; All those are comprehended under
waiting, which Job fixed upon, after he has found his own desire to be absurd;
I will wait, says he. See 1 Cor. 10.13. 2 Cor. 12.7, 8, 9, 10.

5. Such as resolve to find an issue of their trouble in patient submission,
must let patience have its perfect work, Jam. 1.4. They must not fix their own
time, how long they will wait upon God, and no longer, as 2 King. 6.33. but
must submit that God be the appointer of the time of their patience and
exercise; For, says he, All the days of my appointed time will I wait.

6. As it is at death that Saints get a complete relaxation and case of all
their troubles; so they must resolve, if it be Gods will, to wait all their
life in a continual warfare, without a satisfactory issue of their troubles;
For, Job resolves to wait till his change come, even all the days of his
appointed time, or life, and that in a warfare, as the word tendered, appointed
time, also signifies.

7. It may encourage Saints to wait thus long, that death unto them is not a
destruction, but a change; as here he calls it. And, indeed, it is a great
change (as in many respects common to all men; in that it turns an animated
body to a rotten carcass; that it is a change wherein a man is fixed
everlastingly in that state of his person wherein it finds him; that it levels
the greatest of men with the meanest; Job 3.13, 14, 17, 18, 19. Ezekiel. 32.17. --
32, etc. So,) Particularly to the godly, in that then they are delivered from
sin, misery, toil, and discomfort, Rev. 14.13. and then they will have the
better of the wicked, who trampled upon them in the world, Luke 16.25. which
will be made manifest in the Resurrection, Psalm. 49.14.

From v. 15. (wherein he resumes his former wish, and expatiates upon the
advantages he expected, if it were granted.) Learn,

1. Passions may be strong in exercised Saints, that they will not be permitted
to continue in their resolutions of submission; For, here, after he had
corrected and rejected his own wish, v. 14. he falls upon it again. We must not
mistake such tossings; For submission must be a new gift every moment.

2. Passions and Tentations are, often times, fed and cherished with many
pleasing fancies of happiness, if we got our will in our desires; As here those
sweet apprehensions, how it would be with him if God would hide him till the
storm were over, drew him to his wish, and to hearken to the tentation again.
Then, says he, thou would call, and I would answer, etc. whereas now it is
far otherwise, v. 16. Herein he failed, in thinking his own way of guiding
would be far better than that which God took; in fancying those advantages
which God had never promised, on his terms; and, in fancying them to come in a
way of his own, when he might have expected them, with more advantage, in
Death, and at the Resurrection. This does warn us, never to promise our selves
any good out of Gods way, and to limit our expectation of comforts and issues
to Gods Promises, lest our loving fancies breed us much trouble, if they be not
satisfied.

3. Though Job timed his expectation of those advantages ill; yet here are held
out sweet Truths and Consolations of Saints, which they may expect will be
accomplished and made out to them at the last day; and, it may be, sooner,
though God will not be limited, far less will he condescend to such a way of it
as Job proposed. And,

1. It makes a sweet time indeed, when God, after frowning, begins to smile
again upon his people; As Job here supposes it would be, when Gods wrath is is
past, v. 13. Thou would call, and I would answer, etc. See Jer. 31.20. Isai.
40.1, 2. and 54.7, 8.

2. Albeit Saints were so low, as one in a grave, that they could not help
themselves, not get a look of God; yet then the kindness will begin on his
side; For, Thou would call, (says he) by a voice of Omnipotency, upon dead
Job. So Chap. 7.21. Thou will seek me.

3. When God but speaks and calls on a Saint, to comfort him, he will be made
to answer, were he in his grave; For, says he, Thou would call, and I
should answer thee. Here his faith goes further then it did, Chap. 7.21. where
he said, Thou shall seek me, but I shall not be: though he spoke more truly
then, as to Gods ordinary way by the course of Nature.

4. When God has wrought a work of grace in any, he will respect that, and
have a care of them as his own workmanship, were they even in a grave; For,
Thou would have a desire to the work of thine hands. See Chap. 10.3.

Verse. 16. For now thou numbrest my steps, do thou not watch over my sin?

17. My transgression is sealed up in a bag, and thou sowest up mine iniquity.


Job proceeds unto the end of the Chapter to amplify this Argument; And

first, (In thse verses) he gives an account of the cause which drove him to
this irregular wish; Namely, his apprehension of Gods severe dealing, and
strict marking and calling him to an account for his sin. This he had expressed
more generally, by the name of wrath, v. 13. and now he Comments upon that. The
meaning is, as if Job had said; I have cause to long and wish that I were thus
hid, till that fair day should come about, wherein thy wrath should be past,
and thou should appear to be reconciled with me, v. 13. For then the
intercourse would be sweet, v. 15. whereas now thou seem to count all my
goings (not that I may taste of the fruits of thy sympathy, as Psalm. 56.6. but)
that thou may watchfully and carefully mark all my sins, v. 16. and having
marked them, thou keep them fast in thy remembrance (as a Treasure is sowed
and sealed up in a bag) that they may be all forthcoming in a process, to
punish me for them, v. 17. By which expression he does not so much point out
his apprehension, that God formerly had been laying up his sin to an account,
till now that he punishes for them; as that now by his present afflictions (of
which he is complaining) God is putting him to torture to find out his guilt,
in order to further punishment. See Chap. 10.14 and 13.27. Hos. 13.12.

Hence Learn,

1. Sore afflictions may cause sincere Saints, and tender and accurate walkers,
apprehend that God is pursuing their sin; as here may be seen in Job, who would
not yield to his Friends that he was wicked, and who, in the beginning of this
complaint, asserts himself to be free of transgression and iniquity; Chap.
13.23. and yet here he apprehends sin, transgression, and iniquity, to be
marked and pursued. We are not to mistake, though trouble shake the sloutest,
and, in a fit of distemper, loose their grips. Every man whose confidence
staggers in a hard time must not be cast away.

2. As Gods watchful Providence is a sublime and high study, even for Saints in
their best times, Psalm. 139.1. -- 6. So there is no abiding of sin strictly
marked by this eye of God: For, he would be in his grave, when now God numbered
his steps, and watched over his sin. This may persuade them who have not sled
to Christ for pardon, to do it in time; and those who have made him their
refuge, would hold fast their grip, and pray that they be not led into
temptation, nor given up to such a terrible apprehension.

3. Sore afflictions may not only be looked upon by Saints, as a present
pursuit for sin; but may affright them, also, with the apprehension of a future
account, and that all Gods rods at present are but to discover and draw out all
their guilt, in order to a sadder sentence: For, this is Job's apprehension,
Thou watchest over my sin, my transgression is sealed up in a bag, and thou
sowest up mine iniquity. Such terrors for the future are a sad addition to
present trials, and it warns us still to remember that caution, Matthew. 6.34.

4. Saints, in all these sad exercises, and the consequents thereof, may be
lying under great mistakes; and sense may say, God is marking and pursuing sin,
when he is not: For, whatever Job's sins deserved, yet Job was mistaken in his
apprehensions. For God was not marking his sins, nor sealing them up, but only
exercising him for the Edification of Believers in all Ages, James 5 11. We
have need to guard against tentations of this kind, for Sense is a great
mistaker. It will say, God is pursuing sin, when he is but trying; and that he
is far off, when yet he is very near. And it is our mercy that, when our fears
are many and sad, we may suspect they are but the suggestions of mistaken Sense.

5. Whatever pressure, real or apprehended only, lie upon Saints; yet their
only safety is,

1. Not to run away, but to go to God with it; as Job does here. It is better
to tell it to him, then muse on it only in our own hearts, or complain of it to
others.

2. To be so affected with it, as to press God to consider it, and leave it on
his tenderness and wisdom; For, so much does that question import, Do thou
not watch? not that he had a doubt of it in his own apprehension, but that he
would have God consider what a burden this was to him. And, indeed, we may
hazard upon Gods considering of our case; and when sense suggests to us, that
we tell God our case and yet he helps it not; we are bound to silence it with
our submission to whatsoever his tender consideration of our case sees not
meet to remove.

3. We ought also, for our support in such extremities, to remember that God
makes good use of such sad apprehensions, to humble Saints; as Job was brought
low here. And therefore, when our hearts quarrel that should leave us to be
perplexed with many fears, that are not real; we are to silence them with this,
that, however they be not real, yet, through Gods blessings, they produce much
real good and advantage.

Verse. 18. And surely the Mountain falling comes to naught: and the rock is
removed out of his place.

19. The waters wear the stones, thou washest away the things which grow out of
the dust of the earth, and thou destroyest the hope of man.


Secondly, In enlarging this Argument, Job (having told the cause of his with)
subjoyns how intolerable that procedure was, and how he could not endure or
subsist under it. And therefore having such a pressing cause, and intolerable
burden lying upon him; he could not but be driven to be wish to be dead for a
while, and though he resisted it all he could, yet he could not but be overcome
with it. This his oppressed and surcharged condition he illustrates by several
similitudes, v. 18, 19. -- whereof he makes application to the case in hand, v.
-- 19, 20, 21, 22. The sum of all which, is, that if the most strong and fixed
things could not subsist under c^n^inual and violent assaults, especially from
the hand of God, how much less could a frail man (as his name signifies, v. --
19.) such as he was, endure such assaults as were made up on him.

In these verses, Consider,

First, The particular similitudes, whereof Job makes use; which are,

1. A Mountain, which cannot resist Gods power, but he makes it fall, by
Earthquakes and the like accidents: and then it comes to naught, as to what it
was formerly, and withers like a dried leaf, as the Original word imports.

2. A Rock, which is yet harder then a Mountain, and yet is removed by the same
power.

3. The very hard stones which do wear and waste by the continual dropping of
water.

4. That Deluges will wash away the things that grow out of the Earth, though
never so well rooted, and (as some read it) covers the Earth with Dust and
Sand.

Secondly, Consider Job's Application of these Similitudes to his case, which
is begun here. For Job produces all those instances, to show how unable he was
to endure what he felt. And therefore he makes a particular enumeration of Gods
dealings with Man, answerable to what befell those creatures, wherein, albeit he
speak in general of Man, yet he has an eye to his own present condition, and
many of the particulars do also hold some proportion and resemblance with the
former similitudes

The first particular, which he mentions, of Gods dealing with Man, is, his
destroying of his hope, or, crushing of his expectation, by taking away all
appearance and probability of what he hopes for. This is not to be understood
of the eternal hope of the godly (though they may have sad fears about that; as
the hopes of the wicked, both temporal and eternal, will really be destroyed)
but of their hopes about temporal things. And this Branch of the Application
answers to the first two similitudes; that as Mountains and Rocks are removed
and brought to naught, without hope of recovery; so by Job's troubles, (as he
supposes) all his hopes within time were irrecoverably gone, and all hopes of
restitution lost.

From the Similitudes and Job's general scope in them, Learn,

1. God is powerful to make strange changes, when he pleases, upon his
creatures; Everlasting Mountains, fixed Rocks, hard Stones, etc. cannot resist
him. See Nah. 1.4, 5, 6. Hab. 3.6. Psalm. 114.3, 4, etc. Psalm. 18.7, etc. This
te^cheth us to fix upon nothing within time as permanent; and to wait upon him,
who can do so great things.

2. God has several ways for bringing about of strange shakings and changes;
as these similitudes also teach. He has extraordinary judgments in store, when
they are needed, like Earthquakes to cause Mountains and Rocks fall and remove.
David points at somewhat like this in his deliverance, Psalm 18.6, 7, etc. He
can make very small means, like the dropping of water upon an hard stone,
produce great and singular effects. If one shake will not do it, he can can
carry his point by repeated trials; as continual droppings upon a stone do wear
it at last. He can do his turn, and plague men, by that which in ordinary is a
blessing; As Rain and Water fructifieth the Earth, and causes it produce
Fruits, and yet it may also be employed to sweep them away, and impede the
Earths fruitfulness. All this tells us, that wherever we turn us, we are no
party to God, but he can easily reach us.

3. The Power of God over other Creatures should be a document to Man, to teach
him his weakness; who, though he have excellencies above them; yet, is more
frail then many of them; For, that is Job's scope here, to show that, if these
creatures could not resist, or subsist under Gods hand, far less was he able.

4. Yet this must be admitted with Caution; For,

1. If (as to what Job was formerly, and God had done unto him) the scope of
his reasoning be, to show that he was no terrible creature, but a frail man (as
the name is, v. -- 19.) and far inferior in strength to those creatures, which
yet could not subsist under his hand; And therefore he needed not have dealt so
with him (See Chap. 6 12. and 7.12.) It may easily be answered, that many men
(like Pharaoh, and others) do lift up themselves higher then Mountains, and do
ha^den themselves abov^ Rocks and Stones, against God; and even the godly have
so much of this ^n them, that no less then such a shake will suppress it.

2. If as matters stood now, his scope be to plead weakness, and that he could
not subsist, unless God eased him: It may also be answered, That God, by his
strength can make men endure more then any of these creatures; And albeit
Saints be indeed weak in themselves, yet he can m^ke them invincible in him.
Our weakness should humble us, but not make us carp or distrust, if God be
pleased to exercise us.

From the first branch of the application Learn, It is a sore trial to have our
hope crushed, and that by God, who is able to destroy it when he pleases; For,
he resents this first, as that which made his lot intolerable, thou destroyest
the hope of man. Hope feeds us when we are in want, and it is our last grip in
trouble, when Sense, Enjoyment, and strong Confidence, are gone; and therefore,
it must be sad when it is cut off Ezekiel 37.11. But it is much sadder when God
does it, when it is not our seats and suspicions, but he, on whom our hope
should lean, who strickes at it. Lam. 3.18. This may afford us needful Caution
and Instruction,

First, Concerning our hope in general, And,

1. If it be so sad a stroke to have hope destroyed, we ought to be careful
that we do not voluntarily crush our own hope, and cast it away. Heb. 10 35.
For it draws to Apostasy, Jer. 2.25. Heb. 12.12, 13. and other sad effects.

2 We ought not jealously to suspect God as an Enemy to our Hope; For, we may
be mistaken, if we judge by appearances, or our own apprehensions. Lam, 3.18,
21, 22 Psalm. 31.22. And therefore should learn to hope against hope. Romans 4.18.

Secondly, Concerning our temporal hopes, in particular, to which Job speaks
here, And,

1. We should see Gods hand in all the crushings of our hopes we meet with; for
if he did not reject our confidences, we would prosper better in them, and not
be humbled with so many disappointments. Jer. 2.37. And when we study this, we
will also find, that it is in Gods hand to recover our destroyed hope when he
will; and it will be comfortable to consider that the world is not gone from
under his hand and guiding.

2. In such cases, we should make sure a better hope that will not be
destroyed, and should bless God for it. See, Heb. 6.18. Hab. 3.17.18.

3. We should study to ground our hopes well in every thing. For a crush in a
little may do much harm in other things. The ill grounded hopes of the two
Disciples had humbling effects upon them. Luke 24.17-26.

4. Hence we should learn to be sober in our hopes about those things, and not
to soar high, lest our fall and disappointment be the sadder

5. We should keep God our Friend, who has the destruction of hope in his
hand, not only by having his word engaged for every thing we expect, but by
personal reconciliation with him, and constant dependence upon him for the
attainment of our lawful hopes. Jam. 4.13, 14, 15.

Verse. 20. Thou prevailest for ever against him, and he passes: thou changest
his countenance, and sendest him away.
In this verse we have the second Particular, or Branch, of the Application of
these similitudes; That, as none of the sore mentioned creatures can resist
God, but he removes them, and changes their condition, at his pleasure: So, he
also prevails against man, till, having wrought a notable change upon him, he
send him away by death. As for the first part of the verse, this prevailing
forever, may be understood diverse ways; Namely,

1. As the waters by continual dropping prevail at last over the hard stones,
notwithstanding all their resistance; So God, by continual and renewed
incursions, for ever pursuing Man, does overcome his stubbornness at last, and
makes him pass, or quit the field and succumb.

2. That even at every assault, God prevails for ever, o^, to victory, as the
word also signifies, and gets a com let victory for ever, at all times when he
assaults him; So often as he assaults, so many Victories g^ts he, and so often
causes he Man succumb, though yet he will not give it over.

3. That (beside these particular victories) he does at last prevail over Man
by death, when he makes him pass for ever out of this world. This last (not
secluding the rest, as previous to it) is chiefly to be understood here, which
therefore is enlarged in the following part of the verse, Thou changest his
countenance, and sends him away, that is, as deluges do deform the face of
the Earth; so Gods strokes do first waste Man, and mar his Temperature,
Complexion, and Countenance (as a begun Victory over him) and then, having made
him an ugly spectacle, he sends him away by death.

Though Job, in his reasoning that his condition was intolerable because of all
this, was in a mistake; For albeit God, by those many assaults, did overcome
and bring at under his vigor and bodily strength; yet neither was God fighting
against him as an Enemy, nor was he sent away by death at this time, and so his
condition was not irrecoverable; And though he had been cut off, it was not
therefore insupportable.

Yet the General Truths here asserted, may Teach,

1. Albeit men be, oft-times, so presumptuous as to strive and wrestle with
God; yet there is no resisting of him, but he is sure to prevail; As Job here
asserts, as also, Chap. 9.4. And as Pharaoh, Julian the Apostate, and many
others, have found. And therefore submission and stooping is the best of it.
See 1 Samuel 2.9. Psalm. 18.26. Jer. 44.28.

2. As God does easily prevail over Man, so his Victory is complete, and his
stroke irremediable till his own hand help it; For, he prevails for ever, and
to Victory, at every assault. So that, as it is folly to strive, so, it is
twice folly not to adore his hand, and stoop, when he has overcome. See Isai.
9.9, 10, etc. Mal. 1.4.

3. Proud and contentious Man requires many assaults, to bring him down and
keep him down; And God is fitted for him: For, he prevails for ever, again and
again, and if we think to bear out in one assault, or stubbornly to abide it,
if he get the Victory over us in some particular; he has more of them wherein
he will be victorious, till we find our resistance in vain.

4. God can pursue his Victory, when he pleases, to the utter undoing and
death of the creature; and so make him cease to struggle, and acknowledge his
weakness, when he cease to be; For, Thou prevailest, and he passes, or
goes, that is, he dies. It is an allusion to Soldiers, who quit the Field,
when they are beaten, and can keep it no longer.

5. God, by afflictions, can, and does, give documents of men's frailty, before
they remove by death, by wasting and consuming their bodily vigor and
complexion, and that either by outward afflictions, or grief of mind, or both;
For, Thou changest his countenance, and thou sendest him away, See Psalm. 39.11.
This warns men not to dote on beauty, and to make sure Gods favor, who is the
health of our countenance, Psalm. 42.11. It serves also to humble men, whose lot
it is to have their frailty thus discovered, when they are made to look like
their grave, before they go to it. And Job's recording this as one of Gods ways
toward men, comfort those (as being under no strange lot) whose sorrows will
not hide, but their very continuance must speak them.

6. Whatever be the way of men's going out of the world; yet Divine Providence
has an hand in it; For says he, Thou sendest him away.

Verse. 21. His sons come to honor, and he knows it not; and they are brought
low, but he perceives it not of them.

22. But his flesh upon him shall have pain, and his soul within him shall
mourn.


The last particular, or branch of this Application, is in these Verses; which
(because Job had formerly spoken of death) some do understand of the state of
the dead man, who (in the former verse) is said to be sent away: That being
gone, he remains ignorant of what most nearly concerns him and his, v. 21. Only
his body is pained, and his soul mourns, v. 22. Which, seeing it cannot be
understood literally (for men's flesh has no pain, when it sleeps in the grave.
Nor does it speak any thing to the condition, or place, of souls departed,
unless we will say their bodies go to share with them; and that even the most
godly men (such as Job esteemed himself to be) must share in these sorrows.)
Therefore some understand it figuratively, as pointing out (in a Poetical
representation) Man's state after he is dead, by what was his condition when a
dying. And thus sense is attributed to the dead, Job 21.33. But because this
Interpretation is violent, and seems to be strained, therefore I incline to
understand it of the condition of this afflicted man before God send him away
and he die. And so the words may be rendered. His flesh being upon him (he
being an entire person, not yet dissolved) shall have pain, and his soul being
within him, (or, lying upon him, being now broken and crushed, as a burden)
shall mourn. Thus the words point out one of those intolerable afflictions
whereby God prevails over Man; Namely, that not only does God send him away by
death, v. 20. but even before he die, he is made little better then dead while
he lives; being no way affected with the condition of his dearest relations,
whether they be in weal or woe, but taken up only with his own miseries, both
in body and mind. This Job speaks with a special eye to his own condition, who
could not get leisure to perceive or take notice of the ruin that had come
upon his family, nor would their restitution to life, and their advancement,
afford him so much content as to cause him take leisure to know it, and enquire
after it. Far less could he regard any other earthly contentment, being kept so
throng within himself, by reason of the pressures that were upon his body and
spirit.

From these verses Learn,

1. It is a sore trial, wherewith God may exercise his people, when their souls
and bodies are both afflicted at once; As here Job propounds the case in
general, but with an eye to what was his own lot. Bodily pain is a sharp trial,
yet the spirit of a man will sustain that infirmity; but it becomes heavy and
crushing, when that prop and pillar is taken away. A wounded spirit is a burden
sad enough of it self; but it adds to it, when outward bodily afflictions
concur with it. This may excite us to bless God, when we have but one of those
at once, and both does not assault us together. And when, at any time, both of
these concur to exercise us, we ought to see that all that is needful, to abase
us and to draw out proofs of God. We need all this for our humiliation, and God
makes it to be thus, that he may take occasion to manifest his all sufficiency
in behalf of his crushed Saints. And if our hearts begin to faint under such a
lot, we ought to look to Job here, whose experience does witness that a Saint
may be supported under such a pressure.

2. Men may be exercised with strange changes and vicissitudes, in the
conditions of their posterity, which ought to affect them: For, their sons may
come to honor, and they may be brought low, (either the sons of mean men may
be exalted, and the sons of great men abated, or the Children of any of them
may be exercised with those lots, one after another.) And this Job speaks of,
as a thing that will affect Parents with joy or sorrow, even in the midst of
their own personal trials, if any condition, beside their own, can affect them.
This warns Parents to look well to their Children, as to a gift whereby they
will either have much joy or much grief; and whatever God make their exercise,
by reason of various lots that may befall their Children, they ought to be
careful that they neglect no duty, lest they reap the bitter fruits thereof, in
the miscarriages and sad lots that befall them.

3. Great personal trials may so toss men, and take them up, that outward
contentments will not divert them; For, in such a case as here is supposed,
though a man's sons come to honor, yet he knows it not, or does not notice
it. Thus Heman was like a dead man, sequestrate from all things of time, Psalm.
88.5. Such a ones condition is above ordinary and outward comforts and cure; or
rather he is so low, that they cannot reach him. In this case, we ought to
beware that we do not peevishly refuse to be comforted, Psalm. 77.2. or neglect
to remark even common favors, to see if God may be pleased to breath upon
them, to refresh us thereby. For so godly men have gathered ground of hope from
this very consideration, that they were Gods creatures, as is frequent in the
Psalms. And albeit such refreshments cannot fully serve the turn of afflicted
men; yet they ought not therefore to be slighted, but rather cherished, which
is the way to get more. It is also to be remembered, that when men are so
afflicted, that the good condition of their Children cannot affect them; it may
be the fruit of their too eager seeking after, or doting upon, their Childrens
prosperity. And therefore God puts Wormwood upon that Breast, that they can
suck no sweetness from it though they have it. Herein, also, some may reap the
fruit of their own selfishnes, in taking little notice of the case of others,
dear to them, either to rejoice or mourn with them; in that they are cast in
such a condition as they cannot do it, though they would. Yet when this is the
lot of godly men, who have walked conscientiously, and do endeavor to walk
meekly and tenderly under the Rod, they may believe that God has gracious and
sweet purposes in it. For, hereby God takes proof that their disease is (not
only great, but) so really spiritual, that carnal and outward Consolations will
not cure it; and upon this account it may be sweet to them, that all those
breasts afford them no refreshment. Hereby, also, God prepares the way, and
sits them for his own Consolations; For those are laid aside, that he, who is
the Comforter indeed, may come unto them. And hereby, also, the Lord takes
occasion to prove that he can bear them up, whose weight would sink down all
other comforts into the mire, with themselves.

4. Men, may be, also, so tossed and kept throng with their own troubles, that
they can admit no more, nor be capable to share in the afflictions of those who
are dearest to them; For, they are brought low, but he perceives not of them,
or, cannot get leisure to take notice of it. It may well stupifie him, but will
do no more. It is but like a new wound given to a slain man; which will cut
indeed, but draw no blood. Or like a full vessel, into which we may pour what
water we will, but it runs all over. In this case (beside that selfishness,
formerly marked, whereof this may be a fruit also) sometime men may read the
fruit of their taking impatiently any trouble that comes upon any of theirs, in
that they are kept throng by sharper troubles upon themselves, which keeps them
from noticing what may befall their dearest Relations. It may also be men's fault
that they are so drowned and stupefied with their own sorrows, as to leave no
room for the sorrows of others. For (to say nothing, what is our duty) God may
cure one by the addition of another, and may add a new exercise to all that
they have (though they seemed insupportable) that the Fever may come to an
height, and so to a cool. One trial, added to many before, may work, and help
the rest to work upon us. Yet that this may be the case of godly men, may
afford some profitable Instructions,

1. That none ought to complain of trouble, so long as they can hold more; For,
here it is supposed they may be so low, as no superadded trouble can affect
them.

2. Gods Wisdom toward many is to be adored in this, that he carries them
through many afflictions upon their Relations, (otherwise very intolerable) in
such a throng of inward exercise and bodily pain, that they cannot get leisure
to think upon these sorrows, which, otherwise would be ready to sink them. This
burning is cured by holding the burnt finger to the fire.

3. They who are in this hard case, ought not to doubt of Gods pity; For it is
Job's scope in all this Narration, to plead for pity, from the consideration of
his intolerable condition. Those dumb superadded strokes will plead so much the
more as they have not leisure to resent them.

4. Since even Parents, and godly Parents, may be made useless to their
Children, in their afflictions, and friends to friends; let those in affliction
learn to acquaint themselves with Christ, who had leisure enough, in the midst
of his own sufferings, to mind the necessities of his friends; as witness his
care of Mother, when he was on the Cross, Joh. 19.25, 26, 27. Much less now can
he be diverted from tendering them in their distresses.

CHAP. XV.
Job having been now assaulted by all his three Friends, and having answered
them one by one; there follows (to Chap. 22.) a second conflict with them
all, wherein (as before) Eliphaz begins first. And it is observable, that in
all their discourses they bring no new purpose, or Arguments; but do repeat the
same matter they had formerly spoken, in new words: and that they are more
vehement, passionate and bitter, then formerly. Neither do they, as formerly,
make use of any persuasive encouragements, to invite him to Repentance; but do
reflect upon him with all the sharpness they can, as judging him to be very
stubborn and incorrigible.

In this Chapter, Eliphaz's discourse is recorded, wherein he labors to
maintain his own and his Friends cause. And, First, He reprehends many faults
in Job's former discourses and proceedings; Namely, that his discourses were
but unprofitable, empty and hurtful, ver. 1, 2, 3. That both his way and his
discourses were full of Impiety, ver. 4, 5, 6. And of arrogance and
presumption, both toward them, ver. 7, 8.9, 10. and toward God, ver. 11, 12,
13. And, that he was erroneous in seeking to justify himself before God, ver.
14. which very Angels could not do; ver. 15, 16. This being the point in
controversy, he proceeds (in the second part of the Chapter) to prove that Job
could not be righteous; by showing that none but wicked men were afflicted as
he was. In pursuance whereof, after a preface exciting to attention, and
clearing how he would prove his point, ver. 17, 18, 19. He gives an account of
the miserable estate of the wicked, Chiefly in respect of their inward
vexations and fears, ver. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. and of the cause of this and
their other miseries; namely their presumptuous wickedness because of their
prosperity, ver. 25, 26, 27, 28. Unto which he subjoyns an account of the
outward Plagues that God sends upon them, ver. 29.30. And draws a conclusion
from his whole discourse; wherein he warns deluded souls, that they deceive not
themselves with vain confidences, otherwise they will meet with disappointments
and Plagues, ver. 31, 32, 33. as their sins, of hypocrisy, oppression, and
maliciousness, do deserve, ver. 34, 35.

Verse. 1. Then answered Eliphaz the Temanite, and said,

2. Should a wise man utter vain knowledge, and fill his belly with the
East Wind;

3. Should he reason with unprofitable talk? or with speeches wherewith he can
do no good?


THe first fault, reprehended in Job's discourses, is general, that they were
but unprofitable, empty, and hurtful. This is expressed in borrowed terms, v.
2. That his knowledge which he uttered, was but vain knowledge, or, knowledge
of wind, that is, that it was empty and airie, did puff him up and make him
unsober, and was unprofitable, like windy meat, or feeding upon wind. Further,
he is said to fill his belly with the East wind, (which was both turbulent and
noxious, Isai, 27.8) that is, he filled himself with unruly passions, and
pestered his heart with them; which made him break forth in those violent and
hurtful speeches. The first of these Metaphors is explained in proper terms, v.
3. That he made use of discourses in his reasonings that were no way
profitable, nor could do good to himself or others. As for the other Metaphor,
of the East wind, it is explained and enlarged in the following challenges,
wherein he tells Job how violently, and how much to his own prejudice, he had
expressed himself. In sum; He lays to Job's charge, that his speeches were
not only unprofitable to others, and violent and boisterous against God and
them, as if he would overturn and bear all down before him; B^t in respect of
himself also, they were such as could not profit him, nor help his cause; but,
on the contrary, (like the East Wind) made it worse, by disturbing himself, and
provoking God to make it worse with him. And this he charge home upon Job, by
way of question, as very sinful, and as unbeseeming a wise man, such as he gave
out himself to be, when he contemned them, as knowing but common things, Chap.
12.2, 3.

Concerning this and other of the censures, which Eliphaz passes upon Job's
discourses, and way of proceeding, it must be granted,

1. That the General Doctrine is sound, and the faults challenged are in
themselves real faults, whatever mistake be in the application, or his charging
them upon Job.

2. That in some of these challenges (and but in some) he guesseth better at
the truth of Job's miscarriages, then in the General Controversy. For Job's
discourses were not all to be justified, as has been showed in explaining of
them, and will further appear from the censures which are passed by Elihu, and
by God himself, upon them Yet,

3. Eliphaz's discourse is full of prejudices, mistakes and reflections. For,
partly, he mistook Job and his doctrine, particularly, concerning man's purity,
as may be marked upon ver. 14. Partly, while he is made hot with passion,
because of supposed reflections upon their abilities, v. 9, 10. he speaks more
unadvisedly then he ought. Partly, he considered not Job's distress and
tentations, whence his ill-ordered expressions flowed, and so judged them to be
evidences of wickedness, rather then of weakness. And hence (lastly) it came to
pass, that all Job spoke was, in his account, but wind, and prejudicial to
himself, so long as he would not grant that he was a wicked hypocrite, and that
God was pursuing him in anger, as is clear from the following part of the
Chapter.

Having premitted this caution for clearing the words; I come to observe
somewhat upon these verses. And,

First, This Reply, considered in General, may Teach,

1. Controversies, once started, are not soon quieted and composed again; For,
after all the three have assaulted him, they again fall to it afresh. Gods
quarrel, for which he sends Debates and Controversies, is not soon seen, nor
laid to heart, and the discovery thereof made use of as it ought. Men's lusts,
interest, and credit, which do engage, and (being engaged) entangle them in
debates, are not soon compesced and mortified; and right use is not soon made
of these debates, nor are men fully tried, and truth cleared, by them; and
therefore it is no wonder, they continue to be an exercise to men. Hence, times
of contention and debate are very humbling times, and will produce growing, and
(if mercy prevent not) endless toil.

2. Their order in dealing with him is also remarkable; For though they were in
passion, and (it may be) did sometime interrupt him; yet they do not fall upon
him all at once, but one by one; See 1 Cor. 14 31. This may condemn the
confusions and disorders practiced by those who pretend to defend Truth; For
though these men be eager enough to defend what they account Truth; yet they
will do it in an orderly way.

3. Mistakes of good men may be started and heightened in debate, even by good
men; For, he does mistake Job here. And here we are to consider these
particulars,

1. Good men, who have a just cause, may yet give too much occasion to others
to mistake them, when they are sharply tried and exercised; As Job said much
that was not justifiable, though Eliphaz and the rest drew wrong conclusions
from it.

2. Debates among sinful mortal men cannot but raise passions, and breed
alienations, which are a false Perspective, misrepresenting them and their
cause, one to another.

3. Personal reflections, resented, will blind men's judgments, that they cannot
see things as they are; As they cannot let pass his undervaluing of their
knowledge, Chap. 12.2, 3. without a taunt retorted, that his knowledge was but
vain, and wind. Men's Credit and Reputation is a great Idol, and apt to
blindfold them, when it is touched upon.

4. Ignorance, and want of experience of the case of others, may cause us
construct hardly of their carriage; As Eliphaz judged thus of Job, because he
considered not his distress, which drove him to speak as he did. See, Chap.
16.4.

5. It is dangerous, when we look upon the distempers of others in tentation
from thence to conclude concerning their state; For, Job's Friends judged him
wicked, because of his failings in trouble. All these considerations may warn
men to look well about them, and to be a fraid and wary in judging of others,
in times of contention, wherein mistakes are so apt to be predominant.

More particularly; This challenge, considered abstractly, and without his
misapplications to Job, may Teach,

1. Albeit passion and reflections be never lawful; Yet when men are indeed
wrong, they who have a calling to it ought to be very full and free in
reproving of them; as Eliphas here was, supposing Job to be wrong. Real faults
are but cherished by b^unt reproofs. See, Tit. 1.13. 1 Samuel 2.22, 23. with 3.13.

2. The best way to get reproofs made effectual, is, to put the Conscience of
the guilty person to it, and study to have that on the reprovers side; For, so
does he here, as those many questions, posing the Conscience do teach. There is
much need that Conscience be put to it to do its office, in debates; For that
alone will bind and silence men, whereas, otherwise, their will and parts may
stand it out long enough.

3. There is a vanity in knowledge, wherewith men, oft-times are much taken up;
as Eliphaz here supposes, that there is vain knowledge, or, knowledge of wind.
Thus imaginations, or reasonings, are said to become vain, Romans 1.21. and some
use of Philosophy is explained to be a vain deceit, Col. 2.8. This vanity
(omitting many other trials) may be discovered, if we press a little the
metaphor of wind, here made use of. It is but vain knowledge which is
unprofitable, and does not feed or edify the man that has it, but is empty
and notional, like wind. That is also vain knowledge, which, like wind, makes a
great noise, but does not produce any solid effect; And which puffs up, and
swells the man that has it, as with wind; making him unsober in mind, or in
expressions. Such knowledge is but vain, even albeit the subject matter which
the man knows, were good. 1. Cor. 8.2.

4. As vain knowledge is ill in any; so, especially, it is unbeseeming a wise
man, or him that would be accounted wise; For, says he, Should a wise man
utter vain knowledge? and so of all the rest. See, Eccl. 10.1. A man's conceit
of himself does agreage his fault and folly, and prove him to be nothing, Gal.
6.3.

5. Men, notwithstanding all their wit, are ready to run on unprofitable,
hurtful and pernicious courses in trouble; For, he supposes that not only
there is wind, but the East wind, in this knowledge, breaking forth
boysterously against God and them who were his Friends, and tending to undo
himself. And albeit he did mistake Job, yet the General Doctrine serves for
caution to all.

6. A special mean to drive men on hurtful courses and ways in trouble, is, the
suffering of violent passions to arise and harbor in their hearts; For, says
he, he fills his belly with the East wind, or pesters his affections with it,
and then it breaks forth.

7. As much evil comes by the tongue, James 3. So, in particular, it is an
evil, when men do not propound this end in discourse, that it may be
profitable, to themselves, or others; For, he supposes it a fault for a man,
to utter vain knowledge, to reason with unprofitable talk, or with speeches
wherewith he can do no good. Even idle speeches are censurable, Math. 12.36,
37. as being an evidence of the heart and disposition, Math. 12.33, 34. Psalm.
37.30, 31. and multitude of words are also condemned, Eccl. 5.3. Jam. 1.19.
Prove. 10.19. Which teaches us, that care should be had to observe
Scripture-cautions in our speeches. Ephesians. 4.29. Col. 2.6. and elsewhere.

8. In particular, It is an addition to men's fault in trouble, when to their
vain knowledge, and tentations and passions within, they add the venting and
uttering thereof to others; As here, he charge upon Job, that having vain
knowledge, and the East Wind, he did utter it, and had such a conceit of it, as
to presume to reason, and argue therewith. Thus to speak and utter tentations
adds to the guilt of entertaining them. Isai, 40.27.

Verse. 4. Yea thou castest off fear, and restrainest prayer before God.
The second fault which he reprehends in Job's discourses and way, is, impiety;
which (with those that follow) does explain that Metaphor, v. 2. of the East
wind, And therefore, having, in the former challenge, explained that of
knowledge of wind, v. 3. he adds this to it, and joins them together by the
copulative particle, Yea. In this verse the challenge is propounded; That he
cast off (or, made void) fear, and restrained prayer. Concerning which,
Consider,

First, As for the sense of these words, and the meaning of the challenge; it
may be understood,

1. Of Job's practice; That, without standing in awe of God, and casting off
all reverence, he would not pray in trouble, but fell a quarrelling, and
offered to contend with God; as (it seems) he gathered from his discourse,
Chap. 13.20, 21, 22, etc.

2. It may be understood of Job's Principles, Opinion, and Doctrine; That while
he maintained that the godly and wicked were alike dealt with in this world,
Chap. 9.22. and that the wicked prospered, Chap. 12.6. while he, a godly man,
was afflicted; He did, by this means, open a door to Profanity, Atheism, and
Irreligion: For, who would fear God, or call upon him, if things were so
ordered? and he did but shake loose all fear of God, while he maintained those
Principles. Both those senses do very well consist together, that not only in
his own practice he thus miscarried, and cast off fear, but, by his practice
and discourses, did what he could to infect and misl^ad others, and to make
void fear, as the words will also read.

Secondly, As for the truth of this challenge, and how justly Job was charged
with this crime of impiety, It would be Considered,

1. As for his practice, it cannot be denied that he spoke in much passion, and
uttered many irreverent words to God, and of him; and did quarrel much, instead
of praying. Yet it was an unjust charge to say he cast off fear, and restrained
Prayer, altogether. For even in his stoutest expressions, Chap. 13.20, etc. he
declares he stands in aw of God, and fears his rod and terrors; and his
failings did evidence his weakness, not his impiety, seeing he cl^aves still to
God, Chap 13.15, 16. And albeit his speeches to God be, oft-times, ill ordered
and full of complaints: Yet, they are, in effect, Prayers. For the scope of
them all, is to plead for pity and moderation, as has been showed in
expounding them; and so himself explains his own scope in them, Chap. 16.20.
The consideration of this may teach, Partly, what great need there is of
moderation of spirit in debates; without which, Saints may be calumniated, even
by good men, not only as failers in duty, but as impious, Partly, what a great
fault, and cause of mistakes, it is, to weigh the expressions or carriage of
Saints, when they are in their Fevers, in the sober man's Balance; when as they
should have many grains of allowance at such times; For, Eliphaz will have Job
(when in the heat of a Fever) speaking as a Saint in a calm undisturbed temper
and condition, otherwise, he will judge him to be wicked and impious, See 2
King. 4.27.

2. As for Job's Doctrine; It is true, Providential Dispensations toward the
godly and wicked (whereof Job speaks, and maintains that God did dispense them)
do prove stumbling blocks to Hypocrites and wicked men, and they take occasion
thereby to harden themselves in their impiety, Isai. 58.3. Eccles. 8.11. Mal.
2.17. and 3.13, 14, 15. The godly also may, sometimes, be assaulted with
dreadful tentations, by looking awry upon those dispensations, Psalm. 73.11. --
14 Yet as Gods Providence, acting these things, is free of any such
miscarriages, so neither must Job's Doctrine, concerning this Providence, be
charged with them: Nor does the asserting of those Truths, concerning the Lot
of the godly and wicked within time, any way contribute toward the advancement
of impiety. Because,

1. Piety will teach men (when they are in cold blood) not to quarrel with God,
because of outward lots.

2. Piety will bring a man such advantages by trouble, as will discover it to
be excellent, whatever trouble come.

3. Piety has an advantage when all trouble is over (which Job often saw,
Chap. 13 16. and 19.25, 26.) which may sweeten all toil by the way.

4. Whatever be the Lords dispensations toward godly or wicked men; yet Piety
is advantageous and necessary for the blessing of men's lots. For Piety only
assures a man that his lot (sweet or bitter) is blessed, which to another is a
snare and plague. This being his mistake concerning Job's Doctrine; It may warn
us, That, as it is the duty of all, to commend and keep up the reputation of
true piety, Psalm. 73.15. So men, who are real friends to it, may think they are
advancing it by their Principles and way, and that their opposites are acting
to the prejudice thereof; when yet themselves are in the wrong and against
Truth, and their opposites are in the right. Thus was Job sound in his
Principles (whatever weakness escaped him) and his Friends in an Error, in
that wherein he is so severely censured. Thus the Psalmist, when he yielded but
a little to their opinion, or to the consequences which they drew from Job's
Doctrine, accounts it an offending of the Generation of Gods Children, Psalm
73.15. whereas he was never checked for asserting (as Job did) that true Piety
and trouble were consistent. We must not judge of Causes by the fair and
plausible pretenses whereby men would set them off, nor think to help and
advance Piety by Errors and Untruths.

Having explained the words, and vindicated Job, I shall observe somewhat from
the words, as they are a challenge and censure of a very heinous crime,
abstracting from his misapplications, and mistake of Job. And,

1. Impiety and Irreligion is an horrid sin, far above ordinary failings and
transgressions; For, this charge is added to the former, concerning
unprofitable discourse, v. 3. with a, yea, or, yea more, to express that this
was a heinous fault, above the former. As there are degrees of sin, Psalm. 1.1.
to be well adverted unto in our examination of our own way; So men come to a
great height in sin when they hate Piety, or profess or practice Irreligion,
were they, otherwise, never so blameless in their external conversation.

2. Great troubles are a sore tentation to drive men upon Atheism and Impiety;
For, so does Eliphaz suppose that, because Job was so afflicted, therefore he
had cast off scar, etc. And men by Nature are indeed so stout-hearted, that if
God cross them, they will cast off his service, Mal. 3.13, 14, 15. 2 King.
6.33. Hypocrites will lay aside the mask of a Profession under trouble, and the
Profane will turn impious Atheists. This should put men upon their guard in
times of trouble, as knowing that trouble, of it self, and without Gods
blessing, will not make them better, but rather make them worse then it found
them. And it should also mind us to lay to heart man's perversity and
stiffeness, who not only will not regard God in prosperity, Job 21.7. -- 14.
but even in adversity, and when his hand is upon them and they are made to know
his severity, they will slight him, and become more impious, Rev. 16.10, 11.

3. As it is a great sin to turn impious in practice; So it is yet a greater
sin, to lay a stumbling block in the way of others, to draw them to impiety, by
doctrine or miscarriage: For, so Eliphaz charge this upon Job, not only as
his own personal fault, but that, pa^tly, by his practice, and, chiefly by his
doctrine, he tempted others to impiety, as has been explained. And albeit (as
has been cleared) he wronged Job in this; Yet the General Doctrine is sound:
That it is an horrid sin to be a stumbling block and snare to draw others to
sin, especially to gross impiety, 2 King. 17.21. And such as would be free of
this, ought to look well to their practice, lest not only profane carriage in
the wicked, but heartless discouragement, impatience under trouble, etc. in
Professors, deterr others from Piety. And as they would beware of commands, or
counsels to sin; so particularly, of a doctrine of impiety, or opinions which
in their nature tend to it, Jude, v. 3. Matthew 5.19.

4. They open a door to Impiety, and cut the throat of all Religion, who,
either in Doctrine or Practice, do not entertain reverence, fear, and aw of
God; For, the first step to impiety, here, is, want of fear, or, reverence.
This is the root of all Piety, and the beginning of true Wisdom; Prove. 9.10.
and therefore true Piety is, oft-times, expressed by this fear of God. And,
indeed, men ought to reverence and adore God in his super-excellent and
glorious Majesty, considering their own baseness; they ought to fear lest they
offend him, and tremble and fear his Justice, when he is provoked; they ought
to reverence his dispensations, fear his goodness, Hos. 3.5. and tremble at his
Word; Isai. 66.2. Ezra 10.3. and where this Principle is not entertained and
improved, men are prone to every evil, Genesis 20.11. and 42 18. Neh. 5.15. And
albeit men be not gone the length of open impiety, yet when their hearts are
not tender and kept in an holy aw of God, they blast their Piety (if they have
any) at the root, and do open a wide and dangerous gap, whereby any evil may
enter. Hence it is that God especially regards a tender heart, that trembles
at the Word, Isai. 57.15. and 66 1, 2.

5. It is dreadful to want this fear of God, but more dreadful, to cast it off,
and make it void, that it, when men in their judgments esteem it a thing void
of it self, which will have no profitable effect, nor will do them any good,
Mal 3.13, 14. and so reject it, and cast off any Profession of it they sometime
had; as he insinuates Job to have been an Hypocrite, and that now he was
discovering himself. Which shows that, as men will not, with their credit,
get retreated from any shows of Piety they ever had, but it will be their
reproach that they have cast it off; Gal. 3.3, 4. and 4.14, 15. So, Prejudices
against Piety, because of ill success, would be repented of and amended. For
albeit men may have such prejudices, who yet cast not off all duties of
Religion; yet, if they be entertained, that will be the sad issue of all at
last.

6. The more eminent any have been for professing of Religion, their
miscarriages under trouble, or relapses to impiety, are the more odious; For,
there is an Emphasis put upon this, Thou castest off, etc. Albeit in the
Original Language, the person be included in the verb, which does sufficiently
express it; Yet here he prefixes also the Pronoun, Thou, to the Verb, to
intimate how odious it was that he, who was such a noted one, should do this.
So likewise Eliphaz in his first speech, having indirectly charged him with
that crime which he now speaks more distinctly out, does like aggravate it from
the consideration of his former eminency, Chap. 4.3 -- 6.

7. As communing with God by Prayer is a notable exercise of Piety; so to cast
off Prayer under trouble is a sad mark of Impiety, and of one who casts off,
and makes void, the fear of God: For, this is the instance whereby he proves
casting off of fear, Thou restrainest Prayer, or Speech, before God. See Psalm.
50.15. Job 36.13.

8. However God may humble Saints in their Prayers under trouble; yet those who
desire to be approved of God, ought to beware of sinful neglects in Prayer,
especially under trouble: This is employed in the charge, of restraining Prayer,
whereof he supposes Job guilty. Saints may, indeed, be straitened in their
Prayers under trouble, by reason that it does over-whelm them; and they may be
much deserted, when so many clouds do arise betwixt God and them. Nor is it any
wonder (...) when God by trouble takes away borrowed wings from our Prayers (or
these outward supports and refreshments of spirit, which may bear us up in our
Duties and Exercises) they move more slowly, though no less sincerely. But
Eliphaz speaks to none of these here, but only to some voluntary sinful
n^glects of this duty; Which (according to his apprehensions of Job) may be
thus taken up,

1. When, though men do not cast off Prayer altogether, yet, they cut off and
abate, or diminish, of them (as the word is rendered, Jer. 48 37.) either in
fervor and frequency, or instancy, and continuance and perseverance when they
go about that duty. This is evil at all times, but it is especially evil when
need increases, and yet diligence decreaseth.

2. When this cutting short of duties does, in process of time, tend to
quitting of Prayer altogether; and so the word signifies, as it is here
rendered. And this will unavoidably follow upon the former, if it be not
prevented. For let once a prejudice be entertained at Prayer, and it become a
burden, and then men will be ready to quit it, if they do not recover
themselves, by repentance and the study of encouragement, Heb. 12.12, 13. To
those may be added (which comes nearest indeed to Job's practice, though not so
much minded by Eliphaz.)

3. When, though men do not give over their approaches to God in trouble, but,
it may be, are more frequent in them; Yet, they restrain and stop all that
which is properly supplication, and do give loose reins to violent passions and
expressions. They lay aside Humility, Submission, Hope, Faith, etc. which
enable men to speak Supplications; and let Passion, Sense, Haste,
Mis-construction, D^ffidence, Anxiety, etc. speak to God what they please. God
may indeed read Supplications in the necessities which drive Saints to those
distempers, but such humors will not produce any thing that can be called
Prayer, if it be tried by the Rule.

Verse. 5. For thy mouth utters thine iniquity, and thou choosest the tongue
of the crafty.

6. Thine own mouth condemns thee, and not I: yea thine own lips testify
against thee.


In these verses, Eliphaz clears and confirms that challenge of impiety, v. 4.
(as is implied in the particle For, whereby this is joined with what he
formerly said) showing, That in stead of humble Reverence and Supplications to
God, Job uttered the Iniquity and Impiety of his heart, particularly, in his
subtle and crafty way of discoursing, v. 5 and that therefore there needed no
more to prove his impiety, but what he said himself, v. 6. The words contain,

1. A General Position, that his discourses did prove his impiety, Thou castest
off fear, etc. v. 4. For thy mouth utters (or teaches, and instructs)
thine iniquity, v. 5. -- that is, That which thou speak and ventest in thy
passion discovers thy impiety, and instructs us that it is so with thee,
without needing any further proof.

2. A particular instance of the Impiety of his Discourse, v. 5. -- And (which
is Exegetick, and gives an instance of the former General) Thou choosest the
tongue of the crafty. Some do restrict this to some particular expressions such
as that, Chap. 6.24. wherein he seemed to be ingenuous and willing to be
taught; and yet it was but spoken in craft^ to take off any Odium that might
lie upon him, and not from any Principle of Conscience and Sincerity, since he
stuck still by his Opinion. But I conceive that he rather refl^cts upon the
general scope of Job's Discourses, in which he alleges here that Job choosed,
by nimbleness of wit, and subtle and fine insinuations* and flourishes of
discourse, to defend his bad cause, and make it seem good, rather then to
glorify God by taking with his wickedness. Which way of discoursing he
charge upon him as impiety.

3. A Conclusion and Inference drawn from all this, v. 6. That however Job
might u^ge him to prove the challenge, and might account him a rigid censurer,
who durst judge him to be impious; yet since his own mouth had made i^ out, and
taught it to him, he was not to be challenged as condemning him rashly, but his
own speeches were his Di^tay; nor needed there any other proof of the
challenge, since his own lips were a witness without exception, and as good as
never so many, or all witnesses beside.

This discourse, and confirmation of the challenge, is faulty, as the challenge
was, and upon the same grounds there marked. And further.

1. His discourses of all sorts were not crafty, but ingenuous downright truth,
though ill worded.

2. His faults in his discourses where not craft and dissimulations, nor
iniquity, but only weaknesses.

3. They did neither prove his person nor speeches to be impious, nor his cause
to be wrong, though the faults in themselves were to be condemned, according to
the degree of their sinfulness.

4. It was great injustice to assert that Job choosed this course as evil. For
he choosed it not when he knew a better, seeing he saw there was no better
course for him then to cleave to God, and to the maintenance of his integrity.
And his failings in his discourse were not his choice, but he was driven upon
them through the ^xtremity of trouble and tentation

5. Eliphaz was bound in charity to have enquired the sense of any expression
he stumbled at, from Job himself, before he had passed so hard a censure. These
are some of the mistakes in the application of this; which may lead us back to
the remarks made upon such mistakes, v 1, 2, 3, 4. and may tell us how far they
may be mistaken who are yet right, as Job was, Chap 42 7. Having premised these
cautions, the gene^al Doctrine (passing the misapplication) may afford wholesome
instructions, there being many such pranks in the world, as are here
challenged, though Job was free of them.

From the general Position, v. 5. -- Learn,

1. Men ought not to please themselves in sin, upon this pretense, that sin is
in all; but as the least sin is to be avoided, because it is a transgression of
the law of God, who is supreme and absolute; So, especially, men ought to guard
that they be not guilty, not only of infirmities, but even of gross wickedness,
which is more heinous then ordinary failings: For, Iniquity is that which he
fastens upon Job here. See, Deuteronomy. 32.5. Ezekiel. 24.13. Hos. 6.9. And as this may
be tried by the grossness of the evil into which men fall; so also by their
violent prosecution of it, their frequency and constancy in following such a
course, their running to it, when there are few, or no, tentations to draw them
etc. though some of those may have place even in the infirmities of the people
of God,

2. Though man's corrupt nature be prone to all iniquity, having the seed of all
sin in him; Yet, there are some iniquities that prevail more with some persons
and dispositions, at some times, than others; This is pointed at by this, thine
Iniquity, or, predominant evil. See. Psalm. 18.23. And that some sins are thus
more prevalent with some men, flows, Partly, from their temper, constitution
and inclination; as we see some are more sensual, others are naturally more
averse from that, and yet are proud or covetous; Partly, from the times wherein
they live, sins that are Universal and Epidemick being more apt to infect men,
then other sins which are not so rife; and, Partly, from the conditions wherein
they are, and the callings and employments wherein they are exercised: For as
every lot, and station and calling, has its own tentations to some sins
especially, so men are most easily overtaken with these. And therefore as men
ought to guard against all sins, so especially against those.

3. When iniquity, or men's predominant evils, prevail within, they will soon
break out upon occasion, and when a tentation is offered; For, thy mouth
utters thine iniquity, or teaches others that it prevails within. A
conquered heart will soon command the outward man, as there is a tentation: And
when men enslave their hearts to sin, God in justice gives them up, that they
may appear what they are.

4. Where the fear of God is not, to put us to the exercise of prayer in
trouble, and to employ our mouth that way, we will soon utter much iniquity in
such a condition; For, the one follows upon the other; if he cast off fear,
and restrain prayer, then his mouth utters his iniquity. They will be worse
employed who are not exercised in Prayer, especially in trouble.

From the particular instance, v. -- 5. Learn,

1. True wisdom is of a very different nature from craft, or politic subtilty;
For, v. 2. Eliphaz taunts Job for accounting himself a wise man, and here he
tells him that, in his opinion, he was but a crafty man. It is one of Satan's
devices, to make vices pass current in the world under the names of virtues,
And, particularly, to make craft and nimble conveyances pass for true wisdom,
and to be the only cried-up wit in the world; whereas true wisdom is always
straight and sincere.

2. It is a special part of men's sinful craft, when they employ their
invention, parts and eloquence, to defend and give a luster to a bad cause; As
here he thought Job made use of the tongue of the crafty, in his own defense.
And, indeed, the greater parts men have in a bad cause, they have the more sins
and snares, and they sin the more in so employing them. For it is horrid
impiety when men, being once engaged in an ill cause, will rather bend their
wits to maintain it, then stoop to truth.

3. It is a great aggravation of men's sins, when they are their own choice; As
he supposes Job did choose the tongue of the crafty. Men do thus choose sin,
either when there is much of will and inclination in sin, rather then of
weakness or tentation; Or (which I think Eliphaz chiefly intends here) when
they voluntarily betake themselves to a sinful course, though they have another
and better way at hand: As he thought Job might have come better speed by
humble confession of his wickedness, then by his defenses. So when men reflect
upon all their by-ways under tentation, it will be bitter to them that the word
did direct them to a better course, though they judged otherwise of it.

From the conclusion and inference, ver. 6. Learn,

1. Men ought not to judge rashly of others, nor ought they to condemn them,
further then their own words and actions proclaim what they are; As here
Eliphaz implies, that he did not condemn Job, till he condemned himself.

2. It is no breach of charity to condemn men, when they write their hearts
upon their foreheads, by their carriage or expressions; As here Eliphaz clears
that he was not to be accounted rigid, since his own mouth condemned him, and
not he. The meaning whereof is not that he did not at all condemn Job, for his
very scope in this discourse is to condemn him; but that he said nothing of him
but what might be clearly deduced from his own discourses.

3. That is the strongest conviction and condemnation which is from a man's own
self, in his light and conscience, or actions; For, this was an heavy charge,
if it had been true, Thine own mouth condemns thee, and not I. See, Mat.
26.65. Luke 19.22. Tit. 3.11,

4. Albeit men are not easily convinced by others, of their bad condition; yet,
their carriage, in word or actions, is a convincing and undeniable witness to
demonstrate to others what they are; and a witness which themselves in reason
cannot decline, nor will get declined at last: Therefore it is added, yea,
thine own lips testify against thee, and do cry down all the clamours and
noise which thou make in behalf of thine integrity.

Verse. 7. Art thou the first man that was born? or wast thou made before the
hills?

8. Have thou heard the secret of God? and do thou restrain wisdom to thy
self?

9. What know thou that we know not? what understandest thou, which is not
in us?

10. With us are both the gray headed, and very aged men, much elder than thy
father.


The third fault which Eliphaz reprehends in Job's discourse and way, is,
arrogance and presumption, both toward his Friends, and toward God. His
presumptuous carriage toward them (in these verses) is instanced in his unjust
arrogating of wisdom and knowledge to himself above them; which he charge
home very sharply with pungent questions. Here we are to Consider,

1. The fault wherewith he charge him, v. 7, 8. which is, that he restrained
wisdom to himself, or, accounted himself the only wise man above then all; and
that he did this no less confidently then if he had lived not only since the
first man, but even before the hills were made, and so had remarked and learned
all the experiences of time; or, then if he alone were admitted to be on Gods
secret Council, or had some secret revelation known to none else. These two
(namely experience through observation, and secret and peculiar, revelation)
were the means of attaining knowledge before the word was written; and
therefore he pitcheth upon them, and lays it to Job's charge that he was so
arrogant, as if those were appropriated to him alone, or he had them in some
singular way,

2. The groundless presumption that was in this supposed clam^ of Job to
wisdom, may not only be gathered from what is said, that he had no singular
advantages to make him so singularly wise; but is expressly demonstrated, v. 9,
10. That however Job did thus conceit of himself, yet they knew as much as he
could know, v. 9. if not more, some among them being elder then his Father, v.
10. which may be understood of some of the Disputants themselves, who were very
old, or of some others in their Country who were of their opinion, and had
taught them these things; as Teman (which was the Country of Eliphaz) was
indeed a place famous for wisdom, Jer. 49.7.

As for the truth of this Challenge, and how justly this fault was charged upon
Job; It seems Eliphaz did ground it upon what Job had said, Chap. 12.2, 3, 7,
8. and Chap 13.1, 2. where Job had checked them for their conceit of
themselves, and showed, that their Knowledge was common and obvious; that their
Error might be refuted from the consideration of very common things; and, that
himself was not an Ignorant, but understood right and wrong in this
Controversy, as well as they. Now as for Eliphaz's Inference from this,

1. Albeit Job was wiser then they in this Controversy; yet he was not
arrogant, as Eliphaz alleges; but did only show that their light was not so
singular as they fancied, and that himself understood Truth in this matter.

2. As for the harshness of his expressions in declaring this, Eliphaz and the
rest little considered his great grief, and the irritations given him, by their
imprudence, rigor and false Doctrine, which drove him to speak so to them.

3. As he did unjustly charge Job with arrogance, so the Grounds and Principles
upon which he asserts their Knowledge in this matter, are unsure, as shall be
cleared; and therefore do not certainly conclude they are in the right.

4. What Job wanted of conceit and arrogance, Eliphaz really had it, in taking
it so ill that Job should (as he judged) prefer himself to them.

Having cleared the words, I shall not insist upon what is implied here, of the
means they had of attaining knowledge before the Word was written, Namely,
Experiences gathered by Observation, and extraordinary Revelation, both which
are abundantly supplied by the written Word, especially when we have still the
advantage of Experience to clear and confirm it. Only this may put us in mind,
That they had great toil in gathering Experiences for their Institution, which
renders us inexcusable in our Ignorance, who may learn Knowledge more
compendiously from the Scriptures. As they needed both Observation, and the
secret of God, to instruct them; So men have need of much Experience, and that
their life be well improved in those Observations, and of much intimacy with
God, who would be wise indeed. And men may live long in the world, and not know
things well, if they had only Experience to lean to, and not the Word (or
extraordinary Revelations in their time) to help them. But passing those, This
purpose may teach us these Truths,

1. As Man is, generally, proud of all he has, and filled with a conceit of
it; so, in particular, there is nothing whereof he is more ready to be proud,
than of his wit and parts; For, albeit I will not (as Eliphaz does) charge th^s
upon Job in this debate, but rather upon himself, yet it is a general Truth
that Man is naturally inclin^d to restrain wisdom to himself, 1 Cor. 8.1. It
began with Adam and Eve, that they desired to be as God, particularly, in
knowing good and evil, Genesis 3.5, 6. So that, as Humility and Modesty is nothing
natural to us, so, in particular, we are to guard against affectation and
conceit of singularity, in the matter of wisdom.

2. A man that conceits of his own wisdom, and of himself because of it,
supposes impossibilities of himself, and boasts of that which cannot be
attained without wonders; For, so does Eliphaz insinuate, that he who restrains
wisdom to himself, as if none could compare with him, must be the first man
that was born, and be made before the Hills; which is so impossible and
ridiculous to suppose, that he lays it before Job in these bitter Questions.
And albeit Eliphaz mistook the case in particular, nor were any such advantages
necessary for attaining the knowledge of Truth in this Debate; Yet the General
Doctrine is sound, That the ordinary means whereby God teaches Man, gives him
no ground to boast of his singular wisdom, nor can he in reason claim to that,
unless he can prove that God has afforded him singular means. For those
questions put it undeniably home, that Man cannot restrain wisdom to himself,
unless he were the first man that was born, etc. seeing others, having the same
means, may improve them with as good success as he.

3. A conceit of wisdom, and of being singular in it, is indeed an evidence of
shallowness and emptiness; Therefore Eliphaz shows that he, who restrained
wisdom to himself, v. 8. was but like his neighbors, if not inferior to them,
v. 9, 10, What know thou that we know not, etc? with us are both the gray
(...) etc. And albeit he mistook in the particula^ (...) ^s a general sound
Truth, That a conceity pro^ is defective, at least, in the manner of his
knowledge, 1 Cor. 8.2. And for the measure of knowledge, if we were indeed
knowing, we would think little of what we know, Chap. 26.14. and the effects of
sound knowledge would tend to humble us, and not to pull us up. For knowledge
increases sorrow, Eccl. 1.18. and saving knowledge humbles, Job 42 5, 6.
Prove. 30.2, 3.

4. This Text may afford Evidences of men's conceiting of their own wisdom,
which are to be gathered, not from Job's carriage, but, from Eliphaz's way. And,

1. It is an evidence of conceit, when men are so puffed up, that they think it
impossible they should be found in an Error, or out-stripped by others in
finding out Truth; As he thinks that Man behoved to be made before the Hills,
etc. that would decry their Opinions; and that all must be secrets, simply hid
from all others, which they know not.

2. It does also evidence this evil, when men cannot endure to be under-valued,
or cried down, in the matter of wisdom; as he is enraged at Job, for attempting
to decry their knowledge. Such a disposition evidenceth that there is an Ulcer
there, which may not be touched.

3. It is another evidence of conceit, when men are so jealous, that any
check^ng of them, or commending of others, does alarm them, as if they were
quite decried and undervalued; For, when Job did only clear the Truth, and let
them see that their conceit of themselves was groundless, Eliphaz looks on this
as if he had restrained Wisdom to himself, and quite decried all their
abilities.

4. It does also evidence this evil, when men are so full of self love, that
they are nothing sensible of any irritations they give to others, or contempt
they put upon them; and yet themselves do highly resent the least indignity
they imagine to be offered to them; and are so blinded, that they can digest a
beam in their own eye, but cannot endure so much as a mote (if it be so much)
in another. For, he cannot endure that Job should speak to their prejudice, as
he thought it; and yet he spares not to speak contemptibly of him, little
regarding or pitying the sad trouble that was upon him.

Doct. 5. From this challenge we may, also, gather several needful Instructions
and Cautions concerning men's wrong managing of Disputes, for finding out of
Truth. And,

1. It is a wrong course, when men turn from the consideration of the Cause in
Debate, to the consideration of, or reflecting upon, persons; as here Eliphaz
falls upon a personal debate, whether Job or they ought to be preferred for
parts. This may well produce Passion and Irritation, but will not find out
Truth. And albeit men may be brought to think on Causes and Questions more
seriously, when they are made to know themselves, their ignorance, or ill frame
of heart; Yet, that is not to be rested on, as sufficient to find out Truth.

2. Men take a wrong way of managing Debates, when they think to carry a Cause
by the consideration of Persons or Parties; As he would bear down Job in this
Debate, by sh^ng that whether he looked to their persons, o^ ^herents in their
Country, they were his man ^iore. For albeit one man may indeed comp^^e with
another, and, in some respects, be preferred to him; yet that will not prove
his cause good, if it be not otherwise instructed.

3. Men do also miscarry in this matter, when the learning or wisdom of
Disputants is cried up, to make men believe that every thing they hold is
Truth, because they are more learned then their opposites: As here he prefers
himself and his adherents to Job, in the matter of knowledge, that so he might
persuade him he was in an Error. Whereas suppose Job had been less wise then
they, yet his reasons proved he had Truth on his side, nor could their
abilities prove their Opinion was Truth. For Wisdom and Learning do not always
fall to be on Truths side; And we should look to the Arguments in the Cause,
and not to men's Parts; but ought rather to magnify Truth, if it defend it self
in weak hands.

4. It is also a wrong way to find out Truth, when men make a flourish of
antiquity of Opinions, or of the age of persons who maintain them, as a clear
proof of the Truth thereof; as Eliphaz speaks of their age who maintained his
Opinion (and consequently of the Antiquity of the Opinion) to prove the Truth
of it. It is indeed to be granted, that ancient men should be wise, and that it
is a pity on ancient Opinion, which has for a long time possessed many, should
not be true; But no Antiquity can prove an Opinion true, unless we recurr to
the Ancient of Days, and find that it flows from him. And the Spirit of God
is not astricted to old or young men; but the one may take up Truth as well,
and sometime better, then the other, Job 32 7, 8, 9.

Verse. 11, Are the consolations of God small with thee? is their any secret
thing with thee?
In this and the two following verses, Eliphaz charge Job with a presumptuous
and arrogant carriage toward God. The charge has two branches;

The first whereof (in this verse) is, That he did undervalue these
consolations which God allows upon his People in trouble, as if they were but
slender, empty, and not satisfactory; and as if he had some secret way of
getting comfort, which none else knew of. In this charge he reflects upon what
they had formerly propounded to Job, when they made so many fair offers of
encouragement, if he would repent and turn to God. Wherein he thinks they had
laid before him the ordinary road-way of attaining comfort, and therefore he
takes it ill that he had rejected all those encouragements, as if he expected
comfort in some odd way.

In this challenge Eliphaz does unjustly charge Job, seeing in all their offers
they were but Phisicians of no value, as Job tells them. Chap. 13.4. For they
put him to that task of Repentance, as an Hypocrite, that had never done any
thing before sincerely; and upon these terms, only, they assure him of
encouragement; and this was the cause why Job would not hear of their offer.
And this their mistake may teach us,

1. Imprudence in Application will mar many a sweet Encouragement in its
Operation; As their misapplication of Encouragements to him (wherein there is
good General Doctrine) as to one that had been a Hypocrite before, makes him
reject them all.

2. Scripture misapplyed is not to be looked on as Gods Word, nor the
Consolations thereof, tendered on wrong terms, as given of God; For, so does
Job look upon all their sweet Encou^agements, when misapplyed to him, however
in themselves they might be truths.

But, passing his mistake, the General Doctrine may teach,

1. God is so infinitely rich, that there is no condition of his People, but he
has a suitable Consolation for it; As here is supposed, that there were
Consolations of God, suitable to his deep distress. See, 2. Cor. 1.3, 4, 5.

2. Albeit these Consolations be tendered and applied by men; Yet they are
still Gods Comforts, because they are carved out by him, and allowed by him
upon his people: Therefore he accounts those the Consolations of God, which had
been propounded by him and his Friends. See, 2. Cor. 1.20.

3. The sure way of men's attaining Consolation in trouble, is, to repent and
turn to God, and to have their Peace made sure with him; that Consolation may
flow from that Fountain for their good; For, such were the Consolations of God
tendered by them, wherein their Doctrine was sound, though it was misapplied
For that is the true Fountain of sound comfort, and Job was bound to make use
of it, though he was not obliged to set about that work as one that had never
been at it before.

4. It is a great sin, when men in trouble do refuse and undervalue the
Consolations of God, as mean and empty; as Naaman undervalued the water of
Jordan, Achaz cared not for a Promise, and a Confirmation of it, from God,
Isai. 7.10, 11, 12, 13. and as many others do, who seek for signs and wonders,
whereby they may be comforted; For, it is, in it self, a fault (whatever was
Job's accession to it) when the Consolations of God are small with men. Many
think his Consolations not rich enough, because they are accompanied with
humbling Exercise, and many are ready to prescribe unto God how he should
comfort them, wherein if he do not grant their desire, they will not be
comforted at all. Hence it is, that Gods salvation may be near, Psalm. 85.9.
when our Salvation, which we carve out and prescribe, may be far off. See,
Psalm. 7.8, 9, with 10. 2 Cor. 12.7, 8, 9.

5. Men's Consciences, if put to it, will soon discover the ill of undervaluing
Gods Consolations; For, so much does the question import, Are the Consolations
of God small with thee? implying that Conscience, dare not own such a practice
as justifiable. And, indeed, such an humor and practice does evidence great
pride, and want of humble stooping and submission to God; a strong desire to be
singularly dealt with, not acquiescing in the common allowances of Gods People;
and much corruption, that loves not the exercise that accompanyeth the
Consolations of God. And it should be so much the more odious, as it refl^cts
upon the wisdom, goodness and love of God, as if he had not provided
sufficiently for the comfort of his People.

6. Men refusing, or, undervaluing, the Consolations of God, should see what
secret thing is with them; As Eliphaz here subjoyns in the next question; That
is,

They would see where they may do better, or if they have any singular way of
comfort beside, before they despise those.

2. It should put them to see and try out what Idols, or false Consolations,
they have in their hearts, which make them despise his offers, For it is
certain that, if men be not quite desperate, they must have some false dreams
of comfort, when they reject the Consolations of God.

3. It may give them cause to suspect their comforts, i^ they be secret and
odd, and not known to Saints.

Verse. 12. Why does thine heart carry thee away? and what do thine eyes wink
at,

13. That thou turnest thy spirit against God, and let such words go out of
thy mouth?


The Second Branch of his supposed Presumption against God, is, that he was so
transported with Perturbation and Passion, v. 12. that, in stead of humbling
himself, he was proudly bitter against God, and impatient before him, both in
the frame of his spirit, and in his expressions, v 13. The words, v. 13. are
clear, and so also the first part of ver. 12. where his hearts carrying him
away, is nothing else but that the perturbation and disorder of his heart did
violently drive him to miscarry toward God, as it is, v. 13. But the other part
of v. 12. concerning the winking of his eyes, is more obscure. Winking with the
eye is taken in Scripture for a sign of insolent scorn and disdain, Psalm.
35.19. And so it seems that Job being forced to wink often through pain, either
when himself spoke, or when he was hearing them; Eliphaz looked upon it as an
evidence of his disdain, and an external symptom of that inward perturbation
mentioned in the beginning of the verse. Likewise, as men wink when they aim at
a mark in shooting, so this winking seems to be noticed in Scripture as a sign
of a man's driving some pernicious or foolish design, Prove. 6.13. and 10.10 And
so he would charge Job that not only he was full of Perturbation, but was upon
some mischievous or foolish design in the course he took, which he wishes him
to consider what it might be. This verse thus explained, may have some
reference to what is spoken, v. 11. as if Eliphaz had said; If thou know not
better Consolations, nor any secret thing beside these Consolations of God
which we tender to the^, Why suffers^ thou thy heart thus to rage? Why shuttest
thou thine eyes upon Truth, and scornfully rejectest it through prejudice? What
design can thou be driving in all this? But it has more express reference to
that which follows, v. 13. as if had said; Why suffer thou thy heart thus
to be pestered with rage and passion? How great is thy insolent contempt? And
what can thou mean or design in this, that not only thou should thus
miscarry toward us, but even toward God? That thou should not only reject
his Consolations, but set thy spirit on edge against him, and speak so
presumptuously and irreverently to him, and of him?

In this Branch of the Accusation, as the fault challenged is, in it self,
gross and heinous; so it cannot be denied that Job was much guilty of it; his
disordered expressions witnessing how much he was distempered in spirit. Only
it flowed not from any principle of wickedness, as his Friends alleged; But
from his weakness, which drove him upon those sits of passion, through the
vehemence of tentation. And therefore God constructeth more tenderly of this
his way then they did, accounting those to be (though faults) but friendly
complaints in his distemper, which they censured as hostile accusations. So
hard is it to judge wisely and tenderly of the afflicted, and of their failings
under trouble, that godly men would, oft-times, be in a sad plight, if God were
not more favorable to them then even their godly friends are.

The General Doctrine (passing their severe censure) does teach,

1. Men's hearts being filled with passion, will strangely precipitate them,
through perturbations and distempers, so that they will not be themselves; For,
says he, thy heart carries thee away.

2. Where the heart is thus disordered, men's carriage will be strange and odd;
insolency will not be wanting, and strange projects will then be set on foot;
For, upon the former it follows, thine eyes do wink at somewhat.

3. Men themselves will be the severest censurers of such perturbations, if
they will soberly reveiw them; Therefore he propounds it by way of question,
Why does thine heart carry thee away? and what do thine eyes wink at? Whatever
be passions verdict, yet those distempers are unjust and unreasonable, as the
Lord insinuates in his challenge and questions to Jonah. Jon. 4.4, 9. And our
inconsiderateness, and not reflecting upon our way, does hold us in many wrong
courses, which if we seriously examined, we would abhor, Jer. 8.6.

4. When men despise the Consolations of God, they will readily fall in an ill
frame of spirit against God; For, upon this, that the Consolations of God are
small, v. 11. it follows, v. 13. thou turnest thy spirit against God, etc.

5. It is a very sad and lamentable case, when men's spirits are against God,
when they oppose their wit and counsels to his will, and when, in trouble, they
are imbittered at his dealing, and alienated from him; For, it is here a sad
charge, that his spirit is against God. See Zech. 11.8. To love and adore God
brings sweet ease under saddest dispensations.

6. This condition is so much the sadder, when men turn their spirits thus
against God; when they are not so much driven upon this through the strength of
tentation; as voluntarily they run to this course, as their choice, and are not
careful to entertain a meek frame of spirit: For, it heightens the challenge
here, that thou turnest thy spirit against God. He reflects upon Job's
abandoning that patient way of bearing the Rod, wherewith he had begun, Chap.
1.21. and 2.10. in place whereof he had turned him to impatient complaining.
And albeit Job was not wicked in this, and was under more pressing tentations
to miscarry, then Eliphaz did well consider; Yet he was not wholly free of
blame in his activity to distemper his own spirit.

7. Distemper of spirit is at a great height, when it is not smothered within,
but breaks out in expression; For, that is added to the former here, and
let such words go out of thy mouth. He seems to point at those expressions,
Chap 7.20. and 10.2, 3, etc. and 13.27. and others the like, of which in their
proper places.

8. When men are in such a distempered frame, they ought to consider well what
it is, and what is in it; For, Eliphaz thinks it not enough to charge it upon
him, v. 13. but premits questions, v. 12. Why does thine heart carry thee away?
and what do thine eyes wink at, that thou turnest thy spirit against God, etc.
which implies (according to the Exposition formerly given.)

1. Men should consider what reason they can pretend for such a carriage; For,
they will never be able to produce any that is relevant, let them muster up
never so many.

2. They should consider what pride and insolency there is in it, especially if
they will not be admonished of it. We may think our selves crushed with
trouble, when yet pride is much aloft.

3. They should consider what design they can drive by such practices, and what
they will do next, if they behave themselves thus: For it will be with men, in
such a case, as with peevish Children, who do embrace at last what they have
often rejected; so must they abandon such ways, when they have at last found
they are in vain and to no purpose.

Verse. 14. What is man, that he should be clean? and he which is born of a
woman, that he should be righteous?
The fourth fault charged upon Job in his Discourse (which makes way to the
Second part of the Chapter) is, that he maintained Error, in justifying
himself and his cause before God. The charge is propounded, here, and amplified
and illustrated, v. 15, 16. The sum of the Proportion is, That, however Job
labored to justify himself; yet, it was impossible that frail Man (as his
Name here signifies) born of a Woman, should be righteous.

This Charge is sound Doctrine in the Thesis, and Job was guilty of
contradicting this Truth, in some respects, and therefore is checked by Elihu,
Chap 33.8, 9. and 34.7. of which in its own place; Yet as for Eliphaz's
Application of it to his purpose, it is to be considered,

1. In the Truth here asserted, Job and he did not controvert; For however he
asserted his righteousness too much, and too violently, and by way of indirect
reflection on God (and is therefore challenged by Elihu, and by God himself)
yet he expressly denied there was any perfect purity in man, Chap. 14.4. and so
yielded what is asserted here.

2. This Doctrine seem to be repeated by Eliphaz, from that Vision which he
had, Chap. 4.17, 18, 19. But, beside his mistake marked there, we have this
further here; That whereas th^s Doctrine was propounded comparatively, Chap. 4
17. that Man cannot be more just then God, here he repeats it as absolutely
true, that Man cannot at all be righteous; at least, any comparison is but very
darkly (if at all) hinted in the following verses. Now there is a great
d^fference betwixt those two. For no Man can compare with God in this, and yet
some may lawfully say, they are righteous.

These mistakes in the Application may teach,

1. Passion and heat in debates will cause men very far, and grossly, mistake
one another; For, so does he fasten that on Job which he had expressly denied.

2. It is most necessary, for preventing of mistakes in dispute, that men be
accurate in stating the Question; and particularly, that, in debating about
men's integrity and righteousness, we distinguish, b^twixt men's state and their
condition, betwixt their state by Nature and by Grace, betwixt reigning sins
and infirmities; Otherwise, we will never judge rightly of persons nor of
things. For, the confounding of these bred this mistake of Job. His Assertion
does, indeed, hold true of Man, considered in himself and by nature, that he is
neither clean nor righteous; which Job never denied, and yet a Man, as
regenerate, may be righteous by imputation, and by begun Sanctification and
Sincerity, which Job maintained. It is true, even Saints are not righteous, as
to freedom from original corruption and infirmities, yet they may be free from
wickedness, which he would fasten on Job. It is true, also, no man can prove
himself perfect before God, or compare with him in righteousness and purity;
yet he may prove himself righteous and sincere, according to the tenor of the
Covenant of Grace.

3. When men are once biased with their own Principles, they will be ready to
adulterate, were it even Revelations given to them; and will understand all
light offered to them, only as it is represented by their own prejudged
understandings; For, that Vision which Eliphaz expounded wrong, Chap. 4. he now
alters the words of, so as might make more for his purpose.

4. It is our mercy that Divine Revelations are not entrusted only to our
memories, but do stand registrated in the written Word; For Eliphaz's memory
fai^s him, and he does change and alter what God had said.

From the General Proposition, considered in it self, Learn,

1. There is no perfect purity to be found among the sons of men, who come of
Adam by ordinary generation; For, Man is neither clean, nor righteous. Where
(if it be necessary to distinguish these words) cleanness may point at that
purity in Nature, whereof Man is destitute, and righteousness, at their
straightness in Conversation, which cannot be attained where the Fountain is so
corrupt; or, at any other thing which Man can attain unto, to supply the defect
of this cleanness, whereof he is altogether unprovided.

2. They who think otherwise of Man, and dream of his being perfect, are very
ill acquainted with M^n and his Original; They do not well enough discern that
he is frail man, nor do they read aright what his miseries do say of him, nor
consider that he is born of a woman, see Chap. 14.1. So much is implied in
Man's Name here, that he is frail wretched Man, and that he is born of a Woman;
which are put in the assertion, to verify the truth thereof.

3. The heart of Man ought (and being godly, will) rise and swell with
indignation, at any conceit of Man's pu^ity or worth; For, those pungent
questions, What is Man that he should be clean, etc? do speak indignation in
Eliphaz, that any should have such a thought.

4 The best way to refute any such conceit of Man's Purity, is, to bring home
the matter of our condition, to be cognosced upon by our Consciences; For,
therefore does Eliphaz propound these question to Job, that himself might
seriously consider of the matter.

5. Whatever self-justifiers pretend they have to say; yet their Consciences
will not still be able to stand out against Gods verdict of sinful man: For, so
much do these questions also import, that Job's own Conscience would at last
(whatever he thought in his passion) be forced to acknowledge this truth.

Verse. 15. Behold, he puts no trust in his Saints: yea, the heavens are not
clean in his sight:

16. How much more abominable and filthy is man, which drinks iniquity like
water?


In these verses we have the Amplification and Confirmation of this
Proposition, That if Saints and the Heavens be not clean before God, nor
trusted in by him, v. 15. how much more vile must Man be, who greedily drinks
in iniquity? v. 16. By Saints, here taken in opposition to M^n, Angels are to
be understood, who, though they be holy one^, yet, do stand by the grace and
favor of God. And by the Heavens we may understand the pure Heavens
themselves, those celestial Bodies and the Lights that shine in them, which are
free of spots and blemishes, and do shine brightly; and yet are not clean in
Gods sight. So Chap. 25.5. Or the same Angels (formerly designed by the name of
Saints) who are heavenly creatures. Of this, see Chap. 4.18.

Doct. 1. Albeit the Lord have made creatures which are excellent above Man,
especially as he is now fallen by sin; yet none of these are so perfect, as that
they can boast of purity before him. For, it is here again inculcated, that
Saints and the Heavens, are not clean. So that, whatever perfections there be
in some creatures, above others; yet, all of them must be sensible of
imperfection before God.

2. As the Lord is so infinitely glorious and all-sufficient, that he needs not
trust on any thing without himself; so no dependant goodness in the creature
can bear the weight of the trust and confidence of any; For, God, who knows
his own creatures best, puts no trust in his Saints, to show that men are fools
when they lean the weight of their confidence upon them, or any other creature.

3. The best Sight will be got of the emptiness of the creatures perfections,
when we look to God, how perfect he is, and what his thoughts are of the
creatures; For, they are not clean in his sight, says he, whatever others may
think of them.

4 Men may not only see their pollution, but the grossness thereof, when they
compare themselves (not with themselves, but) with more excellent creatures,
who yet are not pure in Gods sight; For, if Saints, and the heavens be not
clean in his sight, how much more abominable and filthy as Man? Or, How much
less is abominable and filthy Man to be accounted clean?

5. Filth, and being abominable, should go together in our estimation and
account; whatever is filthy, should therefore be abominable, and nothing should
be abominable, or detested by us, but what is really filthy; as here they are
conjoined.

6. It is not sufficient we have a General notion of Man's pollution, unless we
be so well acquainted with it, as we may be able to instance it in particulars;
Therefore he here subjoyns this as a proof that Man is abominable and filthy,
he drinks Iniquity like water. Wherein Man's vile and abominable condition by
nature is hinted at in these particulars.

1. That it is as natural to him to sin, as it is to eat or drink.

2. That he is possessed with fiery and raging lusts, which make him thirst and
long after satisfaction to them; as a thirsty man does after drink.

3. That much lust make, sin desirable to him; as drink is to a thirsty man.

4. That lust makes him stand upon no iniquity, how ugly and base soever,
whereby he thinks to reap satisfact^on; he will drink iniquity, be what it will
as a thirsty man will be glad of very water, when he is extremely dry.

Verse. 17. I will show thee, hear me, and that which I have seen, I will will
declare;

18. Which wise men have told from their fathers, and have not hid (...):

19. Unto wh^m alone the earth was given, and no stranger passed among them.


Follows the second part of the Chapter wherein Eliphaz having taxed Job for
so many faults in his discourses and carriage; he proceeds (in prosecution of
the last charge, that Job was erroneo^s in asserting his own righteousness) to
prove the point in Controversy betwixt them, that Job was a wicked man,
because none but wicked men were afflicted as he was; where though he spoke to
the point in general terms, yet in many things he reflects upon Job.

This part of the Chapter consists,

1. Of a Preface, v. 17, 18, 19

2. Of a Narration concerning the miserable estate of the wicked, wherein he
labors to prove his Opinion, v. 20. -- 30.

3. of a Conclusion drawn from this Narration, v. 31. -- 35.

In the preface (in these verses)

1, He excites Job to attend to what he had to say, v. 17. --

2. He informs him how he would prove his point; Namely, not only by telling
him what himself had learned by Observation and Experience, v. -- 17. but also
what was the invariable experience of all ages. For, what he was to speak, wise
men before them had not only inculcated it upon their Children from their own
observation and experience, but had it before inculcated upon themselves from
their Fathers, v 18. As for what is added to the commendation of these who
taught this Doctrine, that to them alone the Earth was given, and no stranger
passed among them, v. 19. It may be understood, either of the Fathers of these
wise men, v. 18, such as Noah, Shem, etc. who lived in the most Primitive age
after the flood, and who there alone were the first Planters of the Earth, and
were free of the molestation of strangers and en^mies, people being then but
few and well known one to another; and so they had the experience of all men
then living known to them, which, from them and their successors, he is now to
communicate to Job. Or it may rather be understood both of these Wise men and
their Fathers, from whom he had this Doctrine; who, in what Age soever they
lived, were ^o eminent for wisdom, that they had the Earth given them; Or, were
advanced to govern in these Countries where they lived; and did so manage their
government, as they had the Earth alone, or lived in peace and quiet, keeping
off (as it is after added) all Foreigners who might be ready to invade or
molest them; and were free of all strangers who might b^ing in idolatrous
Opinions, to corrupt the sound Doctrine that was among them. By all which
commendations of his own doctrine, and of the Patrons thereof, he would fast^n
upon Job, that he was a man condemned by the verdict of all the godly-wise in
all ages, whose experience led them to conclude that such afflictions as he
smarted under, were proper only to the wicked.

As to the validity of this way of Probation, by Experience, much has been
spoken on Chap. 4.7. and Chap. 8.8, 9, 10. and elsewhere. Communication of
experiences from Generation to Generation was indeed a special mean of
knowledge in these days, and in the times before them. Nor could they then call
for Scripture-proofs in matters controverted, seeing it was not then written;
and what they knew of the mind of God (beside the Law written in their hearts,
and observations and remarks upon Providence of God) was by extraordinary
Revelations, thus transmitted from one to anoth^r. Yet this his way of
Probation is defective,

1. Because he produces no Revelation for his Opinion (save only that one,
Chap. 4.17. which he mistook) but only the Observations of wise and godly men.

2. Though these Wise men and their Fathers told all the experiences they had
learned; yet in their time they could not have all experiences, of all things,
and conditions of men; For, the world had not continued so long (especia^ly
since the Flood) as that all things could have readily occurred, which God
might be pleased to do in after-ages of the world.

3. It is not certain they did observe all they saw, or might have known; and
so could not tell it. For it is certain some godly men were afflicted at the
very beginning, as witness Abel.

4. Their Posterity could not undertake that they had remembered all was told
them; but hearing so much of the sad lots of the wicked, they might readily
forget any thing they heard of the suffering of some of the godly, whereof
(probably) there were so few experiences in that infancy of the world.

5. Neither is it certain that Posterity understood what was told them, in the
true sense of it.

For the Truth in this Narration seems to be this, That some particular wicked
persons and Societies had been dealt with as is here recorded; and the Fathers
having transmitted the knowledge of this, to warn and deter their Posterity
from sin; their Posterity did hence conclude, that all and only the wicked were
so dealt with. Whereas the Lord may see it fit to make some to be Examples and
Beacons to warn others, and yet not always strive with others who fall in the
like faults; for so the world should soon be destro^ed, which the Lord is
pleased to preserve, as for other ends, so, that he may gather in his Elect,
many of whom do spring out of the loins of such wicked transgressors. And as
the Lord may thus spare the wicked; So he may let the godly taste of the
outward lot that befalls some wicked men, that none may know love or hatred by
these outward things. The consideration of all this may Teach us,

1. It is a great mercy we have the sure rule of the written Word; seeing the
Observatio^s and inculcated Doctrine of the godly-wise were mistaken without it.

2. A Child of God may seem to have all godly men, and (...) their experiences,
on his top, when yet he is in the ^ight; as here it was with Job.

Having observed these Cautions, if we lay aside mistakes and mis-applications,
the General Doctrine, here held ^orth, may teach,

1. Such as take pains to instruct others in matters of importance, especially
in the matter of Truth and Error, ought to be hearkened unto carefully, and
nor despised, providing what they say be examined by the Word; For, says he, I
will show thee, hear me.

2. Men should take heed that they speak not any thing in the matters of God,
or to men's souls and spiritual conditions, but what they certainly know; For,
so much does Eliphaz yield to he his duty, while he professes that only that
which he has seen (or punctually observed) will he declare, in this grand
Question in debate. And though even such as are thus most accurate may err, as
he did; yet others are more likely to err. See 2 Cor. 4.13.

3. Such as truly observe and understand spiritual things, will not disdain to
take help of the knowledge of others, for their own furtherance and
confirmation; For, Eliphaz (who thinks himself sure in th^s matter) professes
that he not only had seen it himself, but wise men have told it, etc.

4. It is the duty of men, in their stations, not to hide what they know of God
and his way; but they should be careful to have Truth perpetuated in their
Families, and among their Posterity: For, wise men have told this from their
Fathers; they had it from their Fathers, and did communicate it to others, who
were to succeed after them. This their care, before the Scriptures were
written, may exceedingly condemn our negligence.

5. It should cause Truths be the more seriously pondered and embraced, that
spiritually wise men are frequent in inculcating and pressing thereof; For, by
this woold he commend his Doctrine, that wise men have told, and not hid it,
or, have been earnest and frequent in inculcating of it. Much more ought that
to be seriously pondered which the Spirit of God does frequently inculcate upon
us, in the Scriptures.

6. It is not talking of wisdom, but proofs thereof in men's actings, that
proves them wise; For, he proves they were wise men, v. 18. by their being
advanced, and by their good and successful government, To whom alone the Earth
was given, etc. v. 19. And albeit wise men, i^ Gods righteous judgment, may be
overpowered and become fools, or even godly wise men may be slighted, Eccl. 9
15. or their affairs not succeed, for their trial and exercise; Yet, it is a
certain rule, that Wisdom is not to be tried by words or discourses only.

7. Invasions of Enemies, especially strangers in Religion, is a special mean
to corrupt sound Doctrine; For, this (as has been explained) commends the
Doctrine of these Wise men, that no stranger passed among them, they were not
invaded by others who were Idolaters who might have adulterated their
Principles, and corrupted their Religion.

Verse. 20. The wicked man travelleth with pain all his days, and the number of
years is hidden to the oppressor.
Follows to v. 31. the Second Branch of this part of the Chapter. Which is
the Thesis, or, Doctrine, which he proves by his own experience, and the
consent of Antiquity; And that is, the miserable estate of wicked men,
agreeable to what Job now suffered: whereof he makes a large Narration, to
convince Job that only the wicked were so afflicted, and, consequently, that he
could not be a godly man, as he pretended. This Narration may be summed up in
three Heads.

1. (...) gives an account, chiefly, of the inward troubles and vexations of
the wicked, by reason of an evil Conscience, v. 20. -- 24.

2. The Cause of this, and their other miseries is interlaced, v. 25. -- 28.

3. Unto this is subjoyned the outward Plagues, which God sends upon them, v.
29, 30.

In the first Head of this Narration, containing, chiefly, an account of their
inward vexations, because of an evil Conscience, we are to remark a few things
in general, for clearing (...) way.

1. That this Doctrine was not only gathered and observed by Eliphaz in his own
experience; but was indeed the Doctrine of the Ancients, which they had, from
time to time, inculcated, that they might terrify men from wickedness. For
Eliphaz asserteth they had taught this, v. 17, 18. and we are bound in charity
to believe he speaks true.

2. That in this Narration he pitcheth upon those particulars which himself had
learned, by experience, or gathered from the instructions of the Ancients,
which seem most nearly to parallel Job's present case. For, in what he speaks
of the wickeds pain and apprehensions in his prosperity, v. 20, 21, 23. he
reflects upon what Job had said, Chap. 3.25, 26. In speaking of the wickeds
want of hope, v. 22. he reflects upon Job's frequent Declarations that he
expected never to get out of this trouble; And in speaking of the fear and
anguish of the wicked, v. 24. he reflects upon the exercise that was upon Job's
spirit, Chap. 7.13, 14. And so throughout all the rest of this Chapter, he
speaks so as might touch Job most nearly, and prove him a wicked man, being
exercised as they are. It was a poor trade (yet such a trade this godly man was
at) to rake into every particular of his godly friends miseries, that he might
prove him wicked.

3. That this Doctrine which he had learned from the Ancients, concerning the
case of the wicked, is not erroneous (whatever may be said of Eliphaz's
Opinion, in the Application thereof to the question in debate) but holds true
of them in several respects.

(1.) That all the evils here recorded are deserved by all wicked men,
according to the tenor of the threatenings of the Law. See Lev. 26.36. Deuteronomy.
28.65. and frequently throughout these Chapters.

(2.) Some of the wicked meet with these plagues, and particularly with this
inward terror and vexation, eminently; that they may be a warning to all
others; as witness Cain's terror, Genesis 4. and Pashur's, Jer. 20.3, 4.

(3.) Such of the wicked as are not put to this vexation at present, yet have
no security against it by virtue of any Promise, but it may come upon them when
they least expect it.

(4.) Nor is the present quiet, which wicked men enjoy, any true or solid Peace
of Conscience; but a stupid security, arising from negligence, or some defect
in their Consciences, or from judicial Plagues infl^cted upon their heart by
God.

(5.) And then being exempted, in this life, from the extremity of this
vexation, will be sadly made up in end, when, in the Pit, their Worm shall gnaw
for ever.

4. Notwithstanding all this, which may and ought to be conceded as true in the
Doctrine of the Ancients; Yet Eliphaz errs here in his Scope and Application of
this Doctrine. And,

1. (As has been often marked) In that he understands the Ancients true
observation of the lot of some wicked men, as if it were universally true of
all wicked men, even in the extremity here recorded: For many of the wicked may
live in great case, as experience verifies; and Job often asserts. See Chap.
21.13. and frequently.

2. In that he reflects upon, and misconstructs the exercise of Job's Spirit
and Conscience, as if it were like unto the wi^^^ lot, when yet the difference
is very great and wide. For though he was under sad tentations, and much vexed
in spirit; yet he still drew near to God, and clave to him, which wicked men do
not. This being his great mistake in this matter, does Teach, That not only
natural men, but even such as are truly godly, may, through want of experience,
mistake the exercise of mind, and the vexations which assault others; and may
judge of them as unlike the lot of Saints. Thus David complains that he was a
fear to his acquaintance, Psalm. 31.11.

Hence it follows,

1. That men ought wisely to consider the case of the afflicted and poor, that
they add not to their afflictions by their misconstructions.

2. That godly men, being exercised in spirit, should be armed against such
hard measures from their friends; not expecting still to be dandled, nor
stumbling at it, when some of their friends, who should comfort them, do pass
by, and others do pour Vinegar into their sores, and add to their sorrow.

3. That since other godly men may mistake such exercises, they who are under
them should guard lest themselves also stumble at them; and, for that end,
should study how useful and necessary they are.

Having premitted those Generals, I shall ^ow explain the parts of this misery,
as it is branched out in the several verses; and draw some general
Observations, according to those former Rules and Cautions; without insisting
any more upon Eliphaz his mistakes and reflections in them. And first, in this
verse it is declared that the wicked man has a miserable life of it, being
like a woman in travail (as the word signifies) throughout his time; and that
not only through Gods making it to be so with him by afflictions, but (as the
form of the word bea^s) He makes himself to travel with pain, through
discontent and anxiety. As for that which follows in the end of the verse.
Some read it only as an Explication, or other expression, of all his days,
thus; The wicked man travelleth -- all his days, even the number of years which
is ^id (or determined by God) to the oppressor, or, wicked man. But leaving
this, and other readings not so apposite as our Translation, it contains an
Explication and Instance of the wicked man's vexation. Wherein,

1. Having more generally designed the person he speaks of, that he is a wicked
man, he more particularly restricts what he is to say, to the oppressor, That
so he may reflect upon Job, whom he supposes to have been guilty of that sin,
when he was in eminency and power.

2. He instanceth this as a cause of the oppressors vexation and pain, that
the number of years is hidden to him. Whereby we may understand, either, That
it breeds him great vexation that the time of his death is kept hid by God, so
that he knows not when it shall arrest him; the consideration whereof ma^^s all
his present mirth: or, That his vexations are so bitter to him, and his mind is
so little at ease, that he never desires to think on death, but hides from
himself all thoughts of that subject. Both those come to one purpose, and may
agree in one, as shall be marked in the Doctrines.

From this verse thus explained, Learn,

1. Whatever wicked men promise to themselves in their way; yet if they
considered matters well, they will find they have but a miserable Dogs-life of
it; For, so much may be gathered in general from this, that the wicked man
travelleth with pain, and from the rest of the Text. Not only does God make the
life of some of them to be visibly miserable; but even all of them bear some
prints of the truth of this, in some measure. The best of it is but a drudgery
in serving sin and lusts; and many times it is seen they do but weary
themselves, Isai. 57.10. Jer. 9.5. Ezekiel. 24.12. and pierce themselves through
with many sorrows, 1 Timothy 6.10. This may keep us from complaining of Gods
service, seeing Satan is a most cruel Task-master.

2. It adds to the misery of wicked men, that their vexations are endless; That
he travelleth with pain all his days, not as women who travel but some days:
Albeit they have intermissions of visible troubles; yet their anxieties and
drudgeries continue; and whatever they get, yet they are far from that sweet
issue of trouble which is promised to the godly, Psalm. 30.5. This may warn all
to beware of provoking God to imbitter all their moment of time; And it
teaches Saints to bless God for any real vic^ssitude, or change to the better,
which they find in their condition.

3. It adds also to the misery of the wicked, that God gives them up to be
their own tormenters; That he makes himself to travel with pain, as the word in
the Original bears. His own ^theism, diffidence, love of this present life and
the things thereof, his fears about them, his envy that others speed better
than himself, etc. lets him never be at quiet. And albeit the spirits of godly
men may make them very sad exercise, which they should guard against; and so
this will not always prove a man wicked, that he breeds himself vexations: yet
the point should teach all to try what is real, and done by God, in their
vexations, and what is only apprehended, and made a vexation by themselves. And
when men find that they do thus vex themselves, they ought to search into the
grounds and causes of it (whither Idols or unbelief) and avoid them, lest the
increase of their vexations be a just punishment thereof.

4. To be an oppressor is a particular evidence of a wicked man, whatever he
pretend unto otherwise; (as he may pretend to Piety and an acknowledgment of
God, Zech. 11.5.) There he instanceth that General Assertion, concerning a
wicked man, in the person of an oppressor, intending (but unjustly) to reflect
upon Job.

5. Albeit Oppressors seem to be the men who should have most quiet, since
they heap together so many outward delights, and think to secure themselves in
the enjoyment thereof, by the bearing down of others; Yet, in Gods judgment,
they are often times plagued with greatest vexations and sorrows: For, they in
particular, are the wicked, who travel in pain, and of whom the following
particulars, in this and the rest of the verses, are verified. And albeit the
point hold not fully true in the sense of Eliphaz; yet they have their own
vexations in purchasing, and in keeping their purchase, wh^rewith they dare not
trust God; And sometimes their Consciences also do vex them. Which should keep
the godly from envying of them, and make them be content with their own lot.

6. It is an evidence of wickedness, or, at best, of a wicked and evil
disposition, when the common trials and exercises of mankind become intolerably
bitter, and are not digested because they are common; So the oppressor is
wicked, in that it v^xeth him that the number of years is hid from him,
although it be so with all mankind, 1 Cor. 10.13.

7. It is also an evil evidence in men, when their end, or death, is looked on
as an Enemy, and when they dare not seriously think on it, or how much time
they have spent, and how near they are to death by the course of nature; as
being never ready nor willing to die: Thus both the Interpetations of the last
part of the verse agree in one, That it evidenceth his wickedness, that he is
vexed because his days* are hidden, and determined by God, so that he can
neither avoid death, nor knows when it shall surprise him; and that he is so
vexed with this, as it makes him hide all thoughts of death from himself. It is
true, the godly may have their own vexations and fears about death; and so it
is not simply true, that to fear death is the evidence of a wicked man; Yet,
the difference betwixt the godly and wicked in this is very clear. For, partly,
the godly's fear is of another nature then that of the wicked is; The godly
desire to die, if they were reconciled to God; whereas the wicked seek not Gods
favor, and so love not death on any terms, except despair drive them upon that
hopeless remedy, or a satiety of time, or want of strength to prosecute the
delights of it, make them weary thereof. Partly, the fears of the godly are
groundless, as the wickeds are not; but their tentations, and fears and
apprehensions, are real plagues upon them. And if godly men in their fits of
security or distemper, have any other fears of death, in any thing like unto
the wicked, they ought to labor to be rid of them, as no evidence of their
Piety, nor of their good frame for that time.

8 It is also an evidence of an evil disposition, when it vexes men, and
imbitters their lives unto them, that they are left in all conditions upon Gods
hands and Providence; as here it is a vexati^n to the wicked oppressor, that
his years are hid, or determined by God, as Chap. 14.5. This does not at all
please the wicked; because they cannot trust God, nor willingly submit to him;
whereas it is enough to the godly, in greatest troubles, that their times are
in Gods hand, Psalm. 31.13. and this should be their encouragement in all cases.

9 Whatever sweetness men think they reap by wickedness and oppression; Yet,
this is Wormwood in the midst of it, and the Worm in the root thereof, that it
is but temporary, and they know not how soon death may put a period to it; For,
this is also implied; that it is the wicked oppressors pain, and vexation,
that the number of years is hid, that death will put a period to his
enjoyments, and he knows not when it may steal upon him.

Verse. 21. A dreadful s^und is in his ears; in prosperity the destroyer shall
come upon him.
Follows in this verse another branch of the wicked, or oppressors, misery,
and a special cause and part of his vexations pain; to wit, his perpetual
terror of Conscience, every thing putting him in a fright, as Cain was, and
his Conscience suggesting the dreadfulness and terror of deserved vengeance,
as if the sound of its approach were daily ^inging in his ears. As for that
which is subjoyned in the end of the verse it may be understood thus, with a
reflection upon Job's case; That the wicked man is not only surrounded with
fears and terrors, but God makes his fear prove real, and sends unexpected
ruin upon him when he is in the height of his prosperity (as b^fel Job;)
Whereas the godly are, oft-times, mercifully disappointed, and are not made to
feel what they fear. This Interpretation, though it hold out that which
oft-times (though not universally) proves true; yet it agrees better with the
scope here, (where he is speaking, especially, of the wickeds inward vexation)
to understand it as as a further amplification of that terror upon the wicked,
mentioned in the former part of the verse, That his terror is so great, that,
notwithstanding his present prosperity, he is still apprehending that
destruction will come upon him in the midst of it.

From this verse according to the former Rules and Cautions, Learn,

1. The end of a wicked course, and particularly of oppression, is very
terrible; even that which is dreadful (or, the matter of many fears or
terrors, as the word is in the plural number, in the Original) and destruction
and ruin from the hand of some destroyer. So much are we here taught; that the
Consciences of many of them do sometime suggest this unto them. Which should be
well considered by themselves, and by others also, that they stumble not at
their prosperity.

2. This end of wicked men is not only dreadful when it comes, but the very
apprehension thereof, by a wakened Conscience, is an Hell upon Earth; For it is
a dreadful sound, or, voice of terrors, in the midst of prosperity, and like
the sight of an armed and cruel destroyer.

3. Whatever be the temper and condition of particular wicked and impenitent
men; yet, they have so little fence and security against this storm of terror,
that when their Consciences are not alarmed with it, it is an evidence they are
dead and deluded; For, that a dreadful sound it in the ears of any of them, it
shows that this is the deserving of all, and the nature of their condition
tends to it; and that they are but mad and stupid who continue impenitent in
sin, and yet are not at this exercise; and that so much the more is owing them
that they are forborne for the present. And accordingly there is a standing
sentence in the Law concerning this, Levit. 26.36. Deuteronomy. 28.65, 66, etc.

4. Whatever be the exercises which God may send upon godly men, for their
correction, humiliation and trial? and whatever may be their fits of fear,
through the power of tentation: Yet distracting and tormenting fears and
terrors are none of their allowance: For, it is the wickeds lot only, to have
a dreadful sound in his ears. See Matthew. 28.4, 5. Psalm. 112.7.

5. The prosperity of wicked men, who do not repent nor seek to be at peace
with God, is neither a sufficient security against their fears, nor against
their actual destruction; For, so both the Interpretations of the latter part
of the verse may agree in one; In prosperity the destroyer shall come upon him.
As he will not always get his heart kept free of the fears of ruin, seeing he
has no better fence then his outward prosperity (and nothing of the Peace of
God, Phil. 4.7.) to keep his heart and mind; So neither will prosperity hold
off actual vengeance, Psalm. 92.7. 1 Thessalonians. 5.3.

6. Whatever be the fears and apprehensions of the wicked; yet that produces
no preparation for what they fear, but they are still surprised, even with the
judgments they apprehend; For, in this respect it holds true, the destroyer
shall come upon him, not only does he seiz upon him, but surprizeth him.

Verse. 22. He believes not that he shall return out of darkeness, and he is
waited for of the sword.
Follows yet more of the wickeds misery, in this verse. The first part
whereof, concerning darkness, is not to be understood, properly, of the
darkness of the night; which a wicked affrighted man (as he is described, v.
21.) thinks never to put over, or to see daylight; somewhat like unto which is
threatened, Deuteronomy. 28.67, But it is to be taken improperly, of the darkness of
trouble. And so the meaning is; That a wicked man, not only before he enter in
any trouble, but especially when he is in it, is hopless ever to see an issue
of it, or to get out of it. As for the other part of the verse, it amplifieth
and adds to this his hopeless condition, that not only he has present
despair under what he suffers (as is said in the former part of the verse.) but
is tormented with a fear of yet greater troubles, like a Sword in an Enemies
hand, ready to cut him off.

From this verse Learn,

The Lord sees it fit, sometimes, to give the wicked some taste of trouble, as
an earnest of what they deserve, and will get in end; For, here it is supposed
some of them are in darkness. And albeit this should not always be expected,
that it will come upon all the wicked; Yet both themselves and the godly ought
wisely to consider such a dispensation, when it comes.

2. Trouble will prove a very sad and dreery condition, especially to the
wicked; For, it is darkness, wherein they will want comfort, and light whereby
they might be directed to any thing for their own ease or relief. And albeit
the godly may have sad essays of such a condition Isai. 50.10. Yet their
saddest case is really (whatever their apprehension be) an out-gate, in
comparison of this, when it comes upon the wicked.

3. Hoplesness, and despair of favor or an issue, under trouble, is the sting
of it, and more bitter then the real pressure; For, this is the vexation, not
that he is in darkness, but that he believes not that he shall return out of
darkness. And therefore the godly do take the contrary Antidote of Hope for
their cure, Psalm. 42.5, 11.

4. The wickeds presumption in prosperity (which is their usual frame, when
they are free of the terror of God, mentioned in the former verses) is justly
plagued with dejection and despair in adversity; For, this is his plague and
torture, he believes not that he shall return out of darkness. It is true, they
may still presume, even when some troubles are come upon them, as the wicked
Jews, did; Jer. 12.4. Yet trouble will drive them from their confidences at
last, and sink them as deep in despair; as the same Jews sound, Ezekiel. 37, 11.
Nor have they any promise to warrant them to expect an issue from trouble, nor
any blessing with it, though they get it. And therefore they cannot but be in a
desperate condition, if they saw it. And however it may succeed with them, as
to this, in Gods Patience and long-suffering; Yet it is certain the godly
should leave hopless despair in trouble to the wicked, as their portion: seeing
themselves have the Promise of a blessed issue, one way or other. And if the
Godly, at any time, be troubled with diffidence of this kind, they ought (among
other things to be considered) look upon it as a fruit of their indulging
themselves too much in their secure presumption, and so walking too like the
wicked; which makes them, for a time, share with them in some measure of their
plague. Only this is to be marked, that it is no evidence of despair (though it
may be a mistake) that a godly man lay his reckoning never to see an issue, in
this life, of some outward trial, provided he be not crushed therewith, as the
wicked are, all whose hope is gone, if outward prosperity, or hope of
restitution to it, be lost. For Job, in his weakness, never looked to be
delivered, from this affliction upon him, in this life (and Eliphaz reflects
upon that here) and yet he was far from the despair of the wicked; seeing his
heart was filled with the hope of eternal happiness with God, which made him
long so earnestly for it.

5. Whatever outward temporary trouble the wicked be under; Yet they ought not
to harden themselves as if they could not be worse, seeing God can make their
condition yet sadder: For, he has a Sword after darkness, or, a sharp Scourge
after a disconsolate condition, to send upon them. See Lev. 26.21, 23, 24, etc.

6. Albeit it be most safe, especially when in trouble, to be looking out for
all possible afflictions that may come upon us; providing we be not anxious and
diffident about them, but do only study to prepare for what may probably come,
trusting God for furniture in a time of need; Math. 6.34. Heb 4.16. Yet it is a
judgment upon the wicked, that their present despair is joined with future
fears: For, here they are conjoined, to torment him. He not only believes not,
that he shall not return out of darkness, but his fear tells him, he is waited
for of the Sword. In this, their condition is far different from the godlies
lawful solicitudes, and their allowance under them. For,

1. The Lord, by these slavish fears, does break the stout hearts of the
wicked, which puffed at trouble. Whereas God may humble his people, but does
not crush them, though sometimes they wrong themselves that way.

2. Seeing there are so many troubles incident to men, beside what a wicked man
presently suffers; and seeing he has no security against any of them in God;
It is no wonder if, when God begins to reckon with him, he be vexed with daily
looking for all he can imagine, or does deserve. Whereas the godly man may be
assured that, even in wrath, God will remember mercy, and will not reward him
according to his iniquities.

3. Those fears and apprehensions cannot but be a torment to the wicked man,
who cannot go to God, nor cast his cares and burdens upon him; as is the
allowance, and (in some measure) the practice of the godly man.

Verse. 23. He wandreth abroad for bread, saying, Where is it? he knows that
the day of darkness is ready at his hand.
Yet more of the wickeds misery and vexation is held out in this verse. The
first part whereof (concerning his wandering abroad for bread, etc.) is to be
understood, not so much of the wicked man's anxiety, when he is oppressed with
poverty, as before it come upon him. And if we compare the end of the verse
with the beginning of it, we will find the sense to be this; That the wicked
man's Conscience causing him every day to fear approaching want and distress, as
if it were ready to take hold of him; He takes a poor, impatient, heartless and
hopeless shift, to provide and heap up against such a time. So that, although
he be not presently poor, yet he can never get enough provided, to secure him
against his fears that he may die a beggar.

From this verse Learn,

1. Albeit some wicked men may be plagued with Security and Presumption,
because of their prosperous condition; as Luke 12.19. Yet it is ordinary with
many of them, that plentiful enjoyments do not secure them against fear of
want: And therefore they wander abroad for bread; that is, for their
livelihood, which is comprehended under the name of bread, because it is the
staff of a man's life, Isai. 3.1. and because a man ought to be content, if he
get so much as bread, to sustain his life. And all men's endeavors to acquire
the things of the world, are called endeavors to get bred, because they who
purchase most, will get no more of it but their meat, Eccl. 5.10, 11.

2. It is a sad Plague upon men, when their faithless fears are let loose upon
them; and their imagination gets leave to multiply vexations without end: For,
this is the wicked man's plague, that he wandereth abroad for bread, out of an
apprehension of a day of darkness or trouble and want, which he knows, or,
assures himself, is ready at his hand. Such faithless fears are more
tormenting then many real crosses.

3. Wicked men, through want of contentment in their lot, and of trust in God,
are justly driven upon heartless, anxious, sinful and hopeless shifts; For, so
is imported in his wandering abroad for bread, and in the question subjoyned,
Where is it? Which signifies that he is restless and impatient in seeking,
doubtful to find or see what he seeks, and ready to take any shift, good or
bad, and to go any where to find it.

4. Albeit wicked men do, ordinarily, put an evil day far away, Amos 6.2. yet
they will not still get it done; but their Consciences will be set on work to
prognosticate their own miseries, and represent their miseries as near
approaching, that so they may be tormented before the time: For, here are some
wicked men who have misery and want still before their eyes, He knows that
the day of darkness is ready at his hand.

Verse. 24. Trouble and anguish shall make him afraid; they shall prevail
against him, as a king ready to the battle.
In this verse the wicked man's inward misery is summed up in this, That trouble
and anxiety shall not only affright him, but shall astonish and prevail over
him as easily as a King with his Royal Army (being well provided when he is in
the Field in Person, and ready to join in battle, will prevail over an
inferior subject, or single person.

Whence Learn,

1. However the wicked, when they are at ease, think lightly of anxieties and
vexations of Conscience; Yet, as those are sad and heavy in themselves, so, God
can make them find by experience that they are so: Therefore is their exercise
here called trouble and anguish: The words in the Original signify that which
straitens men, and closes them up from all comfort, as when they are besieged
in a City; and that which, being painful, cleaves to men, however they would,
and do, endeavor to shift it.

2. Anguish and trouble of mind is very affrighting to them who are not at
peace with God; and that both in it self, and in that it begets fears of more
and greater trouble: Therefore it is said, Trouble and anguish shall make him
afraid.

3. However the wicked may think to shake off their affrighting perplexities,
and to encourage themselves again, after they are borne down with them; Yet, if
God pursue, they will be forced at last to succumb under the pressure: For,
they shall prevail against him, whereas the godly may fall and rise again.

4. The terror of God, or anxiety inflicted by him as a Plague, is too hard a
party for weak man, and as irresistible as it is impossible for a weak subject
to resist a King with his Army; For, They shall prevail against him as a king
ready to the battle. It points both at the force and strength, and at the
numerous variety, of terrors (like so many several Troops or Soldiers) which
God has in readiness, to overwhelm him thereby.

Verse. 25. For he stretches out his hand against God, and strengthens
himself against the Almighty.
Before Eliphaz proceed to rehearse the Doctrine of the Ancients concerning the
outward plagues which befall the wicked; He does (in the Second Head of this
Narration, and, as would appear, from the Doctrine of those Ancients also)
interlace, to v. 29. the cause both of their outward and inward miseries, to
clear the equity and justice thereof: And that is, their presumptuous
wickedness because of their prosperity. Their wicked attempts are recorded, v.
25, 26. and that their prosperity emboldens them to this, is asserted, v. 27,
28.

In this verse this account is given of the wicked man's attempt, that he is
stout-hearted in his sinning against God, provokes him with an high hand, and
is obstinately pertinacious in that course. Thus, to stretch out the hand
against any, notes a resolute and eminent opposition against them, and an
endeavor to destroy them, if it can be effectuated. It seems to be the same in
substance with what is elsewhere spoken, of doing any thing with a stretched
out arm, Exodus 6.6. and with an high hand; Exodus 14.8. which, in other cases,
imports eminent resolution and courage, and acting accordingly; and in the
wickeds course of rebellion against God, it imports his presumptuous sinning,
Numb. 15.30. in the Original. And for his strengthening of himself, subjoyned to
this, it imports how obstinate he is in his course, notwithstanding all means
used to reclaim him. In this Character of the wicked, it seems Eliphaz would
reflect upon Job's carriage, who would not humble himself and stoop to God, but
stood it out rebelliously (as he thought) both against his Word and the
dispensations of his Providence. And, indeed, had Job been guilty of this, his
condition had been dreadful. But his resolution and stiffeness, in the point
controverted, was better grounded than Eliphaz thought; and any failing in it
was his infirmity only, and not presumptuous wickedness.

From this verse Learn,

1. It is not sufficient that men feel, or be sensible of, judgments inflicted;
unless they see also the causes thereof distinctly; and so they be neither dumb
nor confused rods: Therefore does he subjoyn a reason of all the former
miseries, For he stretches out his hand, etc.

2. As all sin is an opposition unto God; so, especially, presumptuous sinning
is a waging war against him: For, such a sinner (whether his sin be directly
against God and his Interests, or not) stretches out his hand against God. And
indeed, when men dare sin with full consent, and against clear light, and do
break over all bounds; they do not only proclaim that they think God is not to
be feared, nor stood in aw of; but that they would destroy him, as he is a
Lawgiver and just avenger of sin, if they could. And therefore men would
beware of making a sport of sin, and especially of such sins; seeing they have
no security against the hazard thereof, unless they can prove that they are
stronger then God.

3. When men fortify themselves in a vain conceit of their own good condition,
against the clear verdict of the Word, and will not yet stoop when God pleads
against them by afflictions; they put God to it, to take a proof whether they
be stronger then he: For, this is the particular supposed fault of Job, upon
which he reflects in what be says here. And though his reflection was unjust,
yet, the General Doctrine is true. See Jer. 44.28.

4. It is the property, and great sin, of wicked men, that their opposition
unto God is not for a fit only, but resolute, and pertinaciously maintained;
For, he not only stretches out his hand, but strengthens himself, in this
course. He hardens his own heart, stops his ear, debaucheth his Conscience,
and entertains jealousies and prejudices against God; and when he is put to the
worse at any time, he gives it not over, but resumes his courage and falls to
it again. This is much worse than a simple fit of stout-heartedness.

5. Not only is God stronger than man, being the strong God, (as his Name in
the first part of the verse imports) and the Almighty, who has all sufficiency
of means to oppose unto frail man's attempts: But it is the great sin of a
wicked man, and an evidence of his madness, that he does not consider this;
otherwise, he durst never engage in the course he follows; Therefore, it is
marked, as the height of his madness and folly, as well as of his sin, that he
does all this against the Strong God, and the Almighty.

Verse. 26. He runs upon him, even on his neck, upon the thick bosses of his
bucklers:
There is some difficulty in taking up the sense of this verse. For this
running is, by some, expounded of Gods assaulting the wicked man; and that, as
he assaults God, v. 25. so, in this verse it is said, God runs upon him, upon
his neck, or natural strength, and on the bosses of his bucklers, or his
borrowed external strength. This is a Truth in it self, but the Context runs
not so smoothly to understand it so. And therefore I understand this verse as
containing a further amplification of the wicked man's attempt against God. Yet
herein also is some diversity: For the words may be read thus, He runs upon him
(that is, upon God) with his neck, that is, with a resolute stiffe-neck and
undaunted courage, and with the thick bosses of his bucklers, that is, with all
the borrowed strength and means he can make; employing Gods creatures as
weapons wherewith to fight against himself. This is also most true of
presumptuous wicked men, and all of it is imported in that one expression, that
he runs upon God. But taking the words as they are translated here, on his
neck, and on his bucklers, they are borrowed terms, setting forth yet more of
the height and desperateness of the wicked man's presumption, in his sinning
against God; which may be branched out in these particulars.

1. As to run and fall upon men's necks, in kindness, imports great tenderness
and affection, Genesis 33.4. and 45.14. and 46.29. Luke 15.20. Acts 20 37. So to
run upon ones neck, in an an hostile manner, imports as much bitter violence.
And particularly, As getting of the neck of Enemies, Psalm. 18.40. imports their
being foiled and put to the worse; and taking an Enemy by the neck, imports
sharp usage, as is expounded, Job 16.12. And as treading upon the necks of
Enemies, Josh. 10.24. imports an absolute conquest; So the wicked man's running
upon Gods neck imports his malicious endeavor to get him under his feet and
power, if he could.

2. As in conflicts, eager fighters do not only assault one another at a
distance, but do close upon one another necks, and within the reach of their
defensive weapons, even shield to shield; So does the wicked man eagerly pursue
his attempt.

3. As a weak naked man would show himself a fool in grappling with a strong
resolute stiff-necked man, being also well-armed, both for defense and
offense; (For some of the bosses of their bucklers, in the middle thereof, were
offensive also:) So is a wicked man madly presumptuous to encounter so strong a
God, who is well able to bear out, and to defend himself, and offend him. In
this, it seems, Eliphaz reflects upon Job's grappling so stoutly with God, in
the point of his Righteousness and Justice in afflicting him a righteous man;
though in that debate God be so able to abide a trial, and invincible, like a
strong man well armed, and though there be so much hazard to close and grapple
so near. Herein he wronged Job, in charging upon him that he was guilty of it
in his sense, and that he did oppose the Righteousness of God, because he would
not grant that himself was wicked; yet Job was not altogether free of it upon
another account (as shall be marked in its own place) which was his great sin,
for which God challenges him, Chap. 40.2, 8.

From the words thus explained, Learn,

1. The attempts of wicked men, in their presumptuous sinning, are not soon
seen nor pondered, in the desperate wickedness thereof; Therefore does Eliphaz
insist so much to enlarge and amplify it here, after all he has spoken in the
former verse.

2. It is one evidence of the wicked man's dreadful presumption, and to be
trembled at, that with furious and blind obstinacy he bends his outmost
endeavors against God; Therefore it is marked that he runs upon him, with
all he can make, to testify his furious eagerness. Thus is he also greedy
after sin, Ephesians. 4.19.

3. It evidenceth also his desperate wickedness, that his design is, not only
to oppose and cross God, but to overthrow him quite, if he could; For, He
runs on his neck, and closes with him, to get an entire victory, as is
explained. And albeit wicked men will not profess all this; Yet the nature of
their work looks toward it.

4. It does also evidence a wicked man's furious and desperate disposition, that
he is so mad upon his attempt, as he sees not the folly of his way, nor
pondereth or fears danger, though it be full of hazard; For, how is he
transported who runs on his neck, and the thick bosses of his bucklers,
where he can expect no advantage, but rather much damage?

5. Gods Justice and Righteousness in his dispensations is so undeniable, and
invincible by any opposition or quarrelling, that none can essay to oppose it
with any advantage, but with much loss; For, this is the particular he reflects
upon, that to quarrel the Righteousness of God, is, to run upon his neck and
bucklers.

Verse. 27. Because he covers his face with his fatness, and makes collops of
fat on his flanks.

28. And he dwells in desolate Cities, and in houses which no man inhabiteth,
which are ready to become heaps.


In these verses, this desperate attempt of the wicked man is amplified from
the cause and reason driving him to it; Which is, his abuse of outward
prosperity; in pampering of his own body, and caring only for back and belly,
v. 27. and in making a prey of the poor, by acquiring and building up ruinous
habitations, which the poor owners could never have repaired, v. 28. Herein, no
doubt, Eliphaz reflects (but unjustly, as Job often clears) upon Job's former
prosperity and purchases, and upon his Childrens feasts, of which, see Chap.
1.4.

From the General Doctrine of these verses (passing his reflection) Learn,

1. Albeit the Lord can give prosperity to his own Children, and bless it to
them; Yet, ordinarily, it proves a snare to our corrupt hearts, and especially
to the wicked; For, this is the root of all his miscarriage, because he
covers his face with fatness, etc. And albeit adversity, also, will bring
forth the naughtiness of wicked men's hearts, Isai. 8.21. yet this is their
ordinary snare. See Deuteronomy. 32.15. Hos. 13.6.

2. Prosperity is then, especially, a snare, when it drives men to fight
against God, and to employ the advantages they have by it, that way; For, that
is, in particular, his miscarriage here, Because he covers his face, etc.
therefore he runs upon God, and stretches out his hand against him, v. 25, 26.

3. They do improve prosperity ill, and are ready to improve it yet worse, who
make no other use of it but to pamper themselves therewith; For, it is the
wicked man's sin, and a cause of his other presumptuous miscarriages, that he
covers his face with fatness, that is, pampers himself so, that nothing but
fat is to be seen; and makes collops of fat on his flanks, that is, he feeds
himself till his body become a swelled, unweildy, fat lump. See Psalm. 17.10.
and 73.7. To be fat or lean, considered simply in themselves, is nothing, as to
a man's state and condition before God; For a lean man may be wicked and proud
against God, and a corpulent man pious and humble. But here fatness is pointed
at as a man's sin, in so far as it is an evidence of his pampering of himself,
(which yet always it is not, for some sober persons may be corpulent, and
riotous persons of a slender constitution.) In which regard; as it is a great
burden, to a rational man, to spend his time in feeding of his body, and to
load himself with such a burden; so it is his great sin also, Romans 13.14. Phil.
3.19. and an evidence that the Spirit of God is not well entertained; And
therefore pampering of the body is opposed to our being filled with the Spirit,
Ephesians. 5.18. Yea, in this men are beneath, and worse then, the brute beasts,
who are content with that which may suffice nature.

4. Albeit it be not simply sinful, but rather lawful, for men in power and
place to build houses more stately and ample then others; nor yet is it simply
sinful to repair desolate Cities and Houses in a Land: Yet this becomes
sinful, when either men are excessively sumptuous in their buildings (See Amos
3 15.) or, especially, when they raise themselves, their Possessions and
Habitations, upon the ruin of others, and take occasion of their meanness and
inability, to make advantageous bargains for themselves: This is a sin, and an
ill way of getting or using of prosperity, here hinted at, v. 28.

5. Such as, by reason of their eminency and prosperity, get their hand over
other men, may very readily be emboldened thereby to lift up their hand against
God also: For, he who rises upon the poor man's ruins, v. 28. will hazard to
oppose himself against God also. v 25, 26. Thus prospering Uzziah attempts to
offer Incense, 2 Chronicles 26.16.

Verse. 29. He shall not be rich, neither shall his substance continue, neither
shall he prolong the perfection thereof upon the earth.
Unto this account of the cause of the wickeds miseries is subjoyned (in the
third Head of this Narration, contained in this and the following verse) yet
more of their misery, especially in respect of outward plagues and judgments.
This Doctrine we are also to understand with the former cautions, That it holds
true that all the wicked deserve those judgments, and accordingly some of them
are made to smart under them; though it be not universally verified of them
all, that they come under this las^; nor yet are the godly exempted from the
like exercise, as it is a furnace to try them.

In this verse the wicked man's miseries are held out in negative terms, to show
that he shall miss of his aim in these purchases, mentioned, v. 28, wherein we
may observe this Gradation.

1. He shall not be rich; that is, he shall never attain to that measure of
riches he projects; or, though he acquire much (as is supposed, v. 28.) yet he
shall never account himself rich, nor find that in it which he expects in
riches.

2. Though he attain to so much wealth, and so much satisfaction in it, as
makes him account it substance, yet it shall not be stable, nor continue, with
him.

3. Though it continue for a time, in a state of seeming perfection, yet he
shall not be able to perpetuate it, (or, extend it, as the word signifies) on
Earth to his Posterity.

Whence Learn,

1. As it is not in man's power, of himself, to get wealth, Deuteronomy. 8.18. So God,
oft-times, crosses the wicked, that they find not what they seek in their
hunting after wealth; For, he shall not be rich. Not a few of them are kept
beggars still, for all their ill shifts; all of them do imagine so much
happiness in having riches, that, for most part, when they get most, they are
the more miserably disappointed, of their expectation, Eccl. 5.10, 11. And none
of them have any solid contentment, which is only tree wealth. See Luke 12.15.
1 Timothy 6.6.

2. Notwithstanding the frequent disappointments which the wicked get of this
kind; yet, sometimes also, the Lord sees it fit to let them glut themselves
with vain imaginations, that things of the world are better then indeed they
are; that their disappointments may be so much the more bitter, when they come
at last: For, so is intimated here, that some of them get wealth even till they
come to count it substance (or power and strength, as the word also signifies,
whereby they think they are able to do great things) and perfection or a
completed thing, even an Idol busked to their mind: And all this is given them,
that their lot may be more bitter, when God overturns them.

3. Though wicked men get their will, and more, sometime, of wealth; Psalm.
73.7. Yet as riches are but that which is not, and without a substance
(whatever they dream to the contrary) and abides not for ever, Prove. 23.5. So
this will especially be verified upon the wickeds ill purchase; For, his
substance (the oppressors, of whom, v. 28.) shall not continue.

4. Albeit the wickeds prosperity may continue longer, not only then they
deserve, but than the godlies patience will, oft-times, allow; yet the fullness
and splendor thereof shall not be continued to them and their posterity, but
their Idol shall be broken: For, Neither shall he prolong the perfection
thereof upon the earth.

Verse. 30. He shall not depart out of darkness, the flame shall dry up his
branches, and by the breath of his mouth shall he go away.
In this verse is declared, more positively, what evils shall come upon the
wicked man. Namely,

1. That he shall be cast into calamity and poverty (for so, darkness, may be
taken here, with relation to what is said, v. 29.) which shall be unavoidable
and inextricable, so that he shall not get from it.

2. That the wrath and judgments of God shall consume his fruitful estate and
posterity, as the branches of a tree (which do fitly resemble both his Children
and outward estate) are consumed by fire.

3. That when he has lived to see all this, God will breath out his final
displeasure against him, and destroy him. In all these, there are sad (though
unjust) reflections upon Job's hopeless-like condition, whose goods were
consumed (some of them) by a fire from Heaven, and his Children by a Tempest of
wind, and himself ready to be consumed.

The General Doctrine Teaches,

1. Trouble and calamity is very dark and dreery to the wicked, especially
after they have been in prosperity; For, here it is called darkness, after that
warm and bright Sunshine, v. 27, 28.

2. The wicked have need to hold Prosperity fast, when they have it; For when
they are in trouble, they have no assurance of an issue, and, at last, their
troubles will be endless: So much may safely be gathered from this, He shall
not depart out of darkness. See v. 22.

3. A stroke is then sad when wrath is in it, as it fares with the wicked in
their troubles; For, that is meant by fire, or a flame, frequently in
Scripture; and it is here marked as an addition to his calamity, that wrath
sends it on, and accompanies it.

4. Men's greatest enjoyments, their Children, prosperity, etc. are as little
able to secure, or stand out, against wrath, as branches, or twigs, are to
endure the fire; Therefore it is said in these borrowed terms, the flame shall
dry up his branches, To show how easily wrath can consume and suck all the
sweetness out of these enjoyments, as a Thunderbolt blasts the branches of a
Tree, when it lights upon them.

5. As sinful and wicked man draws plagues on himself and his enjoyments; So
God has many ways whereby to plague him. When he has consumed his Family and
enjoyments, he has plagues and death to send upon his person, till he go away
out of the world; so much are we taught here, where the word rendered, to go
away, signifies to retire, or, go back. It seems to point at his running upon
God, v 26. which, when death comes, he will be forced to give over, and make
his retreat.

6. Gods Power and Indignation can as easily cut off men, as one can breath, or
by a puff of his breath blow away a feather; For, by the breath of his mouth
(that is, when he lets out his anger) shall he go away. See John 18.6. and
compare Job 4.9.

Verse. 31. Let not him that is deceived, trust in vanity: for vanity shall be
his recompense.
Follows the third Branch of this part of the Chapter, and the Conclusion of
this whole Discourse; Containing,

1. An Exhortation, or, Counsel, to fall deluded Souls, that they should not
deceive themselves with vain confidences, v. 31. --

2. Some reasons of this counsel, taken from the disappointments and plagues
that such will meet with, v. -- 31, 32, 33.

3. Those plagues, or judgments, are amplified, and the equity thereof cleared,
by pointing at some causes procuring the same; where he concludes those plagues
to be due to several sorts of self-deceiving wicked men, in particular, v. 34,
35. In all which Discourse, albeit Eliphaz, notwithstanding all his bitterness,
express his mind in general terms; Yet there is no doubt but he intends an
Application thereof to Job, and points at him in the counsel he gives, and
reflects on his calamities and supposed guilt, in the rest of the purpose. And
albeit he was unjust in this, yet the General Doctrine may be received with the
ordinary Cautions.

In this verse we have,

1. His Exhortation, or, Counsel, That neither Job, nor any other after what
had befaln him, should ever again delude themselves with vain hopes and
confidences. Whereby we may understand, either that men should not trust in
hypocritical and deluding shows of Religion, or that they should not rest
secure, or dream of Gods favor to them, because of outward prosperity. Both
those may be comprehended under this General, of trusting in vanity, and both
seem to be intended by Eliphaz, as agreeing (in his opinion) with Job's case,
who had prospered, and (as he judged) was an Hypocrite.

2. We have in this verse the first Argument pressing this counsel; which is,
that all those confidences will disappoint deluded men, Job had already found
it so; and so should all others, and himself also, were he put in never so good
a condition again.

Whence Learn,

1. There are many deluded and deceived souls in the world; For, so is here
implied, there are who are deceived. All who are not utterly ignorant of God,
or madly desperate, and yet are not seeking God in sincerity, they are under
the power of some one delusion or other. And no wonder many be thus deluded;
For, being by nature ignorant of right and wrong in many things, and loving
case, we are ready to be take our selves to any course which may spare our
pains, and prevent our disquiet. Beside, we have to do with such subtle
enemies, not only Satan, with his wiles, Ephesians. 6.11. and devices, 2 Cor. 2.11.
and sin with its insinuations, Heb 3.13. but even our selves and our own
hearts, Gal 6.3. Jer. 17.9. that it is a wonder if we be not deceived. This may
warn every man to be jealous over himself, and cautious in all he goes about.

2. A great cause of men's delusions are their vain and ill-grounded
confidences; For, they are deceived through trusting in vanity, from which he
now disswades the deluded man, in order to his cure. See Isai. 59.4. Some are
apt to trust in Idols, or a false Religion; Isai. 44.20. Some in contempt and
sleighting of the Law, hoping to be dealt with and judged by another Rule;
Deuteronomy. 29.18, 19. Some in an apprehension that God is all mercy, without any
justice or severity, who will be miserably confounded when they find it is
otherwise; Isai. 33.14. Some in their external shows of Religion, wherewith
they are puffed up, Gal. 6.3. And, some in their prosperity, which is not only
lying in it self, Psalm. 62.10. but far more deceitful when it is made a mark of
Gods favor. This should teach men, not to look so much to their confidence, as
to the grounds of it; and to be very tender and cautious in bottoming
themselves, especially upon the former false grounds of confidence.

3. Men are so desperately averse from true Piety, and so prone to delude
themselves; that even experience of their folly, in some measure, will not
divert them, but they will persist in it: For, he thinks it needful thus to
advise Job, even after he has been once deceived already, Let not him that is
deceived trust in vanity. He does indeed wrong Job, yet the general holds true,
that it is only grace, and no experience without it, that will divert men from
deluding confidences, or any other ill course. See Prove. 23.35.

4. How mad soever men be on this course of self-deceiving; Yet it is their
great sin and misery to be thus deluded; Therefore, does Eliphaz so seriously
dissuade from it. It will make Hell to be a double Hell, that men delude
themselves till they slip into it. See Matthew. 7.21, 22, 23.

5. If men will not take notice of this hazard in time, from the Word; yet the
issue will sadly refute them: Therefore he subjoyns this certification, if his
counsel be not followed, for vanity shall be his recompense. As his hope was
vain, so the recompense can prove no better then vanity. And albeit he will not
see this in particular disappointments; yet he will be made to find it in end.

6. Men, by reason of their false Principles, and Prejudices, may so far
mistake Saints, and the grounds of their confidence, that they may account
their faith to be presumption and delusion; For, so does Eliphaz judge of Job's
faith here. And it is a trial for which a godly man should be a^med.

Verse. 32. It shall be accomplished before his time, and his branch shall not
be green.

33. He shall shake off his unripe grape as the Vine, and shall cast off his
flower as the Olive.


In the first of these verses, we have other two Arguments further pressing
this counsel: One is, That it (that is, his vain hope, or trusting in vanity)
shall not only prove vain and come to a sad end, but this shall come to pass
even in the deluded man's sight, and before he die. It shall be accomplished (or
cut off, and come to an end) before his time. The other is, his branch shall
not be green; that is, not only shall his present flourishing state and
posterity fade away, (as is said, v. 30.) and so be accomplished, or cut off
and come to an end (as is said in the beginning of the verse) but being so, his
confidence for the future shall come to nothing, as a withered branch can
promise no fruit. These Arguments are illustrated by a similitude, v. 33. That
as Trees, sometime, shake off their unripe fruit and flowers, and so the owner
can expect no increase of them; So the self-deluder shall see the untimely
death of his Children, and the overturning of his prosperity, and shall lose
all future expectation. In both those verses he has a tar^ (but unjust)
reflection upon what had befaln Job and his Family; his mistake in which having
been so frequently marked before, I shall now pass it.

From the General Doctrine, Learn,

1. How stable and well rooted soever deluded wicked men seem to be; Yet they
may outlive all their enjoyments and confidences; For, it shall be
accomplished before his time.

2. The suddenness of calamity adds to the sadness thereof; For, it is an
Argument pressing deluded souls, not to persist in that course, that not only
their confidence shall be accomplished and cut off, but that it shall be thus
before their time, and they shall see their own rise and fall. See Psalm. 37.25,
26. Lam 1.9.

3. It evidenceth the wicked man's great abuse of mercy, and Gods great anger
against him because of that, when God not only plagues his person, but smites
his enjoyments and Children, that he may refute his delusion; For, this is
threatened, as a sad fruits of his way, His branch (his wealth that adorns him,
and his Children that grow out of him as the root) shall not be green. And this
should be sad to wicked men, that they are such a plague to themselves and to
all that is theirs.

4. No present stroke on wicked men will convince them of their folly, unless,
also, their hope, and future expectation be cut off; and God, when he pleases,
will do so to them; For, his branch shall not be green.

5. It is an easy thing for God to ruin all the enjoyments of deluded
sinners, and their hopes also; For, as the unripe Grape, and Flower, are soon
shaken off; so he shall shake off his unripe Grape as the Vine, etc. that is,
God shall make him lose, and be deprived of it.

6. Wicked men are so stupid, and slow of heart to believe those sad things
which they deserve, and do abide them here and hereafter, that they need to be
very plainly and seriously inculcated upon them; Therefore are these
similitudes here made use of, to explain and inculcate this threatening.

Verse. 34. For the congregation of hypocrites shall be desolate, and fire shall
consume the tabernacles of bribery.
Those threatenings inculcated in the former Arguments, are (in the close of all
this Discourse) amplified, and the equity thereof cleared, from the
consideration of the sins procuring these judgments. Wherein he instanceth his
assertion, that self-deluding sinners will be plagued, as verified on several
sorts of them. In this verse he pitcheth upon the sins of hypocrisy and
bribery (of both which he unjustly suspects Job was guilty) and asserteth that,
when men are guilty of those, their Societies and Families (though never so
great, and straightly combined) are justly laid desolate, and wrath, like ^i^e,
pulls down and consumes their houses, however they delude themselves in their
sinful courses.

Whence Learn,

1. Hypocrites are under a special curse from God, as mocking him, and wronging
the holy Profession; Therefore in this reason of the former judgments, taken
from the sins of wicked men, Hypocrites are put in the first rank here, as
those especially whom God cannot endure. For the Congregation of Hypocrites
shall be desolate.

2. It is righteous with God, not only to plague Hypocrites in their persons,
but to ruin their families for their cause, as well as the families of the
openly profane; and to break their combinations, were they never so strong or
numerous. For, both these are included in the Congregation of the Hypocrites,
which shall be desolate.

3. As bribery is an horrid sin; so it is a sin wherein Hypocrites may fall, as
well as the profane. They are not sound in their Religion, nor are they
mortified to their interests, and therefore they are ready to seek after the
things of the world in a wicked way; and it is an evidence of their
unsoundness, that they do so. Therefore is bribery here subjoyned, as a sin
that may go hand in hand with the former.

4. Though men may gather much wealth by bribery; yet wrath follows it, which
will consume all that purchase, and all that the taker of bribes has; For fire
shall consume the Tabernacles of bribery, or their who^e House and Family,
which shall prove but like a flitting Tabernacle before the Indignation of the
Lord, See Hab. 2.9, 10, 11.

Verse. 35. They conceive mischief, and bring forth vanity, and their belly
prepares deceit.
In this verse he pitcheth upon another sin procuring these judgments, and that
is, malicious hatching of wickedness; which provokes the Lord in justice to
cause their plots miscarry, and resolve in vanity. As for that which is
subjoyned, that their belly prepares deceit, it does not only point out that
after one plot miscarries, they set on again, to project new deceits. But it
may be taken more generally, that in those words he resumes and repeats what he
had said before; showing, that as they prepare and intend deceits for others,
so God makes them prove deceits and disappointments to themselves.

Hence Learn,

1. Wicked men are put to much toil and pain in sinning, and it is a punishment
to it self; For, it is a conception, and a birth prepared in the belly.

2. As sin has its degrees of growth; (for, there is a conceiving, a preparing
in the belly, and a bringing forth) so mischeivous and malicious sins are so
much the more hateful, that they are not the result of a sit of tentation, but
are so long in breeding and bringing to maturity: For, all these steps of their
malicious plots are marked, to show how hateful they are.

3. The Lord abhorrs, not only deliberation, but, affection, in projecting of
sin; That not only they conceive, and then bring so^th, but that their belly
(which in Scripture is made the Seat of affection) prepares deceit.

4. As all mischief, greedily committed, is abominable; so also deceitful plots
mischeivously contrived against others, in special; Therefore the general, of
mischeifs, is instanced in the matter of deceit, as a mischief specially
hateful to God.

5. It is Gods just judgment upon wicked men, that their assiduous projecting
of sin tends to their own sad disappointment at last; For, whatever they
conceive, the birth is vanity, and their Preparations to deceive others prove
deceit to themselves also at last.

CHAP. XVI.
In this and the following Chapter we have Job's Reply to Eliphaz and his other
Friends; wherein he reprehends them for their Discourses; enumerates his
miseries, and yet proves that he was righteous for all that; prosecutes his
wish to debate his Cause with God; and rejects all the Consolations they
offered to him upon his repentance. In this Chapter, 1. He premits a Preface,
wherein he reprehends them more generally for their Discourses, as being but
trivial, and nothing to the purpose, ver. 1, 2, 3. such as would be bitter to
them, were they in his case, and such as he would be loath to propound to them,
were they in distress, ver. 4, 5. 2. He refutes Eliphaz's former Discourse,
that only the wicked were sadly afflicted; by showing that himself was under
sad ^fflictions, ver. 6, -- 16. and yet was not wicked, ver. 17. as he proves
by several Arguments, ver. 18, 19, 20. 3. He repeats his former wish, that he
might plead his Cause with God, before he die, ver. 21, 22.

Verse. 1. Then Job answered and said,

2. I have heard many such things: miserable comforters are ye all.

3. Shall vain words have an end? or what emboldeneth thee that thou answerest?


IN these, verses, we have the first part of Job's Preface, and the first fault
he finds in their discourses; Namely, that they were but light and trivial, and
nothing to the purpose. And,

First, He propounds this censure, v. 2. -- that Eliphaz had said nothing
concerning the miseries of the wicked, but what he had often heard, not only
from others long ago (as he speaks of other their discourses before, Chap.
12.2, 3. and 13.1, 2.) but from themselves also. His Discourse was to the same
purpose with what he and the rest had said before; and contained nothing but a
tautologie, and idle repetition of what he had often heard from them. Secondly,
He amplifieth and presses this censure by several Inferences from it.

1. That however Eliphaz pretended that he propounded the Consolations of God
to him, Chap. 15.11. Yet, in effect, he and all the rest were but cruel
comforters, while they augmented his grief, by such idle and useless
tautologies, v -- 2.

2. That it was a wonder they would never end, nor give over those vain and
superfluous discourses, that were so little to purpose, v. 3. --

3. That he could see no cause wherefore Eliphaz should thus repeat those
things, which had been so often refuted. And therefore he puts him to it, to
consider what vain presumption was in it, what reason he had for it, what
encouraged him to it, and what spirit he was of in doing of it, v. -- 3. It is
to be marked, that though sometime he direct his speech to Eliphaz who spoke
last, in the singular number, v. 3. (as he did also to another before, Chap.
12.7, 8) and though his scope in the second part of the Chapter, v. 6, etc. be
to refute particularly what Eliphaz intended in his Narration concerning the
miseries of the wicked, Chap. 15.20 etc. Yet he directs his speech also to all
of them, in the plural number, v. 2, 4, 5. and Chap. 17.10. because they all
agreed in one opinion, and when one of them spoke, it made him resent the like
injuries done to him by all of them.

From v. 1, 2. Learn,

1. Saints must not be weary to bear out, under never so many assaults and
renewed conflicts, whether from men, or from tentations within suggesting the
same things which men, through mistake, do utter; and the Conscience of men's
integrity will bear them out under all this: For, notwithstanding this renewed
opposition, Job answered and said.

2. Men may be very much in love with their own conceptions and opinions, which
yet are very trivial and common; For, notwithstanding the estimation Eliphaz
had of his Doctrine, Chap. 15.11, 17, 18, 19. yet, says Job, I have heard many
such things. Thus many things which men cry up as new Lights, are, in effect,
but old Errors.

3. Albeit there may be much precious excellency in common and obvious Truths,
which is not to be slighted; Yet, oft-times the ordinary method of curing
afflicted souls will not prevail in extraordinary cases: For, says he, I have
heard many such things, as being common notions, and yet am not the better.
What Eliphaz had spoken ^as (as has been said) the ordinary observation
concerning the lot of wicked men; and such Doctrine was fit for them: Yet it
did not suit with his extraordinary case, Saints must submit to be led in
extraordinary paths.

4. Impertinent remedies, the oftener they are inculcated, are the more
grievous to troubled minds; For, it grieves Job that he had heard such things
so often from them, and this is a part of his trial.

5. Men ought still to eye their chief scope in their work and undertakings,
that so they may ponder how they act sutably, so as they may reach it;
Therefore he puts them in mind that they came to be comforters, Chap. 2.11.
that they might consider how they dealt not so with him as might reach that end.

6. It is no new thing for Saints in trouble, to meet with Physicians of no
value, Chap. 13.4. and with comforters, who, in stead of mitigating, do
increase their grief and sorrow: For, they were miserable comforters, or
comforters of trouble and vexation, who troubled and vexed him. This the Lord
orders to come to pass, for trial of the faith of his Children, and that he
may draw them to himself for Consolation.

7. They are but sorry comforters, who, being confounded with the sight of the
afflicteds trouble, do grat^ upon their (real or supposed) guilt, weaken the
testimony of their good Conscience that they may stir them up to repent, and
let them see no door of hope, but upon ill terms; For, by these means, in
particular, were they miserable comforters to Job.

8. It may please the Lord, for the trial of his own Children under affliction,
not only to let loose one discouragement and discourager upon them; but to shut
all doors of comfort under Heaven upon them, and make every person, or thing,
that should comfort, add to their grief: For, they were all, miserable
comforters, and elsewhere he regrets how every person, from whom he might have
expected comfort, slighted him, Chap. 19.14, etc.

9. As one trouble may waken many upon a Saint; so when any are a grief to any
of them, all will be put upon their account which that grief may waken upon
them: For, upon Eliphaz his Discourses, this vexes Job, that they all were
miserable comforters, and this he lays upon Eliphaz's score.

From v. 3. Learn,

1. Gods people may mutually charge and load one another with heavy
imputations; whereof, though one party only be guilty, yet, who they are, will
not be fully cleared (save in men's own Consciences) till God appear: For, there
is a mutual crimination, that vain words were uttered in this debate, (as is
clear from Chap. 8.2 and 15.2. compared with what Job says here) and as Job is
not simply free of this fault, though he was not so guilty as they judged; so
they were indeed guilty of it; and yet none of them take with it, till God come
to decide the controversy.

2. M^n may sadly charge that upon others, whereof themselves are most guilty;
For, they charged him to have spoken vain words, or words of wind, and yet he
asserts themselves were guilty of it, having no solid reason in their
Discourses, but only prejudice, mistakes and passion.

3. Men may teach Doctrine, true and useful in its own kind, which yet is but
vain, when ill applied; For, the Doctrine of the Ancients, rehearsed by
Eliphaz, was good in it self, but vain and wind, when applied to Job's case.
Thus Satan may abuse and pervert Scripture.

4 Vain and useless discourses are a great burden to a spiritual, and,
especially, to a weary spiritual mind, that needs better; For, Job wearies that
they have not an end.

5. When men are filled with passion, prejudice, or self-love, they will
out-weary all others with their discourses, before they weary themselves; Yea,
they may think they are doing very well, when they are a burden to them that
hear them: For, so blind was Eliphaz's passion and conceit of himself, that he
insists on that he has to say, as excellent, when Job is quite wearied with
it, as he was also with the discourses of the rest.

6. Men are not easily driven from their false Principles and Opinions, when
once they are drunk in; For, so did Job find by his Friends here, Shall vain
words have an end? says he; or how long will ye persist to multiply them.

7. As men may be bold, who have Truth and Reason upon their side; so,
oft-times, Passion will hold men on to keep up Debates, when yet they have no
solid reason to justify their way, but they will still inculcate their
passions, prejudices, and will: For, Eliphaz is imboldened (or confirmed, and
strengthened, or smart, and vehement) to answer what had been before refuted,
without producing any new reason.

8. Men's Consciences will be put to it, to see upon what grounds they go, in
debates; And it will be a sad challenge, if either they start, or continue,
them without solid and necessary causes, but only out of prejudice, interest,
or because they are engaged; Therefore Job puts the question to Eliphaz, What
emboldeneth thee that thou answerest? as a question which would be sad to
answer, if he considered it seriously in his Conscience.

9. Men ought also seriously to consider what spirit they are of, and what sets
them on work, in every thing they say or do: so much also does this question
import.

Verse. 4. I also could speak as ye do, if your soul were in my souls stead, I
could heap up words against you, and shake mine head at you.

5. But I would strengthen you with my mouth, and the moving of my lips should
assuage your grief.


In the rest of the Preface (wherein he speaks to them all in common) we have
another fault which he finds in their discourses; Namely, that they were cruel
to him who needed no such usage (as they would find, were they in his case) and
who would not deal so with them. He convinces them of the truth of the former
censure, and of their unkindness to him, by showing that if they were in his
case, and if he dealt with them as they dealt with him, by multiplying
uncharitable words and scornful gestures; they would soon know how grievous
their carriage was, and how miserable comforters they were to him, v. 4.
whereas he, being more tender and knowing his duty, would labor to encourage
them, v. 5. We may read, v. 4. by way of Intterrogation, Would I speak as ye
do, -- Would I heap up words against you, etc? and so it imports a denial that
he would deal so with them, but would rather endeavor to strengthen them, and
assuage their grief, as he expresses his purpose, v. 5. But as we read it, in
v. 4. he declares what he would do, and what were very easy to be done, if he
took as light a burden of such a condition as they did. But, in v. 5. he
declares what indeed he would do in such a case. By all which, he insinuates,

1. That they were cruel, in doing that to him, which themselves would find
bitter, were they in his case.

2. That they were also cruel, in taking so light a burden of his trouble, and
applying no remedy, but what evidenced how little they regarded him or his
trouble.

3. That they were cruel and unkind, in dealing so with him, who would be more
tender of them.

From v. 4. Learn,

1. Soul-trouble is the saddest of trouble, far above all outward pressures;
Therefore Job instanceth the greatness of his trouble, by reflecting upon the
condition of his soul. If your soul were in my souls stead. Where, albeit the
soul may be taken for the whole person; Yet that very denomination of the
person imports that the soul is the chief part, and consequently, that Job here
was most affected with what lay upon his soul.

2. Men, out of their self-love, may think lightly of the sad condition of
others; and accordingly, may do that to them which would be very bitter to
themselves, were they Scholars at their own School: Therefore does Job put them
to think on this, how ill they would relish it, if their soul were in his
souls stead, and if he spoke as they did. It is not easy exactly to follow
that Golden Rule prescribed by Christ, Matthew. 7.12.

3. Men should so look upon, and deal with, others in their sad condition, as
reckoning that, though they yet are not, yet they may be, in their case; and
that their undutifulness toward others, in their distresses, does justly
provoke God to make them meet with such lots themselves: Therefore, also, makes
he such a supposition to them, If your soul were in my souls stead See Heb 13 3.

4. It is a great sin to take a light burden of the afflictions of others, and
not to be serious in seeking out remedies for them, as we have a calling and
opportunity; For, I also could speak as ye do, intimates that they took but an
easy lift of his burden, and did not bestir themselves to find out and apply
proper and effectual remedies; and that this was their great fault.

5. It is a great fault to multiply expressions to distressed godly persons,
without considering to what purpose they serve; and, especially, it is a fault
to discourage them by discourses, as being a furtherance of Satan's design: For,
such was their fault, implied in this check, they heaped up words, and that
against him, to crush him.

6. It adds to men's cruelty and sin, when, with their unprofitable and hurtful
expressions, they testify their scorn and disdain of a person and his
afflictions; which will render their discourses ineffectual, be what they will:
For, it is implied here, that they did also shake their heads at him, in
testimony of their scorn, contempt, and disdain. See Psalm. 22.7. and 44.14.
Isai. 37.22. Lam. 2.15. Matthew. 27.39.

7. Afflicted minds are so tender, that even sleighting gestures will add to
their sorrow; For, so was it with Job here, their shaking of the head is
resented as an unkindness. Which should warn all to look how they carry
themselves toward such.

From v. 5. Learn,

1. Whereas the wicked want only power and opportunity to do ill; a godly man
is so tender, that he will be loath to do ill when he may; For, what Job could
do, v. 4. here he declares he would not do, but the contrary, if he he had
opportunity.

2. None can rightly deal with a broken spirit, but they who have some
experience of it themselves; For, whereas they had marred his cure, through
their want of skill, he would take another course, if they were his Patients,
as having more experience of the disease.

3. Truly godly men, who are humbled under the Cross, will not be revengeful,
when they have advantage over those who have notably injured them; For,
notwithstanding all their cruelty, yet, were they in his case, and he in
theirs, he would not serve them as they do him.

4. Such as have experienced trouble of mind, will be compassionate and tender,
even of an Enemy under it; For so would he be to them who had wronged him, if
their soul were in his souls stead.

5. Broken spirits are never rightly dealt with, but when, with all other
remedies, encouragement is pressed upon them; For, I would strengthen you,
says he, as a proper cure for such a disease.

6. When the saddest of conditions are rightly studied, there will somewhat be
found to mitigate the excess of that grief which Saints, ordinarily, have under
them; For, says he, I would find out means to assuage your grief. In the
Original it is only, spare, or, restrain, And so some understand it thus, I
would, in speaking, or, moving of my lips, spare to rake into your infirmities,
o^, would spare and restrain the moving of my lips in impertinent discourses,
as ye do not. But the sentence is well filled up, and supplied here, from v. 6.
where the same word is, and grief added to it.

7. As right trouble of mind is not only the result of outward afflictions, but
comes in by the ear from the Word speaking to the Conscience; So sound and
seasonable Doctrine is a mean to cure it; For, his mouth, and the moving of his
lips, would strengthen them, and assuage their grief, namely, as affording fit
matter of encouragement and ease, and as a mean in Gods hand.

8. It is great cruelty and ingratitude not to be tender to those in
affliction, who either are, or would be, tender to us in our trouble; For, by
this does Job check them, telling that it was their fault to deal thus with
him, who would be more tender of them.

Verse. 6. Though I speak, my grief is not assuaged: and though I forbear, what
am I eased?
Follows, to v. 21. the Second Part of the Chapter wherein he again debates
the main Controversy, concerning his integrity, and refutes Eliphaz's
discourse, who asserted those afflictions that befell him to be proper to the
wicked. He, on the contrary, maintains that, though he was no less sadly
afflicted then Eliphaz said the wicked were; yet, he was not wicked. This part
of the Chapter consists of three branches.

1. That he was afflicted, which he makes evident by an enumeration of
troubles, v. 6. -- 16.

2. That he was righteous for all that, v. 17.

3. His Arguments proving his integrity, v. 18, 16, 20.

In the first branch of this debate, we have a large enumeration of Job's
troubles and miseries, which he insists so much upon, Partly, That he may ^ase
himself, by complaining so much of them; and partly, that he may aggreage his
own miseries, as nothing inferior to what Eliphaz said befell the wicked. And
therefore he does several times reflect (here, and in what he speaks after) on
his discourse concerning wicked men, to show that there was no considerable
difference betwixt him and the wicked, as to that, though he could prove a
difference otherwise. His complaint may be taken up in six evidences of his
afflicted condition; Whereof the first (in this verse) and a Preface to the
rest, is, That his trouble was so stubborn, as it did not yield to any remedy.
Neither did speaking of it assuage his grief; nor did silence ease him, nor any
of his trouble go from him thereby, as it is in the Original, What goes from
me? This was true, partly, in respect of his Friends; For if he spoke, they
would not admit what he said, but did accuse him thereupon, without offering
any comfort to allay his griefs: Nor was he the better of silence before them;
for they would be ready to look upon his silence as a proof of guilt, and his
being silent to hear them, did but vex him. But chiefly, it holds true in
respect of God, who afforded him no ease, either by complaining, or by his
sitting silent, as he had done, as well as they, Chap. 2.13. and, belike, had
essayed that same course afterward. Job's scope in premitting this, is, Partly,
to obviate the exceptions of his Friends against his speaking, which he
grants (as they alleged) did not ease him; yet seeing he was nothing
bettered by his silence, more then by his discoursing, he would speak on. And
partly, by way of Preface to the ensuing Discourse, to show that, however he
might doubt whether to speak or be silent; yet, finding silence as unprofitable
as speaking, he would speak on, and see if it might any way ease him.

From this verse Learn,

1. Speaking and silence are two remedies to ease troubled minds; as Job here
supposes. And however he might fail in managing of them, yet there is an
useful way of both in such a condition. Men should speak, and lay open their
case, in opposition to senseless stupidity; and they should forbear, and be
silent, in opposition to murmuring. Or, having spoken their case to God, they
should submit and silently wait for his issue.

2. Troubled minds are bent and earnest to get ease, and to follow all means
that may procure it; as here Job was. And this should make exercised Saints
wary and cautious, that they follow not wrong means, to promove that which they
so much desire.

3. Troubled souls ought to omit no means that are lawful, to attain quiet and
tranquillity; As here Job essayed both speech and silence.

4. God may see it fit to blast all means, and shut all doors of ease and
comfort upon his own, so that they will find it neither in the use of one mean
or other; For, so was it with Job here, Though I speak, my grief is not
assuaged; and though I forbear, What am I eased? or what of my trouble goes
from me? Hereby,

1. The Lord does humble and further try his own Children, when they are in the
furnace.

2. He discovers that the means are not to be rested on (though they must not
be neglected) and that it is not the means, but himself by them, that does, at
any time comfort, or bring ease. For if he suspend his influence and blessing,
they prove empty.

3. He teaches Saints to submit to the want of ease, when he is pleased to
make that their exercise. Otherwise, the more impatient they are to get ease in
the use of means, they may readily afford them the less; As Job's experience
does teach, who thirsted after ease, but found none.

Doct. 5. It is a sad exercise and trial, when God sends disquiet upon his
people, that they may be stirred up to the use of the means; and they come to
the means with real need, and yet their refreshment is suspended: Therefore Job
speaks of this first, as being among the saddest of his sorrows, that no use of
means afforded him case. And, indeed, this cannot but perplex them who, being
in real distress, and having essayed all means to no purpose, cannot easily
tell what course to take next.

6. Saints, through Gods upholding power may be borne through such a sad
perplexing case, as to be sore afflicted, and yet denied any case, in the use
of all lawful means; How desperate or deadly soever such a condition be, yet it
will not destroy a Child of God; As Job's experience does teach, whose lot this
was, and yet he was upheld till he saw the end of the Lord.

7. Whatever disappointments Saints find in the use of the means; Yet, they may
not, nor (when they are in a right frame) will they quit them, but will still
follow whatever is lawful; and seems to promise any relief: For,
notwithstanding all this disappointment, Job sucks still at the breast of
pouring out his complaint; which was a lawful and necessary mean, if it had
been managed. See Psalm. 102. in the Title.

Verse. 7. But now he has made me weary: thou have made desolate all my
company.
A Second Evidence of his afflicted condition (and a cause why he choosed to
speak, rather then to be silent) is, That God had wearied him, and made his
life a burden to him (whereof all the rest of his miseries, that are hereafter
enumerated, are causes) Particularly, by making desolate all his company,
cutting off his Children and Family, and making those who were left of them,
and the rest of his Friends, rather a burden then a comfort to him, and as bad,
if not worse, then if they were not. In this Job reflects upon what Eliphaz had
said of Bribers and Hypocrites, Chap. 15.34. and grants it was true such things
had befaln him, and yet he was no Hypocrite.

Hence Learn,

1. Saints may be so put to it, that they cannot be silent, would they never so
gladly be at it; For, this is a cause why he must speak, and prefers that to
silence, But now he has made me weary, and therefore I must regret that it is
so. In such a case, though Saints miscarriages in their expressions, cannot be
justified, yet they are to be pitied, as 2 Kings 4.27.

2. Even Saints have so much of flesh and weakness in them, as to make them
weary and be laid by, under sad pressures and exercises; For, so was Job made
weary. Hereby the Lord tameth proud and undaunted flesh in his Children, and
makes them humble. Hereby also he prepares them to receive and observe proofs
of his supporting power.

3. Saints must not look to get through troubles, till first they be humbled
and laid by with them; For, so did Job find in experience.

4. As the company of a Family and Friends is a great case in trouble, so the
want thereof is a great affliction; For, this made him weary, that all his
company was made desolate, either cut off, or useless, or a burden and opposite
to him. See Chap. 19.13, 14, etc. Psalm. 55.12, 13, 14. Joh. 16.32.

5. When God has Saints to try, Friends are not to be trusted unto; He can
withdraw all fellowship and means of comfort, either by removing, or blasting
of them: As Job here found.

6. A little thing will add to their trouble, who are already crushed with
inward exercise; For, Job being already weary with his pressures within, this
his sad condition makes the desolation of his company bitter, and to weary him
yet more. It is great cruelty to be accessory to their further trouble, whom a
little thing will hurt.

7. When Saints are wearied, and being so, get a load above a burden, yet God
can bear them up, and carry them through, till he send deliverance; For, so did
it prove with Job.

8. It is the duty of Saints to see God in every trouble, without whom trouble
would not come, and who, being seen in trouble, can assure them of a blessing
and good account of it; For, He has made me weary, says Job of God.

9. It is not enough that we see God in trouble (as Job does here, and not the
Instruments of his trouble only) unless this cause us betake our selves to him:
For, Job having in the beginning of the verse spoken thus of God, in the end of
the verse he turns his speech to God, Thou have made desolate, etc. To show
that the only best use of seeing God in trouble, is, to tell himself of it, and
not complain of him.

Verse. 8. And thou have filled me with wrinckles, which is a witness against
me: and my leanness rising up in me, bears witness to my face.
The Third Evidence of his afflicted condition (wherein he also observes Gods
hand) is, his lean and wasted body, so that he was filled with wrinckles, and
his bones did stick out and appear because of his leanness. These were not only
witnesses how spent he was with trouble, and that his grief, which caused them,
was real and not feigned, but witnesses against him, as is supplied in the
Translation from the end of the verse, where it is said that they witness to
his face; or seem to depone against him, that God was angry at him for
wickedness, as sense was ready to suggest, and his Friends said. By all this he
would also intimate that, if ever he had been fat, as Eliphaz said of the
hypocrite, Chap. 15.27. his fatness was now gone by the consuming hand of God.

Doct. 1. Afflictions and especially trouble of mind, will soon waste a man's
body, and make it look like old age and the grave; so that his very countenance
will bewray his inward pressures; For, so Job had wrinckles, and his leanness
rising up in him, or, his leanness causing his bones rise up and stick out. A
sound mind, and inward tranquillity, is good medicine, Prove. 14.30.

2. Even trouble of body, occasioned by other pressures, will plead for pity
before God, when Saints come to him with it; Therefore Job makes it a part of
his complaint to God, and holds up the stroke which he had inflicted, to
himself to consider, Thou have filled me with wrinckles. It is good to come to
God, and own him in every trouble, and make an errand of it to him, be what it
will. And when distresses have real sad effects upon us; and are not talked of
only, but God may see our distress in our face and body, as well as hear of it;
such a condition will plead for pity with him. Though yet we ought to avoid all
crushing and wasting of our strength, by voluntary discouragement; For,
(whatever pity God extend to one in such a case; yet) so to do is their sin.

3. Troubles added to troubles will much heighten the bitterness thereof;
Therefore this is joined to the former, v. 7. by the copulative, and, to show
how both together overcharged him. And yet when it is thus, it must be borne,
and may be got through.

4. Afflictions are not only sad in themselves, but much more in what they seem
to say, or really speak from God; For, his wrinckles and leanness were sad, as
they were witnesses to his face, and had tentations fastened upon them. And
therefore, as we are to beware of dumb and stupifying rods; so we ought also to
guard that we read not that from them which they say not.

5. Saints may have sad tentations under trouble, which yet faith ought not to
yield unto; For, Job's sense said, these were witnesses to his face, of guilt
and displeasure; and yet he would never take with it, though here he lay it out
before God as his tentation. Faith must take heed that it subscribe not to all
that sense says in trouble; nor must faith quit its grip, because tentation
and sense contradicts it.

6. Men may, oft-times, feed the tentations of Saints by their calumnies and
suggestions; For, what Job's Friends asserted, here his own sense suggested.
And after he has regreted how desolate and grievous his company was to him, v.
7. he subjoyns this, of witnesses to his face, to show how sad it was, that
they should assert that of him, which sense said his afflictions did witness.
Thus men by their uncharitable expressions of exercised Saints, may be more
cruel, and wound them deeper, then they are aware. Yet God, by these would
drive his Children from hearkening to their tentations; As it was with Job,
who, whatever tentations; did assault him, yet would never hearken to them,
when his Friends charged them upon him.

Verse. 9. He teareth me in his wrath, who hates me: he gnasheth upon me with
his teeth; mine enemy sharpeneth his eyes upon me.

10. They have gaped upon me with their mouth, they have smitteen me upon the
cheek repreachfully, they have gathered themselves together against me.


The Fourth Evidence of his afflicted condition, is, his hard usage from them
who hated him, and were his Enemies. This some do understand of God, as spoken
of in the singular number, v. 9. who let loose wicked Instruments to vex him,
who are spoken of in the plural number, v. 10. But what God did to him, in an
hostile manner, comes in afterward, v. 12, 13, 14. Others do understand what is
said, v. 9. of Satan, and what is said, v. 10. of other Instruments of his
affliction, who were acted by him, through Gods permission. But it is not clear
that Job knew so distinctly what hand Satan had in his troubles, as it is
related, Chap. 1. and 2. Therefore if we consider what is insinuated of his
Friends carriage toward him, v. 4. It is more clear to understand it first of
Eliphaz who spoke last, and therefore is named by himself, v. 9. and then of
his other Friends, v. 10. whose carriage toward him was brought to his
remembrance by what Eliphaz spoke. Of them he says in common (for it is not
needful to apply one part of it to Eliphaz, and another to the rest) that they
were very cruel to him. They not only dealt so sharply and fiercely with him,
as if his greatest Enemy had torn him in pieces; but, not being satisfied with
all that, they gnashed upon him with their teeth, in testimony of their
indignation, and desire of further revenge; (See Psalm. 35.16. and 37.12.) They
sharpened their eyes upon him, to testify their anger and ill will; They gaped
upon him with their mouth, as if they would devour him: They smote him
reproachfully upon the cheek, or buffetted them with their tongues, and used
him basely, not regarding his dignity; And, they gathered themselves against
him, or combined themselves together, to seek his ruin. It seems Job, in the
most of these expressions, of gnashing with their teeth, sharpening their eyes,
and gaping with their mouth, does reflect upon their gestures when they spoke,
or heard him speak. And albeit his expressions of their cruelty fly high; yet
they hold out nothing but what his afflicted and broken condition made him find
in their expressions and behavior; For they were his Friends, from whom he
expected better things, and therefore his disappointment made what they did
more grievous to him.

Doct. 1. Even Friends, by their imprudent carriage, may do many things which
favor much of hatefulness and enmity to the afflicted; For, Job insinuates
that they had wrath and hated him. The nature of their work spoke thus, however
they intended it not, which may warn men not to lean to good intentions.

2. Unfit remedies applied to the afflicted, and, especially, endeavors to
draw Saints from confidence in God under trouble, are no less cruel then if men
should offer to tear their Friends in pieces, in their anger; For, so does Job
look upon their carriage, He teareth me in his wrath, who hates me.

3. To persist in cruelty to the afflicted, adds to the sin of it; Therefore he
marks that, after tearing, there was gnashing upon him with the teeth. To be
uncessantly vexed with men's cruel usage is a very sad lot; Yet it must be
borne, and they whose lot it is, should look upon it as needful, that they may
be tried to the utmost.

4. A tender and broken spirit will remark, and be affected with the least
untender gesture; For, Job marks all here, as his affliction, that they gnashed
upon him, sharpened the eye, and gaped upon him.

5. Saints must not expect that even their dignity will exempt them from base
and uncivil usage, when God has them to try; For, they dealt with Job as if
they had smitten him upon the cheek reproachfully. This is a trial which should
make the afflicted an errand to God, as it is made a part of the Churches
Lamentation, Lam 5.12.

6. Combinations and Consultations, how to vex and discourage the afflicted,
adds to their trial; and it gives them matter of complaint to God, when many
agree to run such a course: For, he regrets that they have gathered themselves
together against him. It may be his three Friends did, sometime, withdraw, and
consult together what answer to return to him; which did so vex him, that he
complains of it here. Or, at least, they run one course in their usage of him,
as if they had consulted and agreed upon it.

Verse. 11. God has delivered me to the ungodly, and turned me over into the
hands of the wicked.
The Fifth Evidence of his afflicted condition (to v. 15.) is, that God, being
a party in this trial, had sadly exercised and afflicted him: Though this be
common to all his afflictions, and all the evidences thereof, that they came
from God; and accordingly, he has observed Gods hand in the matter of his
Friends and company, v. 7. and in the matter of his wasted body, v 8 yet here I
look upon it as a distinct Evidence of his sad condition; not only because it
is indeed sad to have God a party, whether in strokes inflicted by instruments,
or, especially, by his own hand: But because Job, having resented the cruelty
of his Friends, v. 9, 10. as a speaking evidence of his sad condition, does
here set before them what God had done to him, to aggreage their cruelty, as
Chap 19.5, 6 etc.

The greatness of his tro^ble from God is aggravated from a fourfold
Consideration; The first whereof (in this verse) is taken from the Instruments
employed in some of those affl^ctions wherewith God had visited him, that God
had delivered him into the hands of the ungodly and wicked to affl^ct him.
Where, by the wicked and ungodly, we are not to understand his three Friends
(against whom he would not pass so hard a censure) but the Sabeans and Caldeans
who spoiled him, Chap. 1. and so it is not needful to strain the word rendered,
the ungodly, as signifying, an Infant, or young Child, Ch 19.18. and 21.11.
intimating that his Friends might in so far be called wicked, as they had
childish opinions of God and his way. This signification of the word does
rather import, that the wicked are really babes, notwithstanding all the wit
they think they have.

Doct. 1, Saints must resolve to have their wounds kept still bleeding, and
their old sorrows wakened by new trials, till their trial come to an end; For,
when Job speaks of his Friends present cruelty, v. 9, 10. it leads him back to
remember all his former sufferings, when this storm first brake upon him. This
will render their account sad, who minister occasion to them to make those sad
reflections, by their present cruelty. See Chap. 19.22.

2. God is Sovereign and Supreme Lord, who disposes of his own people as he
pleases, and who orders the wicked and their actions by his holy Providence;
For, so does Job here acknowledge, that both himself, and his wicked Enemies,
were in Gods hand.

3. God may permit wicked men to afflict the godly, for their correction and
trial, and to clear that outward events are no infallible witnesses of his love
or hatred; For, God delivered Job to the ungodly, etc. See Hab. 1.13.

4. Not only may godly men, when they provoke God, fall before the wicked; but
even when God is well-pleased with them, and purposes only to try them; For,
so was it with Job here.

5. Gods permitting of the wicked to prevail over the godly, is matter of sad
lamentation; as here Job complains of it. It is sad, not only that God and men,
friends and foes, and heaven and earth, seem to be against them at once; as it
was with Job: But especially, that God takes not his people into his own hand,
to chasten them (as 2 Samuel 24 14.) but imploys vile Instruments to correct
them, Ezekiel. 7.24. that the wicked abuse this advantage, Hab. 1.13 -- 16. and
others are tempted thereby to fall out of liking with Piety, Mal. 3.14, 15.

6. How sad soever it be to see God in our afflictions; yet it is useful so to
do; That we may see him to be holy in all our trials, and so our time be not
spent in murmuring; That we may see there is hope of an issue when he pleases,
were Instruments never so averse; Isai. 49.24, 25 And, That we may see that to
be near God ^s the best of it in a trial: Therefore does Job take this look of
his trouble.

Verse. 12. I was at ease, but he has broken me asunder: he has also taken me
by my neck, and shaken me to pieces, and set me up for his mark.

13. His archers compass me round about, he cleaves my reins asunder, and does
not spare; he pours out my gall upon the ground.


The Second aggravation of his trouble from God, v. 12. -- is, That thereby God
had ever-turned his former sweet estate. He had been at ease (not in respect of
security, Chap. 3.16. but) in respect of a flourishing condition; But, as a
strong man taking a Child by the neck and shaking him, would quite disjoynt
him, or, as a Wrestler takes his Party by the neck and shakes him, or
Sergeants, when they arrest men, take them by the neck and hurry them away; so,
God, by those troubles, had quite shattered all his outward prosperity and
inward quiet, and his strength also both of body and mind. The doubling of the
expressions imports how comprehensive this shake was, reaching to all his
enjoyments. And in the words rendered breaking, and shaking, the radical
letters are geminated and doubled in the Original, to show that it was a rough
shake, and such a shattering, as there was no hope his former tranquillity
could be pieced together again.

Whence Learn,

1. Men, often times, get the clearest sight of their mercies and good condition,
when they are gone; For, now he can say, I was at ease, whereas, ordinarily, we
see and prize it little, when we are so indeed.

2. Men ought to lay their account, and make ready for changes in their outward
prosperous condition, which can soon and easily be doshed and over-turned; as
Job here found.

3 Former prosperity will readily imbitter adversity, when it comes, unless we
be upon our guard; For, so Job resents the change here, I was at ease, but he
has broken me asunder, etc. See Chap. 29. with Chap. 30.1, etc. Lam 4.2, 5. We
had need to be very sober, both in our present use, and future expectations of
prosperity.

4. God may afflict them very severely, both for the measure and number of
their trials, whom yet he loves very dearly; For, even in trying a beloved Job,
he breaks him asunder, and takes him by the neck and shakes him to pieces We
ought to acknowledge it as a mercy, when we meet with less then this; and ought
to beware of limiting God to that measure of trial which we like.

5 Grief is a great Orator, and chooses great wo^ds to express great misery;
as Job here doubleth every word, and joins diverse words, to express his sense
of his broken condition. And if sense of trouble prompt men thus, how would a
lively frame help us to speak out ca^e to God to better purpose then ordinarily
we do.

The Third Aggravation of his trouble from God, v. -- 12, 13, is, That being
thus broken, God had made him yet a Butt of his further indignation (alluding
to what Eliphaz said the wicked did to God, Chapter 15.26.) v. 12. and had made
afflictions and tentations on all hands (from within and from without, from
friends and foes, and from himself immediately) pierce him in so deadly a
manner, and so imbitter him, as if his reins had been cleft by the Stone, and
his very ga^l wounded and poured out.

Whence Learn,

1. Afflicted and broken men must not think to set up their rest, as if they
would meet with no more; but must still lo^k out for more: For, the broken man
is also set up for a mark.

2. It is very terrible to be the object of Gods anger; The sense that godly
men have of it may witness how sad it will prove to the wicked; For, Job
regrets this that he should be his (or, Gods) mark

3. Afflictions do not hit men, and particularly Saints, by chance, but come by
direction, according to the purpose of God; For, so is here imported, that they
come as ^^rows, from Archers, to a mark. See 1 These 3 3. 2 Samuel 16.10. And of
the metaphor of Archers and Arrows, see Chap. 6.4.

4. When God has Saints to try, they cannot turn them ^ut they will find a
trial; For Gods Archers (or, the Instruments of Job's troubles, and the
tentations wherewith they assaulted him) compassed him round about.

5. When God afflicts his dearest Children, he will not have them stupid, but
will make them sensible of the smart of the Cross; For, Job found it like the
cleaving of his reins, and pouring out of his gall.

6. It contributes to the imbittering of trouble, that whatever there be really
in it, yet Saints, oft-times, can see no moderation, nor blenk of favor under
it; For, so does Job resent, He cleaves my reins asunder, and does not spare.

7. As God may have an especial favor to them from whom it is hid; (as here it
was from Job:) So he may assault them with very deadly difficulties, whom yet
he will carry through; As he did with Job, notwithstanding he thought his reins
and gall were pierced.

Verse. 14. He breaks me with breach upon breach; he runs upon me like a
giant.
The fourth Aggravation of his trouble from God, and an amplification of the
former, is, That God did all this to him, not at once, but renewed his strokes
again and again, like battering Engines against a Wall. And he not only thus
renewed his strokes, but was irresistible in them; as these Engines do make
breaches in a wall, and as a Giant wound run down a weak man.

Hence Learn,

1. Saints ought to six no periods to their exercises, but should submit till
their trial be ended; For, Job had frequently renewed assaults.

2. Change and variety of trials adds to the weight thereof; As it was sad to
have breach upon breach, or breach after breach.

3. Gods afflicting of his people may so crush them, and make such an
impression, as they will be left open to all tentations, to s^iz upon them;
For, it makes to them like a wall wherein there are many breaches, so that any
Enemy that pleases may enter in.

4. As Man cannot endure the assaults of Gods Power, so Gods end in exercising
of his Power in afflictions, is, to make man know frailty: For, then Job se^th
him like a Giant, running upon a weak man.

5. God can uphold crushed and weak Saints, even to admiration, under the
strokes of his irresistible hand; as here Job was.

Verse. 15. I have sowed sackcloth upon my skin, and defiled my horn in the dust.

16. My face is foul with weeping, and on mine eyelids is the shadow of death;


The Sixth Evidence of his afflicted condition, is taken from his carriage and
behavior to which it drove him. And it is not only a proof of his affliction
and misery, but of his being humbled thereby; and so it is also a transition,
from the preceding purpose, to the asserting of his Integrity, in the following
verse. His carriage under affliction was,

1. His putting on of, sackcloth (an usual practice of those times) and that
nearest to his skin, whereby it came to pass that the Sackcloth was sowed upon
his skin, or, stuck to it, by reason of his ulcerous sores.

2. His defiling of his horn in the dust, that is, his abasing all his dignity
and power (whereof an horn is the emblem, Psalm. 75.4, 10.) before God; whereof
this was a visible sign, that he covered his head (which of late had been
exalted) with dust and ashes, and sat down upon the dust and ground. See Chap.
1.20. and 2.13.

3. His weeping, and that so long and so sore, that his face was all soul and
clayed (where the Original word is doubled, to intimate how very foul he was)
and his eyes were sunk in his head (as if he were dead, or presently going to
expire) with tears and weeping.

Doct. 1. The best way to refute aspersions, is by contrary practices; As here,
that calumny of being stout-hearted against God (wherewith Eliphaz, at least
indirectly, charge him, Chap. 15.25.) is refuted by his submissive carriage.
It is good when men's practices do refute calumnies; And when calumniators are
let loose, the Lord thereby calls men to see their walk. And whatever the evils
be that are unjustly charged upon men, the Lord thereby points at the contrary
graces or practices, either as having been formerly neglected, or as singularly
excellent, to be studied yet more.

2. It is to little purpose how much men have to say of their afflictions
before God, unless they have also somewhat to say of their own good carriage
and exercise under them; at least, of their endeavors after these things: For;
Job counts it not enough, that he had all the former evidences of his afflicted
condition, unless he have this also, and unless his being afflicted be seeen in
his stooping and going to God with it, as well as in his strokes. Without this,
men's sense of their many crosses is but a dittay against themselves; nor can
their complaining thereof plead any thing before God, unless it be to inflict
yet more upon them, till they be set on work to their duty.

3. Of all carriage under affliction, humiliation and submission (^lowing from
faith) is the chief, and a root of all other good behavior; This was signified
by putting on of sackcloth, and lying in the dust. Here it is to be considered,

1. That afflictions are sent to abase men, and to put them out of conceit with
themselves; because, ordinarily, they esteem too highly of themselves in
prosperity. See Psalm. 9.20. Ezekiel 28.9.

2. That affliction is the great Touchstone of our hearts, and we do then
prove really, either the prevalency of corruption, by proud swelling against
God, or of our grace, by stooping to him. See Jer. 5.3. with 31.18.

3. That, till we be abased and lie low before God, we proclaim that affliction
has not done its errand, but that we need yet more of it.

4. That there can no use be had of affliction; till it first humble us.

5. That the humble man lies so low under the lash of trouble, that the storm
blows over him, and he gets an out-gate by patient bearing of his cross. This
may make us lament that we are so much humbled, and yet become so little
humble; that we are broken with trouble, but not bowed; and brayed, but not
melted and purified. This does evidence that we know neither our selves, nor
God, as we ought: and it makes difficulties to slay us, which, otherwise, would
prove medicinal. And if we were more acquainted with humility in our
prosperity, it would be more easy in our adversity; whereas, otherwise, it is
long ere trouble bring us down.

Doct. 4. Such as abase themselves before God, ought, in particular, to lay
down all their excellencies before him, whether Grandeur and Authority, or
spiritual Privileges; Thus he defiled his horn in the dust, and Israel were
bid put off their ornaments, Exodus 33.5. Here Consider,

1. These very outward signs, of putting on of sackcloath and lying in the
dust, whereby he witnessed his abasement notwithstanding his dignity, does show
that (although these Ceremonial practices be ceased, yet) men that are humble
under trouble, should look like it in their deportment. Thus Israel put off
their ornaments when they sinned. Which speak, sadly against excess in Apparel,
and adorning of men's bodies, in sad times; as looking rather like Jezebel, 2
King. 9.30. then Saints.

2. However God be pleased to exalt us above others, either in grace or other
dignities; Yet, we are in our selves nothing before him, and ought to esteem so
of our selves, especially when he humbles us by afflictions.

3. Though we may keep fast our spiritual Privileges, to assure us of Gods
favor; Yet, we must never make use of them to fight against him, or to quarrel
his Providence and disposing of us at his pleasure; but we ought to lay them
all at his feet, and put our hand upon our mouth. Otherwise, if our hearts do
rise against God, because he afflicts us who have been made partakers of his
grace, we may fall into that tentation, Psalm, 73. and do deprive our selves of
the comfortable sight of what God has wrought in us.

4. When God strips us of our outward dignity, we must not be imbittered, by
reflecting upon what we were, and how we are now dealt with; but must stoop to
be lifted up and cast down at his pleasure; as Mordecai, being honored by the
King, is content to return to the Kings gate again, Esth. 6.11, 12. For men
have the surest grip of those things, when they are cast at Gods feet.

Doct. 5. When men are truly abased, they will be very tender before God; For,
Job, in this condition, was put to weeping. Grief will draw tears from the
stoutest, and especially from tender Saints, who are lying in the dust, as Job
was: unless sometime their trouble be so great, that it goes above tears and
other expressions of it. And as the Lord approves of no external shows and
expressions of sorrow, unless a man be a mourner indeed; So, he approves not of
tears which go before humility, which may be wr^ng out by pride, bitterness and
discont^nt; but would have a man first humbling himself in the dust, and then
weeping, as Job did. This condemns them who, however they mourn (or, roar, as
the word is) one toward another* Yet do not mourn and weep to God, Ezekiel. 24.23.
And them, also, who evidence how little they are afflicted and humbled under
the cross, by their neglect of Prayer, and want of tenderness and sorrow. This
was not the way of Job here, nor of the godly in sad times, Jer, 9.1. Psalm.
44.24, 25.

6. The Lord may suffer his humbled people even sink to death (to their own
sense) in sorrow, before they seem to be respected; For, his face is soul with
weeping, and on his eyelids is the shadow of death, and yet he is not only not
delivered, but gets not so much as any evidence of pity and sympathy, either
from God or his Friends. Saints are, sometime, under a tentation, and mistake
in this: and may have much sorrow, when yet they need no real deliverance, but
only open eyes to discern their good condition. But even when their afflictions
and causes of sorrow are real, the Lord may thus exercise them, as he did Job.

1. That all may be warned to lay their account how deep their trials may draw;
and that, when they are almost consumed with sorrow, yet, the trial may go on.

2. That he may try what estimation men will have of duty, and of grace to go
about it in trouble, though they get no outward deliverance. For it is indeed a
mercy to get grace to cleave to God, and lament after him, whatever he do to us.

3. That he may try men's sincerity, by their perseverance and continuance in
duty, though they seem not to be respected or noticed, As it was with Heman,
Psalm. 88.1, 13, 14.

4. That men may be quickened to increase in diligence, and to be more
seriously and solidly rooted in what they have attained.

5. That God may give proof under how much distress and pressure, and under how
many disadvantages, he can uphold his people.

6. That he may give proof how he can recover that which seems to be
irrecoverably lost; as he did with Job. This may discover that it is no wonder
others be slighted in their troubles, who come not near this length in sorrow;
when even the most tender Saints seem not to be noticed. And it warns those
who are overcharged with sorrow, and left (to their sense) to sink there,
that, as they should moderate their sorrows, as not mourning without hope, and
not suffer them to cause them forget all Covenant-encouragements; so, they
should not mistake such a condition, nor reckon that they have not an out-gate,
so long as they get grace to mourn before God, and are not left to themselves,
to undervalue and cast off the exercises of Piety (as it is, Mal 3.13, 14.) for
that is a real deliverance.

Verse. 17. Not for any injustice in mine hands; also my prayer is pure.
In this verse we have the Second Branch of this part of the Chapter. Wherein
Job asserts that, notwithstanding all those afflictions, he was not wicked, but
a righteous man; being just in his conversation and practices toward men, and
pure in his Religion and Addresses to God. Though Job did manage this debate
and assertion about his integrity with too much heat and reflection, for which
he is afterward censured by Elihu and God; Yet this Assertion is true, as to
the substance of it, and does teach,

1. A man may be sadly afflicted, who yet is a righteous man; so that
afflictions do not prove a man wicked, or that God is angry at his person,
unless there be other Evidences; For, so much does Job maintain here. His
Friends inferred upon his being afflicted, that he was wicked; but he grants
that he was afflicted, yet denies their conclusion, and asserts the contrary,
that those things befell him not for any injustice in his hands, etc. Thus
tentations from Satan, about the good estate of Saints, may be fastened upon
true and real things which they cannot deny, and yet Satan draws wrong
conclusions from them. This Truth is the main point debated in this Book; and
it ought not be wrested by every one who is in affliction, as if he might rest
upon a conceit of his integrity, notwithstanding his afflictions, unless he can
make it out upon solid grounds. Only it teaches,

1. That men ought to stoop to Gods absolute Dominion, who may, when he
pleases, afflict and exercise most holy and righteous men.

2. That we should study the worth of inward Peace and a good Conscience, which
will support, and afford a testimony, under greatest difficulties; as may be
seen in Job's experience.

3. That we may learn that Gods love is not tied to these things, with the want
whereof Job was exercised; For, all those trials may come upon men, and yet
they may be beloved.

Doct. 2. Not only may righteous men be afflicted; but they may attain to be
assured of their own integrity in the midst of their afflictions: For, so Job
here is assured that he is afflicted not for any injustice in his hands, etc.

Here we are to consider,

1. Trouble will try and search men, what they are; As here Job, in his
affliction, is put to it, to see whether he was righteous or not. Trouble will
be a furnace to discover whether we have built upon the foundation or not, and
what we have built upon this foundation, in our ordinary walking.

2. Men ought not to quit a good Cause, the Truth of God, or the testimony of a
good Conscience, for any trouble; as Job cleaves to his integrity here.
Troubles are sent to humble us, but not to drive us from any of our Rights and
Privileges.

3. Saints may attain to see the favor of God, and their interest in him,
through the thickest of clouds; as here Job does. See also Chap. 10.13. and
23.8, 9, 10, 11. Romans 8.35, 36, 37, etc.

Doct. 3. Such as would be approved of God as righteous, must testify their
integrity by their respect to both Tables of the Law; For, so does Job here,
who was free of injustice in matters of the Second Table, and looked well to
his Prayers, in obedience to the First Table. Where, Prayer includes all other
religious performances and duties to God (being that which draws forth
furniture for them, and makes us lively in them); as injustice includes all
Transgressions of the Second Table. Where those two are conjoined (as the
fruits of faith in Christ) men are indeed righteous; neither mere Civilians,
who mind only the duties of the Second Table; nor yet Hypocrites, who look only
to some performances of the First Table. And when men are wanting in either of
these, it will meet them in a strait: As Job in his trouble is put to look to
both.

4. Though Prayer be a chief exercise of Religion (and therefore only named
here, and frequently Saints are designed by their calling upon the Name of the
Lord. See Joel 2.32. Acts 2.21. Romans 10.13.) Yet it will not prove men's
integrity, unless it be rightly qualified, especially with purity; For, so Job
avows his integrity as to this, my Prayer is pure. Without this, Prayers may be
very hateful to God. See Psalm. 109.7. Prove. 28.9. 1 Timothy 2.8. And here purity
is required.

1. Of the person praying, that he be washed in the blood of Christ, justified
and reconciled, Prove. 15.8.

2. Of the matter of Prayer, that the things sought be agreeable to the will of
God, 1 John 5.14.

3. In the manner of Prayer, that it be offered up through faith, James 1.5, 6.

4. In respect of the condition of the person who prays, that he be pure in
his walking, 1 Timothy 2.8. not unjust, as it is here in the Text. See Matthew.
5.23, 24. Isai. 1.15. The want of this obstructs the success and acceptance of
the Prayers of godly men, Psalm. 66.18. and renders the Prayers of the wicked
yet more abominable, Prove. 21.27.

5. In respect of the end, that Prayers be not made to be seen of men, Matthew.
6.5. nor to be a cloak of wickedness, Matthew. 23.14. And that good things be not
sought in Prayer for sinful ends, James 4.3.

Verse. 18. O earth, cover not thou my blood, and let my cry have no place.
In this, and the two following verses, we have the Third Branch of this part
of the Chapter, Wherein Job confirms the former assertion, by three Arguments.
The first (in this verse) is, by way of imprecation; wherein (seeing he cannot
be cleared otherwise) he asserts the testimony of his good conscience, by
assenting that all the creatures (particularly, the earth) bear witness against
him, by not concealing his injustice, or bloody crimes, if he were guilty of
any; and consenting that his cry and prayer be not heard, if it be not pure.

As for this way of proving his integrity, whatever was Job's distemper, when
he reflected upon his Friends obstinacy, who would not give credit to him; Yet
the thing it self is not to be condemned, as being practiced by Saints in the
case of malicious slanders, Psalm. 7.3, 4, 5. It is far from that sinful
disposition that prompts men to curse themselves or others; and does only
import, That he is convinced that wickedness deserves such punishments* That
his Conscience could not but submit to them as just, if he were what they
called him; and, That he was so sure of his own integrity, that he declined no
punishment, if it were found he was wicked.

Whence Learn,

1. Innocent Saints may be so oppressed and over-clouded with slanders and
unjust aspersions, that their innocence cannot be got cleared in an ordinary
way;, Therefore is Job put thus to appeal to the creatures as afterward he
appeals to God.

2. A man that is reconciled to God through Christ, and has a good Conscience
in the matter of his walk, may rest secure that no testimony or discovery, from
Heaven or Earth, will make against him, and that, however he may be belied and
slandered, yet, he will never be condemned as wicked; For, Job declines no
evidence against him here, from the earth, or from Heaven in sending a return
to his cry. This points out the great advantage of having the heart sprinkled
from an evil Conscience. See 1 John 3.21.

3. Truly-godly men do so much hate sin, and adore the Holiness and Justice of
God, that they will subscribe to all the judgments due to wickedness, as just;
For, so much does this way of arguing import, that none can decline this as the
due reward of wickedness and hypocrisy. And this the Consciences of the very
wicked will be forced to acknowledge at last.

4. Cruel and bloody crimes will not be got hid kept secret, let men palliate
and cloak them as they will; For, this assent of Job is sounded upon a Truth,
that the earth will not cover blood, or, blood will not hide, were there
nothing but the very earth to discover it, Genesis 4.10, 11. Isai. 26.21. See,
also, in the matter of oppression, Hab. 2.10, 11. So that an ill Conscience and
unpardoned guilt will prove bad company; and it will be to no purpose to bear
down the the oppressed, that they dare not complain, so long as every creature
has a tongue to cry, and bear witness against the oppressor.

5. Whatever men think of it in the day of their case, when they neglect
Prayer, or superficially go about it; yet it is the saddest of strokes, not to
be heard of God in a strait, For, Job assents to that, as a very sad judgment,
if his cry have no place. See Numb 16.15. 1 Samuel 28.6. Hence it is that Saints
pray so much for audience, Psalm 20.3. and rejoice so much in the hope of it,
Micah 7.8.

6. Albeit the wicked do, ordinarily, neglect Prayer; and albeit, sometime, God
may reward their hypocritical Prayers with temporal advantages, 1 King. 21.27,
28, 29. Yet this misery is abiding the wicked, that the most profane of them
shall be convinced of the usefulness of Prayer, and when they set about it in
their greatest straits, they shall not be heard; For so much is here imported,
that a wicked man may cry, and that it shall have no place. See Job 27.9. Prove.
1.28. Micah 3.4. Joh 9.31. And no wonder this befall them, considering that
their persons are not reconciled, that they have slighted Gods call, and, that
they are not sincere in their Prayers, nor set on work by the Conscience of
sin, but only from the sense of troubles, Hos. 7.14.

Verse. 19. Also now, behold my witness is in heaven, and my record is on high.
The Second Argument, confirming his Assertion, is taken from Gods testimony
and witness-bearing to his integrity; which he points out to be admired, and
repeats it here in diverse expressions, to confirm the certainty thereof.

Whence Learn,

1. As God is the Judge of all men, so he is a witness and observer, also, of
their ways; For he is a record and witness. He is a witness whose testimony
cannot be declined, Jer. 29.23. Mal. 3.5. And as this assures us that his
procedure cannot be unjust, seeing he proceeds upon his own infallible
knowledge; so it should excite men to walk as before such a Witness and
Observer, Romans 1.9. Phil. 1.8. and should persuade upright walkers, to be
comforted in his testimony.

2. Men's Consciences, or their Profession that they have a good Conscience,
will not bear them out, unless, also, God bear witness unto what they say; For,
says he, Also (with the former proof, v. 18) my witness is in Heaven. Where
this is not, it is heinous impiety for men to pretend, or make their boast of
their Consciences.

3. Innocent Saints may be brought to that low condition; that (beside their
own Consciences) they will not find any on earth to witness for them, but all
speaking against them, both friends and foes, yea and Gods dispensations, and
their own inward tentations also; For Job can find no witness among men, till
he ascend to a witness in Heaven. It is good for us to know how low Saints may
be brought, that we stumble not when it is our lot.

4. God will be a witness to his sincere Saints, were there never so many
against them. His testimony waits not for the concurrence of others, no not of
Saints; nor will it proceed according to what his own sad dispensations seem to
speak of his mind: For, he is a witness for Job, whom his godly Friends did
condemn, yea, whom himself (as Job thought) had set up as his mark, v. 12, 13.
and that even now, while he is dealing so severely with him.

5. Gods Testimony and Approbation is not only desirable, but sufficient, were
there never so many against it; as being on high above all that can oppose it:
For, however self-seekers cannot be content to want the praise of men, and do
prefer it to the praise of God, Joh. 12.41, 42. Yet Job accounts it enough that
his witness is in Heaven and his record on high. See Romans 8.31.

6. Such as rightly esteem of Gods testimony, will look upon it as an admirable
favor; They will admire his condescendence to own them, whom all are ready to
condemn, and will glory in it over all misconstructions from men: For, says
he, by way of admiration and gloriation, Behold, my witness is in Heaven, etc.

7. Such as do rightly value this approbation of God, will be careful, also, to
feed much upon the thoughts of it, as a soul-refreshing subject, to be much
considered, meditated upon, and tenderly cherished, that it be not
over-clouded, especially when they are misconstructed in the world; For these
causes does he twice mention it, in diverse terms, My witness is in Heaven, and
my record on high.

8. Such as do seek to have this testimony of God, will be careful to entertain
high thoughts of God, that thereby they may be excited to sincerity, that so
they may not be deluded in boasting of it; Therefore does he mention this
witness, as being in heaven, and, on high, or, in high places, not only to
express how sufficient a witness he is, but to show what thoughts he had of
him, when he endeavored to approve himself unto him.

9. Gods approving of sincere Saints will not make them insolent before him,
nor diminish their reverent and high thoughts of him; Therefore, also, when he
claims to this testimony, does he look on his witness as in Heaven, and on high.

Verse. 20. My friends scorn me: but mine eye pours out tears unto God.
The Third Argument, confirming the Assertion and the former Arguments, also,
is taken from his practice and carriage under trouble; That however (and even
while) they were scorning him; yet he was humbly mourning to God, and continued
in that practice, notwithstanding that discouragement. As for their scorn, we
need not restrict it to what is said, Chap. 15.4. where he is challenged for
casting off of Prayer, though he was very tender in going about that duty. Nor
need we search their discourses to find any express and palpable way of mocking
him. But the thing he points at in this, is, That with much Oratory, and fine
Expressions (as the word also signifies) they set themselves to undervalue
him, and decry his integrity and piety, and all the defenses whereof he made
use to justify himself: and they were so far from using him tende^ly, that
they grated upon his sores, and reflected upon his piercing afflictions, as
badges of his wickedness: all which he looks upon as an insolent and scornful
deportment.

Doct. 1. Scorn is a very sad trial, especially when it is added to other
afflictions; For Job resents it as such. Thus David often complains of it,
Psalm. 35.21.40.15. and 70.3. and God looks upon it as persecution, Heb. 11.36.
Genesis 21.9. with Gal. 4.29.

2. Saints, under affliction, must not expect to get through without contempt
and scorn; That this may be (as it were) the sharp point, to carry in the dart
of afflictions to wound the spirit, and so their trials may be complete: For,
Job was here essayed with it. See Psalm. 123.4.

3. Men may be guilty of scorning the afflicted, who yet seem to be very
serious; And all those are guilty of it who, by prejudices and
misconstructions, weaken the hands of afflicted godly men, and do slight their
afflictions, and under-value them and their Piety because of their afflictions;
let them conveigh it under never so specious pretenses, and in never so fine
and eloquent terms: For, Job finds scorn in their deportment toward him.

4. Albeit scorn and contempt be a sharp trial to godly men in affliction, come
from whom it will; Yet it heightens the trial, when it comes from friends, and
godly friends, who should be tender and compassionate to friends in affliction:
For, it added to his trial, that his Friends scorn him, or were his scorners.

5. As afflicted Saints ought to be well exercised before God, that they may be
approved of him; So this will aggravate their guilt who scorn them whom God
approves, For, Job in his affliction was pouring out tears to God, and this
heightens their fault that they scorned him who was thus exercised. See Ps.
69.10, 11.

6. Scorn and discouragements should not deter Saints from Prayer, but rather
to excite them to go about it; For, so is here implied, that not only they did
scorn him who was praying, but he prayed on, notwithstanding their scorn. To do
otherwise, gives Satan great advantage.

7. Men ought to be very tender in Prayer, especially when afflictions and
injuries are let loose, to drive them to it; For, in this case, Job did not
only pray, but his eye poured out tears (or dropped) unto God. And albeit
tears, which are external evidence of tenderness, are not always at command;
yet tenderness it self would not be wanting. Thus David was (so to say) only
Prayer in trouble, as it is in the Original, Psalm. 109 4.

8. To continue in Prayer and tenderness, notwithstanding trouble, scorn and
discouragements, is a sure evidence of honesty; and will prove a sweet Cordial,
though others do not notice it: For, it is a proof of Job's honesty, that when
his Friends scorn him, his eye pours out tears to God; and he comforts
himself in this against all their scorn.

9. A sincere and tender man, persevering to seek God under all disadvantages,
may yet be suspended from comfort, and from getting an answer; For, though Job
was thus exercised, yet his trial went on. Which teaches us not to judge of
supplicants or their supplications, by their present success.

Verse. 21. O that one might plead for a man with God, as a man pleads for his
neighbor!
Follows the Third Part of the Chapter wherein Job prosecuteth his former
desire and wish, that he might plead his cause with God, in this verse. And
presses it from the consideration of his present condition, being (as he
thought) near unto death, v 22. And though this desire be another Argument
confirming his Assertion, v. 17 taken from his confident undertaking (if he
could) to plead his integrity before God himself; and therefore it is joined
with the former Arguments by the copulative, and, which is expressed in the
Original: Yet I have taken it up as a new purpose and part of his discourse,
because it is so largely insisted on and prosecuted in the following Chapter.

As for his desire, in this verse. There is a difficulty how to understand his
way of expressing it, that one might plead for a man with God This some
understand, not of his pleading for himself, because of that which follows,
as a man pleads for his neighbor; (where the word, pleading, which is not in
the Original, is repeated from the former part of the verse) but of the
pleading of some other for Gods approbation to him in this debate. And, indeed,
it is a special work of Charity, to help a distressed man in his Prayers and
Desires to God. But this Interpretation agrees not with Job's practice
elsewhere, where he desires to plead his cause himself. Others do understand it
of Christ the Intercessour, and do read the end of the former verse, and this
whole verse by way of confident Assertion, from the Original, thus: Mine eye
pours out (or droppeth) unto God. And he (who is true God, and does now
subsist to exerce his Office) shall plead for a man (that is, for Job himself,
spoken of in the Third Person, to show that it is a common privilege of all
godly men, such as he was) with God; and the Son of Man (as Christ was to
become true Man also) for his friend. So the meaning of this will be Christ,
who is God and will become Man, shall plead with God on my behalf, who am at
friendship with him. This Interpretation has those Truths in it, That Christ
the Mediator was then known, as in his Offices, so also, what he was or would
be, as to his Persons and Natures; That it is in Christ only that godly men can
think to stand, or have their integrity approved; and, That Christ's pleading
and intercession is a sweet Antidote against the scorn and mistakes of dearest
friends; As he subjoyns this to what he said of them, v. 20. But this does not
so well agree with Job's scope here, who (as formerly) does assert his
integrity, rather by wishing he might plead his cause with God, if it were
possible, then by believing it was pleaded; as is also implied in the
repetition of this wish, Chap. 17.3. And withal, this verse so interpreted,
will have no connection with the reason subjoyned, v. 22. Therefore I had rather
understand it (according to his former practice) of his wish that himself might
plead his cause with God And for the Original Text, which seems to favor the
former reading, it would be considered, that the copulative particle, and, may
be variously ^endered, either, and, or, as, or otherwise, as may best fit the
scope; Likewise, the particle rendered, for, in both parts of the verse may be
rendered, for, or, with, or, to, as frequently it is. And if we render the verb
which signifies pleading, not only in the Optative mode, by way of wish, (as
here it is) but Impersonally also, not that he, or one might plead, but that
there might be pleading; if, I say, the verb be thus rendered, the Text will
run fairly thus; O that there might be pleading for a man (that is, that a man
might have leave and opportunity to plead) with God, as a man pleads with his
neighbor, or friend. And so the words contain a desire that he might plead his
Integrity as familiarly with God, as one man pleads with another who is his
friend.

I shall not insist on the particular weaknesses that may be marked in this
desire, of which, see Chap 9 34, 35. and Chap. 13.20, 21, 22.

Here we may Learn,

1. Men's scorn and misconstructions should put men to seek to have their
condition cleared betwixt God and them; For, this Job would be at, when scorned
by his Friends.

2. There is no small disadvantage on the creatures part, in seeking to plead
with God, considering the distance that is betwixt God and them, For, that Job
can wish this only, imports that God cannot be pleaded with as with a
neighbor, or friend. And this should be minded, not only to terrify those who
presume to enter the lists with God as a Party, but to make us sober and humble
in all our approaches to him.

3. Integrity does not fear Gods Tribunal in Christ, oppose it who will: For,
this wish (whatever weakness be in it) imports, also, the strength of his
faith, that at all disadvantages (of scorn from Friends, and afflictions from
God) he is content to plead, if he might.

4. Men who have a good Conscience have need to guard well, under afflictions
and misconstructions, that they miscarry not; For, Job did over-drive in the
rashness and presumption of his offer. It is not enough men have a good
Conscience, unless they bear it fair and soberly.

5. Weaknesses may very often recurr and prevail over Saints, in an hour of
trial; As Job falls again and again upon his passionate wish. This should
humble us, but not crush us as if we had no grace, when we are thus assaulted
and borne down.

6. Saints may be long exercised with wishes and desires, which are not
satisfied; For, so was it with Job, who not only is not satisfied, as to the
passionate and presumptuous way which he propounds for clearing of his
integrity, but even the substance of his desire (which was, to have his
integrity made manifest) is not granted, till his trial was perfected. And, in
general, it holds true, that many desires of the godly are not satisfied,
either because they desire not good things in a right way, or because it is
unseasonable to grant their good desires, or because God has a mind to try
them yet more.

Verse. 22. When a few years are come, then I shall go the way whence I shall
not return.
In this verse we have the reason pressing this wish, taken from the certainty
(as he judged) of, his near approach unto death, which makes him desire to be
cleared before he be removed. In this he seems to reflect upon what Eliphaz had
said of the wickeds being without hope to be delivered from trouble, Chap.
15.22. For he expects no issue from his trouble but by death. Only he is under
no slavish fear, as the wicked are, nor will he grant that he is wicked, though
he have those apprehensions.

Doct. 1. Saints, in their troubles, may be in a great mistake, concerning
their condition, and the issue thereof; For, albeit this General be true, that
man's life is but short, being measured by a few years, or years of number, (any
time that can be numbered being short, in comparison of Eternity) yet he is
mistaken in that he thought to die so shortly; which that it is his mind in
this expression (though he speak of years) appears from Chap 17 1.

2. Men had need to have their condition cleared against death come; it being a
dark passage in it self, we have need of no clouds beside; For, upon this
supposition that he is to die shortly, he desires to plead his cause, that he
may be cleared beforehand.

3. Men ought so much the rather to have all clear against death, that after it
there is no helping of our condition, if it be wrong, as it is in other turns
of our life; For, if once a man go that way, he shall not return, and this
consideration made Job the more solicitous to be cleared

4. The more near men apprehend death to be approaching, they should be the
more busy; For, so was Job here, supposing that death was near.

5. Reproach and unjust imputations are, in special, a trial whereof Saints
would desire a good account before they die; seeing other outward miseries end
at their death, but reproach will live after them, as a blot upon their name:
For, it is upon this account, in part, that he would be cleared, that his
Friends might cease to scorn and reproach him as a wicked man.

6. The Conscience of men's integrity will not be quelled, even with approaching
death; For, Job proves his integrity by this, that he dare plead his cause with
God, even when he thinks he is going to die.

7. Saints ought to submit to go out of the world uncleared, and under a cloud,
if it be Gods will; For, this was Job's exercise, wherein for a long time he
saw no issue, though at last it came: And by this delay God exercised his
submission; as, indeed, a man that has a good Conscience may commit the
ordering of all these things to God.

8. Whatever debates Saints may have with God about his dealing; yet at last
they may find that they get all their will, For, whereas Job thought that since
he could not be admitted to plead with God, he would die shortly, and so go out
of the world uncleared, the Lord at last gave him his will before he died,
though not in his way, nor yet so soon as he desired, seeing he died not so
soon as he expected.

CHAP. XVII.
In this Chapter, Job continues his Reply to Eliphaz and the rest of his
Friends: And, First, He prosecutes his desire to plead his cause with God,
which he had propounded, Chap. 16.21. Wherein, having premitted somewhat which
might evidence his great distress and extremity, putting him upon this desire,
(namely, that he is very weak, ver. 1. and ill entreated by his Friends, ver.
2.) he renews his desire to plead with God, ver. 3. and presses it by several
Arguments, taken from his Friends unfitness to determine in the cause, ver. 4,
5. from his great affliction, bl^sting his Reputation, ver. 6. and wasting his
body, ver. 7. and from the advantage that should be reaped by such
dispensations toward a godly man, and Gods clearing of his Integrity
notwithstanding his troubles, ver. 8, 9. Secondly, He rejects all those
Consolations, as vain, which they offered him upon his repentance. Wherein he
condemns them as unwise in the way of their dealing with him, ver. 10. And,
to instruct this, he declares what is his present low condition, ver. 11, 12.
and that he could not, in reason expect any thing but death to follow it, ver.
13, 14. and, consequently, that the hopes they laid before him were groundless,
ver. 15, 16.

Verse. 1. My breath is corrupt, my days are extinct, the graves are ready for
me.
AS it is usual in some cases, that in Courts of Judgment the pursuer gives an
Oath de calumnia, or, that he pursues not his cause needlessly or maliciously,
but because he thinks it right; so Job, being to prosecute his desire, that he
might enter the lists with God, does premit an Assertion that he did not
propound nor pursue this desire out of a wicked disposition (as Eliphaz seemed
to insinuate of all he said, Chap 15.5.) but upon pressing grounds and causes.
And to clear this, he gives two grounds of his pressing desire; the first
whereof (in this verse, which also clears further what he had said, Chap.
16.22.) is taken from the weak condition of his body. His breath which
maintained his life, was corrupt; and that either in respect of its savor,
being tainted with his inward diseases, and savouring of wasting and being
spent; Or, in respect of motion, his breath was so spent and overcharged, that
he could not breath without great difficulty. Hence he concludes that this
portended his days to be at a period, that his life was ready to be
extinguished, like the snuff of a Candle, through the decay of natural
moisture; and that he was near ready to be cast into the graves, or, some one
or other grave. The consideration of all which put him to it, to insist so much
upon this desire.

In General, we may here Observe,

1. Job is careful to premit the consideration of his great affliction to his
desire of pleading his cause, that he may clear how much he is pressed to
insist upon it. Whatever was his mistake, yet the General Doctrine teaches,
That men ought not to make too much noise about lesser troubles. Unless the
pressure of their afflictions be answerable to their cry, they do but proclaim
that they are unruly and unsubdued, and do need more trouble to tame them. It
argues great moderation of spirit, and mortification, as not to be stupid, so,
to suppress and digest, at least those afflictions that are but ordinary.

Obs. 2. That Job insists thus upon this subject, and having begun it, Chap.
16.22. he here dwells upon it, and that with so much Eloquence, it may import
some, or all, of these,

1. That it is good for men to be acquainted with their own condition; For,
this was so far commendable in Job, that he was not ignorant how much he was
spent, and how near (in appearance) to death. Men ought not to be forgetful how
much of their time is spent, what is their debility, and what it may portend;
And, in a word, they ought not to be strangers to themselves, or their
condition one way or other.

2. That some troubles may be so pressing, as they will be Monitors of
themselves; For, it was Job's distress that put him to it, that he could not
get his thoughts off this subject. So was he also continually haunted with the
indignities done him by his Friends, v. 2. It is no strange thing to see
troubles so pressing, that they continually haunt our minds, and are before our
eyes wherever we turn us. It is our mercy that such a condition has been
essayed before us.

3. That the Conscience of honesty will make a man very sweetly converse with
thoughts of frailty, of a decaying Tabernacle, mortality and death; For not
only Job's pressing necessity, but his affection, and assurance of his own
integrity, made him dwell upon this subject, as sweet to him, and as his
hoped-for issue. So also, v. 14. and elsewhere. Others are, ordinarily, so far
averse from death, that they banish all such thoughts.

4. That much poring upon sad conditions does, readily, beget many distempers
about them; For, whatever necessity or sweetness drew Job to dwell upon these
thoughts; (as ordinarily tentations fasten themselves on that which is good or
justifiable, and usher in themselves under the Cloak thereof:) Yet they beget a
false apprehension of approaching death, and passionate and unruly desires to
be cleared, before it came: Therefore,

1. We ought not to study what is sweet only (as thoughts of death were to him)
but what is our present work; and we should set about that, however it relish;
as, often times, our present duty is least pleasant.

2. However we may be driven to pore much upon troubles, yet we should endeavor
not to be taken up only therewith, but to mix all our exercises of that kind
with some other diversions, otherwise we will fall in a distemper.

3. In eyeing what trouble seems to threaten, we should also look to what God
can do in extremities, and bring out of our troubles; As here, God was to give
a sweet issue of all those troubles, and not to cut him off by them, as he
apprehended.

Having premitted these Generals, we may from this verse in particular, safely
gather those sound Instructions,

1. Man is but a frail putrified creature, and will appear to be so, if God
begin to deal with him; For, so are we here taught. Man's life hangs but upon a
thread of breath, going in and out at his nostrils. And albeit man draw his
breath easily in ordinary, yet when God contends with him by affliction and
pain, his breath will be so corrupt as he cannot draw it without difficulty.
Yea, God can make it favor of his inward putrefaction, and proclaim what a
rotten piece this beautiful structure of Man is; and that he carries his death
about with him, and can soon be made loathsome company to his dearest friends.
This,

1. Teaches man to be out of conceit with himself, his constitution and life,
Isai. 2.22.

2. It teaches him, that, whatever God please to do for his trial, he should
beware, by his conceit or bitterness, to provoke God to contend, and give him a
proof what he is. See Psalm 9 22. and 39.11. Isai. 45.9.

3. It teaches him, that, when God does contend, he should be thereby well
instructed in the lesson of Humility, and knowledge of his own frailty; which is
the thing his dispensations inculcate.

Doct. 2. Affliction and debility of body should cause men think on death and
the grave, and make ready for them; For, from this, that his breath is corrupt,
he concludes, that his days are extinct, and the graves for him, as it is in
the Original; that is, he is ready or near to be buried, and thinks upon it as
the only issue of his trouble. It is true, Job mistook here, and his excess
cannot be justified, as was said before; Yet, those are found Truths in this
case,

1. Mortality is a study wherein men ought to be more frequent, as being born
to die, and dying daily.

2. Though other trials may surprise men; yet they should beware of being
surprised with death and the grave, seeing they are known to be unavoidable,
and the time of their coming is uncertain.

3. Though men ought not peremptorily to determine what will be the particular
event of every affliction that befalls them; yet, every affliction and debility,
either when they are under it, or got out of it, should be looked upon as God^
giving them the Alarm, and putting them in mind to consider how they will look
upon death. For however they escape at one time, yet that is a Summons which
will be renewed.

4. At every such Alarm it is the duty of all, and will be the endeavor of
sincere Saints, to meet and welcome Death and the Grave, and to be as ready for
those as they are for them; as here Job was.

Doct. 3. Whatever be the external splendor of men, yet it will all be
extinguished at death, like a bright Candle ending in a snuff. For, so the
metaphor here does import, My days are extinct. Man's life is in a daily decay,
like a Candle burning to a snuff. And when death comes, the vigor and comely
complexion of the body does all evanish. His Members, Organs, Arteries, Sinews,
etc. are then swallowed up in silence and obscurity, like a Watch when the
string is broken; and Man savours of putrefaction, and becomes dust, which is
his original. And not only so, but all his pomp and glory cease, Psalm. 49.17,
18. and his thoughts perish, Psalm. 146.4. This does exceedingly condemn these
who content and please themselves in their well adorned bodies, their feathers
of honor and rides of amibitious thoughts; but do not study to have somewhat
which will be proof against death.

Doct. 4. It does point out, yet further, the vanity of man, that all his
Patrimony, when dead, is a Grave, though some get not so much; Graves for me,
says he. This is his Earth, Psalm. 146.4. whom, many times, the Earth it self
cannot satisfy and contain. This we should look upon as a sensible
demonstration of the vanity of men, who hunt after things which they must
certainly leave at last, although (as it fares not with many) these things
should not forsake them all their lives; and who seek to bear so much bulk, and
are so troublesome upon earth, when yet a little Earth will contain them, and
render them tame enough at last.

Doct. 5. He names Graves, in the plural number, not only because dead men
have, as it were, Grave above Grave, their Winding Sheet, Coffin (if they were
in use then) and the Grave it self. But further,

1. As Jephthah is said to have been buried in the Cities of Gilead, (as it is
in the Original, ^ Judge. 12.7.) because he was buried in some one or other of
them; So this may import some one Grave or other. And Job speaks so, as not
caring which, or where it were, so it proved a Grave. For, albeit some be
ambitious to make themselves famous by their very Monuments; and decency in
burials and burial-places, according to men's quality, ought not to be
condemned: Yet that is not a thing to be much regarded. If men get a Grave to
hide their bodies from violence, and take them out of sight, it is little
matter what a grave it be, for state or magnificence. The stately Monuments of
many do only serve to continue the memory of their naughtiness, who did not
live holily, nor have left savoury Monuments of their Piety and Charity, as
Doreas did, Acts 9.39. And on the other hand, the dust of the godly is
respected by God, and their memory smells well in the nostrils of Saints,
though they got but course burial; and, it may be, only the ashes of a fire, or
the belly of a wild Beast.

2. It may point out that his afflictions and pressures were so great and many,
that every place presented him with Death and a Grave. Thus was Paul in deaths
often, 2 Cor. 11.23. For albeit there be but one way of entering into this
world, yet there are many ways of dying and going out of it. So that men should
look upon their life as daily surrounded with Deaths and Graves.

Doct. 6. The godly, under their sad exercises, may be much mistaken, about the
issue of their trials; For, albeit all those things, formerly marked, be good
Exercises and sound Truths, and this will be the issue of man's life at last;
Yet for present, Job, notwithstanding all his weakness, was supported and
preserved, till he got a more sweet issue then he expected.

Hence,

1. When we have looked on our conditions at the worst, (and we are not to
deceive our selves, by undervaluing of them) we ought yet (as is said before)
to leave a latitude to what God can bring out of them.

2. We ought to believe that God not only can, but usually does, disappoint the
fears and expectations of his own Children under trouble, and makes them recall
their hasty conclusions, Psalm. 31.22. So that their thoughts are not the Rule
whereby he walks.

3. We are to believe that it is possible and usual for God to extricate Saints
out of deadly difficulties, and to give glorious issues from deadly
extremities, when he sees it good for them so to do. See Isai. 26.19. Ezekiel.
37.11, 12.

Verse. 2. Are there not mockers with me? and does not mine eye continue in
their provocation?
The Second Ground of his pressing desire to plead with God, is, That, being
thus afflicted and near unto death, his Friends spared not to mistake, censure,
and mock his condition, and his discourses and carriage thereupon; which did so
imbitter him, that it deprived him of nights rest. This both added to his
affliction, that, when he was a dying, he was thus dealt with; and it helped on
his bodily weakness, portending his death. And therefore he desires to betake
himself to debate his cause with God, having such cruel Friends to deal with
upon Earth.

Of this see further, Chap. 16.20. Here Learn,

1. It is great cruelty to add affliction to the afflicted; as here they did to
Job, when they mocked him who was so low. See Psalm. 69.25, 26. Job 19.21, 22.

2. Saints in their troubles may expect to meet with this measure, of having
trial heaped upon trial upon them; as here Job found. One trial will not be a
shelter from another, when there is need of it; their trial must be complete,
to search them thoroughly; others also must be tried, in their compassion and
sympathy, by the greatness of their trial; and, God delights to give proof
under how much trial he will support his people.

3. Afflicted men have, oft-times, cause to ascribe much of their death to the
cruelty of their Friends under their affliction, as to an instrumental cause;
For, Job subjoyns their cruelty, as no small cause of his weakness (v. 1.)
portending his death. Unfaithful friends in a sad time, are guilty of many
degrees of murder.

4. Friends prove very cruel in trouble, by their want of tenderness, and
mocking of the afflicted; (See Chap. 21.3.) When they look lightly upon their
afflictions, Lam. 1.12. When they read them wrong, as if they were evidences of
wickedness; and do weaken the hands of the godly afflicted man under them: For,
Job finds provocations, or imbitterings, in their mocking, which deprived him
of rest.

5. He asserts this by way of Question, Are there not mockers with me, etc? or
by way of grave Asseveration and Oath, If there be not mockers, etc. whereby he
purges himself of prejudice and calumny, in asserting this: and expresses his
regret that his case was so little considered, that he must so strongly assert
it, and excite others to notice it. It teaches, That Saints may get that to
bear which is really very sad, and yet get little credit or pity under it. It
will not easily be believed how deep some troubles will draw upon them* and how
much they will wound and imbitter them. They who are cruel to them may be so
little sensible what hurt they do, that they will rather be ready to justify
themselves. And others may be laid by, and the afflicted left alone without
pity, for their trial

6. Saints may be so afflicted, that nights rest would be a great mercy, and
yet even that be denied unto them; For, says he, Mine eye continues, or
lodges, in their provocations. Not only was this injury not done behind his
back, but to his face, and in his very sight and eye; (a trial which Saints may
look for;) but he was kept waking in the night thereby, no^ could he get off
his eye from poring on it.

7. Whatever injury was here done to Job, yet his own weakness bred his
distemper; in that he was first imbitttered by these provocations, and then,
being so, he could not rest for it, which was contrary to that Precept, Ephesians.
4.26.

It Teaches,

1. How sad soever our condition be, yet our own distempers thereby give the
immediate rise to our vexations.

2. To be, at some times, distempered and imbittered, even to the want of rest,
though it be a gross fault, and a fit of impatience for the time; yet it will
not conclude one be an impatient man, who approves not of those sits, and
wrestles against them; For, Job, who is so commended for his patience in this
trial, James 5.11. fell in such a fit here.

Verse. 3. Lay down now, put me in a surety with thee; who is he that will
strike hands with me?
In the Second Branch of this part of the Chapter (contained in this verse) Job
subjoyns, to his former pressing grievances, his renewed desire to plead his
cause with God, which he propounds to God himself. Those words, of striking
hands with him, are borrowed from their way of closing and engaging in
bargains, particularly in Suretyship, Prove 6.1. And as it was their practice
that Parties should strike hands in other Covenants; So, it seems, it was their
practice also, when they engaged to answer in Law, which is the business here
in hand. As for the first part of the verse, where he speaks of laying down,
and of a surety with God, some read it thus; Appoint, I pray thee, my surety
with thee, that is, Appoint Christ to be my Surety; and then, Who is he that
will strike hands with me? that is, upon these terms, I decline no man, who
will engage to enter the lists, to debate against me in the matter of my
integrity. It is, indeed, certain, that Job durst not boast of his integrity
but in a Mediator. And I would very willingly put this favorable construction
upon his wish, if I found not God and Elihu pass a more severe censure upon it.
Others understand it as a desire that God would appoint a common Surety, or,
Umpire, to himself and Job, who might dispute against his Friends for that
cause which was common to them both, seeing both God and he were wronged by
their doctrine. This interpretation has a truth in it, That they who are
imba^qued in a common cause with God, may expect that he will see it pleaded
for both. But it agrees not with the latter part of the verse, where Job
desires that some might strike hands with him, as a party in the debate, and
not as one whose cause was to be pleaded by a common Umpire. Therefore I
understand it to import his renewed desire that he might have access to plead
his cause with God, or, at least, with some who would appear on Gods behalf in
this quarrel. And the form of speech is taken from the practice of those times,
where Parties did give in surety, or pledges, that they would stand to the
determination of the Judge, and perform what was judged. And so the words will
run thus; lay down now, a pledge; and if thou do not that (for it must be read
disjunctively) then appoint me a surety (not, for me, or on my behalf, to be
forth^coming for me, but for my behoof and security in this debate) with thee.
The meaning is, in sum, as if Job had said; Give me some assurance that thou will not judge me according to thy perfect Righteousness, nor deal with me
according to thy transcendent Greatness; And then, it follows, Who is he that
will strike hands with me? that is, upon these terms, I care not who enter the
lists with me, to debate on thy behalf, or where shall I find any who will
undertake to plead for thee, on these terms?

This wish, in the substance thereof, agrees well with his former regrets and
desires, Chap. 9 32, 33, 34, 45. and Chap. 13.20, 21, 22. And it is in answer
to this, and the like wishes, that Elihu offers him so fair quarters in the way
of debating, and yet undertakes to convince him of sinful rashness, Chap. 33.6,
7. And in this his Proposal, as we may read the strength of faith and of a good
Conscience; as also his weakness and presumption, in his way of managing the
same under tentation, (both which have been spoken to formerly;) So here we may
further Learn,

1. It is the great mercy of injured and misconstructed Saints, that they have
God to whom they may appeal, who looks upon them otherwise, then men, ofttimes,
do; Therefore does be so frequently desire to reason the matter with God, when
his Friends misconstructed him.

2. It is not simply unlawful for Saints to plead their own integrity with God,
and to plead with him concerning his dispensations to them, when they are hard
put to it; For, the sum of Job's desire was lawful, if it had been well
managed. See Jer. 12.1. For,

1. Faith is allowed to plead with God, against the verdict of Sense, and when
he seems to reject.

2. We may plead an interest in his love, and our own integrity,
notwithstanding any cross dispensations, tentations, or misconstructions.
Whatever trial or exercise of faith there may be in any of these; yet, they
give us no warrant or allowance to quit our grips.

3. We may also, if we keep within bounds, seek light how to reconcile his love
and his dealing toward us, his Dispensations and our Privileges; Wherein Job
had not failed, if he had been moderate. Yea, those pleadings are so
acceptable, that, ordinarily, they are worse employed in trouble, who are not
so taken up: And some under tentation and trouble do quit their integrity, and
the testimony of a good Conscience, as sinfully, as Job maintained it, while,
at every assault, they are ready to look on all they have received, and all the
Evidences of the grace of God in them, as nothing.

Doct. 3. Pleading with God, in the matter of our integrity, and his afflicting
of us, had need to be gone about with very much caution and fear; For, Job
here, and elsewhere, premits cautions, before he dare be confident in the
challenge, and yet he used not caution sufficient; and therefore others may
debo^d much more. And because it is ordinary for people to miscarry in their
thoughts and apprehensions of God and his dealing, in sad times, I shall speak
somewhat to needful cautions about this matter. And, not to insist in speaking
of the Atheist, who, by reason of trouble, loses sight of God, and denies his
Providence, Ezekiel. 9.9. or of the mad man, who sees God in afflictions, only
that he may blaspheme him, Rev. 16.9. or of the passionate man (though even a
Saint) who, in his heat, stands not expressly to contradict Gods verdict* Jon 4
9. I shall only, from Job's cautions, and from his defects in not adding
cautions sufficient, give these Rules.

1. It is our only safe course to go to God in our troubles, and to look for an
issue by debating and clearing matters with him, as it were at the Fountain;
Therefore does Job betake himself to God here, and this at last cleared all his
clouds. Hence it is, that they are reproved who in trouble mourn, or roar, one
toward another, but do not mourn to God, Ezekiel. 24.23.

2. However, in our troubles, we cleave to our integrity, as to the state of
our person and our righteous cause; Yet we ought still to be sensible of the
transcendent Purity and Power of God, with whom we have to do; For, in this Job
was right, who durst not strike hands with any to debate his cause, but upon
some surety, or, assurance, that God would not judge him according to his
transcendent Holiness, nor deal with him according to his great Power. Hence,

3. We must guard that our righteousness be not an occasion to make us swell
with pride; because we are afflicted; For, herein Job failed, notwithstanding
all his caution, in that he handled his good cause too violently. See Psalm.
73.10, 11, etc. The best of men have so much in them as deserve sharpest rods,
as we will find Elihu teaching him; and when godly men do thus miscarry under
cleanly trials, God is provoked to send rods dipped in their own guilt. See
Psalm. 51.4.

4. We ought, also, to guard that we manage not our complaints, or defenses of
our integrity, with reflections on God; neither taxing his Righteousness who
afflicts, nor bearing any grudge at him: For, herein also Job failed, Chap.
40.8. See Jer. 12.1.

5. We ought so to plead our integrity before God, as we forget not his
absolute Dominion; that he gives not any account of his matters, and that
things are therefore righteous because he, who can do no wrong, does them: For,
in this Job was not sufficiently cautious, who desired to plead with God on
equal terms, and on equal security, as if he had been a creature like himself.
And for this he is taxed, Chap. 33.12, 13.

6. When we seek out reasons of Gods dealing with us, we ought to do it with
much submission; suspecting our own eyes and discerning, and not his
righteousness; when we cannot perceive them; and adoring what we cannot
comprehend nor dive into: For, this the Lord points at in these many puzzling
questions, in the end of this Book, whereby he convinces Job of his
presumption and folly, in debating with him who is so infinitely wise.

Doct. 4. Job is often wishing that those securities and cautions might be
granted to him, in order to his debating of his cause with God, and is sorry
that he cannot obtain his desire; And yet, when it is granted in Elihu's
person, Chap. 33.6, 7. however he did indeed carry his main point, and was
cleared at last to be a righteous man; Yet, he carried it not as he expected,
but was much humbled and abased. It teaches, That godly men may have longing
desires after some things, which will not prove satisfactory, when they get
them. We, often times, see so little mercy in our present condition, that we
promise to our selves but too much in future things, or in any thing beside
that which is present. We are so little versed in the study and belief of Gods
Infinite Wisdom about us, that we foolishly think we could carve out better
lots to our selves, then he allows. And we may, sometime, be so taken up with
our sincerity in the general tenor and scope of our life, that we forget our
humbling failings in the by. And this was a chief cause of Job's
disappointment, when he got his desire; that though he was approved of, as to
the state of his person, yet there was a necessity to humble him for his sinful
miscarriages.

Doct. 5. Their form of proceeding in judgment, here alluded unto, may also
teach us somewhat. The Parties entering of security, or pledges, that they
should stand to, and perform, what was determined, May condemn them who make it
their work to frustrate justice, by drawing out of contentions (even after
sentences pronounced) to an endless length; and may teach Judges not only to
determine well, but to take care that there be effectual execution according to
the sentence. And their entering of this suretyship, or concluding of bargains
by striking hands one with another, does commend their plain and sincere
ingenuity, in that a bargain so closed would bind them; whereas many ties and
obligations will not bind many in this age.

Verse. 4. For thou have hid their heart from understanding: therefore shall
thou not exalt them.
Follows the Third Branch of this Part of the Chapter, wherein Job fortifieth
and presses his desire to plead his cause with God, or, with some in his Name,
by a threefold reason. The first is taken from the incompetency of his Friends
to determine, or Umpire, in this business; and therefore some other was needed.
Of this he gives two Evidences: First (in this verse) that they were unfit and
unable Agents for God, as being deprived of light and understanding in the
point debated; and therefore they should not be exalted, or, should have no
honor by appearing in this cause, and, particularly, should not have the
honor to prevail in the debate; but when God should appear and determine in
the cause, he should pass sentence against them, and they should want
approbation, and be ashamed.

Doct. 1. Even wise and eminently pious men may err and want light, in many
Truths and Controversies; For, so did Job Friends, who were very godly men. The
best of men, (unless they be extraordinarily inspired by God) should not
arrogate to themselves a privilege of being infallible, or that they cannot be
wrong; but should be afraid of ignorance and error, as well as others.

2. It is not to be looked on as an injury, though men, in defense of Light and
Truth which is on their side, do declare even good men, who are opposite to
them, to be in the dark; For, Job sticks not, nor looks upon it as an injury,
to assert that all those three godly men wanted understanding in this matter.
False Prophets did indeed take it ill, to have delusion and error charged upon
them, 1 Kings 22.23, 24. But godly men should make another use of it, and
should rather try whether the charge be true.

3. Men, who would rightly judge of Gods strange dispensations toward his
people, should not content themselves with a superficial view thereof; but
ought to have hearts fraughted with solid understanding, whereby they may
penetrate (so far as is lawful and attainable) into those mysteries of his
Providence: For, this does Job deliderate in his Friends, that they had not an
heart of understanding. See Psalm. 41.1.

4. The knowledge of Truth, or light in difficult Cases, is of Gods giving or
withholding, as he pleases; For, Thou have hid their heart from
understanding, says he to God. See Deuteronomy 29.4. Psalm. 119.18. And as this
calls upon men to abide near God, that they may get light, as they need it,
from him, So, they who would not want light, or be left in the dark or an
error, should,

1. Beware of living unfruitfully and contentiously, under, and against light,
Isai. 6 9, 10. Luke 19.41, 42, 43.

2. They should beware of that great sin, of not receiving the Truth in love,
when it is revealed, 2 These. 2 10, 11, 12.

3. They should beware of Interest, engaging or bribing the Affections to blind
the Judgment; which is more dangerous then simple Ignorance, and may be
imported in this, that their heart is hid from understanding.

4. They should beware of Pride, and conceit of their own Abilities, or a
proneness to be proud of any success they have in carrying on of their
Opinions: For, this marred those Friends success, in their dealing with Job, as
Elihu tells them, Chap. 32.13.

Doct. 5. As God (and not men's own self-love) is the Supreme and Impartial
Judge of men, and what they are; So men may be really ignorant, and looked on
as such by God, who yet do not believe it, not will be convinced of it:
Therefore Job speaks this, not to themselves, but to God, who is impartial in
his Judgment, and knew that what he said was true, though themselves would not
acknowledge it. Thou, says he, have hid their heart, etc.

6. Exaltation, Eminency, and Advancement, is of God only, Psalm. 75.5, 6, 7.
And as his Providence is to be adored therein; so whoever attempt to exalt
themselves against him, or his Rods, or by sinful ways, he can abase them, Da^.
4.37. Mal. 1.4. Therefore he speaks of Exaltation as Gods works only.

7. It is the knowledge and owning of Truth only that makes men precious, and
truly eminent; For, not to be exalted, follows upon, hiding of their heart
from understanding. To call erroneous men, precious men, is a Soloecism in
Scripture-dialect.

8. When the Lord is to debase persons or parties, ordinarily he makes use of
themselves, and their want of judgment, to bring it about; For, so much, also
may be imported in the connection betwixt these two, that men want understanding
when they are not be exalted. Thus Princes and Counselors turn fools, when
Kingdoms are to be ruined, Isai. 19.11, 12, 13.

9 It is a Truth which men may foretell without Prophecy, that a wrong Cause,
or Error, will not always prevail, nor be exalted in the end, nor will the
followers thereof have any honor by their undertaking; For, because they are
wrong, it follows, Therefore thou shall not exalt them.

Verse. 5. He speaks flattery to his friends, even the eyes of his children
shall fail.
The meaning of the words in this verse is clear and obvious, That who so
flatter their Friends, their posterity shall be disappointed of their hope and
expectation; But Job's scope in them is not so well agreed upon. I do not think
that Job subjoyns this by way of Apology for his sharp language of his
Friends, v. 4. showing that he durst not flatter them for fear of judgments.
Nor yet that his scope is to prevent an Objection of his Friends, who might be
ready to say, that since he would not admit of their free censures, as sound,
he desired to be slattered; and therefore he refuses that, and disswades them
from flattering him under the pain of judgments to come upon them and their
Posterity. But I take the words to contain a second Evidence of his Friends
incompetency to determine in this business, that (as they were unfit, v. 4. so)
they were unsound and unjust in this cause. For they were but flatterers, both
of God, by condemning him unjustly that they may justify God (of which, see
Chap. 13.7, 8.) and of himself also; for though they dealt hardly with him in
ordinary, yet they did sometime flatter him, with vain hopes of restitution and
favor, upon his repentance. Yea, while they made Prosperity a sign of Gods
favor, they flattered the wicked in their evil ways. By all which
miscarriages, they provoked God to afflict, not only themselves, but their
Posterity, with disappointments. He propounds this Challenge as to one, in the
singular number, he that speaks flattery, etc. not so much pointing at any
one of his Friends, as singularly guilty of this evil above the rest; as to let
them see that this is a certain Truth, which will be verified upon all who are
guilty of it, and therefore he propounds it in indefinite terms.

Doct. 1. Among other means of sweetening man's vain life, the having of
friends, and the expressions of their friendship, are none of the least; For,
Job speaks here of this relation, of being a friend to any man, as a relation
from which somewhat useful might be expected. See Prove. 18.24. These Bonds
would be well cherished and entertained, and it ought to be matter of regret,
when they are violated, Mic. 7.5, 6.

2. Faithful freedom is a special blessing, and an evidence of friendship; when
men speak only Truth to their friends, and speak it freely, without flattery;
For, speaking flattery to a friend is here marked as a fault, and an unfriendly
act.

3. No Pretenses can justify men in following Error, or other wrong courses;
For, all they said is here accounted but flattery. Though they pretended to
plead much for the righteousness of God; yet, it was not a fruit of their
faithfulness or zeal, but real flattering of him, to offer to defend it in such
a way. And though they apprehended that they hold out to Job the very
Consolations of God, Chap 15.11. Yet, really they did but flatter him with
false hopes; and did harden the wicked by their erroneous Principles.

4. Flattery is a very provoking sin, and whatever friendship it seem to
acquire among men, yet, it makes God the flatterers party; For, the flatterer
of his friend is here threatened.

5. Sinners, and, particularly, flatterers, may leave sad fruits of their way,
to be reaped by their Posterity, whether themselves be spared, or not;
Therefore are the flatterers Children especially threatened.

6. As it is a great judgment upon men, to be fed with hopes, only that they
may get a disappointment, and to be left to abound in hopes, that their
disappointments may be the sadder; So disappointment of hopes is a very just
reward of flattery, whereby men do delude and deceive others: Therefore is this
subjoyned as the just and sureable recompense of such, that as they speak
flattery to their friends, and so deceive them, so the eyes of their Children
fail, and miss of their expectation.

Verse. 6. He has made me also a byword of the people, and aforetime I was as
a tabret.
The Second Reason, fortifying his desire to plead with God, is taken from the
greatness of his affliction and distress; whereof also he gives two Evidences.
The first (in this verse) is the blasting of his Reputation, and his falling
under a general contempt, and becoming a Proverb and a Byword to all. Thus the
sense of the first part of the verse runs clear enough. As for the latter part
of it, Because the Verb rendered I was, is in the future time in the Original,
I shall be, and the word rendered, a Tabret, is, Topheth, the name of a place
in the Valley of Hinnom; 2 Kings 23.10. which also is sometime given (with
allusion to that place) to Hell, or, the state of the dead; Therefore some do
give odd readings and glosses upon it: Which I need be the less careful to
consider, that the bypast and future times of Verbs are frequently used one
for another in this language, and for the present time also (frequently
expressed by the future) which this language wants; And that Topheth in the
Land of Canaan was not known to Job, nor probably to any in his time, under
that name, which was not given it till after Joshua's days, when the Children
of Israel made their Children pass through the fire there, and (whence it had
the name of Topheth) did make a sound with Tabrets and Drums; that the cries of
the Children might not be heard by their Parents. Others do, with more
probability, make this part of the verse to contain only an exegetick
amplification of what is spoken in the former part; That he is not only a
byword of the people, but before them, in their open view, he is as a Tabret,
or rather, as a Tabring, and beating upon a drum, or Tabret; that is, Not only
did they speak Proverbs in derision of him, and made him a common Proverb,
because of his afflictions; but they made Songs of his miseries, which they
sung and played upon the Tabret and other musical Instruments, as was usual in
the calamities of famous men. Or, they made such a noise and sport of his
calamities, as if they had been beating upon a Tabret; the noise of Tabrets
beaten upon, was no louder, then was the stir they kept about his condition.
Others (deriving Topheth, from the same root with, Mopheth, a Prodigy) do read
it thus, that he is a wonder or, prodigy, before them, which is indeed
sometimes the lot of Saints, Psalm. 71.7. Isai. 8.18. and God threatens that it
shall befall his sinning people, to be a Sign and a Proverb, Ezekiel. 14.8. Either
of these two readings would agree fairly with the context, if the word
rendered, aforetime, might be rendered before them, that is, in open and
public view of all. It is true, the word, in a construction with other words,
does oft-times (though not always) denote that which is present, in view, and
before the face of persons, or things; but then it has the person or thing,
before which it is present, expressly named; whereas here no such thing is
named, but the Relative, them, must be supplied in the Translation. But the
word, when it is used absolutely by it self, (as here it is) does always
express that which is anterior in time to that whereof the Writer is then
speaking; as will appear to any who shall consider those passages in the
Original, where the word is used in that form; Deuteronomy. 2.10.12, 20. Josh. 11.10.
and 14.15. and 15.15. Judge. 1.10, 11, 23. and 3.2. Ruth 4.7. 1 Samuel 9.9. 1 Chronicles 9.20. 2 Chronicles. 9.11. Job 42.11. Psalm. 102.25. Isai. 41.26. All those
passages do evidence that the word here must be rendered, aforetime, and
(consequently) that this part of the verse contains an account of somewhat
formerly enjoyed by Job, which serves to aggravate and imbitter his present
despised condition unto him. Namely, That before, in his prosperous condition,
the world sounded his commendation, as if they had met him, where ever he came,
with Pipes and Tabrets, 1 Samuel 18.6. or made public noises of joy in speaking
of him, as men do by playing upon a Tabret. The remembrance whereof contributed
now to the imbittering of his present condition, when he is made a common
Proverb to all by reason of his affliction. And therefore he would be cleared
by God, that he is an honest man.

Doct. 1. When the Lord sends afflictions upon his people, they may expect that
they will not come single, but attended with many sad and imbittering
tentations, or consequents, For, Job, when he is afflicted, has this following
upon it, that he is made a byword thereby. See Lam. 2.22.

2. Among other sad consequents of affliction, this is one, that the afflicted
is made a common Proverb, or the common subject of men's discourse to his
disadvantage and disgrace, especially if the affliction be great, and the
person who is afflicted be eminent; For, Job resents it, as a sad trial, that
he is a by word of the people. This imports,

1. That Saints may have trials which they cannot hide, but they will be notour
to all that know them; and it is an evidence of a sad and remarkable stroke,
when it is thus public.

2. This, of being made a Proverb, or byword, being threatened in the Law
against impenitent sinners, Deuteronomy. 28.37. Jer. 24.9. and 29.21, 22. it cannot
but be sad to a godly man, to lie under that lash which seems to speak
displeasure: And therefore it is much regreted by Saints; Psalm. 44.13. and
69.10, 11, 20. And yet Job's experience here tells us, that even those external
afflictions wherewith the wicked are threatened, as the reward of sin, may be
inflicted upon a godly man, in mercy.

3. Godly men may expect to have shame and ignominy attending their cross, and
that is a sad ingredient in it; For, Job here resents it as such. See Heb.
12.2. And it should teach Saints to be mortified and dead to their credit and
reputation.

Doct. 3. It evidenceth the naughty disposition of the multitude, and adds to
the trial of the godly, that their afflictions do rather make them a derision
and byword, then are made use of by the beholders, or any tenderness showed to
them under them; For, he marks it, as an addition to his trials, and to the
other sad Ingredients of his reproach, that the people made a byword of him,
and did not sympathize with him, nor pity him.

4. When God is about to try his people, they may expect bitterness according
to the measure of sweetness they have formerly tasted of; and that great
mercies will be followed with great trials: For, so Job found: He who aforetime
was as a Tabret, is now a byword of the people.

5. Unless men be upon their guard, afflictions will be so much the sadder,
that mercies have gone before them; For, Job not only complains of this
affliction, that he was a byword, considered in it self; but aggravates it
from the change thereby made in his condition, that he should become a byword,
who aforetime was as a Tabret. Many sad lots would not be so grievous to men,
if they had not been tenderly dandled before. So Job insinuates in his
discourse, Chap. 29. compared with Chap. 30. It is not easy to learn that
lesson which Job observed in the beginning of his trial, Chap. 2.10.

6. The multitude is very unconstant, and popular applause is neither to be
hunted after, nor to be rested on when we have it; For, Job found that their
Opinions were variable, while they applauded him in his prosperity, and
contemned him in his adversity. The multitude, ordinarily, do not value men
according to their intrinsic worth, but by their external condition.

7. How bitter soever our afflictions be, or our distempers under them; Yet it
is our safety and advantage to see God, and fix our eye on his hand, in all of
them: For, so does Job here, He (speaking of God) has made me a byword, etc.

Verse. 7. Mine eye also is dim by reason of sorrow: and all my members are as a
shadow.
The Second Evidence of his great Affliction (and an effect also of the
reproach formerly mentioned, v. 6) is, the wasting of his body thereby His eye
was dim, by reason of the sorrow of his mind, which took away his sprightly
looks, or by reason of his weeping, Chap. 16.16, 20. And his whole body was
become a Skeleton, or Anatomy, or a shadow of it self.

Whence Learn,

1. Trials and Exercises, were they never so many, yet, are no trials, so long
as they do not afflict nor affect; For, whereas many may sleep, through great
sufferings, Job makes out his Argument, that he is in deep distress, by telling
not only what were the effects of his troubles among the people, v. 6. but,
especially, what effects it had upon himself, in wasting his strength.

2. Great outward troubles may be got more easily borne, if bitterness and
indignation at the dispensation do not put an edge upon them; For, it was
sorrow or, indignation (as it is in the Original) that afflicted and spent him.

3. When trouble pierces the mind with sorrow and bitterness, it will not hide,
nor will the body be able to bear it, or subsist under it; For, by this his
body is wasted. A sound mind is good medicine; and albeit men cannot always get
themselves kept free of vexations of spirit, under trouble, yet they should be
careful to purge the Conscience from guilt, freedom from which will moderate
and sweeten all the vexations of the mind.

4. Where grace has any hand about our sorrow and trouble, a wasted eye and a
spent body will go together; For, both went together in Job, whose eye was dim,
and all his members as a shadow. Upon the one hand, tenderness and true godly
sorrow will be seen upon the body, if it be long continued in. And, upon the
other hand, a wasted body with afflictions, and with trouble and vexation of
mind, is to little purpose, if there be not a mournful eye to God with it.

5. Saints, in their troubles, may be so hemmed in, and desolate on every hand,
that they are entirely left upon God, to get proofs of his support; For, so was
it with Job: when God had smitten him, his Friends were unfaithful to him, v.
4, 5. And as if that were not enough, he was also (as it is v. 6.) a byword of
the people: And here another trial is, also, joined to that, that his mind is
broken, and his eye and body spent.

Verse. 8. Upright men shall be astonished at this, and the innocent shall stir up
himself against the hypocrite.

9. The righteous also shall hold on his way, and he that has clean hands
shall be stronger and stronger.


These Verses contain a Third Reason fortifying Job's desire to have his cause
pleaded with God, and determined by him; And it is taken from the advantage to
be reaped by such dispensations toward a godly man, and by Gods clearing of his
integrity, notwithstanding all the troubles and assaults he had endured.
Namely, That not only himself should be confirmed, but other Saints also
comforted by such a determined experience of a godly man, who had been
afflicted and traduced, and yet was found to be righteous and godly. For he
being thus afflicted, and reproached by his Friends, and yet maintaining his
integrity; and being approved of God in so doing: as godly men would be
astonished at his lot and exercise; so they might also admire at the support of
a good Conscience: and they might, from his experience, learn not to be driven
from the testimony of their integrity, whatever hypocrites blaspheme against
them, or whatever be their real afflictions from the Lord; but, having seen him
wade this foord so deep, they might be encouraged to go on in their way, and to
gather strength against every difficulty they meet with in it.

This Argument should be the more narrowly pondered that, by it, it appears Job
had (at least, at sometimes) some transient sight given to him of the use God
intended to be made of his trial and exercise, to the end of the world, Namely,
that his experience should strengthen other godly men in the like exigents,
Jam. 5 11. And that I may a little dip into the sense and use of the words, I
shall in them, Consider,

First, Job's scope in this Discourse, and the force of the Argument in it;
which is, not only to reprehend his Friends ignorance (to which he speaks, v
10) who could see no other cause, or end, of his afflictions and exercise, but
only this, that God was plagueing him for his wickedness and hypocrisy;
whereas all this that befell him was, otherwise, very useful, to clear up a
precious experience for the good of others: But his scope further, is, upon
this ground and consideration, to plead that God would determine and clear this
case, concerning his being afflicted, and his Friends mistakes, that so others
might come to reap this benefit from his experience, which could not be till
God cleared the matter.

Whence Learn,

1. Very gloomy and bitter dispensations may be attended with sweet and
refreshful Cordials; For, Job sees much good to flow out of this affliction,
exercise and debate. God has meat to give, when he will, even out of an eater,
and can make the fruit and remembrance of affliction as sweet, as the feeling
thereof is bitter, Heb. 12 11. And, in the height of our troubles, we should
remember that we may yet reflect upon those our sad hours, with refreshment.

2. Not only may sweet fruits grow out of the bitter root of trouble; but a
right discerner, in the throng of his affliction, and of exercise about it, may
see its usefulness, and it is his duty to study it: For, here Job does not only
feel his present case, what it is, but he sees, also, what rich advantages are
in it. This, would be more easily attained, If,

1. We were not peevish, to refuse encouragements, and dwell only upon the
thoughts of our troubles; but would make this also a part of our study, to see
what mercy is in them.

2. If we would not trust in our own senses, as if we of our selves were
sufficiently able to discern what is our condition, and what it will tend unto;
but would seek light from God in those things, being suspicions of our selves.

3. If we would not eye so much what our condition of it self promises, as
what God can, and by his Promise has undertaken to make out of it.

4. If we were not selfish, as if nothing were really useful, but what is
satisfactory to our sense, or good to us in our apprehension; though,
otherwise, it honor God and tend to the good of others. Of this afterward;
Only such a selfish disposition may misrepresent that unto us which is most
really useful.

Doct. 3. How bitter soever dispensations be; yet, as the sight of Gods hand in
them should allay our bitterness at them, so, it should calm our minds, when we
see our lot is in any way useful, or brings forth any good fruit: For, Job is
so taken up with the thoughts of the usefulness of this dispensation toward
him, that he desires to have that premoved, by Gods appearing to clear the
whole business. Saints may lie under a tentation that their affliction is
useless, and to no good purpose, nor will have any good issue, Isa. 26.18. But
this is but a tentation, and is sent to make them prize the usefulness of it
the more, when they find it. They may also hinder and obstruct the use and
fruit of their trouble, by want of exercise under it, Heb 12.11. And yet, even
in that case, the continuance of their trouble is useful to break their
stubbornness, which declines affliction, and makes them mind the satisfaction
of their humor, more then their profit. In opposition to all those tentations,
we ought to believe that the godly are afflicted for their profit, Heb. 12.10.
And should make use of the faith of this as a Cordial under trouble.
Remembering that the fruit of trouble it self, when it comes, will be sweet
and satisfactory; and, in the mean time, that it speaks mercy, that God will
take such pains on us: and will convey his mercies even by such unexpected
means, and fraught his most bitter dispensations with such proofs of his love.

4. Sincere Saints are so public minded, that, if their afflictions and
exercise prove useful to others; they look upon it as a singular encouragement
and refreshment to themselves; For, Job is here refreshed with looking to the
fruit which the godly in all ages, might reap by his exercise, As the Lord is
pleased, oft-times, so to order matters, that some do sow, and others enter
upon their labors (as Christ speaks of the Ministry of the Prophets and his
Apostles, Joh 4.37, 38.) so this ought to be well remembered in times of
affliction, wherein we should be content to sow in tears, if so be others do
reap the harvest in joy. And it is a sad matter when trouble rendereth men
selfish, without any respect to the public, or the good of others.

5. When sad dark cases are cleared by God in the experience of others, it
concerns such as come after, to walk the more cheerfully and profitably under
such dispensations and lots; For, so Job supposes other godly men will improve
his experience, and Gods clearing of his case. For when some have thus broken
the ice, and paved the way, it becomes others not to shrink nor stumble, Heb.
12.1.

Secondly, We have to consider who the persons are that will get this use of
his exercise, carriage, and issue; They are the godly, who are described to be
upright, Innocent, Righteous, and men of clean hands.

Whence Observe,

1. True Piety is a very comprehensive thing; So much, in general, is implied
in all those Names and Characters. Piety comprehends so many duties, toward God
and Man, and that in several relations, capacities and conditions, and does
engage a man to so much, both within and without; as may teach us not to look
upon Piety, and a profession thereof, as an easy task, to be learned without
difficulty* but as a serious undertaking, which may take up the whole man: and
may reprove them who place all their Religion in some one particular duty or
other, not having a respect to all ^he Commandments, Psalm. 119.6.

Obs. 2. In Particular, not to insist upon the Epithets and Designations given
elsewhere in Scripture to godly men; This one place affords us these Characters
of them, and Duties incumbent to them.

1. They ought to be single, straight and downright in their way; without a
crooked bias, or design, in their scope and aim, or subtle and nimble
conveyances in their deportment and way: For, so much does uprightness import,
in the Original.

2. They ought to be Innocent; that is, both blameless and harmless, as it is,
Phil. 2.15. Men of innocent harmless tempers, and carriage; not boisterous,
outrageous, violent and injurious; and men who have innocence to support them,
and to refute all calumnies.

3. They ought also to be Righteous by imputation, (without which all their
moral virtues will not avail them) and to evidence their Communion with Christ
by a righteous behavior.

4. Whatever failings they have daily to mourn for, and to make use of the open
Fountain to wash them; yet they should beware of gross practices, to blot their
Profession; For, they must have clean bands. See Chap. 16.17.

Thirdly, We have to consider the use which the godly will make of Job's
exercise and experience, when it shall be cleared hy God. This is held out in
four Branches.

1. Upright men shall be astonished at this; not only at his afflictions, of
which he has been speaking in the preceding verses, but at the whole complex
bussiness. When godly men shall look at his afflictions and ill usage from his
Friends, it will surprise, confound and astonish them for a time. But when they
shall look again to his carriage under all this, and to Gods determining in his
favors, (as he desires and expects) they will be as much astonished, and made
to admire at the support of a good Conscience, and the issue of his trouble.
Both those may be included here, without any violence to the Text. And it
teaches,

1. The dispensations wherewith the godly are exercised, may, for a time, even
astonish themselves, and other godly men; as bear is imported. And no wonder,
Considering,

1. That, oft-times, godly men are not upon their watch and guard; and
therefore are ready to be surprised with what is strange and unexpected.

2. Though godly men lay their account to meet with much trouble; yet, their
real exercise may be more then any thing they apprehended; For, though Job was
not at ease, Chap. 3.26. Yet, it seems, his great affliction, and the cruelty
of his Friends under it, went beyond any thing he expected.

3. Though godly men may, sometime, be more vexed with trouble, when they do
but apprehend it, then when they feel it; because they look for more then is
inflicted, and do not mind the strength to be given with the tentation: Yet,
there is no trial, which they are thinking upon before hand, but they will find
it, in it self, more searching, when it is their present exercise, then when
they did only contemplate and meditate upon it: And therefore it may astonish
them, though they were thinking upon it beforehand.

4. A right sight, and a right way of reading Gods dispensations, when they are
sad, is not soon attained, nor can be had till it be gifted from above; and
therefore, till God interpose, they will be ready to be confounded.

5. Sad and strange dispensations toward the godly may put themselves and
others to strange thoughts of heart; concerning the purity and holiness of God,
his purposes in his dispensations, etc. beyond what, at other times, they had;
which may be ready, for a time, to over-charge them. See Jer. 12.1. Hab. 1.12,
13, etc.

6. God uses to discover his peoples weakness and humble them, before he let
them see what grace can do in them, and for them, in such strange conditions.
This may guard men's hearts from being discouraged, when they find themselves
thus, for a time, laid by with their own or others troubles. For so we find in
the Lamentations and elsewhere, the people of God very often astonished in
trouble; as appears from these many questions, Lam. 1.1. and 4 1, etc.

Doct. 2. It is the duty, and will be the practice, of godly men, when they are
right, not to stumble or be scandalized at Gods dealing, however they be
astonished or overwhelmed for a time; For, they are but astonished, and the
following words clear that they betake themselves to their feet again. See Jer.
12.1. And though godly men may even stumble for a time; Yet it is good they
bear down such tentations, and do not let them break forth.

3. The afflictions of the godly are no more admirable, than their support, and
the proofs of Gods love toward them, are; And admirable proofs of Gods favor,
in their present support and future issues, are to be expected upon the back of
their admirable trials: For they shall be astonished at the one as well as the
other.

2. The godly man shall stir up himself against the hypocrite: that is, he
shall rowze up himself to maintain his integrity against all the calumnies of
hypocrites, who question his Piety because of his afflictions. Or, he shall not
be tempted, by his own afflictions, to join issue with prospering hypocrites;
but shall abhor their way so much the mo^e, as he finds the worth of a good
Conscience in trouble, and the testimony of God pronouncing in his favors.

Here, Observe,

1. The godly man's party, is, the Hypocrite. It is not to be concluded that, by
this designation, Job in his passion reflects upon his Friends who condemned
him, as judging them to be hypocrites. For, they were inde^d godly men, and Job
would not readily fall rashly to judge of their estate (whatever he might think
of their cause, and their hypocritical way of managing it) when he is reproving
them for the same fault, in their dealing toward himself. And beside, there
were others who reproached him, v. 6. of whom, and such as they, this may be
understood. Neither is hypocrisy to be taken in a strict sense here, as it is
opposed not only to true grace, but to open prof^nity and neglect of all
religious performances; but more largely, for all sorts of wicked men who are
polluted, as the word also signifies. And this designation of an Hypocrite, is
made use of in this place, where he is speaking of all the opposers of his
integrity, and such as harden themselves in their evil way by reason of his
afflictions;

1. Because frequently in Scripture Hypocrites are taken for impious and
polluted men, as the word will bear; and so the name is comprehensive of all
(or, generally, of the most part of) wicked men. And it teaches, That even the
worst of wicked men are (for most part) Hypocrites, in so far as they are yet
worse then they have the impudence to profess themselves to be: And though, in
many things, they proclaim their own vileness; Yet in other things, they still
walk under some vail. And though their works proclaim them Atheists, and such
as acknowledge no Lord over them; yet they do still profess the contrary.

2. Because hypocrisy is the worst of wickedness, and an evil life is so much
more abominable before God, that it is covered with specious pretexts and shows
of better things; therefore all wicked men are designed by that as a most
odious name.

3. This designation is more especially made use of in this place. To show that
no external Profession, nor vail of hypocrisy, should hinder godly men to
oppose and reject the bad courses and Principles of men. For were men never so
pious, as to the state of their persons; yet a bad course carried on with
specious pretenses (as his Friends had fair pretenses for their condemning of
him) is hypocrisy, and they may be opposed as Hypocrites in that,

Observe 2. The godly man's marriage in opposition to this party, is, he shall
stir up himself against such; or shall oppose all their calumnies, and the
tentations to follow their course, by considering Job's experience. It teaches,

1. Sincerity and true honesty is warranted zealously to bear out it self
against unjust imputations.

2. And to stir up and encourage it self, when discouragements and tentations
would arise upon such imputations.

3. The advantage of true Piety, which is found in a time of affliction, may
encourage men, with more zeal and vigor, to abhor a prospering wicked, or,
hypocritical course; For, thus also a godly man stirs up himself against the
hypocrite, not only fortifying himself against his calumnies, but against all
tentations arising upon the sight of his prosperity. If men were finding more
of the advantage of Piety under trouble, they would stumble less at the
prosperity of others in an evil course; and when it is otherwise, tentations
may prove very strong.

3. He shall hold on his way, or, persevere in his course of godliness,
notwithstanding all these discouragements. It teaches,

1. Piety is the godly man's choice, and the way wherein he delights; For, it is
his way. See Psalm. 119.30, 137.

2. No Arguments or Professions will vindicate a man's integrity; unless his
walk do witness it, and his persevering therein, whatever discouragements and
tentations he meet with; For, thus he opposes hypocrites, by holding on his
way.

3. A man may plead his own integrity, who yet is convinced that he needs to
make progress; For, he is for the present, an upright, innocent, and righteous
man, who yet must hold on his way.

4. The way of Piety is so difficult to flesh and blood, and environed with so
much opposition and so many tentations, whereby Satan would drive men out of
their way; that they will not persevere, unless they put forth their strength
effectually, to lay hold upon, and keep, their way: For, the word signifies to
lay fast hold and grip to his way; which is necessary for all, especially when
afflictions and calumnies do oppose them.

5. God will not reject his own, who wrestle with many difficulties in
following him, and so are much humbled in their walk, if so be they keep their
grip; For, he is righteous, and approved, who thus grips to his way, amidst all
difficulties.

4. He shall be stronger and stronger, or be more encouraged in his walk, under
those disadvantages and pressures. It teaches,

1. There is strength and encouragement allowed in Gods way, and it is needful
both in the beginning and progress of our course; As here is imported.

2. This strength is a growing strength, and will increase on their hand who
wait on God; For, he shall be stronger and stronger. See Isai. 40.29, 30, 31.

3. Trouble and outward discouragements will be so far from obstructing this
strength, that God can make strength increase under all those pressures, and
can lay up much furniture against such a time; For, in such a case as Job was
in, the godly man will be stronger and stronger. See 2 Cor. 12.9, 10.

4. Godly men, by their opposing of themselves unto tentations, and going on in
duty, do promove their encouragement; For, by stirring up himself against the
hypocrite, and holding on his way, he shall be stronger and stronger.

Verse. 10. But as for you all, do you return, and come now, for I cannot find
one wise man among you.
Follows the Second Part of the Chapter, wherein Job rejects all those
Consolations which his Friends offered to him upon his repentance; by showing
that he was to die shortly, and therefore it was in vain to expect any such
restitution and proofs of Gods favor, in this life, as they spoke of.

In this verse by way of conclusion to the former, and transition to the
following purpose, he propounds a General Assertion, which he endeavors to
prove in the following Discourse. In this Assertion he says that to his
Friends which he had said of them to God, v. 4. Namely, that none of them
proved wise in this matter, wherein they spoke so much; neither in the main
Controversy concerning his integrity, nor yet (in particular) in advising him
to quit his integrity, in hopes of future restitution upon his repentance. And
therefore he exhorts them to return and come, that is, to quit their Opinion,
and come hear the truth from him, and close with him; or to come to themselves,
out of that labyrinth of Error, wherein they were involved.

As for the truth of this Assertion, Job himself did indeed mistake in the
matter of his approaching death, and in rejecting their Consolations upon that
ground that he would die shortly; Yet, in the general, it holds true, that they
gave no proof of wisdom in that method of proceeding with him, while they
advised a sincere godly man to renounce his former integrity, upon any hopes
whatsoever.

Whence Learn,

1. True Wisdom is a gift far more rare then most part of men think; For, says
he, there is not one wise man among you. Conceit and a show of wisdom does
blind very many, and prejudices and heat in debates will run, even men who are
otherwise no fools, out of breath.

2. Men may be wise, and godly also, who yet prove great fools in judging of
dispensations of Providence, and in dealing with afflicted and troubled minds;
For, it was in this particular, that he could not find one wise man.

3. Whatever conceit men may have of themselves (as readily their self-love
will hide those defects from them, which others will perceive;) or however they
may satisfy others who have little to do; Yet needy souls will soon find out
their emptiness; For, says he, I (who am in distress, and put to it, to need
real comfort) cannot find one wise man among you, or no solid wisdom in your
flowers of Discourse. Such as are in trouble, may, indeed, be in a Fever, and
so apt to mistake in many things; Yet they will soon miss that in a Comforter
which others will not.

4. Albeit godliness teach men modesty and sobriety, and to be tender of the
reputation of others; yet that does not hinder them to tell men what they are,
when they are called to it, in the defense of Truth, and that they may give a
check to their proud conceit of themselves; For, Job here spares not to tell
his Friends Friends freely of their want of wisdom.

5. Tenderness will not prompt men to tell others their faults, that they may
insult over them, or dash and discourage them, but out of love to reclaim them;
For, he tells them this, that they may return, or, change their Opinion, and
come now, to themselves, or, to close with him, and learn of him.

6. It is the duty and commendation of men, when they are found to be wrong,
not to persist in it because of their reputation, but to quit it, and come and
learn truth; As Job's Exhortation to them imports.

Verse. 11. My days are past, my purposes are broken off, even the thoughts of
my heart.
In the rest of this Discourse, Job proceeds to prove their folly and want of
wisdom, in giving him any hopes of restitution; by showing how low he was
brought, and how hopeless his condition was in it self, v. 11, 12. how he could
in reason expect no issue out of it in this life, v. 13, 14. and (consequently)
how groundless their offers were, v. 15, 16.

In the first place, to prove that his health or restitution, was hopeless in
it self; he not only declares that his trouble gave him to understand that his
days were near an end, (in the beginning of this verse) but, further, he gives
two Evidences of his low and wasted condition. One (in the rest of this verse)
is, That, by reason of his misery, pain and trouble, all his purposes were
broken off, even those thoughts which had been the long possessions (as it is
in the Original) of his heart. Whereby we are to understand, not so much those
particular thoughts of his restitution and deliverance from this trouble, to
which he speaks afterward (for it appears not he had any such thoughts since
his trouble came upon him, whatever thoughts he sometime had of the continuance
of his prosperity, when he enjoyed it, Chapter 29.18.) As, in general, that all his
well ordered purposes, and exercises, wherewith he had been so long acquainted,
and all his refreshful thoughts in the days of his prosperity, were plucked up
by the extremity of his trouble, and other exercise put in his hand, as it is
in the following verse.

Leaving Job's mistake about his approaching death, and the end of his days, we
may here Learn,

2. The days of men are but passing, and will at last come to a period; For
Job's apprehension, that his days are past, supposes this as a General Truth,
that man's days will pass.

2. The Lord may, in deep wisdom, bring men to the gates of death, and exercise
them with thoughts thereof; that they may give a proof how they will look upon
it, and may find what grace will do in such an exigent, and that he may
evidence his power in delivering from it: For these, among other causes, is Job
brought to apprehend approaching death, My days are past.

3. Man, being a rational creature, and not at his rest in this life, has his
mind full of purposes, resolutions and projects, whereby (especially when he
prospers, and is in vigor) he refreshes and delights himself, and
endeavors to add to the satisfaction of his actual enjoyments; For, so is
supposed that Job had purposes, and thoughts, which were so delectable and
habitual to him, that they became the possessions of his heart. Men had need to
look well what those thoughts, are which haunt their hearts; for thereby they
will know themselves better then by their actings.

4. Not only will death make the thoughts and projects of most men to perish,
Psalm. 146.4. But even sore afflictions in this life will break, over-turn and
interrupt, many of their sweet thoughts and purposes; For, says he, My
purposes are broken off, or plucked up, even the possessions of my heart. Not
only can the Lord make sore afflictions batter down all men's thoughts and
expectations of good things within time, even after they have long stood out
under some measure of trials, and have had possessions of heart, and settled
thoughts that it should be otherwise, Mat 1.4. (And when afflictions seem thus
to over-turn our expectations, it is our duty to quit and yield them up to God;
as Job in this discourse does, apprehending he was to die.) But even Saints are
not to think it strange, if the Lord, by sore affliction, over-turn their
orderly sweet thoughts and exercises under prosperity, and about the
improvement of it to his glory; and, in place thereof, fill them with restless
confusion; as it was with Job. And as from this Truth, in general, men should
learn to curb their vain thoughts and purposes, which time (and even a cross
before the end of their time) can over-turn, and to labor after other purposes
and designs, which affliction can never overthrow, however it interrupt them:
So the godly, in particular, should take warning to improve their time well in
spiritual thoughts and purposes, while they have ease, considering that
affliction may put an interruption unto them.

5. Unto a godly man it is not only a sad exercise, but an evidence of his very
low condition, when his troubles do drive him from all his sweet purposes and
resolutions; For, Job propounds it, not only as matter of lamentation, but, as
an evidence of his low condition, and that his days were past, that his
purposes are broken off, etc. As, indeed, however he mistook the matter of his
death; Yet, as it was no ordinary, but very deadly trouble that could drive
him, a godly man, off those Principles and thoughts which were so delectable to
him: So, it could not but waste and spend him much more, that he was deprived
of them.

Verse. 12. They change the night into day: the light is short, because of
darkness.
Another Evidence of his low and spent condition is taken from his restless
anxious thoughts; And that, in stead of his former sweet thoughts and purposes,
his present calamities, and his anxious thoughts about them, did so toss him,
that he got not the nights rest; but night was as day to him, and his dark
condition through trouble made the day seem short, or nothing at all.

Whence Learn,

1. Anxious thoughts are very frequent in trouble, and have a strange Empire
and Command over the afflicted; For, says he, They (that is, my purposes and
thoughts, which before were sweet, v. 11. are now so changed that they) change
the night into day, etc. or, so haunt me, that they take up all my time, by
night and by day.

2. An afflicted spirit is so restless, that it will deprive the wearied body
of rest; so that such would esteem sleep a mercy; For, says he, They change
the night into day, or keep me as busy and throng, as if it were daylight,
and not the time appointed for man's rest.

3. However men in trouble, and vexed in mind, are ready to wish a change of
what is present, as expecting some ease thereby: Yet, no chage of their outward
condition will change their exercise, till their minds be cured: For, albeit
persons that are troubled by night, may long for the day, Deuteronomy. 28.67. yet
neither night nor day brought any ease to Job: But as his vexations changed the
night into day, so they made the light short, or near, to wit, to go down. For
so the word, near, signifies that which is of short continuance, Chap. 20.5.
in the Original.

4. Godly men may have some taste of the wickeds vexing lots; for their
exercise and trial of faith, and that they may be made sensible, by experience,
how great the misery is from which they are delivered: For, Job here has some
taste of that restlesness which is threatened against the wicked, Deuteronomy. 28.67.

5. The condition of Saints may be very dark in trouble, and that is it which
makes it so sad and vexing to them, that it deprives them of rest; For, it is
because of darkness that he is thus anxious and restless. The meaning whereof
is, not only that the darkness of the night, and his toil in it, took away all
the comfort of the light of the day, and made it short, (Though it be likely
that, however neither night nor day afforded him ease, yet, comparatively, the
night was more troublesome then the day, which makes him complain that it was
short in comparison of darkness, as the words also may bear) But, also, that
his dark and involved condition did vex him both by night and day. This tells,
what a mercy it is to see through a thick cloud of trouble, and how necessary
the Word is for that end.

6. Saints may be assaulted with continual restlesness, even till they be made
to despair of life, who yet may come through and get a good issue; For, so was
it with Job here, who, by reason of these vexations, laid his account to die,
and yet was preserved.

Verse. 13. If I wait, the grave is mine house: I have made my bed in the
darkness.

14. I have said to corruption, Thou art my father: to the worm, Thou art my
mother, and my sister.


In the second place, Job, having given an account how low and hopeless his
condition was, in it self, does now declare how hopeless also he was of it, and
what he was expecting to follow upon it. Namely, That should he wait never so
much (as they desired) for restitution in this life, yet he was sure to go to
his grave ere it came, where he should have a dark bed, and rottenness and
worms, in place of all his dearest Friends, Relations and Acquaintances.

Here Job seems to point at somewhat spoken by Eliphaz of the wicked man, or
hypocrite, Chap. 15.22. as nothing doubting of his own integrity, though he
were like them, in not expecting any restitution in this life. And albeit he
did mistake, in his certain expectation of death and the grave; (For though it
followed probably, on his afflicted and vexed condition, v. 11, 12. that he
might die: yet he ought not certainly to have concluded, that he would die;
seeing God might interpose, as he did:) Yet, the General Doctrine teaches,

1. When men's actual enjoyments, are gone, their hopes are left to uphold them;
As here is supposed, that when for present he is low, his next work is to see
if he may hope, and wait for any better lot to come. 1 Cor. 15.19.

2. Hopes exercise is patient waiting for the performance of what we hope for;
For, here, he that hopes is said to wait. The word may signify both, waiting
being the fruit of hope. 1 These. 1.3. Romans 8.25. And here, we are to take heed
of refusing to tarry Gods leisure, who has times and seasons in his own hand,
and knows what is best for us; We ought, also, to beware of being angry at
our afflictions, or at God for afflicting us, and of distrusting his power, to
perform what we have warrant to expect, and, in the mean time, to make our
waiting useful to us. For all these distempers will interrupt our patient
waiting.

3. Death will, at last, cut off all our temporal hopes, by cutting the thread
of our life upon which they all hang; For, so he argues, that his approaching
death proved all waiting for temporal restitution to be vain.

4. It is a very sad exercise when men are filled with hopes and expectations,
and then are disappointed; For, so he imports it would be to him, if he waited
for restitution, and then the grave came in stead of it. See Jer. 14 19. This
should teach men to be sober, mortified and well grounded, in their
expectations, lest otherwise, they add to their own miseries.

5. Death brings a man to a low condition outwardly; For, then he gets the
grave for his house, his bed (and then a bed only, or a place wherein his body
lies, suffices him) is in darkness, and corruption, or rottenness, and worms
are in place of all his Friends and Relations, of Father, Mother, or Sister:
This may teach men how little cause they have to glory in their worldly pomp
and splendor, whereof this will be the result at last. See Psalm. 49.11, 12,
13, 14.

6. Albeit death, in it self, be an Enemy; and albeit godly men may have
tentations to fear death, Heb. 2.15. and, in some cases, they may desire to
live for a time, till their condition be cleared; Psalm. 27.13. and 39.13. Yet,
they are allowed not to fear death, but to be familiar with it, when it comes;
and their happiness is so sure, that they may undervalue and reject all the
comforts of time, and triumph over the wrack of all their worldly hopes: As
here Job gives over all expectations of what they suggested to him, and has
familiar thoughts of death.

7. It is the duty of Saints, before death come, and when they are alarmed with
it, to become familiar with it before hand; As here Job turns his back upon his
hopes, and resolutely looks upon death, and what it would bring him to; I have
made my bed, says he, I have said to corruption, etc. as a man that is
resolved before hand.

8, It commends the power of grace, that Saints are made so familiar with
death, and yet it has nothing beautiful or desirable in it self; For, it is
darkness, worms, and corruption, and yet it is lovely to him, even in those its
worst colors.

Verse. 15. And where is now my hope? as for my hope, who shall see it?

16. They shall go down to the bars of the pit, when our rest together is in
the dust.


In the last place, from what Job has said, he concludes that they fed him
with groundless hopes; and that it was in vain to bid him (who was so near to
death) hope for a visible restitution in this life. For, there was no ground
for any such hopes, nor should ever any man see the accomplishment thereof, v.
15. But all those hopes should be found to be irrecoverably gone (as shut up
with bars in the pit) when he and they do lie down together in the pit: Or,
any man that looks to see his hopes accomplished, must go down to the grave
with him, to see what becomes of them there, v. 16. This last Interpretation of
this verse makes it depend upon the end of the former verse by way of answer to
that question, Who shall see my hope? And it not only implies that both he and
they should be dead and in their graves, before ever they saw such a
restitution, as they spoke of; But it may import, further, an intimation that
he had other hopes beyond death and the grave, which men should see
accomplished, after they are come to death and the grave with him: And that
this might sweeten the loss of worldly hopes to him. But the word rendered, to
go down, being of the Feminine Gender in the Original, and so relative rather
to his hopes, then to other persons I adhere to the other Interpretation of the
verse, that no man should ever see the accomplishment of these hopes, but they
should shortly be buried in the grave with himself. And whereas he had spoken
of hope, in the singular number, v. 15. all the Promises they held out being
summed up this one encouragement, that he should have a glorious and
comfortable restitution upon his repentance: Here he speaks of them as many,
they shall go down, etc. that he may point at the several branches of that
promised mercy which they would have him hope for; such as, health of body,
ease of mind, prosperity, honor, etc. not one of which be expected, but all
should be buried with himself.

From the General Doctrine, and Job's mistake, Learn,

1. It is the duty of men to guard against delusion in the matter of their
hopes; Therefore does Job reason so strongly against the admitting of what he
thought ill grounded, that so he might not deceive himself.

2. Whatever God may please to do in outward things; yet it is in vain to
comfort men only with temporal hopes; seeing they may die, and at last will
die, and leave them all: For, upon this ground does he reject all their offers
and grounds of hope, that he and they are about to lie down in the grave
together. And albeit he was mistaken; yet they are but poor hopes, of which at
any time it may be said, Where are they? Who shall see them? and which the dust
will bring to nothing.

3. Whereas other trials, within time, do but cut off some of our hopes, and
that not without a possibility of recovering them, or somewhat in their stead;
death does cut off all worldly hopes, and that irrecoverably: For, it is a pit,
that has bars to shut in men and their hopes.

4. Whatever death deprive the godly of; yet in this it is sweet, that then
they come to rest from all their outward toil and vexation, as well as they
lose their temporal hopes; For, there is a rest in the dust, which, in some
respect, is true of all men, Chap 3.17, 18. but especially and completely, of
the godly.

5. As many are but too eager upon worldly hopes and expectations; So others
(however they do well to be taken up with the hope of glory, and to keep a
loose grip of worldly expectations, yet they) come short in that confidence and
expectation they should have, even about temporal mercies and difficulties;
For, Job came short here, in not expecting (at least, with submission) what the
event proved God intended for him. I grant it is not safe to urge men to
entertain temporal and worldly hopes, especially in their own particulars; Yet,

1. It is a fault when men, under great troubles, are only for dying, not
minding any other thing to which God calls them, nor submitting, if it please
God otherwise to dispose of them; For, in this Job exceeded.

2. It is a fault when men weary of needful exercise, and so cast away all
desire or hope of life, because they account it intolerable to live; which was
also Job's weakness, as appears from several passages in this Book.

3. It is, also, a fault to quit hope, because of any difficulty, or
improbability of the thing hoped for; As Job, from his present hopeless-like
condition, concludes certainly he will die; not minding how God was able to
interpose, when he pleased. See Romans 4.19, 20, 21.

CHAP. XVIII.
In this Chapter Bildad the Second time makes a Reply to Job; wherein (as is
marked in the entry to Chap. 15. and was the practice of Eliphaz also) he makes
use of no new Arguments to convince Job, nor almost Disputes at all. But only,
in an angry and bitter Discourse, points out the miseries of the wicked, that
so he may convince Job, that, whatever he plead for himself, yet his present
condition, and the hand of God upon him, prove him to be wicked. And withal, he
is so imbittered, that he leaves out all that he had spoken in his former
Discourse to invite him to Repentance, Chap. 8.5, 6, 7. and of the advantages
of true Piety, Chap. 8.20, 21, 22. as judging his condition desperate, by
reason of his obstinacy.

The Chapter contains, 1. A Preface, wherein he taxes several faults in Job's
discourses and carriage, as namely, Loquacity, and Inadvertency to what they
spoke, ver. 2. a proud contempt of them, ver. 3. and a desperate fretting
against God, and his fixed Order of Providence in the World, ver. 4. 2. A
Narration of the miserable state of the wicked, expressed, partly, in borrowed
terms, and by similitudes, taken from extinguishing of light, ver. 5, 6. from
wild Beasts or Birds taken in a net, ver. 7, 8, 9, 10. from a legal procedure
against a Malefactor, ver. 11. -- 15. and, from the rooting up of a tree, ver.
16. Partly, in proper terms; that the wickeds memory and estimation shall be
extinguished, ver. 17. that they shall be driven into misery, and out of the
world, v. 18. that their family shall be desolate, ver. 19. and that their
calamities shall be matter of astonishment and fear to the present and
succeeding generations, ver. 20. In all which Narration, he reflects much upon
Job's case, and what had befaln him, that he might let him see that what he
suffered was the wickeds lot, as he expresses his scope in the conclusion of
his Discourse, v. 21.

Verse. 1. Then answered Bildad the Shuhite, and said,

2. How long will it be, ere you make an end of words? Mark, and afterward we
will speak.


THe faults wherewith Bildad charge Job, in his Discourses and Carriage, are
four; The first whereof (v. 2.) is, Loquacity, and that he would never make an
end of words, or, of his discourses, which were but words, and no more. It is,
indeed, true that Job spoke much, and more then they; (and, belike, Bildad did
interrupt Job's Discourse, which he was about to have continued, if he had not
broken in thus upon him, as a talkative man.) Yet it was only out of the
abundance of his distress, and in his own necessary defense against their
unjust censures and imputations, that he spoke so much. Whereas themselves
rather, were guilty of this fault, who vexed him with so many Tautologies to no
purpose, still repeating what he had so often refuted. The second fault charged
upon him (v. -- 2.) is, Inadvertency, and that his arrogance and passion made
him so little heed or ponder what they said, that all they had hitherto spoken
was fruitless, as to him. And therefore Bildad advises Job now to consider and
take heed, that he may repeat what he thinks may convince him. Yet this was not
Job's fault, more then the former; For he had attended and marked their
discourses, and found them empty, Chap. 16.2. But it was rather their own
fault, who (being nettled with a supposed reproach, as it is, v. 3. and Chap.
20.3,) did not heed his discourses; but would obtrude their dictates upon him.
It is also to be marked that, in this and the following verse, Bildad speaks to
Job in the plural number, as if he had others with him; either because he had
indeed some present who assented to what he said in this debate (as seems also
to be hinted, Chapter 34 4.) or rather by this way of speaking he would reflect
upon Job as an arrogant man, who esteemed of himself as if he were as good and
able as many put together, and himself alone to be preferred, in the matter of
his Judgment and Opinion, to all of them who opposed him.

From these verses Learn,

1. Controversies and Debates, once started, are not soon ended; But men's
Interests, Reputation, and Passions, will hold them on, and obstruct the clear
discovery of Truth, on the one hand, at least. For, hence it is that this
debate continues so long, and after all that has been said, Bildad answered,
and engaged again. This serves to discover their guilt who rashly open this
sluice of Contention, Prove. 17.14. and to warn them who are engaged in such
unpleasant exercises, to walk with much caution, fear and trembling.

2. Gods Children must resolve to be tossed on all hands, till their trial be
perfected; For Job has here three Friends, one of whom, when the rest are
weary, does assault him continually.

3 Debates will readily raise passions, and beget personal prejudices and
reflections, and other mistakes; For, in all their discourses, ere they enter
upon the main Controversy, they have still a fling of passion at him, upon the
account of his way which they mistook; and Bildad observes that same method
here.

4. Men ought to consider, not only what they are doing, but to what purpose
they do it; For, Bildad challenges Job that, though he seemed to be very
busy, yet he was really idle, speaking many words, and but words, as he
judged. Wherein, though he was mistaken, yet the General Doctrine is found.

5. To triffle away precious time, especially when men have opportunity to
employ it better, is an heinous sin; For, so much also may be gathered in
general from this challenge, wherein Bildad supposes it to be Job's fault,
(and by making a question of it, implies Job could not justify it, as it
could not have been justified, had it been true) that he was so long wasting
time with words, when he should have been about another work, and hearkening to
them, while they propounded grounds for his humiliation.

6. Such as would judge aright of the actions of others, ought also seriously
to consider what their condition is, and what puts them upon these actions;
For, herein Bildad failed in looking only how much Job spoke, not minding his
distress which drove him to it. See 2 Kings 4.27.

7. Self-love will readily so blind men, especially while they are in heat and
passion, that they may impute faults to others, whereof themselves are really
guilty; For, he charge Job with Loquacity, when himself and the rest were
only guilty of it, in speaking so much, and nothing to the afflicted man's case.

8. Inadvertency, and not attending to what is spoken, is a great evil, as
being the cause of fruitless bearing, and rendering men's pains and diligence in
Doctrine, useless; For, so much may be gathered in general from that
Exhortation, Mark, and afterward we will speak: which implies that it is to no
purpose to speak, unless they who hear do mark, or, consider and understand, as
the word is.

9. It is a very great fault to judge of men, and their proficiency, by their
acquiescing in our judgments; For, in Particular, this Error is supposed in
this Exhortation, that Bildad judged Job to be still arrogant and inadvertent,
so long as he heard not so as to become of their opinion.

Verse. 3. Wherefore are we counted as beasts, and reputed vile in your sight?
The third fault, which he challenges in Job's discourse and way, is, his
proud and arrogant contempt and sleighting of them, as if they had been Beasts
and vile things in his eyes. Job had indeed sent some of them to the Beasts, to
be taught, Chap. 12.7. and had called them all liars, and Physicians of no
value, Chap. 13.4. and told them that they were not wise, Chap. 17.4, 10 But
all this was spoken in the necessary defense of his cause, and of the truth it
self. Neither does he reflect upon their persons, nor their Piety, nor yet does
he simply and absolutely call them erroneous and unwise, but only in this
particular cause, wherein they were indeed faulty and defective. And yet Bildad
cannot endure it, but does resent it as a notable injury.

From all which Learn,

1. As men's Credit and Reputation ought not unjustly to be blasted, nor they
irritated thereby, Matthew. 5.22. So Reputation is so great an Idol, to the most
of men, that it may not be touched upon any terms and whatsoever is said of
their real faults, they look upon it as reflecting upon their Reputation: Thus
does Bildad here judge of what Job spoke of their Errors, and challenges him
by way of question, witnessing his indignation. Such spirits may look for many
rubs.

2. Proud men look upon what others do to them through a multiplying and false
glass, which represents their way worse then it is, and sometime what it is not
at all; For, when Job abases them in his own defense, that he might discover
their Error, and humble them, Bildad says, they are affronted; and when he
speaks sharply to them of their ignorance; he makes it worse then it is, as if
he called them, beasts, and esteemed them to be vile and polluted persons;
whereas all he said was, that they were mistaken in their Doctrine, and
ignorant of truth in this particular Controversy, which yet might be learned
by studying the Providence of God about the Beasts and other Creatures.

3. Men are more apt to resent zeal or supposed injuries, then to ponder how
justly they are so dealt with; For, Bildad could not bear this censure at Job's
hands, and yet did not consider how he and the rest deserved it by their
carriage. If such as cannot endure reproaches would learn to do well, they
would take a safer and surer course. And they who are most accurate in their
walk, will bear reproaches with least disturbance.

4. Men may be very tender skinned in the matter of their own Reputation, who
yet may be lavish in laying load, more then enough, upon the Reputation of
others; For, Bildad here carps, if an afflicted man let out but a bitter word
in his own defense; and yet he never considers that himself and his two
Companions were far more bitter against Job, who had less need of it, and could
worse bear it. See Chap. 16.4. But it is ordinarily found that they who make an
Idol of their own Reputation, are least tender of the Reputation of others.

Verse. 4. He teareth himself in his anger: shall the earth be forsaken for
thee? and shall the rock be removed out of his place?
The fourth fault challenged in Job's Discourse and way (by mentioning whereof,
Bildad makes way for the Second Part of his Discourse) is, That in debating the
main Controversy, Job did express much desperate impatience and fury, and
fretful and insolent murmuring against God and his Providence. The fault
challenged by Bildad, is, anger, or impatient fretting at Gods dealing; which
he amplifieth and aggravateth,

1. From its effects, That it did tear and rent him, as a wild Beast teareth
its prey; and made him tear himself, or, his soul, as it is in the Original.
That is, his own impatience was the sting of his afflictions, and tormented him
more then the cross it self did.

2. He aggravates this fault from the absurdity thereof, considering against
whom, and what it was he fretted at; in the rest of the verse. In the
understanding whereof, there is some diversity of Opinions. For these words,
Shall the Earth be forsaken for thee? are by some looked upon as an Argument
against Job's Opinion in this Controversy, that the godly may be no better
dealt with, in outward things, then the wicked are. And they take up the force
of the Argument thus; That, the Earth must be forsaken, or, it were better the
world were made void of Inhabitants, and all the godly taken out of it, if
Job's Opinion were true, that the godly were no better dealt with then the
wicked. Now, this being absurd, there is no reason why the Earth should be
forsaken for him, or, such a wild absurdity admitted to gratify him: This
Argument (if Bildad intend any such thing) is very weak: For, it argues great
weakness in men, either to cast out with Piety, or weary ofttime, merely
because of outward troubles. And beside, Though the outward lot of the godly
and the wicked were the same in this life; yet, (to say nothing of the eternal
difference that will be betwixt the one and the other) there is a great
difference betwixt punishment inflicted upon the one, and trials exrcising the
other; betwixt the pure and unmixed wrath of God let out upon the wicked, and
fatherly displeasure against his own, where the cloud is never so dark, but
they may see his favor through it; and betwixt the torture of an evil
Conscience, and the peace of a good Conscience, under trouble. All these do
sufficiently distinguish them, although they undergo the same outward trial.
But leaving this Interpretation, which seems to put a force upon the Text, I
conceive both these questions, Shall the Earth be forsaken for thee? and shall
the Rock be removed out of his place? do contain (as has been said) a serious
aggravation of Job's fault, and a challenging of him for the absurdity that was
in his way. His impatience (as he conceived) was but a barking against God and
the constant course of his Providence on Earth (in punishing wicked men, and
rewarding the godly) which is as fixed and unalterable as a Rock. And therefore
he judges it most absurd in Job to think that it would be otherwise, or that
God should give over to govern the Earth justly, and alter his fixed way of
Providence, to gratify him who was but a wicked man. He might well vex
himself, but it would be to no purpose: For all wicked men would be still dealt
with as he was (as he tells him more fully, in pursuance of this, v. 5, etc.)
unless God should turn the world, and way of his Providence, upside down, to
gratify him.

Before I speak to this purpose in it self, somewhat would be spoken of
Bildad's mistakes and his mis-applications of what is true. Where,

Obs. 1. This fault of impatience, here charged upon Job, is indeed a great
sin; But as for the truth of the charge, and Job's accession to it, Upon the
one hand, it is certain that Bildad wrongs Job, in some respects, and does
mistake both the nature and degree of his passion. For though he did complain,
(as even a man who is a mirror of Patience, such as he was, James 5.11. may be
driven to that in trouble) yet he had no wicked anger, or desperate
tearing-impatience, nor did he maliciously carp at Providence, as he supposed.
Upon the other hand, it must also be granted that Job was not free of some
measure of sinful passion, for which he is checked by Elihu, and after him, by
God himself. Only here is the difference, Bildad and the other two Friends
spoke truly, when they asserted Job was passionate; but they hit wrong in
charging it upon him upon a false ground, asserting that he was impatient,
because he would not grant this to be Gods fixed way, to afflict only the
wicked as he did him; but did contradict and oppose this their Opinion,
sometime with heat and sharpness enough. Job would not at all take with the
guilt of being passionate upon this account; but the justice of his cause, and
the strength of reason whereby he maintained it (which they judged to be but
furious impatience) bears him out against all their reflections and challenges.
Yea, sometime his weakness takes occasion of their unjust censures, to break
out into real fits of passion; t^ll God interpose, who hits the right vein, and
lets him see wherein he is indeed passionate (namely, in maintaining his good
cause with indirect reflections upon God) and then he takes with his fault and
stoops. All this may teach, That many real faults, when they are reproved, yet
are not taken with, through the ill managing of the challenge, when either want
of meekness in the reprover alienates affection, and so ma^s the cure; or, want
of prudence obstructs the challenge, that it gets not in, or when men do not
solidly instruct their challenges, nor reprove with Doctrine, 2 Timothy 4.2. For,
thus did Bildad fall short in charging Job with impatience.

Hence we may infer,

1. That when men are called to reprove others, even for real faults, they
should not look upon it as an easy task, to get them well charged home.

2. That upon the other hand, though men be able to avoid challenges, as they
are given them by men, and upon their grounds; yet they should try narrowly,
whether God may not have the fault it self to charge upon them, upon another
account. And for this end, every imputation, just or unjust, should be looked
on as saying somewhat from God; And it should be considered, that God,
oft-times, lets men pitch upon false challenges, or false grounds of
accusation, wherein we may hold up our face, that we may the more seriously
take with true challenges, upon true grounds, before him. Herein Job was
deficient, who looked so much to the unjust grounds upon which his Friends
charged him with passion, that he forgot to take with the fault at all, till
God came and put him to it.

Obs. 2. Though Bildad speak soundly in the General, that Gods fixed way of
Providence should not be altered, to gratify the humors of men; yet, he erred
in the Application, thinking that which he asserted (that God afflicts only the
wicked, as he did Job) to be the fixed course of Gods Providence, unalterable
as a Rock. It is true, Gods order is firm, so as not to be altered at men's
pleasure; yet, it is not true, that this is Gods order. It teaches, That
Error may be very powerful and effectual upon men, and may cause them to look
upon that as a very certain truth, which is indeed a very gross mistake and
error; Such as is Bildad's Opinion here. Which warns men to try and examine
their Opinions well, even those wherein they think they have a firm persuasion.

Having thus cleared these mistakes, if we look upon this purpose in general,
and in it self, abstracting from his mis-applications, and from his particular
Opinion concerning Gods Providence, it may afford us these sound Instructions.

1. The ordinary result of sharp afflictions, is, passion and impatient
fretting at our lot; For, Bildad supposes that anger was Job's frame, whereof
too many are guilty under afflictions, as he was also in part. Pride, want of
submission, and unwillingness to be afflicted, fullness of lusts, carnal
discouragements, and even weakness in Saints, and the irritations they meet
with, are apt to breed much passion instead of other exercise, and to break the
spirit, when it should stoop and bow. Thus was it with Jonah, Jon. 4.1, 9. and
thus is it especially, with the wicked, as is foretold, Rev. 16.9. and employed,
Romans 9.20. and therefore we would especially guard against this distemper in
trouble, for it is an exercise easily attained, whereas right exercise under
the Cross is not attained without difficulty and wrestling.

2. Passion and Impatience is an evil very hard to deal withal; and they who
would oppose and cure it in others, will hardly know to what hand to turn them,
or where to begin: For, in this challenge, Bildad begins with complaining of
Job to his Friends, Ho teareth, etc. and then turns to complain of this fault
to himself, Shall the Earth be forsaken for thee? as hardly knowing what course
to take, or how to get in upon him. See Chap. 4.2. It is true, Bildad mistook
Job in part, yet this is a certain Truth, That men in passion should consider
that they are under a distemper, and therefore when any thing spoken to them
pleases them not, they should consider that the cause of it may be their own
distempered taste. They, likewise, who have such to deal with, would remember
that it is a task too hard for them, till they put themselves in Gods hand.

3. When men look aright upon their lots and conditions, they will find that
the sting and bitterness of their crosses lies in their own impatience, which
distempereth their souls and spirits; For, says he, He teareth himself (or,
his soul) in his anger. Many things we fret at in our impatient fits and
distempers, which are not real afflictions, but (how ill soever we relish them)
real mercies, tending to our own and others good, and which it would be (in so
far) a misery to want. Thus Jonah is angry at his own lot and Gods dealing with
Niniveh, when yet it wa^ (...) singular mercy, that so many souls were
perserved from the stroke of justice, and his mercy, that he was employed as an
Instrument in that Preservation. Further, Such things as are real afflictions,
and sad, would be most easy, if Pride, Impatience and Murmuring were laid
aside, and Humility, stooping and meekness, studied, as Psalm. 39.9. Withal,
Whatever use or fruit the Lord call for, or intend, in our affliction,
impatience hinders it all, like a boisterous wind that brings no rain; and so
we prolong our own trial. A man that is impatient possesses not his own soul,
Luke 21.19. and so cannot rationally improve his trial. Yea, thereby he makes
shipwreck of more then trouble could deprive him of. If this were well studied,
we would find that Patience and Submission is a compendious way to get ease,
and a remedy of all that ails us. And for attaining thereof, the following
Instructions, concerning the Providence of God, will afford some help and
direction.

4. God has a Providence in the Earth; As here is implied, That he forsakes
not the Earth. See Acts 17.28. Men should still remember, and fix their eye
upon this Providence in all things: which may keep them from barking at God in
their impatience, (as indeed impatience reflects upon God, whatever we pretend
in it, Exodus 16.2, 3, 7, 8.) Isa. 45 9. And, being at peace with him, may
secure us of all Providential Dispensations, be what they will, that they shall
do us no hurt.

5. The Providence of God is Universal, on the Earth. (See Matthew. 10.29, 30.
and 6.26, 28, 29.) and constant and perpetual; The Earth is not forsaken; as
Atheists reckon, Ezekiel 9.9. This teaches us, to see God in every thing, and not
in things which please us only; and, to acknowledge his mercy, who, though he
be provoked, cease not to uphold and govern the Earth, yea, and to bring
about that which may be for the good of his people. And if he have an hand in
all things, we are bound to believe that the most cross dispensations do very
well beseem his Goodness, Holiness, Justice, Wisdom, etc. seeing he does
nothing but what is like himself: and that when he has tried, purged and
humbled his people, he can bring about good out of the bitterest of them, even
meat out of the eater. Such Principles as those, being fixed and seriously
studied, may prevent many mistakes and fears.

6. The Dominion and Providence of God is ordered and fixed at his own
pleasure, and not to be altered at the pleasure, humors and arbitrament of
meant of men, whose passions are very inconstant and variable: For, the Earth is
not to be forsaken for him, and Gods Providence is like a Rock not to be
removed It is true, it may please God to alter his own way of outward dealing
with men, whether good or bad; And it was Bildad's Error to think that God
still ^stricted himself (like an unalterable Rock) to one (...) ^eding, in
punishing the wicked and rew^ ^odly: Yet in this respect there is a truth in
it: That God being Sovereign Lord, there is no reason he should alter his way
(be what it will) to gratify the humors of any. Shall the Earth be forsaken,
and the Rock removed, for thee? See Chap. 23.13.

Here we are to consider,

1. Upon the one hand, when we are dissatisfied with his dealing, and would be
otherwise guided; right rea^n would tell us, that this is a contest with God:
and that not about a trifle, but a very special Jewel of his Crown; whether he
or we should be absolute and Supreme? whose will should be a Law? Whether he or
we should prescribe and give Laws? In which case, our reason may tell us, we
ought not to contend with him, and that (however we prove impertinent and
presumptuous) there is no cause why he should cede and quit his Prerogative, to
please us.

2. Upon the other hand, though our corruption may be ready to repine at this,
as an hard measure, that we must thus stoop and renounce our will; Yet, a Child
of God may look upon it as his mercy that his guiding is not in his own hand,
who (had he the world, or his own condition, in guiding) would be sure to
misguide all: But that it is in his hand whose Wisdom, Power, and even Love to
his People, is infinitely above their skill and power, or true love to
themselves. If Saints were at their own disposal, they would never abide so
much trial as is necessary for their good every way, in purging them, and
fitting them for proofs of Gods love, and they would miss of all those proofs
of kindness which he brings about by cross means. And therefore if we were
wise, though our will, and the carving of our lot were put in our own hand, we
could never do better with it, then put it back again in Gods hand.

Doct 7. The study of God, and of his fixed Providence, should teach men
submission to what they meet with; For, this being (as Bildad supposed) Gods
settled course of proceeding with men, he would have Job give over impatience,
and stoop. It is true, the Lord may, sometime, work strange things, above the
ordinary course, for the relief of his people, as David insinuates he did for
him, Psalm. 18.7, etc. But it is our duty, not to prescribe unto him to do such
things for us; but whatever he please to do, we ought to say, it is the Lord, 1 Samuel 3.18. and submit, laying our hand upon our mouth, Psalm. 39.9. and
digesting what we cannot get otherwise ordered, Jer. 10.19. This is a sweet
exercise in all turns, and times that pass over us; especially considering that
God does all things well (as was said of Christ, Mark 7.37.) and that he does
exercise his Sovereignty, but with an eye to his peoples profit, Heb. 12.10.
His very crossing of their humors is their mercy, and that they are crossed by
any of his dispensations proves that they are given to be medicinal; So that
even disappointments of their expectations and desires will be the matter of
their praise, when they come to judge aright of their lots.

8. As all quarrels at Gods Providence are sinful and unjust; So, in
particular, it is an evidence of singular impatience, when men will not submit
to be exercised with common lots, but would be singularly dealt with, and
exempted from those: For, so Bildad supposes Job would have God to take a new
way, for him, different from the way he had taken in all ages with the godly
and wicked. And this he censures as a great fault (as it was indeed great, had
it been true) that he should seek to have the Earth forsaken, and the Rock
removed, for him, and would not submit to be dealt with as others. If men
should not quarrel God, even though they were afflicted in a singular way, and
there were no sorrow like unto theirs; considering that Gods Sovereignty is
absolute to do so, if he please; that he has singular support and proofs of
love to allow upon his people in such exigents; and, that what is singular in
our lot, is fitted to our case and need: Much more must it be odious to quarrel
those lots which are common to men: 1 Cor. 10 13. and to take it ill that we
find the world vanity, since it is so to all others, as if we should have a new
world and Providence fitted to our humor.

9. Whoever quarrel Providence, when they are exercised but with common lots,
they bewray much pride; For, so much is imported in that reflection, for thee?
whereby he would tax Job's supposed pride in this matter, and would teach him
to think less of himself alone, when compared with all the world beside, than
he did. The study of humility would give a speedy issue in lots, which to pride
seem intolerable; and how low soever passionate discouragement seem to lie, yet
it is far from humility. Job was much broken, and yet Bildad supposes him to
be proud; which was very true, though he took not the right way to convince him
of it.

10. Men (and especially good men) in cold blood, and when Conscience begins to
speak, will be most strict Judges and severe Censurers of their own
miscarriages under tentation; For Bildad having complained of Job to his
Friends, in the beginning of the verse. He teareth himself, etc. does afterward
lay the matter home to his own door, by way of question, Shall the Earth be
forsaken, etc? intimating how sharply Job would censure his own carriage, when
he came to himself: See Psalm. 73.11, 12, 13, 21, 22. This shows, how little
men (and particularly, Saints) are themselves in their fits of passion, as may
be seen in Jonah, Jon. 4.9. And therefore when they loose the reins to passion,
they should remember what bitter repentance and sorrow may be in the issue
thereof, when they shall seriously reflect upon it.

Verse. 5. Yea, the light of the wicked shall be put out, and the spark of his
fire shall not shine.

6. The light shall be dark in his tabernacle, and his candle shall be put out
with him.


Follows the Second Part of the Chapter, containing a Narration of the
miserable estate of the wicked; wherein he reflects much upon Job's present
case, as intending to prove that what he suffered was the wickeds lot, as may
be gathered from his conclusion, v. 21. He propounds this lot of the wicked in
borrowed terms, wherein he makes use of four similitudes, to v. 17. and in
proper terms to v, 21. and then sums up the scope of his Discourse by way of
conclusion, v. 21.

Before I enter particularly upon this purpose, In General,

Obs. 1. That his scope in all this Narration, is, (as has been said, and may
be gathered from v. 21.) to prove that only wicked men are dealt with, as Job
was. And to prove this, he enumerates several judgments which come upon the
wicked, like unto those which had befaln Job; wherein he supposes that he
gives a particular account of that fixed order of Divine Providence, whereof he
had spoken, v. 4. The defects of this way of probation have been often
considered before; Namely, That however some of the wicked meet with this lot,
yet neither all, nor only are they so exercised. And beside this mistake,
Bildad yet errs further, in judging not only of Job's state, but of his future
condition, by his present case; reckoning that as Job was now ruined, so his
name should be rooted out, and he should have no Posterity, etc. v. 16, 17,
etc. For albeit Job did agree with him in this apprehension, particularly, that
he should die before he had any issue or posterity: yet the event did refute
both. However, the Repetition of this matter is not unuseful. For hereby we are
taught,

1. That it is our duty to study yet more the miserable estate of the wicked,
who deserve all this and more, according to the sentence of the Law, albeit it
do not visibly come upon all and every one of them in this life.

2. Men may be very pertinacious in asserting and maintaining of Errors; For,
they will not give over to mistake and misapply these things, notwithstanding
all that Job has said to refute them.

3. It may be the great trial of Saints, to meet with such dispensations as are
generally constructed to be the lot of the wicked, and to have wickedness
charged upon them, by godly men upon that account, under which they cannot but
sink; unless themselves learn to put a difference betwixt themselves and the
wicked, by holding fast their integrity, and reading other thoughts in Gods
heart toward them, then the stroke seems to speak. This was Job's lot, and was
much sadder then the affliction it self; and yet the one did not exempt him
from the other.

4. Though it be no great matter what height of extremity the outward trouble
of Saints come unto; seeing they are happy, though trouble even consume them
and theirs in this world: Yet, it is a great fault to judge infallibly of their
future condition, even in this life, by their present lot; seeing God can make
a wonderful change when he will: For, Bildad did without ground determine what
should be Job's condition for the time to come.

Obs. 2. That he falls upon this Narration with great vehemence, (Yea the light
of the wicked shall be put out, etc.) as it were answering his own question, v.
4. The meaning is, as if he had said; Shall God alter his course to gratify
thee? v. 4. Nay, fret thou never so much, or let thee take all the pains thou
can to justify thy self; yet, God has dealt with thee as with a wicked man,
and his Rods upon thee do prove thee to be wicked. And let the wicked prosper
never so much, as thou did, yet at last those sad strokes will come, as has
befaln thee.

Though Bildad erred here, yet it may teach,

1. Men will gain nothing by their impatience, but God will hold on his course,
yea and bear down all their opposition; For, so much does this teach in
General, though he erred in the particular.

2. Men may have a great confidence, who yet are in a gross Error; For, Bildad
errs, and yet is bold.

3. The Rod is a very strong tentation to draw men to question their estate;
and when that weapon is in Satan or Seducers hands, it is a wonder if godly men
hold their feet; For, this was Bildad's strong weapon, that makes him speak so
stoutly, and assault Job so courageously, that he was under affliction like
that which befalls the wicked. And by this God tried the strength of Job's,
faith.

I come now to the particular similitudes whereby Bildad points out the
miserable estate of the wicked. The first whereof (in these verses) is taken
from light which is extinguished to the very least spark in an house, as the
several expressions import. Hereby he signifies that all the prosperity,
splendor and comfort of the wicked does utterly evanish, both as to their
persons and families, as had befaln Job.

This (abstracting from his mistakes) does in General, teach,

1. The wicked may, for a time, be in a state of light, or outward prosperity,
in respect of wealth, honor, friends, and comfort resulting upon those; For,
it is supposed here the wicked may have light; And this their estate is
resembled to light; partly, because it does indeed make them shine and become
glorious in the eyes of men, and be noticed by others, as one set in a bright
light. See Mic. 7.9. It does also make themselves cheerful and encourages them
(which is not simply unlawful, Eccl. 7.14.) as it is pleasant to be in the
light (Eccl. 11.7.) and not shut up in a dark pit: And it does encourage and
enable them to go about their affairs, as light is needful to walk in, Job.
11.9, 10. And thus the wicked are said to walk in the light of their own fire,
Isa. 50.11. or, are emboldened in their course, by the comforts they muster up
to themselves. Partly, their estate is resembled to this, because they make too
much of it, as their only light and comfort. It exhilarates them against all
terrors, and is the only proof of Gods favor wherein they rest satisfied.
Therefore as they who are in prosperity should esteem of it as becomes, and
look upon it and improve it as a great advantage; So they should, also, guard
lest they esteem too much of it.

2. All the light and comfort which wicked men enjoy in their prosperity is but
artificial and composed; For, it is compared to a Fire, and Candle, or, Lamp,
which enlighten a house when the Sun is set, or its light has no access. It is
true, all the light of the Children of Men is but borrowed; yet, the wickeds,
in special, is but a light of the lowest and basest sort: Not a Sun or Star,
but a Fire and Candle, and a spark of their own kindling, wherewith they
deceive themselves, Isa. 50.11.

3. The splendid and glorious estate of the wicked deserves to be over-turned;
and it may be over-turned even in this life: For, so much do these various
expressions import, that it is the desert of all, and may be the lot of some of
them, that in stead of a glorious and shining estate in the eyes of others, and
of their own comforts and encouragements, they shall be filled with adversity,
obscurity, contempt, and sorrow. And however it fare with them in this life,
yet, all of them may certainly expect, that they shall lie down in sorrow, Isa.
50* 11. and that those things shall leave them in the dark when they have most
to do.

4. It is a plague upon the wicked, that as they soar very high in their
prosperity, so, their estate in trouble is very disconsolate; For, their light
goes out to the very spark of a fire, and their light is dark, and their
candle put out. Whereas to the godly, light arises in darkness, Psalm. 112.4.
the Lord is their light in darkness, Mic. 7.8. and it is impossible their light
should be quite extinguished.

5. The judgments and plagues of the wicked do justly reach their posterity and
families, as well as themselves; For, the light shall be dark in his
Tabernacle, and his Candle shall be put out with him, or, his glory and
splendor shall die with himself. Albeit God punish no man eternally, but for
his own sins, yet he may smite the Parents in their Children, as a part of
themselves, in these external enjoyments which they transmit to their Children.

Verse. 7. The steps of his strength shall be straitened, and his own counsel
shall cast him down.

8. For he is cast into a net by his own feet, and he walks upon a snare.

9. The grin shall take him by the heel, and the robber shall prevail against
him.

10. The snare is laid for him in the ground, and a trap for him in the way.


The second Similitude pointing out the miserable estate of the wicked, is
taken from wild Beasts, or Birds, who are taken in snares or nets. As they,
having snares, nets and traps, laid for them by Hunters and Fowlers, do with
their own feet, or wings, rush into them, from which they cannot expede
themselves, but are prevailed over by the Huntsman or Fowler; So the wicked, in
Gods Providence, are taken into the snares of trouble, where all their violence
and fury shall not avail them, but the hand of God shall reach them, and they
shall be entangled in inextricable miseries. Bildad here records this in a
retrograde order, ascending from the Effects to the Causes. And,

1. The wickeds misery, when involved in trouble, is set down in terms borrowed
from a Bird, or rather a strong Beast, taken in a net or snare, v. 7. -- The
steps of his strength shall be straitened; That is, as a strong Bird or Beast
rangeth whither it pleases when it is at liberty, and, being taken in a net,
labors by strength to break through it, but in vain, it being the faster
held the more it struggleth; So insolent wicked men will be tamed and held by
trouble, so that they shall not be able to extricate themselves.

2. The immediate causes and means of the wickeds being thus entangled, are set
down, partly, in proper terms, v. -- 7. and partly, in borrowed expressions, v.
8, 9. Namely, that as a Bird, or Beast, does it self run into the snare, v. 8.
and, being in it, is held fast there, and prevailed over by the Huntsman or
Fowler, v. 9. So the wicked by their own counsels bring themselves into
inextricable ruin, v. -- 7.

3. Unto this is subjoyned the supreme and chief cause of his misery, v. 10.
Namely, that as Birds or Beasts are thus taken, because there are traps and
snares laid for them by Hunters or Fowlers; So the wicked are taken in this
evil hour, because the Supreme Lord does rain snares upon them.

This Doctrine is not so to be understood, as if even godly men might not fall
into a snare of outward trouble, and be cut off by it; though the Lord sometime
be pleased to break the snare, Psalm. 124.7. However it points out several
Instructions concerning the disposition, properties and deservings of the
wicked; which I shall point at, not as they lie in the Text, but in the natural
order of the purpose. And,

1. Wicked men are by nature wild and untamed, never submitting to a yoke of
God, till some grievous yoke of Providential dispensations bring them at under;
Therefore are they compared to wild Beasts or Birds, who must be taken by
grins, nets and snares, See 2 Pet. 2.12. Jer. 2.24. And as this corruption is
predominant in the wicked, so the godly have some remainders of it, to be
watched over, Psalm. 32.9.

2. As the wicked are wild and untamed; so they live in a contempt of God and
of his threatened judgments; as having steps of strength, v. 7. whereby they
think to break through all impediments in their way, or wings whereby they may
mount high above snares below them. See Psalm. 10.5, 6. Thus did the men of
Sodom mock at warnings, Genesis 19.14. and ordinarily the wicked are most insolent
when judgments are nearest:

3. Let wicked men carry never so high; yet God has variety and abundance of
means and ways whereby to reach them; So much is imported in the various
expressions here used, of nets, snares, grins and traps. God is too hard for
wicked men, and can every where, and in every condition find a plague for them,
though he should create it out of nothing.

4. The judgments attending the wicked ordinarily come upon them unexpectedly,
and when they are most secure and dream least of them; For, they are as Beasts,
or Birds, taken in a snare, that is hidden, as it is in the Original, v. 10 See
1 These. 5.3.

5. The wicked have little cause to be secure, considering that they walk
continually upon snares; For, so is asserted, v. -- 8. he walks upon a snare,
as Birds or Beasts do, who have snares laid for them in all the places, where
they are known to haunt. Thus the wickeds very Table is a snare, and that
wherein they expect to be well and happy is a trap, Psalm. 69.22. Wherever they
turn them, they are but ensnaring themselves, and by their guilt ripening and
rendering themselves obnoxious to Gods wrath and judgments. And it speaks Gods
long-suffering, if in every step of their life they meet not with a Plague. For
God can make it so with them, and they have no assurance but it may be so,
since they are not in Gods way.

6. Though the wicked may escape many snares and hazards, yet at last a
judgment shall overtake them, which will quite master and overpower them; For,
as he walks upon a snare, so, however he escape for a time, yet, the grin
shall take him by the heel, as the Bird or Beast is taken in some one or other
of the grins that are laid by the Huntsman or Fowler. See Isai. 24.17, 18.

7. Were there no other mean to bring wicked men under the lash of vengeane,
their own wit, projects and counsels will serve the turn; For, his own counsel
shall cast him down, and he is cast into a net by his own feet, as Beasts or
Birds enter into the snare with their own feet or wings.

8 It is a Plague upon wicked men, that when Providential dispensations cross
them, their unsubdued corruptions, meeting with the Cross, do torture them;
For, they have steps of strength, which vex them, when they are in the snare;
as Birds or Beasts employ their strength to toil themselves, when once
entangled. Mortification will be found good company in an afflicted condition.

9. Whatever use God intend by afflictions in end, or to the godly, yet of
their own nature, and at first, they are apt to irritate corruptions; As Beasts
do struggle in the net, when the steps of their strength are striatened. And
godly men are not to mistake, albeit such fruit of trouble appear at first. See
Isa. 51.20.

10. To rage and fret under affliction will be to no purpose, but to increase
and imbitter the trial; For, as Beasts and Birds, by their strength and
struggling, do not extricate, but fasten their feet faster in the snare; So,
the steps of the wickeds strength shall be straitened. God delights thus to
abase them, and cross their pride; and the greater their strength be to rage
and fret, their affliction and torture will be the greater.

11. God, by his judgments, will mar all the wickeds projects, and cut them
short in their wicked courses; For, thus also the steps of their strength
(whereby they ranged through the world, as wild Beasts, who run at large) shall
be straitened, and consined within the narrow compass of the snare.

12. God will at last make the most insolent of the wicked know that he is too
hard for them, and too great a party, that they should dare to engage against
him, or to undertake any course in contempt of his Law; For, as the Robber, or
Huntsman and Fowler, who live by their prey, shall prevail against the ensnared
Bird or Beast, so, shall the Lord prevail over the wicked, and executioners of
his justice, raised up and employed by him, shall be successful against them.
See Dan. 4.37.

13. It is a great sin in wicked men, or others, when afflicted, to look upon
judgments as coming at adventure, and not to see a Providence in them;
Therefore it is subjoyned, to obviate all mistakes, v. 10. The snare is laid
for him in the ground, and a trap for him in the way. As the Huntsman and
Fowler lay snares in the usual hunting places of Beasts or Birds, whereby they
are taken; So God in his Providence ensnareth the wicked in his own projects,
and in the courses which he follows. See Amos 3.5, 6.

Verse. 11. Terrors shall make him afraid on every side, and shall drive him to
his feet.
Follows, to v. 16. the third Similitude, whereby Bildad points out the
miserable estate of the wicked. The similitude is borrowed from a legal
procedure against a Malefactor, and in it he reflects strangely upon Job and
his condition, as if it evidenced him to have been a great delinquent and
notorious Malefactor against God. It may be taken up in four branches; In the
first whereof (in this verse) Job's fears before he came into trouble, Chap.
3.25, 26. and those terrors, which he complains did accompany his trouble,
Chap. 6.4. and 7.13, 14. are reflected upon as resembling Sergeants, or,
Officers, sent out to apprehend Delinquents; which do terrify them where ever
they turn them, and drive them to flee, if they knew whither. In this
reflection upon Job's condition, albeit it be true, that Job was haunted with
terrors, yet he erred in judging that therefore he was a wicked man. For Job's
experience does prove that such a lot may befall the godly. And so his mistake
may teach,

1. In General, That it may be the humbling lot of Gods people, not only to lie
under the saddest of afflictions; but to have those afflictions painted out to
them in their most black and discouraging colors: For, so much does Job's
experience witness, who, in this, and the following verses, has his miseries
so lively and bitterly painted out in this similitude, which makes him complain
so sadly in the next Chapter. Hereby, The Lord (who has an holy hand in all
this) does exercise and humble his people, and lets them see what they need
(beside simple crosses and afflictions) to humble them, and try their graces
and weakness; and, withal, lets them see what he can support them under. And as
men do exercise great cruelty in dealing thus with afflicted Saints (as Job
tells them, Chap. 19.5, 6, etc. See also Psalm. 69.25, 26.) so the Lord,
oft-times, makes use of this addition to their trial, to cure an ill practice
in themselves. For they are ready in affliction thus to paint their own
crosses, and represent them as black and ugly to themselves; and therefore the
Lord permits others to give them a fill of it, to excite them to take another
course, and to claim to love in Gods heart; as is the practice of the Psalmist
in such a case, Psalm. 22.6, 7, 8, 9, 10.

2. In Particular, It may be the lot even of Gods reconciled people, to be
exercised by the terrors of the Lord; For, in this Bildad reflects upon Job's
condition, who had indeed terrors, and yet was a godly man, though Bildad
unjustly concluded, they were the fruits of his wickedness. As all the wicked
are not assaulted with terrors in this life; so a godly man, notwithstanding
it be his allowance to have peace, may yet be affrighted with terrors: and not
only be exercised with terrifying dispensations, but tossed with inward
terrors. See Jer. 17.17. Psalm. 88.15. Only these come not upon a godly man as
Officers to hale him to justice (as Bildad judged of all such terrors) but
they arise upon other accounts and grounds. And,

1. Their own weakness and misapprehensions, and jealousies of God and his
dealing, may beget causeless fears and terrors; and their own spirits may
become a spirit of bondage to them, when God allows upon them the Spirit of
Adoption. See Isa. 49.13, 14, 15.

2. If they fall in sin and walk not tenderly, God may let loose terror to
drive them to Christ, and when the awe of God does not keep them from falling
in sin, as, Chap. 31.23. he may cause them taste somewhat of that from which
they are delivered by Christ, to cause them walk more tenderly for the future.
See Psalm. 32.3, 4.

3. Much remaining stubborness must be, by this mean, daunted and made tame in
them; and whereas, under other afflictions, they continue Bullocks unaccustomed
to the yoke, Jer. 31.18. terrors must be let loose, to cause them stoop.

4. By these, also, the Lord drives them to make continual use of Christ, and
of his mercy in him, which otherwise, would rust beside them without employment.

5. When they voluntarily entertain discouragement and unbelief, under lesser
exercises, God may let loose his terror to drive them from their peevish
humor, and cause them haste to grip to him in such an extremity, wherein they
may not dally, but must either exercise faith, or resolve on present ruin.

6. By this, also, the Lord would put them in mind, how much they are obliged
to Christ, who drank of that bitter cup; and so he not only can sympathize with
his people in such a condition, as one acquainted with it, Heb. 4.15. but has
taken all that is deadly out of it. So that even terrors may be, in so far,
comfortable, as they are known to come out of his hand. These are some few of
many reasons of this dispensation, to be well considered and improved by Gods
people in such a condition.

Having thus cleared this mistake, if we look upon this Doctrine as pointing
out the lot of a wicked man (which is Bildad's scope in it) it is true, indeed,
that (whatever be Gods indulgence toward some of them, yet) by the sentence of
the Law, he deserves this as his lot and portion, Lev. 26.16. And so the
General Doctrine may teach,

1. Among other calamities of a wicked man, terror from God is a part of his
portion; For, so is here supposed, that he is assaulted with terrors. As,
indeed, in many respects he is obnoxious to them, and lies under the hazard of
such a stroke from God. So that,

1. Whatever be his prosperous condition, yet he has no cause to sleep in a
sound skin; For, God has terrors, as his Sergeants, to arrest him, when he
will.

2. Whatever be his troubles within time, yet his terrors and fears may justly
be above his troubles, and may tell him that those are but the beginning of
sorrows, as his Conscience may tell him he deserves more. Yea, not only what he
feels or foresees, but what he can but imagine and apprehend, may be his
terror.

3. His fears, in justice, may be, not ordinary, but singular, dreadful and
full of terror; he not having God reconciled to him, to whom he may flee in
such a distress.

4. Beside all his exercises about outward and temporal-afflictions, God can
raise terror in his Conscience, and give him an Hell there. Now albeit all
this do not befall every wicked man; yet the apprehension of those things, and
how they are deserved by them, may affright them from secure trusting in their
prosperity and outward comforts (see Prove. 23.34. Isa. 50.11.) and from
pleasing themselves in a quiet Conscience, when yet it is not a good
Conscience, as not being sprinkled by the blood of Christ, nor purged from dead
works.

Doct. 2. Whatever shift wicked men make under other troubles (Isa. 9.9, 10.
and elsewhere) yet, the terror of God, when it comes upon them, will
surround, and shut them in on every hand; For, so is here declared, that
terrors shall be on every side, wherever he would turn him. This is deserved
by all of them, and inflicted upon some of them, Jer. 20.3, 4. For God has
terrors in abundance, wherewith to hem them in, and their own minds, being
once terrified, can make enough, to vex them yet more. This,

1. Serves to point out the great mercy and advantage of the godly, who
(however they may, sometime, to their own sense, be thus hemmed in, as well as
others, yet) never want an out-gate on some hand, if they could see it; were it
but to run through terror into mercy, as Job professes he would do, Chap.
13.15.

2. It teaches, that in other troubles it is not safe to find an issue without
God, or without going to him (as the wicked endeavor to do, and sometime the
godly are tempted to take that course) lest God be provoked to send
overwhelming terrors, where no such issues will be found.

3. When the godly are, at any time, thus hemmed in on all hands, as they ought
to read their own stubborness in it, Hos. 2.5, 6, 7. and their unwillingness to
deny themselves, and trust entirely on God, 2 Cor. 1.8, 9. So, being rightly
exercised under such a condition, they may expect that God is sitting them for
a notable proof of his love, as Paul found by experience, 2 Cor. 1.10.

Doct. 3. How stout soever the wicked may be under other troubles, and resolute
to bear them, when they cannot avoid them; yet, they will find themselves too
weak a party to grapple with terror from God; For, Terrors shall make him
afraid on every side, and drive him to his feet, or make him ready to betake
himself to his heels. And though this be unjustly applied to Job, who was never
so afraid, but he expected God would be his salvation, Chap. 13.16. yet, it
holds true of every wicked man, when terror comes upon him, that he, being a
weak creature, and God a strong God, and this stroke seizing upon the very fort
of his courage, he cannot but be confounded and dismayed. And this warns those
who are stout-hearted under other troubles, to expect that God will send
terrors to suppress their obstinacy, as is said in another case, Ezekiel. 28.6,
9. And such as are under the terrors of the Lord, ought to look on stooping
and humility as their only safety.

4. It is the disposition of wicked men, under judgments and terrors to run
the faster away from God; For, Terrors shall drive him to his feet, or scatter
him to his feet, and to all corners and subterfuges, where he may think to find
relief. Though the godly may have some inclination to this, in their fits of
tentation, by which we are not to judge of their state; yet, this is unjustly
applied to Job, who, in his greatest extremity, never thought of running away,
but would gladly have been at God: Yet, it holds true of wicked men in such a
condition, that, with Adam, they seek to hide themselves from God, and are
ready to run any where before they run to God. For terrors do represent God as
dreadful, especially to them who never tasted of his love, and therefore they
run away from him. They know not Gods scope in those terrors, when he lets
them loose on godly men, which is, to drive them to himself; and therefore they
turn not to him who smites them. Their guilt (if they have any sense of it)
adds to their amazement, and helps to suggest sad thoughts of God to them. And
they are justly thus scared away, by terror, from God, who were still careful
not to come to him, and afraid lest they should be prevailed with to seek him,
Mat. 13.15. And when godly men under such an exercise, are tempted to run away
from God, they should enquire at themselves, what they will leave to the wicked
to do, if they do so? And if they be driven to God thereby, they should notice
that as the finger of God, and a mercy beyond any thing that terror it self
could either promise or produce.

Verse. 12. His strength shall be hunger-bitten: and destruction shall be ready
at his side.
In the Second Branch of this Similitude, Job's loss of Goods, his present
pain, and that apprehension of death which he speaks of, Chap. 17.7, 11, etc.
are pointed at, as resembling that affliction which Malefactors suffer in
Prison before their execution; who, being destitute of means, are wasted with
hunger, and live in a continual fear of a violent death, and (it may be) are
tortured in the mean time.

In this reflection also Bildad does mistake,

1. In suspecting Job to be so much afflicted with any apprehensions of his
destruction, as that it should daily represent it self to him, ready at his
side, in its ghastly colors. For, though he did indeed apprehend approaching
death, yet, it was with so much confidence and courage, that he did familiarly
look upon the worms and corruption as his nearest Relations, Chap. 17.14. Which
shows how little others may be acquainted with the courage God may afford to
his own people in deadly difficulties; For, Bildad could not discern what Job
found in this trial.

2. He did mistake, also, in looking upon this part of Job's affliction as a
proof his wickedness. For hunger, sickness, and apprehended death, have been,
and may be the lot of Saints; As is not only to be seen in Job here, but in
David, Psalm. 6.2. and 30.9. in Paul, 2 Cor. 1.8, 9. and 11.27. and diverse
others. Hereby, the Lord does mortify his people, and fit them for Eternity,
and other trials that may be before them. Also, by these he fits them for
receiving more proofs of his love, in strengthening them to bear want,
providing supplies for them, fitting them that they shall not abuse mercies,
Phil. 4.11, 12. and, in causing them meet with many blessed disappointments of
their fears,

But passing his Reflections, the General Doctrine, as it is understood of the
wicked according to the tenor of the Law-sentence, may teach,

1. To flee or seek to shift the terrors of God, will be to no purpose; For,
he who is driven to his feet, v. 11. is here supposed to be taken and in
Prison. See Am. 9.2, 3, 4. They flee only best from Gods judgments, who flee
into his own bosom; and who-so neglect this, they do but multiply their own
sorrows, Isa. 24.17, 18.

2. Albeit wicked men may have much strength (not only bodily strength, but
strength of spirit, beside the strength of their corruptions and humors) when
they engage in troubles; So that not only their pride and height of spirit does
ripen them for the snare, which does surprise them, when in the pride of their
heart, they puff at trouble; But it contributes to make their trouble more
grievous and bitter, that it has strength of spirit, and strong corruptions to
work upon, whereas it would be easy to subdued men: Yet, created strength can
neither preserve from trouble, nor subsist under it, but the godly must
renounce it, and the wicked will succumb, because they do not renounce it: For,
his strength shall be hunger-bitten.

3. Albeit even the godly, when they are under one trouble, should be looking
for another; and they should not limit God, who, if he please, may send
destruction to cut them off the world, (for such limitations are the sting of
our crosses, and do provoke God to increase our sorrows; yet, it may be
terrible to the wicked, that for all that is come upon them, God has not done
with them, but has only given them an earnest of yet sadder things to come
upon them: For, after his strength is hunger bitten, destruction follows upon
that. If once God begin to reckon with them, they cannot expect bounds to be
set to their trial (as the godly are warranted to pray, Jer. 10 24.) but they
may fear it will grow till they be cast into the pit, whereas the godly may
know there will be an end, Prove. 23.17, 18.

4. God has calamities in readiness, whereby to cut off the wicked, albeit he
do not always, or for a time, execute them; For, here he lets the wicked see
destruction ready at his side, though for a time he be kept alive in Prison.
And this serves to refute their own presumptuous brags, and the godlies fears,
who see not how they can be reached. God who has issues prepared for his
people, 1 Cor. 10.13. has also judgments ready for the wicked, Deuteronomy. 32.34, 35.

5. How presumptuous soever the wicked be, before trouble come upon them, or
under lesser troubles; Yet, when trouble comes to an height, they run as far
upon the other extremity, of discouragement and despair: For, now, this
arrested wicked man apprehends sadly of his condition, as if destruction were
ready at his side, to cut him off every moment. And this is the just fruit of
their presumption. Hearts broken with pleasure, and sinful delights, wherein
men are imperious and presumptuous, Ezekiel. 16.30. will make weak hearts, when
trouble comes to an extremity, Ezekiel 22.14.

6. Albeit even the godly ought to foresee troubles, and to look out to what
may probably come upon them, that they be not surprised; Yet, it is a plague
upon the wicked, that they die often, in their apprehensions and fears, before
they die really; and it is a snare to all who are obnoxious to it, to be
anxiously tortured about future events: As here the wicked man has destruction
standing ready at his side, to torture him before he be actually destroyed. See
Matthew. 6.34. And therefore when the godly are vexed with apprehensions of
future events, they should reckon that God can disappoint them; if he will, 2
Cor. 1.8.9, 10. and that, if they come pass, and they renounce their own
strength, God will enable and teach them how to beat them, when they are put to
it.

Verse. 13. It shall devour the strength of his skin: even the first born of
death shall devour his strength.
In the third Branch of this Similitude (in this and the following verse)
somewhat in Job's case is reflected upon as resembling the execution and
violent death of this Malefactor. In this verse Job's present dead-like
condition, and his apprehending to be cut off in this extremity, Chap. 17.13,
14. are reflected on as resembling this Malefactor; who being wasted in
Prison, and apprehending destruction, v. 12. at last, It (or, that destruction
which he apprehended) shall devour the strength of his skin, or, his body and
flesh and bones, which are (as the word is in the Original) as bars to uphold
his skin. And this death, which devours his strength, shall not be ordinary,
but the first born of death; that is, a singularly violent death, which carries
away the principality and preeminence from other kinds of death, as the first
man did from the rest of his brethren; and (so to say) a most deadly death, as
the first born of the poor, significe them who are most poor, Isa. 14.30.

Here, albeit both Job and Bildad did mistake, in expecting that a violent and
odd way of death should be the issue of this trouble; and Bildad did f^ther
err, in judging that such a death should be the reward of Job's wickedness,
seeing godly Josiah, Jonathan and others, have died a violent death, and all
things of that kind come alike to all, Eccl. 9.2. Yet, this Doctrine,
understood of the wicked, may teach,

1. It is a plague upon the wicked, that their fears prove real (at least, they
may do so, for any security they have against them) whereas the godly meet with
many blessed disappointments; Isai. 51.12, 13: 2 Cor. 4.8, 9. For, after that
destruction has been ready at his side, v. 12. it shall now devour him.

2. However a wicked man may get some Sergeants shifted, yet the Executioner
will come at last, whom he will not get declined: For, destruction will come at
last, which shall pay all home; And this is enough, let them escape never so
often, considering how dreadful it will be, and how soon it may take hold of
them, Luke 12.19, 20.

3. Death is a great Conqueror and Triumpher over men, in their Bodies,
Dignities, and outward Estate; For, It shall devour the strength (or bars) of
his skin. Yea it triumphs over Princes, notwithstanding all their grandeur. See
Job 3.13, 14, 15, 18, 19. Psalm. 49.14, 17. and 146.3, 4. Ezekiel. 32.23, 26, 27,
etc. This tells that men have need, and ought to provide somewhat that will be
Deaths-proof.

4. A violent death is an addition to the sadness and terror of death;
Therefore is that called the first born of death. Though the godly may fall in
common calamities, and go to Heaven in a fiery Chariot, and wicked men may die
peaceably; yet, this is the desert of the wicked, and is executed upon some of
them, nor have any of them any security against it; and it is a mercy in it
self to die a quiet and ordinary death.

5. God has reserved singular judgments for wicked men, and their plagues are
really such, however they appear outwardly; For, their death, come what way it
will, is still the first born of death, considering all the consequences
thereof; whereas the godly are bound to judge that they are dealt with in a
different manner, though they fall under the same outward dispensation.

6. God will at last make it evident that he is too hard for the stoutest of
men, and that all their strength must succumb and fall before his power; For,
the first born of death shall devour his strength.

Verse. 14. His confidence shall be rooted out of his tabernacle, and it shall
bring him to the King of terrors.
In this verse the resemblance is further prosecuted; and Job's renouncing of
all confidence and hope in his family, as making for death, Chap. 17.13, 14,
15. is pointed at as resembling this wicked Malefactor his being desperate of
all hopes in his wealth, friends and family, and his being brought to death,
which is the Prince and King of Terrors, both in it self, and in what it
appears to be, and really proves to the wicked man.

Here there are also several mistakes; As

(1.) That Job was to die, and be cut off at this time.

(2.) That his renouncing of all his temporal enjoyments is looked on as an act
of despair; whereas it flowed only from his cleanly self-denial; a practice
which the world does not understand.

(3.) That Job did fear death or looked on it as the King of terrors, who was
rather too eager to be at it.

(4.) Or, suppose Saints do sometime fear death, yet it is a mistake to think
that therefore they are wicked. For they may be afraid, as considering they
have a soul to save, while the wicked may mock at death, and step laughing into
Hell. And godly men may get proofs of their own weakness, when God is to give
them most notable proofs of his grace and love.

But passing those mistakes, there are general sound Truths here also, as it
relates to the wicked. And,

1. Wicked men may have their own confidences, whereby they uphold their hearts
when many other things fail them; For, so is here supposed, that there is his
confidence. This is a great snare to make them stubborn in an ill way, Isa
57.10. though when those are removed, it will not reclaim them, Jer. 2.25.

2. It is the wickeds plague, that their confidences are but low, base, and
perishing; Such as his family, wealth, or, friends, all which are comprehended
under the name of his Tabernacle. See Psalm. 146.3, 4, 5.

3. All the carnal confidences of a wicked man will, at last, come to utter
ruin; His props will all fail him, and his hopes will end in despair, and he
must quit them; For, his confidence shall even be rooted out of his tabernacle.
His confidences will at last prove too weak to bottom his hopes, and Gods
jealousy is provoked to crush them.

4. If not before, yet certainly at death, all carnal confidences shall come to
ruin, For, then his confidence shall be rooted out, when he comes to the King
of Terrors.

5. Death, of all outward strokes, is the chief terror to men; as being the
punishment threatened and inflicted for sin, and as cutting off all their
outward enjoyments at one stroke; Therefore, is it called the King of Terrors,
or, the chief of Terrors which are visible on Earth. So that men had need to
prepare for it, and to close with Christ, in whom they may triumph over it, 1
Cor. 15.54, 55.

6. Beside what death is in it self, and as it is the common lot of all men, it
is especially dreadful, and the King of Terrors, to the wicked; For, it is in
reference to them it is so designed here. The godly may die in some trouble and
fear, though that be not their allowance, but slow from their weakness. But as
for the wicked, though some of them may die peaceably, as others of them die
full of horror; Yet, to all of them it is terrible, if they considered whither
they are going Death in its most terrible colors may look sweetly upon the
godly; and the mildest aspect of it may be dreadful to the wicked.

7. The more carnal confidence men have, the more terrible will death be, when
it comes, and all their hopes are cut off; For, it is his confidence rooted
out, that brings him to the King of terrors; Not so much because the ruin of
his hopes hastens his death, as because it makes death terrible, that he has
fed upon so many vain hopes.

Verse. 15. It shall dwell in his tabernacle, because it is none of his:
brimstone shall be scattered upon his habitation.
In the last Branch of this Similitude, the destruction of Job's family, is
reflected upon as resembling the consequents of a Malefactors death, or the
confiscation of his Estate, and ruin of his House. He seems to allude here to
the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah by fire and brimstone, and declares that
destruction, or terrible desolation (for the relative, It, must be referred to
what has been spoken before of the wicked himself, v. 11, 12, 14. as befalling
his house also, according as it is capable thereof) shall dwell in his house,
and eat up his substance, which he had so unjustly acquired, and was indeed
none of his by right. And that his habitation shall be consumed, as Sodom was
by brimstone, or, brimstone shall be scattered upon it, as a sign of perpetual
desolation, which the strawing of a place with Salt does also signify, Judge.
9.45.

Here there is an unjust reflection upon Job's purchase of his wealth, and upon
the stroke of God by fire upon some of his goods, Chap. 1.16. as if that
evidenced his wealth to be ill purchased, and God to be angry at him as a
wicked man. Yet, understanding this also of the wicked, it may teach,

1. Whatever the Lord may please to do, in scourging the Families of his own
Children, and sparing the houses of the wicked; yet, the wicked deserve that
judgments should rest upon their families, when themselves are gone, and that
their names should rot upon earth: For, in so far this is true of all the
wicked, that destruction dwells in his tabernacle.

2. God does no wrong to the wicked in ruining their families; He but justly
takes from them what they had unjustly taken from others: For, it shall dwell
-- because it is none of his. He had called it before his tabernacle, now by
way of correction he subjoyns it is none of his. Not only has he no spiritual
sanctified right to what he enjoys being a wicked man; but he has no right
to it, as being ill purchased; and therefore God justly strips him of it.

3. A stroke inflicted by God, in justice, is justly irreparable; So much is
imported in this, that brimstone shall be scattered upon his habitation, as God
destroyed Sodom. And albeit all wicked Families and Societies be not plagued as
Sodom was; Yet that example teaches what all of them do deserve. And it is a
plague upon wicked men, that their desolations, are oft-times, repaired, when
yet they have never repented under the hand of God.

4. When God is pleased to inflict signal strokes of justice, they ought to be
remarked by all, for their use and instruction; For, therefore are the
habitations of some made a perpetual desolation, as if they were strawed with
Brimstone, that they may be monuments to warn others.

Verse. 16. His roots shall be dried up beneath: and above shall his branch be
cut off.
The Fourth Similitude, pointing out the miserable estate of the wicked, is
taken from a Tree that is plucked away, root and branch; Whereby is signified,
that he is cut off, as to his being in the world, and as to his wealth, which,
like a root, supported him; and as to his posterity and pomp and glory, which
like branches spring from him, or adorn him. See Chap. 8.16, 17. In this those
Truths may be observed,

1. The wicked may flourish for a time on the earth, being like a well planted
Tree, having much splendor, and bearing much bulk in the world, and seeming to
be fixed and rooted in all this; For, here he is resembled to a Tree, having
both root and branches. See Psalm. 37.35. That the wicked are thus, is both a
snare to themselves, and a trial to others.

2. God, when he will, can make a sudden change of this condition of the
wicked, and so root him out as his place shall not know him; Psalm. 37.35, 36.
For, so is here held out.

3. God has variety of strokes, for reaching the wicked in all their
concernments; He can, by withholding a blessing, dry up his roots beneath, and,
by other judgments, cut off his branch, or, every one of his branches, not
missing so much as any one. Yet,

4. The godly are not always exempted from such a stroke as this, in their
temporal being and enjoyments; For, Bildad erred, not only in supposing Job to
be quite rooted out and cut off, without hope of recovery, but in judging him
wicked, though it had been so. For the world not being the native soil of
Saints, it is no wonder if their roots be loosed by cutting off their outward
enjoyments, and their seed be sent away before them, and themselves translated
to a soil where they will fructify, and meet with no such blasts as do often
use to nip the buds of grace here.

Verse. 17. His remembrance shall perish from the earth, and he shall have no
name in the street.
In this, and the three following verses, the miserable estate of the wicked is
pointed out in proper terms in four branches. And,

First, (In this verse) it is declared, that they shall become so ignominious,
and be so rooted out by the judgments of God, that their estimation and memory
shall perish, as if they had never been in the world. In this we may observe
these Truths concerning the wicked,

1. The justice of God, and his indignation against wicked men, ought to be
much and seriously studied; Therefore, after all the former similitudes, it is
again inculcated in proper terms, to show how necessary and useful this study
is, and yet that it is difficult to get it believed, especially when they
prosper; though it be nothing the less true, that we are slow of heart to
believe it.

2. It is the great sin of wicked men that they hunt much after a name,
aspiring to be great and renouned in the world, and choosing rather, (if at all
they claim to goodness) to have a name of goodness, and to seem to be somewhat,
than to be so really; For, so is here supposed, that their name and remembrance
are so dear to them, that a stroke on those is a sad affliction to them.
Wherein their fault is not simply that they desire a name, if it were a good
name, Prove. 22.1. nor yet that they should resent a scourge or trial upon their
name unjustly; But the fault is, that that they are for a name upon any terms.

3. As the wicked seek much after a name, so they may obtain their desire for a
time; They may be remembered, and have a name. Hereby they become a visible
Butt for Gods indignation, when he comes to plead with them; and (if they cover
their wickedness with hypocrisy) they get their reward since they seek but a
name, Mat. 6.2, 5.

4 The name and memorial of the wicked is justly buried in forgetfulness and
ignominy; as here is threatened. Whatever may be Gods indulgence, yet they
deserve this. For because they seek no more but a name, and a name written upon
the earth, God may justly take that away, and make them be forgotten; or, he
may preserve their name only that it may rot above ground, as Jeroboam's name
did. See Prove. 10.7. Yet,

5. This is to be adverted unto, That the loss of a name on earth is no
evidence of a wicked man, nor judgment upon a godly man; For, Bildad erred,
both in his apprehending that Job's memory should perish, whose memory was
revived, and whose name is so savoury in the Church; and in judging that this
stroke (if inflicted) was an evidence of his wickedness, or would be a plague
to him. For, as God can make their name savoury, when he pleases; so he has
taught his people rather to be afraid when all men speak well of them, Luke
6.26. And though they may be sent out of the world with ignominy, yet he can
make them be missed and esteemed of, even by them who despised them; as Moses
was lamented by the Israelites, who frequently murmured against him when alive.
And however, their name is in the Book of life, and though (as is said of their
bodies) it be sown in dishonor, yet it will be raised in honor.

Verse. 18. He shall be driven from light into darkness, and chased out of the
world.
Secondly, It is declared, that the wicked shall be driven and chased out of
the world, from a cheerful, to a dark and sad estate. It is said in the plural
number, in the Original, they shall drive him, whereby we are to understand
that either those whom he oppressed, or the variety of judgments sent out by
God, shall do this to them. Here (passing his mistakes) we may observe,

1. It is a sad plague on the wicked, and an evidence of their woeful condition,
that they are driven and chased away out of time, as here is said. They do not
voluntarily deliver up their soul, but it is taken from them, Luke 12.20. Some
of them die in despair, others of them are pursued and hurried away with
visible vengeance; and others, though they die softly, or seem too weary of
their life, because they cannot have all the satisfaction they desire in it*
yet really they never live out half their days, Psalm. 55.23. nor are they ever
content in cold blood to die, if they had strength and opportunity to satisfy
their lusts in the world. Whereas it is otherwise with the godly; and it is the
duty of all who would approve themselves to God, to be still willing and ready
to depart upon a call, and then they will be chased by no tempest, but in the
throng of troubles, they will voluntarily follow their Fathers messenger sent
about them. And whatever shake we get to loose us from time; yet love should
have a chief hand in drawing us away.

2. The wickeds change by death is so much the sadder, that at death they have
seen the fairest day that ever they will see; though some of them may
ignorantly leap (as it were) out of hot water into the fire: For, they are
driven from light to darkness, from life to death, from sparks of their own
kindling to eternal darkness, from temporal felicity to eternal misery, from
honor to disgrace and ignominy; and they are chased out of the world, where
all their happiness lay.

Verse. 19. He shall neither have son nor nephew among his people, nor any
remaining in his dwellings.
Thirdly, It is declared, that their family shall be desolate, their issue,
familiars and acquaintance, being cut off. As Bildad here does falsely
apprehend that Job should never have issue nor a family again; So, in this
stroke, which he appropriates to the wicked, God is pleased to deal variously
both with good and bad. For even the godly, sometime, have no issue; and if
they have, sometime they are violently cut off; and sometime they do not
imitate the p^ous steps of their Parents. And though God may be pleased,
sometime, to plague the posterity of the wicked; Yet, it is no less true, that
sometime they may have a numerous and great posterity, as Cain had, whose off
spring were chief inventers of Arts, Genesis 4. Yea, sometime, they may bring
forth Children, who are heirs of glory. However, this may teach,

1. Wicked men do deserve that their families should be ruined, as well as
themselves; as here is threatened. And as the wicked should seriously mind
this, what a plague they are to their Relations; So, their posterity, though
godly, should remember it, that they may be sober, and may acknowledge that
mercy which has prevented them.

2. This stroke is no plague on a godly man, if it be his lot; As Bildad
supposes such a stroke was only a judgment. For, they will get a better name
than that of Sons and Daughters, Isa 56.3, 4, 5. And they want not Kindred or
Children, so long as there are other godly persons, with whom they may hold
Communion. And they make up the want of Children, by being Instrumental, in
their Station, to convert and bring forth many Children to God.

Verse. 20. They that come after him shall be astonished at his day, as they that
went before, were affrighted.
Lastly, It is declared, that the effects of their calamities shall be,
astonishment and fear in the present and succeeding Generations. By those, who
went before, who were affrighted, we are not to understand those who lived
before he was, and before God plagued him; For such could not be affected with
what they could not know. But it is to be understood of these who were before
those who come after him, or, those who have seen his prosperity and ruin
also. Those shall be affected with it, together with those who afterward shall
hear of it.

Leaving his mistakes, Learn,

1. The justice of God manifested on wicked men is, in it self, very
affrightful; For, his day, or the day of his calamity breeds astonishment and
affrightment, or, horror, and that so great (as the word signifies) as makes
their hair stand up. See 1 Samuel 3.11. Herein the justice of God is to be
adored, who makes their plagues a terror, when men think upon them, as they
have been terrible and dreadful to others in their way.

2. Such as are witnesses of Gods judgments upon wicked men ought, especially,
to be affected with it; For, those that went before, and saw these plagues, did
even lay hold on horror, as it is in the Original.

3. The sense of Gods judgments should continue long among men; For, they that
come after him (when he is gone, and so they do but hear of his ruin) shall be
astonished. As this condemns them who are not so much as affected with present
and incumbent judgments; so they who forget bypast proofs of Gods indignation
against sin, are justly made spectacles and monuments of justice themselves.

4. Fear, Astonishment, and Horror, are but common and fruitless effects of
judgments, unless they be accompanied with Faith and Repentance; For, he
mentions those as the effects of such strokes among the generality of men, who
yet are usually far enough from a right use of them. And if such impressions as
these be not enough, they are far behind who have not so much.

Verse. 21. Surely such are the dwellings of the wicked, and this is the place
of him that knows not God.
In this verse Bildad sums up his scope in this Discourse, by way of
conclusion; Showing that certainly those calamities are the lot only of the
wicked: And therefore Job, considering what had befaln him, behoved to conclude
that he was a wicked man. Of this Assertion I have often spoken before, and
shall not repeat:

Only, in General, Learn,

1. Ignorance of God is an ordinary and great evil among men; For, it is marked
as the wickeds great fault, that they know not God.

2. They prove themselves to be ignorant of God, who walk not holily, let them
pretend what they will; For, the wicked, here, are they who know not God, see
Tit. 1.16. It is their ignorance of God, and their Atheism that emboldens them
to do wickedly, Psalm. 14.1, 2, etc. And from this, also, do the failings of
Saints flow, Psalm. 9.10. Isa. 51.12, 13.

3. It is not easy to believe the misery that hangs over the head of the
wicked; For, it must be gravely asserted, Surely such are the dwellings, and
place of the wicked, or, those things formerly mentioned do befall only them and
their families, and that certainly. And though he erred, in the particular, yet
it is true, that what they deserve is hardly believed, see Deuteronomy. 29.18, 19, 20.
Nor ought we to stumble though their ruin be object of faith only, and not of
sense; and though we find themselves crying peace and safety.

4. It is an undeniable truth, that the state of the wicked is miserable, and
will prove so in end; For, though matters go not as Bildad asserts, yet this
General is surely true, That they are miserable, and obnoxious to all this. See
Eccl. 8.11, 12, 13. Isa. 3.10, 11. and it is our sin to doubt of it, Mal. 3.15.

5. The wicked do meet with a just recompense from God, in that, as they will
not know, nor acknowledge him, so, they are deprived of the Protection of his
Providence; For, they know not God, and their dwellings and place either come,
or deserve to come, to that issue which he has formerly mentioned. And we
should read our not acknowledging nor depending upon God, in any cross
dispensations of Providence we meet with.

6. Men ought to try their persuasions well, seeing good men may have strong
persuasions in an Error; As here Bildad asserts all this to be surely true,
when yet he erred in some respects, in what he taught. And here we are to guard
that sound General Principles against wickedness, and concerning the desert
thereof, do not occasion our erring in particular Applications, as it was with
him and his Associates.

CHAP. XIX.
This Chapter contains Job's Reply to Bildad, together with the rest of his
Friends; Wherein his chief scope, is to reprehend their uncharitable and cruel
dealing with a man so afflicted: which yet he manages so, as he takes occasion
to ease himself, by venting his Complaints; and withal, handles the main
Controversy debated betwixt them, and proves that he was righteous, though
thus afflicted.

The Chapter may be taken up in two Principal Parts; First, A Challenge for
their Miscarriage, or, a General Proposition of their fault, ver. 1, 2, 3.
Secondly, Some Arguments fortifying and pressing home this Challenge. Namely,
1. That they should not rail upon him, instead of convincing him, if so be he
were in an Error, ver. 4. 2. That they should not have been so cruel, in
vexing him, who was so sadly afflicted by God, ver. 5. -- 22. 3. That it was
yet greater cruelty to deal so harshly with a man under affliction, who is a
righteous man as he was, ver. 23. -- 28. 4. That if none of these
Considerations did move them, yet they should be afraid to provoke the wrath of
God to break out upon themselves, for their miscarriage, ver. 29.

Verse. 1. Then Job answered, and said,

2. How long will ye vex my soul, and break me in pieces with words?

3. These ten times have ye reproached me: you are not ashamed that you make
your selves strange to me.


IN these verses (beside a General Intimation that Job did answer, v. 1.) we
have,

1. A General Proposition of the Challenge, v. 2. -- that, by their alleging
of untruths, and brangling his peace and driving him to despair, they had
grieved and vexed his soul, and that for a long time.

2. An Explication of the Challenge, v. -- 2. that they did not only vex; but
even crush and break in pieces his strength and courage of mind, by their
impertinent, untrue, and cruel language.

3. An instructing of this Challenge, v. 3. -- that those ten times, or, very
many times (a definite number being put for an indefinite, as Genesis 31.7. Lev.
26.26. and elsewhere) they had reproached him, and slandered his integrity.

4. An aggravation of this their fault, v. -- 3. That they, who ought to have
proved friends, and professed to do so, yet, without shame, dealt so strangely,
and left off all tenderness toward him.

In General Learn,

1. As Controversies are not easily ended, when once they are begun; So it does
commend a man's honesty and zeal for truth, that many renewed assaults do not
make him quit it: Both these may be gathered from this, that Job, after all the
former debates, yet answered.

2. A good way to put an end to Controversies, is not always to jangle about
Questions debated, but sometime to put the matter roundly home to the
Consciences of Debaters; that they may consider whether, in cold blood, they be
not refuted and self-condemned in their own bosoms: For, such is the strain
and scope of Job's Reply at this time, to charge home their cruel and
uncharitable carriage upon their own Consciences. Where Conscience interposeth
not in Debates, men's parts, and their delight to make a show of them, their
interest and credit being engaged, and their heat and passion kindled and
increased by debating, may keep strife long on foot.

In Particular, From v. 2. Learn,

1. Afflictions are sad, and men's carriage cruel, in so far as they reach the
souls and spirits of men, to vex and grieve them; When either afflictions and
men's way of dealing get in upon their spirits, and cause a breach and wound
there, or men do fall upon the afflicteds inward state and condition, to
question the goodness thereof: For, this is his complaint, that they vexed his
soul and brake him in pieces, by one or other of these means.

2. Affliction is so much the sadder, when it is added to former afflictions;
For, says he, ye vex my soul, who am already afflicted in my outward
condition. They either added the breach of the peace of his soul to his outward
crosses; or his inward peace being already disturbed by desertion and
tentation, they contributed to the continuance and increase of that vexation.

3. The longer men continue in an ill course, it is so much the worse; in
regard they do more hurt thereby, and do witness that it flows not from a fit
of weakness, but from a fixed resolution; For, he points at this as a great
aggravation of their fault, How long will ye vex my soul? etc.

4. A small thing may hurt one that is already crushed; and particularly,
impertinent words may do much hurt to one who is tender and broken with
afflictions: For, Job, who had born all his other losses, could not bear such
language, but words brake him in pieces.

5. Men who have the testimony of their integrity, and get grace to stick by
it, may yet expect to meet with many rubs in going through a time of trial;
their corruptions may be irritated, and God may try and humble them thereby:
For, Job, who who was honest, and would not quit the testimony of it, yet, is
vexed and broken with irritating words. Such distempers should not be looked
upon as a proof that men have no integrity.

6. Men intending most good to others, may yet prove most hurtful, unless God
lead them to prove comfortable; For, Job's Friends intended no such thing, and
yet they vexed his soul and brake him in pieces.

From v. 3. Learn,

1. It is not sufficient that men accuse and challenge others hard, unless they
be able to instruct and prove their challenges; Therefore does Job here
instruct what these words were which brake him, Ye have reproached me.

2. Men ought to look upon their way with others, not only as it is in it self,
or as themselves may judge of it, but as those may feel and apprehend it to be,
who are already broken with trouble; For, in this respect it was ten times to
Job, that they had reproached him, though possibly it was not so much in it
self.

3. Reproach is one of men's carriages, whereby the afflicted are apt to be
crushed and broken; For, he instanceth the former Challenge in the matter of
reproach, Ye have reproached me. See Psalm. 69.20.

4. It is men's duty not to be strange to Friends, or to harden themselves
against them, and especially against godly Friends in trouble; and it is a
shame when they do so; Therefore he charge it upon them, as a fault they
might be ashamed of, that they make themselves strange to him, or, harden
themselves against him, never considering his trouble and grief, when they
spoke so sharply to him. See Psalm. 38.11. 2 Timothy 1.16

5. It is a great fault, and aggravation of sin, in men, not to be ashamed when
they do evil; as here he charge it upon them, you are not ashamed, etc. See
Phil. 3.19. Jer. 6.15. and 8.12. and 11.15.

Verse. 4. And be it indeed that I have erred, mine error remains with my
self.
Follow the Arguments pressing and bearing in this Challenge upon them. The
first whereof (in this verse) is diversely interpreted and taken up. Some
conceive Job's meaning to be this, That if he had erred in judgment or
practice, himself (and not they) should have the worst of it, and smart for it;
and therefore they might let him alone to take his own hazard. Or it was a
secret Error betwixt God and him (for his practice and way, in the view of the
world, had been blameless) and therefore not to be cast up by them. As it were
nothing strange to admit of such an escape as this in Job, when he is in the
heat of dispute and passion; so such reasoning could not be justified. For
grant those Errors should not break forth to infect others; yet, his godly
Friends, in such a case, were bound to be more tender of him, then to suffer
even himself alone to continue in an Error.

But I take the force of the Argument to lie rather in this; That, supposing he
had erred in the point controverted, yet it would lodge (as the word is) and
remain with him for ever, for any thing they had done to convince him of it.
And so the meaning of the words, is, They were far in the wrong, and very
cruel, in that they railed upon him as unsound in judgment and practice, when
yet they had taken no pains solidly to convince him of any Error. Neither
could he be edified by such a procedure, nor would it make him quit an Error,
if he were overtaken with any. This Interpretation agrees with what Job had
said, Chap. 6.25. and what Elihu afterward censureth in those three Friends,
Chap. 32, 3.

It Teaches,

1. It is possible the soundest of men, considered in themselves, may be
overtaken in an Error; For, though Job grant not that he erred in this Debate,
yet the Supposition, Be it indeed that I have erred, imports the case be
possible.

2. Among other causes, Ignorance is a great help to Error; For, the word
signifies a failing through Ignorance, as it is, Numb. 15.28. Not only is
there an Ignorance of Truth in every Error, but many are led into Error
through their weakness, simplicity, and ignorance.

3. Railing and calumniating will never prevail with rational and conscientious
men, to cause them change their Opinions; But as honest men will not therefore
quit Truth because others rail at it, and call it Error; So, oft-times,
Errors are the more rooted in men, because they are ill refuted; For, in such
a case, Job says, My Error remains with my self, or, shall lodge with me.

Verse. 5. If indeed ye will magnify your selves against me, and plead against
my reproach:

6. Know now that God has overthrown me, and has compassed me with his net.


Follows, to v. 23. the second Argument pressing this Challenge; The sum
whereof is, that they were cruel and inhumane to deal so sharply with him, whom
God had afflicted so sadly. It may be branched out in those three.

1. He propounds, in General, that if they would insult over him, and take
advantage of his afflicted condition, they had indeed ground enough to go upon,
v. 5, 6. --

2. To instruct this more particularly, and to ease himself by complaining, he
takes occasion to enumerate his miseries, wherein he gives eight proofs or
instances of his afflicted and miserable condition, v. -- 6. -- 20.

3. Upon all this he inferrs, that they were in the wrong, who dealt as they
did with a man in his condition, v. 21, 22.

In the General Proposition, (If indeed ye will magnify your selves -- know
now that God has, etc.) in a sharp, but oblique, way of reprehension, he tells
them, that if they would insult over him, and still make use of his afflicted
condition to cry him down, they had advantage enough of that kind against him;
though (as the way of propounding imports, and he tells them expressly
afterward) it was but a poor trade they drove.

Whence Learn,

1. Some men (and even good men, when they are in an Error, and under
Tentation) are so stiff, that there is no reclaiming of them (at least, for a
time) from their evil course; For, Job supposes that they will indeed go on,
notwithstanding all he had said to reclaim them.

2. It is hard for men who are ex^mpted, when others are afflicted, not to be
puffed up, and tempted to undervalue those who are afflicted; For, they
magnify themselves against him.

3. The reproach of affliction is a great seeming advantage in debate, to bear
down those who are under it; For, they pleaded against him his reproach, and
that God had sadly afflicted him, to bear down all his defenses in behalf of
his own integrity.

4. God may give much seeming advantage of this kind, even against a godly man;
not only to try his faith and patience, and submission toward God, but to add
to his trial from men, who make use of the crosses of the godly, that they may
reproach them and their integrity: For, so does Job acknowledge, that, if they
will plead that, then they may know that God has overthrown him, etc.

5. It is but poor gallantry to run down afflicted men; For, Job intends this
concession, as a sharp reprehension, as is after cleared. It is great folly not
to consider that the afflicteds condition may be our own, which might make us
sober, and that great afflictions may occasion some escapes, which are not to
be censured hardly. And it argues want of compassion, to insult over a godly
man in his trouble, Psalm. 69.26.

Follows the Second Branch of this Argument, which begins at v. -- 6.
wherein, in several particulars, he lays out the greatness of his affliction,
of which they might take advantage against him, if they would be so cruel. His
scope in all which Enumeration of his miseries, is, not only to tax their
cruelty, but to ease himself by complaining and venting of his grief: And
indirectly to refute them, and to show his courage and assurance of his own
integrity. For in this enumeration, he alludes to what Bildad (Chapter 18.) had
said was the lot of the wicked, and adds more to his account; that he may
intimate that, however all those things had befaln him (if not more) which he
said was the portion of the wicked; yet he will not take with it, that he is
wicked. Only this is further to be adverted unto, that though Job point out
here his real miseries, yet he cannot be excused from some excess of passion
and indirect reflections on God in this Narration. For Elihu hints at some
expressions here, in his refutation of him.

Before I enter upon the Particulars, this purpose in General, and Job's scope
in it, may teach,

1. It is the duty of Saints to take all their afflictions from God and out of
his hand, whoever be the Instruments employed therein; For, Job all along does
ascribe them to him.

2. Saints may be exercised and humbled, but they need not be astonished, or
their confidence shaken, by their sad afflictions, even albeit they see God
their party in them, and their afflictions be such as look like the wickeds
lot: For, Job grants this to be his case and yet quits not his integrity.
Afflictions are not the Rule whereby we are to try our Integrity, nor do they
speak any thing against men's honesty, whom the Word does not condemn.

3. Some Saints may be made spectacles for outward affliction, not only above
what other Saints have suffered, but above what some of the wicked suffer; As
Job here points out his case to be singular, and that he suffered many things
above what Bildad said of the wickeds lot. This comes to pass that all may
adore Sovereignty, and that others may not quarrel under lesser troubles.

4. Saints may be so far at under by their afflictions, that they can find no
case of them, but to disgorge their own hearts by venting and telling over
their miseries; For, that is Job's case here, who must ease himself by
complaining.

5. Albeit complaints of our troubles may bring some ease; yet, oft-times, they
are not so well managed, but Saints fail in them; as Job did in his complaint.

6. In particular, when Saints complain of God and his dealing, and do not
speak the matter to himself, they are most ready to miscarry; For, Job is
complaining of Gods dealing before his Friends, when he fails here; though it
be also true, that he failed when he spoke his condition to God.

I come to the particular proofs and instances of his misery; The first whereof
(v. -- 6.) is, That God had utterly subverted and overthrown him, in his
Person, Estate, Children, etc. And so had taken him in that which Bildad called
a net to the wicked, Chap. 18.8, etc.

Whence Learn,

1. Afflictions are then really sad, when they not only shake and make men
stagger, but do utterly overthrow them, to their sense and feeling, and to
outward appearance; For, Job begins at overthrowing, as a sad part of his
trial; which may teach others not to murmur at lesser trials.

2. The dearest of Gods people may be overthrown and overturned in their
outward estate and condition; As Job was here. Hereby the Lord drives them from
all confidence in any help and comfort beside himself, in their trouble; and he
loves to have them thus broken, that he may give them proofs of his love in
making them up again.

3. Men are by nature very wild, and not only averse from afflictions, but ill
to tame by them; Therefore does he compare his afflictions to a net, which is
appointed for taking of wild creatures, intimating that even a godly man has
much of that untamed disposition in him, which predomines in the wicked, Jer.
2.24.

4 God can easily, when he will, overtake and incompass the wildest, and reach
them with what afflictions he pleases; For, says he, He has compassed me
with his net. See Hos. 7.12. Am. 9 2, 3.4.

5. While afflictions are compared to a net, it should further teach,

1. To take heed that we be not only outwardly restrained by afflictions, while
lusts are raging inwardly; as wild creatures are only held fast, but not tamed,
in a net. See Isa. 51.20.

2. To take heed of struggling under Gods hand, or striving against the bonds
he lays upon us; For that will but entangle us the more, as wild creatures in
a net are held the faster, the more they struggle.

Verse. 7. Behold, I cry out of wrong, but I am not heard: I cry aloud, but
there is no judgment.
The Second proof and instance of his misery, is, That though he cry to God
against their unjust dealing and false accusations, and against the oppression
of the Sabeans and others who wronged him; yet, he is not heard nor righted.

Whence Learn,

1. Prayer to God should be our chief refuge and shift under violence and
unjust usage; For, says he, I cry out of wrong, or, complain to God that I am
wronged.

2. Prayer in such a case should be instant and fervent, especially when an
answer is delayed; For, I cry out, and I cry aloud, when I am kept crying
still. See Luke 22.44.

3. Even when godly men have right on their side, and do pray fervently and
diligently to be helped in their right; yet, their Prayer may not be heard for
a time, to their sense; For, when he cried out, and cried aloud, and that of
wrong, or, violence, yet he is not heard, and there is no judgment, or, no
sentence passed by God to redress his wrongs. We are not to judge of our
selves, nor of our Prayers, at all times, by our visible success, Psalm. 22.2.
But Saints may get wrong, and yet must resolve to suffer it, even when they
have done duty.

4. It is a sad trial to Saints, when Prayer seems to fail them in Gods way;
For, this complaint is subjoyned to his being overthrown, v, 6. as yet sadder,
that in such a condition he should be denied access, and his Prayers (which are
the mean whereby men find relief in trouble) not avail him; and therefore he
prefixeth a behold, to it. It is sad to Saints at any time, to find their
Prayers neglected, considering that their life consists in Communion with God,
which is entertained by Prayer; and that they may be ready to draw sad
conclusions from such a lot. But it is most sad when Prayer seems to fail them
in a peremptore and great distress, such as Job was now in.

5. Yet in this complaint Job is not to be altogether justified, but his
mistakes and passion in it are blameworthy. For,

1. He reflects upon God as not letting him have judgment, or fair play; which
is injurious to his Holiness, Sovereignty and Justice.

2. Though all other issues had failed him; yet Patience and Grace to bear his
Cross was an issue, which if he had cherished, he needed not complain for the
want of other answers, 1 Cor. 10.13.

3. Though there had been no passion, nor other defects, in the manner or
matter of his Prayers (wherein he was not altogether blameless, and many times
we cry earnestly for that which we would not love, were it granted; as Habakkuk
complains that God took not notice of the Jews sinfulness, and yet is grieved,
when God threatens to punish them, Hab. 1.2, 3, -- 6, -- 12, 13, etc.) yet it
was reason that God should have the timing of the answer of his Prayers, were
they never so honest.

4. It was necessary that he should abide under the trial, for the exercise of
his faith and patience, and that corruptions might be discovered and purged by
the delay.

5. If God love to hear the Prayers of his own Children, and therefore suffer
them to cry on, there is no reason that he or any other should quarrel or
mistake such a dispensation. These are a few of many particulars to be marked
upon this complaint, whereof the godly should make use in the like case.

Verse. 8. He has fenced up my way that I cannot pass, and he has set darkness
in my paths.
The Third proof and instance of his misery (wherein he alludes to the
condition of some Travelers) is, that he is hemmed in with difficulties and
irresolution, not knowing what to do, nor where to find an issue, and filled
with discomfort in the mean time. His being se^ced up and in darkness, imports,
both his difficulties without, and from his irresolution and discomfort from
within. And by his way and paths, we are to understand, both, his present
duty, and the issue he would be at by following his duty.

Hence Learn,

1. Men are not behind so long as they have a duty to go about in any strait;
For, when he is not heard, v. 7. he would account it a mercy to have away and
paths wherein to walk. Such as are not deserted as to duty, do enjoy a special
mercy, though they be deserted as to comfort, Psalm. 88.13, 14. See Job 23.3, 4,
etc.

2. Afflicted and tender Saints will not take up duty at random, or by their
own will, but from Gods light; For, he would have light, and not darkness in
his paths.

3. Saints may expect to be bounded and straitened with troubles, so that they
cannot walk at large as they were wont to do; For, he complains that his way is
fenced up. See Hos. 2.6. Hereby, as God corrects them for their wantonness and
wandering; so, he calls them to seek enlargement in himself.

4. Saints, being thus hemmed in, may also be deprived of all ability to rid
themselves of their difficulties, by their own endeavors; For, he cannot pass
toward any issue. We will not be able to shake off trouble, till God interpose
and be seen in it.

5. It may be the lot of Saints, as to be shut up from all issues, so also to
have no light nor skill to know what to do; For darkness, of irresolution,
accompanies the fencing up of his way. Trouble may confound the judgment, and
if any light offer, it may be readily suspected, lest trouble suggest it, to
bring ease any way.

6. The perplexities of Saints in trouble, flow not only, or so much, from the
weakness of their judgments, as from the hand of God, who afflicts, tries, and
humbles them thereby; For, he fenceth up, and sets darkness in his paths.

7. The condition of Saints, when shut up under trouble, and involved in
perplexities, i^ very disconsolate; For, so much also is imported in this
darkness, and his complaint tells it was sad to him. Such a condition pleads
for pity, and may expect it from God.

8. Saints may be involved in troubles, from which they cannot expede
themselves, and be also filled with perplexities, who yet are, and will be well
guided; For, so was it with Job here, whom God brought to a good issue. See
Isa. 42* 16. Psalm. 73.22, 23.

Verse. 9. He has stripped me of my glory, and taken the crown from mine head.
The fourth proof and instance of his misery (wherein he alludes to the habit,
or, ornaments of body) is, That God deprived him of his dignity and Reputation,
of his Riches, Children, and outward State; which had been his glory, like
splendid Apparel, and as a Crown upon his head, in the view of others. See
Chap. 29.7, 14, 20. Leaving his Observation that God had done this, and the
rest that follow, which has been marked in the entry;

Here, Learn,

1. The Lord may see it fit, sometimes, to exalt his Children to an height of
prosperity; as Job had Glory, and a Crown, in this respect. Thus the Lord does,

1. That men may learn to look upon no outward condition as an infallible
evidence of love or hatred; and that neither afflictions nor prosperity do
prove men wicked.

2. That by such instances he may give proof what he could do, and would do to
all his people, if it were for their good.

3. That he may try his people how they will keep their feet in such a
condition; as prosperity is a trial no less then adversity, and Job's
testimony, that he kept his integrity in his prosperity, does comfort him, when
his prosperity is gone; Chap. 31.

4. That Saints, enjoying those advantages, may experimentally know the
emptiness of them, which they would not so easily believe; if they had not
found it: as may be seen in their doting upon them who never enjoyed them.

Doct. 2. After Saints have been thus exalted, the Lord may see it fit to
tumble them down again; as here Job was stripped of his Glory, and the Crown
taken from his head: and instead of his former prosperity, and his esteem with
others, he meets with loss and contempt both at once. Hereby,

1. The Lord exercises his Sovereignty, and makes it appear that he may toss
his Children at his pleasure.

2. He demonstrateth sensibly the vanity and uncertainty of these transitory
things, that we may not fix upon them, but what is a better and more enduring
substance.

3. He tries us by those changes of condition, which are sorer to abide then
any one condition, if we were kept at it. It is easier for one to bear want who
has always been a beggar, than for those who, after they have been clothed
with Scarlet, are made to embrace Dunghils, Lam. 4.5. See Psalm. 102.10. Eccl.
7.14.

4. Hereby also God gives proof how he can uphold his people in all those
shakes; as he did uphold Job.

Doct. 3. Such changes in our outward condition may be a trial, even to the
mortified Child of God; For, though Job did not set up his rest upon his
prosperity and dignity, yet here he complains of the loss of it, and that he
wants his Crown and Glory.

Here Consider,

1. Saints have sense and flesh which cannot but feel, and grieve under,
trouble and contempt; and they are not to mistake, though they find somewhat in
themselves that ^epineth at the Cross.

2. By this God makes it evident that Saints are not Stoics, or wholly
insensible of troubles; and that it is not themselves, but Grace in them, that
bears them out.

3. When the spirits of Saints are otherwise broken (as Job's was) then any
thing will be a burden, though otherewise in their judgment they think little
of it.

4. Our bitterness and peevishness may cause us have too great an esteem of
things when we want them, which we were but little thankful for, when we had
them, and so we disquiet our selves.

Verse. 10. He has destroyed me on every side, and I am gone: and mine hope
has he removed like a tree.
The Fifth proof and instance of his misery (wherein he alludes to the
destroying of Houses, and plucking up of Trees, whereof Bildad had also spoken;
and whereby he further explains what he had said, v. 6 --) is, That his present
enjoyments and future hopes were quite overthrown and gone; as an House that is
quite overturned, and a Tree that is plucked up by the roots.

Whence Learn,

1. The sense of grievances, being entertained, will make men great Orators in
pointing them out; As Job's insisting upon his complaint may teach, and
experience of others recorded in Scripture, who have dwelt long upon their
lamentations and complaints, does witness. This

1. May encourage them who cannot get an end of their complaints, nor have soon
done with them, when they consider that they want not company at that sad Trade.

2. It may warrant us to study our grievances well, that they may press
humility upon us, and we may make use of them as Arguments to plead for pity;
and, by the sense thereof, may be fitted for proofs of Gods love; and withal,
we may glorify God, by our submission to him, and our hope in him,
notwithstanding all those grievances. Yet,

3. We should beware to dwell upon this subject, only out of bitterness, or a
desire to complain. Upon those terms, we should think one word of our
distresses too much* and the least moment of time too long, to spend about
them, seeing we have better exercises wherein to be employed. And herein Job
failed, who spent much time and talk on this in his bitterness, when he might
have been better employed.

Doct. 2. God can, and sometime will, surround his Children with an universal
havoc and desolation, in their Children, Goods, Body, Name, Peace of mind,
etc. As here Job was destroyed on every side. See Lam. 2.22. Here,

1. The repeating of this again, from v. 6. serves to confirm Saints, that such
a condition is not inconsistent with a gracious state: and to warn us that we
should not make exception of any outward trial, as if it were inconsistent with
grace in a person.

2. This does also teach murmurers, that it is their duty to look upon their
lesser trials as abounding with mercies, when they consider this total
overthrow of a godly man, as to his outward condition. Too much noise about
those, and little praise to God, who moderates his stroke, do argue much
self-love, ingratitude, and need of more afflictions.

3. Such as are made to drink of this bitter cup, should submit to God in it,
believing that no less is necessary to try them, to put them out of themselves,
and to fit them for the singular proofs of love, which God intends for them.

Doct. 3. When God engages with the Creature, especially in any measure of
severity, the Creature will soon succumb; For, says he, He has destroyed me,
and I am gone. So that stooping is our best, when God becomes our party.

4. Hope is the last refuge and life of a destroyed and gone Saint; For, so is
here supposed, that when he is destroyed and gone, he looks what hope will
afford, to comfort him. Saints should not cast away hope and confidence, Psalm.
42.11. Heb. 10.35. but should wrestle from under the ruins of their destroyed
condition, by hope.

5. Not only the present enjoyments, but the future hopes of Saints, may be
destroyed and gone, to their sense; For, his hope was removed like a Tree, that
is rooted out of the ground. This is to be understood of his hopes about
temporal favors and restitution; wherein (though Job was mistaken, in casting
off hopes of restitution) men ought to be very sober, and submit all to the
good pleasure of God. For, to do at upon those things, is to feed murmuring,
evidence insobriety, and breed our selves many disappointments. But even other
and better hopes of Saints may fail much; that God may try how we will hope
against hope, out of our love to him, and may take a proof of our delight to
give him credit in difficulties; and that he may give proof what he will do for
his own Children, who sometime will not so much as cherish hope in him.

6. God can, and will do for his people, even far above their present sense and
hopes; For, Job thinks he is gone, and his hope removed, and yet he is carried
through. See Ephesians. 3.19. Psalm. 94.18, 19.

Verse. 11. He has also kindled his wrath against me, and he counts me unto
him as one of his enemies.

12. His troops come together, and raise up their way against me, and encamp
round about my tabernacle.


The Sixth proof and instance of his misery (wherein he alludes to a mighty
Kings making war against his Enemies, or rebellious Subjects) is, That God
seemed to deal with him in wrath, as with a Rebel and Enemy, v. 11. and,
accordingly had let loose afflictions, and Satan, the Sabeans, Chaldeans, the
Wind and Fire, and other Instruments of his trouble, which irresistibly hemmed
him in, like so many Troops raising up Trenches, and drawing ^nes about their
besieged Enemies, v. 12. While Job speaks here of Gods wrath kindled against
him, and Gods accounting him an Enemy, he does not hereby absolutely contradict
what elsewhere he speaks concerning his own integrity, and his faith in Gods
favor. For by faith he still cleaves to this, that he is a righteous man and
beloved of God; though in his complaint he sometime speak this language of
sense, that God was wroth, and looked upon him as an Enemy.

From the first part of v. 11. He has also kindled his wrath against me: Learn,

1. The dearest of Saints may be under sad apprehensions of Gods anger and
wrath; For, so was Job here, and David frequently. They may not only be really
under fatherly displeasure, but ^ad afflictions, joined with tentation,
weakness and desertion, may cause them tremble under the sense of wrath. And
this,

1. Should cause Saints not stumble, if they be so exercised. They may have a
sure interest in the love of God, whose eyes and thoughts are held fixed upon
wrath.

2. It should make them careful not to judge by sense, which is rash, and
judges by appearance, and not by the Word, and represents our condition worse
then it is.

Doct. 2. Apprehension of wrath is most dreadful Saints, and puts the cap-stone
on all their other sorrows; Therefore he joins this to the rest of his
grievances, with an also, as an over-charging addition to them. See Chap.
13.24. And this gives us a sure evidence of Saintship, and that it is but our
sense that affrights us, when we are most affected with wrath of any thing. See
Isa. 64 5.

3. This also contributes to make the apprehen-of wrath sad, especially to
Saints.

1. That it is not lying buried under the ashes, but kindled and broken out.
And indeed, wrath, when it is deferred, or but apprehended at a distance, may
seem but little in respect of what men will find it when it breaks out. Then it
will be found unsupportable, Isa. 33.14. Psalm. 90 11. And Saints will see cause
to lament that they apprehended it so little, till it came to that issue.

2. After wrath has been revealed against the Elect in their natural
condition, or against converted Saints for some particular faults, and it has
been buried again, and God reconciled with them; It cannot but be sad that it
should kindle up again, and that after they have tasted of kindness and sweet
imbracements, they should again fall under the lash of wrath; As Job here
apprehends it. This is matter of sad regret, Psalm. 85.3. with v 4.5.

3. This also heightens the sadness of such an apprehension, that it is his
wrath, and that he has kindled it against them, whose way, many time, with his
people, is, not to stir up all his wrath, but to quench and take it away, Psalm.
78.38 Isa. 57 16, 17, 18. and that he, who is their hope and refuge in all
their troubles, Jer. 17.17. should become their party, Isa. 63.9, 10. Now
albeit all those sad sights be but Saints apprehensions and tentations, or at
most, there is only fatherly displeasure in their lot; yet, from this we may
gather, That true Saints cannot endure to have God their party in anger, on any
terms; and it will be no small grief to them in such a condition, that
evidences of displeasure have not been seen beforehand in the Word; and it
will sadly affect them in their distress, when they remember it was sometime
otherwise with them, as is said in another case, Lam. 1.7. In all those
respects Job complains of this here.

From the last part of v. 11. He counts me to him as one of his Enemies
(wherein he clears and explains the former, that God looked upon him as an
Enemy, and so let out wrath upon him, or strokes which seemed to speak wrath)
Learn,

1. Such as are indeed Enemies to God, are obnoxious to wrath, which will break
out at last in sad effects; For, so much does the connection betwixt those two
import. Where God accounts a man an Enemy, there he has wrath, and this wrath
will break out in hostile acts, such as those which made Job apprehend wrath,
and that God counted him an Enemy. See Psalm. 7.11, 12, etc and 75.8.

2. However men may bear out under the harsh judgments of men, who neither are
infallible, nor can judge of men's estate; Yet God is Supreme Judge, whose
sentence is always just and irrepealable; For, Job looks here to what he
counted him to be; and though he was not shaken by his Friends mistakes, yet
this is matter of sad complaint, that (to his sense) he counted him to him, or
in his judgment, as one of his Enemies.

3. It is the saddest of wrath that is let out on Enemies, and which comes
from God looking on the party, whom he pursues, as an Enemy; For, this
aggravates end heightens his sense of kindled wrath, that it comes upon him as
an Enemy. In respect of this, Fatherly displeasure is a deliverance and mercy,
as being mixed with, and flowing from love. And Saints should read it so, and
bless God that it is so.

4. Saints may look upon their lot as inflicted on them as Enemies, when yet it
flows from real friendshid; For, Job mistook in this, there was neither wrath
nor enmity in all this. Saints are thus affrighted, because they cannot discern
Gods tender heart, which may be warm toward them, when his hand seems to speak
severity, Jer. 30.14. with 31.20. Therefore it is a sweet study wherein Saints
should be much exercised, To know how much of cross dispensations may consist
with love, yea, and flow, from it; To know that all real displeasure is not
pure and unmixed wrath; That Senses language under trouble is Apocryphal, and
not to be credited; and, That we may read much from our ill deservings and
guilt, in our trouble, which yet Gods love does not intend in it, as not
pursuing our pardoned guilt, nor chastening because he has a quarrel, though
we deserve it should be otherwise.

From v. 12. (wherein he clears how he thought God pursued him as an Enemy)
Learn,

1. Where God has a quarrel, we need not doubt but he can avenge himself,
seeing he has forces in abundance to prosecute his Controversy: For, here
there are Troops to send out against an Enemy.

2. Afflictions, trials, oppressors, etc. are Gods Armies sent against man,
though not always in wrath, yet to subdue Rebellion, and make him stoop;
Therefore are those called his Troops, to show that he, as Supreme General,
has them at his command, to cause them come and go at his pleasure; and that
as Armies are sent out to subdue Rebels and conquer En^mies, so they are
employed to bring and keep us in subjection to God. And therefore we should be
careful that they get their errand, lest he send out more Troops against us,
Lev. 26.21, 22, 23, 24, etc.

3. God, when he pursues men by afflictions, is irresistible; For, those
Troops raise up their way against him, and encamp round about his Tabernacle.
So that it is to no purpose to struggle or contend with such a dispensation;
but it is our only safety to stoop.

4. When sad afflictions come upon Saints, it is not easy for them to avoid
thoughts that God is angry, and looks upon them as an Enemy; For, because of
those Troops, Job suspects that wrath is kindled, and that God counts him as
one of his Enemies, v. 11.

Verse. 13. He has put my brethren far from me, and mine acquaintance are
verily estranged from me.

14. My kinsfolk have failed, and my familiar friends have forgotten me.


From this, to v. 20. we have the Seventh proof and instance of his misery;
Namely, That while he is thus afflicted, he is diserted of Friends, Servants,
his Wife; and most intimate familiars, and despised by others. This instance is
deduced in a large complaint, and may be taken up in five Branches. The first
whereof (in these verses) is, That all his Friends, Kindred and Acquaintance,
had deserted him. These here mentioned under the names of Brethren,
Acquaintance, Kinsfolk, and familiar Friends, must be distinguished from those
most intimate bosom Friends, of whom he complains, v. 19. and are the same with
those who returned to him when God smiled upon him, Chap. 42.11. And under
those various names are comprehended his Relations in the flesh, and his
Neighbors and Acquaintance, who took notice of him before, and with whom he
entertained familiarity and neighbourly intercourse. These he declares were
far, and estranged from him, did fail and had forgotten him. That is, they
withdrew from him, and failed him in his strait, and took no more notice of him
than if he had been a stranger, or one forgotten among them. It seems from
Chap. 42.11. that they had not come at him in his distress, or if they did,
they carried strangely toward him, forgetting his former condition, and what
familiarity had been among them. And, to add to all this, he declares they were
verily, or, only, thus estranged from him, v. -- 13. that is, they were
altogether so, and really so, and not in his apprehension only. From all this,
Learn,

1. Piety does allow men to make use of, and entertain familiarity and converse
with, natural Relations, and other Neighbors and Acquaintances; For Job
entertained such. Piety does not teach men to be without natural affections,
Romans 1.31. with 2 Timothy 3.2, 3, etc. nor yet to be selfish, insociable and wild
creatures. For grace does sanctify, and not destroy Nature. And gracious men
should labor to commend and insinuate Piety to others, by taking notice of
them and conversing with them.

2. Those Relations among men do import obligations unto duties, according as
any need them; For, Job, by his complaint, insinuates, that Brethren and
Acquaintance, etc. should not be far off, not fail, or be forgetful and
strange, when any they have relation unto are in trouble, and need their help.
A friend ought to love at all times, and a Brother is born for adversity, Prove.
17.17. And men are to look how they acquit themselves of their bonds of
Relation and friendship, in such cases; lest it be said to them, as Absalom
said to Hushai, Is this thy kindness to thy friend? 2 Samuel 16.17.

3. It oft-times falls but that men, and especially Saints, are deserted of
their Friends, Relations and Acquaintance, when they come to be in trouble;
For, so Job found in his experience, and David, Psalm. 31.11, 12. and 38.11. and
elsewhere, see Prove 14.20. If men try upon what they ground their friendship,
it will be found that few are real friends to the men, or their virtues, whom
they pretend to affect; but only to their prosperity; and that there are few
such friends as Jonathan was to David. And though men may pretend otherwise;
yet adversity (which is the Touchstone of friendship) will discover the truth.
Therefore we should lean upon our Kindred, Friends and Acquaintance, as a very
uncertain prop. And when we are deserted by them, we should consider that this
has been the lot of Saints before us, and should learn to trust in God, who is
a friend that never fails, fail us who will, Psalm. 27.10.

4. To be deserted of friends under trouble is a great addition to the trial;
For, Job here complains of it as a part of his exercise. And no wonder; for
this deprives afflicted men of that help and comfort, countenance and counsel,
which might be expected from friends, and which will be much needed in trial.
This shows how great their guilt is who are wanting in that duty to the
afflicted.

5. While he says, they are, verily, or, only estranged, it imports,

1. That the reality of this their unkindness made it sad: Apprehensions of
such a thing are sad enough; yet, it is an case when we consider that they are,
or may be, but apprehensions: But when we find we do not mistake, but our
condition is such as we apprehend it, is cannot but sink the deeper upon our
spirits.

2. That afflicted men, by reason of their distempers, are ready to mistake
their friends; and therefore they should try if things be verily and really so
as they judge, as Job imports he had done, so that he can certainly conclude
they were verily estranged.

3. That this aptitude in afflicted men to mistake should put others upon their
guard, that they do not so much (if it be possible) as seem to grieve them;
much more should they be careful that they do not verily so; as Job complains
of those.

4. That a fit of unfriendliness is nothing so sad, as when men constantly
persist therein, and do only, and altogether so; as Job complains they did.

Doct. 6. The best sight of such a trial, and the best way to get the right use
of it, is, to see God doing all this; For, so does Job here, He has put my
Brethren far from me. For,

1. This quickens the trial, and helps it to work, when we see a Supreme hand
in it.

2. Saints, seeing God in such a trial, will see also that his end in it is but
to try them; and that therefore they should look well how they bear it, when
God puts them in the furnace, and on the stage, to give proof of what is within
them.

3. They will also see, that a compendious way to get an issue in such a trial,
is, to wait on God that he may show mercy, and then the bowels of all others
(as it may be needful) will be loosed upon them; as Job found, Chap. 42.7, 10.
with 11. See Jer. 42.12.

4. They may also see, in some cases, that God turns off false friends from the
godly, not only for their trial, but for bringing about the ruin of these
friends; Thus was it with Egypt, after they degenerated from their wonted
kindness to Israel, Psalm. 105.25, 26, 27, 28, etc. and with many other false
friends to that people.

Verse. 15. They that dwell in my house, and my maids count me for a stranger: I
am an an aliant in their sight.

16. I called my servant, and he gave me no answer: I entreated him with my
mouth.


The Second Branch of this complaint and instance, is, That he was slighted in
his own house, by his domestics, maids and servants; who took no more notice
of him, than if he had been a stranger and alien, v. 15. nor would so much as
answer him, when he called for their help; even though he laid aside his
authority, and did not command, but used entreaties, v. 16. As for those who
dwell in his house, whom he mentions with his maids and servants, it is not
needful to understand by those any Widows and Orphans, whom he entertained,
(and it seems, some of them, in his own family) Chap. 31.16, 17, 18. nor yet
any of them who made ordinary resort to his house. But (if we make a difference
at all betwixt those and his other maids and menservants) those dwellers in
his house, seem to have been sojourning hired servants (to which sort of
servants he alludes, Chap. 7.1, 2. and so it seems he had some of them, and
they made use of such in that Country, as well as of Bondslaves) who slighted
him, together with his other Bond-servants, men and women, who perpetually
attended him, as being bought with his money, or otherwise purchased.

Doct. 1. In the sharpest trials of Saints, God may yet reserve somewhat to
them, which ought to be acknowledged as a mercy in it self; For,
notwithstanding all that befell Job, Chap. 1. Yet he has still an house and
servants, and so had a shelter where to stay. And this was a mercy in it self,
that he had a house and some provision and servants to attend him, and so
needed not wander abroad for his meat, though some of those proved not
comfortable to him.

2. Whatever moderation the Lord use in afflicting, yet a trial may be expected
even in that, till Saints be thoroughly tried; For, though it was a mercy in it
self, that Job had servants and maids, and those that dwelt in his house, yet
he has an exercise from that, and it is a part of his complaint that they
slight him.

3. Trials within a man's house and doors, were it even from servants, are very
sharp and grievous: For, though he reserve the loss of some friends, v. 19. as
the last and saddest part of this complaint; yet he subjoyns this trial from
his servants, to the loss of his common friends and acquaintance, v. 13, 14. as
being a sadder trial then that. They have a great mercy, who have domestic
peace and content, amidst other trials; and they are very cruel who disturb the
quiet of a godly man within his own doors.

4. Though it be the duty of Servants to respect their Masters in affliction,
and to answer at their call; Yet, oft-times, their insolency is a great trial,
and an addition to other trials; For, so Job found from his servants, who
counted him for a stranger and alien, or, noticed him no more than if they had
not known him, or he had no power in that house, and when he called, gave him
no answer. Servants will have this undutifulness, especially when their Masters
are in affliction, to answer for unto God. And when God begins to try Saints,
they should arm themselves against trials from all relations, even from slaves
that are bound to them. Withal, though Job's experience do witness, that there
may be ungodly servants, (notwithstanding all men's caution) in a godly family,
at least such as may prove undutiful in a day of trial; Yet, it should be our
endeavor to prevent this trial all we can, by choosing such servants as will
respect us in well and woe. And when we find servants dutiful in affliction, we
ought to acknowledge God in it, who spares us in that wherewith others have
been tried before us.

5. It may be a part of the trial of Saints, to which they should breed
themselves, to be brought to a necessity to stoop to entreat their inferiors,
whom they have right to command; For, Job was put to this, and stooped to do
it, I entreated him with my mouth; he did it himself with his own mouth, being
present, and sent not a message by another, and he did but entreat, and not
command. This practice is much better than fretting at what we cannot help; and
it argues a subdued spirit thus to stoop when God calls us to it.

6. As no endeavor, nor stooping disposition of the afflicted, will hold off
needful trial: So men's sins are very heinous, when they sin not only in
neglecting a commanded duty, but do this notwithstanding the condescendence of
those who call for the duty; For, here it was Job's trial, and his servants
great sin, that they gave no answer, when he but entreated. And if it heighten
the sin of servants, that they are undutiful, when well and lovingly entreated
by their Masters; much more will Gods condescendence to beseech us to do our
duty, 2 Cor. 5.20. and the warm encouragements and cords of love, whereby we
are drawn to it, heighten the guilt of the rebellious.

Verse. 17. My breath is strange to my wife, though I entreated for the
childrens sake of mine own body.
The Third Branch of this complaint and instance, is, That he had yet a sorer
trial within his own house, from his own wife, who was either an ungodly woman,
or wonderfully carried away by her corruptions in this trial of her husband.
For as she had given him a wicked counsel in the beginning of the trial, Chap.
2.9. So, in the progress of it, she did desert and would not own him, but
accounted his breath and savor strange and stinking, by reason of his ulcerous
sores, and, it may be also, some inward putrefaction in his body. And she
continued in this temper, notwithstanding all his entreaties, and his obtesting
of her by the remembrance of their Children, the common pledges of their love
and conjugal affection.

Doct. 1. Saints must resolve to meet, not only with common, but, most singular
trials; For, Job had trials not only from his servants, but from the very wife
of his bosom. He had lesser trials, but as a preparation for a greater. The
strength of Gods grace in Saints would not appear, nor would they be fitted for
the singular proofs of his love, without these; neither would humbling weakness
be discovered, without such a furnace. And they ought to stoop to Sovereignty,
in fastening trials upon all then enjoyments.

2. Marriage society is one of the most special of outward crosses, or
blessings; As Job here finds it sad. And he subjoyns it to the rest formerly
mentioned, as sadder than they, and to express his grief that where, in reason,
he might have expected a special comfort, he should find a singular cross. They
little mind this, who do not eye God in their choice, and do not depend on God
for a blessing upon that estate of life.

3. It may be the lot of very godly men, to find very heavy afflictions in
their matches; As Job, a godly man, found this sad cross in his marriage, once
and again. So Moses with Zipporah, David with Michal. Some get a meet
chastisement of their folly (to which the godly also may be obnoxious) in the
matter of their marriage; and (howeuer it be as to that) godly men get a
constant trial and exercise of their graces, by such matches. And withal, this
may be a document, that example and good company will not always prevail with
people.

4. Marriage affection should digest many infirmities in the married parties,
and obliges them to go nearest, and have most special care one of another, in
their trouble: For, It is employed here, as her fault, that his breath was
strange to her, or, that she loathed him because of his infirmities. Parties
should marry each other with an eye to this, that they may be infirm; and that
they are appointed to be helpers in such cases.

5. Where God has his own Children to try (and especially, when, in such a
case, they are joined to those who either are without grace, or have strong
corruptions) no ties or Bonds, and no Arguments they can use with Relations,
will hold off a cross from them; For, albeit she was his wife, and he entreated
her, by the strongest Argument he could use, yet she perseveres in her ill
temper. If persons be either graceless, or entertain strong corruptions, they
are not to be leaned to in a day of trial; and especially, if they live under
good means (as she did in his family) and are not bettered. And before a man
want a needful trial, the very wife of his bosom will be a trial, Mic. 7.5, 6.

6. Whatever be the undutifulness of Relations, particularly in marriage
Society; Yet, it is the duty of the godly to keep within their bounds: For,
though he handled her more roughly in what concerned God, Chap. 2.10. Yet in
his complaint of her miscarriage toward him, he declares he only entreated, and
dealt lovingly with her, as became a husband to do to his wife.

7. Albeit Gods institution of marriage, and his command, do tie man and wife
to the mutual duties of love and tenderness; yet, Issue and Children are
notable pledges and bonds of matrimonial affection, and should be improved as
such; For, he pressed a strong Argument to reclaim her to her duty; when he
entreated her for the Childrens sake of his own body. This implies that love
betwixt married persons should be growing daily (for he supposes it should be
heightened by those means) and cherished by every proof of love they get in
their marriage society, particularly, by Gods giving them Children; For which
end, they should be devoted to God, that they may be blessed to them, for that,
as for other ends. And where married persons want Children, they should seek
after the more of God, which will not only make up that want, but will keep
fast the bonds of marriage affection without them.

Verse. 18. Yea, young children despised me; I arose, and they spoke against me.
The Fourth Branch of this complaint and instance, is, That very young ones,
who before respected him, did now follow the crowd in despising him. And albeit
he stood up, to reprove and dash them, yet to his face they persisted to speak
disdainfully to him.

Doct. 1. It is the duty of younger persons to reverence the aged, especially
if they be also honorable for dignity; For, the want of this is complained of
as a grievance, young Children despised me. See Lev. 19.32.

2. As honor and respect among men is empty in it self, so it is very
inconstant and little to be leaned to; For, so Job sound it, when very young
Children withdrew their respect from him, who had been reverenced by all, Chap.
29.7, 8, 9, etc. Greatness is but a lie, Psalm 62.9. And if men either hunt
sinfully after respect, or lean much to it, they are in a dangerous Error. For
it is but one of the passing shows of the world.

3. Young ones are very apt to follow the ill example they see; For, when elder
persons, within and without doors, had slighted Job, it is added, Yea, young
Children despised me. For this cause young Children were torn by Bears for
mocking the Prophet, as they had learned to do from their Parents and others in
Bethel, that nest of Idolatry, 2 King. 2.23, 24. Therefore Parents had need to
see to their Children, what example they give, or suffer to be given them.

4. The looking to Instruments employed in a trial adds, oft-times, to the
bitterness of it; For, so Job resents here, that yea, or even young Children
despised him, So Chap. 30.12, etc. Psalm. 35.15, 16. and 69.12. But we must
stoop, and consider that the employing of such Instruments is a part of our
trial, wherein we should look to God; and that those irritations of our
corruptions are the touchstone of our humility. Neither is it enough to have
somewhat to say against the Instruments of our trouble, if we mind not the
Sovereign hand of God in it, nor learn the lessons he teaches thereby.

5. Our endeavors, or exercise of any power or authority we have, will not
ease, but rather add to, our trial, till God come and interpose; For, his
arising, and engaging to compesce them, did not hinder them to speak against
him, but made their persisting to speak more bitter, than if he had altogether
slighted them. I arose (says he, adding to the former, that they despised
him) and yet they spoke against me. It is safe to slight many such
irritations, and when ever we are called to use means for our own relief, and
they succeed not, we ought to silence our own hearts with this, that our trial
is not yet ended.

Verse. 19. All my inward friends abhorred me: and they whom I loved, are turned
against me.
The Fifth and last Branch of this complaint and instance, is, That his dearly
beloved and bosom friends did abhor him, as an hypocrite, and not a godly man,
and did turn against him, to weaken his hands, and shake his confidence. This
part of his complaint is chiefly to be understood of his three Friends; and in
the last part of the verse he speaks of the person in the singular number, This
man whom I loved, though the Verb be in the plural number, they are turned
against me. An usual change of number in this language, to be understood
distributively, that every one (even to the least one) whom he loved, was so
changed; or, thereby, he would reflect particularly on Bildad who spoke last,
that he, among the rest, was thus estranged.

Doct. 1. Though godly prudent men be friendly and civil to all with whom they
converse; yet they make distinction of friends, and do admit but some only upon
their secrets and counsels; As here Job, beside those, v 13, 14. had his inward
friends, or, men of his secret, as it is in the Original. There is no small
need of Gods guiding in our choice of friends, whom we may trust, from among
all our familiars.

2. Intimate and bosom friendship must be entertertained by love; For, his
inward friends were they whom he loved, to whom he expressed much affection at
all times, for entertaining of his friendship, and whom he constructed well of,
so long as he could. See Prove. 18.24. -- Where friendship is ill entertained,
it justly ends in division and alienation.

3. Dearest and most intimate friends may forsake a godly man, when God has
him to try; and though some friend stick closer then a brother, Prove. 18. --
24. Yet even such a friend may fail in a time of trial: as Job here found. Some
of the godlies bosom-friends may be but gilded Hypocrites, who will discover
what they are in a trial, Psalm. 41.9 and 55.12, 13, 14. Others, though godly,
may be alienated upon their own mistakes; as those Friends were. This may put
godly men's friends in mind, that in times of trial they are tried, no less than
their afflicted friends. And it may also warn godly men that, let them choose,
or entertain their friends never so well; yet they will not get them kept when
God has them to try, but they will be left on God alone, 1 Samuel 30. 6. Psalm.
142.4, 5. And when this is the lot of any godly man, he should remember that it
has been already tried in Job's experience.

4. It is the greatest outward cruelty that Saints can meet with, to be
deserted (and much more to be opposed) by intimate friends in a strait; as not
only leaving them helpless, but discouraging them: Therefore Job complains of
this last, as the most sharp of that kind, that those did abhor and turn
against him. Men should take heed of inflicting such a cruel stroke, and of
unjust prejudices and mistakes, whence this cruelty will flow.

5. As for their carriage toward him, abhorring and turning against him; Had
Job been an Hypocrite, as they supposed, this had been but their duty: As it is
the duty of godly men to abhor hypocrisy no less (if not more) than other
evils; and to set themselves against Hypocrites, to convince them of the evil
of their way. But Job being a godly man, this their carriage may point out a
threefold cruelty in friends to their friends in affliction.

1. When they deny them so much as a room in their affection and pity, as
abhorring them.

2. When they misconstruct the afflicteds case as abominable, when it is
nothing so; and so discourage them under the sadness of it; This is also
imported in their abhorring of him.

3. When they not only think thus of their condition, but turn opposites, and
do avowedly set themselves to discourage them, and weaken their hands; as they
turned against him in their discourses.

Verse. 20. My bone cleaves to my skin, and to my flesh, and I am escaped with
the skin of my teeth.
The Eighth and last proof and instance of his misery, is, The wasting of his
body and strength, with out ward pains and sores, and inward anxieties. His
miseries hitherto mentioned are not all that which grieves him. Had he but a
whole skin and body under all the former pressures, it had been somewhat. But
not so much as that is left him; His bone cleaves to his skin, and flesh, or,
as to his flesh, that is, as of old his bones clave to his flesh, so now (his
flesh being gone) they cleave immediately to his skin: or, they appeared now
through flesh and skin both. And how universal this decay and distemper of his
body was, is apparent from what he subjoyns, that he was escaped with the skin
of his teeth, or, nothing was left him of his body, free of pains and sores,
but his gums and lips, which were left him to complain of his miseries, and, as
Satan thought, that he might blaspheme God. In expectation whereof, he touched
not his mouth and lips with those boils, that he might not lisp it out.

Doct. 1. It is a sad and trying lot, when outward trials are joined with
affliction upon men's own persons; For, Job does complain of this conjunction,
that he was both tried by crosses from without, and from his own body. A weak
body is a great burden to a man's spirit, hindering it to exercise its
functions, in reference to that, or any other trial.

2. Saints may expect such a conjunction of trials as this; For, so was it with
Job, who, beside all his other trials, had scarce any part of his body free.
God will not have his people promise themselves exemption from any trials, or
complication of trials, which are common to men; nor will he have them
excepting any thing in themselves, as if it must be freed from a trial; or
beholden to any thing in themselves for their support.

3. This condition of Job's body, and his complaint about it, may teach, That
bodily health is a mercy, which whosoever do not prize, nor are thankful for; but
rather abuse it, are exceedingly guilty. And, that our vigor and bodily
strength are but little worth that we should do at upon them, seeing they may
be soon blasted; as Job here found. See Psalm. 39.11. and 102.3, etc.

4. Albeit Satan intend our sliding by the conveyance of our trials, yet God
can overruled all to a blessed end; For, whereas Satan left him the skin of his
lips, for an ill end, God overruled it, that thereby he might be able to utter
his precious and profitable exercise. And whatever success Satan have in his
designs about Saints (as sometime Job's tongue spoke rashly,) yet in end he
will miss of all designs that he has upon them.

Verse. 21. Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, O ye my friends; for the hand
of God has touched me.
In this and the following verse is contained Job's Conclusion of his Second
Argument; wherein, from all that he has spoken by way of complaint, he inferrs
that it was not their part to be so cruel to him who was thus afflicted: and so
he charge home upon them, what he had complained of them, v. 19. This
conclusion is propounded, Partly, by way of Petition and Request, v. 21. that
they would do the duty of friends in pitying him, who was so afflicted by God.
Partly, by way of reprehension and challenge, v. 22. that they should pursue
him so severely, whom God was pursuing, and had brought very low; and that they
were not content that God had thus afflicted him, unless they added more to it.

In this verse we have his Petition and request for pity, which he doubleth, to
testify his great distress, and urges it from the consideration of the hand
of God upon him, and from their professed relation of friendship to him;
whereby he insinuates that, since his case pleaded for pity at their hands,
they were exceeding cruel, who not only neglected that duty, but violently
opposed him.

Whence Learn,

1. God may deal sharply with his dearest Children, and his hand may be upon
them, for trial and correction, and for the exercise of his Sovereignty; and
they must not expect always to find sensible love-imbracements; For, Job, is
put to complain of the hand of God upon him.

2. It is God only who has Supreme hand in the trials of his people, as in all
other Providence, Am. 3.6. And it is their safety, in all that befalls them,
to see the hand of God, and not Satan, or other Instruments, carving out their
lot, that so they may be comforted (as well as humbled) when they consider in
whose hand they are. Therefore, though Satan and other Instruments had an hand
in Job's trial, Chap. 1. and 2. yet he looks only to the hand of God.

3. He calls it a touch, which expression, though elsewhere it be made use of
to extenuate a stroke. See Chap. 4.5. And so the expression would speak Job not
excessive, but sober, in his complaints (as we ought to be while we are living
men, Lam. 3.39.) and yet sensible, that the least touch of God makes him cry.
But this Interpretation suits not with Job's case, who does not extenuate his
troubles, but rather exceeds in his complaint. And therefore I take this
expression to point mainly at the event of Gods stroke, that it was such a one
as had touched him home, and made him feel it, and smart under it. And it
teaches, That, as a touch of Gods hand is enough to undo man; So, where he is
pleased to assault, he will reach and touch; So that men will not get it
shifted Obad. v 4. nor will they be able to find ease under it.

4. Whatever comfort it afford, yet to a Child of God, it is very sad, to lie
under Gods afflicting hand; For, as seeing of the hand of God (as has been
marked) affords some ground of comfort in trouble, so it also represents such a
case as humbling: And therefore Job sums up all his affliction in this, The
hand of God has touched me. It is very sad to a Child of God, and will affect
him, that God should deal so with him, especially if his strokes be also sharp;
and Saints may try their Piety, by considering how they stand affected with a
sight of Gods hand in their Rods. And if this be sad to the godly, much more
will it be sad to the wicked, when they fall in the hands of the living God,
Heb. 10.31.

5. When Gods hand is sadly lying upon any of his Children, dearest friends
cannot help, they may well pity them, and it is well if they do not worse; For,
whatever supply friends may afford in some outward necessities, yet in such a
condition as his was, all that can be expected and craved of them, is, pity; It
is only Gods coming and appearing that will heal such strokes of his own hand.
And Saints should not mistake though, among all their friends hands, and
notwithstanding all their pity, their afflictions continue, till God come.

6. It is much to an afflicted man, if he find simpathy and pity among friends;
For Job craves, have pity upon me, as a favor and kindness. They who meet with
that in trouble, should prize it as a favor which is not afforded to every one
in the like case, Psalm. 69.20. And they are not idle, nor uselesly employed,
who are busy at simpathizing with the afflicted, though they can do no more.

7. Friendship and professed love obliges men to the duty of sympathy with
their friends in trouble; For, Job claims it upon this account, Have pity
upon me, O ye my friends.

8. Though they had grieved him, and proved unfriendly; yet here he calls them
Friends at first, and pleads and entreats that they would do duty for time to
come; This he does, not only to check them, who were friends, and neglected
duty; but, being abased with the sense of all his miseries before enumerated,
he at first speaks thus calmly and pitifully to them, as not willing to resent
injuries, if they would return to their duty; though in the next verse knowing
their disposition, he speaks more sharply. This teaches, That when Saints are
themselves, they are very calm in their passions, they do not easily break
bonds of friendship, nor cast often relations, and are willing to digest
injuries, if they could see them any way refrained from for the future.

9. The doubling of his suit, from his great and pressing necessity, teaches,

1. That as we should not make too great noise of our troubles, nor let our
clamours be above our real necessities; So we should also come up to our need
with our earnestness; For, so does Job double his request in distress.

2. That whatever be the judgment of on-lookers, or unconcerned persons, yet
distressed Saints stand in great need of sympathy; Therefore does he so
earnestly call for it.

Doct. 10. Saints may miss and earnestly seek; and yet not find, sympathy, even
from their godly friends; As Job found here. His Friends Principles led them
necessarily to endeavor to humble him, rather than pity him; and God had him
yet to humble further, though not upon the account they went upon; and
therefore all expressions of pity are withheld from him.

Verse. 22. Why do ye persecute me as God, and are not satisfied with my flesh?
In this verse Job inferrs his Conclusion by way of Expostulation and
Challenge, that they should deal so cruelly with him, whom God had not only
touched, but brought very low. For clearing of the words, Consider,

1. To persecute, here (whether it be applied to God, or them) is not to be
taken in a strict sense, as it imports an afflicting for righteousness: But
more generally, as it signifies to pursue or prosecute with troubles, or other
vexing carriage, though in some sense it be true that they did trouble him for
righteousness, or for maintaining a righteous cause.

2. Their persecuting him, as God, is not to be strictly urged, or taken up in
any exact parallel, as if he would challenge them that they afflicted him
causelessly, as God did, and would put them in mind that they might not deal
with him as they pleased, though God might do so, nor might they censure him as
an Hypocrite, seeing it is Gods Prerogative to judge of men's state. But the
meaning is more simply this, that they ought not thus to fall upon him, when
God was so severely prosecuting him.

3. While he complains that they are not satisfied with his flesh, it may be
understood, either,

1. That they were not satisfied with the outward afflictions inflicted by the
hand of God, which wasted his body, unless they also crushed his spirit with
their carriage and doctrine. As, indeed, however his spirit was exercised by
the immediate hand of God, deserting him in his affliction for his trial; Yet,
it seems they had a great hand in the breach of the peace of his mind, by their
uncomfortable visit and silence at first, and their doctrine afterward. As may
be gathered from, Chap. 2.12, 13. with Chap. 3. Or,

2. (Which may be joined with the former) That though his body, or flesh, was
wasted, both with pain, and with the inward tentations of his spirit; yet it
seemed all this would not satisfy them, unless they had him quite overthrown
and cast in the ditch. In sum, here he aggravates their cruelty from this, That
though God was his party, and though his stroke from God was not ordinary, but
such as the effects thereof might be seen on his flesh and carcass; yet they
would put on, for their part, to make him utterly miserable, if they could.

From the words thus cleared, Learn,

1. The Lord, by afflictions upon his people, especially when they are sharp
and of long continuance, does prosecute and pursue them, and somewhat in them;
Therefore trouble gets the name of persecuting, or, pursuing, here. And
whatever was Job's sense in uttering this word, yet it may have a sound sense.
For as God pursues hidden dross in his people, by searching trials, and does
thereby also draw forth proofs of his grace in them (which were some of Gods
ends in Job's trial, beside the exercise of his Sovereignty, and other ends
mentioned elsewhere) So it is also true, that God, oft-times, by trouble
pursues his people, for then wanderings, Jer. 2.24. or their seeking to shift
trouble, and to find ease from it, without and beside him, Hos. 7.11, 12. or
their stubborness under it, Jer. 31.18. or their not improving of it Amos 4.6,
-- 12. In all which, or the like cases, it should be remembered; that where he
pursues, he will overtake.

2. When the Lord is pursuing his Saints, they will not want other trials, and
others to follow the chase with him; For, so did Job find, They did also
persecute him as God. Many are but lying at wait, to take advantage of godly
men, and persecute them, when they think God has forsaken them, Psalm. 71.10,
11. Others are so corrupt in their Principles (which was the case of these men
here) that Gods pursuing and afflicting of a godly man will occasion such
prejudices and misconstructions, as may turn very Friends to be Enemies. And if
God hide his face, and withhold his pity, Saints are to expect, in such a case,
that all other bowels will run dry. See Jer. 42.12.

3. It is unreasonable and absurd cruelty thus to persecute Saints, when they
are already afflicted by God; Therefore he puts it home to them, Why do ye
persecute me as God? See Psalm. 69.26. Here, Consider,

1. That this is a cruel course, seeing when God takes men in hand, to exercise
them as he did Job, there needs no help from others, to make their condition
sad. It is true, when God has afflicted most severely, his Children must stoop
if it please him to add yet to their trial, by what Instruments soever; Yet, as
to men, it may be pleaded that they are cruel in what they do.

2. The unreasonable cruelty of this way is so obvious, that, even themselves
who act it being Judges, they will in cold blood condemn and abhor it; Why,
says he to themselves, Do ye persecute me? intimating that, however they were
eager on this way in their passion, yet, if they reflected upon it seriously,
they could not justify it. And this does further teach us, That men are so
little themselves in passion, and do so little consider what they are doing in
such a mood, that they will need no other but themselves, in cold blood, to
condemn themselves in what they do. This makes our walking very difficult, we
being encompassed with so many difficulties, which breed passions and
distempers, from whence flow many miscarriages. And hence it is, that it were
good men would more frequently crave from themselves, in soberness, an account
of the grounds and reasons of their actions, either before, or after they go
about, them.

3. One ground of the unreasonableness of their pursuing him, though God was
pursuing him, is, That Gods dealing with his people, being the Sovereign Lord,
is not a rule for us, to walk by toward them; nor does his afflicting of them
give warrant or advantage to others, to insult over them. See Jer. 40.3, with
50.7. nor have men still a ground of quarrel against them, where he has one.

4. Another ground of the unreasonableness of this course, is. That Gods
tenderness is such toward his people, even when he afflicts them, that he
allows and requires all others to pity them, notwithstanding that himself is
against them; and he makes a quarrel of it, when they do not so. See Isa. 47.6.
Zech. 1.15. Which may discover the tenderness of Gods heart toward his people,
even in his greatest severity.

Doct. 4. The Lords hand, when he pursues any of his own, can soon waste and
consume them, and make their carcass a pitiful spectacle, whether by sickness,
or trouble of mind, or both; For, so is here supposed, that his flesh was in
such a condition as might plead for pity. Which serves to put us in mind of our
frailty, and to suggest unto us high thoughts of God, who is not to be
provoked, as being too strong a party, when he begins to contend.

5. It must be great cruelty, not only not to pity, but to persecute those who
are even exhausted with trouble; and to be like wild Beasts, who, when they
have eaten the flesh, do gnaw the very bones: For Job challenges this as great
cruelty, that they are not satisfied with his flesh. Such cruelty may be the
lot of Saints, even from good men, when God is trying; But men should consider
whom they afflict and vex; especially that they be not cruel to those who are
already crushed, lest they miss of the blessing, which is pronounced upon the
tenderhearted, who consider the poor, Psalm. 41.1.

6. It is, in special, great cruelty to crush and disturb the peace of their
minds who are already broken with outward afflictions; For, thus also they were
not satisfied with his flesh, as has been explained. The peace of men's minds,
(especially if it be joined with peace of Conscience) is a very precious and
tender Jewel: For where it is wanting, A wounded spirit who can bear? And never
so many outward afflictions are easy, in comparison of one wound upon the
spirit, especially when it is accompanied with other afflictions, which help it
to take impression. But Gods people must resolve to be tried by this also; and
when their spirits are broken and vexed, it should be their care to keep the
Conscience pure and peaceable, as Job did, still holding fast the testimony of
his integrity, and an assurance of Gods favor, in the throng of his bitter
fits.

Verse. 23. Oh that my words were now written, oh that they were printed in a
book.

24. That they were graven with an iron pen, and lead, in the rook for ever.


From this verse to 29. we have Job's third Argument pressing and bearing in
his Challenge upon them. It is taken from his integrity, and concludes thus,
That it was yet greater cruelty thus to persecute him, who not only was
afflicted (as he demonstrates in his former Argument) but was a righteous man,
though afflicted. In the Argument we have,

1. An antecedent, wherein he clears his integrity by two Evidences; One more
General, held out in a desire that this debate might be kept upon Record, v.
23, 24. And another more particular (clearing and confirming the former) taken
from his saving knowledge of, and faith in a Redeemer, v. 25. and his
expectation of a blessed and glorious Resurrection through him, v. 26, 27.

2. A Consequent, or, inference from this, That he being a righteous man,
therefore they should not persecute him, as they did, v. 28.

In these verses, we have the first evidence of Job's integrity, held out in a
desire that this Controversy might not be lost, nor come in oblivion; but that
it, and particularly his defenses in his cause, might be kept on record. A
desire which is repeated much to the same purpose, Chap. 31.35, etc. and which
shows how confident he is of being in the right, in that he cared not into
whose hands this debate came, or who cognosced upon it. For further clearing of
this purpose, a few things would be considered. And,

1. For the matter which he would have written, my words, some restrict it to
the following confession of his faith, v. 25, 26, 27. Others extend it to the
whole discourses in this cause, and Chap. 31.35. he extends his desire further,
wishing that what they opposed to him were written also. It is most safe and
clear to understand it here of all that he had said in these debates, and
particularly, in defense of his integrity. Consider,

2. His scope in this desire, to have his words written; It needs not to be
extended, nor yet restricted, only to that time of the Resurrection, v. 25, 26,
27. as if his meaning were, that he would have his defenses kept on record till
that time, to be discussed there; For there will be no need of such Books for
clearing of processes in that day. But his scope is this; Being confident that
he was in the right, and that he would carry his cause in that day of the
Resurrection and General Judgment; (and therefore he subjoyns his assurance of
that, joining it to this desire by the causal particle, for, v. 25. to point
out the grounds he goes upon in this desire) He desires that his defenses may
be recorded, that all Ages, present and to come, might know and judge of them;
as being sure that, however his Friends were not moved with what he spoke, yet,
he should carry his cause, and all impartial Judges would take his part.
Consider,

3. As for the way of recording his words, which he so passionately desires,
there is a gradation in it.

1. He would have them written.

2. Not only so, but he would have them printed in a Book. Not after the way in
use among us, which was not then known, nor long after; But (as the Original
word imports) he would have them recorded as public Statutes use to be; that
is, engraven in fair and legible Characters, that all might easily read them,
and the writing not be obliterated; and that they may be kept safe; as Statutes
use to be secured; and that not in loose Schedules, but in a Volume, Book, or
Register.

3. Because Books may be eaten by moths, or worms, and so what is written in
them may be lost; Therefore he desires that his words may be graven upon a
Rock, to be kept for ever as public monuments are, and that with an iron pen
(of which, Jer. 17.1.) whereby the letters were cut in the Rock, and with lead,
which was poured into the letters, thus cut in the Rock, to make them more
legible. By all which he evidenceth his desire to have his Doctrine
perpetuated, that it might bear witness that he was an honest man, though
afflicted by God, and traduced by his Friends. Consider,

4. As for the validity of this way of proving his integrity by such a desire,
Albeit Job had his weaknesses and passions in his debates, which, upon better
advisement, he would wish deleted, or that they had never been; And albeit this
his desire to have what he had said perpetuated, do not necessarily, or of it
self, prove his integrity; For men may stiffely enough cleave to Errors; yet
if we restrict his desire to his defenses in the main cause, wherein he was
sound, and will consider that his desire is grounded upon his confidence
after-mentioned, v. 25, etc. and that it is uttered by him, when, to his his
own apprehension, he is ready to die; we may safely conclude that his confident
desire in such a case speaks much for his honesty.

From the verses, thus cleared, Learn,

1. Saints may be strangely frustrated in their desires for satisfaction and
case under trouble; As Job here desiring pity from his Friends, v. 21. does not
obtain it, but must row to some other shore, and seek some other way of case.
Till a trial be perfected, whatever we look to for ease, may not only
disappoint us, but augment our grief. Which teaches the afflicted to be sober
in their expectations; to look for disappointments, when they essay lawful
means of case; and to fix upon God, who only can command refreshment and case,
though even in so doing, we may also meet with an humbling trial. Psalm. 77.3.

2. It is the very sad and humbling lot of Saints, under trouble, that they are
under a cloud of mistakes and prejudices from others; so that to be cleared of
those, were much to them; yea, or to have hope of being cleared afterward: For,
this is Job's trial, that under his afflictions, he is mistaken by those who
are present with him, and that it would be a great comfort to him, if there
were a probability that he should be cleared afterward. Whenever Saints come
to be in affliction, they may expect many tentations will be fastened upon
their lot; and, in particular, that they will be mistaken by men, and, it may
be; by their dearest friends, and have their integrity and approbation with
God, under and because of their afflictions, questioned. This, as it is a sad
trial, shaking the very foundations upon which they must stand in a storm, and
great cruelty in men, to pluck this from them; (as Job insinuates, Chap. 6.29.)
So, when it is the lot of any Saint, it should make them sober, and to be
content with little, were it but to have hope to be cleared even when they are
dead, which Job longs after here.

3. However the integrity of Sains be questioned under trial, yet it is their
duty not to quit it; For, Job here does still cleave to it, and when for the
present he could not get it cleared, he does propound other ways of being
vindicated afterward. See also Chap. 27.3. -- 6. And though in this, his
passion and excesses are not to be justified, for which he is checked, Chap.
34.6. Yet it is certain that tentations and assaults, with the continuance
thereof, are let loose upon Saints under trouble, of purpose to try if they
cleave to God and the testimony of a good Conscience; and therefore they
discover their weakness, and their dross in the furnace, if they quit it: Yea,
having the command of God to maintain their integrity, they sin if they do
otherwise.

1. This may teach Saints their duty, both in debates from without, and
confl^cts from within.

4. Such as have a good Conscience, and Truth on their side, need not seek to
corners for shelter; For, Job cares not who, in all ages, cognosce upon his
cause and way; Yea, he would have it recorded for that end. Truth is a strong
Second, which will support and vindicate its maintainers. And men should study
so to walk and act, as if not only all the present Generation, throughout the
world, saw them; but all their actings and discourses were to be transmitted to
all Posterity, and were all written, to be presented before their Judge; as
Job's desire does import.

5. Ordinarily after ages, or others less concerned, will judge better in
Controversies, then those who are imbarqued in them, and transported with heats
of debate; Therefore Job would have all this written, as supposing that others,
in other parts of the world, or who were to come after, would judge better of
his defenses then his Friends did. Truth will at last triumph, and will make
the graves of its maintainers smell well, though they should, not only live,
but be buried, with ignominy. And therefore in times of Debate and
Controversy, men should guard lest their passions and interests drive them to
maintain a cause, whereof they may repent afterward, or which may render their
memory unsavory, when they are gone.

6. The exercises of Saints, and the fruits of their integrity, under trouble,
are worthy monuments, and such as it were a pity they should be lost; For, so
much also is employed in Job's desire to have his exercise kept upon record for
ever. The Scriptures insist rather upon these, than upon the valorous acts of
martial men in the world; and Saints should improve those experiences of the
Saints before them, as rich treasures; and when themselves are essayed with
such exercises and conflicts, they should look upon them as tending to their
own and others great advantages.

7. God may strangely and wonderfully fulfill the desires of his people; For,
Job could only wish and desire that his words were written and graven; but now
we find they are written in Scripture, and better kept upon Record, than if
they had been graven upon a Rock. This may assure Saints, that their lawful
desires will not be always frustrated, however they may look upon them as
hopeless.

Verse. 25. For I know that my redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the
latter day, upon the earth:
In this and the two following Verses, we have the second and more particular
Evidence of Job's Integrity, taken from his saving knowledge of, and faith in a
Redeemer, and his expectation of a blessed Resurrection through him. To
understand all this (as some do) only of his hope of a temporal restitution of
the health of his body and outward prosperity, is not only to wrest the clear
words, but to make Job contradict his own Assertion, that he is certainly
expecting death, Chap. 17.14, 15, 16. which is here also supposed by him, in
this encouragement, v. 26, 27.

In this verse he asserts that he was not ignorant, nor wicked, as Bildad had
insinuated, Chap. 18.21. But had sound knowledge of a Redeemer, and was assured
of an interest in him. He knows there is a Redeemer, who is God, and was to
become Man, that he might be a kinsman (as the word signifies) having right to
Redeem his people; that he lives eternally, and that having conquered all his
Enemies, he would stand at last upon the Earth, as Judge of the world. Here are
precious Truths, which it were well if they were as well studied and improved
now, in the clear Sunshine of the Gospel, as they were in those days by him.
And that we may make some use of the words,

Observe. 1. The Connection of this with the former Evidence, intimated by the
particle for, or, and may teach,

1. Men who boast of their integrity before men, had need to be sure of the
grounds upon which they go, and that they will hold before God; For, Job
confirms the former evidence of his integrity, wherein he desires his cause
were made known to all ages, by this other other evidence that he is sure his
Redeemer lives. It is easy to delude men, but God will not be mocked, and it
is full of danger to be deluded, as to his approbation.

2. Men who are sure of an Interest in Christ, and have a sure hope of a
sentence of Absolution from him in the last day, need not fear any partial
Judge on earth, nor be troubled with misconstructions and prejudices from men;
For, Job bottoms his desire and confidence, as to men, on this, For I know my
Redeemer lives.

Obs. 2. While Job bottoms the testimony of his Integrity and good Conscience
upon his sure Interest in a Redeemer, and his knowledge thereof, I know my
Redeemer, etc. It teaches,

1. Man is fallen into a condition of sin and misery, and it was known by the
godly of old that it was so; For, then there was word of a Redeemer of men,
which presupposes their bondage.

2. There is a Redeemer appointed (and but only one) to deliver man from this
bondage; by whom God does recover and set free his own Elect, who had sold and
alienated themselves, as of old the Jews did sell and mortgage their
Inheritances. This great truth, wherein the Wisdom and Mercy of God shine to
admiration, was known also by Job, long before the days of the Gospel, who
speaks of the Redeemer here, or, of him who, by virtue of some Title, had right
to redeem the people of God; as the Name in the Original does signify one
that, by being a Kinsman, has right to redeem, and therefore it is given
afterward to the Kinsmen of the impoverished Jews, who had right to redeem
their Lands and Houses.

3. It is a Truth of eternal Verity, that none of Adam's fallen Posterity can
prove their own integrity before God, but in a Redeemer; So that only that man
is righteous and sincere before God who; being humbled under the sense of his
misery and bondage, does flee to a Redeemer for pardon and reconciliation, and
for grace to enable him to walk uprightly: For, thus does Job prove his
integrity, and clears in what sense he maintains his own righteousness in
this debate, by showing that he laid claim to a Redeemer.

4. Albeit, when a man is convinced of his own sinfulness, his fleeing unto,
and recumbency upon, Christ upon all hazards, be sufficient to clear his good
condition: Yet, the full comfort of it depends upon a particular assurance of
his interest, which is attainable, and should be studied after: For, Job here
attains to call him, My Redeemer.

Obs. 3. Job here professes not only an interest in this Redeemer, but his
knowledge of him, what he is, and instanceth it in several particulars; Which
teaches; That to know our Redeemer well (in his Godhead, his humanity, and
likeness to us in all things except sin, his offices, his successes against his
and out Enemies, etc.) is a special mean to clear our interest in him, by
loosing all doubts about it; and to draw out the comforts that flow from this
interest. See Psalm. 9.10 Hos. 11.8, 9. 2 Timothy 1.12.

Obs. 4. The Name, Redeemer, in the Original, signifies, (as has been hinted)
a Kinsman, or, one who, upon a Title of Kindred, has a right to redeem his
Brother, or Friend, or any thing that pertained to him. Hence it is the Name
frequently given to such a one in the Judicial Laws of Moses. See Lev. 25.25.
Ruth Chap. 3. and 4. and elsewhere. It teaches,

1. It was known of old, that the Redemer of sinners (as he even then lived,
being the Eternal God, so) in the fullness of time should become Man, and their
Kinsman, that he might redeem them; so much does his very Name here import, as
also his Name Immanuel, God with us, or, in our nature, Isa. 7.14. This is held
out in that Promise in the Garden, Gen 3.15. and in the Churches desire to see
that day, Cant. 8.1.

2. The confidence of the godly, even before the Redeemers Incarnation, was
fixed upon him as to be incarnate, for their Redemption and Comfort; For, here
Job looks upon him, and closes with him, as the Kinsman having right to
redeem: Thus was he made use of as the Lamb slain, from the very foundation of
the world, or from that very day wherein Adam first heard of the Promise of the
Seed of the Woman, Rev. 13.8. And the eyes of Believers were upon that day,
wherein he should come in the flesh, to pay the price, Luke 10.23, 24 Job 8 56.
This may point out the infinite fullness of Christ, who is the joy of all ages,
even of those who lived before he came; may show us how sure a bargain that it
which is made betwixt the Father and him, in that it was useful and effectual
to save sinners, even before he said down the price; and the practice of those
Believers of old may make us ashamed, if we esteem not highly of him.

3. The knowledge of the Redeemer as our Kinsman, and flesh of our flesh, is
the notable encouragement of Believers, and help to their faith; For, here it
upholds and refreshes Job, that he is such a one. For,

1. This clears up the admirable condescendence and love of God the Father and
his Son Christ (far above what shined in the type of the Temple, which yet
ravished fouls, 2 Chronicles. 6.18.) in that such a gift is given to sinners, Isa.
9.6. Joh. 3.16. Romans 8.32. and that he would come to us, who could not go to
him, and would be made like us in all things, without sin, that we might be
made like to him.

2. This is the sure foundation and pledge of the Reconciliation to be made
betwixt God and Man through him, in that such an union is made betwixt God and
Man in his Person. That he is Immanuel, secures the Church, that it cannot be
ruined (And therefore his Incarnation is given as a sign that the Church shall
be preserved) Isa. 7.14. and secureth Salvation to sinners, Mat. 1.21.22, 23.

3. This assures us that he is a fit party to undertake our debt, as having
right to redeem us, being of the same nature with us, as well as he has power
to do it as he is God.

4. All his fullness as God, is treasured up in our flesh, in him who is a
Kinsman, who has taken our nature and sinless infirmities, who is acquainted
with our distresses, and with sorrows and griefs.

5. Hereby Believers are assured, that he will prove the nearest friend to them
of any; will own them, though all forsake them; will faithfully keep their
counsels, when they pour out their grievances in his bosom; will sympathize
with them, and take share in all their sorrows, etc.

6. To all this may be added. That poor Believers are ennobled by having such a
Kinsman, who will own them, and make them Kings and Priests unto God, Rev 1 5,
6. All those may let us see how sweet and refreshful this study of Christ may
be to Believers.

Obs. 5. He says, he knows his Redeemer lives; He lived even then (as he
does from everlasting to everlasting) as God; and he lives also after his
sufferings as our Kinsman; For that this is also imported in what Job says,
may be gathered from what he subjoyns, as the consequents of his living, that
his Redeemer shall stand at the latter day upon the Earth, and that he shall
set him in his flesh, and with bodily eyes, v. 26. It teaches,

1. It is the great comfort of Believers to know that their Redeemer and
Kinsman is God also; As here he was known to live before his Incarnation, and
he is called God, v. 26. whom Job expected to see with bodily eyes in his
Humane Nature. Hereby, they see their treasure in him is infinite. They see all
those sufferings he endured to be of infinite value, as being the sufferings of
him who is God, Act 20.28. They see all that pity, and bowels of compassion
that are in him, not to be a man's, or our Kinsmans only, (for so they might be
exhausted) but to be his who is Infinite and Unchangeable God.

2. It adds, in particular, to their comfort, that he is the living God, who
lives eternally; and so is able to give spiritual life to his people, when
they are dead; to preserve it, when it is given, and recover it when they lose
any degrees of it; and, who lives for ever, to make them eternally happy with
himself.

3. It may yet further comfort Believers, That, however their Redeemer behoved
once to die; yet, not only was he still alive as God, but after all his
sufferings, he is alive as Man; For, in this respect also does Job comfort
himself, that his Redeemer lives. And it is comfortable that not only was he
to outlive all his sufferings, even death it self, by which he could not be
held; but that he is alive to be Executor of his own Testament, and to apply
his own Purchase, Heb. 7.25. that he has triumphed over death, Rev. 1.18. and,
by his living again, has assured his people, that their debt, which he
undertook, is discharged, Romans 4 25.

Obs. 6. Job adds further, That he knows his Redeemer shall stand at the
latter day upon the earth, The Original may also be read thus, He shall stand
last upon the Earth. Both those readings may be joined, as they will be both
verified in Christ at the last day, when He shall stand last upon the earth,
or, dust, as a Conqueror in the place of Battle, after he has foiled all his
Enemies; and shall also stand on, or, over the earth (as the word also will
bear) in the clouds, when he comes to judge the world. Both those being joined
together, do teach,

2. The Redeemer of sinners did undertake all his Peoples Enemies, as his own;
As is here presupposed in his triumphing over them. We should send all our
Enemies to the right Party, who only is able to grapple with them, who has
satisfied all that can be craved in justice, and who declined none of these
Enemies; so that they have themselves to blame if they got not satisfaction in
him, and since he has escaped them, they cannot be heard to pursue any of
those who serve themselves Heirs to his Conquest.

2. Our Redeemer will outlive all the opposition of all his Enemies, and will
stand last in the field, when he shall destroy the last Enemy, Death. 1 Cor.
15.25, 26. and shall bring all his Enemies, who would not suffer him to reign
over them, and slay them before him, Luke 19.27. Believers need not fear the
long continuance of Enemies, nor that one Enemy rises up after another; For
Christ will outlive and triumph over them all.

3. When all those Enemies are destroyed, then time will have an end; and the
General Judgment will come; For, when he thus stands last, then it will be the
latter day, or, the last, of time, 1 Cor. 15.24, 25, 26. This was a truth known
and believed in the very infancy of the Church, as appears from Enoch's
Prophecy, recorded, Jude v. 14, 15.

4. The Redeemer of Sinners will be their Judge at the last day; For, He shall
stand over the Earth; which, as it will be terrible to the wicked, who shall
then be forced to see him whom they still declined to own; So, it may comfort
all those who have made their peace with him, and with God through him, in time.

5. Our Redeemer will testify his love to his People, by coming to Earth again
to fetch them, as he came at first to redeem them; For, he shall in that day,
stand again upon, or, over the Earth, for this end. See John 14.2, 3.

Verse. 26. And though after my skin, worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh
shall I see God.
In this verse Job prosecutes that encouragement of his Redeemers living and
standing upon the Earth; professing his faith of a blessed Resurrection, in
that day, to enjoy the presence of God; And that, notwithstanding that after
his skin (now broken with sores) is pierced, the worms also destroy his body.

Doct. 1. As the bodies of the dearest Children of God may be deformed in their
lives; so they have no exemption from death, notwithstanding their integrity;
but they must did, as well as others, that they may enter into their rest: For
Job looks to be destroyed, or cut off by death.

2. Believers being dead, they have no privilege in their graves, but the
worms will feed upon, and destroy their bodies, as well as others; For, Job
supposes that, after my skin, the worms will destroy this body: In the
Original it is only this, not, this body; but the sense is the same. For he
thus designs his body, as pointing at it with his finger when he spoke, and
intimating that it was not worthy to be called a body, being so spent. Withal,
worms, who are said shall destroy his body, are not expressed in the Original,
but only, they shall destroy, but the sense is still the same. For the worms
are they who use to pierce dead men's skins, and then destroy their flesh. See
Psalm. 49.14. Both these points should teach the godly, that since they are not
exempted in those cases, they should not plead exemption in lesser things.

3. Though men's bodies be thus confirmed in the grave, yet they will be raised
up again, and will be animated with their souls, to exerce their Functions;
For, here he believes that, notwithstanding this havoc to be made of his body,
yet in his flesh he shall see God. The faith of this Article may assure us of
the power of God to do what he will. Acts 26.8. Romans 4 17. and of his
unchangeable love to his people, who seeks after their dust, after it has been
so long buried in oblivion, Matthew. 22.31, 32.

4. It is the great happiness of Believers that after death they see and enjoy
God, and that not darkly and in a glass, but face to face; For, he comforts
himself with this, that after death he shall see God See 1 Cor. 13.12. Psalm.
16.11.

5. It completes the happiness of Believers, that not only their souls, but the
whole man, shall enjoy this sight of God; For, this is Job's comfort, in my
flesh I shall see God, at and after the Resurrection. Not that the soul sleeps,
or is suspended this sight till then. See 2 Cor. 5.6, 8. Phil. 1.23. Luke
23.43. with 2 Cor. 12.2, 4. but that the happiness of Believers will be
completed, when the whole person, which fought the good fight of faith, shall
get the Crown. See Psalm. 17.15. 1 Thessalonians. 4 16, 17.

6. The hope of a blessed Resurrection should sweeten all bitterness by the
way, and it is the mark of a godly man to eye it much for that end; As Job does
here comfort himself in that, over all his sorrows.

7. Faith, believing a Resurrection, must look over many impediments and
objections, which to carnal sense seem insuperable; as here Job looks over the
destruction of his body, in believing this. Thus in every other case,
difficulties should but heighten faiths courage, and quicken its diligence.

8. The belief of Christ's living, and that he shall stand at the latter day
upon the Earth, may assure the godly of a blessed Resurrection; For, having
asserted the one, v. 25. he subjoyns the other here, as a necessary consequent
following upon the former. For if he live, he will not only care for them when
they are dead, but will cause them live also, Joh. 14.19. and his Resurrection
is a sure pledge that they also shall be raised again, Ephesians. 2.5, 6. Romans 8.11.

Verse. 27. Whom I shall see for my self, and mine eyes shall behold, and not
another, though my reins be consumed within me.
In this verse Job yet insists upon this Article of the Resurrection, and
shows his strong faith about it. Asserting,

1. That he shall see God for himself, that is, not only he himself (and not
another) shall see him, but he shall see him for his own profit and advantage.

2. That it shall not be another body, but the same, wherein he shall see God.

3. That all this shall be, though his very reins, and what is most inward in
him, were consumed, as they were already consumed in part. Some read this last
part of the verse without, Though, (which is not in the Original) as an
Assertion, that his reins were consumed in him, with earnest desire and longing
after that day: And so it is a special proof of his integrity and honesty. But
I shall not insist upon that reading, seeing the Original language many times
wants such Particles, which are sufficiently implied in the sense, in that
language.

Doct. 1. There is need of many acts of faith about the Resurrection, that we
may make sure that we believe it, and may draw out the rich comforts of it;
Therefore does Job so much insist upon that subject.

2. Believers should be frequent in studying their own happiness, which they
shall enjoy at the Resurrection, in the sight and vision of God; Therefore also
does Job insist on this, in particular, I shall see and behold him.

3. This sight of God cannot but be comfortable to the godly, as being for
their behoof and advantage, their interest in him being then made fully clear,
and their joy consummate in his favor and presence; whereas the wicked shall
see him, but as the God of others, and to their own eternal confusion: For,
says he, I shall see him for my self, or for my behoof.

4. Believers shall see God in the same individual bodies they have here; For,
mine eyes shall behold him, and not another, or, a stranger. The qualities of
the body will then be different, and glorious above what now they are, 1 Cor.
15.42, 43, 44. yet the substance will be the same. And as the daily decays and
reparation of our bodies, in this life, do not make them cease to be the same
bodies which we bring into the world with us; So neither will the changes they
undergo by death make them other bodies, when they are raised again.

5. Faith must look over many impediments, to believe this wonderful
restoration, and take Gods Word for all; For, so does he look over the
consuming of his reins within him.

6. Under present wasting of our bodies, and the future consumption thereof by
death, and in the grave, Saints should comfort themselves in the hope of a
blessed Resurrection, and that Christ will gather their dust again; and raise
it up in glory; For, so Job triumphs, both over his present decay, and over
death when it shall come, and consume his reins within him. See 2 Cor. 5.1.

Verse. 28. But ye should say, Why persecute we him? seeing the root of the
matter is found in me.
In this verse is contained the Conclusion of Job's Third Argument; the same in
substance with that Conclusion, v. 22. that, considering what he has said for
himself, they should not thus persecute him. Only further,

1. He subjoyns a sum of what he has argued concerning his integrity, as a
ground of the challenge, That the root of the matter is found in him, or, he
was solidly rooted in true grace, and, notwithstanding any frailties he had,
the substance of Religion, and the Word also (as the word rendered, matter,
signifies, also, the Word) whereby it was begotten and cherished, were fixed
and rooted in his heart; And he was not an hypocrite who had only some external
shows: And therefore they should not thus persecute and reproach him, and add
to his sorrows.

2 He amplifieth the challenge, That not only they should not persecute him,
but should condemn such a practice themselves, and so either prevent it, or not
need his reproof, if they did it. For it was a fault to be so cruel, and a
double fault, that they did not censure themselves most severely for it.

Doct. 1. Religion and Piety is the great matter and concernment of men, about
which they should be busied above all things; Therefore here it is called, the
matter; or, thing, by way of excellency. See Mark 8.36. Luke 10.41, 42.

2. It is not enough men have fair flowers of Profession, unless Religion be
well rooted in their hearts; For, Job claims to a root of the matter, in
opposition to shows only. That men may attain to this, they should be careful
that the Word take deep root in their hearts (and so it may be rendered, the
root of the Word, or, a root fixed in them by the Word) Psalm. 119.11. And that,
by this Word, faith closing with a Mediator be wrought in them (for that was
Job's root here, v. 25, 26, 27. See Col. 2.6, 7.) and that they be sincere,
having the heart stored with solid and sound Principles, not as the temporaries
who want a root, Matthew. 13 20, 21.

3. It is not enough that men pretend they are thus rooted in Piety, unless it
be really so, and unless it be able to abide a trial; For, this root of the
matter must be sound, after the most serious search. See 2 Cor. 10.18.

4. Where this root of Piety is, it will remain and afford a testimony, even
where there are many failings; For, Job asserts and comforts himself in this
root of the matter, even when he confesses he was not sinless, yea and had
more failings than he descerned. See 1 John 3.9 This truth ought not to be
abused to foster presumption, or to embolden decliners, while they are turning
away and not returning; yet it may comfort Saints, who are humbled with their
daily failings, that such weaknesses do not alter the state of their persons;
and it may encourage backsliders in their returning, that a seed in them,
through Gods blessing, may soon revive again.

5. It is great cruelty and injustice to persecute an afflicted man, who is
solidly pious, and rooted, as to the state of his person, and right in his
cause; For, he argues, that they should not persecute him, who, had the root of
the matter in him. Here, Consider,

1. It is dangerous to be found in opposition to what is right, or to a good
man in his right cause. Whatever men's interest may seem to plead (which,
ordinarily, is more minded then what is right or wrong) yet, they should be
able to do nothing against Truth. 2 Cor. 13.8. For God is a party against the
opposers of Truth, and Truth and its Friends will be found too hard for any
Creatures.

2. As it is a sin, and unbeseeming Saints to be cruel to any, seeing the sense
of mercy to themselves should make them merciful to others, Matthew. 18.23. --
35. Tit. 3.2, 3, 4. So, in Particular, It is an heinous sin, not only to be
against godly men in what is right, but even to be violent and bitter, and
persecute them. And readily this follows upon the former, any opposition to
Truth tends to persecuting of it, if there be a tentation.

3. That favorers of Truth are afflicted by God, is the great disadvantage of
those who oppose and persecute them; For, if we join the former Argument with
this, we will find, that their fault was so much the greater, that they
persecuted a righteous man who was already afflicted.

Doct. 6. Albeit men ought not to spare any sin, yet, they may be cruel in
persecuting men for real faults, so long as the root of the matter is found in
them; For, so much may be here gathered, that though Job had failings, yet
since the root of the matter is found in him, they should not thus persecute
him. This should not he abused to excuse men who (it may be) have this root in
them, when either they maintain a wrong cause, or turn loose in their
conversation; yea, no good that is in any should excuse any of their faults.
Yet, when men are righteous, both as to the state of their person, and their
cause (as Job was, his cause relating to the state or his person) and they fail
in the way and manner of maintaining their cause, it must be great cruelty
violently to persecute them, especially when they are under the hand of God.
And though their miscarriages he real sins, yet they should not be charged upon
the state of their person, as altering it, and they should be meekly dealt
with, as Brethren, in reproving them, 2 Thessalonians. 3.14, 15.

7. It is a sin and shame for men, not only to fail in their duty, but that
they should need admonition to set about it from others, or, a reproof, if they
neglect it; And that they do not put themselves to it, either to prevent
miscarriages, or to mourn for them; For, ye should say, Why persecute we him?
It is sad when Saints are not the first and most severe censurers of their own
neglect of duty, and when it may be said by others (as of the wicked, Psalm
53.4.) where is their Conscience and tenderness, that they walk so contrary to
their rule?

8. Men engaged in debates, and over-driven with passions, do not readily see
their own duty, but their actions do outrun their reason, and others will see
what they ought to do better than themselves; For Job must tell them what they
should say. See Jer. 8.6.

Verse. 29. Be ye afraid of the sword: for wrath br^ngeth the punishments of the
sword, that ye may know there is a judgment.
In this verse we have Job's last Argument pressing his Challenge; taken from
their hazard, if they went on thus to persecute him. Wherein,

1. He asserts they had cause to be afraid of the sword, or, some extraordinary
judgment, because of their cruelty.

2. He confirms his Assertion from this, that wrath brings the punishments of
the sword, that is, (if we take wrath largely) the wrath and displeasure of God
will inflict it, and that because of their rage and wrath against him, who was
an afflicted godly man.

3. He amplifieth and confirms the equity of this proceeding, by pointing at
Gods end in it, that ye may know there is a judgment. Whereby we are not to
understand that, by this their punishment, God would have them to correct their
former Error, and know that there is a judgment to come. And that therefore
they should not judge of men before the time, nor expect that God, by his
dispensations within time, should put a visible difference betwixt the wicked
and the godly, as their opinion led them to think. But the meaning is; That
God, by these punishments, would teach them that there is a Providence to
execute judgment upon these who offended as they did; which they had but
slightly considered.

As for the Assertion and Exhortation, that they should be afraid of the sword,
If we consider it in it self, as is is an Argument diswading them from their
cruelty, It teaches,

1. The carriage, even of Gods people, particularly, when they are cruel to the
godly in affliction, does deserve, and may draw on, sad strokes, even the
Sword, or some such Rod. So far may they miscarry (not only a visible Church,
but even particular sincere Saints, 2 Samuel 12.9, 10.) and so sharply may God
pursue them, especially for cruelty.

2. The judgments of God, even against his sinning people, are dreadful, ( Lev.
26. Deuteronomy. 28. 1 Samuel 3.11, 12.) and ought to be feared, and will be feared by
all godly men who are in their right wits; For, Job, out of his own experience,
bids them he afraid of the Sword. See Psalm 90.11. Heb. 10.31. This is true of
every judgment of God, and of the Sword in particular.

3. It is the duty, and were the great advantage, of men, not to need to be put
to learn the dreadfulness of Gods judgments by feeling them, but to be afraid,
that they may prevent them; For, Job bids them beforehand be afraid of the
Sword. It is sad that we seldom fear Gods displeasure, till we feel it; and it
is yet sadder, if we fear not, though we feel it, but do harden our selves; as
may be gathered from those complaints, Psalm 90.11. Isa. 1.5.

4. There is no fear of Gods displeasure sound or acceptable, but that which
persuades men not to provoke him by sin, or to quit sin, if they fall in it;
For, he persuades them so to be afraid, as to give over their persecuting of
him. They do not fear God aright as a Judge, who do not fear him as a Lawgiver.

If we look upon this Exhortation, not only in it self, but as it is made use
of by Job, and is his counsel to his Friends who had injured him, it teaches
further,

1. Whatever be the dreams of secure souls; yet such as know the sharpness of
Gods displeasure against his sinning people, and of the corrections that flow
from it, will even pity their very Enemies, if they undergo them; For,
therefore Job warns them, who had injured him of their hazard.

2. No injury can warrant us to neglect our duty toward those who have injured
us, or to wish, or not study to prevent, their hurt who wrong us, especially
when they are running the hazard of making God their party: For, therefore also
does Job warn them of their danger, who were so cruel to him. Men's wronging of
God and us also, does not warrant us to sin against God and our own souls, by
the omission of any duty he has enjoined us.

3. When men are tender, and do duty to others, it is not only their advantage
to whom they do it, but their own much more; Therefore Job presses this, not
only as their interest and advantage, but as affording himself ease and
comfort, in that he is kept so tender toward them. When we reckon right, we
will find that in doing duty to God or our Neighbors, the advantage is chiefly
our own; and our selves have the greatest disadvantage, if we neglect it.

From the Confirmation of this Assertion, For wrath brings the punishments of
the Sword. Learn,

1. Even the Children of God may lie under wrath and fatherly displeasure, for
their faults; as here is supposed of these three godly men. See 2 Chronicles. 19.2.
Isa. 64 7.

2. Rage and wrath against godly men; is a special quarrel and cause of Gods
displeasure; For, so this wrath does also (if not chiefly) here signify.

3. Though men think little of Gods displeasure (particularly against their
rage at the godly) when it is only intimated in the Word, or may be read from
their sin; yet it will prove sad in the issue, and portends sad corrections,
and those many of them, pursuing sinners till they repent; For, if there be
wrath, then there are the punishments (even many of them) of the Sword. If God
be angry, his wrath brings them, as is here supplied in the Translation. And as
for men's wrath and rage, it may be thus tendered, wrath is the iniquities of
the Sword, or, one of these sins which are punished with the Sword.

From Gods end in these Corrections, That ye may know there is a judgment,
Learn,

1. There is a Providence executing just judgments in the world; For, there is
a judgment, See Psalm. 58.11. But as Atheists deny this, Ezekiel 9 9. Mal. 2.17. So
the godly do not enough draw out the comforts of it.

2. This Providence and Judgment of God will be exercised against them who
rashly judge others; For, this is directed to them who rashly judged him; him;
which is an heinous fault, when the creature set is himself on Gods Throne, to
pronounce sentence against others, Romans 14.4. James 4.11, 12. See Matthew. 7.1.

3. In many cases men may be said to be ignorant of a Providence and Judgment,
who do not only acknowledge it in General Professions, but are really godly;
For, they were godly men, and did not deny this truth, and yet must be taught
to know there is a judgment. Men know not their Principles as they ought, when
they act not according to them, as they did not. And men may know much in
General, and by Contemplation, who yet in their Passions can but little
consider and improve it in particular cases. For they considered not their way,
and whether it tended, till God tell them in the close of this debate.

4. Afflictions are sent to teach men Lessons; and particularly, to cause them
know, and make right use of, a just Providence of God; For, here they are
threatened with punishments, that they may know there is a judgment. Here,
Consider,

1. Men must not only look what they feel, but what they are made to know under
affliction; and must be careful that Rods be not dumb, Psalm. 94.11.

2. Though, often times, carnal men turn Atheists, under, and because of, great
troubles; Ezekiel. 9.9. yet afflictions should lead men to be better acquainted
with a Providence in the World, which ordinarily is but little minded or
studied; For, that is the lesson here inculcated.

3. Such as study the Providence of God in the world, will be afraid of doing
wrong, as knowing that there is a righteous judgment to follow.

4. In Particular, This study should make men afraid to injure the afflicted,
especially if they be godly; seeing such are left upon Gods hand, that he may
redress all their wrongs and grievances; For, that is the particular lesson he
would have them taking from this study.

5. This study should yet further persuade men to take heed of being
incorrigible by the Word, seeing there is a Providence and Judgment, to
inculcate that, which men will not learn^ from the Word; Therefore he counsels
them to be afraid in time, lest to their own cost they be made to know there is
a judgment, and so have that sad reflection upon their own course, that their
being untractable made them need the Rod to teach this lesson. See Psalm. 32.9,
10.

CHAP. XX.
In this Chapter Zophar, the third of Job's Friends, assaults him now the
second time. It is not the proper place here to enquire, how it comes that this
is his last speech to Job, and that he does not answer him the third time, as
the rest did: though it be clear that Job did not at all satisfy him by his
following discourses, and so laid him by; but as all of them did at last give
him over as a stubborn man, Chap. 32.1. So Zophar wearied sooner then the rest,
as being (it may be) more passionate then they. Here it suffices us to know,
that he takes yet his turn with the rest, and falls fiercely upon Job. Wherein
(as has been marked of the rest also) as he brings forth no new matter, so he
lays aside all that meekness, and all those encouragements whereof he made
use in his former Speech, Chap. 11. as being now more heated with his own
passion, and further prejudged in his thoughts of Job.

The Chapter contains these two. First, A Preface, wherein he declares that he
will answer, and gives the reasons of his resolution, ver. 1, 2, 3. Secondly,
The answer it self; where, in a long Discourse, (which he confirms from the
consent of Antiquity) he gives an account of the calamities that befall the
wicked, that he may persuade Job, that his lot is the same with what befalls
only wicked men and hypocrites; And therefore does prove him to be one of them.
And (having hinted whence he had this Doctrine, ver. 4.) 1. He gives an account
of the wickeds ruin in their downfall from their prosperity, That it is speedy,
ver. 5. a shameful and utter ruin, to the admiration of all, from which no
grandeur shall secure them, ver. 6, 7. And, a ruin which shall discover the
emptiness of their former prosperity, and which shall not be repaired, ver. 8,
9. 2. He gives an account of the miseries wherewith they are pressed, after
their fall, That their Children shall be miserable, ver. 10. That their sins,
and the effects thereof, shall accompany them to their grave, ver. 11. And that
all their pleasure in following wickedness shall prove bitter and deadly, ver.
12, 13, 14. And particularly, they shall have no comfort, but much bitterness,
in their ill purchase, ver. 15, 16. when God shall deprive them of expected
sweet ease, ver. 17. and make them restore what they had unjustly acquired,
ver. 18. (as the just fruit of oppression, ver. 19, 20.) yea, and take away
their very meat, ver. 21. 3. He amplifieth this Narration, both concerning the
ruin, and subsequent miseries, of the wicked; pointing out, That in their
greatest prosperity, ruin shall come upon them, being pursued by wicked men,
who shall be the instruments of Gods vengeance, ver. 22. And by God himself,
pursuing them in anger, ver. 23. That God shall pursue them with variety of
weapons, or judgments, ver. 24, 25. From which they shall neither secure
themselves, nor their families, ver. 26. And, That all creatures shall conspire
their ruin, thereby (as so many witnesses) to convince them that they are
wicked, ver. 27. upon which their utter ruin shall follow, ver. 28. 4. He sums
up all this Narration by way of Conclusion, that he may press Job to take more
notice of it, ver. 29.

Verse. 1. Then answered Zophar the Naamathite, and said,

2. Therefore do my thoughts cause me to answer, and for this I make haste.

3. I have heard the check of my reproach, and the spirit of my understanding
causes me to answer.


IN this Preface is not only recorded that Zophar did answer, v. 1. but his
profession that his thoughts did drive him to be in great haste with it, and
caused him to answer, who (it seems) otherwise intended to have kept silence:
together, also, with the causes moving him to make this reply; which are
expressed more generally, that somewhat in Job's discourse did so fill him with
thoughts, as he could not forbear nor delay to answer, v. 2. and more
particularly, v. 3. That he had bin reproached in Job's discourse, and
therefore would answer for himself; though yet that only did not move him, but
his sound knowledge of the Truth in this debate furnished him with matter, which
he would bring forth deliberately, having gravely thought upon it; And so,
however he had met with passion, yet, he thinks he will not answer in passion.

That I may further explain and make use of these verses; Observe,

1. We find here that Zophar does yet answer Job; And albeit he bring forth no
new purpose, but what has been often refuted by Job (of which afterward) yet
he will not give over. Yea, we find not in all this discourse, that he does any
thing consider all those miseries of Job, which had been so largely enumerated
in the former Chapter. Nor does he regard Job's ample confession of his faith,
Chap. 19.25, etc. Nor the intimation of the hazard of wrath which he had made
unto them, Chap. 19.29. But the more Job spoke of those things, he falls the
more fiercely upon him.

Whence Learn,

1. It is not easy to change learned and witty men's Opinions, when once they
are engaged in dispute; For, Job's Friends have still somewhat to say and
answer. And therefore God should be much employed in such cases, who ends this
Controversy by his Word, Chap. 42. and without whose presence and operation,
disputes will not put a close to Controversies.

2. Afflicted Saints ought not to build upon most rational and likely means for
ending of their trials, till God come and interpose; For, albeit Job had said
so much for himself, as might make men in reason think it were a thousand
pities to use him harshly any longer; yet all this is but Oil cast into the
flame with his Opponents, who deal the more harshly, that he pleads pitifully,
and yet confidently under his pitiful case. And herein,

1. Men ought to look to God, who has the inflicting, continuance, and ending
of trials in his hand, and will permit none to sacrifice to their ownner, in
this business: But in the use of all means, will have them submit entirely to
his will, and will have them see that he may justly continue that trial which
they can show just reasons why men, that are his Instruments, should not
continue it.

2. Men ought also to look on this as a great part of their trial, if they will
continue to hold fast by their Grounds and Principles, after they have asserted
them, and yet God permits men to continue unjustly in opposition to them; For,
every new Reply of Job, after these unjust assaults of his Friends, is a
further trial and proof his constancy and integrity, and a mirror wherein his
patience and faith do shine, for the Edification of others in all ages.

3. Men should look what God may have to say in the unjust continuance of their
trials from men; For, in all this long debate, though Job had the better cause,
and the better of them in the dispute, yet, he failed much toward God: And
therefore an exercise, of one kind or other, never left him, till he took with
these, and was humbled for them.

4. Men should also read, in this instance, how far passion, kindled through
the heat of contention, especially when joined with ill Principles, may mislead
them; For Zophar's unsound Principles and his Passion did necessarily engage
him to condemn Job, let him say for himself what he would; Which should warn
men to take good heed to their Principles, what they are, and to the frame of
their spirits.

Observe, 2. In the next place, we are to consider the manner and way of his
going about to answer; My thoughts, says he, cause me to answer, (or cause me
to return, and bring me back into the lists again, and make me interrupt my
resolved silence) and, I make haste, or, my haste it in me. The word here
rendered thoughts, does properly signify, the branch of a Tree, and is
figuratively applied to signify, the clefts of Rocks, and men's cogitations,
or, thoughts. And so it may import, high, unsettled, and turbulent thoughts,
like branches tossed with the wind; as accordingly we find it made use of to
signify unsettled Opinions, 1 Kings 18.21. thoughts and fancies in a man's
sleep, Job 4.13. and ill and vain thoughts, Psalm. 119.113. But It is not to be
conceived that Zophar makes use of this word to express any bad opinion of his
own thoughts and conceptions, but only that they were his thoughts issuing from
his heart, as branches from a tree. This is certain, that by those words he,
intimates that his thoughts were burning within him, and he was in so great
haste to get a vent to his conceptions, that he had no patience to hear Job any
longer. And albeit his design, in all this haste and perturbation of mind, was
to vindicate the Righteousness and Justice of God, and to reclaim Job, whom he
supposed to have miscarried grossly in this matter; yet the sequel clears
that he was wrong in this which he is so hasty to see about.

It teaches,

1. Men's spirits; when they suffer themselves to be over-driven with haste and
perturbation, do readily miscarry; For, Zophar, in this his haste, is found to
be in an Error. Thus David's expressions in his haste prove to be unsound, and
such, as, he finds cause to retract them in cold blood. And ordinarily men's
haste and passion (which is but a short madness) furnishes them with matter
enough of sorrow and repentance, when they seriously reflect upon it. And
therefore in all actings, men's first and chief care would be ever their own
spirits, which are their chief opposites in doing duty, and particularly, in
managing Controversies as they ought.

2. Men, even when their designs and intentions are good, may yet miscarry in
the prosecution of them, through haste and passion; For, Zophar had a good
design, in this his hasty undertaking, to reclaim a man whom he judged to be
in an Error; and yet his haste made him to miss his mark, so that he was not
able to discern what was right or wrong in Job, nor to hit upon his real
miscarriages in this Controversy. Even a good Cause may be marred by men's
managing of it with passion and haste, and therefore much less are men to make
use of a pretense of zeal or good intentions, to break out in passion, for who
so give way to that distemper of spirit, cannot readily but go wrong.

Observe 3. As for the General account of his Reasons moving him to answer, and
to make haste in it, Therefore my thoughts cause me to answer, and for this I
make haste; Though this, therefore, and, for this, may be looked on only as a
General, which is particularly expressed and instanced in the next verse: Yet
if we consider more narrowly, there may be more found in it; For, in the former
Chapter Job had closed his discourse with a threatening of Judgments against
them, because of their miscarriages toward him: And Zophar begins (and,
possibly, interrupts Job) with this, Therefore I answer, and for this I make
haste; as if he had said; The fear of that same wrath, wherewith thou
threatenest us for speaking as we do, causes me speak yet more to the same
purpose; lest, by my silence and suffering thee to go in in thy course, I
should indeed draw on that wrath upon me.

It teaches,

1. Men should be well advised, and maturely ponder the grounds upon which they
speak, and, particularly, upon which they either engage or persist in a debate;
they should first think well, and then speak: For, so much does his pretending
to this ground and reason of speaking, teach in general, though he ^^red in the
particular, Therefore do I answer, etc.

2. Great may be the differences, even betwixt godly men, in a time of debate;
the one thinking it a duty to be silent, and the other to speak; the one
threatening the other with wrath, because of what they do; and the other
thinking themselves obnoxious to wrath, if they do it not. This is so sad, that
it calls for much humiliation, and for search to find out where it is that the
error and mistake lies, and for dealing with God, that he may appear in mercy
to decide the Controversy which alone can put a close to this Dispute.

Observe 4. The first express reason of his resolution to answer, is, I have
heard the check of my reproach, v. 3 --, or, thou have bitterly reflected upon
me in thy discourse. It is not necessary to restrict this to what Job had said,
Chap. 19.29. But the meaning is, That generally in all his complaints,
challenges, and arguings, Job had indirectly rubbed upon them; And it seems,
Zophar had understood somewhat that he had spoken as reflecting particularly on
him and his discourses, which makes him so earnest to answer. Compare Chap. 18
3.

It teaches,

1. Men are naturally very tender of their Reputation, so that they will soon
(and, sometime, but too soon) resent any affront put upon them; Yea, the more
free men are of real sufferings and trials, they are, ordinarily, the more
needlessly and causelessly vexed about their Reputation: For, those men, who had
little other exercise, are much taken up about their Reputation, and think
themselves rubbed upon and reproached, and checked, if they be but dissented
from, or soberly in ^^med of their mistakes. Much real exercise would cause men
make less noise about this.

2. When a man's self, or his Reputation is much in his eye, he will not readily
do much good in debates; For, Zophar beginning with the sense of this check of
his reproach, or, reproachful check (as he judges it) makes but a poor reply,
as the sequel clears. Men ought to bear down that Idol of their own
Reputation, who would find out or follow Truth, and the mind of God, in any
particular.

Observe, 5. The second express reason of his resosolution, is, And (or as some
read it, But) the spirit of my understanding causes me to answer; That is, It
is not only the sense of the indignities I have received, but the sound
judgment and clear light I have in this Controversy, and my knowledge how
needful it is that thou be humbled, and Gods Justice, in afflicting thee,
vindicated, that puts me to answer. In this sense, the two parts of the verse
are to be joined by the copulative, and, that the sense of his reproach and his
knowledge in the cause concurred to cause him answer. And this indeed is Truth,
that Zophar was persuaded that what he had to say was found. But there seems to
be more in it, and somewhat intended that sets the two parts of the verse in
opposition one to another; I have heard -- But the spirit of my understanding
causes me to answer. Hereby is not only meant that, however Job reproached
their Opinion, yet it was found, and flowed from a spirit of understanding; but
further, as to the way of answering, that, however Job had answered them with
passion and reproaches, yet he would deal otherwise with him, and answer him
from a spirit of understanding, or, a sober and sound judgment. Both these
Interpretations may agree in one, the first being included in this last. For it
supposes he had sound light in the Controversy, and proposes, that he will
bring out this, and not his passions, in his answer; whereas Job (as he
supposed) wanting truth and solid matter, behoved to take himself to such poor
shifts as revilings and reproaches.

It teaches,

1. As men had need, to be sure and well grounded in what they hold out as the
Truth of God; So disputes, for finding out the mind and will of God in any
particular, should be free of passion, and managed with sound judgment and
understanding; For, Zophar pretends to a spirit of understanding, declining
passion, in this answer. As God will not be served by our passions, Jam. 1.20.
Nor have our lies and mistakes fathered on him, Chap. 13.4. So it is found
light, and not passions, that will convince rational men. Yea, where passions,
it darkens and disturbs men's own light and judgments, that they cannot make
such use of them as they ought, and otherwise might.

2. Irritations from those with whom we have to do, will not warrant us to
serve them in their own coin; For, though Job (as he supposed) reproached him;
yet he will answer him from a spirit of understanding.

3. Men may have a strong persuasion that they are sound and right in that
wherein yet they are very wrong; For, he thinks that all this answer flowed
from the spirit of his understanding, which was but the result of his Ignorance
and Error. So blind and i^ self love, and so great need have men to examine
and try their persuasions, that they be sound and well grounded; and (for this
end) to be sober and diffident of themselves, and jealous lest their engagement
in debates, or estimation of their own abilities, cause them think they are
very clear and sound, when yet they are in the dark.

4. In particular, Men may be very passionate, who yet think themselves very
rational and sober; For, Zophar, even when in passion he is resenting a
supposed, check of his reproach, does yet think he is led by a spirit of
understanding. Passion is in it self a great fault, but it is yet greater when
it blind-foldeth men, that they cannot see themselves as they are.

Verse. 4. Know thou not this of old, since man was placed upon earth,

5. That the triumphing of the wicked is short, and the joy of the hypocrite
but for a moment?


Follows the answer it self, wherein he labors to persuade Job that his lot
being like that of the wicked man, or, hypocrite, it did prove him to be one of
them. In all this discourse, concerning the calamities of the wicked, we have
no new matter or Arguments to convince Job, but only the same consent and
testimony of Antiquity (so often urged before) here again repeated; And the
same subject matter, of the calamity of the wicked, is here again set forth
with variety of expressions and flowers of eloquence. And he insists (as others
before him had done) so particularly to recount the wickeds miseries, Partly,
that he may reflect upon Job's case, and show that those miseries which he
suffered, and whereof he complained, were the same with what the wicked had
suffered in all ages; And, partly, that by inculcating this Doctrine with a
stream of Eloquence, it may be the more taking, and more effectually convince
Job.

In the first part of his Narration (to v. 10) he gives an account of the way
of a wicked man, or hypocrites, downfall from his height of prosperity, and how,
being in prosperity, he is brought low and made miserable. And in these verses,

1. He shows whence he learned, and how he will prove and confirm, all his
following Narration, v. 4. Namely, by the consent of Antiquity, and the
testimony of all Ages from the beginning of the world; and therefore he
propounds it by way of reprehension of Job, that he should be ignorant of that
which has been of old, and even from the beginning of the world, that man was
placed upon the earth.

2. He subjoins this account concerning the downfall of the wicked man or
hypocrite, that it shall be speedy, his triumphing and joy being but short, and
for a moment, v. 5. Some from this do gather that, by Jobs former discourses,
he is somewhat convinced, and persuaded to remit a little of the rigor of
their opinion; And to yield that the wicked may sometime prosper (as Job
maintained) though he will maintain that their prosperty is followed with
speedy, shameful, and irreparable ruin. But no such change appears in the
debate, for all a long they denied not that the wicked might sometime prosper;
Only this they maintained (as herein Job contradicted them) that if the wicked
were not still in misery, yet any prosperity they enjoyed was soon overturned.

As for this way of probation, by consent of Antiquity, and the experience of
all ages, I have already cleared that is not true (as to matter of fact) that
all the wicked, and only the wicked, meet with such downfals; For the
experience of Nimrod and Abel (to seek no more) assures us of the contrary.
Neither is the Argument valid or relevant, in point of right, suppose the
allegation were true. For not only will it not follow that, because they knew
of no contrary instances, therefore, there were none; but it will as little
follow that, because there had been no such instances in the times before them,
therefore there should never be any such; And because no godly man had fallen
from such an height of prosperity as Job did, therefore he could not be a godly
man, whom the Lord had now brought down. For the Scriptures teach us, that Gods
proceedings in those external things are variable, according to his pleasure.
And for the Doctrine it self which he delivers, v. 5. and prosecutes in the
rest of his discourse, I have spoken often to it, that the wicked do deserve
all those things, and it is agreeable to the sentence of the Law, that they be
so dealt with; and in so far we may safely make use of his Doctrine. But it is
still unsound to assert that all the wicked are actually so plagued, and only
the wicked; And that the godly may not be exercised with the like lots, either
for correction, or for trial. So, from this way of arguing, and his mistakes in
it, in General, Learn,

1. Men once engaged and prejudged, will not soon see their Errors, though
never so often, and so clearly refuted; For, he yet insists upon their common
Doctrine and Argument, as valid and sufficient to convince Job, though he has
often demonstrated the falsehood or weakness of it. More is needed to draw men
from Error, than the Proposition of clear and convincing light; even that they
shake off and renounce passions, Prejudices, Interests, and their engaged
Reputation, and that they pray to God that there be not a judgment, or
spiritual plague, upon their hearts. 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11, 12,

2. Men of parts, though never so often refuted, will not want abilities to set
a new and good face upon an ill cause; For though Zophar repeat the same thing
that had been spoken before, yet he repeats it in new terms, and variety of
flowers of Eloquence are made use of, to render it plausible, and cause it to
take with Job. This shows how dangerous men's abilities are in an ill cause; and
how needful it is that we take off all masks, and buskings, that may be put
upon things and discourses, that we may see them in their true and native
colors, and what is at the bottom of them.

If we look upon this purpose in it self (abstracting from these mistakes) and
what may safely be gathered from it;

It teaches,

1. It is men's duty to be so acquainted with Gods works in the world, as to
make good use of them; For, he finds fault with Job for being ignorant (as he
supposed) of what God had wrought, the study whereof might have humbled him.
And albeit he mistook in the particular, yet it is of general verity, that we
should have our eyes exercised to observe what God is doing in the world, and
should be careful to improve it. Psalm 64.9.

2. The more obvious and general Truths are, ignorance of them is the more
sinful; For, he aggravates Jobs ignorance from this (and it had been a great
crime, if the charge had been true) that he knows not this of old (or, which
has been of old, even) since man was placed upon the earth; or, that this
Truth was common, and verified in all ages, and yet he was ignorant of it.

3. God, in all ages, has put such marks of his displeasure upon the wicked,
as may warn men to abhor their course and way; For, albeit this Doctrine, taken
from the experience of all ages, be not broad enough to bottom Zophar's
conclusion; Yet, there is enough in it to make this out, That, albeit God make
not every wicked man a public spectacle or monument of his justice, nor does
exempt the godly from the like exercises and lots; yet (beside what he has
declared in his word) he has in all ages so testified his displeasure against
the wicked, by his judgments upon some of them, that they must be mad who are
not deterred from following their ways.

4. In Gods account a wicked man and an hypocrite are all one, and they may
expect the same portion from God, if the hypocrite fare not worse, because he
is an hypocrite; Therefore the wicked and the hypocrite are joined here, as
sharing in the same lot. And by this he warns Job, that this Doctrine belonged
to him, as having been a close hypocrite (as he supposed) though he should
clear himself of gross wickedness.

5. Wicked men and hypocrites may, for a time, not only have matter of ordinary
joy, but even of triumph, as being (to their own apprehension) victorious, and
set up above the reach of all difficulties; For, so is here supposed, that they
have their triumphing and joy. All of them are not so dealt with, but many of
them buy their wicked courses dear enough, and find vexation and misery enough
in following a Trade of sin; yet some may attain to such a measure of
prosperity, as they please themselves to joy and triumph in it. And hereby they
bewray their carnal dispositions, that can so rejoice and exult in such base
objects, when they are rather to be pitied, considering they will get no other
portion. And it calls upon the people of God to be sober, and not to fix their
happiness and satisfaction in these things, which the wicked may receive as
well as they.

6. The joy and triumph of the wicked is but short-lived; For, it is but short,
(or, from near, and of no old date) and for a moment. They deserve that it
should be so, and they have no assurance but it may be so. The joy of some of
them comes to this issue, to be a warning to the rest; And how long soever
their joy continue, yet it is but short, considering that it is but for a time,
and that all their joy will but contribute to the imbittering of their eternal
sorrow. See Luke 16.25.

7. God can bring about the overthrow of the wicked speedily and in a moment;
For, if their joy be so short, their fall must be very sudden. See Isa. 17.14.

8. All the joys of the wicked perish with their outward prosperity; and the
remembrance of their bypast joy will nothing avail them in trouble; For, their
ruin and downfall is expressed by the perishing of their joy and triumphs,
because the one will follow upon the other, and they know no joy that will
continue with them in tribulations, as the joy of believers does, Romans 5.2, 3.

Verse. 6. Though his excellency mount up to the heavens, and his head reach
unto the clouds:

7. Yet he shall perish for ever, like his own dung: they which have seen him,
shall say, Where is he?


In the next place, we have a further account of the way and manner of the
wicked and hypocrites downfall, in these verses; wherein (alluding to a great
and flourishing tree, as Dan. 4.10, 11.. and making use of an hyperbolical
Supposition) he asserts that, though he mount never so high in his excellency
and state, like a flourishing Tree; yet he shall perish contemptibly and
utterly, to the admiration of all beholders. By all which he intimates that the
wickeds ruin is certain, so that his grandeur shall not secure him against it,
but rather contribute to imbitter it; that it shall be shameful, like his own
dung; an utter ruin, for ever; and admirable, putting those who have seen him
to enquire, Where is he?

Here it is probable he reflects upon Job's former grandeur, from which he was
so wonderfully fallen, and left in a loathsome condition; that thereby he might
convince him that he was a wicked man or hypocrite. But albeit it be true (as
has been marked before) that the wicked deserve such a fall according to the
tenor of the Law-sentence, and that some of them are made monuments of Gods
justice, by such an eminent overthrow: yet all this does not conclude any thing
against Job's state; seeing neither is love nor hatred known by any of those
things, neither was he so utterly ruined as Zophar supposed, though God had
laid him low; nor so contemptible (like his own dung) as he alleged, but even
in his lowest condition, he did smell well in the nostrils of God, and of all
right discerners.

However, understanding this Doctrine according to the tenor of the Law
threatenings.

It teaches,

1. Wicked men may not only come to be in state and grandeur, but may mount
high in it; either really getting up still higher and higher; or, in their own
proud conceit of themselves, because of their grandeur, or both; For, so is
here supposed, that the wicked man's excellency may mount up to the heavens, and
his head (or, state, like the top branches of an high Tree) reach unto the
clouds. See Psalm. 37.35. By this,

1. The Lord sits some of the wicked for remarkable proofs of his displeasure,
which, otherwise, would not be so well discerned.

2. He teaches his people not to esteem too much of worldly pomp and grandeur,
which may be so plentifully heaped upon wicked men; and not to stumble when
wicked men, instead of falling, do, for a time, rise higher and higher, Psalm.
92.5, 6, 7.

3. He warns all to take heed, that their spirits do not swell, but keep
sober, when they are advanced, and that their grandeur do not render them so
much the more secure, and presumptuous and insolent, and the less afraid of
sin, and of his displeasure for it.

Doct. 2. All that height and grandeur, to which wicked men can reach and
attain, is so far from securing them against ruin, that were they higher than
indeed they can be, yet, destruction can reach them; For, did he mount to the
heavens, and the clouds, yet he shall perish. See Obad. v. 3, 4. This imports,

1. That, notwithstanding the high advancement of such wicked men; yet, the
favor of God is nothing the more toward them, but they deserve to perish
still, and the sentence of the Law stands in force against them. See Eccl.
8.11, 12, 13. If the wicked think otherwise of themselves because of their
prosperity, it not only argues their great presumption, but it will hasten
their ruin, that they delude themselves with a conceit of Gods favor, because
they prosper eminently in their sin. See Hos. 12.7, 8. And it evidenceth the
great weakness of the people of God, if they apprehend that the wicked are
therefore approved of God, because they prosper.

2. However it fare with other wicked men, whom God may spare; yet (ordinarily,
though not always) such of them as are wonderfully advanced, are but thereby
fitted for some notable stroke to ruin them.

3. They must be great fools who bless themselves in their petty honors and
advancement, seeing God can over-turn it, were there more of it.

Doct. 3. Wicked men's ruin is justly irrecoverable and irreparable; For, the
wicked man shall perish for ever. Here consider,

1. The wicked man deserves this, and he has no security that it shall be
otherwise; whereas the Church in General (though not every particular person)
has a contrary promise, even as to deliverance in this life, Mic. 7.6.

2. Ordinarily such eminent wicked men, when once they begin to fall, do never
recover again; as Haman's wife told him, Esth 6 13.

3. However it be within time, yet the destruction of the wicked will certainly
be eternal. And that is sad enough, and will put a real difference betwixt the
godly and them. Yet,

4. Whatever may be Gods outward dispensations to his own Children; yet, as it
is a great injury to say, that their rods are the fruit of their wickedness,
so, it it is not safe to gather from their present hopeless condition, that it
is irreparable: For, Job did not perish for ever, even as to his outward
condition, albeit he might have been a godly man, notwithstanding he had so
perished.

Doct. 4. The ruin of the wicked is justly accompanied with much disgrace, and
renders them contemptible; For, he shall perish as his own dung, or, he shall
be stinking, and rot in base ignominy, contempt, and vileness. See Isa. 14.19.
Mic. 7.10. Nah. 1.14. Here is imported,

1. That the wicked have no native and internal beauty, but are like stinking
Carrions, their throat an open Sepulcher, etc. only they are busked up with
borrowed excellencies, as a deformed body in fine Apparel, and when these are
gone, they appear in their true colors.

2. The great estimation they are in in the world, and their excessive
satisfaction in it, does but ripen them for proportionable vileness and
contempt; And this their vileness is but the just fruit of their pride and
deifying of themselves in their prosperity. As Rev. 18.7, 8.

3. Their effeminateness, and trusting in their prosperity, make them sordid
and dejected under adversity, when they have not a reconciled God to look unto,
nor better things to be comforted in.

4. Their carriage is so insolent in their prosperity, that none do cordially
respect them, however they may flatter them; And therefore they despise, and
are ready to insult over them, when they are brought at under.

5. The Lord, also, heaps contempt on them in their fall; Partly, by suffering
their pride to struggle with their calamities, that their fall may be the
fouler (as one in vain striving to get out of a mire, does defile himself the
more;) and by leaving them to discover their base and dejected dispositions,
when they cannot rid them themselves of their troubles; And partly by
sleighting them in their troubles, even though they should make some essays to
cry to him, as Psalm. 18.41. In all those we ought to read the great advantage
and happiness of the godly, whose blood is precious in Gods sight, and their
loathsome carkases beautiful, even when full of sores, and lying on dunghils;
and whose graces, of humility, submission, confidence, triumphing over
miseries, etc. do shine brightly in their low condition. And therefore men
should take heed that they do not (with Zophar) account Gods people, or his
Interests and Ordinances, vile and contemptible, because they are in trouble,
and so take liberty to insult over them, and tread upon them as the mire of the
Street. See Isai. 51.23.

Doct. 5. The Lord sees it fit, often times, to make the ruin of the wicked
wonderful, and remarkable to them who observed them in their height; For, they
which have seen him shall say, Where is he? wondering at so remarkable a
change. See Psalm. 52.5, 6, 7. Herein, Consider,

1. The Lord would indeed have his wonderful works of Justice remarked, and
become matter of meditation and conference to others. For they are loud
preachings, and should be observed in all their wonderful circumstances.

2. The Lord does justly give them up to be wondered at, and mocked, who did
insult over all others in their prosperity; See Isa. 14.9. -- 19.

3. The Lord would hereby teach that he can as wonderfully ruin them, (as
ordinarily the fall of such is reserved to be a proof of his wonderful
Providence) and make men wonder as much at their fall, as ever they wondered at
their height, and at Gods patience and long-suffering toward them, Psalm. 73.10,
11, 12. with v. 17, 18, 19, 20.

Verse. 8. He shall fly away as a dream, and shall not be found, yea, he shall
be chased away as a vision of the night,

9. The eye also which saw him, shall see him no more; neither shall his place,
any more behold him.


In the last place, in these verses, we have yet a further account of the way
of the wickeds downfall, Which,

1. Is propounded in borrowed terms, or, illustrated from a similitude, v. 8.
That as Dreams and Visions are not only soon forgotten themselves, Dan. 2.5.
but the pleasant things then represented to men's fancies, do all flee away, and
are found to be vain, when men awake; So also does the wicked and his
prosperous estate flee away, and is chased away and he, or it are not to be
found. And by this he would not only enlarge what he had said before, v. 5, 7.
that the ruin of the wicked shall be sudden, like a dream when one awakes;
and irreparable, so that he nor his prosperity shall not be found, more then a
man finds what he dreamed of, really before him, when he awakes: But further,
he intimates, how vain all his former prosperity shall be found in the day of
his calamity, even like the fancies of dreaming men.

2. That which he had spoken^ concerning the wickeds irreparable ruin, is
enlarged end insisted on in proper terms, v. 9. That men shall see him no more,
at least in his former prosperity, nor shall he continue in his place in his
former grandeur, nor his habitation bear any marks of him, or it.

This Doctrine has the mistakes in it formerly mentioned, that godly men are
all exempted from such strokes, and that all the wicked are so destroyed, or
that Job was so quite gone, and not to be restored.

Yet the General Doctrine may teach,

1. Wicked men's prosperity is but a fair nothing, and an empty vanity; it has
no more real consistence or comfort in it, than there is in a dream and vision
of the night; Therefore is a wicked man's prosperity compared to these, because
he has a lie in his right hand when he enjoys it. See Isa. 29.7, 8. Psalm.
39.6. and 73.20.

2. Wicked men, in their prosperity, are asleep, and cannot discern the truth
of their condition; For, so much do their Dreams and Visions (which are sweet
to sleepers) import. So that what is said of Idolaters, Isa. 44.20. is true of
them.

3. Readily nothing does awake the wicked out of their secure dreams, but
judgments, and the Word does not prevail with them till these come; For, their
Dreams and Visions are found to be what they are, only when they flee away and
are not found; when their persons are destroyed, or, at least, when those their
imagined happinesses are gone, as it was now with Job's prosperity, though
himself was as yet preserved.

4. Let the wicked sleep never so sound, God will, sooner or later, awake them
by judgments upon them; For, so far this holds true, that they shall flee away,
and be chased away (by plagues and calamities) either out of the world, or out
of their former prosperous estate, and shall not be sound.

5. When God sends judgments on the wicked (which he can as speedily do, as one
can chase away sweet Dreams and fancies, by awaking the sleeping man) all the
comforts of their prosperous condition will fail them, and be found to be
empty; As sweet Dreams and Visions are found to be, when men awake. Psalm.
73.20. See Isa. 10.3.

6. God sees it, oftimes, fit to make the world witnesses of the ruin of the
wicked, and to cause their habitations bear the prints of his displeasure; So
that the eye which saw him shall see him no more, neither shall his place any
more behold him.

Verse. 10. His children shall seek to please the poor, and his hands shall
restore their goods.
Follows to v. 22. The second part of this Narration; Wherein he gives an
account of the miseries wherewith the wicked are oppressed after their fall,
which point out their condition as yet more miserable. It may be taken up in
three branches; In the first whereof (in this verse) he gives an account of the
miserable condition to which the Children of the wicked man shall be redacted,
and that they shall seek to please the poor; that is, they shall beg the poors
favor, and that they will not molest them, nor reveng upon them the injuries
done by their father to them: Or, they shall seek to be relieved by the poor in
their extremities, being now poorer then they. And yet (as some read the words,
though the Original bear it not so well) they may have but bad success in all
these their endeavors; the very poor, whom their father impoverished, may
oppress them again, which is a sad scourge. Prove. 28 3. As for that which is
added in the end of the verse and his hands shall restore their goods, it may
be understood of the wicked man's children, formerly mentioned, that every one
of them (for the word is here singular) shall restore the goods of the poor,
taken by their Father, that so they may please and appease them. But it is
clearer to understand it of their Father himself, who shall restore his ill
purchase (as it after follows) and therefore his Children are unpoverished,
and must please the poor. Thus the copulative, And, must be rendered, for (as
it has various significations) the latter part of the verse giving a reason of
what is said in the former part. His Children must seek to please the poor, for
his hands shall restore their goods.

To say nothing, how sad a calamity it is to be driven upon this necessity, to
please the poor, and to be a servant to the meanest slave, as Job complains he
was despised by base persons, Chap. 30.1, 2. etc. we may from this verse,
according to the general Rules, Learn,

1. The sins of wicked men may have sad effects, not only upon themselves, but
on their Posterity also, in whom they may be plagued; and that either when
themselves are alive to see it, or even after they are dead; For, the fruit of
the wicked man's sins teaches his children. See, Exodus 20.5.

2. It is no strange thing to see men, who in their prosperity have mounted to
the skies, brought so low, as they or their Children shall become so poor, as
to be in the reverence of the meanest; As here is held out. So uncertain and
vain are the things of time, and so little cause have men to aspire or seek to
climb high, which oftimes brings so fowl and low a fall after it!

3. Men in Power and Eminency ought to be very condescending, and not look too
high above the meanest, far less above others; Lest they or theirs be made to
stoop to the lowest; As here is threatened against the children of the wicked
man, See Chap. 31.13, 14.

4. No unjust possession of Riches gives a man a true title thereto before
God; For, However the wicked man had gotten and possessed these Goods, yet they
are still their (or, the poors) Goods, from whom he had unjustly taken them.

5. God can make the unjust title of ill Purchases appear, by restoring to the
poor what was unjustly taken from them; and that by the oppressors own hand,
though to the impoverishing of himself and his family: For, here the poor shall
get their goods, and his hands shall restore them, by which means his children
are brought low. The Lord may bring this about, by drawing the Oppressor
to-repentance, (as he did Zacheus Luke 19.8) though that be not meant here; Or,
by terrors of Conscience let out upon them (though without true repentance)
making them as glad to be rid of an ill purchase, as ever they were to get it;
Or, by forced restitution, when the oppressor is overpowered and brought down.
This may assure us that wicked men have no sure hold of their ill purchase,
though there were none to oppose them, so long as themselves have Consciences,
and hands to restore it; And it may teach the appressed to wait patienly upon
God, who can right them by very unexpected means.

6. God can make calamities very grievous, and he does order them so as they
may be most bitter to the wicked; As here, it cannot but be a vexation to the
wicked man (whose affections are not mortified) to part with his wealth, which
he loves so well, and, much more, to put it away with his own hands; and yet
God can make him do it

Verse. 11. His bones are full of the sin of his youth, which shall lie down
with him in the dust.
A second branch of the wickeds misery after his fall, is set forth in a
similitude taken from riotous young men, who, by their lewdness in their youth,
do contract infirmities which cleave to their bones, till they put them in
their graves. And the meaning of the words, is, That even the sins committed by
the wicked man, or hypocrite, in his youth, do stick to him, in the guilt
thereof, and, it may, in some sad effects also, and are inseparable from him
till he go to his grave, and even then also they continue with him. In place
of, sins of youth, the Original has only, youth. and because the word
signifies also, hidden, therefore some understand this of the wicked man,
hidden sins (as it is also rendered, Psalm 90.8.) which, how closely soever he
conveigh them, shall thus cleave to him. But I shall hold to the Translation,
where, as the name given to his youth, which is taken from hiding, points out,
how early he begins to sin, and God begins to reckon up his sins upon his
account, even from the time that he lives hid under his Parents shadow, and
before he appear in the affairs of the world; So, while the sins of his youth,
are called only, his youth, of which his bones are full it serves to point out,
how ordinarily in all men (and always in the wicked) youth and youthful lusts
are inseparable, so that if they have youth, or, be young, they will have the
other.

In this Branch of the Narration, Zophar tartly reflects upon what Job had
spoken, of Gods making him possess the iniquities of his youth, Chap. 13.26.
but unjustly, in that he measures the truth of the godly man's condition, by his
own tentations about it, when he is in a distemper; And in that he judges what
will be his end and his condition in the grave, by this exercise within time.
For albeit Job apprehended, in his fits of tentation, that God was pursuing the
sins of his youth; yet, it does not follow that it was really so; and albeit
God had indeed been chastening him for these; yet, it would not follow that
therefore he should lie down in the grave with his bones full of them, but
rather, of the contrary, that God was now pursuing him for them, that, by
sleeing to a Redeemer, he might attain to true peace in life and death. However
the General Doctrine may teach,

1. Though the courses of men in their youth may be looked upon as hid (as the
word signifies;) yet youth is a very dangerous time, and a time of much guilt
and provocation; For, so is there intimated, that the wicked man has sins of
his youth, or his youth is such as draws on sad consequents; and there is a
fullness of the miscarriages of his youth, which accompanies him. See Psalm.
25.7. 2 Timothy 2.22.

2. Though men, ordinarily, think light of the sins of their youth, and do
apprehend that they should not be much noticed, because they are done in youth;
Yet they stick with the impenitents as here we are taught.

3. Sin, the longer it be continued in, sticks the faster, and is removed with
the more difficulty; For, in process of times, his very bones and marrow are
full of them. Not only may the Conscience of sin, in a day of trouble, go
through all the faculties of the soul, and consume the marrow and bones; And
some effects of some sins cleave to some men in their bodies and bones: But the
guilt of every sin cleaves to all of them, still the longer the faster.

4. Even the dust and grave will not separate impenitent sinners and their sin,
and the sad effects thereof; For, these sins shall lie down with him in the
dust. Some of these sins do hasten men to their graves, by consuming their
bodies, or bringing them under a stroke of justice. And all of them go to the
dust with them, and do rise and appear against them in the Resurrection. So
that they are foolish who think that length of time can remove their sin, or
that they have done with it, because they forget it.

Verse. 12. Though wickedness be sweet in his mouth, though he hide it under his
tongue.

13. Though he spare it, and forsake it not; but keep it still within his mouth:

14. Yet his meat in his bowels is turned, it is the gall of Asps within him.


A third Branch of the wickeds misery after his fall (which contains, in sum,
that all his pleasure, in following of wicked courses, and particularly,
oppression, shall then prove deadly and bitter to him) is held forth in a
similitude taken from a man's eating of a sweet, but poisoned, morsel; which
therefore he must vomit up again, and it proves deadly to him. This is,

1. General propounded, with Relation to all his wicked courses, v. 12, 13, 14.

2. It is applied, particulurly, to his ill purchase, v. 15, 16.

3. This Metaphor, as it relates to his sinfully acquired wealth, is more
particularly and in proper terms, explained and instanced, v. 17. -- 21.

In these verses, the allusien is plain and obvious; The wicked man's following
of wicked courses, is compared to a man's eating of a sweet poisoned morsel, or,
Tablet; and as a man, finding it sweet, keeps it long in his mouth, and is
unwilling to chew and let it over into his stomach; but, being once swallowed,
it turns into the gall of Asps, or, is found to have been poisoned, and so
proves another thing then meat, and does change and alter his health: So, he
delights in prosecuting wickedness, but it proves bitter and deadly in the
issue. There may be witty allusions made upon his hiding of wickedness under
his tongue, as pointing at his dissembling, defending, palliating, and excusing
his sin, by his fine language; but it is safer to take it more generally, as
pointing at his complacency in sin, as a man that keeps the taste of a sweet
morsel so long as he can in his mouth, and so the rest of the expressions in
the Text expounded it.

Doct. 1. As to the godly, it is their greatest delight and refreshment to
converse with Gods Word, and do his will, John 4 34. with Job 23.12. So sin is
to the wicked as their very meat and drink; as this Metaphor imports, that
wickedness is as a sweet morsel to the wicked man's mouth. They sleep not except
they do evil, Prove. 4.16. and it is their very souls delight to wallow in sin,
for which they have great cause to mourn.

2. The wicked, in the choice of their way, are not led by any principle of
Grace; nor so much as by sound reason, but only by their corrupt sense; So
that, though the way that is sweet and delectable to flesh and blood ought
therefore to be suspected, seeing the right way is cross to our humors and
inclinations; Yet, they are only affected with what seems sweet to their taste:
For, he follows wickedness because it is sweet in his mouth.

3. It is a Character of wicked men, that they find much sweetness in sin,
which draws them to it; as here is also imported.

4. It does further evidence their wicked disposition, that they are not
surprised with some fits only of delight in sin, (which may befall a godly man)
but they persist to delight, and have a continued complacency in it, whether in
their fancies and contemplations, or in acting of it; For, it is sweet in his
mouth, he hides and spares it (as a man is not willing to let a sweet morsel go
soon over) and forsakes it not, etc. All which variety of words shows how hard
it is to express that great delight the wicked find in sin.

5. All the sweetness of sin will prove bitter in the end; For, his meat in his
howels is turned, it proves as poisoned meat, which, being swallowed down,
changes and proves to be another thing than it seemed to be in the mouth, and
changes the man's health into sickness, and bitter pains and wringings. See Romans
6.21.

6. Sin delighted in does not only prove bitter and vexing for a time, but
(without repentance) it proves deadly and destroying also; For, this meat is
the gall of Asps (which is bitter and deadly poison) within him.

Verse. 15. He has swallowed down riches, and he shall vomit them up again: God
shall cast them out of his belly.

16. He shall suck the poison of Asps: the Vipers tongue shall slay him.


In these Verses, this Metaphor is particularly applied to the wicked man's ill
purchase; where his wealth and riches resemble a man's food, or a morsel desired
for its sweetness; his ill shifts to purchase riches resemble the poison that
is in that morsel; His actual acquiring of riches by those means resembles a
man's swallowing down this morsel into his stomach: Gods judgments depriving him
of his purchase, and destroying of himself, resembles the working of a deadly
poison (like that of Asps, or which comes from a Vipers tongue) which causes
a man to vomit up all that he has swallowed, and takes away his life.

This general Doctrine (omitting his mistakes) teaches.

1. The world and the enjoyments thereof have a special sweetness to the
wickeds taste, and are a special snare drawing them wrong; For, what was said
of wickedness in General, v. 12. is here instanced in the matter of riches, in
particular, to show that those are a sweet morsel to a wicked man.

2. It is an evidence of the wickeds inordinate affection to the things of the
world, that they are most eager and violent to have them, not caring what, or
how they have, so they may have them upon any terms; For, he swalloweth riches
as an hungry greedy man does a morsel, never considering what food it is, or
what hazard may be in it.

3. The Lord may let eager greedy men after the world prosper for a time, in
their endeavors, that their success may heighthen and augment their sorrow
afterward; For, he swalloweth down riches, and gets them into his belly.

4. When a wicked man has got his will, he is as little secure of his desired
wealth as ever; For, when he has swallowed down riches, he shall vomit them up
again. Not because he thinks he is too full, or loathes and has an antipathy at
them, but he is forced to it (either by worldly sorrow and despair, as it was
with Judas. Mat. 27.3, 5. Or by violence used toward him by others) as poison
causes men to vomit.

5. Though it be very sore and bitter to a wicked man to be deprived of his ill
purchase, as it is for a man to cast his meat, by vomiting it out of his belly;
(and so he has more torment in losing it, than pleasure in getting it) yet God
is able to put him to this unpleasant task: For, God shall cast them out of his
belly.

6. Wicked men do not only justly lose their ill purchase, but do bring ruin
upon themselves thereby: For he shall suck the poison of Asps, and the Vipers
tongue (or, the Vipers poison, which, having fastened upon a person, Act. 28.3.
it transmits from the tongue and other vessels about the teeth where it lies)
shall slay him; as poison not only makes a man vomit, but kills him.

Verse. 17. He shall not see the rivers, the floods, the brooks of honey and
butter.
What has been spoken in borrowed terms, of the wickeds ill purchase, and the
bitter fruits thereof, is now (to v. 22.) more particularly, and in proper terms
explained and instanced, not without reflecting upon Job and his case. And,
first, in this verse he asserts, that the great abundance of all things, and
that sweet and easy life which the wicked man had, or expected to enjoy yet
more, shall utterly fail him and disappoint his expectation, when God reckons
with him. The thing he dreams of, as the result of all his purchase, is, to be
surrounded with Rivers, Brooks and Floods of Honey and Butter, or, the
affluence and perpetuity of all delights to cause him lead a contented life;
but he shall be disappointed. Either he shall never attain what he expects, or
it shall not continue with him for the future.

Doct. 1. It is the property of wicked men, that a little of the things of time
will not content them; as placing their happiness in these things, and knowing
no better things after which to seek; For, he would be at Rivers, Brooks, and
Floods of Butter and Honey (as the land of Canaan is said to slow with Milk and
Honey) or, an abundance even to superfluity, continually flowing out unto him.
It may be that here he reflectts upon Job's great plenty, which he enjoyed
formerly, of which see Chap. 29.6. But he wrongs Job, if he judged that he
doated upon these things, or, placed his happiness in them, as the wicked do.

2. It is also the property of the wicked to have vast and large thoughts of
the advantages of outward prosperity, because their hearts are set upon it;
For, these expressions do also point at the fine life the wicked dream of in
their own minds, and what an easy life they intend to lead, as Luke 12.19.

3. It points out the vanity of outward enjoyments, that let men prise them
never so highly, yet they can do no more, at best, but maintain a temporal
life, which must perish at last; For, were there Rivers and Floods of them, yet
they are but Butter and Honey, or, means to preserve a dying life; And this is
all that the greatest will get, Eccl. 5.9, 10.11. and 6.7. Yea, others may
subsist with loss, whereas they, oft-times, drown themselves in these Rivers,
Brooks, and Floods.

4. Wicked men's contentment in the Creatures is, ordinarily, rather hoped for
and expected, than enjoyed; Either they are but laboring for it, and building
their nest, or if they enjoy any plenty, it is not so much their present
enjoyments, as somewhat they are yet expecting, which comforts them: For, so is
posed here, that they build much upon what they shall see.

5. It is just that the wickeds expectation of this, contentment do perish;
For, He shall not see the Rivers, etc. Either he labors for it, and yet never
attains it, or whatever he attain, his expected stisfaction is but still a
coming; or at last, once for all, his contentment shall come to an end, and he
shall part with it, never to see it any more.

6. The more big thoughts, or the greater expectations, wicked men have had of
the world and the contentments thereof, their disappointment will be the
sadder; For, so is here imported; that they were Rivers, Brooks and Floods,
upon which he did do at, and expected to see them; but was disappointed; and
therefore this big expectation will make his case more sad.

Verse. 18. That which he labored for shall he restore, and shall not swallow
it down: according to his substance shall the restitution be, and he shall not
rejoice therein.
In the next place, He explains what was spoken in borrowed terms, v. 15. of
the wicked man's restoring his ill purchase. And shows,

1. That he shall restore and not swallow down, what he labored for. Whereby
is to be understood, not so much what the poor had labored for, and the wicked
man had taken from him; as what the wicked man himself had labored for, either
by his toil in robbing others of it, or what he had purchased by his own
labor, beside his robbery. All this, shall he restore, either it shall be
violently taken from him, or he shall be forced to give it back, when he is
brought at under.

2. That he shall restore according to his substance, even all the wealth which
he had gathered by robbery, or, at least, all his goods which he has, so far
as they will go to make a restitution. Hence,

3. He shall be disappointed of the joy and blessedness he expected in these:
things. While he says here, that the wicked man shall not swallow down, but
restore, what he labored for, which seems contrary to what he said, v. 15.
that he has swallowed down riches; we would consider, Partly, that these
different expressions may point at the different lots of several wicked men:
some get leave to swallow down wealth, and enjoy it a while; And some get not
so much, and have not so much as even a moments contentment of their evil
purchase, but it is presently snatched away: Partly, that this expression added
to the former points out, what the wicked man's enjoyment of prosperity really
is; They have it in their power, and so they swallow it indeed, as a sweet
nourishing morsel, but all this is as bad and worse than if they had never
enjoyed it. It is like meat that, being eaten, does not feed, and so it is all
one as if they had not swallowed it. Yea, their vomiting of it up again makes
it better they had not swallowed it at all.

In this part of the discourse, Zophar, no doubt, reflects upon Job's losses,
but unjustly; as not distinguishing (in such a lot) betwixt punishments or
plagues for sin, and cleanly trials; not yet remembering that Job did not so
rejoice in his prosperity, ( chap. 31.24, 25.) as he asserts here the wicked do.

However the General Doctrine teaches,

1. Wicked men want not their own toil in their purchases, either in their
ordinary callings, or, courses of oppression; For here he labors, for what
he has, one way or other.

2. All this toil and labor does not give wicked men a sanctified title to
their purchases, nor will secure them unto them; For, though he labor for it,
yet he shall restore.

3. Oppression is a plague in men's estates, and deprives them even of their
other lawful purchases, as well as of what they gained by oppression; For, what
he labored for (any way, as has been explained) shall he restore.

4. When wicked men count all costs, their success in oppression is no success,
if not worse, than if they had never succeeded at all; For, so he shall not
swallow down, even what he has swallowed down, as has been explained.

5. God pursues wicked men's ill purchase, so long as they have any thing left,
and till they be as poor as ever they were rich; For, the restitution (or, Gods
taking away of his wealth, and giving of it to others) shall be according to
his substance, even all the substance which he has.

6. Whatever be the joy of wicked men because of their enjoyments; yet,
oft-times, God cuts them short of their joy, and lets them see how empty it
was, and how sobriety had beseemed them rather than joy: For, when this change
comes upon the wicked, he shall not rejoice, or, exult, in his purchase, nor
shall he have any joy at all (for in the Original it is only, he shall not
rejoice) as not knowing how to rejoice in God, and in spiritual things, in the
want of temporal enjoyments.

Verse. 19. Because he has oppressed, and has forsaken the poor; because he
has violently taken away an house which he builded not.

20. Surely he shall not feel quietness in his belly, he shall not save of that
which he desired.


In the third place, this spoiling of the wicked man is amplified, and the
equity thereof cleared, from the consideration of the procuring cause; That
since he oppressed the poor, and cast them out of their houses and possessions
without law, v. 19. Therefore he shall have no true peace of mind, nor enjoy
his desirable things, but shall loose them all, v. 20. or, (as it is, v. 14,
15, 16.) he shall have no quiet with those morsels which he has got into his
belly, till he quit them again.

In this also he reflects unjustly upon Job, who neither was an oppressor, nor
wanted peace with God in his trouble.

However, the General Doctrine teaches,

1. Oppression of the poor is a quarrel wherein God will appear and be a party;
For, this is a cause of all those plagues, because he has oppressed, or,
crushed, the poor. See Exodus 22.22-27. and 23.6. Psalm. 12.5.

2. While he subjoyns this to the sin of oppression, and has forsaken the
poor; it may, in general, point out; That to forsake the poor in his extremity,
and as we are called to help him in our stations, may be joined with oppression
of the poor, as a sin, little inferior to it. But more particularly, It may
point out the height of the wicked man's cruelty; That having crushed the poor,
till he did exhaust and leave them nothing, he did not extend the least
compassion toward them, when he had thus oppressed them, but turned them out of
doors, as is after subjoyned, and dealt with them as Amnon dealt with Thamar,
2. Sam. 13.15, 16. And so it teaches, That oppressors are very cruel, and do
never give over, till they exhaust and extenuate men (as the name poor imports)
and leave them so to wallow in their miseries; and God marks every step and
degree of this oppression: For, he oppresses and forsakes, and because of
that God punishes.

3. God not only looks to men's right, whatever their possession be; but he
abors that height of cruelty; when men are turned out of their very habitations
by oppressors: For, it is a sad quarrel against this wicked man, that he has
violently taken away an house which he builded not.

4. Oppressors need expect no true peace, nor contentment, whatever they
enjoy; but that God will shake them out of their enjoyments, as a man vomits up
a Surfeit: For, surely he shall not feel quietness in his belly, nor brook that
morsel in peace, till he cast it up again.

5. Albeit Oppressors set their hearts, and build their felicity, upon their
unjust possessions; yet all that will not secure them, but it will rather be
their plague, that they have desired those things so much which they must
loose: For, he shall not save even of that which he desired, and that shall be
bitter to him.

Verse. 21. There shall none of his meat be left, therefore shall no man look
for his goods.
In the last place, it is declared, that this ruin shall be so great, that he
shall not have so much as a bit of bread left him; and therefore shall no man
look for his goods; that is, he shall have nothing left him, which his heirs
may expect, who, in his prosperity, no doubt, looked greedily for that day
wherein they should succeed to so great wealth. Or, men shall never cease
spolling him, but will still have their eyes upon his goods, so long is he has
a bit of bread, and when that is gone, they need look for no more.

It teaches,

1. That men have meat, whereby to subsist, is a great mercy, and it is a sad
trial to want it; Therefore it is here threatened, as a sad stroke, there shall
none of his meat be left, or, there shall be none left (of his desired
substance, v. 20.) for his meat. They who enjoy what is simply necessary, have
little cause to complain of the want of superfluities.

2. When men are not content with food and raiment, but would still heap up
more, it is just with God to leave them not so much as bread; and to suffer men
to have an evil eye upon them, and to pluck at them, even so long as they have
meat: For, none of his meat shall be left, and then, no man shall look for his
goods.

3. Albeit wicked men do not stand to provoke God, and rob others, that they
may leave much to their heirs; Yet, God when he pleases to pursue a
Controversy, can make them poor heirs, yea, and deprive them of all hope, even
in the wicked man's own life time: For, thus also, no man shall look for his
goods, as has been explained.

Verse. 22. In the fullness of his sufficiency, he shall be in straits: every
hand of the wicked shall come upon him.
Follows to v. 29. The third part of this Narration, Containing a further
Amplification both of the downfall and subsequent miseries of a wicked man.
Wherein he is represented as a terrible delinquent, pursued by God; And (having
already spoken of the procuring cause of his fall and miseries) he gives here a
further account of the time and efficient cause of his ruin, both
instrumental, v. 22. And principal, v. 23. of the means of his ruin, or
weapons employed against him to make him miserable, v. 24, 25, 26. of the
witnesses that shall be led against him in this process, v. 27. of the effects
of all, v. 28.

In this verse we have an account of the time of the wicked man's ruin, and of
the instruments employed to bring it about; Namely, That when he is at the
height of his prosperity, and full and abounding in all things that are
sufficient for a contented life, then straits shall come upon him; and that by
the means of all the wicked (or, troublesome men, as the word signifies) that
are about him, who shall do to him as he did to others. Here he has another
unjust reflection upon Job's case, who was oppressed by the Sabeans and
Caldeans, when he was in a flourishing condition, and his Children were
feasting. But the General Doctrine teaches,

1. Albeit wicked oppressors may, for a time, take elbow-room enough in the
world; yet, when God reckons with them, they will be pinched; For, then he is
in straits, or straitened. And by this, partly, the Lord meets with their
lawless dispositions, and he straitens them who will not be hemmed in by his
Law. And partly, he plagues them for their taking liberty, and loosing the
reins to themselves, in prosperity, by causing trouble pinch them sore.

2. The height of the wickeds prosperity is so far from securing them, that,
ordinarily, ruin comes upon them when they are so exalted; For, in the fullness
of his sufficiency, and when he abounds in all things, and has a full
sufficiency of them, he shall be in sl^^ites. See Psalm. 92.5, 6, 7. Luke 12.19,
20. 1 Thessalonians 5 3. As in then most flourishing condition, they are for most part,
in wants, through the want of satisfaction and contentment, Eccl. 5.10. So God,
in the time, brings real wants and straits upon them, and oft-times their
stroke is but waiting for them till they be higher, that the stroke may be
sadder.

3. Such as wickedly and unjustly oppress others, God justly turns them ove
unto as wicked hands, who will show them as little pity: For, as he oppressed
the poor, v 19. So every hand of the wicked (^^^^els, of those are about him,
and can reach him) shall come upon him. Thus the very wickedness of (...)
instruments of vengeance (which prompts them to be cruel) ought to be remarked
Ezekiel. 7.21, 22, ^3, 24.

Verse. 23. When he is about to fill his belly, God shall cast the fury of his
wrath upon him, and shall rain it upon him while he is eating.
In this verse we have a more particular account of the time of the wicked man's
ruin, together with the principal Efficient Cause thereof; Namely, God, who
shall rain the fury of his anger (or, some effects of his hot displeasure) upon
the wicked man, even, when he is about to satisfy himself with his purchases
and with what he wished for, to make him happy. Thus the words are to be
understood, not so much; literally, that while he is eating his meat, his ruin
comes (as befell Job's Children, and the People of Israel, Numb. 11.33.) as
(according to the scope of the former Metaphor, v. 12, 13, 14, 15.) that he
shall be destroyed, even when he is about to glut himself with these sweet
morsels, which he had acquired with so much labor and toil.

Doct. 1. Who ever be the Instruments of the wickeds ruin, yet, God is the
Principal Cause of it; who should be waited upon, that he may bring it about in
his due time, and should be seen in it, when it comes to pass: For, God shall
cast upon him, etc. And though the word, God, be not in the Original, yet it is
to be reputed from, v. 15. And the expressions, of fury of his wrath, and
raining it down upon the wicked, do evince that it is his work.

2. When God is a man's party, all instruments that he shall be pleased to
employ will also be against him; For, every hand of the wicked shall be against
him, v. 22. when God is pursuing him in the fury of his wrath..

3. God can holily make use of wicked men, and their wicked actions, to scourge
other wicked men; As this verse, compared with the former, does also teach. See
Isa. 10 5.

4. God chooses the time for plaguing of wicked men so as they may be most
surprised, and their plagues prove most bitter to them, For, he is plagued when
he is about to fill his belly, and is eating; when he is at the height of his
expectation, and beginning to joy in it, this comes upon him. He begins to
eat, and taste of sweetness, but gets not leave to fill his belly.

5. It is the great misery of the wicked, that, whatever plague come upon them,
it flows from wrath, and the fury of wrath; As here we are taught. And it warns
men not to judge of the greatness of a stroke by what it is in it self, but by
the measure of divine displeasure that is manifested in and by it.

6. Wicked men may expect that the effects of Divine displeasure will not only
come suddenly and unexpectedly upon them, as a plump-shower in the fairest day,
and will fall upon them from heaven (whence the ruin comes) when there is no
appearance they can be reached by any upon earth; but that they will be powered
down abundantly upon them, to compense all former delays and sparing them: All
this is imported in this, that God will rain wrath upon him, when he is about
to fill his belly, and is eating.

Verse. 24. He shall flee from the iron weapon, and the bow of steel shall
strike him through.

25. It is drawn, and comes out of the body: yea, the glistering sword comes
out of his gall; terrors are upon him.


In these verses, and the next that follows, this ruin of the wicked man is
illustrated from the consideration of the means of it, or the weapons employed
to bring it about. And, in these verses, he asserts,

1. That though the wicked man flee one mean of ruin, yet another shall reach
him; As a man fleeing the sword, or the like Iron weapon, which kills at a
nearer distance, is overtaken by an arrow shot out of a Bow of steel, or, of
brass, which they used to temper well in those days. v. 24.

2. That, as when a man is thus wounded by an arrow at a distance, his Enemy
approaches nearer, and draws out his Arrow, and wounds him again with his
Sword; So God, shall never cease to pursue the wicked man, by one mean or
other, till those weapons be drawn out of his very gall, or leave him with a
bitter and deadly wound, v. 25. wherein he seems to allude to what Job had
complained of Chap. 16.13.

3. That being thus left in the pangs of death, he shall be haunted and
tormented with terrors, v. -- 25.

From this, according to the General Rules, Learn..

1. As wicked men must be fought with, and their stubbornness crushed, before
they will stoop to God; So God is provided for them, having deadly weapons, and
instruments of destruction, at command; For, here are the Iron Weapon, the bow
of steel, and the glistring sword, wherewith God is provided to bring down
stubborn man. See Psalm. 7.11, 12, 13.

2. Though wicked men have the stoutness to resist when God pursues, and are
more careful to avoid, than to improve, plagues; yet, all will be to no
purpose, for they cannot escape, nor stand out under Gods hand: For, here it is
assured, that, let them flee as they will, they will be reached.

3. Though wicked men escape one plague, it is only because they are reserved
for another, and for a more sudden and unexpected stroke, like an arrow coming
out of a Bow at a distance; For, he shall flee from the Iron Weapon, and the
Bow of steel shall strike him through. See Isa. 24 17, 18.

4. God will at last conquer and triumph over all the stubbornness of wicked
men; For, it shall not be a slight hurt, but shall strike him through, and he
shall wound him as often as he pleases, and draw his weapons out of his body.

5. Since wicked men will not amend or turn to God under afflictions, as the
godly do; God does justly pursue them with deadly plagues; For, the wounds here
given him are deadly.

6. The strokes that come upon wicked men will prove bitter and terrible to
them; For, the Sword comes out of his very gall the seat of bitter humors,
and, terrors are upon him. It is no wonder the wicked man dies always
violently, because he has never will to die, and he wants the peace of God,
which might secure his heart against the terror of such sad dispensations.

Verse. 26. All darkness shall be hid in his secret places: a fire not blown
shall consume him; it shall go ill with him that is left in his tabernacle.
In this verse we have a further account of the means of the wickeds ruin;
wherein is declared,

1. That when the wicked man it terrified and deadly wounded, as has been said
in the former verses, he will seek to all hiding places and refuges, (as a
wounded and pursued man seeks to secret and obscure corners) but in vain, for
darkness shall meet him there.

2. That he shall be consumed by a fire not blown, that is, by plagues sent
upon him suddenly and from God, without the hand of any creature.

3. That this ruin, shall not only reach himself, but his family.

Whence Learn.

1. Wicked men will be known by the refuges to which they betake themselves,
when they are terrified or plagued; For, the wicked man has his secret places.

2. Terror, discouragement, and want of peace will meet a pursued wicked man,
even in his hiding places and refuges; For, darkness is hid, or, reserved and
laid up for him, in his secret places.

3. His dark and d^eery condition is not such in part only, but wholly and
altogether, to him; For, it is all darkness, or, every kind of it, without any
light of counsel or direction, of comfort for the present, or hope of Issue for
the future.

4. God is a consuming fire, Heb. 12.29. and will especially prove such to
incorrigible wicked men; For, a fire comes from him, to consume them,

5. God delights much to appear against wicked men, by sending judgments upon
them whereof their is no apppearance in the second causes; For, it is a fire
not blown by men, but such as was rained down upon Sodom, and upon Job's
cattle, Chap. 1.16. Not that every plague upon wicked men comes so immediately
from God, as second causes have no hand in them; For the contrary is asserted
in the preceding and following verses, But the meaning is, that though, there
were no second causes which could reach them: yet God would reckon with them;
And beside all these plagues, wherein he makes use of second causes, he is,
oft-times, pleased to appear more immediately against them,

6. Wicked men are causes of misery, not only to themselves, but to all that
are theirs; For, it shall go ill with him, that is left in his Tabernacle, and
then his stately habitation appears to be a Tabernacle only.

Verse. 27. The heaven shall reveal his iniquity: and the earth shall rise up
against him.
In this verse we have an account of the witnesses led in the process against
this delinquent. Not simple witnesses to depone and give their testimony only,
but means of his destruction also, with those formerly mentioned; or such
witnesses as (having given their testimony) had their hands first upon the
delinquent to execute the sentence, to confirm the truth of their Testimony.
See Deuteronomy. 17.7. So the meaning of the verse is, that Heaven and Earth, and all
the creatures in them shall conspire the wicked man's ruin, thereby to convince
him how wicked he is.

In this he does reflect upon the various strokes, from Heaven and Earth, that
had been inflicted upon Job's substance and family; and upon Job's appeal to
Heaven and Earth, Chap. 16.17, 18. but very unjustly, seeing the word had not
born witness against him.

However the General Doctrine teaches.

1. Iniquity will not be got hid, so long as either men have Consciences, which
God can force to tell out what they are, or so long as there are insensible
creatures to be witnesses against the ungodly; For, the Heaven shall reveal his
iniquity. Sin will find men out, Numb. 32.23. And God has, oft-times, by
strange means found out notorious delinquents.

2. God can employ all the creatures to speak to a wicked man by plagues, who,
otherwise, will not notice what he is; For, thus they are witnesses to reveal
his iniquity, by rising up against him.

3. All Gods Creatures are Enemies to wicked men, and will prove so, if they
get a Commission from God for that effect; For, Heaven and Earth are ready to
rise up against him, if they be employed. Which shows that wicked men dwell
among more Enemies than they are aware of.

Verse. 28. The increase of his house shall depart, and his goods shall flow
away in the day of his wrath.
All the procedure against this delinquent is here summed up in the effects
thereof; Namely, the ruin of his Children and Prosperity, in that day of
divine displeasure.

Whence Learn,

1. When God pursues wicked men, the effects of it will be sad and dreadful;
as here we are taught.

2. Men's increase (whether of Children, Wealth, or Honor) is a very uncertain
thing; especially, when they hold it not with a good Conscience; For, the
increase of his house shall depart.

3. God can make all the wickeds enjoyments very suddenly to melt and ebb
away; For, this increase of his house (which is to be repeted from the
beginning of the verse instead of his goods, which is supplied by the
Translatours) shall flow away.

4. As all the calamities that befall the wicked flow from displeasure, so when
wrath goes forth against them, nothing will be able to stand before it; For it
shall flow away in the day of his wrath.

Verse. 29. This is the portion of a wicked man from God, and the heritage
appointed unto him by God.
In the last part of the Narration, this whole Discourse is summed up in a
Conclusion, that all th^se plagues and judgments, formerly mentioned, are
proper and peculiar to wicked men only. This he subjoyns to his Discourse, that
he may convince and press Job to take more notice of what he has spoken. But
still he forgets that there is a difference betwixt trials and plagues; And
that there is not always such a visible difference put betwixt the godly and
the wicked in this life.

However, from this Conclusion we may safely, Learn,

1. It will not avail that men hear much, unless they apply whar they hear to
their own condition; so much does Zophar insinuate, by inferring his Doctrine,
by way of conclusion, in the close of his discourse.

2. Wicked men ought not to look so much to what they may enjoy for a time
through Gods indulgence, as to what is their portion, and will be their
heritage for ever: So much is imported in that he puts him in mind what is the
portion of a wicked man, and the heritage appointed unto him.

3. Whatever the wicked may enjoy for a time, yea, all the days of their life;
yet, sooner or later, they will find that wrath and ruin is their portion and
heritage: For, though all that has been said be not true in Zophar's sense,
yet in so far it is true, that this (all that he has spoken) is the portion
and heritage of a wicked man. He is still under the wrath of God, and he
deserves all that is here threatened, and all of it, or worse, will at last
befall him.

4. Wicked men, though they presume to choose their own ways, yet will find
that they are not carvers of their own lots, but God will assign those unto
them; For, it is the heritage appointed unto him by God, or, the heritage of
his decree from God, which is spoken of, and determined for him by a sentence
from God, as the Original imports.

5. Though wicked men be stubborn and stout-hearted against God; yet, he is
strong and powerful to execute his sentence against them; Therefore is the name
of the strong God (as it is in the Original) given him in this business.

6. Men may strangely mistake, in the matter of the lot of the godly and
wicked, if they look only to temporal enjoyments, and not also to that which
men receive after this life; For, Zophar did here mistake, while he judged that
all Gods threatening against the wicked, and promises to the godly, were
visibly fulfilled in this life.

CHAP. XXI.
This Chapter contains Job's Reply to Zophar, wherein he refutes his, and the
rest of his Friends Assertions, more distinctly than before. And from their own
Argument, of Experience, lets them see that all the wicked are not so plagued
as they assert, but many of them prosper even till their graves; though it be
also true that some, (and but some only) of the wicked do feel and smart under
those miseries they speak of. By which account of Gods Dispensations he clears
that all things come alike to all, both godly and wicked: and that neither
prosperity nor adversity is the rule whereby to judge of either states, seeing
both prosperity and adversity are common to some both of the godly and wicked.

His scope in all this Discourse (as may be gathered from his Conclusion, ver.
34.) is to convince them that all their endeavors to comfort him in his
afflictions were but in vain, seeing they went upon false grounds and
principles in their discourses. And to clear and make this out, First, He
premits a Preface, wherein he craves attention to what he had to say;
Considering, That their patient hearing of him would be better to him than all
the comforts they offered him, ver. 2. That he would bear their mocking of him
the more patiently, if once they would hear him out, ver. 3. That they were
bound to hear him, as God did, to whom he directed his complaints, being in a
sad plight if he had not his recourse to him, ver. 4. And, That if they
hearkened to what he was to say of the dispensations of God, they might be
astonished thereat, and at their own mistakes about them, ver. 5. As his own
study of these depths of Divine Providence did fill him with fear and
admiration, ver. 6. Secondly, He refutes their common assertion (so surcery
prosecuted by Zophar in the last Discourse) concerning the miseries of all the
wicked, and them only, by showing that the wicked are more frequently in a
prosperous condition, and but some of them only, remarkably afflicted. And to
clear this, he speaks of the various lots and conditions of the wicked, 1.
Separately, That some (if not many) of them do prosper to their graves, ver.
7-13. and even these of them who are most grossly wicked, ver. 14, 15. Whom yet
he abhorrs, notwithstanding their prosperity, ver. 16. And, upon the other
hand, That others of them are sometime afflicted, their prosperity coming to an
end, and they being destroyed with violent judgments which they cannot resist,
ver. 17, 18. and their Children reaping the fruit of their sins, even in their
own time, ver. 19, 20. Whereby all their expectations are frustrated, ver. 21.
2. Conjunctly, That none should presume to prescribe to God in those things,
ver. 22. seeing he may and does, at his own pleasure, exercise a great variety
in them, suffering some of the wicked, to live and die at ease, ver. 23, 24.
and others of them in great trouble, ver. 25. and making their conditions equal
in the grave, ver. 26. Thirdly, he applies what he has said, to the present
questions, to refute their thoughts concerning him and his conditon. For,
whereas (which he knew well enough, ver. 27.) in all their General Discourses
they had aimed at him in Particular as a wicked man, ver. 28. They might very
easily be informed, if they had taken pains, that (however God deal with some)
generally the wicked are reserved for destruction and wrath to be let forth in
the life to come, ver. 29, 30. and that even albeit they be eminently wicked,
ver. 31, 32, 33. Fourthly, Unto all this he subjoyns a Conclusion, concerning
the vanity of all their endeavors about him, ver. 34.

Verse. 1. But Job answered, and said,

2. Hear diligently my speech, and let this be your consolations.


BEfore I enter upon Job's Reply, if we consider what is here premitted (as
also elsewhere) by the writer of this Book, that Job did answer, and so
answered, distinctly and calmly, as is after cleared in his discourse; We may
Observe,

1. Though Error and Delusion may be talkative more then enough; yet Truth is
so strong and invincible, that it will never leave its Champion without a
defense, and somewhat to say on its behalf: For, this is now the sixth time
that Job has an answer in readiness. Truth is a sure friend, which will never
desert them who do not desert it.

Obs. 2. Friends of Truth ought not to be discouraged, nor weary, were the
assaults made upon them never so frequent or sore; For, Job does not weary,
though he be so often put to it. We must resolve upon a continual fighting
life, one way, or other; and it is good service to God thus to continue
steadfast, notwithstanding all the indefatigableness of men who are against
Truth; and when we are toiled, still the longer the more, we should remember,
that it is service to God still, first and last.

Obs. 3. All his Friends heat and violence does not cause him forget the cause
and question in Controversy, but he still handles that solidly, and searches
into the grounds of it accurately. Which teaches, That it should he men's great
care not to loose Truth by Debates, nor to be driven from their point by
needless janglings. For a small point of Truth is of more worth than much of
our wills and humors.

Obs. 4. The more they are in heat, he is the calmer, and argues now more
moderately than ever. Which teaches,

1. Calmness is necessary in managing of Debates, that we wrong not God and our
selves, our just Cause and the Truth of God, because men, by their
miscarriages, do wrong us, or it.

2. Though calmness be not an infallible evidence of men's being on Truth's
side, yet readily they are most in the right who are most calm; as Job here was.

3. Continued and renewed assaults should not irritate, but rather compose
godly men so much the more; as here to Job grows the longer the calmer.

I proceed to Job's Preface, the scope whereof, is, to crave their attention to
what he was to say; Which he presses by five Arguments. And in this verse
after the Exhortation to attention, he propounds the first Argument, wherein he
puts them in mind of their duty, and of their errand they came about, when they
came to visit him. And shows them that, however they came to comfort him, Chap
2.11. and, probably, that was their ultimate design in all they spoke, yet they
followed that design in so ineffectual a way, that it would be better to him
than all the Consolations they offered him, if they would say nothing, and only
hear him peaceably, and therefore he judges they should attend to what he
says, seeing he craves no greater proofs of hindness from them.

Doct. 1. It is no easy task to be right hearers of grave and weighty Truths;
and, particularly, when men are prejudged, and preoccupied with their own
Opinions, they will not hearken attentively to what is said against them: For,
Job's Exhortation imports that they had not heard diligently his speech, that
is, however they had heard all he said, yet they did not so ponder it as to
embrace the Truths he asserted, or to be enabled thereby to speak more
pertinently to his case.

2. It is the duty of friends to endeavor, what they can, to be comfortable to
their godly friends in affliction; For, consolations were that, which he might
in reason have expected from them, and which they also intended in their way.
Though God afflict his Children, yet he allows Consolation upon them; and to be
useless this way, in sad times and lots, will be very grievous to them who lay
duty to heart, as being not only grievous to the afflicted, but prejudicial to
themselves, and depriving them of these blessings which are promised to the
tenderhearted and compassionate, Psalm. 41.1, 2.

3. The Consolations which godly afflicted men meet with, even from their godly
friends may be, oft-times, little worth; For Job implies that their hearing of
him speak were better than all of their Consolations: Hear, says he, my speech
and let this be your Consolations, or, in stead of these comforts which ye
offer me. Want of skill to deal with afflicted souls (which requires one of a
thousand, Chap. 33.23.) may render men very useless to them; yea, most able and
qualified men will not be useful, unless they put themselves over upon God for
that effect: And here by God would humble men, (as is observed much to this
same purpose, Chap. 32.13.) and fit the afflicted for an immediate proof of his
own compassion.

4. They can never be useful or comfortable to any in affliction, who do not
wisely take up their case what it is; For, this obstructed their intended
Consolations, that they had not heard him diligently, nor taken up his case
aright from his own Narration, and so could not apply sit remedies. See Psalm.
41.1. Prove. 18.13. And here men cannot but fail in their duty, if they judge of
men by outward appearance, or their own inward prejudices, or, if they do not
give many grains of allowance to the afflicted in their distempers, as Elisha
did to the Shunamite, 2 Kings 4.27. or if they do not put their souls in the
afflicteds souls stead, as Christ bare all the Sicknesses, by Sympathy, which
he cured, Mat. 8 16, 17.

5. When afflicted men can find no other comfort, they should account it a
comfort to get their grievances vented, and patiently heard; For, so Job
accounts it Consolations, to be diligentgently heard. Humility will make
afflicted persons stoop to very mean comforts. And it is indeed an case, and
they should complain the less, if they get but a friend to whom they may pour
out their hearts, and not be misconstructed; and such should be made use of as
a special favor, Mal. 3.16. lest, otherwise, the afflicted meet with the sad
trial of impatient and misconstructing friends. And, especially, they should
have a care to pour out their grievances to God (not neglecting that, as Ezekiel
24, ^3.) which will bring solid ease, 1 Samuel 1.15, 18.

Verse. 3. Suffer me that I may speak, and after that I have spoken, mock on.
In this verse Job repeats the Exhortation to Attention in other terms,
desiring that they would suffer him, to speak out his mind, and not interrupt
him, as formerly they had done; and adds the second Argument, which is, that if
once they would hear him out, he could bear their mocking the more patiently.
He expresses this in the singular number, mock thou on (as the Original has
it) as pointing at Zophar, and his late insolent discourse, in particular. And
as he does hereby insinuate, that they had formerly mocked him, rather then
answered to what he said; So this Ironical concession, mock on, does further
imply, that if they heard him, as they ought, they would not persist to mock
him, or if they did, he would bear it the more patiently, if once he were
heard; and therefore he thinks they ought to hear him, seeing it might prevent
their further miscarriage, or, at least, they should allow him this poor case
to get leave to speak his mind, let them make of it what they pleased, when he
had done.

Doct. 1. Godly men may be so much mistaken by others, that they will not so
much as patiently hear them speak for themselves; For, Job implies here, that
he was interrupted and not suffered to speak. Men should be prepared for such a
lot as this; and it points out how much they need to study sincerity, and to
approve themselves to God, seeing they may meet with such usage from men. And
self-seekers, and such as hunt after the praise of men, should consider how
unsure a foundation men's opinion and approbation are, and how loose a grip they
have thereof, even when they think they are most esteemed.

2. Not only may godly men be thus misconstructed, but their laddest complaints
may be but matter of mockage, even to their dearest friends; as Job here found,
who had been but mocked by them, which is the construction he puts upon all
their discourses, and the consolations they had offered to him. See Chap. 12.4.
Men will be more ready to mock and insult over godly men, (especially in
affliction) than either to answer their Arguments, or recover them out of their
supposed Errors. And it is but, in effect, mockery, to deal with an afflicted
godly man as they dealt with him.

3. Were the condition of godly men under affliction well considered, it would
be found no matter of sport, and that it is not Childrens play wherewith they
are exercised; For, Job's discourse imports that they would not mock on, and
would find that he spoke nothing that might procure their scorn, if they
hearkened to it attentively.

4. Men who get their consciences discharged, and their mind spoken in behalf
of truth, may enjoy peace; whatever be the miscarriage of others; For, if they
will suffer him that he may speak, it will not trouble him though they mock on.

5. It is a poor advantage, were it well considered, when men get liberty to go
on in their sinful courses; As here Job supposes they gain nothing, when they
are permitted to mock on.

Verse. 4. As for me, is my complaint to man? and if it were so, why should not
my spirit be troubled?
In the third Argument pressing attention (in this verse) he obviates the
exception which might be taken at his complaints; and asserts that his
complaints were not directed to man, but to God, and if it were otherwise, he
might have much cause of grief and trouble. And as to his scope in this, The
words may be looked upon as a justification of his complaints, from the
consideration of the cause of them; That his complaints being not for ordinary
strokes inflicted by men, such as they saw, but for strokes inflicted by Gods
immediate hand in an extraordinary way, it was no wonder he could not keep a
measure in them. Yea, had he but to complaint of strokes inflicted by men, such
as they saw, and were they only his party, it were no wonder if his Spirit were
troubled, or shortened (as the word is) in all his resolutions to be patient.
This Interpretation does import, That men in trouble should not be too severely
censured, though their passions and distempers put them to grief and
complaints. And especially, when God is a party in trouble, and men^ly under
more pressures than only outward trouble, it is no wonder they get it not so
well born, but some weaknesses do appear.

But it seems rather that the words are to be understood of his complaint in it
self; That his complaints were directed to God, and not to them; And therefore,
since God heard him, they were bound to hear him also. And to excite them to
ponder this the more, he adds that if he had not God to complain unto, but men
only to deal with, it might have added much to his trouble, considering how
cruelly they dealt with him.

Whence Learn.

1. It does beseem the Children of God, and is an evidence of his grace in
them, that they prove not Rebels under their afflictions and grievances, nor do
rest upon what may be expected from men, but do go to God with them; For,
whatever were Job's failings in these his complaints, yet it is commendable
that his complaint is not to man.

2. Saints may be so far mistaken and neglected by all others that they will be
driven to this blessed necessity, that they must go to God with all their
grievances. For, so was Job necessitated, to make his complaint not to man. See
Psalm. 142.4, 5.

3. When Saints are thus hemmed in, it is a call to go to God, who will respect
them when all slight them; For, so Job looked upon it, when in that case he
made his complaint, not to man, but to God. See 1 Samuel 30.6.

4. God is so compassionate to his own Children, when they come to him in
affliction, as may make the best of friends ashamed of their short coming in
duty to them; And Saints will find that in him, which they will find no where
else; For, so much does the force of Job's Argument import, that since his
complaint is not to man, they might well give attention to what God suffered
him to speak to himself.

5. Saints in their trouble would readily find their case intolerable, were
they left upon men, and had not God for a refuge; For, so much does Job here
suppose, If it were so, Why should not my spirit be troubled?

Verse. 5. Mark me and be astonished, and lay your hand upon your mouth.
The fourth Argument pressing attention, is, That if they would look to him,
or, consider his condition, and what he was to say of the various dispensations
of Divine Providence, it might astonish them to think upon them, and their own
mistakes about them, and might make them silent and not speak as they did,

Whence Learn,

1. Before men judge of Gods dealing in any particular, or of the afflictions
or lots of others, they ought to consider and mark them narrowly; As here Job
requires of them, Mark me, or, look unto me, my condition, and my doctrine
concerning Gods Providence.

2. Men may see and hear much of that which yet they consider and mark but
little; For, they both saw his condition, and heard what he is now to say, from
his former discourses; and yet, says he, mark me, or, look to me, as calling
for more accurate attention. Men do see many things and yet observe them not,
Isa 42.20. And it is a plague upon them when they see and perceive nor. Isa.
6.9.

3. Many of the dispensations of Providence in the world, and particularly of
the lots of Saints, may be such as might astonish right discerners; For, says
he, both in reference to his own condition, and his doctrine concerning Gods
Providence, Mark me, and be astonished. We adore not God in what is ordinary,
And therefore singular dispensations are sent to rouse us up. And albeit stupid
astonishment be not good, yet this imports that, in effect, Gods dispensations
cannot well be pried into, but ought to be wondered at.

4. Men will be so much the more astonished at the dispensations of God in the
world, and toward Saints, when they consider them narrowly, and do remember
that they have been in an error, and have not considered them well before;
For, this is required of them in particular, that they be astonished, when they
shall consider them well, and reflect upon their own mistakes about them. As it
is not unusual that men get open eyes, to be astonished at their own mistakes
in things wherein they thought they were very clear.

5. A wise consideration of Gods dispensations will cause men silently to
adore, rather than to carp, and foolishly talk and prate of them; For, he
supposes that if they mark well, they will find all their former babbling so
refuted, as may cause them lay their hand upon there mouth.

Verse. 6. Even when I remember, I am afraid and trembling takes held on my
flesh,
The last Argument (confirming the former) is taken from his own sense of his
condition, and of what he was to say. When he thinks upon the deep counsels of
God, and his various and strange dispensations in the world, and toward himself
and other Godly m^n, it causes him tremble and admire at the Majesty, Wisdom,
and Power of God shining therein, and at the ignorance and incapacity of
shallow man. Whence he would infer that they ought to learn at him, who was so
well trained and exercised in that study, and should hear him speak of that
subject, who was so sensibly affected with it.

Whence Learn,

1. What men do press upon others, they should first essay it themselves, that
they may recommend it by their practice, as well as by their counsels:
Therefore Job, having recommended astonishent and rereverence to them, v. 5.
does press it further here by his own Practice, When I remember I am afraid.

2. Such as would take up and understand the ways of God to any purpose or good
effect, ought to be much at serious meditation; For, I Remember, says Job,
when he gives an account of his fear and trembling; intimating that his
meditating upon these things, produced these effects.

3. Afflictions are then blessed, when they fix men's wandering and unstable
minds, and draw them seriously to ponder and consider, what God and his
Dispensations are; For, so Job, in his affliction, is brought to remember these
things more seriously.

4. It is a further evidence of the blessing of an afflicted condition, when
those serious thoughts do not evanish or miscarry in men's hands, but do produce
suitable effects, and impressions upon their hearts; For, Job's Remembering of
those things had such effects, of fear and trembling.

5. However men at ease may lightly pass over things of greatest importance and
concernment; Yet, in an afflicted condition, men (especially godly men) will
find that thoughts of God and his dealing ought to take deeper impression upon
them; For, however his frinds looked upon all things, yet he was affected with
them.

6. Gods dispensations may be very affrightful, even to his own Children, when
they think upon them in their afflictions; For, says Job, when I remember, I
am afraid, and trembling takes hold on my flesh. He had such an awful regard
of God, manifesting himself by these dispensations, as made him fear, yea, and
tremble. Wherein (beside that fear and reverence which he owed in duty to God,
and that horror which their ignorance and mistakes might beget in him) there
wants not some excess unto which Saints, remembering God in trouble, are apt to
fall. Psalm. 77.3. Which, as it flows from their crushed spirits, becoming a
spirit of bondage unto them; And it may be their fruit of not delighting in
mercy, that they are put to this School: So, it is, often times, very needful, to
excite them to renew their peace with God.

Verse. 7. Wherefore do the wicked live, become old, yea, are mighty in power?

8. Their seed is established in their sight with them, and their offspring
before their eyes.

9. Their houses are safe from fear, neither is the rod of God upon them,

10. Their bull gendereth, and falls not, their cow calveth, and casts not
her calf.

11. They send forth their little ones like a flock, and their children dance.

12. They take the timbrel and harp, and rejoice at the sound of the organ,

13. They spend their days in wealth, and in a moment go down to the grave.


Follows, unto v. 27, the second part of the Chapter, wherein Job refutes
their common assertions concerning the miseries of all, and only, the wicked.
And, resolving to clear this question more fully, he does not content himself
(as formerly, for most part) with contradicting of their assertion only, and
proving that many wicked men did prosper: But, giving an account of the various
lots of wicked men, both separately and conjunctly, he clears how God exercises
a great variety in these things; and that, however they might produce some
instances of wicked men who had been plagued, yet these were not sufficient
upon which to found a General Assertion, nor did they refute his opinion, who
notwithstanding these instances) could make it appear that even many of them
prospered to their graves. And consequently, these outward dispensations of
Providence could not convincingly prove a man to be either righteous or wicked.

From this, to v. 17. Job, in the first place, proves from experience the
prosperity of many wicked men, even till death. The Narration consists of three
Branches, the first whereof (in these verses) is, an assertion (contradictory
to what his Friends maintained) that many of the wicked have a constant and
uninterrupted gale of prosperity even to their grave. This he branches out in
several particulars, opposite to the many branches of the wickeds misery,
mentioned by Zophar and the rest. And namely,

First, that in their life,

1. In their persons, they live to old age, in strength, vigor and power, or
wealth. v. 7.

2. In their relations, they prosper also; their children and off spring are
many, and settled in their sight. v. 8.

3. Their families within doors are peaceable, without fear of trouble from a
Rod of God. v. 9.

4. Without doors, their Wealth is great, and their Cattle fruitful without
miscarrying, v. 10.

5. And as their Children and Offspring are many, so, because of their great
prosperity, they live in great mirth and Jollity. v. 11.12.

Secondly, That in death, after they have lived long in much prosperity, and
have spent their days in mirth and jovial^y, They die in a moment peaceably,
and without any bands in their death. v. 13.

This whole Discourse tending to one purpose, I need not insist upon every word
of it, but shall reduce the whole to these Heads.

First, This question, Wherefore do the wicked live, etc? being considered
abstractly from the scope, and as spoken to God, might import Job's stumbling
at this dispensation, and his desire of solution about the causes of it, as
Jer. 12.1. Hab. 1.13. And the Answer to such a Question might be, That God
suffers them thus to prosper, not because he loves them, or minds their good in
it, or cannot reach them, but because he would witness his long-suffering, Romans
2.4. would try the faith, and patience and other graces of his Children, would
teach them to imitate him, who is good to his very Enemies, Mat. 5.44, 45. and
would suffer the wicked to discover themselves more and more, and run upon
snares, etc. But Job does not here stumble at this lot, v. 16. and he propounds
the case not to God, but only to his Friends to refute their Opinions; As if he
had said; If that be true which ye assert concerning the ruin of wicked men,
How comes it to pass that daily experience lets us see so many wicked men
prospering? This being Job's scope in the Question, it teaches,

1. Men once engaged in an Error may be so blind, and so be misled with
prejudices and mistakes, that they will not see clearest Refutations of it; as
they could not remark constant (at least, frequent) Experiences witnessing
against them. Some men, being once engaged, think themselves so interessed, as
they will not see what may reclaim them; and there are so many delusions and
strong delusion, and some are so given over to them, that it is no wonder they
cannot see the Truth.

2. The more obvious and clear that light be, against which men sin by their
Errors, their sin is the greater and the more inexcusable; As when men sin not
only against Divine Revelation, in things which are above the reach of Reason,
or against sound Principles of Reason, in things that may be proved thereby,
but even against sense and experience, whereof Job makes use here to refute and
aggravate the Error of his Friends. Thus men are said to become unreasonable
or absurd, 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. and natural brute Beasts, 2 Pet. 2.12. And men are
given up to such dispositions, not only for the trial and exercise of the
Lovers of Truth, who oppose them, and cannot get them convinced by any means or
arguments, and to excite us to pity Adam's fallen Posterity, when left to
themselves; and to cause all men read their own dispositions and inclinations
by nature, in their way: But that this may be a warning unto (and if they
persist, a punishment of) these who see not the evil of more refined, and
polished Errors.

Secondly, The gale of the wickeds prosperity, in their Persons, Children,
Family, and Wealth, within and without doors, v. 7, 8, 9, 10. may teach this
Truth, That, the doctrine of Zophar and his Companions, is not true of all the
wicked; But many of them have a constant and full portion of prosperity. A
Truth which the Lord in this Book does inculcate, for guarding of the hearts of
the godly, who (because they need rods to mortify their corruptions, and have
many Enemies) are exercised with another lot. And it is a Truth which may hold
out these Instructions.

1. Prosperity is not of so much worth and excellency as many think; nor is it
the conduit whereby God conveys and communicates his special love to all to
whom he gives it; For, if it were so, it would not be dispensed as it is. And
it is because the godly think so much of it, that they want it so much; And God
is more gracious to them than to it give to them* when they are in such a frame
as makes them ready to abuse it.

2. Though dispensations, both of prosperity and adversity, be not dumb and say
nothing, nor should be useless; Yet they, alone and of themselves, say nothing
to clear the state of a man's soul before God, nor can a man judge thereof by
any such lot. The highest gale of Prosperity, here mentioned may consist with
Gods hatred, and all Job's Adversity may consist with love.

3. The godly should not envy the wickeds prosperity, (as the Psalmist did,
Psalm. 73 3, etc.) but should rather pity them, seeing they will get no more;
Nor should they quarrel much with the wicked about these things, which are
their only portion, and not theirs.

4. The godly should not be stumbled at adversity, nor cast down with the want
of prosperity. If there were no more to be considered but the will of God, who
orders all these things, it were enough; But, much more ought they to be
satisfied, when they consider, That their portion is secured, whatever befall
them in the world; That they are only separated a little sooner from the
contentments of time, for they will part with them at last, as the wicked must
also do; That, whatever their lot be, they are supported and provided for, and
have food and raiment, though, possibly, not to their carnal hearts desire;
That, in their adversity, they are called to bring up a good, report of the
riches of the grace and favor of God, wherein all their wants are made up; and
not to mourn over these Idols whereof they are deprived, but to let see that
they can be crucified to the world, as well as it is crucified to them; That
they are but fitted to move toward their Country, being delivered from many
impediments of a prosperous condition which clogged them; And in a word, That
there is a blessedness, even in adversity, to them, Psalm. 44.11. We will never
attain the right use of our present lot, nor are we fitted for any issue from
adversity, till we come to under value prosperity, and to rejoice in the love
of Christ, in the want of other things, Romans 8.35 -- 39. And till we be more
mindful and careful of the blessing of our sad conditions, than of an issue of
them. For without this, if we were delivered, we would but run mad in seeking
to satisfy our unsubdued and long starved lusts.

5. When the godly look upon all these particulars of the wickeds prosperity,
in their persons, children, family, wealth, etc. they may also, on the
contrary, see how many doors God has, whereby to let in trouble upon them, by
afflicting them in any of these. Whence may be gathered, partly, how frail man
is, and how God has him at an advantage to make him miserable if he please, by
many means; Falling upon him either in his Person, or his Children, or within,
or without doors. Partly, How many things the wicked need to patch up some show
of happiness to themselves, seeing they will not delight in God. Partly, That
the godly ought to remember what trials (in all or any of these enjoyments)
they ought to be armed and prepared for, if it please God to call them to it.
And, Partly, that they should observe and acknowledge Gods mercy, if they be
spared in any of these.

6. This should teach us that prosperity is a plague and snare to a wicked man,
and the greater his prosperity is, the snare is the greater: For all this is
given him, not in mercy, but in judgment. It is a blessedness unto the godly,
that God, by afflicting them, takes pains on them, and it is a plague on the
wicked, that they are not restrained from the desire of their hearts. And as
the godly are oft-times, tried by the want of trial and exercise; so are the
wicked most severely plagued, when they want a visible stroke and plague. And
as prosperity discovers their naughtiness who seemed to be somewhat before, 2 Chronicles. 25.1, 2. with v. 14. 2 Chronicles. 26.3, 4, 5, etc. with v. 16. and as it
tries, and discovers the weakness even of the truly godly, 2 Chronicles. 32.24,
25, 31. So it will, much more, bring out the naughtiness of the wicked. Their
prosperity secures them (as they think) of Gods favor, prevents all challenges
of Conscience, or affords them mirth to bear out under and against them, hides
from them the sight of their need of God, or of Prayer to him; and hardens them
most of any thing, Romans 2.4, 5. so that men have need to look how they improve
prosperity.

7. If in all this height of prosperity the wicked be but miserable, how much
more must they be miserable, who are in adversity, and yet neither have nor
seek after Piety?

8. This may also serve to point out how inexcusable wicked men are, and how
much they have to make account for, who abuse so much mercy, Romans 2.4, 5. And
who slight God without any provocation on his part.

Thirdly, The great mirth of their numerous Children, v. 11, 12. May teach,

1. All that the wicked get of their prosperity, is, but a little watery mirth,
and evanishing pleasure, which others want. Their Children and little ones do
but dance in flocks and rejoice in making use of their musical Instruments.
This (in so far as it is lawful) men might attain, had they contentment, in a
meaner condition. Yea, oft-times, meaner persons have more solid mirth and
satisfaction, than they who co^^ most to acquire much of the world. So that
they do but follow a shadow who seek prosperity for that end; seeing they seek
the thing which is not lost, if they would but be sober to obtain and discern
it. Much more might men find in God all that which they seek after in a
prosperous condition, yea, and infinitely more; Psalm. 4.6, 7.:

2. Whatever lawfulness their be in mirth and cheerfulness; yet it is a mark of
the wicked to hunt after it as the issue of all their care; when they aim no
higher than to have occasion to bid their souls take case and mirth, Luke
12.19. and their prosperity does not teach them sobriety; and when they have no
other care of their Children (which is the particular in the Text) but to breed
them in vanity, Idleness and revellings; as the care of Childrens Education is,
indeed, a searching trial of men's honesty.

3. It is also an evidence of a wicked disposition when men (like brute Beasts)
are taken up only with sensitive and sensual joys, of Mirth, Dancing, etc. And
do know, or (at least) prize, no other joy in comparison of those. And though
some unrenewed men may, by the Principles of sound Reason, be set above these
toys, yet where such an Inclination prevails, it is a sure evidence of an empty
and carnal disposition.

4. The issue of all their prosperity, v. 13. may teach,

1. The godly must nor stumble at the long continuance of the wickeds
prosperity; and that they not only taste of it for a time, but do even live,
wax old, and spend their days in wealth, or, in good, that is, in a cheerful
prosperous condition, wherein they acquiesce as their good, and chief
happiness. All this tract of prosperity is not sufficient to prove that they
are in Gods favor; and it is all little enough, since they will get no more.
And the godly must be tried by the continuance of this tentation, which will
discover how solid and fixed their resolutions are.

2. Death and the grave will put an end to all the wickeds prosperity; For,
after all this, they go down to the grave. And since they have nothing to
secure them against death, and what follows upon it, Psalm. 49.6, 7, 8, 9.
they cannot be happy, enjoy what they will in the world. And it concerns all,
who would assure themselves of true happiness; to see what they have to oppose
against the fear of death.

3. As the state of wicked men ought not to be judged happy, because of their
prosperous life, so neither is their peaceable death any evidence thereof; For,
in a moment, and peaceably, they go down to the grave, and have no bands in
their death, Psalm. 73.4. Men may be so much obdured, through the abuse of much
prosperity, as they do not apprehend Gods anger against them, nor see any
hazard upon the back of death. And, we ought to judge of men, rather by their
lives, than by the outward and visible way of their death; and should consider
that the more speedily and easily they pass away, they are but posting the
faster to their eternal misery, and that one moment puts an end to all their
joy for ever.

Verse. 14. Therefore they say unto God, Depart from us: for we desire not the
knowledge of thy ways.
In the Second Branch of this Narration (in this and the following verse) Job
proves that they who thus prosper are wicked men, and of the grossest sort of
them. For, whereas his Friends might object, that any who thus prospered were
the more polished and refined sort of wicked men: He averts they were even the
worst and most Atheistical of them, as appeared by their carriage in
prosperity. For, they reject God and all Religion, or Knowledge of him, and his
ways, v. 14. and confirm themselves in this wretched resolution by some unsound
Reasons and Principles, v. 15.

In this verse he declares how they evidence their wicked disposition in their
prosperity, by rejecting God and all his offers, as desiring no knowledge of of
his ways and service, which they do not mind to observe or follow.

Whence Learn,

1. Whatever some wicked men may seem to be in other conditions; Yet their
prosperity will draw out, and make them discover, what they really are; For,
Job by this proves their wickedness, that, because they prosper, Therefore they
say unto God, Depart from us.

2. It is an undeniable evidence of a wicked disposition, when prosperity, and
Gods favorable dispensations, become plagues to men, and turn them insolent;
For, so it is with these wicked men, Therefore (because they have affluence of
all things) they say unto God, Depart from us.

3. It is in particular, an evidence of wickedness, when prosperity turns men
impious contemners of God and Religion, and slighters of all his Interests;
For, in this do they evidence their insolence here. Albeit much adversity will
wring out the Atheism and Irreligion of men's hearts: Yet prosperity will
imbolden them to it much more.

4. God does notice the hearts and practices of of wicked men, as speaking,
oft-times, loud blasphemy, however they smooth the matter with their tongues:
For, they say this, not all of them with their tongues (though some may come to
that height of impiety) but in their hearts, and by their practice, Psalm. 14.1,
2.

5. God is so long suffering, that he follows even the wicked with offers,
convictions, and excitations to their duty: For, that they would have him
depart, imports he is with them, following them to reclaim them. Which shows
how difficult it is for men to get over the belly of Light, and sober
Principles, and to turn open and avowed Atheists, but when they are most
wicked, they will be haunted with somewhat checking and convincing them.

6. Wicked men are so far from following after God, when he seems to flee from
them, that his presence and company is a burden to them, and they cannot endure
the means be affords them, and that light, and those Convictions, whereby he
seeks to reclaim them; For, they say, Depart from us.

7. That they say this to the strong God (as the Word signifies) does not only
testify Job's respect to God whom they slight, in that he calls him by that
Name; (as such insolent miscarriages should excite godly men to their duty so
much the more) But that they are so hardened in their course, that they fear
not his power, or that he is the strong God. Which shows the power of
obduration, that it is afraid of no hazard.

8. Such as would prove themselves to be truly godly, ought to resign
themselves up to God, to observe and follow his will, and not their own
inclinations; For, thy ways (or, Gods ways, not wherein himself walks, but
which he has enjoined to man) are the paths which they ought to trace.

9. Men must have solid knowledge of Gods ways, what they are, and what
advantage there is in following of them, before they can observe them; For, so
is here supposed, that there must be the knowledge of his ways.

10. Albeit the knowledge of Religion, and of Gods ways be a special favor,
yet wicked men have no esteem of it; For, they desire not the knowledge of his
ways. They have the light and all reproofs, Joh. 3.20. because they are vexed
thereby. And if wicked men desire not knowledge, because it would trouble them,
and interrupt their joy in their sinful courses; they must be much more
hardened, who have knowledge, and seek after it, and yet never take notice of
their practice and conversation.

11. It is a Character of wicked men, when not only their practice, but their
affections are corrupted; For, not only are they ignorant, but they desire not
the knowledge of his ways, which is much worse than simple ignorance.

12. When men do not delight in the knowledge of Gods ways, nor seek after
knowledge as all treasures, they do, upon the matter, bid him depart from them;
For, the one is subjoyned, as a confirmation of the other, Depart from us, for
we desire not the knowledge of thy ways.

Verse. 15. What is the Almighty that we should serve him? and what profit
should we have, if we pray unto him?
In this verse we have an account how the wicked do confirm themselves in this
wretched resolution, upon some false Grounds and Reasons. Namely, That they see
no excellency in God (though he be Almighty and Alsufficient) wherefore they
should serve him, nor any advantage to be reaped by calling upon him.

Whence Learn,

1. It is an evidence of true Piety, when men are not their own, but do give up
themselves in all things to be subjects and servants to God; and when they make
Conscience of Prayer as a special part of their homage and service, and as a
mean of keeping near their Master, of drawing out furniture and strength for
their other service, and of partaking of the reward of it; For, these two are
joined here, as the Characters of godly men in those times, wherein the wicked
refuse to concur with them, that they serve God, and pray unto him. And both
these must be joined by those who would approve themselves to God. For other
services in our ordinary conversation will not excuse the want of Prayer, and
the practice of Prayer, will not afford us a dispensation to live in other
things as we please.

2. The word rendered, Prayer, in the Original signifies, to meet God; which
not only intimates, That Supplicants should have their face toward God, by
Holiness, and should not pray (so to say) over their shoulder to him, while
their hearts and inclinations are another way: But further also, That Prayer is
a tryst and mean of intercourse betwixt God and them, wherein God is coming to
meet them, Isa. 64.5. And they not only go to meet him, but do take up his
meeting of them as an encouragement to that duty. And particularly, That Prayer
is the right way of meeting God, when he comes with threatened judgments, and
to deprecate his anger, as the word principally imports.

3. We have here also an account of the Principles and Encouragements of
serving God, which were in use in these times, and ought yet to be studied.
Namely,

1. High thoughts of God, particularly, as an Alsufficient God, able to protect
and do all things needful for them who serve him; For, so is imported, that he
was held out as the Almighty, or, Alsufficient, to invite men to serve him. See
Gen, 17.1.

2. The advantage that men reap by serving God, particularly, by calling upon
him; For, it has also been held out, that here was profit in praying to him.
See 1 Timothy 4.8. and 6.6. And we should study both these, for low thoughts of
God, and want of hope, will hinder Service and Prayer.

Doct. 4. It is the character of wicked men that they loath to be servants to
God, nor can endure a yoke, or any above them, and the more prosperous, the
more insolent are they: For, here they decline to serve him See Psalm. 12.4.

5. It is also a Character of the wicked, that they harden themselves in the
sleighting of Gods service, by entertaining low thoughts of him: For, What is
the Almighty, (say they) that we should serve him? They do not know nor
acknowledge God as he is; and they look upon his glorious Titles as nothing
else but fine words, to which he is nothing answerable in his blessed nature;
or they think they need no proofs of his Alsufficiency, but can stand upon
their own legs, and serve their own turn without him.

6. Such as will not serve God, do not only transgress a command, and prejudge
themselves of their own happiness, but they offer to reflect upon, and affront
God: For, their way, upon the matter, says, What is the Almighty, that we
should serve him?

7. Prayer is a part of Gods Service, from which, the wicked are most
especially averse; For as they decline all service in general, so in special,
they decline to pray unto him.

8. The wicked are not content to slight Prayer only, but they do also (at
least in their heart and practice) traduce it as an unprofitable undertaking;
For, say they, what profit should we have, if we pray unto him? It is their
fault, that they look only to their own advantage and profit in this matter;
seeing they are bound to it as their duty, and as service to God, whatever they
reap by it. And it is yet further their fault, that they do not discern the
true spiritual advantage of Prayer (which is not small) but do measure all
things by outward advantages. Whence it comes to pass that (in many cases and
times) they loose sight of the profit of Prayer; Carnal men cannot discern how
Prayer, and Access to God thereby, do sweeten and sanctify hard Lots when they
are not removed; Atheists think Prayer not the most compendious way of relief
in trouble, but will rather essay any other shift, or will weary of it, if an
answer be long delayed. 2 Kings 6.30, 33. Hypocrites will cast of Prayer,
when, after making a show of seeking God, they are yet left in trouble, Isa.
58.3. Especially if they see others, who neglect that way, prospering. Mal.
3.14, 15. And prospering wicked men, are ready to think they have no need of
God, and that they are not in his Reverence, nor can be bettered by him, or his
help, and therefore care not for Prayer to him; which is the disposition of
these here. See also, Chap. 22.17. Hence, it ought to be looked on, as a plague
upon men, when they cast out with Piety under any dispensation; when they are
out of the sensible need of Gods help in every condition; when they look not
upon Prayer, and keeping of the way of God, as a reward to it self Psa. 44.17,
18, 19. or, when outward prosperity causes them to under value spiritual
mercies.

Verse. 16. Lo, their good is not in their hand, the counsel of the wicked is
far from me.
In the third Branch of this Naration, Job subjoyns a Caution; And, lest any
should think that his speaking thus of the wickeds prosperous lot, and of their
principles and way, did import that he liked and was taken with them, or
stumbled because it was otherwise with himself; He shows that this scope in
all the former Narration is not to commend their prosperous condition, or to
express his envy at their prosperity; But (as to clear how false the reasonings
of his Friends were, who said that such wicked men were most afflicted; so) to
show how detestable their manners are to God and him, notwithstanding all their
prosperity. And for this end,

1. He declares, as to their condition in it self, that their good is not in
their hand; That is, Notwithstanding all they do enjoy, yet not only do they
want that which is man's true good, and happiness (which is the favor of God)
But even as to that prosperity which they think their good, and place their
happiness therein; though they think themselves so sure of it, and so settled
in it, that they see no need of depending upon God, or calling upon him, v.
14.15. Yet as their power could not acquire, so neither can it retain even that
outward prosperity, without God.

2. He declares, as to himself, that, however they prospered and he was
afflicted; Yet, he was far from agreeing to their counsel or, opinion, either
in looking on prosperity as man's chief good, or in their Atheistical impiety.

Whence Learn,

1. When the godly under adversity are either thinking or speaking of their own
lot, or the wickeds prosperity, notwithstanding their impiety; they should
guard well, that neither their own hearts be poisoned, nor others get cause to
think they are stumbled or ensnared with any unsound Principle: Therefore Job
subjoyns this caution, to guard himself and prevent any mistakes from his
Friends. The study of the wickeds prosperity is a very trying exercise to godly
men, Psalm. 73.2, 3, 10, 11, 12. Jer. 12.1. Hab. 1.13. And therefore they should
guard themselves, lest, their own hearts being distempered with it, they
express any thing which may dishonor God, or offend Saints. Psalm. 73.15. or
harden the wicked in their ill courses:

2. Whatever the lot of the wicked may seem to say at first view (either to
themselves, or to the godly) to commend their way; yet a right discerner will
see that in it, which may refute their folly, even to admiration; Therefore he
premits a Lo, or behold, to to what he is to say, to intimate that it is
admirable, that this should be the true state of their condition, when yet
themselves and others think far otherwise of it. It is true, that not only the
wicked themselves see not the truth of their own condition. Psalm. 92.6, 7. Mic.
4.11, 12, 13.. But even godly men under tentation may be much in the dark about
it. Psalm. 73.15.16. yet when they come unto the Sanctuary, they may get another
sight of it, even to admiration and till they see cause to be ashamed of their
ignorance. Psalm. 73.17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22.

3. Though the wicked think themselves so happy in their prosperity, as to
stand in no need of God, v. 16. yet they are far from true happiness for all
that; For, whatever they enjoy, true happiness is another thing, their good is
not in their hand, See Psalm. 4.6 7. And this is a needful caution under trying
dispensations, that we be careful to discern wherein true happiness consists,
and to see the vanity of time, that we may be as careful to die to it, as it
dies to us.

4. Though the wicked fear not God, and do look upon what they have (which they
account their good and happiness) as procured and acquired by themselves; And
do think that they are able to secure it, without owning of God, v. 15. Yet
herein also they are mistaken, they neither could acquire it, nor can secure
it, of themselves: For, thus also their good is not in their hand. Hence it is,
that God asserts that it is he that causes wicked men to prosper, for his own
holy ends, Isa. 10.5, 6, 7. with v. 10, 13, 14. See also Isa. 37.23-27. This is
a special plague upon the prospering lots of the wicked, that they seclude
their dependence upon God; and it is the godlies mercy when they are taught to
deny themselves, and depend upon God, in every condition.

5. It is a sure principle, and much to be studied for encouraging to Piety,
that the world is not at the wickeds disposal, God not noticing which way it
go; But that there is an hand of God in every dispensation, and that it is he
who makes the wicked to prosper, and continues their prosperity during his
pleasure: For, so much does Job assert here, that their good is not in their
hand, but in Gods. To loose the sight of an overruling hand of God in these
things, is the ready way to cause us decline, or faint in the way of God, Ezekiel
9.9. Psalm. 73.10, 11, etc. But if we be serious in minding Providence, it may
afford us useful and comfortable thoughts of Gods ends and purposes in all
these dispensations.

6. It adds to the sin of wicked men, that they are deliberate in their evil
courses, and that their miscariages flow not from a violent fit of tentation,
but are the result of their fixed principles; For, there is the counsel of the
wicked in what they do. Which may warn us to beware of ill principles (whatever
our failings be, 1 Kings 15.14.) which will not only draw to evil courses, but
will aggravate the sinfulness thereof before God.

7. It is not enough, that men have not corrupt principles, unless they do
abominate them, and do walk in godly fear and solicitude, lest they be
entangled in them; For, Job was far from this counsel of the wicked. He kept
a great distance, as fearing and abominating such Principles. And where this is
not, men are not far from a snare, if they meet with a strong tentation.

8. Godly men, when they discern aright, will neither stumble at their own, nor
at the wickeds lot, nor will they be taken with the wickeds Principles; but
they will love Piety with a Cross, better then Prosperity with impiety: As here
Job, having given an account of the wickeds lot and Principles, does subjoyn,
The counsel of the wicked is far from me. Only here we must guard, lest we
trust to our own strength in this undertaking, for we find the godly have
stumbled. Psalm. 73. And therefore, for our help.

1. We ought not to pore too much either upon our own, or the wickeds Lot, as
the Psalmist did, Psalm 73. seeing we have other meditations, besides these,
recommended to us by God.

2. We ought not to lean to our own wit and counsel, but should go to the law
and Testimony, Isa. 8.20. Where we have Gods infallible verdict concerning all
things that occurr.

3. It is not enough we have clear light from the word, unless we be near God,
that our light may have an impression upon us; As the psalmist went into the
Sanctuary, Psalm. 73.16, 17. where he got clear information and near fellowship
with God.

4. However our hearts may be tempted to stumble; Yet we should beware of
offending the Generation of the godly; as the psalmist was in the like case.
Psalm. 73 15. which put some stop to the distempers and miscarriages to which
tentation drove him.

5. We ought to be much in the study and practice of Patience, seeing a short
while may let us see the woeful issue of wicked men's prosperity; As the Psalmist
discerned in the Sanctuary: Psalm. 73.17.18, 19.

6. We ought to be sensible how brutish a disposition it is, to stumble at the
temporal prosperity of wicked men, or our own want of it; So the Psalmist
judges, when he reflects seriously upon it. Psalm. 73.21, 22.

7. We ought seriously to study wherein true happiness consists, and how vain
a thing temporal Prosperity is, when compared with the rich advantages of
Piety; As is likewise marked, Psalm. 73.20. with, 25.26.

8. We ought to keep our hearts and eyes seriously fixed upon a Supreme hand of
Providence in all these things; questioning whereof led the Psalmist upon the
Snare. Psalm. 73.11, 12, 13, 14.

Verse. 17. How often is the candle of the wicked put out? and how often comes
their destruction, upon them? God destributeth sorrows in his anger.

18. They are as stubble before the wind, and as chaff that the storm carries
away.


Job having thus cleared that many wicked men have prospered even till death,
he proceeds, to v. 22. upon the other hand, to speak of the calamities and
ruin of others of them. Wherein that question, How often? propounded in the
entry, is to be repeted with every particular of their misery here spoken of.
And his scope in moving this Question, about the wickeds calamities, is not
simply to deny that they are afflicted; for he puts that out of controversy,
when he speaks of the various lots of wicked men conjunctly, v. 23, 24, 25. Nor
is it his scope to assert that they are often thus afflicted; for he seems to
speak of prosperity as the more usual lot of wicked men: But his scope is to
maintain that they are not so often afflicted as his Friends asserted. And so
he would delare that, however he would not deny but some wicked men were
plagued, as well as others prospered; Yet, they could not propound so many
instances of it as might bottom their General Conclusion, that all, or
generally, the wicked, and only they, were afflicted..

In General, we may here Learn.

1. As God sees it meet to give a proof of his long suffering, in sparing the
wicked and suffering them to prosper; So he sees it, also, fit to plague
others of them; as here we are taught. And God exercises this variety in his
dispensations toward them, not only to show that all things come alike unto
all; Eccl. 9.2. And that his love is not to be judged of by outward
dispensations, seeing he spares these who are as guilty and wicked as these who
are smitten: But, more particularly, he plagues some of the wicked, To let the
godly see that there is a vengeance, Psalm. 58.10, 11. And to make them Beakons
to warn the test of the wicked; whereof they should make a right use, and not
apprehend that the sure way to prosper is to be wicked, whatever Gods
indulgence be.

2. It is an evidence of a sincere lover of Truth, when he ponders it in all
the limitations thereof, and what seems to be against him, as well as for him;
And when he is not so addicted to his own will and way, as either not to see
any thing that speaks against him, or in fleeing one extremity, to run to
another; For, so does Job here walk. When they asserted that generally all
wicked men were visibly plagued, he will not (in the heat of opposition unto
them) averr that all the wicked do prosper, nor will he shut his eyes upon what
is true in their assertion; but yields so much of it as may be granted
according to truth, even albeit it should seem to militate against him, though
indeed it did not.

3. Though the Lord be pleased visibly to plague some wicked men, yet it is not
his ordinary way so to do with all of them; For, How often is it so? says he,
intimating that it is not frequently so. For,

1. It is his glory to exercise long suffering in the world.

2. If the Lord did always visibly plague wicked men, the world would soon be
consumed; as befell Sodom and Gomorrah, and all mankind in Noah's days. But he
spares the world, and many wicked men in it, that he may gather in all his
Elect out of it.

3. God would have his Chidren weaned from doting upon outward favors, which
he may heap upon wicked men; and would have them look unto, and judge of things
according to the Word, and acquiesce in spiritual mercies.

4. Some few instances, of Gods displeasure let fourth against wicked men, are
enough to give warning to all other wicked men, especially these of them who
have the Word, which if they believe not, they will believe nothing else, Luke
16.27, 31.

Doct. 4. As dispensations are but a crooked rule, when by them we would judge
of men's estate before God; so it is yet more unsafe to draw an ordinary rule
from extraordinary and rare precedents; As here they would draw a general
conclusion from that which was not so often verified. Thus are we also to Judge
of Gods singular manifestations and impulses and instincts given to some of his
people, which are not to be expected by all, not the effects following their
upon to be drawn into an example for imitation by others.

I come to the particulars of the wickeds misery here mentioned; Wherein
(pointing at the expressions they had used in their discourses) he grants such
things may be as they speak of, but not so frequently as to bottom that
General Conclusion, Chap. 20.29. In these verses, he speaks of the
extinguishing of their glory and prosperity, like a Candle put out; (which was
Bildads phrase, Chap. 18.5, 6.) that his stroke comes upon them, even to
destruction; And that the supreme cause hereof is God, who measures out sorrous
to them in anger, v. 17. And that so violently, easily and effectually, as
chaff and stubble, are driven away by the wind and storm, v. 18.

Whence Learn,

1. All men are, by Nature and in themselves, dark, and destitute of the light
of comfort and encouragement; For, it is common to all of them, that they need
a Candle, or, Lamp, without them, to give them light, not only for their
direction, but for their Encouragement, and the cheering of them up also.

2. Albeit godly men's comforts may be compared to a Candle, Chap. 29.3. because
they are but borrowed, and without these they would be in a dark condition; yet
the wickeds comforts are so called, because they are but artificial and of the
basest sort; not like a Sun, etc. but like a Candle, or, Lamp, in a darkhouse,
or night. See Isa. 50.11.

3. Not only can all the wickeds comforts be easily reached, and are such as
may be extinguished by outward trouble; but calamities will put and leave them
in an ignominious condition; like a Candle put out, which leaves a stinking
snuff, in stead of a shining light.

4. Gods Judgments upon some wicked men tend to their utter destruction in a
violent way: For, their destruction comes upon them. They have no security
against this, whereas it is otherwise with the godly, 2 Cor. 4.8, 9. Psalm.
118.18.

5. God is the Author of any calamities which befall the wicked; who can reach
them when they are without the reach of others, and who ought to be looked
unto, for repressing the insolency of wicked men by his plagues, and seen in
them, when they come: For, it is God who does this, and distributeth sorrows.

6. God carveth out and distributeth men's lots and portions to them; He gives
unto them what, and how much he pleases, and he makes Rods great or small,
easy or heavy, as he will; For, God distributeth, and is a carver in these
matters.

7. The wickeds calamities are accompanied with much and many sorrows, and
without any such encouragement as the godly have; For, God distributeth
sorrows, as the chief ingredient in their lot.

8. It is a sad ingredient in the wickeds lots and sorrows, that they flow all
from wrath, and are not mixed with that love which sweeteneth the bitter
potions of the godly, Rev. 3.19. For, God distributeth sorrows in his anger.
See Psalm. 11.5, etc. and 75.8. Ezekiel. 5.13.

9. As the wicked, even in the height of their prosperity, are but light and
vain, when put in Gods balance; Dan. 5.27. So the violent storms of Gods
Judgments will easily overpower them; For, they are at stubble before the
wind, and as the chaff that the storm carries away. See Psalm. 35.5.

Verse. 19. God lays up his iniquity for his children: he rewards him, and
he shall know it.

20. His eyes shall see his destruction, and he shall drink of the wrath of the
Almighty.


In these verses, he further declares, That the wicked man's Children shall
also reap the fruit of his sin, and that not after his death, but in his own
time, v. 19. That he shall know and feel his destruction, in his own and his
Childrens mine, and shall drink largely of the wrath of God in these plagues,
v. 20.

Whence Learn,

1. The sins of wicked men are a sad Patrimony to their Children, in whom they
are often punished; as here we are taught, See Exodus 20.5.

2. God will not always forbear to plague the Children of wicked men till
themselves be gone, but will make them sad witnesses thereof; For he shall know
and see it.

3. All these plagues which the wicked undergo, in their Persons, Children, and
Estates, are procured by themselves, and the just recompense of their way; For,
God rewards him by those.

4. God can make the stoutest and most stubborn feel his hand, and the bitter
effects of their sin; For, when he rewards him, he shall know it, or, be made
to feel it, and know it is the reward of his way. See Isa. 26.11. Levit. 26.21,
22, 23, 24, etc. Stubbornneses and stupidity under rods do but portend sadder
strokes, till we be made sensible, and till God get a witness in our bosoms to
plead for his Righteousness in afflicting.

5. It is a sad aggravation of men's misery, when in their own time they see
their own ruin, and the ruin of all that belong to them; For, his eyes shall
see his destruction. This should teach men to prepare for such a lot, and to be
laying their account, that they may outlive all their temporal enjoyments and
contentments.

6. It is yet sadder to consider that the wickeds lot flows from wrath, or,
indignation; that they shall drink, and that largely of it; and, that God, who
is their party, is Almighty, or, Alsufficient, too hard for them to oppose, who
can make his threatenings effectual, and cause them drink of the cup of his
wrath, whether they will or not, Jer. 25.28. All these are held out here, in
that, He shall drink of the wrath of the Almighty.

Verse. 22. For what pleasure has he in his house after him, when the number of
his months is cut off in the midst?
Here is subjoyned a reason and confirmation of what is formerly said; Wherein
is showed that this makes all the former strokes sad, and speaks the wrath of
the Almighty in them, that he has no pleasure in his house after him, etc. The
meaning whereof is not that he needs not care how it fare with his family after
him (as many do too anxiously) seeing himself is cut off in his own person; nor
yet that, though he expects that his prosperity shall be continued in his
family, yet, it cannot comfort him, seeing himself is cut off; For, his
Children being to be destroyed in his own time, v. 19. he cannot expect the
prosperity of his family when he is gone. But the meaning is, That though
sometime he pleased himself with the expectation of the continuance of his
house and family, yet he shall be deprived of all that comfort, when he and his
posterity are cut off violently, and before the time; for then all his
expectations shall be frustrated.

Whence Learn,

1. It is a part of the wickeds folly, that they feed themselves with vain
hopes, and imaginary comforts and pleasures in them; as the wicked man here
seeks to find pleasure in his house after him, or, in the apprehension of the
continuance of his family. See Luke 12.19. Which may put us to try what vain
thoughts we may be feeding upon.

2. One of wicked men's vain dreams, is, their hope of perpetuating their house
and glory, Psalm. 49.11. And that they feed, beforehand, upon an apprehension
of the eternity thereof; For he takes pleasure in his house after him, what he
presently enjoys will not serve his turn, unless he antedate imagined
contentments and pleasures to come.

3. Such vain hopes, of a long tract of prosperity to themselves and their
posterity after them, are ofttimes blasted to the wicked before their own eyes;
And as God mercifully, oft-times, disappoints the fears of the godly, so he
walks contrary to the wickeds hopes: For, it comes sometime to this, in the
wickeds own time; What pleasure has he in his house after him?

4. If no less will bear down the wickeds vain hopes, God can do it by a speedy
cutting off of themselves and all the prosperity of their family and condition;
For, this takes away his pleasure, when the number of his months is cut off in
the midst. Albeit man's months and time be determined, Chap. 14.5. yet the
number thereof is said to be cut off in the midst, when they die violently,
before the time they might have continued by the ordinary course of nature, and
before the ordinary term of man's life be expired, Psalm. 90.10. and sooner than
they are ready for death, or expect it, Psalm. 55.23. and before they be well
settled in their prosperity.

5. Man's life is so short and uncertain, that they are most wise who reckon it
by shortest periods; As here it is reckoned by months, and elsewhere by days,
Psalm. 90.12.

6. It speaks great wrath, and imbitters the wickeds sad lot, that they
expected the contrary, and fed upon vain dreams, which are disappointed; For,
this speaks the wrath of the Almighty, v. ^0. and renders his condition sad,
that when he was taking pleasure in his house after him, the number of his
months is cut off.

Verse. 22. Shall any teach God knowledge? seeing he judges those that are
high.
From this to v. 27. Job speaks of Gods various dispensations toward wicked
men, conjunctly, that he may silence the carpings of man's wit in these matters.
This Narration consists of three Branches; In the first whereof (in this verse)
he gives an account of his scope in this Discourse, which is, to demonstrate,
that none should presume to teach, or set bounds to God in these things, as his
Friends, by their doctrine, tied up God to one way of proceeding with wicked
men. Whereas God being the Supreme Judge of the highest, he ought not to be
controuled by any, but may deal variously with the sons of men, at his pleasure.

Whence Learn,

1. In Gods guiding of the world, and particularly in his dispensations toward
wicked men, much of his Knowledge and Wisdom do shine, and they come not to
pass at random or adventure; For, so is here imported, that there is knowledge
in these affairs, or, God makes his Wisdom manifest in them. See Psalm. 92.5, 6,
7.

2. Most part of men do not see this Wisdom of God, but because they cannot
comprehend, they do carp at it, or would carve out a way of Providence of their
own, which they think most fit; For, here it is imported that some men would
prescribe a way of their own, as his Friends did in the debate betwixt him and
them.

3. To carp at what God does, or prescribe what God should do, in his
Providential dispensations, is, in effect, to presume to teach God, as if we
were wiser than he; For, so is here imported that they, by their Principles,
and by their censuring of his Doctrine wherein he gave a true account of the
dispensations of Providence, did presume to teach God knowledge.

4. The sinfulness of this course, of prescribing unto God, is such as should
make it to be entertained with indignation by all who fear God, and be looked
on as abasing God, and dishonorable to him, who guides all things better than
man can prescribe; For, so much does this question import, Shall any teach God
knowledge?

5. God is nor only Infinite in Power above the highest, but in authority also:
being a Judge who can call them to an account when he pleases; For, he judges
those that are high, whether fallen Angels, Jude v. 6. or great men, Eccl. 5.8.
See Rev. 6.15, 16.

6. The absolute Sovereignty of God, manifested in his judging, even of the
highest, may discover the folly of men's presuming to teach him wisdom; seeing
herein shines his Sovereignty, not to be carped at, his Wisdom suitable to his
Authority, and his purposes far beyond our reach: Therefore is this brought in
here as a reason of the challenge, Shall any teach God knowledge? seeing he
judges these who are high.

Verse. 23. One dies in his full strength, being wholly at ease and quiet:

24. His breasts are full of milk, and his bones are moistened in the marrow.

25. And another dies in the bitterness of his soul, and never eats with
pleasure.


In the Second Branch of this Narration (in these verses) he gives an account
of the various dispensations of God toward wicked men.

1. For prosperity, That some die in full strength of body, having inward and
outward case, and without any disquiet till their death, v. 23. which is
further amplified, v. 24. That they are in great vigor, and their bones full
of marrow, like breasts full of milk; or, rather, that they have affluence of
all things, instanced in the abundance of milk, wherewith their breasts (namely
of their Cattle) or their Milk-pails (as the word also signifies) are filled;
and that, because of this affluence, they are in great vigor, every one of
their bones (for the verb is singular) being moistened with marrow (or, as the
words will also read, the marrow of their bones being watered and refreshed) by
reason of their plenty of food, and their encouragement in their prosperous
condition. This last may also import their power and strength to maintain their
prosperous condition. And so these two verses will contain four Branches of the
prosperity of the wicked, their vigor and strength of body, their peace and
quietness, v. 23. their plenty, or, affluence of all things, and, their power
to maintain all this, v. 24. any of which, if they be wanting, will render
their prosperous condition defective.

2. For Adversity, That some of them die in great disquiet and bitterness,
having had their very meat imbittered to them all their days, v. 25.

Whence Learn,

1. God exercises great variety in his dealings with the Children of Men; that
he may prove he is debtor to none, that none may know love or hatred by outward
things; and, that the wit of man may not think to comprehend his way; For, so
are we taught here by these various Instances.

2. It is profitable for men to be acquainted with this, that God exercises
such variety in his dispensations, especially in their prosperity, that so they
may not stumble at it in their adversity; For, Job shows he had been
acquainted with all this beforehand, and therefore did not stumble at his own
lot, as his Friends did.

3. Bodily strength is no fence against death, which observes not the Laws of
Nature, but the appointment of God; For, here some die in their full strength,
or, in the strength of their perfection.

4. To live plentifully, at case, and in strength and power, till death come,
is no infallible mark of Gods favor; For, here the wicked have that, being
wholly at ease, and quiet, and their breasts full of milk, etc. all which will
but make the separation by death sadder to them.

5. Bitterness of mind is the saddest of troubles; as here it is instanced as
the sad lot of some of the wicked, that they have bitterness of soul.

6. Bitterness of soul will make all men's necessary comforts and refreshments
of body bitter to them; For, a man in such a frame, even, never eats with
pleasure.

7. Bitterness of soul justly follows some wicked men, not at some fits only,
but even to their graves; For, some die in the bitterness of their soul. Only
unto all this it would be added, That however this be the just lot of the
wicked, yet the godly may have some tastes of this soul-bitterness, as Job's own
experience (to name no other) does teach, Chap. 3.20, 24. And therefore,

1. We should beware of pride and murmuring, which do imbitter us; we should
beware of feeding or entertaining our bitter humors, or of provoking God, by
our doting upon time, to imbitter it unto us.

2. We should observe that there are degrees of imbittering our condition. As
no Saints can say they have all bitterness, and no pleasure at all; so none
have their condition wholly pleasant, but some have less pleasure than they
have pain, and some have little pleasure and much sorrow. Therefore we should
beware of complaining, or to make our lives altogether bitter, because we have
not all the satisfaction we desire.

Verse. 26. They shall lie down alike in the dust, and the worms shall cover
them.
In the last branch of this Narration (in this verse) he gives an account of
the issue of the wickeds life, and their equality in death, notwithstanding the
various lots they found in their lives.

Whence Learn,

1. Whatever be men's lot within time, sweet or sour; yet they must die and
leave it, as here we are taught.

2. Death will bring all men to the dust, and to be trampled upon by the worms;
For, they ly down in the dust and the worms shall cover them, See Psalm. 49.14.

3. Death it self will not make a visible difference among men (by what is
visibly in it) but leaves them equal and alike till the resurrection; For, they
(and others also, as well as wicked men) lie down alike etc. Even those who had
an harder lot than others in their lives, are but equal with those who lived at
ease, in the grave.

Verse. 27. Behold, I know your thoughts, and the devices, which ye wrongfully
imagine against me.

28. For ye say, Where is the house of the prince? and where are the dwelling
places of the wicked?


Follows, to v. 34. the third part of the Chapter, Wherein Job applies his
general doctrine to the present debate in hand, and to refute their thoughts
concerning him and his case. It may be reduced to three Heads. The first
whereof (in these verses) is the stating of the Controversy, or, a proposition
of their thoughts concerning him and his family, and the thing which they d^ave
at in their discourses, and which he is to refute, He propounds, in general, v.
27. that he knew their designs and thoughts in all their discourses, and their
unjust devices to conclude him wicked. And, v. 28. he lays out-their thoughs
more particularly, That in all these generals which they had spoken, of the
ruin of wicked great Ones, their houses and families (of which, see Chap.
15.34. and 18.21. and 20.28.29.) he was the Butt they aimed at; and that by
reason of the ruin of his family (who was a prince, Chap. 29.25) and the
overturning of the house where his children were met, Chap. 1.18, 19. they
would have it concluded that he was a wicked man: So that they might as well
have named him and his children, in their discourses, as hold in general, as
they did.

This may serve to clear that we have stated the controversy aright betwixt
Job and his Friends, from the beginning, and that the debate runs upon this,
whether greatest temporal afflictions (such as befell Job and his Children) do
prove men to be wicked. So that unless we carry this along, as the great
Controversy debated betwixt them in contradictory terms, we cannot but mistake
in expounding this Book. Withal, Job's way here shows, That in all debates it
is needful the controversy be rightly and clearly stated; As he states the
case distinctly here, when he is to make use of his former doctrine to refute
them Where this method is not followed, men will easily be bemisted with
confusion, and error may be adorned with specious pretenses, and truth loadned
with reproaches and odious consequences. The only remedy whereof (as also in
clearing of inward soul exercises and tentations, when clouded with confusions)
is to draw questions to a clear and true state, that we may be able to judge of
the merits of the cause, and not (by a mistake) draw wrong conclusions from a
weak or false ground.

In particular, Obs.

1. If we consider that general Doctrine in it self, v. 28. which they intend
to apply unto him, it teaches, That God, in his holy Providence, may sometime
give a strange and sad account of wicked men's lots; It may be said of them,
Where is the house of the Prince etc? Here, if we abstract this from their
erroneous principle, that this is the lot of all the wicked, and from their
intended misapplication, that this is the lot only of the wicked; And therefore
Job, who was so afflicted, must be a wicked man: And if we do consider only
these true Observations of what befell some of the wicked, which Job does
acknowledge, v. 17. etc. And which they might reflect upon in this discourse,
it holds out;

1. God may make the wickedness of some conspicuous in their plagues, because
they will see it in no other mirror; As here is seen in their houses and
dwelling places.

2. He may in justice smite, not only the persons of the wicked, but their
children and famil^es; As here we are taught.

3. He may smite them, even with utter ruin, so that they shall not be found
any more; As this question imports; Where is the house? Where are the dwelling
places? See Psalm. 37.35, 36.

4. The authority and power of wicked men will be no fence against Gods
vengeance, but will rather make Gods justice more conspicuous in reaching them,
For, even the house of the Prince may be a seeking, if he be wicked.

5. The number of wicked men, combined together in evil, can ^s little secure
them from Gods vengeance, as their power, but God can reach many of them as
well as one; For, the house of the Prince, and the dwelling places (or, tent of
the Tabernacles) of wicked men, in the plural number) ^are all one to him.

Obs. 2. If we consider their design in this remark, which is, to suggest to
him, that he is a wicked man because thus afflicted, it teaches.

1. Afflictions upon godly men may have strange tentations fastened upon them,
and may be represented in a sad mirror to the afflicted; As here Job's case is
represented to be not only full of sharp trials, but an evidence of wickedness.
Hence the afflictions of the godly are frequently called, tentations, which are
the saddest ingredient in them, and the engine whereby Satan drives his design
in them, either to cause godly men run into a sinful course to be delivered
from troubles, Or, to doubt of their good estate because of their troubles. And
in this we need not help from without to suggest tentations to us, our own
hearts being too prone to fasten tentations enough upon every affliction: as we
read in the trials of David and others. Hence, to be hid from tentations, under
affliction, may make any simple affliction easy. And when we cannot get them
avoided, it is our duty to distinguish betwixt what is real, and what is a
tentation only, in our lot. And for the curing and removing of these tentations
when they assault us, we should consider, That afflictions do weaken and crush
our spirits, and weakness is the breach at which tentations do enter, Psalm.
77.8, 9. with 10. and therefore we should be upon our guard, and know that we
have our own weakness to accuse, more than any thing else, when tentations
prevail upon us. Further, if we studied to be humble and bear down pride, and
did not love case too well, but would, be content to be at pains, and stir up
our selves to cleave to God, tentations would do us little hurt. For, it is
pride, idleness, and diffidence, which put an edge upon our tentations. Withal,
we should remember that we ought nor to lie down and die, but are called to a
battle, and should not cast away our weapons, though we prevail not at the
first in the use of these means.

2. It is one of the saddest of tentations, when trials contribute to bring
men's Estate, and their Interest in God, in question; as here his troubles are
made use of to prove him wicked. It is sad enough when men's sad lots seem to
speak Gods Fatherly displeasure, their rebellion in some particular
miscarriages, their distance from God, their unbelief, etc. But it is much
sadder when they seem to speak them wicked, and cast off by God.

Hence, we may gather,

(1.) That the assurance of a man's good estate and reconciliation is a notable
Cordial in all Afflictions, and other tentations. So long as that is not
questioned, men may grapple the better with other assau^ts; and therefore, men
should study to make their calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. and to keep
the evidences thereof clear, Romans 8.35, etc. And, on the other hand, this
imports that to be wicked, and unreconciled to God, is the saddest of
conditions, especially when God is reckoning with men as such.

(2.) Though Saints may be sometime troubled with questions about their estate,
especially in great difficulties, or upon gross miscarriages; Yet, they should
not be so ready (as often times they are) upon every assault to destroy and raze
these very foundations; seeing an interest in God may consist with sharp
trials, and many distempers and failings; (a marriage bond stands firm, when
yet the parties may fail much in their duty one to another) and the faith of
that will enable them to bear troubles, and help them to repent of, and amend
their faults.

(3.) It should be looked upon as Satan's great policy, at every occasion, to
cast in doubts about our personal Interest and Reconciliation with God, that so
he may divert and take us off all other real fruit and use of our afflictions
and tentations, to which the Lord is calling us by these dispensations. And
while we are perplexed and debating about that without cause, he finds a way to
make us neglect our present work of Humiliation, Repentance, Self-denial, etc.
or what other duties our condition calls for.

(4.) We should remember that trouble and tentations do put us in a fever; in
which case we are very unfit to judge of our estate. And therefore we should
leave such a tentation, till we be more fit to grapple with it. And, in the
mean time, should set about our present work and duty, in bearing troubles and
enduring assaults; which will indeed prove that we have true grace, and so
refute the tentation.

(5.) If, at any time, it vex us (as it may fall forth) that ever we yielded to
these tentations which bring our grace in question; yet we should not be
discouraged. For, if it be not persisted in, we should know that it is not an
evidence of the want of grace to be troubled with such a tentation; but godly
men have been over-taken in the snare, though they have recollected themselves
again.

Obs. 3. If we consider that these tentations are not suggested by his own
heart, but by his Friends, it teaches, That, besides tentations fastened upon
our troubles by our own hearts, God may permit others, and even godly men, to
give a sad representation of our condition and estate; as Job here found. And
as this trial of Job from his Friends may be an encouragement to the godly in
all ages, in the like case; So the Lords ends in putting of us to this kind of
trial from godly friends, are,

1. That we may be narrowly tried, when we are assaulted from within and from
without.

2. To prevent, and, sometime, to cure and drive us from entertaining our own
inward tentations, as Heretics are permitted to vent the tentations of Saints
as their own opinions, that Saints may loath them. And this mercy or medicinal
correction of our own folly and weakness should we observe and improve, when
others do misconstruct us under trial.

3. That hereby we may have (not an Argument to subscribe to the suggestion,
but) an exact trial of our faith, when it is thus assaulted by godly friends;
For, the more eminent the trial is, the more eminent will our faith be, if we
hold fast, and we are called to give the more eminent proof of it.

4. That hereby we may be weaned from seeking after, or building upon the
applause or approbation of godly friends, which, when we rest too much upon it,
provokes God to put us to this exercise.

Obs. 4. If we consider Job's noticing of this their design, his opposition
thercunto, and his condemning all their proceedings, as devices wrongfully
imagined against him, it teaches,

1. It is great iniquity in godly friends to judge rashly of the estate of
godly men, especially to proceed upon false grounds, and by indirect means, in
that matter; For, he challenges their thoughts, as devices wrongfully imagined
against him; being both wrong in the matter, and wrong in the manner, in that,
(as the word imports) they violenced, or forced their wits to devise arguments
to prove him a wicked man, and tartly reflected upon him in their general
discourses concerning the wicked. As godly men may be left to themselves to
mistake their afflicted friends; So it is their great fault not to judge
righteous judgment of godly men, especially when they are afflicted; or to
plead their afflictions against them, to question their estate or righteous
cause (thereby evidencing that they are too much taken up with outward
prosperity, that the want thereof causes them to stumble, and taking the Name
of God in vain, by reading his dispensations wrong) or to bend their wit, and
put it upon the rack, to forge cavillations, lies and calumnies, to bear in
upon them that they are wicked, and by their salt and sharp way of dealing, to
evidence that they want love to godly afflicted men.

2. It is the duty of godly men, under affliction, as to labor to discern the
thoughts and drift of these who oppose them, so not to be daunted or
discouraged thereby; For, here he tells them he knew their thoughts; and that
they were devices wrongfully imagined, and prefixeth a behold to this, to
intimate what a mercy it was to him, that he could thus discern and judge of
their way. It is a commendable duty (yea, and a mercy) not to call Truth in
question, were the opposition never so great; nor are they stupid, secure, or
presumptuous, who will not succumb under every calumny; yea, it is a mercy when
God gives godly men strength, to bear out against such a stream of opposition.
See Chap. 27.5, 6.

Verse. 29. Have ye not asked them that go by the way? and do ye not know their
tokens?

30. That the wicked is reserved to the day of destruction, they shall be
brought forth to the day of wrath.


In the Second Head of Doctrine in this part of the Chapter (in these verses)
we have Job's resolution of this Controversy, and his refutation of their
Principles. Wherein he declares that if they would but ask any Traveller by the
way, and were acquainted with their tokens, v. 29. they would easily be
resolved thereby that (though some of the wicked be plagued, yet, generally)
they are reserved till a day of destruction and wrath in the life to come, and
at the day of Judgment, v. 30. The Assertion it self, v. 30. concerning the
common and ordinary lot of the wicked, is clear, and evinceth Job's point, that
if the wicked be so generally reserved, then they receive not their visible
reward here; and so, to be afflicted, is neither common to them, nor peculiar
to them only. But the way of clearing and confirming this assertion, v. 29. by
asking at Travelers, and knowing their tokens, is not so clear. It holds out,
in General, that this Truth, was obvious, and could be cleared not only by
these Travelers who had made many Observations, and seen much concerning the
lots of wicked men; but by any ordinary Traveller they first met with by the
way. But that is not sufficient to clear the latter part of the verse, and by
what means these Travelers could resolve this case. Therefore we must know
that Travelers (especially in desert, or, ill peopled Countries, such as these
Countries of Arabia were) had marks and tokens, whereby they took up their way,
and directed their journeys from one place to another, when they had no beaten
path, nor Inhabitants to enquire at. And as they had some such marks and
tokens, which were natural, as Hills, Mountains, Rivers, etc. whereby they took
up their way; and some artificial (called, by the Romans, Mercuriales Statuae)
set up in cross ways, or at other sit places, for that very purpose, to direct
Travelers, which way they should follow to come to the place they minded: So
it seems they made use also of the Tombs and Monuments of great men (which are
called heaps, v. 32. in the Original) which were buried here and there in the
Country. Thus we find that Rachel's grave was a noted Monument long after her
death, Genesis 35.19, 20. with 1 Samuel 10.2. So the meaning will be clear, that if
they will but ask at Travelers how they direct their way, and take notice of
their tokens, and how they point out their way from such a Tomb to such a Tomb
of wicked and eminent oppressors, this would clearly inform them, that many
wicked men went to their graves in outward peace, and with honorable burial,
and get leave to rest quietly in their Tombs, or Heaps, (as it is v. 32.) their
visible recompense being reserved till the day of General Account.

Doct. 1. Very eminent men for abilities may, by reason of mists raised by
passion and prejudices, be ignorant of what is very obvious, As here is
imported, that they knew not that which any body could tell them. In many cases
we stand not so much in need of outward evidences, as of inward serenity and
clearness of spirit, to take up what is evidently represented to us. See Chap.
12.7. And wise men may be ignorant (especially in heavenly mysteries) of what
the meanest know. Math. 11.25. 1 Cor. 1.26, 27.

2. As it is a shame for men of parts to be ignorant of what is common and
obvious; so it is their duty to be humble and willing to learn what they know
not, were it even at inferiors: For, he would have them ask at them that go by
the way, and makes it a question, Have ye not asked? that he may check them for
their ignorance of what they might so easily know.

3. It is a clear Truth that Gods displeasure is not let forth against all
wicked men within time, nor visibly at their death, but they are reserved for a
day of judgment; As here their Tombs, or, Tokens, do witness.

4. Whatever be the lot of wicked men in life or death, yet destruction and
wrath will befall them, be they more or fewer; For, they meet with a day of
destruction, and of wrath: And this is spoken of them in the singular number,
in the beginning of the verse, to show that if there were but one, he shall not
escape, and in the plural number, in the end of the verse, to show that were
they never so many, God can reach them.

5. Whatever plagues wicked men do escape within time, it is but owing them to
be paid with interest, nor are they spared in mercy; For, they are but
reserved to the day of destruction.

6. Wicked men shall not be able to shift Gods vengeance, at the resurrection
and general judgment, nor shall any thing secure them against it; For, they
shall be brought forth to the day of wrath, or wraths, that is, extreme wrath,
wherein all things shall concur which may signify and express displeasure, and
the extremity thereof.

7. It is the duty of men to be so spiritual minded, as to gather instructions
and edifying lessons from the most common things which they see; As here Job
learns this lesson from the Tombs of wicked men, which are to be seen by all
Travelers.

Verse. 31. Who shall declare his way to his face? and who shall repay him what
he has done?

32. Yet shall he be brought to the grave, and shall remain in the tomb.

33. The clods of the valley shall be sweet unto him and every man shall draw
after him, as there are innumerable before him.


In the third place, This assertion is farther amplified and enlarged, that not
only wicked men whose wickedness is not so gross, but even these who are most
eminently wicked, are reserved for judgments in the life to come, and are not
visibly rewarded in this life: Where,

1. He gives an account of their insolent and eminent wickedness, v. 31. that
none dare freely reprove them, far less are they able to requite and recompense
them.

2. Unto this he subjoyns his assertion, v. 32, 33. the meaning whereof, is,
not so much that death shall reach these wicked men (for though that be true,
yet it is not his scope here) as, that, notwithstanding all that insolency of
wicked men, v. 31. yet they bear not any extraordinary marks of Gods anger in
their death. Which he instanceth in several particulars.

1. That not only they get a grave, some one or other (for the word is plural,
graves, in the Original) but they shall be brought to it, in state and pomp, as
the word imports, and shall not get the burial of an ass. Jer. 22.19.

2. That they shall remain in the tomb, or, heap; Their bodies shall remain
inviolate in the grave; yea, they shall have a stately heap and tomb erected
over them; and, (possibly) their image shall be graven, as if they were
watching (so it is in the Original (above their tombs, as is the custom in the
tombs of great men, to make Statues of them above them, which may be seen by
all.

3. That the clods of the valley shall be sweet unto him; They shall have a
quiet and contented rest there, as to their outward estate, embracing and being
emb^aced by their common parent, the earth, and free from outward troubles.

4. That albeit death seem sad enough, yet that is but a common lot of every
man, who shall draw after them, as there are innumerable before them; From all
which, Learn.

1. As it is a mark of wicked men, that they cannot endure free reproof (such
as Paul gave to Peter, Gal 2.11. See 1 Samuel 25.17.) so they are, oftimes,
plagued with the want of it; they being such as men dare not reprove them to
their faces, whatever they speak of them behind their backs; For, who shall
declare his way to his face? Yea, it is, oft-times, their great misery, that
they are flattered when they ought to be reproved, Psalm. 49.18.

2. Wicked men, through Gods indulgence and long suffering, may get above the
reach of humane opposition and be left upon Gods own hand, to reckon with them
in due time: For, who shall repay him what he has done?

3. Were wicked men never so high and insolent, yet death shall reach them;
For, he shall come to the grave.

4. The way of the wickeds death and burial may be such, as bears no mark of
visible displeasure, but Gods indulgence and forebearance may follow them even
to the grave; As here we are taught. So that we ought not to limit God in these
things.

5. There may be much pomp and state in men's burial, and in their tombs and
monuments, who yet are under the heavy wrath of God, And are suffering sadly in
their souls; For, so is here also declared, as has been explained.

6. As the grave is a sweet bed, wherein men rest who never got leave to rest
before; So they who dote upon, and desire after much sweetness here, must at
last be content of the clods of the earth to rest in; For, the clods of the
valley shall be sweet unto him.

7. Death being the common Rendezvous of all men, all ought to prepare for it,
and none ought to stumble at it as a strange lot; For, So is intimated of the
death of the wicked, that every man shall draw after him, as there are
innumerable before him. See Eccl. 7.2.

Verse. 34. How then comfort ye me in vain, seeing in your answers remains
falsehood?
This verse contains the last part of the Chapter, and a conclusion of the
former debate; Wherein, from what has been said, he shows that they did but in
vain endeavor to comfort him, seeing they proceeded on a false ground, while
they persuaded him to take with wickedness because he was afflicted, and
propounded grounds of encouragement to him only upon these terms.

Whence Learn,

1. It is the duty of men, and an evidence of their being in a good frame, when
they entertain charity, so far as is possible, even toward these who are most
severe unto them; For, Notwithstanding all his Friends cruelty and sharpness,
yet he has charity for them, that in their intentions they designed to comfort
him, according as they purposed when they first came to visit him Chap. 2.11.

2. Men's endeavors to comfort their afflicted friends may, oftimes, prove
unsuccessful, for the further trial and exercise of the afflicted; For, says
he, ye comfort me in vain.

3. False principles will never afford true and solid comfort, and they do but
lose their labor who make use of them; For, says he, ye comfort me in vain,
seeing in your answers there remains falsehood, or, prevarication, and double
dealing.

4. It is great wisdom in men under affliction, to discern offered comforts,
that they neither snatch at a delusion and false comfort, nor admit of what
overthrows the new grounded testimony of their consciences, how much so ever it
seem to plead for God; For, upon this account he did not admit of the comforts
offered; seeing in their answers there remained falsehood, or Assertions
prejudicial to his Integrity, though by them they pretended to plead for God.

CHAP. XXII.
Here begins the third Conflict betwixt Job and his Friends; wherein two of
them (the third being laid by) give him a third assault, and he replies. In
this Chapter Eliphaz begins, who, being heated with passion, does lay aside all
Prefacing, and presently falls to work. And since Job had clearly stated the
Controversy, and showed that he understood their meaning, Chap. 21, 27, 28. he
deals no more indirectly, but positively asserts that Job was wicked, which
(for most part) he had but hinted at before. Only in the close he exhorts and
encourages him to repentance, as he had done in his first speech, Chap. 5.
though he omitted it in the second Chap. 15.

In the Chapter, First, he shows what their Opinion was of Job's afflictions,
and that they came because of his wickedness; endeavoring to prove that his
life was polluted with wickedness and impiety. And that by Arguments taken from
his conceit of his own righteousness, as useful to God, v. 1, 2, 3. From Gods
greatness, who, being above the fear of hurt from any creature, cannot but be
just in afflicting, v. 4. From the many sins against the Second Table, whereof
he supposes Job to be guilty, v. 5-11. From his sins immediately against God,
and particularly, Atheism, wherewith he charge him, v. 12, 13, 14. From the
judgments that have been inflicted upon wicked men, like unto Job's calamities,
whereby he refutes his supposed Atheism, and thinks to prove him wicked, v. 15,
16, 17, 18. And, From the contrary prosperous estate of godly men, v. 19, 20,
Secondly, He exhorts him to true Piety and Repentance, wherein he propounds the
Exhortation in several Branches, with some encouragements intermixed, v. 21,
22, 23. And subjoyns further Arguments of Encouragement; assuring him, upon
these terms, that he shall have abundance of outward prosperity, v. 24, 25.
Many spiritual advantages, v. 26, 27, 28. and that in times of calamity, he
shall not only be upheld himself, but shall be useful to others, and to the
place where he lives, v. 29.30.

Verse. 1. Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered, and said,

2. Can a man be profitable unto God, as he that is wise may be profitable unto
himself?

3. Is it any pleasure to the Almighty, that thou art righteous? or is it gain
to him, that thou make thy ways perfect?


THese Verses contain the first Argument whereby he endeavors to prove Job
wicked; Namely, That since he boasted of his righteousness as useful to God, or
that which might advantage him, therefore he was a wicked man. Which
conclusion, though it be not expressed here, yet it is the design of his whole
Discourse to infer it; as appears from his express charge, v. 5, etc. and may
be gathered from his counsels to repent and turn to God, v. 21, 22, 23. In
managing of this Argument,

1. He propounds in a general Interrogatory, v. 2. (by which way of expression
he declares the certainty of what he asserts, as being such as cannot be
denied) that a man cannot be profitable unto God, by any thing that he has,
and particularly, not by his righteousness or piety, which is that he intends
here, as appears from v. 3. and from Chap. 35.7.

2. He illustrates this General Assertion by a dissimilitude, v -- 2. that a
wise man may be profitable to himself by his wisdom, but not so unto God. Which
holds true, in general, of all sound moral wisdom; but it is intended here,
chiefly, of spiritual wisdom, which may profit the man that has it, but cannot
bring any advantage unto God. See Chap. 35.8.

3. He applies all this in particular to Job, v. 3. that however he boasted of
his piety; yet it could neither bring pleasure nor profit unto God, though he
were such. Which does not contradict what is elsewhere said in Scripture, of
Gods delighting and taking pleasure in his people, and in their righteous ways.
But the latter word, gain, expounds the first word, pleasure; and it imports
that God does not take pleasure in men's Piety, because of any advantage he
reaps thereby; and particularly, he will let them know how little pleasure he
takes in it, or is profited thereby, when they boast of it.

For further clearing of this Argument, Consider,

1. That this is a true Antecedent, or a fault very justly charged upon Job (as
will appear from the speeches of Elihu, and of God himself unto him) that he
contented not himself to maintain his own integrity, but made too much noise of
his righteousness, and reflected too hardly upon God who (as he thought) took
no notice of him and his Piety. Yet all this will not infer Eliphaz's
conclusion, that therefore Job was a wicked man; But only that he had grossly
miscarried in a fit of tentation.

2. It may also be adverted, that that amplification of his assertion, v. -- 2.
(beside the general scope of the whole Argument) has yet a more particular
reflection upon Job's integrity. For, therein he supposes that, however the
Piety of no man could profit God, yet, it might advantage themselves; whereas
Job's supposed Piety, had not so much as profited himself, since it had neither
prevented, nor delivered him from these afflictions. But, herein he did
mistake; for Job had real advantages by his Piety, even in the midst of his
sufferings.

From this whole purpose, Learn,

1. Albeit Eliphaz erred in his judgment concerning Job, yet his carriage,
considered abstractly and in general, may teach; That it is the duty of godly
men, in their stations, not to da^ly with them who are in an evil course,
especially when mildness will not gain them; For, now he answered, and speaks
home what he had hinted before.

2. It is not enough that men boast of their righteousness and piety, unless
they study sincerity and integrity in their ways; For, he joins both here, to
be righteous, and of perfect ways.

3. Albeit our endeavors will not, of themselves, reach to make us truly
godly, yet God will not do it without our endeavors: For, it should be our
care to make our ways perfect.

4. Whatever be the judgment of the world, yet true Piety is the beginning of
Wisdom, and he is a wise man who makes Piety his great study and care; For the
righteous and the perfect man, is also called the wise man here.

5. The great wisdom that is in Piety may appear from the notable advantages
which, thereby, redound to him who has it; For, he that is wise may be
profitable to himself; See 1 Timothy 4.8. Prove. 3.13, 14, etc.

6. The profit of Piety must not be measured by outward lots, as though it
availed not a man if he be not kept free of troubles; For, in this Eliphaz did
mistake, as has been cleared. And, indeed, trouble may be inflicted upon godly
men, that it may help them to find the worth of Piety, in these cordial
supports and refreshments which the favor of God and the testimony of a good
Conscience do then afford.

7. Whatever profit men reap by Piety, yet it redounds not to God, who reaps no
profit by it, nor has any pleasure in it, upon that account; For, here it is
enquired, Can a man be profitable to God? Is it any pleasure to the Almighty,
that thou art righteous? etc. to assure us that it is an undeniable truth, that
he cannot be profited thereby. And this commends the self-sufficiency and
infinite goodness of God, who takes so much pains to seek us and our service
for our own good; and cries down all opinion of ou^ merit, all conceit of our
selves, and all murmuring at Gods dispensations.

8. Whatever be the Lords condescendence, in taking pleasure in his peoples
righteousness and service; yet they lose all this advantage who conceit or
boast of their own worth; For, to such in special, it may be said, Is it any
pleasure to the Almighty that that thou art righteous? as here it is said to
Job in the like case; And afterward God confirms it by Elihu. See Gal. 6.3.

9. Men are naturally so so selfish, that they will far more easily assent to
general Truths, then admit of particular Applications wherein they are
concerned; Therefore he propounds this Assertion first in general, v. 2. that
he may make way for the particular Application of it, v. 3.

10. Whatever fault there be in a godly man's pleading of his own integrity, yet
that will not prove him wicked: For, Eliphaz did mistake in this, and his true
challenge did not prove his conclusion. And we ought to be careful that we
fasten no more, even upon men's real faults, than they will bear; and that we
judge not of Saints estate by the weaknesses that break forth in an hour of
tentation.

Verse. 4. Will he reprove thee for fear of thee? will he enter with thee into
judgment?
This verse contains his Second Argument to prove Job wicked, which may be
interpreted diverse ways. The word, Fear of thee, may be rendered, thy fear;
and so it comes to this sense, as if he had said; God does not reprove and
enter in judgment with thee (as by his rods he does) for thy Fear, Reverence
and Religion; Therefore, since he has entered in judgment with thee, it must
be for thy wickedness. This is indeed a truth, That whatever God do to any, yet
he has no quarrel at their Piety, if it be sincere; and godly men ought to
reckon that it is so. Yet this will not prove Eliphaz's conclusion; For God may
reprove, and even plead his quarrels, because he loves his own; and he may
afflict them, that he may prove and try them, and that he may manifest his own
glory in their support, and the truth of his own grace in them. But as the
words are translated, the sense is, as if had said; As thy righteousness cannot
profit God, v. 2, 3. so neither does he fear hurt from thee; nor needs he pick
a quarrel lest, otherwise, ^e should sustain prejudice by thee. See Chap 35.6.
Therefore his proceeding cannot be partial, but according to justice; and
consequently, thou must be wicked, since he afflicts. For thy afflictions must
either be for sin, or for nothing, seeing he needs neither fear thou will grow
so good, that he cannot reward thee, or so great that he cannot command thee.
This Argument is faulty, and proceeds upon the same mistake, with the former
Interpretation, that there can be no cause found why God afflicts men, but
either for wickedness, or for goodness, or, fear of hurt from the party if he
were not afflicted; whereas (as has been said) there are many more wise
reasons of his procedure.

However, the General Doctrine may teach.

1. Gods reproofs are judicial processes, or they will draw to that, if not
taken with; Therefore are they joined here, reproving, and entering into
judgment, the one as explicating the other,

2. Men's passions, and, particularly, their cowardly fears, are great enemies
to justice; Therefore it is supposed here, that to act out of fear is
inconsistent with doing justly, cowards being always cruel and unjust.

3. God is above all fear of the creatures, or, of any hazard from them; For,
says he, Will he reprove thee for fear of thee, etc? which as it proves his
greatness, so also the justice of all his proceedings.

Verse. 5. Is not thy wickedness great, and thine Iniquities infinite?
Follows; to v. 12. the third Argument, taken from the many sins against the
Second Table, wherewith he thinks he may justly charge Job, and for which he
thinks he is justly punished. The argument may be thus framed; He whose life
abounds with abominable sins, is justly plagued; But thy life (says he to Job)
is such; Therefore thou art justly plagued. The first proposition being
supposed as true, of it self, the second is proved, partly, by a general
challenge, v. 5. Partly, by particular instances of crimes charged upon Job, v.
6, 7, 8, 9. Upon all which he infers the conclusion, v. 10, 11.

Here the General Doctrine is sound, That the evils here mentioned are gross
sins, and deservedly punished; though yet they be not always actually punished
in this life. But these faults are unjustly charged upon Job. And it may be
wondered at upon what pretense Eliphaz could charge all these foul crimes upon
him, who clears himself so expressly of them, Chap. 29. and 31. But it appears
that he judged thus of Job, Partly, from the event, because he was afflicted,
as v. 10, 11. And because his afflictions, of Poverty, being oppressed and
slighted, etc. seemed to be such as a man might read such sins in them, as the
procuring cause of them. And partly, it is not improbable that these wicked
oppressors whom Job had crushed and made to fall under the hand of Justice (as
himself declares, Chap. 29.12, 14, 15, 16, 17.) did now complain, when they saw
him in affliction, that he had wronged and oppressed them; And that Elipaz
harkened to their Calumnies, as suiting well with his own Principles. But to
come to the particulars as they ly in the Text:

In this verse we have a General Challenge of Gross and multiplied wickedness;
whereof he poseth Job if he were not guilty, not because he did but conjecture
it was so, and would have Job try if it were true (for he asserts it
positively, v. 6. etc.) But being sure he was guilty (his Principles leading
him to judge so of Job) he charge it upon his Conscience if he could shift it.

Whence Learn,

1. It is not enough men know their faults, unless they also ponder the
sinfulness thereof, and aggravate them; Therefore, before he speak of the
particular faults whereof he supposes Job to be guilty, he premits this
General, to mind him that he ought to look on these faults as wickedness and
iniquity. Where this is not, a simple sight of our sin is but a Proclamation of
our Obduration, while we see it, and do not notice the hainousness and
sinfulness thereof, See Romans 7.13.

2. Albeit none can free themselves of sin, and this is sad enough; yet it is
much sadder, when we are found to be gross and wicked transgressors;
Therefore, to convince and humble Job, he speaks of his faults as wickedness
and iniquity. It was David's great care amidst his failings, to guard against
such gross debordings. Psalm. 18, 21, 23. and 19.12, 13. And the Lord does
frequently challenge his people, that their miscarriages are not simple
failings, but wicked debordings. See Deuteronomy. 32.5. Ezekiel. 24.13. Such miscarriages
may be tried, by the grossness of the evils in themselves, Ier. 2.34. Hos. 2.5.
by men's rushing upon them without a tentation, o^, upon a small tentation; by
their unwillingness to be admonished or reproved for them, Amos 5.10. by their
engaging in them with a high hand, Psalm. 18.21. not rashly, but with
deliberation, against their light, and their slighting of all mercies,
admonitions, corrections, and even their own engagements, which might restrain
them; by their not watching against sin, and especially their Predominant
evils, as David kept himself from his iniquity. Psalm. 18.23. By their delight
and taking pleasure in sin, Jer. 11.15. And their frequent relapses in it,
without any serious thoughts of repentance. Jer. 6.15. and 8.4, 6, 12. These
are some evidences of wickedness and iniquity, wherewith not only wicked and
unregenerate men may be charged, but even godly men have challenged themselves
in some particular acts, Neh. 9 33. And to all this may be added, that when
they flee not to Christ for pardon and purging of sin, any sin they are guilty
of, becomes a wickedness.

3. As their is a difference betwixt sins of infirmity and wickednesses; so
there are differences even of wicked men, and degrees of wickednesses: For,
h^re some wickedness is great in respect of others; not only great in number
(as the word also will bear, and is expressed in the end of the verse) but in
nature; like the wickedness of Ahab, who sold himself to wo^k it. 1. Kings
21.25. and many others. So that, upon the one hand, men ought not to please
themselves in sin, because they are not so bad as others: For, they may be
guilty, not only of infirmities, but even of wickedness, great and gross in it
self (as all wickedness, absolutely considered, is) which yet, comparatively,
is not so great as the wickedness of others. And, upon the other hand, their
condition must be deplorable, who come to this height of impiety, that they are
not only wicked, but their wickedness is great. And for trying of such a woeful
condition, Though great wickedness may be many ways discovered, and
particularly, the evils after mentioned, ver. 6. etc. are great wickednesses;
yet it may further be considered.

1. The greatest and most odious wickednesses are perpetrated by those who live
under greatest plenty of the means of grace, which do aggravate common faults,
and leave men obdured and wicked under them. Joh. 15.22.

2. It is an evidence of great wickedness, when men commit evils, while they
profess piety, and under that mask and cloak; As here he supposes of Job that
his faults, while he professed piety, were great wickedness. And though he
wronged Job, yet it is of general verity, that Piety, or a pretense of it, does
not extenuate, but aggravate, a fault.

3. It is also an evidence of great wickedness, when men, being either
erroneous in their judgments, or scandalous in their practice, yet will not be
convinced of it, As he did also suppose Job to be guilty of obstinacy,
notwithstanding all their endeavors to convince him. See Jer. 2.34, 35.

Doct. 4. As the Nature, so also the number of men's sins, does add to the
aggravation thereof; Therefore it is added, as a further aggravation, are not
thine iniquities infinite? Where sin does abound, it evidenceth a trade of sin.
Jer. 13 23. much impenitency, under it, in that men are not ashamed, Jer. 6.15.
or, that they relapse after repentance, Psalm. 85.8. And that they sin under
many mercies and corrections. Ez^. 9.13, 14.

5. When wicked men do impartially examine their own hearts and ways, they will
find an infinite heap of sins whereof they are guilty; For, so he charge upon
Job (whom he supposes to be a wicked man) that his iniquities are infinite,
not actually infinite, but a numberless number of them, where one can find no
end of the reckoning, as the word imports. Even godly men have been made to
groan under this burden, Psalm. 19.12. And if the wicked would search well, they
would find still greater and greater abominations, as it is, Ezekiel. 8. And
withal, this may be added, that while they continue wicked, they cannot break
off this course of sinning and adding to the account (see Dan 4.27.) and there
would be no end of their acting the grossest evils, if they were not impeded by
afflictions and judgments upon them, but they continue still to sin in their
resolutions.

6. Men, in all their actings, ought to set their Consciences a work to reflect
upon them, as being severest Judges and Censurers of their faults, when put to
speak impartially; Therefore does he put Job's Conscience to it in this matter;
Is not thy wickedness great? etc.

7. Albeit wicked men do stupifie their own Consciences, by habitual sinning,
and neglecting the checks thereof, that they do not much trouble them; yet they
carry that tormenter in their bosoms about with them, against which they have
no security, if once God set it on work: Yea, it may be wondered at, what men's
Consciences are doing, when they do not check them for their debordings; For,
albeit he judged Job to be a wicked man, yet he charge his accusation upon
his Conscience, as a party which in reason could not but vex him. Is not thy
wickedness great? etc.

8. Godly men may be very unjustly suspected, and faults charged upon them, so
as if their Consciences could not deny them, when yet they are innocent; And
they may be accused of gross wickedness in some things, wherein they are not so
much as guilty of infirmities; For, so is Job suspected here, who was wholly
free of these evils afterward laid to his charge. This should cause us guard
against such lots, and not make the Opinions of the best of men the rule of our
Consciences.

Verse. 6. For thou have taken a pledge from thy brother for naught, and
stripped the naked of their clothing.
Follows, to v. 10. an account of Job's particular supposed faults, which he
produces as instances to prove the General Challenge. And,

First (in this verse) he accuses him of fraud, oppression, and inhumanity,
under a pretext of justice; In that he took and kept pledges for naught when
nothing was due; and that he did this even to his brother, or, friend, and
though he were poor, yet he even stripped him of his clothing for a pledge,
and so left him naked. It is not to be doubted but Eliphaz does falsely charge
Job here, as his own Apologies do witness (see Chap. 31.) And so it teaches,
That godly men under affliction may lie under most horrid and unjust
aspersions: Ill Principles concerning Gods afflicting of men, and men's taking
the report of biased and prejudged persons, may easily give a rise to such
imputations; as it did to Eliphaz. And therefore men should carefully guard
against both, and that they neither raise nor entertain groundless ill reports
of sufferers. Yet the General Doctrine (wherein he speaks of such evils as are
gross faults, though Job was free of them) and his way of managing the
challenge, which he supposed to be just, may teach,

1. General challenges will not suffice to convince and humble the guilty,
unless particulars be condescended upon; Therefore does he subjoyn particular
instances to that General Challenge, v. 5. that he may more effectually
convince.

2. The faults hereafter mentioned (however Job was free of them) ought not to
be looked upon as infirmities, or simple sins only, but as wickedness, and
great wickedness; For, that is the Character given of them all, v. 5.

3. Men, in prosecution of justice and their legal rights, may be guilty of
horrid oppression; For, though giving of pledges was, in some cases, approved
by the Law of God, yet here it is challenged as a great wickedness, to take a
pledge, etc. See Chap. 24.3, 4. And particularly, it is employed in the words,

1. That violent imposing of Sureties, or Pledges, even for what is due to us,
is cruelty; As is employed in his taking a Pledge (as the word is here
translated, though it be not so emphatick in the Original) whereas he should
have stood without, and received what the man might best spare, so it were of
sufficient value, Deuteronomy. 24.10, 11.

2. That it is yet greater cruelty, if this pledge be taken unjustly, or, for
naught. Either when men obtain Law-sutes (upon which they take pledges) by
fraud, circumventions, and forged cavillations; or do take pledges above the
worth of what is due; and, it may be, detain them though the debt be paid.

3. That it adds to the cruelty, when this is done to a brother by nature,
common profession, or bonds of common sufferings; (see James 2.15, 16. 1 John
3.17.) Or it may be extended to all those who are in need, to whom we should be
Brethren and Neighbors, Luke 10.29, 37.

4. Whether men have a just cause or not, yet it is cruelty utterly to strip
the poor, to strip the naked of his clothing, or, by stripping him, to leave
him naked. See Chap. 24.3, 9. Exodus 22.26, 27. Deuteronomy. 24.6, 12, 13.

Verse. 7. Thou have not given water to the weary to drink, and thou have
withholden bread from the hungry.
In the second place, He accuses Job of unmercifulness and sinful Parsimony,
in not relieving these who were in misery.

Here the General Doctine (passing his mistake of Job) teaches,

1. Beside what we are bound in justice to do to our neighbor, the Lord does
exercise and try us by daily objects of charity and compassion; such as the
weary and hungry, who were in those times (as also in all ages) the object of
men's compassion. See Deuteronomy. 15.11.

2. It may teach men sobriety, when they consider that a very little will
suffice these who are really indigent; that even bread and water will refresh
those weary and hungry ones. Those, doing good at some times, should teach us
with how little we should be content at all times, 1 Timothy 6.6, 7, 8. And albeit
in Scripture sometime, all sort of food be expressed under the name of bread
and water) (as Deuteronomy. 9.9. 1 Kings 13.8, 9. Isa. 3.1. and elsewhere) yet the
reason is, because men should be content if they get so much.

3. Charity may be very acceptable to God through Christ, even when men bestow
a very little, provided, that their power can reach to no more; that what they
give, suffice the indigent, and, that it be given with an honest heart: For, so
bread and water had been acceptable, if he had given them. See Matthew. 10.42.
Mark 12, 41, -- 44.

4. It is an evidence of a wicked man, to want bowels of compassion, and not to
be charitable to the indigent; for this is one proof of that great wickedness,
v. 5. Not to give water to the weary, etc. Hence the want of mercy (especially
toward godly men in affliction) is so severely plagued, James 2.13. Psalm.
109.14, 15, 16.

5. It is not enough to forbear to do wrong to the poor, unless we do them
good, as we have power and they stand in need; omission of what is good being
culpable, as well as commission of evil: Therefore is this challenge joined
with the former, v. 6. as being a proof of wickedness, as well as that.

Verse. 8. But as for the mighty man, he had the earth; and the honorable man
dwelt in it.
In the third place, He accuses Job that, while he dealt thus with the poor,
the mighty and honorable man had the earth, and dwelt in it. What is here
said, of the mighty and honorable man, may be understood.

1. Either of Job himself, that he neglected or oppressed the poor, v. 6, 7.
that he might become a mighty and great man, and that he might engross that
Country to himself, and reign in it, and possess it for his Children and Cattle.

2. Or of others; that while Job thus wronged the poor, yet he was favorable
to great men, and gave all countenance and encouragement, for settleing of them
in their possessions. Both those are real faults, and may readily concur in the
practice of wicked men (and so the g^neral expression may be extended to take
in both) though none of them were truly charged upon Job.

However, the General Doctrine may teach,

1. Oppression or unmercifulness are so much the more abominable, when they are
the faults of men who have enough in the world; For, so is here supposed that
it was a heinous sin in Job to do those evils, v. 6, 7. being a great man.

2. Men's aspiring to be rich and great, ordinarily, is not free of sin; For,
here they are supposed to go together, a wronging of the poor, and a study to
be great and honorable. See 1 Timothy 6.9.

3. Oppression and unmercifulness are sinful ways of advancing our selves; as
here also we are taught.

4. The Lord abhorrs partiality, even toward the poor; much more that men
should partially respect the persons of great men: For, here also it is charged
as a great wickedness, v. 5. that while he wronged the poor, v. 6, 7. yet the
mighty man had the earth, or, land. See Exodus 23.3. Lev. 19.15.

Verse. 9. Thou have sent widows away empty, and the arms of the fatherless have
been broken.
In the last place, He more particularly accuses Job, that he had wronged the
fatherless and widow; That he sent widows away empty, either not supplying them
in their necessity, or, not righting them as a Magistrate, but sending them
away disappointed; and that the arms of the fatherless were broken, or, what
should support and maintain them was taken from them by oppression.

Doct. 1. It is the usual lot of Orphans and Widows, to be oppressed in the
world; as here is supposed.

2. The Lord has a special eye upon the injuries done to the fatherless and
widows; For, here, after other supposed oppressions, this is added in the last
place, as worst of all.

3. It is an heinous sin, particularly, in Magistrates, to wrong and crush
Orphans and Widows either by oppressing them themselves, or, suffering others
to wrong them; As here it was charged on Job, who was a Magistrate.

Verse. 10. Therefore snares are round about thee, and sudden fear troubles
thee.

11. Or darkness, that thou can not see, and abundance of waters cover thee.


In these verses we have the Conclusion of this Argument, That since Job was so
wicked (as he supposed) therefore he was justly brought into these miseries,
surrounded with snares and fears, involved in darkness, and drowned in an abyss
of troubles.

Though it be a truth that such sinners as he has described, do deserve these
calamities; yet it is a mistake to think that they always meet with them in
this life; and an Unjust sentence passed against Job that he was guilty of
these sins, or that God was pursuing him for them by the afflictions upon him.
So hard is it to bring men to change their fixed mistakes of the godly in
affliction.

However, the General Doctrine teaches.

1. God may cause men's lots be such as might send them back to examine their
former life; and to see that, therefore (or, because of their evil ways) such
sad changes befall them. And therefore it were good to prevent this in time, by
daily examination of our Consciences.

2. Judgments upon wicked men do fitly resemble snares round about them; as
here they are called. And that,

1. Because they come suddenly and unexpectedly, as a snare surprizeth the wild
Beast or Bird. As it is their sin that they do not look out for any
afflictions, Psalm. 10.6. so it is their judgment, that afflictions do surprise
them. Luke 21.34, 35.

2. Because their plagues will hold them fast, like fetters and snares, so that
the more they spurn, they are held the faster. See Isa. 51.20. Jer. 2 24.

3. Because they usually meet with many at once, round about them; so that they
shall have nothing but sorrow, and want of comfort, on every hand, Lam. 2.22.
And if they escape one, they shall be caught in another. Isa. 24 17, 18.

Doct. 3. When the wicked are thus surrounded with snares, sudden fear will
trouble them; As here is added. Seeing their troubles do surprise them, and and
are sudden, they cannot but be perplexed therewith, more than if they had
resolved upon them. But, especially, judgments cannot but be formidable to them
who are not at peace with God. Isa. 33.14. And trouble having once made a
breach, they cannot but be continually alarmed with fears of every imaginable
trouble, that it may come upon them when they least expect it.

4. In this case, the wicked will be involved in darkness that they cannot see;
As here is also subjoyned. Such troubles, coming upon wicked men, bring
confusion of mind with them, so that they can neither distinctly know the
causes why they are troubled, nor which way to get out of them; whence
follows darkness of sorrow, discomfort and despair.

5. The wicked being thus distressed, and in the dark, their afflictions cannot
but overwhelm, and swallow them up, as if, abundance of waters covered them;
which is here subjoyned to all the rest.

Verse. 12. Is not God in the height of heaven? and behold the height of the
stars how high they are.

13. And thou say how does God know? can he judge through the dark cloud?

14. Thick clouds are a covering to him that he sees not, and he walks in
the circuit of heaven.


In these verses we have the fourth Argument, taken from Job's sins immediately
against God, where^^ he supposes him guilty; And particularly, A^heisme, and
denial of a Providence, or, that God cares for things below. In prosecuting
this argument,

1. He premits a General Truth, v. 12. That Gods Habitation, or special
residence, is in the height of Heaven, or, the highest Heavens, the height
whereof may be gathered from the height of the ^tars, which yet are below that
glorious habitation.

2. He propounds Job's supposed fault, v. 13. -- That God does not know, nor
take notice of things below, which he propounds by way of question ( How, or,
what does God know?) as supposing that Job thought it impossible to solve that
doubt, and clear the difficulty.

3. He subjoyns the ground upon which he supposes Job did entertain such an
impious thought; which being propounded by way of qu^stion, v. -- 13. is
positively expressed, v. 14. That the great distance and dark clouds
intervening betwixt the highest Heavens and Earth, do impede Gods seeing of
things below; And he is shut up in Heaven, without taking notice of humane
affair^, but walking idly on the circuit of heaven, above the clouds. For
further clearing of this purpose.

1. It would be considered what is the Scope of Eliphaz, in premiting that
general, v. 12. For it may be looked upon a^ the ground, upon which he refutes
Job's supposed crime of Atheism. And indeed, if it be taken in a sound sense
(not that the infinite God is shut up and included in the highest Heavens, Jer.
23.24. but that he manifests himself in a special manner present there, as upon
the Throne of his Glory) it is a truth that may refute all such Atheistical
thoughts. For, if the Stars do reach us with their light, though they be very
high, and have but borrowed light; Much more does God, who reigns over all, and
is all light, behold all things from the Throne of his Glory. Psalm. 11.4. and
33.13, 14, 15. But if we look to the reasons subjoyned to that Atheistical
conclusion, v. 13, 14. where the same things are repeated in substance, which
are premitted, v. 12. the words may be looked on as the principle and ground
from which he supposes Job did deduce his conclusion, and which is more
largely insisted on in the following verses. This Eliphaz in the entry premits,
as a truth which he owns in a sound sense, though he deny the Inference and
Conclusion deduced from it. And so the scope of this charge, in sum is, as if
Eliphaz had said; Because this is a truth, That God in a special manner dwells
in the highest Heavens, v. 12. therefore thou gatherest that conclusion from
it, That God does not know or notice things below, v. 13. -- And those
Arguments, also, (taken from the thick clouds that intervene, and the distance
betwixt Heaven and Earth) to prove it, v. 13, 14. But thou do not consider,
that it contains a Refutation of thy Error, and does not bottom these
Arguments which thou would found upon it.

2. If we consider the charge it self, it is unquestionably an horrid iniquity,
to deny a Divine Providence in humane affairs, as wicked men do, Ezekiel. 8.12.
and 9.9. Yet,

1. It is unjustly charged upon Job, who did constantly assert and acknowledge
the Providence of God, as appears throughout his several discourses. And it
seems the rise of this accusation was only this, that Job asserted that God
dealt otherwise with the godly and wicked (afflicting the one, and suffering
the other to prosper) than his Friends judged to be agreeable to his holiness
and justice, which, in the judgment of Eliphaz, was to deny a Providence.

2. Suppose that Job had been overtaken in some tentations of this kind, and
that it was his great sin so to do; Yet, this would not prove Eliphaz's
conclusion, that Job was a wicked man, seeing truly godly men may be overtaken
with such fits of tentation and distemper, Psalm. 37.10, 11.

Having cleared the words, from v. 12. as it contains a General Truth, Learn,

1. God is high and glorious, having the highest Heavens for his Throne, and
the place where he especially manifests his glory; For, in this sense, it is
true, That God is in the highest Heavens, Isa. 63.15. and 66.1. Which should
lift up our hearts to him, and fill us with high thoughts of him, and of his
glory and power, Lam. 3.4. Psalm. 123.1. Isa. 63.15. should cause us admire his
condescendence, who stoops to notice us, Psalm. 113.5, 6, 7. should cause us
fear and reverence him in our addresses to him, Eccl. 5.2. and, should teach us
that he needs not things below, as being above their good, or, evil.

2. We cannot take up God in his glory and excellency, immediately and
directly, till we come to our Country and habitation; For, here the height of
his habitation is pointed out to us by the height of the Stars.

3. As, the creatures are set before us, that we may study their excellency,
(For, he bids him, Behold, or, see the height of the Stars how high they are;)
so their excellency is rightly studied, not when we rest or dote on them, but,
when we draw some practical use from that study; and particularly, when we are
helped thereby to see and acknowledge the glory and excellency of God: As here
we are taught: See Psalm. 8.3. and 19.1.

From Job's supposed fault, v. 13. -- Learn,

1. All the hurt men can reap by troubles, is nothing to this, when they are
driven thereby to sin; As here is supposed Job was, see Job 36.21. That is the
thing Satan chiefly drives at, and therefore afflictions should be looked on as
touch-stones of tenderness.

2. Atheism is the grossest of all evils; as here is also supposed, in that his
accusation is added to all the former, as the cape-stone of them all. When this
is once given way unto, it strikes at the root of all Piety and Obedience,
Psalm. 73.11, 13, 14. And therefore it should be especially guarded against, as
also every wrong thought of God, particularly in trouble, Isa. 40.27. and 49
14. as evidencing our pride and ignorance, and obstructing the Consolations of
God.

3* Albeit men do not simply deny a Deity (as some do, at least in practice,
Psalm. 14.1.) yet they may be guilty of Atheism in denying and questioning a
Providence; For, that is the Atheism here charged upon Job, (see also Psalm.
10.11. and 73.11. and 94.7.) That God does not know, or, does not exercise a
Providence or Government in the world; For, to know, is here put for the whole
acts of Providence, It being necessary that God do first know the affairs of
the world, and what is done by men, if he do recompense them accordingly. To
deny this Providence is in effect to deny that God is God. And Satan will bend
his endeavors to drive us to this, as at all times, that he may embo^den us to
security and sin, Ezekiel. 9 9. Zeph. 1.12. so especially in trouble, that he may
cut short all our pains in seeking to God: and may deprive us of that
comfortable sight of sad lots, that we are still in Gods hand in the midst of
them. Only we would beware of such a sight of Providence in trouble, as drives
us away from waiting upon him, 2 Kings 6 33.

4. This sin of Atheism is very heinous, not only when men entertain the
thoughts of it, and fix it in their hearts, Zeph. 1.12. but especially when
they have the impudence to speak it out, and say it; as here is charged upon
Job, see Isa. 40.27. And when men do only suppress, and not mortify, these
wicked thoughts of their hearts in prosperity, they will readily break out in
trouble; and hereby God is justified, who has afflicted, when men do proclaim
their own sinfulness under troubles, Ezekiel. 14.22, 23.

5. It is a ready way to turn men Atheists in the matter of Providence, when
they limit God, and prescribe how he should administrate the affairs of the
world; and if God act not according to their mind, they are ready to question
whether there be a Providence at all: For, albeit Job was free of this crime of
Atheism, ye^ Eliphaz's Principles were such as did not a little reflect upon,
and question Providence. For, he judged (as has been cleared) that what Job
asserted concerning Providence was, in effect, Atheistically to deny it; which
imports that it was his opinion, that if God guided the world, as Job said
(which indeed he does) he could not but question whether God did guide it at
all.

6. It does also contribute not a little to beget Atheistical thoughts about
the Providence of God, when men will not believe things, because they cannot
see the way how they can be; For, thus does he propound Job's supposed fault,
not only, What, but, How does God know, considering the distance and darkness
that interveen betwixt him and us? Such do little consider that his ways and
thoughts are above ours, Isa 55.8, 9. and that his way and paths are in the Sea
and great Waters, Psalm. 77.19.

7. Such as do once entertain Atheism, will easily fall into foulest
miscarriages toward men; For, however he wronged Job, yet this General is true,
that if once a man deny the Providence and Knowledge of God, it is no wonder to
see him guilty of all those crimes charged upon Job, v. 5, etc. See Ezekiel 9.9.
Psalm. 14.1, 2, etc. And, indeed, the wicked courses of men do proclaim their
Atheism, which, if they believed a God, or, a Providence, they durst not
commit. For, though they had not s^ith to commit themselves, in keeping Gods
way, to his provident care; yet the fear that he in his Providence would reach
them, might in reason deterr them from provoking of him.

8. It is a great injustice in debates, to brand and load men's Principles with
odious and false consequences; As here, Job's debate, concerning Gods
administering of the affairs of the world, is branded with Atheism. Thus,
because we assert Gods Providence to be universal, and do assert a decree of
Election of some, and Reprobation of others, men spare not to averr that we
make God the Author of sin, and do decry his love. Because we cannot grant a
corporal and carnal presence of Christ in the Sacrament of the Supper, we are
charged with the denying of the power of Christ, and the truth of his Word,
etc. But we should take heed lest we measure Truth by such odious consequences.

From the false grounds of this supposed crime, as they are supposed in that
Principle, v. 12. and expressly deduced and enlarged, v. -- 13, 14. Learn,

1. An evil course, or sin, is then most dangerous and odious, when it is men's
light and principles that lead them to it, and they think they have reasons to
justify it; as here, it is supposed as an aggravation of the crime, that Job
not only denies Providence, but thinks he can justify his denial by strength
of Argument. This also added to the sin of Jonah's passion, Jonah 4 9

2. Greatest Atheists do carry a conviction and refutation about with them, in
their very bosoms and principles; For, that General Assertion, v. 12. upon
which he supposes that Job bottomed his Argument, does refute an Atheist, as
has been cleareed. And men's vexing of themselves, and keeping themselves
throng with ungodly courses, that they may drive away thoughts of a Deity,
Providence, and Judgment to come, does clearly evince that the contrary
thoughts do haunt and trouble them much.

Men's Atheistical thoughts are bottomed only upon their carnal mistakes, and
their measuring of God by themselves, and by their shallow conceptions; For, so
are we taught by the Arguments here produced, which amount only to this, That
because God is said to dwell, in a special manner, in Heaven, therefore he is
only there, and the distance and intervening darkness do hinder his sight and
knowledge, and turn him idle; all which are gross mistakes, flowing from men's
low conceptions. See Zech. 8.6. And therefore if we take him up as God and not
man, who is infinitely exalted above what we can conceive, it will refute our
distempers and mistakes, Isa. 55.8, 9.

4. In opposition to these mistakes, we ought to fix upon these Truths.

1. God is so in Heaven, as he is not secluded from the Earth, Jer. 23.23, 24.
We may even feel after him, in the works of his Providence, Acts 17.27, 28. and
should eye him as present wherever we are, Psalm. 139.7, 8, etc.

2. There is no impediment, of darkness, secrecy, etc. that can hide men good
or bad, and their ways, from God; For even darkness is as noonday to him,
Psalm. 139 11, 12. He sees us when we see not, nor mind, him, nor believe that
he sees us.

3. God is not an idle spectator, or walker in the circuit of Heaven, but an
actor in things below, John 5.17. Which we should study, acknowledge and
improve.

Verse. 15. Have thou marked the old way which wicked men have trodden?
Follows to v. 19. the fifth Argument whereby Eliphaz would prove Job to be
wicked; which is taken from the judgments that have been inflicted on wicked
men who lived before them. Which serves not only to refute Job's supposed
Atheism, v. 12, 13, 14. And to prove that God does know and order the affairs
of the world; but also (as he thinks) to prove his General Assertion,
concerning the miserable ruin of the wicked, and that Job was wicked, because
so afflicted. The discourse may be understood, more generally and abstractly,
of all wicked men who formerly had been destroyed by calamities, as by a flood.
But his mentioning the old way of wicked men, and a flood, v. 16. whereby they
were destroyed, does lead us to understand it of the old world destroyed by the
flood in Noah's days; and that rather than of the drowning of Pharaoh and the
Egyptians in the Red Sea. For, it is not certain that Job lived after that
time, and it is certain that could not be an old way and History in his time,
who lived (as has been cleared in the entry to this Book) before the giving of
the Law, and the astricting of Sacrifices to that place where God had recorded
his Name: and withal, in that instance of Pharaoh's ruin, the condition of the
people of God suffering in Egypt might have been produced to refute his
opinion. As for the Argument it self, it cannot be denied but that destruction
of the old world was a document of Gods Justice, to be observed and improved in
all Ages. But from this it cannot be inferred, that God deals so with all
wicked men, because he has made Beacons of some of them to warn others.
Neither will it follow that, because God destroyed the old world for their
sins, therefore Job who is afflicted must be wicked likewise. For the issue
proved that Job's calamity was not so desperate and irrecoverable as theirs;
and not only men's lots, but their carriage (which is expressly spoken too of
these who perished in the flood) must be looked unto, to clear what they are.

To follow this Argument by parts, it may be taken up in four Branches; In the
first whereof (in this verse) he excites Job, in general, to mark and consider
the old way of wicked men, both the way of their sin, and of the ruin that
followed upon it.

Whence Learn,

1. God has given many Refutations of Atheism, to the no small damage of
wicked men; For, this instance of Gods justice refutes all these Atheistical
conclusions wherewith he has charged Job. See Zeph. 1.12. Thus also are men
refuted when they deifie themselves. Ezekiel. 28.2, 6, 9.

2. Sin is a very old trade in the world; For, here in their days it was called
an old way. Which may commend Gods Patience and long suffering, who has
continued the world so long, notwithstanding the provocations thereof; And may
affright sinners from their sinful ways, lest they be served as heirs to all
these who have sinned in the like kind before them, Matthew. 23.34, 35.

3. A course of wickedness, once engaged in, becomes very ensnaring; For men
being engaged, become bold in sin, and habituate themselves in it; For, they
become wicked men, or, men of iniquity and they tread in that way, it is so
habitual to them as if they made a path by constant walking. This is the cause
why they are not easily reclaimed, Jer. 13.23. And this deludes many, who think
they have peace in their sinful ways, when it is only their stupidity and
impudence that increase upon them as they make progress in sin.

4. Albeit the least sin, or any one wicked act, does deserve extremest
judgments and wrath; Yet, ordinarily, men are grossly wicked, and habituated in
a course of sin, when God makes them spectacles of his justice: For, such were
those whom he instanceth to have been plagued here, they were men of Iniquity
treading in the way of wickedness. So that, when wicked men are plagued, they
ought to reflect upon a trade of sin procuring it.

5. As the trade of sin is old, so also are the instances, of Gods judgments
pursuing for it; And as men make an habitual trade of sin, so his judgments are
also conspicuous; For, this is also the old way which wicked men have trodden,
even the judgments of the Lord, which they have suffered for their sin Not that
God as frequently plagues as they sin, and so makes the one path to be trodden
as often as the other; but that there are some instances of Gods judgments no
less conspicuous, than men's sins are notoure and open. So that wicked men,
sinning after these instances of Gods manifested anger against sin, do sin
against that witness, and do split upon rocks, whereupon God has set very
conspicuous Beacons.

6. As wicked men's courses do prove them to be men of iniquity, and slaves to
it, so the fruit and issue thereof does prove that they follow and labor for
vanity therein; For, so the words will also read, men of vanity. Yea, the name
here given to men, in the Original taken from death, or, Mortality, does point
out, That were there no other plague inflicted upon wicked men, their very
mortality demonstrats the folly of their course; seeing all the imagined
contentments they expect by sin serve, at best, but for this natural life, and
will flee away, and serve in no stead, to secure against death, or, comfort
them in it,

7. God propounds the example of wicked men's ways, and the plagues following
thereupon, to be marked and observed by others for the information of their
judgments concerning sinful courses and the fruits thereof, and for exciting
of them to look well to their own ways; For, this question. Have thou marked
the old way? etc. Imports that it was Job's duty to mark these instances, that
thereby (as he judged of him) he might be helped to correct his opinions and
practices. See Psalm. 107.43. Hos. 14.9. Luke 13.1, 2. etc. God in his great
indulgence will not always destroy all sinners by visible judgments; For, so he
should soon destroy the whole world, which yet he continues for wise ends,
particularly, that he may gather his elect out of it: But yet he sees it meet
to set up some sinners as Beacons to warn all the rest. So that they are stupid
and mad who do not observe and improve such examples, and who, looking upon the
way of Gods judgments upon men, do not reflect upon the way of their sin
procuring these judgments, that they may avoid it; but do persist in sin
against all such warnings, or think themselves innocent, because they are not
smitten as others were, or do look rather upon men's following of duty, then
their sins, as the cause of their calamities, as Jer. 44.16, 17, 18.

8. Men, in the heat of present distempers and debates, will readily be in the
dark and be misled, unless they make use of the light that sometime they have
had, o^ the experiences, they may find, abstract from their present case, to
clear them; Therefore he leads Job from the consideration of his own present
case, to mark the old way, as a more effectual mean to clear his mistakes. And
it is, indeed a General Truth, however he erred in the particular.

9. Godly men may be much be mistaken by others, as if they did not read a
right the strokes of God upon themselves o^ others; For, this question, Have thou marked, etc? imports also a challenge that he had not observed these
things. Which yet was most false; for had he observed them never so much, he
could never read Eliphaz's opinion therein, nor that it was consumed thereby.
For,

1. Though great calamities ought to daunt stubbornness, and deterr men from
standing out in rebellion against God; Yet, they ought not to be so formidable
as to affright men from the testimony of a good Conscience; For, that is a part
of Godly men's trial, to cleave to their integrity, notwithstanding they be
afflicted.

2. No rods should make men condemn that in themselves or their cause, which is
approved by the Word of God; as Job's integrity was.

3. No judgments upon wicked men should make us think that all the wicked will
be so dealt with (as Job's Friends did) and so make us asso^^ all those who are
spared.

4. Nor should any judgments inflicted upon men for their wickedness, make us
condemn Godly men because they fall under the same outward lot; which was
another of his Friends mistakes. In a word, Afflictions upon godly men ought to
make them the more tender, but not discourage them, no^ make them cast away the
evidences of their integrity.

Verse. 16. Which were cut down out of time, whose foundation was overflown with
a flood:
In the second branch of this argument Eliphaz propounds the particular to be
observed, of the way (...) Gods judgments upon these wicked men; That they
perished suddenly, out of time, or, (as the Original has it) they were cut
down, and no time, that is, they were cut of in a moment, and before they could
expect it, and that the foundations of their imagined happiness were overthrown
as by a deluge and flood. This may very well be understood of the general
deluge, but does not at all prove Eliphaz hi^ conclusion, as has been showed,
v. 15.

In General, Learn,

1. It is very commendable in godly men, and a duty incumbent to them, that
they be acquainted with, and keep in memory, the proceedings of God against
sinners; For, here, those men are notably versed (...) the History of the old
world, and many other passag^s of divine providence in the world. See Psalm.
78.5. -- ^ Here we are to consider.

1. If they learned these things only by Tradition, without the written word,
and yet kept them so fresh in memory; How much more should we remember them,
who have them written to us, to relieve the infirmity of our memories?

2. As they remembered those examples, not for contemplation, but for use and
practice: And, accordingly, Eliphaz produces this instance for directing of Job
how to judge of his afflictions, and improve them, though he erred in the
application: So we ought likewise to make use of what is recorded in the Word,
or, otherwise comes to our knowledge, for the like end, and not as the^e did,
Psalm. 78.19, 20. and 106.12, 13. Prove. 23.35. For all these acts of God are
loud preachings to warn and direct sinners, Psalm. 78.22, 23, etc.

3. If they remembered and studied to improve what was done long before their
own time, much more ought we to be sensible of, and to improve, what our selves
do see and feel, that we be not as these who saw Gods works, and yet neither
considered nor made use of them, Psalm. 10^.7.

Doct. 2. The instance of Gods severity against the old world is full of
documents to sinners in all ages; Therefore it is made use of here, as a
speaking lesson, though it do not prove his point; as also 2 Pet. 2.5, etc. And
who so look upon that act of justice aright, as it is afterward inculcated in
Scripture to warn sinners, will find that it points out,

1. That more ages than that one deserve the like punishment, whatever be Gods
indulgence.

2. That the latter perilous declining times do, especially, deserve such an
utter extermination; And therefore that instance is laid before them by Peter.

3. That there is no less wrath let forth in the lesser rods that come upon the
like sinners, yea in the very forbearance they get, than was in that stroke;
For, in that respect the parallel still holds.

4. That though there had been no visible documents of Gods anger against sin
since that time, yet that is enough in reason, to deter men from sin; For, it
is an argument and document in all ages.

5. That God could very easily cause the very course of Nature put an end to
the rebellion of wicked men, if it got a Commission; As then the Windows of
Heaven, and the Fountains of the deep, being opened, the Rain consumed the
World. So also did the Stars in their courses fight against Sisera, Judge. 5.20.

From the words in Particular, Learn,

1. Ruin and destruction is the desert of wicked men, whatever forbearance
they get; For, so is proved by this instance, that these sinners were cut down,
or, (as the Original has it) became wrinkled, as drowned bodies do gather
wrinckles. So that neither Gods indulgence, nor lesser rods, do secure them
against further plagues, Isa. 9.12, 17, 21. Amos 9.4.

2. That this was done out of time, or, and no time, may import,

(1.) The sudden ripening of the wicked for judgments, even before they have
any time, or be ripe in days. Hence wicked men are said not to live out half
their days, Psalm. 55.23. So that it is folly for men to go on in sin, thinking
they may do well enough afterward; when they know not how soon judgments may
overtake them.

(2.) Their sudden surprisal with judgments when they come. For, God in a very
moment can overturn the wicked, were there never so many of them; as in a
moment he surprised and overthrew the old world. It is true, they got warning
by the Preaching of Noah, and by his building of the Ark; yet such was the
power of their security, that they were surprised, Matthew. 24.38, 39. And it is
righteous with God suddenly to cut off wicked men, and to give them no time for
repentance under judgments, who would not take time for it before. Which
refutes the secure dreams of many, who think to be very busy when calamities
come upon them, and so do please themselves in their present security.

Doct. 3. It is a plague on wicked men, that they think they have foundations,
and that their prosperity in a sinful course is firmly bottomed; For, so is
here supposed that they have foundations, and that their prosperity in a sinful
course is firmly bottomed; For so is here supposed that they have a foundation.
These presumptuous dreams are the very snare of a sinful condition, and do
ripen men for sudden and violent judgments.

4. Men's surest standing can no more bear out against Gods judgments, than a
weak building, or the habitations of the old World, could bear out against the
flood; but suddenly, violently, and irresistibly, his hand will reach them:
For, their foundation was overthrown with a flood.

5. Justice will, here, or, hereafter, pursue wicked men, so long as they have
the least remainder of a ruin standing, For, thus will it be sooner or later,
that not only some of their superfluous enjoyments shall be taken from them,
but they shall be overthrown, even their very foundation.

Verse. 17. Which said unto God, Depart from us, and what can the Almighty do
for them?
In the third Branch of this Argument, he insists to point out the wickedness
of these men, or, the old way of their sin; Namely, that they rejected God, as
needing nothing of him, nor expecting any advantage by serving of him. Here
Eliphaz refl^cts upon what Job had spoken of the wicked, Chap. 21.14, 15.
intending to contradict what Job had spoken concerning such. For, whereas Job
had asserted, Chap. 21.7. -- 15. that even such insolent sinners went to their
graves peaceably, as to any thing visible in their lot; His scope here is to
maintain that such were visibly and eminently plagued. But both their
Assertions might be true; For, Job granted that some might be visibly
destroyed, Chap. 21.17, 18, etc. Only these few instances were not sufficient
to invalidate Job's assertion concerning the more general lot of the wicked.

Doct. 1. God does not cease to follow wicked men, nor do they want some
impressions of his presence, and invitations to seek him; as having a natural
Conscience, and the Law written in their hearts, beside what common
illumination some of them may have: For, so is here supposed, in that they
desire him to depart. So that they are singularly plagued, who have not so much
as any such impressions.

2. It is a mark of wicked men, that those impressions of God are a trouble and
vexation to them; whereas godly men do bless God for challenges, and that they
find disquiet in their sin: For, so also is here imported, that the presence of
God with them is a trouble to them.

3. Albeit Gods offers, and the wickeds convictions and impressions thereof, be
their mercy, if they would improve them; yet it is their great study to reject
them, and to put out the light of their own Consciences, and openly contemn
God, being never at ease till the Conscience be seared: For, they say unto God,
Depart from us. Which may excite men to try their own Peace, that it be not
such a Lethargy as this.

4. As this contempt of God and Religion is the greatest of evils; so when men
reject God in his convictions and offers of mercy, they deserve that he should
draw near them with judgments, however he may forbear; For, so is here
imported, that the flood came upon these insolent wicked men.

5. It is the Character of wicked men, that, as they are but mercenary in any
service they pretend at any time to do to God; So, for the most part, they see
no profit in godliness as thinking themselves well enough otherwise, or looking
upon Piety as the way to ruin them: For, What can the Almighty do for them?
says Eliphaz, giving an account of their thoughts, and the reason that moved
them to say, Depart from us, even (says he) because they saw not what God
could do for them.

6. As wicked men see no advantage in godliness, so they fear no prejudice from
God, though they slight it; For, so the words may also be read, that they
asked, What the Almighty can do to them? though they bid him depart. Albeit he
be the Almighty, yet they have but low thoughts of him: And as some dream of
protection from him in their evil ways, Mic. 3.11. Others, that he will not be
so severe against sinners, as the word threatens, Jer. 12.4. Or that God does
not send his messsengers with all these hard messages they hear; Jer. 5.12, 13.
So, others fear not him, nor his Word, at all, do what they will, Exodus 5.2.
Isa 36.20. Jer. 17.15. Isa. 5.19. 2 Pet. 3.4.

7. When men have most low thoughts of God, and of the advantage of Piety, and
are most presumptuous, judgments may be nearest to them; as in the like case it
was with the old world. And it is, indeed, true that such insolency in sin
highly provokes God to plague, though yet he may spare, as Job cleared in the
former Chapter.

8. Men may be equal in sin, who yet meet with different lots in the World;
For, those who were overthrown by the flood, and these whom Job asserteth to
have been spared, Chap. 21.13, 14, 15. are guilty of the same sins.

Verse. 18. Yet he filled their houses with good things: but the counsel of the
wicked is far from me.
In the Fourth Branch of the Argument, He subjoyns a caution to these corrupt
Principles of the wicked, as Job had done before him. Chap. 25.16. And,

1. He asserts that, though they slighted God as an unprofitable Master; Yet,
he had for a time given them prosperity, which gave the lie to the insolent
undervaluing of him.

2. Lest he should seem to be taken with that he had spoken of their impiety,
he expresses his abhorrency thereof in these same words that had been used by
Job. Chap. 21.16. Hereby intimating that he might more justly say, their
counsel was far from him, who believed their speedy ruin, than Job, who
flattered them with hopes of prosperity till their death.

Doct. 1. Though wicked men have low thoughts of God, yet his bounty may for a
time follow them, to refute their ingratitude and contempt of him; For, though
they saw not what the Almighty could do for them, v. 17. Yet he filled their
houses with good things. See Matthew. 5.45.

2. The things of this present life are not only good in the wickeds esteem,
who have no other portion; but they are good in themselves, and ought so to be
esteemed of, and God praised for them; and (however the wicked abuse them,
which will heighten their guilt) they are given for good ends, not only to
supply men's pressing necessities, but to draw them to repentance. Romans 2.4.
Therefore are they here called good things (as also, Job 2.9. Luke 16.25.)
though other things be, comparatively, far better. Luke 10.41, 42.

3. God may heap prosperity upon wicked men, and may fill their houses with his
good things, that so he may give a large proof of his bounty and long suffering
toward them who sin against so much mercy, and that, in his righteous judgment
it may prove a snare, whereby wicked men harden themselves in sleighting of
him; For, he filled their houses with good things.

4. All the favors, that wicked men get, are but temporary; For, they are only
good things filling their houses in this life. For, they seek after no more,
and by this the godly are warned not to think too much of these things, but to
leave them to the wicked who have there Portion in this life. Psalm. 17.14.

5. The more kind God has been, men's sin in despising of him is the more
heinous; As here their impiety, v. 17. is aggravated from this, that he filled
their houses with good things. See Jer. 2.2, 3, 4, 31. Mic. 6.3, 4.

6. They may receive great heaps of temporal mercies, who will be sadly plagued
ere all be done; As here, these who thus prospered were overthrown with the
flood,

7. In all debates, amongst godly men, it is commendable to emulate, who shall
be most opposite to impiety; As here he contends with Job about that, which of
them put the counsel of the wicked far from them.

8. Men may pretend to be most against impiety, and for godliness, and may look
upon others as hypocrites in that matter, when yet it is nothing so, but
themselves have the worst cause; For, Eliphaz thinks he may better say, The
counsel of the wicked is far from him, than Job might, who (as he judged) said
he hated the wicked, when yet he continued in his wicked course, and
strengthened the hands of the wicked by his principles and discourses; and yet
Job was a godly man, and maintained nothing but what was truth in that matter.

Verse. 19. The righteous see it, and are glad, and the innocent laugh them to
scorn.

20. Whereas our substance is not cut down, but the remnant of them the fire
consumes.


The sixth and last Argument (and an Amplification of the former) is taken from
the estate of godly men, contrary to what befalls the wicked. This is first
propounded more generally, v. 19. That the righteous shall have cause of joy,
and of deriding the wicked when they are afflicted.

2. The ground of this their carriage is more particularly subjoyned, v. 20.
which is, Gods different dealing with the wicked and them; the one being
preserved from ruin, and the other consumed, even to their very least
remnants. As the former Argument pointed chiefly, at the time of the general
deluge; So this may point at the lot and practice of Noah, who was preserved,
and had occasion to sing that Song, v. 20. yet so as the godly may make use of
it in all ages, when they meet with such a dispensation. And as Eliphaz and the
rest did look upon Job as the instance of a wicked man consumed by God, while
themselves were preserved; so it is like he repeats this Song even in reference
to that.

As for the strength of this Argument, it contains a truth, of the preservation
of some godly men, at sometimes, when the wicked were destroyed (as we see in
Noah, Lot, etc.) yet it is not so universally or frequently true, as to
contradict Job's Doctrine. And as for this joy, and laughing at the wicked, it
is not to be approved, if it flow from the want of humanity, or from a spirit
of private revenge, Job 31, 29, 30. Prove. 24.17, 18. Yet it is lawful and
right, when it flows from love to the glory of God, whose justice shines in
these acts of vengeance. See Psalm. 58.10, 11. and 107.42.

Doct. 1. God, when he pleases, can make the plagues of wicked men remarkable;
For, the righteous shall see it. So also Psalm. 58.10. Men should make use of
more secret and hid trials, blessing God that they are not made Beacons, much
more are they called to be fruitful when the world may see their calamities.

2. As the prosperity of the wicked, and especially their insolent profanity
and cruelty, when they prosper, do sadden godly men; so their calamities will
revive and make them glad; Fot, this, in particular, is the cause of joy here;
The righteous shall see it (or what befalls such insolent profane men, as have
been above described) and be glad. As the godly may find matter of comfort in
all their tribulations, James 1.2. Romans 5.3. (when they observe Gods love in
taking pains upon them, Rev. 3.19. Heb. 12.6, 7, 8. that he vindicates the
glory of his Holiness in not winking at their faults, 2 Samuel 12.14. that he
supports them under trouble, 2 Cor. 4.8, 9. and 6.9, 10. and 12.9, 10. that he
makes their troubles useful to them, 1 Pet. 1.6, 7. James 1 2, 3. and sits them
thereby for his Consolations, 2 Cor. 1.5. and, that their afflictions cannot
reach their best things, 1 Pet. 1.5, 6) and all their sorrows will end in joy
at last; So in particular, the ruin of the wicked will afford them joy; When
they see Gods justice, and consequently his Providence, made conspicuous, for
their comfort, Psalm. 58.10, 11. when, in the ruin of the wicked, they observe
proofs of Gods Truth and Power to be made use of in other cases; And, when they
consider how they have been kept from the wickeds evil way, and so have escaped
ruin with them.

3. Though wicked men, during their prosperity, be looked upon by many as the
only wise men in the world; yet, in their misery they will be found ridiculous,
when all their witty projects shall fail them, and the courses they have taken
for their own security, shall be found to have tended to their ruin; Therefore
it is said, the innocent shall laugh them to scorn, which does intimate that
they will be found to have been ridiculous in their way, and that innocent
straight walkers have the advantage of them. See Psalm. 52.6, 7.

4. Not only will the godly have cause to rejoice at the calamity of the
wicked, but because of Gods contrary dealing with themselves, and the
difference he makes between the one and the other; For, so much does their Song
import, Whereas our substance is not cut down, but the remnant of them the fire
consumes. See Mal 3.18. Isa. 65.12. God may sometime make this difference,
even by preserving the righteous from common calamities, and by exempting of
them, when t^ouble is most violently consuming the wicked, as a fi^e; as he did
to Noah, and is still able to do it if he please. Yet this is not always to be
expected, but there may be a difference made, even though they taste of the
outward trouble. God can moderate trouble to his own, when it consumes the
wicked as a fire, Isa. 27.7. He can make it easy to their spirits (how violent
soever it be in it self) while the wicked sink under it, Isa. 33.14, 15, etc.
He can deliver his own after they are afflicted, and can make them rise after
they have fallen, Mic. 7.8. and not be cut down; while the wicked never recover,
but their remnants are consumed by the fire. Or (though they be cut off by
trouble) he can make up all with eternal happiness, when the wicked are sent to
the pit by their temporal plagues.

5. None can claim to the privileges of the godly, or to be righteous persons,
who do not study Innocence in their Conversation; For, the righteous, who are
glad and enjoy this privilege, are the innocent.

Verse. 21. Acquaint now thy self with him, and ^e at peace: thereby good shall
come unto thee.
Follows the Second Part of the Chapter, wherein Eliphaz, having endeavored
to convince Job that he was wicked, does now (as he had done in his first
discourse) sweeten this sharpness with an Exhortation to be converted and
repent, pressed upon him by many encouragements. The Exhortation is propounded
in several branches, with some encouragements intermixed, v. 21, 22, 23. Unto
which other encouragements are expressly subjoyned, v. 24, etc. Concerning this
part of the Chapter it is to be marked, in General.

1. That the Exhortation contains sound Doctrine, concerning the way of an
unrenewed man, or hypocrites, conversion and turning unto God; But it is ill
directed and applied to Job, as if he had been an hypocrite before, and ought
now to cast away the testimony and evidences of his former integrity.

2. As for the Arguments, or, Encouragements, especially these promises of
temporal prosperity upon his repentance; whatever truth be in them, that such
Promises are put in the Believers Charter, to be performed as God sees good, 1 Timothy 4 8. Yet they hold not true in Eliphaz's sense, that prosperity will be
heaped upon every penitent and godly man. For, the Scriptures, and Experience
in all Ages, do bear witness to the contrary.

In this verse we have,

1. An Exhortation in two Branches, that Job should acquaint himself, or,
become familiar, with God, and be at peace; which is a good counsel, when given
to the fit person.

2. A General Encouragement subjoyned, that he shall reap good, and advantage
by so doing.

Obs. 1. It may be one of the godlies trials under affliction, to have all
their Piety judged to have been hypocrisy, and that they must begin of new, as
if they had never done any thing in sincerity before; For, so is Job dealt with
here. And godly m^n may be tempted to yield to this, both on the left hand, by
rough usage, wherewith Job has been essayed in the former part of the
Discourse, and on the right hand, by soft and smoo^h insinuations, wherewith he
is assaulted here.

Hence,

1. It is the duty of men, to expect that their state will be tried, and that
their integrity (real, or, supposed) will be assaulted, when trials come; as
the winds and ra^t^y how the house is builded, Mat. 7.24, 27.

2. It is acceptable service in the truly godly to stand fast in this trial,
and not to raze the foundations, whatever infirmities and miscarriages they see
cause to acknowledge; For, it is sent to be a trial, wherein they ought not to
faint.

3. They are very cruel, and do try sharply, who call the grace of godly men in
question in the day of their trial.

Obs. 2. Greatest sharpness against men's persons and faults, ought to be
seasoned with sweetness and love; As here Eliphaz subjoyns sweet insinuations
to his former sharp discourse (though he had omitted it in his last discourse,
Chap. 15.) and falls a beseeching acquaint thy self now, or, I beseech thee.
Sharp rebukes ought to be mixed with love, to make them take; For, it is no
easy art to reprove men aright, but requires much honesty, tenderness, and
love.

Obs. 3. Afflictions do never speak rightly to men, but when they press
Reconciliation with God upon them* either to secure it by renewed evidences and
assurances, if they be already reconciled, or, to make it up, if it be
otherwise; For, in this sense his Doctrine is sound, though it must not be
granted that every afflicted man is unrenewed, and has the friendship to
begin. But otherwise, whatever afflictions seem to say from God to us, yet it
speaks love in God, and safety to us, if our afflictions lead us to Godward,
to make sure his favor, and to have all our losses made up by it; and to run
away from God in afflictions speaks our condition to be very deplorable, Isa.
1.5. Jer. 5.3.

Obs. 4. It it a sweet encouragement to seek to God, that it is never
unseasonable, within time, to seek to have our peace made up with him. But when
we are not only sinful, but wicked, and sadly smitten for it, yet we are
allowed to turn to God, and it is to good purpose so to do; F^^, though Eliphaz
suppose Job to be wicked, and that he is plagued for it; yet he exhorts him now
to come to God. See Jer. 3.1. Lev. 26.21, 22, -- 40, 41, 42. God will make
sinners welcome who come to him, after they have wandered long and far, and
when all other doors are shut upon them. And his rods are sent forth to drive
us to his mercy, and do say unto us, Why will ye die? Ezekiel. 18.31. See Hos.
2.5, 6, 7.

Obs. 5. The first Exhortation is, Acquaint thy self with him, or, converse
habitually and familiarly with him (as a servant attends upon his Master, and a
friend converseth with his friend) and reap the profit of Reconciliation, as
the word signifies also to profit, v. 2. and frequently. And so it may be
understood in opposition to what is said, v 2. That though his righteousness
could not profit God, nor his counterfeit righteousness profit himself. Yet he
would do well to take a trial how much advantage his real acquaintance with God
should bring unto him. It points out,

1. A chief cause of men's continuing in a state of distance from God, is, their
ignorance and want of acquaintance with him; He is an unknown and mistaken God,
and therefore his service and way are also mistaken and slighted. See Psalm.
9.10. Isa. 40.27, 28, etc. and 51.12, 13. Rev. 15.4. Sleighte^s of God and his
servic^ do proclaim their ignorance. And hence it is, also, that Saints do
mistake his frownings, his not answering of their Prayers, his afflicting of
them, etc. In all which his counsels and thoughts are very deep.

2. The Lord approves of no pretense of Conversion or Reconciliation, when men
are not habitual in their converse with him; Nor will he be pleased with the
going about of his service in fits, unless they be constant; For, so much does
the word import here. See Psalm. 78.34.37. and 106.12, 13. This constancy, and
that we have still somewhat to do with God, the receipt of one mercy
discovering our need of another, will both prove and entertain our friendship
with God: and if God be our choice and happiness, we cannot but desire and
delight thus to converse and walk with him,

3. The good and advantage of Piety will be better discerned when men have
persevered in it, than they can at first attain to know and feel; For, by this
acquaintance and habitual converse, they find the profit of it, as the word
signifies. See Hos. 6.3. Mat. 15.22. -- 28. God may have many words to these
who seek him, before he speak warmly and comfortably to them; and they need
much to prepare them for his Consolation. And therefore whatever our success
be, yet if we live in an habitual and constant dependence upon God, it is well.
For, we may be exercised with delays, that we may stay the longer with God.

Obs. 6. He says, acquaint thy self with him, that is, with God, whom he thus
designs, though he had not mentioned him long before in his speech; not only
because the purpose would easily lead Job to understand it of God, but to
evidence that God was so much in his mind, as he speaks of him, as one he had
been immediately speaking of before. And it points out, how much God ought to
be in the hearts of his people; which made the Bride design Christ, him whom my
soul loves, Cant. 3.1, 2, 3, 4. and made Mary speak of him as one who, she
thought, might be known and esteemed by every one, as he was by her self, If
thou have born him hence, says she to the supposed Gardner, John 20.15.

Obs. 7. The Second Exhortation is, be at peace; which though it may import an
encouragement taken from the fruit of acquaintance with God, which will be
peace, Yet, it is here pressed as Job's duty to be at peace. For, in the
following words it is subjoyned, thereby, or, (as it is in the Original) by
these, (namely these two, acquaintance and being at peace) good shall come unto
thee. And by peace we are not only to understand that peace which is the fruit
of justification, Romans 5.1. (which though it be Gods gift, yet it is our duty
also to attain it, in so far as by following of duty, and by making and keeping
acquaintance, we come to it, and we ought to assure our own hearts of it) but
also that peace, which consists in meekness, calmness, and submission (which
certainly it is our duty to seek after) opposite to that murmuring and
impatience, whereof Job was indeed guilty.

It teaches,

1. No true peace, or quietness, or patience, and meekness, will be attained
(especially under affliction) let us turn us where we will, but in and by
acquaintance and familiarity with God; For, the one follows here upon the
other, Acquaint thy self with him, and be at peace. Otherwise, men do forget
their resting place, Jer. 50.6. And do seek peace where it is not be found,
like feverish persons, who seek case in the change of their Beds.

2. Acquaintance with God tends to, and is the ground of true and solid peace;
As this connection also imports. See Romans 5.1, 3, 4. and 8.38, 39. and such as
converse with God are deprived of their allowance, when they want this peace.

3. It is our duty, to be active in promoving this our allowed peace; For, he
is exhorted to it here. Partly, we ought to be sensible, how our distance
keeping with God, our not conversing more constantly with him, and our untender
walking, obstruct our peace, and should study to remove these impediments.
Partly, when we have right to it we ought to persuade and assure our own hearts
of it before God, 1 John 3.19. Partly, when we have attained it, we should be
so tender of it, as to do nothing which may over-cloud it, or take away the
sense and comfort of it; but should confess and repent of sin, meekly stoop
under cross dispensations, digest injuries, avoid distractions, etc. that our
peace be not interrupted. See Cant. 2.7.

4. A right way of making and keeping acquaintance with God, and a fruit of his
being at peace with us in Justification, is, when we become peaceable, and do
quit our weapons whereby we fight against God, and do give over murmuring, and
put on meekness and patience: For, this also (if not chiefly) is intended here.
So that there is no true acquaintance, nor right conversing with God, so long
as we live like Rebels under a pretense of friendship. And passion, murmuring
and fretting, are the fruits of our desertion and distance from God; and the
sting of all our crosses. For, righteousness and meekness, Zeph. 2.3. would cu^e
all our distempers and grievances. Righteousness (that of Christ imputed to us,
and witnessed by a righteous Conversation) will secure the state of our
persons; meekness of disposition will hide us from the evil and hurt of all
cross dispensations; And if we begin first at the study of righteousness (as
the order there is) and to be secured of the favor of God; meekness will be
the more easily attained.

Obs. 8. The encouragement subjoyned, is, By these good shall come unto thee,
which is a truth, though not in his sense, as has been cleared.

It teaches,

1. Although an unreconciled man may receive things which are good in
themselves, yet they prove not good, but snares to him, so that the more good
things he has, it is the worse for him; For, it is only upon acquaintance with
God, that good comes. See Tit. 1.15.

2. Reconciliation with God makes all things (whatever they be in themselves)
prove good to the reconciled man; as here is promised. See Romans 8.28. So that
we ought not to judge of our lot by our sense (as Gideon judged of Gods
presence, Judge. 6.13.) but by our state before God.

3. Peacableness and meekness is a mean to bring about good to us, and to make
our lot good to us, whatever it be; For, be at peace, says he, thereby good
shall become unto thee. Otherwise, passion and bitterness calls for more
crosses, Yea, passion will look upon that as evil, which meekness will see to
be good, and make it prove good to us.

4. Such as are acquainted with God, and at peace, need not to be solicitous
for good things; For, good shall come unto thee. God will watch over such for
good, and will come over all their unworthiness, and do what is best for them,
and in the fittest season.

Verse. 22. Receive, I pray thee, the Law from his mouth, and lay up his words
in thine heart.
In this verse we have another Branch of the Exhortation; That he receive and
acknowledge the divine authority of the Word.

Whence Learn,

1. Such as mind to prevail with others by their counsels, ought to be
unwearied in their affectionate and sweet insinuations upon them, not pleasing
themselves that they do so for a fit only, nor being out-wearied by any
waywardness they find in these with whom they deal: For, he is yet at his
entreaties with Job, I pray, or, beseech thee.

2. True Conversion and Reconciliation with God is evidenced by our respect to
the Word of God; Therefore is this Exhortation, to receive the Law, etc.
subjoyned to the former, as an evidence of acquaintance with God. As we ought
to know and make our acquaintance with God as he has revealed himself in his
Word (not setting up our mistakes and fancies, in place of the true God.) Romans
10 6, 7, 8. So every regenerate person must needs respect the Word, which is
the seed of Regeneration. 1. Pet. 1.23. with Chap. 2.2.

3. Right esteemers of the word will discern and acknowledge the divine
authority thereof; that it is not only a Doctrine (as the word also signifies)
but a Law (which is the name frequently given to all the Scripture, because of
its Divine Authority) and his words.

4. Men, who would prove that they acknowledge the Divine Authority of the Word,
must not carp and quarrel, nor prescribe to God (as many would presume to teach
God how he shall teach them) but ought absolutely to subject themselves to
receive what comes from his mouth; as here we are taught. This Israel
pretended to, Deuteronomy. 5.27. But Cornelius was more sincere in his Profession^
Acts 10.33.

5. When the Word is thus received, it must be laid up in the heart, before it
work any good effect upon us; Therefore it is added; And lay up his words in
thine heart. See Deuteronomy. 6.6. Psalm. 119.11. Prove. 4.20, 21. This imports that we
should not be negligently forgetful of the Word, Heb. 2.1. Jam. 1.23.24. but
should lay it up in our hearts, as in good ground, that it may bud forth in our
practice, Luke 8.15. seriously meditating thereupon, Psalm. 1.2. pondering the
authority thereof, and the importance and weight of what is spoken, Luke
2.19.51. affectionately entertaining even the sharpest message, as a precious
Jewel. Psalm. 40.8. and tenderly trembling at what God speaks. Ezra 10.3. Isa.
66.5.

Verse. 23. If thou return to the Almighty, thou shall be built up, thou shall
put away iniquity far from thy tabernacles.
In this verse we have,

1. Another branch of the Exhortation, that he would return to God, by
Conversion and true Repentance.

2. An encouragment pressing the Exhortation, that he shall be built up, or,
restored to his former estate, and shall remove iniquity far from himself and
his family. Where, by iniquity, we are to understand both sin in it self, which
is abandoned by conversion and turning to God, (and deliverance from it is a
great encouragment to right discerners) and the fruits, or punishment of
iniquity, which, upon conversion, are removed, of the like purpose, see Chap.
8.5, 6. Only it is to be adverted, that the promise of temporal restitution is
to be understood with needful caution.

Doct. 1. In our conversion we are not only to look to our distance from God,
but to our aversion from coming to him; and that our distance has been by a
revolt, and defection, at least from what we had and enjoyed in Adam: F^r, so
much does, returning, or, turning back again, after we have turned away, import.

2. They who are sensible of this distance, defection, and revolt, will not
only see a necessity that they must return, and that convictions of their ill
condition will not suffice, and that they forsook their own mercy, and
committed an act of great folly, and prejudged themselves, when they left God;
But they should also be careful to return indeed to God. Jer. 4.1. Hos. 7.16.
And that one devil do not go out, that more and worse devils may return. Matthew.
12.43, 44, 45: Therefore is the Exhortation given to return,

3. Such as would return unto God, ought to have right conceptions of him, that
he is the Almighty, and therefore not to be dallied with; and, All-sufficient,
which may encourage the worthless and empty to draw near to him, and trust in
him in all exigents: Therefore God, to whom we ought to return, is designed here
to be the Almighty, or, All-sufficient.

4. Distance from God justly brings ruin upon men; And returning to him is the
only safe and sure way of repairing all these ruins; For, in so far (whatever
God do as to temporal mercies) the Promise holds still good; If thou return,
thou shall be built up. For since ruin entered upon mankind by sin, the
returner unto God must lie nearest help, and whatever advantage a man reap in
another way, it will tend to his greater damage at last.

5. Such as would prove that they return to God indeed, ought to abandon all
iniquity, and that with great indignation at it, and jealousy lest they
relapse into it again; Therefore must iniquity be put far from us. See Isa.
30.22.

6. It is not enough that converted men abandon sin in their own persons,
unless they suppress it also in their families, and where they have power; For,
iniquity must be put far from a man's tabernacle. See Josh. 24.15. Psalm. 101.3,
4, etc.

7. It is a special motive to persuade men to keep their families pure, when
they consider how unstable their habitations are upon earth, and that they are
but pilgrims in their families, hasting to their iournyes end, where they must
give an account of all their ways; Therefore is it called a tabernacle, here,
from which iniquity is to be removed.

8. Sin is so great a burden and slavery to a right discerner, 2. Tim. 2.26.
that to be delivered from it, is a reward unto himself; For, it is an
encouragement here, as well as a duty, Thou shall put away iniquity, if thou
return.

9. When sin is removed, the fruits and punishment of sin will be removed also,
however God may continue afflictions, not any more as plagues, but for the
converted man's needful exercise and trial; For, thus also it is true, If thou
return, thou shall put away iniquity (or the punishment of iniquity) far from
thy Tabernacles. Where he speaks of many Tabernacles, alluding to the way of
many in those times, who k^pt their numerous Families in so many several tents
set up together, See Genesis 24.6^. and 31.33. And here this promise is further
confirmed, that though his habitation be but a Tabernacle, yet God will
preserve it, and disadvantages will not hinder nor impede needful proofs of his
love.

Verse. 24. Then shall thou lay up gold as dust, and the gold of Ophir as the
stones of the brooks.

25. Yea, the Almighty shall be thy defense, and thou shall have plenty of
silver.


Follow the Encouragements that are subjoyned to these Exhortations; whereof
the first (in these verses) is, That he shall have abundance of prosperity;
Even the best of Gold (as the first word signifies, and the gold of Ophir is
commended as excellent in Scripture, Job 28.16. Jsa. 13.12.) in as great
abundance as dust, (or, lying upon the dust* no Coffers being able to contain
it) and as common Stones in a brook; and plenty of silver also, or, strength of
Silver (as the word also signifies) to support him in all necessities. And, in
order to all this, It is promised that the Almighty shall be his defense, or,
his Gold (for it is the same word that is used v. 24.) to rain out of his
Alsufficiency, to make him prosperous, and secure him in it.

This encouragement is founded upon their common Error, concerning the
prosperity of Godly men. Yet it seems these godly men spoke so much of this lot
of prosperity, not out of love to it, or because they placed their happiness in
it; but be cause this promise had been so frequently verified to godly men in
their time, that they could not notice the Doctrine or few Experiences that
spoke otherwise of the lot of godly men.

We may from it, Learn,

1. It is not that petty measure of Prosperity for which wicked men sell their
Souls, but most rich abundance of it; which the Lord can give to his People as
they need it, and to which they have right, as it is for their good: For, so
much may be gathered from this large Promise.

2. The Lord also has given proofs and experiences of his bounty to his own
Children, to bear witness unto the truth of his Promises, and that we need not
question either his Power or his Good Will, when it is otherwise; For, in their
days there were many experiences of prospering Saints, which made them speak so
much to this point.

3. That the Lord dealt thus with his People in the infancy of the World
(though not always, and with every godly man, even then as Job teaches) may
teach, how the Lord trains on his People, and deals tenderly with them, when
they are weak, that they may the more cheerfully endure hardships when they are
stronger. Thus also d^d Christ deal with his Disciples, Matthew 9.14, 15, 16, 17.

4. It is not easy to keep men from ^ll principles, when they are bred with
prosperity, but they will readily slight the Word; and, if there be a change
of their condition, they are apt to take it ill, and to stumble at it, and be
unwilling to submit; For, by reason of the many experiences they had of the
prosperity of godly men, they not only call it, the strength of silver, but
they cannot endure to look on a contrary dispensation as consistent with true
Piety and the favor of God.

5. It may discover the emptiness and vanity of all outward prosperity, and
that it is not the portion and happiness designed for the godly, that the more
men enjoy of it, it is the less esteemed; For, then it becomes as dust, and as
the stones of the Brooks, not only for abundance, but because, when it abounds,
it is little esteemed. So was it in Solomon's days, 1 Kings 10.21, 27 We need
no more to point out the emptiness of the things of time, but abundance of them.

6. Prosperity is nothing worth, in the judgment of a right discerner, unless
we have God to be ours with it; Therefore it is p^^^ in the bosom of this
Promise, yea, the Almighty shall be thy Defense, or, Gold. Which imports,

1. That we must have God to be our Friend and Portion, which is greater wealth
even in poverty, then any abundance of Silver and Gold.

2 That we must have him for our defense, to protect us in our prosperity,
without which it lies open to many hazards.

3. That we must have him for our Gold, not only in stead of gold, when we want
it, but to keep the treasure and stream of our wealth running, without whose
blessing we we may soon waste never so much.

Verse. 26. For then shall thou have thy delight in the Almighty, and shall lift
up thy face unto God.
The Second Encouragement, to v. 29. is taken from spiritual advantages to be
reaped by turning unto God: These are the true and real privileges of godly
men, allowed upon them by God; yet they must be understood also with needful
cautions, that godly men may mistake their own condition, and think they are
deprived of these privileges, when they really enjoy them; and that God may
really desert his own Children, and, at sometimes, deprive them of the sensible
comforts that flow from these privileges.

This Encouragement may be taken up in three Branches, according to the number
of the verses; whereof, the first (in this verse) is, that if he return to God,
he shall attain to delight in him, and to lift up his face to him with
cheerfulness and confidence.

Whence Learn,

1. God, especially in his Christ, is a delectable and desirable object, fitted
to refresh and make them up who find grievances everywhere else; Therefore is
he propounded as the Object of delight to Job.

2. As God is desirable and refreshful; so it is the duty of men, and
especially of Saints, to delight much in him, his fellowship, comforts and
service, which will compose their minds as to other things; For, it is
propounded here, as a thing to be pursued after, to have delight in the
Almighty. See Psalm. 37.4.

3. It is both the Touchstone and evidence of men's Conversion, when they
delight themselves in God, and his favor, in opposition to other things, Psalm.
4.6, 7. and are much in his company; and it is their reward also, that they are
allowed to delight in God, if they could follow it forth and improve it; For,
it is here propounded as an encouragement, For, then shall thou have thy
delight in the Almighty.

4. It contributes to the heightening of our satisfaction in God, that he is
Almighty, or, Alsufficient, as here he is designed. Which imports that it is
comfortable that the terror of his Almighty power needs not affright us, Jer.
17.17. and that his Infinite fullness, and free communications thereof, as the
Alsufficient God, may satisfy and refresh us, and comfort us over all our
sorrows.

5. It is also the great and enriching advantage of godly men, that they may
look up to God, in all extremities, with humble confidence, without blushing,
and running away from him, as Adam did; And that they may confidently make
their addresses, and pour out their hearts before him in all their distresses:
For, thou shall lift up thy face unto God. See Job 33.26.

Verse. 27. Thou shall make thy prayer unto him, and he shall hear thee, and
thou shall pay thy vows.
The Second Branch of this Encouragement, is, that he shall receive such a
comfortable return of his Prayers as shall excite him to praise, and pay his
vows unto God. Wherein,

Obs 1. Somewhat is here proposed and employed of a converted man's duty; that he
prays and makes vows which he pays when God hears him, as it is in the end
of the verse.

It teaches,

1. Conversion to God, and delight in him, will not take away nor hide a godly
man's wants from him, nor his need of Prayer; For, he insinuates that, when Job
is converted, and delighting in the Almighty, he will yet be praying. So also
the Disciples, when they are abiding in Christ, must yet be praying, John 15.7.
The nearer men draw to God, their necessities and wants will be the more
discovered to them; The more they have of Communion with God, and partake of
the sweet fruits of his friendship, they cannot but thirst after more; and, It
pleases God to keep the issue of his peoples necessities still running, that
they may live in a constant course of dependence and communion with him, and
may abide still in him. All which, upon the one hand, may give a check to these
who pretend to Communion with God, and yet are filled with a conceit of their
own fullness. See Rev. 3.17. And, upon the other hand, those who grow in the
sense of their necessities, and who, the more earnestly they pursue, find their
necessities the more discovered, have no cause therefore to suspect that they
have no fellowship with God, since such a condition is a sure evidence they
have it.

2. As a man reconciled to God will be kept in a lively sense of his wants; so
Prayer unto God is the course he follows for the supply of his wants and relief
of his necessities; Thou shall make thy Prayer unto him, says he. The Spirit
of God, which is given to a reconciled person, is a Spirit of Supplications,
Zech 12.10. whereby he cries, Abba, Father, Rom 8.15. Gal. 4.6. The reconciled
man is not so much satisfied with the receipt of such a particular mercy, as,
that he receives it out of the hand of God, in answer to his Prayers; And he is
so discerning as to know that, without employing of God, no other mean (how
promising like soever) can do him good, and that, however a wicked man may
neglect God and yet prosper; yet his expectations cannot but fail him, if he
presume to follow such a course. This should put men to try their state and
condition, by the courses to which they betake themselves when their
necessities press them.

3. Saints, engaged in Prayer, will find, oft-times, a necessity of joining
vows therewith, or, to engage themselves with their own consent to their duty,
and to perform what is enjoined by the Authority of God; For, paying of vows,
when Prayer is heard, presupposes the making of Vows in Prayer. See Genesis
28.20, 21, 22. Now this joining of Vows with Prayer imports,

1. That such as pray aright, have an high estimation of what they seek; For,
the granting thereof of engages them to God with their own consent. And it is
no small evidence of our sincerity in Prayer, when we set a value upon what we
seek, and when delays in answering do heighten our estimation thereof, and our
affection in seeking of it.

2. That right supplicants have also an high estimation of Gods favor,
evidenced in his answering of their Prayers; that his love comes over their ill
Deservings, and his Power and Wisdom break through all difficulties and
improbabilities, to do them good; This cannot but engage them to God. Psalm.
116.1, 2. etc.

3. That they who seek God aright will also be sensible of much short coming
and lasiness in ordinary, which needs those new resolutions and vows to excite
and engage them. And when the Children of God come to be in any particular
distress, they will be put to look upon their ordinary negligence, with sorrow.

4. That Supplicants, who know themselves well, will also be sensible of their
own inconstancy, and how ready they are to shake off all these convictions and
resolutions they have in a day of trouble, unless they secure themselves by
these engagements and vows.

Obs. 2. The Promise concerning the success of the godly man's undertaking in
Prayer, is, He shall hear thee.

It teaches,

1. That reconciled men do not pray for the fashion, and sit down upon the work
wrought, but do need the Answer of their Prayers, and will be put to look what
account they get of them; For, so is supposed here, that he needs a promise of
Audience.

2. A reconciled man, making his Prayer to God, for things agreeable to his
Will, will get an answer in Gods due time and way; For, thou shall make thy
Prayer unto him, And he shall hear thee. See Psalm. 50.15. Isa. 45.19. Joh.
15.17. 1. Joh. 5.14. Psalm. 65.2. And though it be the frequent exercise of
godly men, that God hears not their Prayers; Yet, for clearing of this, it
would be considered.

1. When Answers of Prayers are withheld, oft-times the Spirit of Prayer, or
liveliness in Prayer, is wanting, though the form and fashion of it be kept up,
and that (it may be also) with some ingredient of sincerity. Men may lust and
long, but not pray* Jam. 4.2. And if they pray (as no doubt the Jews did,
during the time of their captivity) yet that life in prayer which their
necessity calls for may be far to seek. See Ezekiel. 24 23. Dan. 9.13.

2. Many times we get a bad account of our Prayers, because our distance from
God makes us wild in our Prayers; either lusting after things unlawful, as
Israel did in the wilderness; or crying up these things as our happiness, which
nearness unto God would make us undervalue; and complaining of lots as
intolerable, which a right frame of spirit would make us easily digest; or not
prefering the best things in our desires, though the things we seek be
otherwise lawful, See Matt. 6.33.

3. Though we seek things lawful, which God minds to grant, and do seek them in
the due order, and earnestly; Yet he may delay to answer, because the general
frame of our condition is not good. A Child of God, under some particulat
pressure, may be very earnest to have some good account of that, and his
affection may be a lost about it; when yet (like ice which is a little thawed
above) his condition otherwise is not good, and he may be regarding some
iniquity in his heart, Psalm. 66.18. and living ordinarily at a distance from
God, and has not taken up a resolution to walk more closely and tenderly with
him. And therefore God does shut him up under the power of his pressing
distress, till he amend these evils in himself, and recover out of the snare
of security.

4. Even when Saints are in a good frame, and sincere and lively in their
Prayers, they may yet be much bemisted, in the matter of the answer of their
Prayers, through their own haste. They cannot think that God regards them, or
will at all answer their suits, because he answers not when they would. But
Believers should not make haste. Isa. 28.16. and should learn to put a
difference betwixt Gods hearing, or, acceptance of their Prayers, and the
granting of their desires, which is not attained till first he prepare their
hearts for it. Psalm. 10.17. See also Dan. 10.12.

5. It is also to be adverted, that we are slow of heart to adore and trust the
Wisdom of God in the way of answering our supplications, which is the cause of
many mistakes. A Child of God having an honest design in all his supplications,
that he may be enabled to honor God, and walk as becomes a Pilgrim etc. is
undoubtedly answered by God in that. But his folly and weakness pitcheth upon
some means, only, for attaining that end, which if they be not granted to him,
he thinks he misseth of his design and aim: Whereas God, in his Infinite
Wisdom, can by other (and those little promising) means, bring about the same
end. He can bring about these ends, as well by emptying and humbling of him, as
by granting him sensible comforts.

(6.) Therefore do Saints miss of a sensible account of the answer of their
Prayers, because they do not first exercise faith, in that matter, as 1 John
5.14, 15. But do still doubt and question whether they be accepted and heard.

Obs. 3. The event of this success, or a new emergent duty when God answers
Prayer, is, And thou shall pay thy vows, or be thankful unto God, and and
testify it by performing what thou engagedst to in trouble.

Learn,

1. Gods answering of his Peoples Prayers obliges them to praise; as here is
subjoyned. Such as highly prize the riches, seasonableness, and sutabl^ness of
the mercies they receive, and Gods condescending to notice them and their
Prayers in granting them, will see cause not to spend these mercies upon their
lusts, James 4.3. but to return back all the refreshments they receive in
praises to God, Psalm. 50.15. and withal, a Child of Gods trials do not all end
by the answer of his Prayers; But when God delivers him out of his distress, a
new trial and exercise begins, how to acknowledge and improve his mercies, and
to give evidence that his lusts are mortified, which, otherwise, would abuse
mercies.

2. Albeit praise be a commanded duty, yet it is sweet when we are engaged
thereunto with our own consent; as here is imported, That they should be under
a vow to praise. Albeit no pretense of affection, or voluntariness, in us can
justify our doing of any thing, as service and worship to God, which is not
commanded by himself, Col. 2.18, 23. yet it is desirable when affection does
subscribe to the command, particularly in the matter of praise; and when we
look not upon commanded duties only as that which we must do (as they speak,
Ezra 10.12.) but that which we will do voluntarily and cheerfully, as loving
our duty. So that whatever be wanting in our performances, affection must not
be wanting, to outstrip all our other activity, and mourn over our short
comings.

3. Special care should be taken by these whom God answers, that their vows in
trouble be not forgotten, but conscientiously performed; For, as it is supposed
he vowed in trouble, so now he is to pay his vows. See Psalm. 116 14. It is a
sad thing to see men set such a value upon mercies in trouble, as makes them
engage themselves with their own consent to God, if they be obtained; And yet,
when the trouble is over, they undervalue them as much, and forget all their
distresses and engagements. Such do evidence that they sought not their mercies
for a right end. And however, being delivered, they think now they have no more
need of God^, nor are in his reverence; Yet, such forgetfulness is a ready mean
to draw on new troubles, wherein reflections upon their miscarriages and
ingratitude will be very bitter to them, Jude 10.6. -- 13.

4. It is a great evidence of Reconciliation with God, and of delight in him,
when men love praise, and consent and engage to it in trouble, and faithfully
perform these Vows when they are delivered; For, all this is here promised of
the man who is acquainted with God, returned to him, and delighting in him.
Godly men are not like Hypocrites, who will do somewhat at Praise, but neglect
Prayer; But they love the one as well as the other, and their short coming
therein is matter of sad humiliation to them.

Verse. 28. Thou shall also decree a thing, and it shall be established unto
thee: and tho light shall shine upon thy ways.
The last Branch of this Encouragement, is,

1. Propounded, in these words, Thou shall also decree a thing, and it shall be
established unto thee. If we restrict this, as some do, to the matter of Prayer
spoken of in the former verse; It imports the great familiarity of a reconciled
man with God; That he shall but propound his desire, and what he would have, to
God, and it shall be granted, as Elijah was familiar and had power with God, in
Prayer, 1 Kings 17.1. with James 5.16, 17, 18. But this being joined to what is
spoken in the former verse by the copulative and, or, also, we may take it more
largely, That God shall so direct a godly man, as he shall undertake nothing,
but it shall prosper and succeed in his hand, and he shall expect nothing
wherein he shall be disappointed: but according as he is directed to propose
and expect; so God shall make things succeed in his hand.

2. It is amplified in these words; And the light shall shine upon thy ways.
Where by light we may understand both the light of counsel and direction, in
desiring and decreeing of right things, and the light of success, and of p^ace
and comfort in the success and establishment of the thing decreed. This is
contrary to what Job has complained of concerning his own condition, Chap.
19.8. and must be understood with needful caution, of which afterward.

Doct. 1. Godly men are not to expect a present satisfaction, and that they
want nothing to be desired by them, but much of their satisfaction is still
before their hand, while they are within time; For, the reconciled man (of whom
Eliphaz is speaking) has his decrees, desires, and purposes, yet to be
satisfied.

2. Disappointments in our purposes and endeavors, and in our hopes and
expectations, are a sad affliction and trial; For, the contrary is here
promised as a great mercy. This the godly do sadly complain of, Jer. 14 19. And
it is threatened against the wicked as a plague, Isa. 8.9, 10. Prove. 11.7. Which
warns all to be sober and well grounded in their purposes and expectations;
lest, by feeding themselves with vain hopes, as in a fools Paradise, they lay
the foundation of a bitter cross to themselves, when they shall be disappointed.

3. A godly reconciled man has the promise that his purposes and hopes shall
be established, and not disappointed; as here we see, as also Psalm. 1.3. John
15.7, This must be cautiously understood; For the meaning is not that, because
a man is godly, therefore he may loose the rains to his flesh to purpose and
desire what he will, and God will satisfy him in it; but his decrees must be
restricted to things lawful, if he expect the performance of this promise. Nor
is it the meaning that when a godly man decrees even a thing lawful, he shall
at all times be satisfied; For there is a subjection and submission due to the
Will of God, even in our lawful desires and expectatious. But the sense of this
General Promise ought thus to be understood.

(1.) It is one great fruit of Reconciliation with God, that in so far as a man
is renewed, his will and desires are brought to a conformity to the Will of
God. So that Promise, John 15.7. does not import that godly men have a lawless
liberty allowed them to ask whatsoever they will, with hope of success; but
that, by abiding in Christ, a sweet restraint is put upon the will of the
renewed man, that he seeks nothing, but what is agreeable to the Will of God.
So that when he asks other things, it is an Evidence that his Renovation is
imperfect, and that he is prompted thereunto by his flesh. Thus also Psalm. 37
4. it is promised that delighters in God shall be satisfied in the desires of
their heart, because in so far as they delight in God, their desires will be
conform to the Will of God.

(2.) Hence, when a Child of God finds not his decrees established, he is to
reckon (as has been also touched on, v. 27.) either that his desires are not
agreeable to the Will of God, by reason of his distance from him; which makes
him lust after vain, empty and carnal things; or else makes him look for good
things from God, while he neglects his own duty, and what is required of him
that God may do for him: as Israel complained of disappointments, Jer. 14.19.
when yet they neglected their duty, Jer. 12.4, 11. Or he is to reckon that he
propounds not his lawful desires and purposes in the right order, but prefers
what is least excellent; as the people were disappointed of their expectations,
because they prefered their own houses to Gods, Hag. 1.9. Or that the general
frame of his heart is not right and lively, though his desires be lawful and
well ordered; or, (if that be right also) that God will in due time establish
his Decrees, however he try him for a time; or, (at least) will do what is as
good, and better, though he grant not his particular desire, and will train him
up for Heaven by his disappointments in some particulars.

Doct. 4. He that would so decree, purpose, and desire, as what he Decrees may
be established, should study to have Gods light to direct him therein;
Therefore it is here subjoyned, and the light shall shine upon thy ways. See
Psalm. 37.23. Such as would walk aright under the various dispensations of God,
and the various exercises and desires of their mind, should make sure the
matter of their light. For Ignorance and ill Principles breed many mistakes in
our exercises, as may be seen in the Disciples sorrow, Luke 24.17, -- 25, 26.
And our mistakes about that which we think God should do to and for his people,
and about the evidences of his love, breed us much needless disquiet, Judge.
6.13. Withal, the more a man grows in grace, he becomes the more self-denied,
and dares not trust his own inherent resolutions and light, but must look up to
God for light and direction in every step, as 2 Chro. 20.12. And particularly,
when he is at a distance from God, or under a present tentation or trial, he is
jealous of his own light (considering the clouds of confusion and passion that
attend such a condition, and that present pressures may suggest ill counsels
plaistered over with fair Pretenses) and sees a necessity of dependence upon
God in that matter.

5. The success, peace, and comfort of our undertakings, even when we have
decreed right things, must come from God; For, in this respect also he needs
that the light shine upon his ways. A Renewed Child of God, when he is in a
right frame, looks to God in every step of his way. He imploreth God for light
to guide him, and his eyes are toward him for success and comfort, when he does
guide him. So that their is not a step of his way wherein he needs not God; and
these frequent humblings are the forerunners of many mercies and proofs Of
love. And withal, it is one mercy to be directed, and prove successful in our
undertakings, and it is a new gift of God to have the comfort of all that;
otherwise, God can blast most promising lots, and leave men in a sad condition
when they get their desires in outward things. Yea, the comfort of spiritual
Privileges may be suspended, till God by a new gift help us to discern and be
comforted in them.

6. The consideration of the spiritual advantages that attend Piety ought to
stir up men to pursue after Reconciliation with God; For, this is the scope of
all this Encouragement, to press the former Exhortation to Conversion, as the
only way to attain them. So that when any find the want of these advantages,
they ought not to run away from God, but to draw near unto him, and grow in
renovation, making an errand to God of every want, which is the only way to
speed.

Verse. 29. When men are cast down, then thou shall say, There is lifting up:
and he shall save the humble person.

30. He shall deliver the Island of the innocent: and it is delivered by the
pureness of thine hands.


The last encouragement (in these Verses) is taken from the advantages of true
Piety, in times of common calamities.

1. In reference to the Godly man himself (which is spoken to Job in the Second
Person) v. 29. -- that he shall be preserved and encouraged when others sink.

2. In reference to other persons, v. -- 29. That he shall be instrumental to
save others who are brought low by affliction. This he speaks of the Godly man
in the third Person, to show that it is a common priveledge to all godly men,
as well as it shall be to Job, if he turn to God. Or, it may be understood of
God that he shall save them upon Job's Intercession.

3. In reference to the Country and place where he lives, v. 30, That he shall
be instrumental to save the very Island, or, Country, where he, who is the
innocent man, lives, and that by his Innocence and pureness. Or the words may
also be read, He shall save him that is not innocent; that is, even wicked men
shall be delivered from judgments upon the intercession of a man of pure hands
among them. This also is spoken both of the godly man in the Third Person, and
of Job in particular, in the Second Person, for the reason formerly given. Or,
it may be understood as the former, That God shall deliver the Country, or him
that is not innocent; and that by the pureness of Job's hands who shall
interceed for them.

This encouragement is to be understood with these needful Cautions which have
been often mentioned, as needful to be taken along with temporal Promises.
However, from the first Branch of the encouragement in reference to himself,
Learn,

1. It is no strange thing to see many overturnings and revolutions in the
world; For, there are who are cast down in it. Men's provocations, and Gods holy
purposes about the affairs of the world, make many a reel and change in them.
Which may teach men not to fix on any condition within time (as every man would
fix the wheel when it stands to his mind) for changes, and wonderful changes,
may come, as even the Church and godly men have experienced. Psalm. 102.10 Lam.
1.9. It also teaches men to be sober, and not to climb too high, nor aspire to
be great, lest they get the sorer fall; and it may assure the wicked what will
be the issue of all their eminency at last* Isa. 14.12. Obad v. 3 4.

2. Albeit the Godly be not always exempted, nor delivered from trouble; yet
there is always a difference betwixt the wicked and them in common calamities;
For, when men are cast down (o^, when there is a casting down) then thou shall
say, there is lifting up. See Luke 21.26, 28. Either, when the Lord sees meet,
the godly have a different let from that of the wicked, as he gave Ba^uch and
Ebe^melech their lives for a prey in a time of general havoc. See also Jer.
154 11. Or (if their lot be not different) they get a different look of it from
what the wicked see in it; and though they drink of the same cup, yet a Gospel
sight of their lot gives it a sweet relish to them. They may have also
different hopes from the wicked, And though they be under the same sad
calamities with others, and for present they look as sad upon them; yet they
may hope for b^tter things. Mic. 7.8.

3. Godly men have the promise, not only, that they shall not be cast down with
wicked men; but that they may say, there is lifting up, when the wicked are
cast down; As here we are also taught. For, partly, that a godly man is not
cast down or dealt with as the wicked, is his great dignity and a lifting of
him up; Partly, times of calamity tend to his great advantage, as giving him
opportunity of evidencing the grace of God in him, fitting him for many proofs
of love. 2 Cor. 1.5. and 4.8, 9. and tending to his advantage in end, the eater
affording meat. Psalm. 90.15. Luke 21.28. And partly, his humility will value
every mercy he can observe in trouble at an high rate, And cause him look upon
himself as lifted up by it; whereas pride and bitterness render men's sad lots
grievous and intolerable.

From the second Branch of the encouragement, in reference to other afflicted
persons. Learn,

1. An afflicted man should be an humble man; As here is supposed he is humble,
or, has low eyes: And oft-times in scripture one Word signifies both an
afflicted, and an humble man. Before a man come to this under trouble, readily
his pride breaks forth, in proud riseings against Gods afflicting hand, and his
design in it; Isa. 1.5. and 9.9, 10. in murmuring and repining that he is
afflicted, when he cannot resist; and in sinking discouragement, when he is
driven from the other.

2. Whatever respect God have to men in affliction, yet only the humble man
has the Promise of help, by sit means; For, the humble person is in the way to
be saved. See Isa. 57.15. and 66.1, 2. Psalm. 68.6. So that humility is a very
safe grace.

3. Whatever be the Worlds esteem of godly men, yet they are very useful to
others in the world; For, he, (the godly man as an instrument, or, God upon his
intercession) shall save the humble person. A godly man may be instrumental to
save those who are afflicted, and who are dejected and made to look down, with
low eyes, by it, though they be not humble, Amos 7.1 -- 6. much more if they be
indeed humble under it; an evidence of whose humility it is, That they need,
and (as they have opportunity) crave the help of the intercession of others.

From the Third Branch of the Encouragement in reference to wicked men, or
their Country, Learn,

1. The Country is called the Island of the innocent (or, where the innocent
dwells, though many others be not innocent) to show, That as Islands are
environed, and bounded by waters; So God has set bounds to Nations and their
Countries, which they ought not to break over, by seeking sinfully to enlarge
their borders. See Amos 1.13. Which rule ought also to be observed in private
possessions. Deuteronomy. 19.14. and 27.17.

2. It is the duty and property of godly men to be public minded, and by their
intercession, to seek the good not only of afflicted persons, but of Nations
and Countries; Particularly, these where themselves live; For, the godly man
sets himself to deliver, not only persons, v. 29. but the Island, (or Country)
of the Innocent, where he who is innocent dwells. See Ezekiel. 9.4. Jer. 18.20. No
man is useful in sad times but he who is an Intercessour, Isa. 59.16. And the
practice of Uriah, (2. Sam. 11.11.) will be a witness against them who turn
idle spectators of the condition of their Brethren, or of the Church and
Country where they live. See Amos 6.4, 5, 6.

3. As it is the duty of godly men to be thus public minded; So they prove, by
their Intercession, great blessings to the places where they live; For, he
shall deliver the Island of the Innocent; he, as an instrument, or, God upon
his Intercession shall do this. Thus did Moses prove a blessing, Exodus 32.10.14.
Psalm. 106.23. Elijah, 2. King. 2.12. Elisha, 2. King. 13.14. Paul, Acts 27.23,
24. and many others. So that godly men, in some respects, are the very Pillars
of the world.

4. Godly men, by their intercession, may be great blessings, in holding off
temporal judgments, even from a wicked people; For, he shall deliver him that
is not innocent (as the words will also read) as well as the humble person. See
Genesis 18.32. Jer. 5.1. Hence, They are well employed who are exercised this way,
as Aaron stood between the living and the dead, till the Plague was stayed; and
who weep between the Porch and the Altar. Joel 2.17. It is an evidence of a
sinful frame of a people, when such are wanting. Isa. 59.16. Ezekiel. 22.30. And
it is an evidence that a people are in a desperate condition, when
Intercessours are either put from praying, Jer. 14.11. or, their intercession
is not regarded Jer. 15.1. Ezekiel. 14.14. Only we must leave a latitude to him
who can come over the want of Intercessours. Isa 59.16. and 63.5.

5. Those who, by their intercession, would be instrumental for the good of
others, ought to be pure and innocent in their practice, and not in shows and
pretenses only, as Saul was, 1. Sam. 15.13, 14. For, It is delivered by the
pureness of thy hands, or, upon thy Intercession, who studiest that purity
which is required in Supplicants. 1 Timothy 2.8. James 4.8.

CHAP. XXIII.
In this and the following Chapter, we have Jobs reply to Eliphaz his
Discourse. In this Chapter he defends himself and his integrity, which Eliphaz
had assaulted; and in the next Chapter he refutes that common Argument, taken
from the experiences they had observed of the calamities of wicked men, whereby
Eliphaz and the rest endeavor to prove him wicked.

In this Chapter his scope, in general, is, to regrate, and check them for,
their carriage toward him, as may be gathered from his desire to quit them, and
betake himself to God, and from his pointing out of his own miseries whom they
did so hotly pursue. And, in particular, his scope is, to vindicate his own
integrity, and to justify his own complaints, who was so severely afflicted
every way, being a godly man. And in this Discourse, though there be many
evidences of his sincerity, and of the grace of God in him; and many complaints
of a sensible and tender man; Yet his weakness and passion did much transport
him, and we will find here many things for which he is afterward reprehended.

I shall take up the whole purpose in a Complaint (which is Jobs own strain,
and will take in all the particulars of his defense) consisting of several
branches. 1. That his lot was very grievous and bitter, and sadder than that he
could express it by any complaints, v. 1, 2. 2. That he was denied audience,
or, access to God, where he know he would be assoyled, however he was condemned
by men, v. 3 -- 9. 3. That though he was a godly man, v. 10, 11, 12. yet God
plagued him as a wicked person, and was inexorable to his desires,
notwithstanding all his miseries, v. 13, 14. Unto which, 4. He subjoynes an
account of his fears and perplexities, and a complaint that God had not
prevented these sad days, v. 15, 16, 17.

Verse 1. Then Job answered and said,

2. Even to day is my complaint bitter; My stroke is heavier than my groaning.


IN these Verses, Job begins his complaint in general; Showing, that however
they censured his complaints, and judged them to be rebellion, (as some read
the words, Is my complaint rebellion?) Yet, he had sad and bitter cause of
complaining continued and augmented to that day. And however they quarrelled
his complaints as excessive and immoderate; yet he felt more grief than could
be expressed by any complaints or groans. By all which he not only points out
the greatness of his trouble from the hand of God; but insinuates also, that
his Friends, by their discourses, had added to it: And that he could not attain
to that peace which Eliphaz had commended, Chap 22.21. so long as he was so
sharply afflicted by God, and they proved so miserable comforters.

Doct. 1. As sincerity and integrity will enable men to endure many assaults,
so men may miscarry even in defending their own integrity: For, Job answered
and replied again, nor will he take with their challenges for faults of which
he is free, though he vindicate himself with too much bitterness and sharpness.
Men must not weary in standing to the defense of truth; yet they ought to go
about it with much fear and caution, that they do not miscarry.

2. So frail is man, that he is able to do nothing for himself under
over-charging afflictions, but vent his distress in complaints and
lamentations; For, here Job insinuates his weapons had been, and yet are, a
complaint, It does indeed argue stupidity not to feel strokes, that we may make
use of them; but when we do feel them, even the stoutest is so frail, that he
can but complain of them. And God thus orders the condition of his own
children, that they may get an errand to him, to pour out their grievances in
his bosom, and that he may be much seen in their trials, and in their support
under them.

3. Complaints of Saints may be, and oft-times are, very bitter; As he
professes his complaint was bitter; Not that he judged his own frame in
complaining to be bitter (for he does not condemn himself for that, till God
convince him of it) but that the evils he complained of were very bitter and
grievous to him. It is the will of God, that our afflictions, for the present,
should be grievous, Heb. 12.11. and we, by reason of our distempers, may make
them yet more bitter to our selves, and turn our own Spirits into a frame of
rebellion, as the word will also read. And therefore, whatever bitterness God
put into our cup, we should guard against our being imbittered thereby (which
is our ordinary way) and against such a way of complaining as overwhelms us (
Psalm. 77.3.) or makes us bitter. It will not be found easy to complain, and
yet keep off this rock; only it is good if yet we pour out our bitterest
complaints unto God, rather than complain of him, 1 Samuel 1.15.

4. The bitter complaints of Saints may be of long continuance; For, that his
complaint was bitter, even to day, imports that it had continued from the
beginning till then. God may continue the afflictions of his people so long as
he pleases, as having Sovereign Dominion; Their own bitterness under trouble
may contribute to lengthen their sorrows and complaints, And the discovery and
purging of their dross (even when trouble has touched upon their sores) may be
so long in working, as may continue their exercise long upon them.

5. Endeavors to comfort and relieve the afflicted, may, sometimes, add to
the bitterness of their trial; For, even to day is my complaint bitter,
imports, also, that his bitterness was not a little augmented by the cures they
applied to his sores, so that every speech of theirs did for that time awake
all his sorrows and bitterness upon him. As it is not an easy task to deal
with troubled and afflicted Saints, so they themselves ought to guard against
supervenient irritations when they are afflicted.

6. Strokes may so confound the afflicted, that they can hardly so much as make
distinct complaints of them, but only groan; or, at least, when they have
vented never so much by complaining, there will be much more left to be uttered
by inexpressible groans; For, with his complaint, he had groaning. As this
points out the emptiness of the creature, that a man dare not so much as
promise to himself to be able to ease himself by d^stinct uttering of his case;
So Saints, in such a condition, should be comforted, by considering how much a
groan may speak to God, if it be uttered by his own Spirit, Romans 8.26, 27.

7. It is a great ease to Saints in trouble. to get leave to vent their
grievances and complaints, were it but even by groans; For, here Job complains
that his stroke is heavier than his groaning, or, that it could not be uttered
even by groans. Where the word rendered my stroke, in the Original is, my hand;
So also Psalm. 77.2. Whereby we are to understand his st^oak coming from the
hand of God, and it gets the name of, his hand, or, the hand upon him, to show
that this is the right sight of our afflictions, when we especially eye the
hand of God in them. This point may teach them to be thankful who get if it
were but the mercy of such an ease. And when it is wanting, we must look to him
who sees our condition, as well as he hears our complaints about it.

8. It is an evidence of a sinful distemper, when men complain more than they
have cause, and when their cry is louder than their stroke is smarting; For,
Jobs defending of his complaint, by showing that his stroke is heavier than his
groaning, does import, that it could not be justified, if his groaning were
heavier than his stroke. It is the duty of Saints to study to be moderate in
their resentments, and not to aggravate their sorrows and strokes. And for this
end, they ought to remember how much they deserve above what they feel, Ezr.
9.13. to observe any moderation and mercy that is in their lot, Lam. 3.18.22.
and to be content with whatsoever affliction God will enable them to bear, 1
Cor. 10.13.

9. Saints in their distempers are unfit Judges of themselves and their way;
For, Job did indeed exceed In his complaints, but does not discern it. As men
ought not simply to trust their own knowledge of themselves, as having to do
with God who knows them far better, 1 Cor. 4.4. So, in particular, they
ought to be jealous of themselves, when they are in any distemper or trouble.

Verse 3. O that I knew where I might find him! That I might come even to his
seat!

4. I would order my cause before him, and fill my mouth with Arguments.

5. I would know the words which he would answer me, and understand what he
would say unto me.


In the second branch of his complaint (to v. 10.) he regrates that he could
not get access to God, where he was sure to be absolved, though he was
condemned by men. And in this, his scope is not only to ease himself by
complaining of his sad condition; But withal,

1. To assert his own integrity, in that he expected to be assoyled by God.

2. To insinuate that his Friends had dealt cruelly and unjustly with him,
which makes him seek to another Judge, and complain that he gets not access. In
all which, albeit his honesty, and the strength of the grace of God in him, do
appear; Yet it is further to be marked,

1. That while he studies to avoid and repel their unjust censures, he runs to
another extremity in the way of asserting his confidence of his integrity.
Which shows, that even a good cause may prove an occasion (though not a
cause) to a man to manage it ill, when he is tempted by the injuries of others.

2. That being ill used by his Friends, and so irritated and put in a
distemper, he reflects too much upon God, who gave him not that satisfaction
which he desired. Which also warns us, that when passions are aloft, they are
madd steers-men, and will readily drive us upon a rock.

This branch of his complaint, and the grounds of it, may be taken up in four
particulars.

First, His earnest desire to meet with God, to argue his cause with him. since
he found so little help or comfort among his Friends, v. 3. Where if we look
upon the matter abstractly, it is sound and right, that a man desire to draw
near unto God in his trouble, especially when he is mistaken and ill guided by
his Friends. But if we look to the way of his desire, and his particular scope
in it, he will be found passionate and faulty, and therefore he is checked for
his escape in it by Elihu; For his scope here is, to desire, that, since he
missed of comfort and satisfaction in his addresses to God by faith and prayer;
therefore God would (not so much help him to appear before him in Heaven, by
taking away his life, as speaking after the manner of men) set up some visible
Tribunal, before which he might plead his cause. The whole Discourse alludes to
such a finding of God as this, which was granted to him afterward, in the
person of Elihu, and by Gods own interposing in the debate, though not so much
to his advantage as he expected.

The second Particular in this branch of the complaint (contained also in these
Verses) is, an account of the use he would make of this liberty and opportunity
of finding God: Namely, That he would boldly approach to God, being set upon
such a Tribunal, v. 3. That he would propound and argue his cause, and plead in
defense of his integrity, v. 4. and would answer all exceptions against it, v.
5. and so formally deduce and manage the process.

Here there are great evidences of his integrity, but vented without that
modesty and reverence that were requisite, and therefore he is afterward
reproved for this. However, it may afford us useful instructions. And,

First, From his desire, v. 3. Learn,

1. A man's good conscience is a sure friend in trial; For, it was this that
prompted him to make this confident (though too bold) address. It is good to
have this friend made sure, for it is that only which will speak to a man's
comfort in distress, as Hezekiah found when he received a sentence of death,
Is. 38.1, 2, 3. See also, 1 John 3.21.

2. God is the only sure Friend, Judge and Witness of a good conscience; For,
it is to him that Job would appeal in this cause. It is not enough we say we
have a good conscience, unless God judge so also, Is. 38.3. 2 Cor. 10.18. And
his letting loose others to traduce us (or even tentations more immediately
from himself, as he did to the Woman of Canaan, Matthew. 15.22, 23, etc.) is no
evidence that he does condemn us, if his Word do absolve us.

3. When godly friends do misconstruct us, it may be a check for our leaning to
their approbation, and certainly is a call to go to God, to seek, and be
comforted in, his approbation: For, the carriage of Jobs Friends puts him to
seek where to find him, that is, God, whom he thus designs, because they knew
well enough of whom he meant, and to show how much God was in his mind. See
Psalm. 142, 4, 5. As our negligence, and resting upon the applause of men, is
often challenged and punished by such a measure as Job found from his Friends;
So it is sad when hard usage here does not call and send us to God, and when we
have such an exercise, and yet are not put so much the more to seek God, but do
sit his call.

4. Men may have much need, and an earnest desire after God, when yet they are
at a loss where to find him; As Jobs desire, O that I knew where I might find
him? does import, and as is expressly regrated, v. 8, 9. Though our own mistakes
have, oft-times, a hand in this (of which afterward) yet God does order it,
that it may breed us exercise, discover our graces, make us see and mourn for
our former negligence, and teach us that our approbation is not always to be
judged by our success.

5. When we are at a loss in finding of God, our affections and desires should
be quickened thereby, to act more strongly; For, so Job is at vehement desires
about this matter, O that I knew where I might find him. So is it also with the
Church in the Canticles frequently. Such exercises are sent to be a touchstone
of our love, whether it will grow in absence, or not.

6. God is, oft-times, missed by his people, because they do mistake, and
follow not the right way of finding him, which is by faith closing with him as
he reveals himself in his Word; For, Job, not being content with this, but
seeking after a new, or, at least, a more sensible way of, meeting with God (as
has been cleared) may well wish he might find him, but comes no speed.

Secondly, From the use he would make of his liberty, if he knew where to find
God, Learn,

1. Needy Souls, who are cast upon God, will decline no pains to be at him;
For, Job would come near, wherever he were to be found.

2. Uprightness has great boldness, however men may miscarry in managing
thereof; For, whatever was Jobs weakness, yet it argues his great confidence,
that if he knew where to find God, he would come even to his seat. It argues a
childs disposition, when we still draw near to God, provided we season our
approaches with due reverence. See Heb. 4.16.

3. As men who deal with God ought to know their own condition, so they must
not dally, but deal ingenuously with him; For, Job supposes that he ought to
order his cause before God, when he comes unto him; which presupposes his
distinct knowing of himself, that he may clearly propound it to God. And when
it is otherwise, confusion will prove a great enemy to confidence in trouble.

4. God allows that his children do argue and plead their interest in him,
against the suggestions of troubles and tentations; Not to persuade God, far
less to quarrel him because he deals sharply with them (which was Jobs fault)
but to persuade their own hearts, and to evidence the strength of their own
faith, which has the promise of a good issue: Therefore, Job would fill his
mouth with arguments. See Matthew. 15.22, 23, 24, etc.

5. God has furnished his people with variety of evidences, whereby they may
strengthen their faith, and prove their own good estate, notwithstanding the
strange lots that befall them: For, Job has variety of Arguments, wherewith he
may even fill his mouth in this plea. And though it be sweet when these
abundant evidences are all clear to us at once; yet we are not to despise any
one of them (as that we have sense of need, do still adhere to God, do run to
him with every grievance, etc.) though other evidences be over-clouded.

6. Gods people may expect that sometimes God may seem to oppose their faith,
and to repel all their essays to cleave to him, and to muster up objections to
shake their confidence; For, so does Job suppose, that God would answer him,
and say somewhat to him, by way of exception to his evidences. Thus did Christ
deal with the Woman of Canaan, Matthew. 15. And they are not all unsound, the
evidences of whose good estate are pleaded against.

7. It is the duty of sincere Saints to implead all exceptions against their
estate, and even to wrestle with God, till they prevail, Genesis 32.26, 27, 28.
Hosea 12.3, 4. For, so does Job resolve, if he had access, I would know the
words which he would answer me, and understand what he would say unto me.
Where, by knowing, is not to be understood, that he would approve what should
be excepted against him (for Job minds no such thing here) but that he would
see if there were any thing could be excepted against his integrity, which he
could not implead. And (whatever his miscarriage was) it is certainly the godly
man's duty not to lie by, or succumb, when he is thus assaulted, but to rouse up
himself to plead with God; as the child of God will do, when he has a lively
sense of his necessity under such a condition, and is indeed humble before God.

8. Men's confidence of their integrity, being joined with much distress, may
over-drive them, and make them forget themselves in their addresses, and
pleadings with God; For, so Job is irreverent and presumptuous in his
undertakings. And though there was, indeed, nothing to be objected against the
truth of his grace, yet there was so much to say against him (as himself
confesses elsewhere, though now he does not so distinctly mind it) and which
deserved so much, if God should deal in strict justice ( Psalm. 130.3. and
143.2.) that it became him not to resolve to speak so passionately in defense
of his integrity before God, nor to insinuate that God could reveal nothing
against him which he knew not before, or which he could not answer and repel.

Verse 6. Will he plead against me with his great power? No, but he would put
strength in me.

7. There the righteous might dispute with him; so should I be delivered for
ever from my Judge.


The third Particular in this branch of his complaint, is, an account of his
encouragements which make him so earnestly desire to plead his cause with God.
One ( v. 6.) is, That he would thus (if he could have access) come unto God,
because God would not employ his great power against him in the debate, but
would even strengthen him to plead and prevail. Or, God would not destroy him
when he appeared to debate his integrity, but would only produce Arguments (if
there were any) against him, (as some read the latter part of the Verse) and
strengthen him to answer, if he had any thing to say. And it is indeed true,
That God will not employ his power to crush men, if they be able to answer what
may be excepted against them; Yet if any come presumptuously to plead, they
deserve that he should put forth his power to cause them know themselves.
Another ground of encouragement, ( v. 7.) is, That, at the Throne of grace, the
righteous may plead their cause with God; and by that debate, and the sentence
upon it, he should not only be delivered from their slanders who took upon them
to be his Judges, but from Gods condemnatory sentence in the day of Judgment,
and from the judgment and sentence which he might pass by virtue of his
transcendent Sovereignty.

From v. 6. Learn, 1. If God proceed in justice, or exercise his Sovereignty
over the best of men, and put forth his power against them, they cannot stand;
For, Job declines to have God so pleading with him.

2. God, in his dealing with Saints, does not proceed according to their
perfection, but their sincerity, nor does he employ his Sovereign power to
crush them; For, Will he plead against me with his great power? No. See Job
37.23, 24. Psalm. 99.4. This is a great encouragement to humble Saints, though
Job did justly fore-fault his privilege (if God had pleased to deal in
severity) by his pride and passion.

3. God not only withholds his great power in pleading with his people, but he
strengthens his people when he pleads with them, to make them prevail; For, He
would put strength in me, or, would put in me (for strength is not in the
Original) that which would bear me out in this plea. Thus did he strengthen
Jacob to wrestle and prevail with himself, Genesis 32. And thus does he deal with
his people, even when he leaves them to be pursuers of him. Ps. 63.8.

4. As Saints, who know the great power of God, will not hazard to make it
their party; So they dare not lean to their own inherent strength, as
sufficient to bear them out, even when God condescends to plead most gently and
tenderly with them: For, Job needs that strength should be put in him, even
when God makes no use of his great power in pleading.

From v. 7. Learn, 1. Albeit God allow not quarrellings (such as many of Jobs
pleas were) yet he approves of the pleading of Faith at the Throne of grace;
For, there they may dispute with him, if they manage their plea in a right way.

2. God allows his Saints even their righteousness and integrity, though they
be conscious to themselves of many imperfections; For, the righteous might
there dispute with him. But hypocrites, who are neither perfect nor sincere,
should not dare to appeal to him.

3. Godly men, in their pleading, may lawfully challenge the effects of Gods
goodness, and plead against his harsh usage of them, and desire him that he
would reconcile his present dealing with their privileges and the testimony of
their consciences; providing they do all this modestly and reverently: For, so
much is imported in this disputing, or, arguing, which is indeed allowed to the
righteous, if they do not miscarry in the managing of it.

4. Saints, notwithstanding their integrity, are obnoxious to the
misconstructions of men, and liable to the Justice and Sovereignty of God, if
he please to put it forth to call them to an account for every miscarriage;
For, these are to be understood by that Judge, which Job desires to be
delivered from.

5. Saints, by pleading and prevailing at the Throne of grace, are liberate
from these Tribunals and Judges: Gods approbation there fortifieth them against
all slanders, and answers all the accusations of the Law: For, so (by pleading
my cause at the Throne of grace, and disputing there with him) I should be
delivered from my Judge.

6. When God assoyles his people at the Throne of grace, he assoyles them for
ever; so that (however the godly man may, in his tenderness, mind his faults
often, and God may put him in mind thereof, to excite him to more tenderness
and caution, yet) the sentence passed there will stand valid and ratified in
the great day: For, says he, so should I be delivered for ever from my Judge.

Verse 8. Behold, I go forward, but he is not there; and backward, but I
cannot perceive him:

9. On the left hand, where he does work, but I cannot behold him: he hides
himself on the right hand, that I cannot see him.


The last Particular of this branch of the complaint, is, the Complaint it
self, wherein he regrates, that, though he had this earnest desire to find God,
that he might plead his cause with him, and had these grounds of hope to be
absolved; yet, let him turn himself where he will, upon all hands, he cannot
get a sight of God, nor access to him, to plead his cause. For clearing
whereof, Consider,

1. Jobs scope in all this is, not to deny Gods Omnipresence, or that he is to
be seen in his works upon every hand: But only to assert that he could not find
nor discern him in so sensible (if not also a visible) way of presence, as he
might plead his cause with him, as one party does with another.

2. While he mentions his going forward and backward, to the left, and to the
right hand, in his successless quest, the meaning is only this, that no where,
and by no means, could he meet with God; And as to what he speaks of the left
hand where he does work, some do understand it of the Northern parts of the
World (which are on a man's left hand, when he stands with his face toward the
East, the West being behind him, the South on his right hand, and the East
before him, which was the way of designing the quarters of the World among the
Hebrews) where Gods working is more conspicuous, as being more inhabited than
Southern Climates. But (however the Jews did indeed so design the quarters of
the World, and Job alludes to it) this is too subtle to be looked on as Jobs
scope here; For, though he speak of his working only here, yet it is not to be
doubted but that he saw him in his works on every hand, though he was still hid
to him, as to that way of presence he desired.

3. From what has been said, it is easy to conceive, that while he speaks of
going backward and forward, etc. it is not to be understood of any local motion
from place to place to seek and find out God, but only that, turn him where he
pleased, there was no seeing of God, and though he should travel all the World
over, and leave no quarter of it unsearched, and take never so much pains, it
would be to no purpose.

Doct. 1. Such godly men as are really distressed and needy, will be careful to
look on all hands where there may be any hope to meet with God, and will be
ready to try all foords where they think they may come speed; For, so Job
intimates concerning himself, that he was ready to go forward, or, backward,
etc. if he knew where to speed in his quest.

2. Godly men under affliction may also be convinced that it is not so much the
change of their condition, as a sight of God, to clear his mind and their
estate in trouble, that will serve their turn; For, a sight of God, for these
ends, is the thing that Job would be at.

3. They may be the dear children of God, who are yet shut up on all hands from
any imaginable hope of out-gate, or of a sight of God, and any token of love;
For, here Job is shut up on all hands, and has no hope to be cleared by God.
This sad case, as it flows, oft-times, from former guilt, from our prejudged
minds in coming to God, which makes our success agreeable to our prejudices,
from our doting upon sense, without which we cannot be satisfied, and from our
haste, which concludes our condition irrecoverable because we are not presently
satisfied: So in Job here, it flowed from his desire to see God in an odd and
singular way, as has been cleared on v. 3. So that they who would be comforted
in affliction, ought to submit to the ordinary means and way of it; which they
will never want, if they can discern it, 1 Cor. 10.13.

4. In particular, a sight of God in his working, will not always comfort
needy sinners; For, Job looked where he does work, and sees his work, but
finds no comfort. For (beside that no work of God is appointed to give such a
sight of him as Job desired) Gods common working and providence will not
always clear a distressed Soul, unless God give a special manifestation of
himself; Whatever be in his common operations (as they are full of deep
instructions, and therefore are looked unto by Saints in their deepest
distresses, as Psalm. 74.16, 17. and elsewhere) yet they are so blind-folded
that they cannot discern it; What is done by God to themselves, may, to their
sense, speak against them; God may be working much about them, when they do not
see it; They are apt to judge of his working, not according to his purpose of
free grace in it, but by their own ill deservings; or by their own wit and
skill, not minding the depth of his wisdom, as is the practice of the wicked,
Psalm. 92.5, 6, 7. And when they reflect on their own former experiences, and
Gods working about others of his people, they are apt to start so many
exceptions as may hinder their present comfort in that study. All which may
serve as cautions to afflicted Saints in their reflecting upon the works of God
whatsoever; And particularly, may warn them not to look to his works without
the Commentary of his Word, otherwise they may be involved in darkness and
sorrow.

5. Such a dispensation as this, when Saints can no where get a comfortable and
satisfactory sight of God, is very sad and afflicting to them, and it is a
proof of their honesty to be so affected; Therefore Job prefixes a behold, to
all this, to show how he is affected with it.

6. It is to be observed, that after Job has said of God, be is not there, he
adds, I cannot perceive, nor behold, nor see him; Whereby he not only clears
(as has been said in the entry) that he denied not God, omnipresence, however
he could get no comfortable sight of him; But further teaches, That though
sense be an ill judge of Gods presence or absence, yet, oft-times, he is judged
not to be present when the only fault is in our sight, that cannot discern him;
And if Saints cannot perceive him in trouble, they are ready to conclude that
he is not there, when yet God may be very present in the thick darkness.

7. It is also another addition to Job's grief, that not only he cannot see
God, but that God hides himself, that he cannot see him. Which teaches, That
sad strokes, and even want of a refreshful sight of God, are not so sad in
themselves, as in the apprehensions Saints may have of Gods thoughts and heart
in dealing so with them; And that it is not their darkness and blindness that
aileth them, but Gods hiding of himself, that they shall not see him. Therefore
godly men should guard that they do not foster groundless mistakes about Gods
love; And particularly, that they measure not his love by such odd evidences
and manifestations as Job here desired.

Verse 10. But he knows the way that I take; when he has tried me, I shall
come forth as gold.
Follows to v. 15. the third branch of Jobs complaint; Wherein he regrates
that, though he was a godly man, yet, God had afflicted him, and was inexorable
to his desires in his distresses. The substance of this complaint is the same
with the former, and in it he gives a reason of his confident desire to plead
with God, taken from his integrity, that so he may aggravate his former
complaint, that God denied him access to himself. His scope may be thus
conceived; Since the Lord denied him access to plead his cause in the way he
desired, he is bold to pass a sentence in his own favors; and does assert and
give evidences of his own integrity, v. 10, 11, 12 upon which he inferrs an
aggravation of his former complaint, that God should deal so hardly with him a
godly man, v. 13, 14.

In this Verse we have a more general assertion and evidence of his integrity;
which he propounds by way of opposition to Gods dealing with him, ver. 8, 9.
Containing this in sum; That however he could not find access unto God; yet
God knew his way to be such as, after all trial taken of it, he should come out
as Gold, which is so much the brighter as it has been purified in the furnace.
For further clearing whereof, consider

1 As for this way which Job takes, we are thereby to understand, not so much
the way of affliction and trial wherein he was made to walk and to endure it
(though indeed, it be sweet to consider, that God sees his own children and
their distresses, when yet they cannot get him seen, v. 8, 9. and Faith may
judge that it is so) as the way of his duty, and that course of integrity that
he followed.

2. By Gods trying of him, after which he will come forth as Gold, we are not
to understand only, or so much, his being tried by afflictions, and that God,
after he had tried him, had a mind to bring him forth and deliver him; For Job
oft-times judged that God minded his ruin, rather than his trial, by this
affliction, and he had no hope of ever coming out of that Furnace in this life.
But the meaning chiefly is, that if God would let him have a judicial trial
(which he had before desired) he was sure to be approved, and that his
integrity should shine the brighter, the more it should be searched into. And
in this Job asserts a truth (had he spoken it reverently and modestly) as to
the state of his person, though he forgot that he was guilty of many failings,
even since he was put into the furnace of affliction, which after trial would
be found to be blemishes in him. But however it be as to his mistakes
concerning his failings, or the way of trial he desired, this is a general
truth, That a sincere godly man, after all trial taken of him, by affliction or
otherwise, will, here or hereafter, shine brightly, notwithstanding any Cloud
he may be under.

Doct. 1. Men may be sincere and truly godly, who not only are under trials (
Psalm 142.3.) but are deserted by God, to their sense, and cannot get a sight of
him in their way; For, Job asserts, But he knows the way that I take, though
he could have no access to God, v. 8, 9.

2. Not only men may be truly godly, but themselves may be by Faith assured
that they are so, who yet are kept under a Cloud, as to any comfortable sight
of God; For, in this case, Job is confident that God knows the way that he
takes.

3. Men's honesty must be tried, not by what they are at fits, but by what they
are constantly; Therefore Job asserts this as a proof of his honesty, that his
way, or, constant tenor of his walk, is known, or, approved by God. Which, as
it refutes them who are satisfied with some fits of doing good in themselves;
so, it assures these whose constant endeavor it is to please God, that God
will not reject them, because they have some fits of distemper and failing.

4. Men will not be approved simply, because they follow a way that is good,
unless their hearts be seriously engaged in it; For, Job says of his course,
it is the way that I take, or, the way that is with me (as it is in the
Original) that is, the way which his heart settled upon as his choice and study,
and therefore did closely follow it in his practice. See Psalm. 119.30, 173.
Without this, men may follow a good way, because of company, or because it is
their present interest, or because of crosses lying upon them, who yet are not
approved of God, and will, sooner or later, weary and give it over. But where
the heart and affections are engaged in the way of God, it will plead much in
the midst of many failings, Romans 7.22, 23, 25.

5. Men's pleading of their own integrity will be to no purpose, if themselves
only say they are sincere, and God do not know and approve of them as such;
For, Job builds upon this, He knows the way that I take. See 2 Cor. 10.18.
Ps. 139.21, 22, 23, 24.

6. Godly men do need to be tried in the matter of their sincerity, both for
the discovering of their graces, and for discovering and purging out of their
humbling weaknesses; For, so does Job suppose there, that an approved man may
be tried. And albeit he understand it of a peculiar and odd way of judicial
trial; yet it is of general verity, that God uses to try his approved
children, by outward afflictions, or by calling them to a strict account in
their consciences, in times of desertion and tentations. Hence,

1. They do but deceive themselves who dream of idleness, and that they shall
not be searched and tried, even though they be sincere.

2. They cannot but be deluded in the matter of their sincerity, who dream that
they are perfect, because they are sincere, whereas a sincere man may need
trials and discoveries. And, upon the other hand, they are no less mistaken who
question their sincerity, because they find imperfections.

3. If trials be for discovering both of graces and infirmities, they are
acceptably employed who give proof of their graces when they are tried; and,
upon the other hand, it is no good token when trial does discover and purge out
no dross, Ezekiel. 24.6, 13. And herein Job failed, who discerned so little his
infirmities, when they appeared in the furnace of affliction.

Doct. 7. It is God who tries his people, and takes proof of what is in them,
by every exercise to which he puts them; For, so Job supposes, that he must
try him. Hence,

1. We should see him watching about our furnaces, that he may try us; and that
instruments of our trial will not get their will. See Is. 48.10.

2. We should be afraid, under any exercise, to dally with God, who knows
us, and is taking a trial of us.

3. We may believe that in our trials he takes pleasure to try and bring forth
our graces, and to let see how his grace will shine in frail and sinful dust.

Doct. 8. The trial of Saints will not soon be perfected; For, when he has
tried me, imports that, notwithstanding all his afflictions hitherto endured,
his trial is not yet done. And (to pass the way of trial which he desired) it
is certain we are ill to know; patience, and other graces, do not soon attain
to their perfect work, Jam. 1.4. and length of time is an addition to the trial.

9. Whatever God do to Saints, for measure or continuance of exercise, yet it
is but still their trial, and not an evidence of their rejection; For so Job
looks upon it as trying. And however he mean of a peculiar kind of trial; yet
all that God did to him proved but a trial in the issue. See Is. 27.9. And when
Saints suspect any other thing, it breeds them much needless disquiet, and
retards them in their work; But when they look upon their lot as a trial, it
will put them to look well what they bring forth, when God takes a trial of
them.

10. Tried Saints will at last come out of their furnace, when their trial is
perfected; For, whatever was Job's peculiar expectation in this, yet it still
holds true, here or hereafter, when he has tried me, I shall come forth.

11. That tried Saints will come forth as gold, does not import that God will
try them so exactly as gold or silver is tried in the furnace, for he tenders
them because of their weakness, Is. 48.10. But it teaches,

1. Saints, in the issue, will reap advantage by every trial, as gold is the
better of the furnace.

2. It is a special advantage of trial, when we come more refined out of it; As
Gold leaves its dross in the furnace.

3. Saints, after their trials, and their profiting by them, will shine the
brighter, as purified and refined Gold when it comes out of the furnace.

4. When trials have given Saints a proof of the grace of God in them, it will
be more precious in their eyes, and they will esteem of it above refined Gold
and Silver, 1 Pet. 1.7.

Verse 11. My foot has held his steps, his way have I kept, and not declined.

12. Neither have I gone back from the commandment of his lips, I have esteemed
the words of his mouth, more then my necessary food.


In these Verses Job instructs his integrity by more particular evidences;
Showing that however Eliphaz had advised him to begin his acquaintance with God
and his word, Chap. 22.21, 22. yet he had been no stranger to that practice.
But had closely cleaved to Gods way and Commandments, and had esteemed Gods
word more than his necessary food.

From v. 11. Learn 1. General assertions will not avail to prove men's
integrity, unless they be able to give particular and distinct evidences of it;
Therefore Job subjoyns these particular evidences to that general assertion, v.
10. And who so would attain this, ought to be well acquainted with themselves,
and frequent in self-examination.

2. Our way, wherein we seek to be approved, must be Gods way, otherwise, our
greatest diligence is but wandering; For, the way that Job takes, v. 10. is the
same with Gods steps, wherein he did trace and imitate him (studying a
conformity with God, Mat. 5.44, 45. 1 Pet. 1.15, 16.) or, his steps, a also his
way, which he prescribes and chalks out for men to walk in.

3. It is not enough that men speak much good of piety, unless their practice
do commend it; For, says he, my foot has held his steps.

4. Men who would be sincere and constant in their course, have need to be
earnest and painful, and to hold, or, lay hold on Gods steps, because of the
many difficulties in that undertaking; As Job here professes to have done.
Which points out that an easy way of Religion is not the surest way, and that
the difficult and strait way is not to be suspected.

5. These who would be sincere need, also, much tenderness and vigilance, to
take up the way of God in every step, to watch for, and take hold of,
opportunities of being helped on in it, and to keep them constant in the
pursuit of it, For, says he, I have kept, or, observed his way.

6. Sincerity must appear in constancy and steadiness in our course, and that
we do not decline to the right hand, or to the left; as Job here professes he
also studied to do. Not but Saints may decline somewhat in an hour of tentation
and trial, and yet be sincere: But the meaning is,

1. It is their duty to be free of a bias, and to look straight forward in the
course of piety, Prove. 4.25.

2. They should not only beware of open Apostasy, but of declining, or,
turning aside in the least, to any hand.

3. They should not gadd nor wander, as if there were not work enough for them
in the course of Piety, but should keep themselves throng at it.

4. Whatever their declinings may be, yet it should be their study and
endeavor to do otherwise, and to hold Gods paths, and to mourn for their
short-comings; and if they thus pursue after the ways of God, Psalm. 119.20,
131. they will reap the blessing of an enjoyer.

5. While Saints do otherwise, their Integrity will not afford them ground of
Comfort.

From v. 12. Learn 1. Gods approved way is to be searched for in his Word, and
not elsewhere; For, his steps and way, verse. 11. are here called his
commandment and words

2. Such as would subject themselves to Gods Word, must look upon it in its due
authority, and as his commandment; as Job does here.

3. That Commands do come from Gods lips and mouth, and that he has spoken
them, will be reason enough to a sincere man, to make him submit to them; Yea,
it renders them sweet to him that they come from Gods mouth, whose Love they
believe; As Job's description of these Words and Commandments here imports.

4. Having said, v. 11. I have not declined, here he adds, I have not gone
back, to point out, Partly, that declining tends to Apostasy; For, if he had
declined in the least, he might readily also have gone back. Partly, that it is
also an evidence of men's sincerity, when, whatever wrestlings they are put to
with their declinings and slidings; yet they are kept from open defection and
Apostasy, which is a very dreadful evil, when men, after they have spoken of
much blessedness in the ways of God, do quite abandon them.

5. None will thus sincerely cleave to the directions of the Word but those who
have much affection to it; Therefore he adds, I have esteemed the words of his
mouth. This esteem of the Word (whereof this in an evidence as the word in the
Original signifies, when men do hide, or, lay it up, and suffer it not to
slip, as Heb. 2.1. Jam. 1.23, 24) will quicken us to the obedience thereof, and
witnesses our sincerity, while we are not forced to our duty, but do willingly
delight in it, and in the Law that prescribes it, and do bewail our daily
failings, Romans 7.

6. It is the duty of the sons of men to be content with necessary food; as is
here supposed, that his necessary food, or, his daily appointed portion was a
satisfying mercy to him. See Prove. 30.8. 1 Timothy 6.8. And when men do not
acknowledge mercy in this, it is just they be deprived of it.

7. When men discern aright, they will prefer the Word, not only to delicates,
but, to their very food that is necessary to maintain their life; For, I have
esteemed the words of his mouth more than my necessary food. The Word does
maintain a more noble life than that which is maintained by bodily food; and is
more necessary and sweet than any creature comforts, Ps. 4.6, 7. and will
sweeten all other cold and scant entertainments, and therefore should be
esteemed accordingly.

Verse 13. But he is in one mind, and who can turn him? and what his soul
desires, even that he does.

14. For he performs the thing that is appointed for me: and many such things
are with him.


In these Verses we have Job's complaint, that notwithstanding his Integrity
(whereof he has given so many evidences in the preceding Verses) yet God was
inexorable to his desires, and regarded not his miseries, and would neither
hear him plead his own Innocence, nor yet forbear to plague and afflict him.
This Complaint he utters in several expressions, whereby he evidenceth the
greatness of his grief and vexation, because of his lot.

1. But he is in one mind, and who can turn him? v. 13. Where, whatever may be
said of these general truths, that God is unchangeable in himself, and in his
mind and purpose of Love toward his own Children, however he may change his
way of dispensations and dealing with them; Yet, the meaning of these words,
and Job's scope in them, is only to regrate that, however he be innocent, and
desire to be cleared and delivered from his trouble; Yet, God continues
constant in his purpose of afflicting him, and of letting his Integrity lie
under a Cloud; and that since that is Gods purpose, none can impede him in it,
or cause him alter it.

2. What his soul desires even that he does, v. 13. that is, God carries on
the pleasure of his own will, by his efficacious Providence without
controlment. This being a general, he therefore adds,

3. For he performs the thing that is appointed for me, v. 14. Which applies
that general to his own case; and imports his regrate that God goes on to
execute his purpose concerning him, without any respect to his grievances or
desires.

4. And many such things are with him, verse. 14. Which some understand thus,
that it is Gods ordinary way to deal with others also. And albeit this should
have mitigated his sorrow, and moderated his complaints, that such a lot was
common; Yet Job's passion startles at it, that being thus common and ordinary,
there was the less hope that God should change his way of dealing with him: As
it is usual for pride and passion to gather grounds of discontent, where
prudence and meekness would find ground of case. But the words seem rather to
look another way, and to import that from what he already felt, verse. 14. he
apprehends there are many more purposes of the same nature yet to be performed
and executed against him. Now concerning these complaints of Job, it is to be
adverted, that, albeit they were true upon the matter; yet, they ought to have
persuaded him to submission under the hand of God, and not to loose the reins
to bitterness, or to discouragement and diffidence, as if it were to no purpose
to be sincere or able to plead his integrity, as he would insinuate. And so his
complaints cannot be justified.

From v. 13. Learn, 1. Sense, in a time of trial, is very apt to judge that
men's integrity is not respected by God; For, after all he has spoken of his
own integrity, v. 10, 11, 12. he subjoynes this, by way of opposition, But he
is in one mind. This shows that Sense is a very blind and partial Judge, and
does little understand what is good for Saints; For Gods very trying of him,
was, indeed, a dignifying of him, and made way for putting of much respect upon
him.

2. It is no strange thing to see the mind of God differ from the desires of
his troubled Saints, in their distresses; For, here Job apprehends an
unchangeable purpose of God, opposite to his desires. By this not only does God
bring down the stout hearts of his people, while he crosses their desires; but
they evidence how low their thoughts creep, and how blind they are in their
distempers, that they cannot discern, and so acquiesce in, his high and wise
thoughts about them, Is. 55.8, 9.

3. God may, at least for a time, prove inexorable to the desires of his own
children; For, whatever Job desire, yet he is in one mind (or, still at one, as
the word is) without change or alteration. Some of our desires are passionate,
and dictated by our ignorance; so that it is our mercy they are not answered.
And when they are right, yet we may be too hasty in them, and so conclude them
inexorable, if he do not presently grant them.

4. The tenor of Gods dealing may continue long the same with his people in
trouble; For, he is still at one. This is because we have not soon done with
our work under trouble, nor do we soon attain to that which trouble is sent to
work. And if we be coming speed in our work, the trouble may yet continue, that
we may give proof of our proficiency, and may be well and solidly rooted in it.
Withal, it is many times our mercy (when our desires are irregular) that our
incessantness and importunity does not draw out an answer to our mind, though
not to our profit; Such as Balaam got. Numb. 22.12.19, 20, 22.

5. However Prayer, being put up in a right way by Saints, will still get a
good account of Gods dealing; yet, as God is unchangeable in himself, so, his
purposes about his creatures cannot be altered by them, nor will they gain any
thing by striving with him about them: For, When he is in one mind, who can
turn him?

6. Though it be a sad lot to be concluded under an unchangeable purpose of God
to afflict us; yet this should preach submission and silence to us: For, it was
Jobs fault to complain and quarrel, and not to submit, when he apprehended this
was the unchangeable mind and purpose of God. See Job 34.23. Submission is a
choice out-gate, for which we need not be beholding to our lots, or instruments
of our trouble; but, by the grace of God, it may be attained even in the midst
of trouble.

7. God is absolute and Sovereign to do what he pleases; even whatever his
Soul desires. See Psalm. 115.3. So that none ought to prescribe Laws, or set
limits and bounds to him in his operations.

8. Whatever God pleases to do, he brings it easily to pass by his
efficacious Providence; For, what his Soul desires, even that he does, no
impediment being able to stand in his way.

9. The Sovereignty of God, in afflicting when he pleases, is not easily
submitted unto, even by Saints; For, here Job makes a complaint of it. To which
also this may be added, That it grieves him to think that Gods Soul desires,
or, takes pleasure thus to use him. For Saints can more easily digest hard
lots, than their apprehensions that God takes delight to inflict them; and
consequently (as they interr, but falsely) that Gods affection toward them is
changed.

From v. 14. Learn, 1. The^e are purposes of God about the lots of his
children, so that not so much as the hairs of their head are exposed to blind
chance, or to the wills of men; For, Job inntimateth that his lot was appointed
for him.

2. Gods purposes will not be frustrated, neither by enemies, nor by the
peevishness of his children; For, he performs the thing, that is appointed
for me. It were sad, if we, in our froward humors, got leave to be our own
carvers; And Gods inexorableness to his peoples desires is, oft-times, in great
mercy to them.

3. The purposes of God, when they are revealed, ought to be submitted unto;
For, this ought not to have been complained of, but he ought rather to have
said, The will of the Lord be done.

4. As Gods Sovereignty is universal, not over one, but all persons, and cases,
(For, in this sense it is also true, that many such things are with him, to
deal with others as he dealt with Job) So when the Lord has tried any of his
people much, he is still Sovereign and absolute to try them yet more: Thus Job
apprehends, that many such things are with him, to be yet performed against
himself. And it is true, we should not think to shelter our selves under one
trial, as if that should exempt us from another, Amos 9.4. But God, when he
pleases, may send many trials, one upon the back of another, or all of them
together, Lam. 2.22.

5. As God has variety of trials to send, as he pleases, upon the Sons of
men; So he has variety of ways and means whereby to bring about their trial
and exercise: Even many such things, whether trials, or ways and means of
trying. Therefore we ought not to boast, that, because we have endured one kind
of trial, therefore, we can stand in whatsoever assault. For Hezekiah stood
firm in adversity, who yet succumbed in prosperity.

6. It is an evidence of the weakness of Saints, that when they get not their
will in being delivered from present trouble, they are ready to fear there are
yet greater troubles to come upon them; For, so did Job conclude here, that
because God would not ease him, nor grant his desires, therefore many such
things were yet abiding him. It is our duty in trouble to hold our selves at
our present work (which is oft-times interrupted by these fears) without either
presumption or anxiety about what may befall us for the future. And as we are
not to judge of Gods purposes about our future lot by what is present (seeing
he can soon change his way of dealing) nor yet by the thoughts of our own
hearts, when they are crushed and distempered by present troubles: So neither
are we to judge how we will be able to endure future trials (if it please God
to send them) till they be our trial; at which time we may expect grace to help
as being a time of need: Provided that for present we be not asleep, but
self-denied, and living in a continual dependence upon God.

Verse 15. Therefore am I troubled at his presence: when I consider, I am
afraid of him.
In the last branch of Jobs complaint, he sums up all his former complaints in
a new complaint; Wherein he shows how grievous these things formerly
mentioned were unto him, and what matter of fear, perplexity and regrate, they
ministered unto him. In this Verse, he propounds in general, That the
consideration of God, as he had taken him up in the former complaints (Namely,
that he had not only smitten him with sad strokes, v. 2. but would not be found
of him, v. 8, 9. was inexorable and unchangeable in his purpose of afflicting
him, v. 13, 14. and particularly, seemed to be about to afflict him with more
plagues, v. 14. The consideration, I say, of all this) did perplex and affright
him. Whence, Learn,

1. The sadness of men's afflictions ought not to be measured only by the weight
of the stroke inflicted upon them (for much trouble may be made easy to some)
but by the exercise of Spirit which it produces in the afflicted: For, Job
aggravates all his former complaints, and the causes of them, from the effects
thereof, that he was troubled and afraid. This is seriously to be considered,
that men may be pitied, when God makes lesser troubles prove heavy to them; and
that he may be acknowledged and commended, when he makes a heavy burden prove
very easy to the afflicted.

2. It is a sad and humbling effect of afflictions when they so perplex and
confound men, that they know not what to do, and do keep their minds in a
perpetual restlessness, and tossed with confusions; and when they are
accompanied with fears and terrors, which break the courage of men's Spirits:
For, this is the matter of Jobs sad complaint, that he was troubled, or,
perplexed, and afraid, by reason of his troubles. Men should expect to be thus
exercised in trouble, that they may neither lean to their own wits nor courage,
and when their Spirits are not broken by trouble, they ought not to complain of
any sharp trial.

3. Sad strokes in themselves will not so easily put Saints to perplexities and
fears, as their apprehensions of Gods thoughts in the strokes he inflicts; For,
says he, I am troubled at his presence, and afraid of him. Hence it is that
wicked men prove so stout-heatred in outward troubles, which may be ready to
crush godly men, because they do not look to God, nor regard his thoughts, in
their afflictions, as the godly do.

4. Saints do much augment their own perplexities and fears, by their dwelling
much upon the consideration of their condition; For, says he, When I consider,
I am troubled at his pres^nc^, and afraid of him. As the wicked want exercise
through want of consideration of their own ways, and of what God is doing to
them; So the godly do beget it through too much poring upon their condition.
And therefore they should be sober and cautious in ruminating upon their trials.

5. As God is terrible and d^eadful in himself, and in his pursuing of wicked
men; So a sight and thoughts of him may be affrighting, and breed perplexities,
even in Saints, when they are in trouble; For, so was Job troubled at his
presence, and, afraid of him. So that godly men ought not to question their own
state, because of these apprehensions of God.

6. Looking unto God through a wrong Perspective, will, readily, breed Saints
more perplexity than is allowed; For, so was it with Job here. His looking upon
God (not as his revealed will declares it to be our mercy that we are in his
hand in trouble, and that he minds the good of his children thereby, but) as
his passion and present distress misrepresented him; his poring upon his own
sad condition, and his missing of these out-gates, and ways of appearing to
plead his integrity, which he devised, breed him all this trouble and fear, and
not any thing God minded to his prejudice by this trial, if he could have
discerned aright.

Verse 16. For God makes my heart soft, and the Almighty troubles me:

17. Because I was not cut off before the darkness, neither has he covered the
darkness from my face.


In these Verses, Job expresses his complaint and grievance more distinctly,
together with the cause thereof. His grievance and sad case ( v. 16.) is, That
God did not only trouble and confound his spirit and judgment, but did make
his heart soft; not so much soft by reason of tenderness, as by taking away the
strength and fortitude of his Spirit; So that it was apt, like wax, to take any
impression of fainting and terror. A particular cause and reason of this his
dejected condition, is subjoyned, v. 17. Namely, That God had made his life
bitter with sorrows, and had not prevented these his sorrows, either by taking
of him away by death before they came, or by withholding them from coming upon
him, or taking them away when they had come. Concerning which, we are to
consider, that though this be, indeed, a sad grievance and distress; yet, it is
a fault that he should complain of it by way of quarrel against God.

From v 16. Learn, 1. God is too hard a party for any whom he undertakes, in
any particular; So much is intimate here, in that in this contest Job calls
him, God, or, (as the word imports) the strong God, and, the Almighty. See 1
Cor. 10.22. Stooping before him, and pleading pity in consideration of our
weakness, is our safety, when afflicted, Job 13.25. Jer. 10.24. And we ought to
acknowledge his great mercy, when he puts not forth his power against us. See
ver. 6. Job 34.23. Psalm. 99 4.

2. Saints may be much humbled and laid by, in times of distress and
difficulty; as here Job was ready to faint and succumb. This comes to pass,
partly, by Saints casting away of their confidence and strength, and their
undervaluing what they have, because they think it not enough, or sufficient to
bear them through without any toil or vexation at all: Partly, because God
emptieth them, that they may learn not to trust in themselves, 2 Cor. 1.9. And
that he may give proof what he can make of them when their strength is gone,
Psalm. 73.26. 2 Cor. 12.8, 9. And, indeed, Gods children are but beginning to be
strong in the Lord, when they become weak in themselves, and look up to him,
Isa. 40.29, 30, 31. And they have reason to suspect their own condition, whom
trouble never empties nor humbles, and they may fear, that, as it proves not
medicine to them, so, they shall not find proofs of Gods power and love in it.

3. Saints may be so far emptied by trouble and Soul-exercise, as to have all
their courage and resolution spent; For, so was Job emptied here, God makes my
heart soft. As sin makes the heart of the wicked weak, Ezekiel. 16.30. and 22.14.
So trouble may enfeeble the godly, Psalm. 22.14. and 73.26. and 109.22. Which,
as it is a reason why we should not be so foolish, as to trust in our own
strength of heart, and should give a check to all proud boasters; So, when it
is the lot of any Saint, it pleads pity before God, Is. 57.16. Only they are to
know that he is not so sparing of their exercise, as their own self-love would
be, and that he can pity, and help and support them, when yet he keeps them
infirm in themselves.

4. When Saints are deprived of courage, and the peace of their minds is
broken, they will soon be confounded with any troubles; For, upon the soft
heart it follows, that he is troubled. If we discern aright, we will find
that it is not so much the greatness of our troubles, as our own weakness,
which over-drives us, multiplies our fears and sorrows, and wastes us every
way, Psalm. 22.14. with 15. and 102.3, 4, 5. and 109.22, 23. Therefore we should
seek fortitude of mind from God to meditate terrors, Is. 33.18. and that will
bear us up under greatest pressures, and give us a more comfortable sight of
them.

5. Much trouble and perplexity may consist with the assurance of our interest
in God; And as peace and quietness of mind is not always accompanied with true
peace of conscience, (For not only the wicked may cry peace and safety to
themselves, but even the godly, for a time, may sleep securely in their sin, as
David did after his adultery and murder) So there may be trouble and
perplexity of mind (both in the godly and wicked) where yet there is no trouble
of conscience; but either it is asleep, or dead, or enjoys sound peace, in
the midst of these perplexities: For, Job is here troubled and perplexed in his
mind, when his conscience is in peace, and assured of his own integrity before
God. And though it flow from the godly man's weakness, who has sound peace of
conscience, that he should be thus perplexed in mind; yet we should distinguish
betwixt these two, that we take not the one in stead of the other. And when our
minds are any way perplexed, it should put us to see what the Conscience says
to it; and if we have peace here, we should improve it for our own comfort, in
the midst of all our other sorrows.

6. Whatever we find or apprehend in trouble, yet it is good to see God in all
of it, and that we are not out of his hand; As here Job sees God, and, the
Almighty, doing all this. Though, in some respect, it be sad to see him our
party; yet all would go further wrong if we saw not his hand. For that will
press both submission and hope upon us, and allow us to leave him a latitude,
as to what he may intend by, or bring out of, the saddest condition wherein he
puts us.

From v. 17. Learn, 1. Trouble will prove a very dark condition to them that
are under it; Therefore it is here called, Darkness, and Is. 50.10. and
frequently. Which may warn men, To have their light clear before they engage in
it; To beware of confusion, and feverish distempers, under it; To cleave by
faith to the Word, if confusion come upon them, Is. 50.10. And, To bless God if
he continue light with them, whereby they may see through the dark clouds of
trouble.

2. It is a great addition to the sadness and darkness of trouble, when all
issues from it, which we imagine, are hid from our eyes; As here Job regrates
that he was not cut off before the darkness (and so it had been prevented)
neither was the darkness covered from his face, either by withholding, or
speedy removing of it. So that it is a great mercy, and we have no cause to
complain of saddest troubles, if there be hope concerning them, Jer. 30.7. and
31 15, 17. It is here to be considered, that albeit the negative Particle, Not,
or, Neither, be not expressed in the Original, in the latter part of the Verse,
yet it must be repeated from the former sentence, to make the sentence complete
and clear, as is usual in this language. As for those who read it
affirmatively, He has covered the darkness from my face, to wit, till it came
upon me and surprised me, they do not consider how that reading does contradict
what Job says of his not being surprised, Chap. 3.25, 26.

3. It is the great presumption and folly, even of Saints, that they would
think to guide God, and direct him how to guide them; For, Job here presumes to
complain, that he got not his will in the matter of trouble, which flowed from
his folly and weakness.

4. It is, in particular, an evidence of weakness and distemper in Saints, when
they are simply against it that they should be afflicted; and when they desire
to be cut off, that they may not see trouble: For, such was Jobs sinful frame
here; his quarrel and complaint is, that ever he saw this darkness, and that he
was not cut off before it came.

5. Saints do therefore mistake and quarrel their own condition, because they
are blind, and cannot discern all out-gates that God has in his hand, or will
not stoop to any of them, but such as they please; For, Job sees, or will be
satisfied with, no issue, but either that he should have been taken away from
trouble, or it withheld, or, speedily removed from him; And does not consider
that when God does neither of these, he can give strength to uphold, which
ought to satisfy, 1 Cor. 10.13.

6. When Saints have carped and quarrelled never so much, Gods way is still
better than any they can prescribe; For, albeit self-love, and love to ease,
would judge Jobs overtures to be best; yet God was more honored by the way he
took. Yea, it was better, both for Job and others, in the issue, that God did
as he did, than if Jobs desires had been granted. None of a sound judgment,
who shall now reflect upon the whole procedure, will prefer what Job desired
to these man^fold advantages Job himself reaped (and godly men, to the end of
the World, do reap) by the pains God took upon him.

7. God will not judge of his own children by the fits of their infirmity,
which break forth in trouble; but will judge them patient and submissive, who
yet have many sits of passion: For, Job here proves weak and peevish, and yet
is commended for his patience, Jam. 5.11. They must not be cast away, as
altogether dross, in whom some dross appears while they are in the furnace.

CHAP. XXIV.
In the former Chapter, Job has been asserting his own integrity, and pouring
out his complaint, that he, a godly man, found such hard measure: Now, in this
Chapter, he proceeds to refute their common Argument whereby they endeavored
to conclude him wicked: Namely, That experience did testify that all and only
the wicked were remarkably plagued in this life, as he was. In opposition to
which, he proves, by their own Argument taken from experience, that there are
many sorts of wicked men who go out of the World in an ordinary way, without
any remarkable or singular plagues.

In the Chapter, we have, First, A general Proposition, that the experience and
observation of godly men can instruct no such thing, as, that wicked men are
generally plagued in this life, v. 1. Secondly, To confirm this Proposition, he
produces, on the contrary, many instances of wicked men who are spared, and do
dye but in an ordinary way. And, 1. He instanceth Oppressors, whether these
who still converse with men in civil societies, v. 2, 3, 4. or those who turn
open Robbers. v. 5 -- 11. who yet are not visibly punished, v. 12. 2. He gives
instances of these who follow works of darkness, v. 13. (such as Murderers,
Thieves and Adulterers, v. 14, 15. who shun the light, v. 16, 17.) and of
Pirates by Sea, v. 18. All which, notwithstanding their wickedness, are cut off
only in the ordinary way, v. 19, 20. 3. He gives instances yet again of
Oppressors, who are cruel both to the poor and afflicted, v. 21. and to the
mighty, v. 22. And shows, that, though God have an eye upon them to call them
to an account, yet, they are brought down only in an ordinary way, as others,
v. 23, 24. Thirdly, To all these instances, Job subjoynes a Conclusion,
confirming the truth of his discourse and instances, asserting that they could
not be contradicted by any of his Friends, v. 25.

Verse 1. Why, seeing times are not hidden from the Almighty, do they that know
him, not see his days?
IN this Verse, we have Jobs general Proposition; Wherein, in opposition to
Eliphaz his Doctrine (that not only the wicked are remarkably punished in this
life, but the godly do see it, Chap. 22.19.) he asserts, that the experience
and observation of the godly cannot instruct any such thing, as that the wicked
are generally plagued in this life. For understanding of the words as they are
translated, it is to be remarked, that Job here repeats a principle of his
Friends; Namely, That times are not hidden from the Almighty, or, that he had
his own times prefixed (which were well known to himself) for punishing of the
wicked in this life. Against which assertion, and their sense of it, Job argues
thus; If it were true, as they asserted, that these times were not hid from
him; How then came it to pass, that godly men, who knew him, did not see these
days of his, nor could discern these times wherein the wicked were visibly
plagued? And consequently, since they did not see them, it behoved rather to be
inferred that they were hid from the Almighty, in his Friends sense; or, that
he had prefixed no such times for punishing of the wicked as they alleged. For
further clearing of the words, Consider,

1. By times and days of the Almighty, we are to understand (as the sequel of
the Chapter clears) the times prefixed by him for remarkable and visible
plaguing of the wicked in this life; which times in Scripture are frequently
called the day of the Lord, Isa. 2.12. and 13.6. Joel 2.11. the day of his
wrath, Job 20.28. Prove. 11.4. and, a day of vengeance, ser. 46.10.

2 While Job disputes against their assertion, that these times are not hidden
from the Almighty; we are not to understand it as if Job denied Gods simple
prescience of things that are to come to pass, or his purposes how to dispose
of wicked men: But he only denies that God has fixed any times for the
punishment of all and every one of them visibly in this life. He neither
denies that God has a prescience and providence about things below, nor yet
does he maintain, in opposition to them, that times are simply hid from the
Almighty; Only he denies such a providence and purpose about wicked men as they
asserted. And that because, if there were any such thing, it could not but be
visible to Saints, and Spiritual observers, when it were accomplished; whereas
he is able to give instances, which Saints have observed, contrary to their
assertion, v. 2. etc.

3. As for the force of his Argument, that if there were any such times not
hidden from the Almighty, Saints, who knew him, could not but see them; it
tends not to prove this, that Saints must needs see and know every thing that
is not hidden from God: For who can know all his secret purposes? or who may
dare to pry into them? But his scope is to prove that if times were not hidden
from God, in their sense, but he had his prefixed times wherein Judgments
should visibly break forth upon the wicked: Then (as any body might see these
remarkable plagues, so especially) Saints could not but see these visible
executions of his purposes. And particularly, by this he refutes their
Argument, taken from experience and their observation of the plagues that had
befallen the wicked generally; by showing that the experience of Saints does
not prove their assertion, but rather the contrary.

4. From this reasoning of Job, that godly men do not see such days of God, we
are not to think that Job would universally conclude that God has prefixed no
times for punishing any of the wicked, even visibly in this life; or that godly
men see no such instances at all, of Gods plaguing them exemplarily: For God
revealed his purpose concerning Sodom to Abraham, even before it was executed,
Genesis 18. And Job himself, Chap. 21.17, 18, 25. grants that there were some such
instances to be seen. But his meaning is, That it holds not universally true of
all and only the wicked, that they are singularly punished in this life, as his
Friends asserted; But God punishes some of them so visibly in this life, as
others may discern it; Others, and many of them, he permits to walk on in their
wicked course, and yet lets them die an ordinary death, reserving their
punishment to be inflicted in another World.

This being the meaning of the words, the sense will easily agree with another
reading, which takes the whole words as spoken by Job according to his own
sense of things, but with a little difference of Translating, thus; Why are not
the times hidden by (instead of, from) the Almighty, (or, surely they are
hidden by him) seeing they who know him see not his days? That is to say, the
time and way of Gods punishing the Wicked is so various, that Saints cannot
discern it, so as to make a fixed general Rule of it; far less can they judge
of men's state, whether they be godly or wicked, by their outward lots. But God
hides those with himself, sometime plaguing some of them visibly, and again
sparing many of them all their life long; so that none can know Love or Hatred
by these things.

From this general Proposition, Learn 1. The judgments to come upon the wicked
are here designed by the times, and days thereof, To let them see, that
whatever be the Lords dealing and indulgence toward them; Yet,

1. Their Prosperity is changeable if, and when he pleases; as being measured
but by time, which is still in flux and motion, and wherein men are obnoxious
to changes, and cannot get fixedness.

2. The change of their condition may be very sudden and speedy, even in a day.
See Psalm. 30.5. Prove. 27.1. Is. 17.14.

Doct. 2. That judgments and miseries will come upon the wicked is most
certain, though the time thereof be not so determined that men can know it;
For, the Question betwixt Job and his Friends is not about the thing it self,
Whether wicked men shall be miserable in end; but about the times and days of
it. So that though it come not in our way, nor when we would fix the time, yet
it will come.

3. The times wherein God will reckon with wicked men are in his hand, to fix
and determine them as he pleases; For, it is imported here, that these times
are in Gods hand, and hidden by him, to plague the wicked when he will (though
he do not fix the times as his Friends asserted he did) and that he is the
Almighty, to make his purposes effectual. So that the wicked are not Masters of
their own times, but God may surprise them ere they be aware, Luke 12.19, 20.

4. Times of Gods Judgments upon wicked men are called, days, and his days.

1. To show that by these Judgments, as by clear day light, the wicked and
their ways will be discovered what they are, since they would not see them
selves and their courses in the Word, but judged partially because of their
prosperity. See 1 Cor. 3.12, 13. Is. 10.3. Ezekiel. 28.9.

2. To show that as the wicked will take their day and time of it, wherein they
walk after the imaginations of their own hearts, and contemn God; So then God
will take his time of it, wherein he will make his Holiness and Justice to
shine, and cause the wicked know themselves. So, Is. 2.12. and frequently.

Doct. 5. It is the Character of truly Godly men, that they know God; For, here
they are designed to be, they who know him. See Joh. 17.3. This imports,

1. That godly men consider with whom they have to do in their Religion and
walking.

2 That they do not take him up by guess, or at random, as the wicked do, but
from sound light, so that they know him indeed.

3. They entertain this knowledge by keeping up acquaintance and familiarity
with him.

4 And by studying to observe his hand, and take him up in his dispensations
and providence in the World; as here they would endeavor to see his days.

5. All this knowledge is not in their head only, but sinks in their heart, and
appears in practice, Ps 9.10. Dan. 11.32.

Doct. 6. Godly men are most like to know any passages of Providence, or
purposes of God about men in the World; For, so does Job's arguing import, that
if there were any such thing as his Friends asserted, Saints would most readily
know it. Albeit they must not, nor is it required of them to know every thing,
and particularly, all Gods purposes, See 2 King. 4.27. yet they are most likely
to know Gods secrets, in so far as it is good for men to know them, Genesis 18.17,
18. Ps. 25.14. and they are most accurate Observers of his Works.

7. There is no experience or observation of Saints, that can prove the wicked
to be always visibly plagued in this World; For, so much does Job assert and
argue here, and confirms it by contrary instances, in the rest of the Chapter.
So that we are not to take the evidences of men's state before God from their
outward lots; and we must leave the providence of God about men, as a Mystery
into which we cannot dive, and wherein he will not be limited or prescribed
unto by us.

Verse 2. Some remove the landmarks; they violently take away flocks, and feed
thereof.

3. They drive away the ass of the fatherless, they take the widows ox for a
pledge.

4. They turn the needy out of the way: the poor of the earth hide themselves
together.


In the second part of the Chap. Job proceeds to confirm that the experience of
Saints proved no such thing as his Friends asserted; But, on the contrary, that
experience will bear witness that many wicked men escape unpunished in this
life. And first, (to v. 13.) he produces instances of Oppressors and Robbers,
v. 2. -- 11. who yet are not visibly punished, v. 12.

In these Verses, he seems to speak of these Oppressors who converse in Civil
Societies as among men, and yet oppress their Neighbors.

And first, he shows, that some of the wicked (for though in the Original it
be universal or indefinite, they remove, etc. yet the scope leads us to
understand it but of some of them) do remove their Neighbors Landmarks, v. 2
which God expressly forbids, Deuteronomy. 19.14 Prove. 22 28 and 23.10. and that under
pain of a Curse, Deuteronomy. 27.17.

2. He declares, that some of them also take away the Flocks of others, and
feed upon them, or, feed them as their own, v. 2.

3. That they oppress these who are already afflicted, even the fatherless and
widow; by taking away (under pretense of a pledge) what is most necessary for
them, as an Ass to bear their burdens, and the Ox that should plough their
ground, v. 3.

4. That they not only oppress the poor and afflicted in the matter of their
goods, but are a terror to their persons; so that they dare not be seen
openly, or, in the way whether their affairs call them; but they must hide
themselves for tear of these oppressors.

In general, Learn 1. Men given up to error are pestered with ignorance, and
will not see clearest light that might refute them; For, Job produces clear
instances disproving their assertion, which yet they had never heeded. The
power of delusion is very great, and love of error will make men be willingly
ignorant, as 2 Pet. 3.5.

2. Oppression is a sin that lies as near a stroke as any; For, Job instanceth
that sin first, to show that, if any sin were always punished in this life, it
would be one: And if it went unpunished, not only was their assertion false,
but it was no wonder if God winked also at other sins. Naboth's Vineyard cost
Ahab dear, and none have cause to bless themselves in that sin, though they
have present immunity.

3. Oppression is committed not only by open and notorious Thieves or Robbers;
but even by these who, living in Civil Societies as neighbors, do, by deceits,
Law-tricks, or boisterous violence, undo others; For, of these Job here speaks
first.

In particular, from v. 2. Learn 1. God has given men a right and propriety in
their goods and possessions; For, if it were not so, robbery were no sin (the
contrary whereof is here supposed) nor needed there any Landmarks, to
distinguish men's possessions, nor would there be any breaches of the Eighth
Command which prohibiteth stealing. Men may be ready to plead against this
propriety of goods, when themselves are in want, who could soon change their
opinion, if themselves were possessed of what they desired.

2. It is men's duty, in prudence, to prevent contests about interests and
possessions; For, for this end were Landmarks appointed, to prevent future
debates. It is the fruit of a sanctified Spirit to abhor, and endeavor to
avoid these contests, Genesis 13.7, 8.

3. It is a great sin to remove these Landmarks, or what distinguishes men's
interests, or to encroach upon the rights of others; especially in the matter
of their Inheritances, which perpetuates the injury to men and their posterity:
For therefore it is instanced, as a branch of oppression, that some remove the
landmarks. And if it be oppression to remove a landmark, were it but a
little, how much more if men deprive others of all their inheritance? Mic. 2.2.
Senacherib boasted that he was good at removing the bounds of the people, Isa.
10.13. and God suffered his sons to pass over the bounds of duty, and kill him,
Is. 37.37, 38. And if it be a crime to remove the bounds in Civil interests, it
must be much more heinous to remove the bounds which God has set in the
matters of Religion. See Hos. 5.10. And such as proclaim this liberty in Gods
matters, to secure their own interests, may justly be plagued with licentious
invasions upon what they think thus to secure.

4. Oppression is odious in little things, as well as in greater matters;
Therefore removing of Landmarks, were it but a little, is ranked in with
taking away of flocks.

5 Wicked Oppressors do not regard reason or right, so they have power to
execute their will; For, they violently take away flocks. See Mic. 2.1. It is a
rare thing to find men of Joseph's and Nehemiah's Consciences ( Genesis 42.17, 18.
Nehem. 5.15.) when they have power, but they are rather like the Fishes of the
Sea, Hab. 1.14. where the greater devour the lesser.

6. Wicked men have not only their Consciences stupefied, to engage them in an
ill course; but they persist impenitently in it; For, when they have taken
these Flocks they feed them in the land which they have taken by oppression,
or, they feed thereof, and make use of them for their daily provision. See 1
King. 21.19. Conscience is very readily deaded after an ill turn, were it even
in a child of God, as David's experience, after his Adultery and Murder, does
witness.

7. Wicked men, notwithstanding their oppression, and their secure stupidity in
it, may yet be long spared; For, these Oppressors get leave to feed, or, feed
upon, their ill purchase.

From v 3. Learn 1. Wicked men are so set upon evil, that they will oppress for
very little advantage; For, they will take, were it but an Ass, or an Ox only.
Men may vent very much wickedness and corruption in a very small matter, as may
be seen in the transgression of our first parents, Genesis 3.6. And it will not
excuse men that they do but little acts of wickedness, if they put forth all
their power (were it but like snail-horns) and improve all the opportunities
they have, to do evil.

2. The less men's tentations be to oppress, their sin in it is the greater;
For, because an Ass, or, an Ox is but a poor prey for such Oppressors, their
sin in taking thereof is the greater. Small tentations do aggravate men's sin,
and bear witness of their perverse dispositions, which cause them to run to sin
of their own accord, when tentations do not effectually draw them.

3. Oppression is yet more heinous when it is committed against the poor, Eccl.
4.1. and 5.8. and, especially, the widow and fatherless whom God owneth; and
when Oppressors are so cruel as to take from them what is necessary for their
very being and subsistence; As here they take the very Ass and Ox of the
fatherless and widow. See 2 Samuel 12.3, 4.

4. Oppression is nothing the less odious that it is committed under pretext of
Law; For, here it is Oppression, though they take things for a pledge. It is a
great sin to abuse Law, which is an Ordinance of God, to palliate injustice;
and solemnities and formalities of Law, in committing of iniquity, do add to
the ugliness thereof, as may be seen in the way of Jezebel's purchasing
Naboth's Vineyard, 1 King. 21.7, 13, 23.

From v. 4. Learn 1. Wicked men make no end of sinning, nor keep any bounds in
it; For, they proceed from oppressing of men in their Lands and Good^, to
oppress their persons. Men by sinning do but drink themselves dry, and
committing of a lesser sin breeds them to commit a greater without remorse.

2. Violence to men's persons is the height of oppression; when poor men are not
only deprived of their good: and livelihood, but they cannot live, nor dare be
seen beside oppressors; especially if they appear to vindicate themselves: As
here, these oppressors turn the needy out of the way, where their affairs
calls them to walk, and the poor of the earth hide themselves together. It is
sad when right is thus overturned by might; yet such as have a right cause may
expect, sooner or later, to find a Friend and Patron, Prove. 23.10, 11.

Verse 5 Behold, as wild asses in the desert, go they forth to their work,
rising betimes for a prey: the wilderness yields food for them and for their
children.

6. They reap every one his corn in the field: and they gather the vintage of
the wicked.


Job proceeds, to v. 12. to give instances of Oppressors who turn open
Robbers, and live in the desert like wild Asses (as was very frequent in
Arabia, and Job had experienced in his own case) and yet are not visibly
plagued. Several branches and acts of their cruelty are pointed at, in these
and the following verses; And, First, in these verses, he shows how they
subsist by robbery; That they are so active and early about it, that even in
the Wilderness they purchase a livelihood for themselves and their families, v.
5. Either by robbing of passengers who pass by, or, (as it is, v. 6.) by taking
the Corns and Vintage of others, as if it were their own. Whence Learn,

1. Some men may come to such an height of wickedness, as may be matter of
wonder and astonishment to serious beholders; Therefore is a behold prefixed to
all this. See Jer. 2.12.

2. Men may so far degenerate in following evil courses, as they look rather
like beasts than men, in their sensual and violent courses; For, these Robbers
are as wild asses in the desert. See Psalm. 49.20. 2 Timothy 4.17. yea, they may
become more stupid and brutish than very beasts, Is. 2.3. Jer. 8.7.

3. In particular, some wicked men, and especially Robbers, do resemble the
wild asses in the desert; Not only because they live solitary, and not among
civil Societies, Jer. 2.24. Job 39 5, 6, 7. (and it must be very sad when
robbery leaves the desert, where its residence should be, if it have any at
all; and comes to abide openly among civil Societies;) But because they are
lawless mis-regarders of Authority and Laws, as the wild Ass is, Job 39.5, 7.
And violent in their lusts and desires, as the wild Ass snuffeth up the wind
at her pleasure, Jer. 2.24 Whosoever are thus impetuous and lawless (as men may be
in other courses than that of robbery) may expect, in due time, such restraints
as are suitable for beasts, Psalm. 32.9, 10. See also Isa. 37.29.

4. It is a character of wicked men, that they make sin their very work and
trade; For, these Robbers, when they go a robbing, go forth to their work.
Wicked men do not stumble upon a sinful course accidentally, nor are hurried to
it through the power of tentation; But they do intend and design it; It is
their trade wherein they delight, and about which they spend their time and
strength, and they are skillful in it, while as they are reprobate to every
good work, Tit. 1.16.

5. It is also the character of wicked men, given up to sin, that they are
industrious, diligent, and active in it; As these Robbers rise betimes for a
prey. See Prove. 4.16. Mic. 2.1, 2.

6. As Oppressors will have a livelihood, if it be above ground, and will
shift for themselves and their families, by robbing in the desert, as wild
Asses feed themselves and their young ones there, Job 39.8. So it is an
evidence that men drive some ill trade, when they keep up themselves and their
families in a rank, and yet have no visible means and subsistence; But (as it
were) the very wilderness yields food for them and for their children. It
were good if men would conform themselves to their lots, which would prevent
many ill shifts.

7. It is no evidence that God approves of wicked men and their way, that he
suffers them to prosper in it, or subsist by it; For, though these be wicked
Robbers, yet the wilderness yields food for them and for their children,

8. It is great cruelty and oppression when men take the fruit of other men's
labors, as if they were their own, and reap where they sow not; For, it is the
great sin of these Robbers, that they reap every one his corn, or, the corn
which they take as their own, or its (that is, the fields) corn; and that they
gather the vintage of other men. Men ought to live on the sweat of their own
brows, Genesis 3.19. And these who are thus oppressed, ought to look upon that lot
as the fruit of sin, Deuteronomy. 28.30, 33. And it should be looked on as a great
mercy, to be delivered from such an affliction, Is. 62.8, 9.

9. While he calls it, the vintage of the wicked, which they gather, the words
may be thus read, The wicked (such as these Robbers proclaim themselves to be
by their practices) gather the vintage. But the Noun (the wicked) being
singular, it will not so well agree with the Verb in the plural, they gather;
unless we take it distributively, that every one of these wicked men concur to
gather the vintage of others. As the words are rendered, they may import, That
Robbers and Oppressors spare neither good nor bad; So that wicked men gain
nothing by their impiety, as the piety and innocence of others will not secure
them from these barbarous hands. Or, that some Robbers and Oppressors do spoil
others, upon this pretense, that they are wicked men whom they rob; As Naboth
was made wicked that he might lose his Vineyard, 1 King. 21.9, 10, etc. Which
is most horrid and abominable oppression, when men's wealth is their crime, and
makes them wicked. Or, that to do wrong, even to wicked men, will not assoyl
the Actors, but it is oppression in the sight of God, even to gather the
vintage of the wicked.

Verse 7. They cause the naked to lodge without clothing, that they have no
covering in the cold.

8. They are wet with the showers of the mountains, and embrace the rock for
want of a shelter.


Here we have an account of further acts of their cruelty; that they use
violence to men's persons when they come into their hands; stripping them of
their very apparel, which should cover them from the cold, so that they are
left destitute in the open air; And (being stripped in the wilderness, far
from home, and, it may be, driven out of their houses, as well as stripped of
their apparel) they are glad to flee to hills and rocks, to be a shelter
against storms. Whence, Learn,

1. Cruelty has no bounds nor mercy, when men are given up to it; For, these
Robbers will strip men, and drive them to these sorrowful shifts. Hazael, once
engaging in an evil course, will go a further length than he dreamt of at
first, 2 King. 8.11, 12, 13.

2. All the sad consequents of oppression will lie at the doors of Oppressors,
and they must answer for them before God; For, here, when they strip men, it is
charged upon them that they cause the naked to lodge without clothing, that
they have no covering in the cold, and are wet with the showers of the
mountains, etc.

3. When men are under great afflictions, small mercies will be very great in
their eyes; As those stripped persons are content to embrace a rock for want of
a better shelter. Undervaluers of me^cy do proclaim that they are so dealt with
as they forget the difficulties of others. See Heb. 11.37, 38.

Verse 9. They pluck the fatherless from the breast, and take a pledge of the
poor.

10. They cause him to go naked without clothing, and they take away the sheaf
from the hungry.

11. Which make Oil within their walls, and tread their Wine presser, and
suffer thirst.


In these Verses, Job proceeds yet to give an account of further acts of these
Robbers cruelty, and of the aggravations thereof. And,

1. That they spare not even the weakest, but pull the very fatherless babes
from their mothers breasts, that they may keep them themselves, or sell them to
others, for slaves, or cause their mothers redeem them again, v. 9.

2. That they spare not even the poorest, but take the apparel of the poor for
a pledge; and take away the sheaf which the hungry have gathered among the
reapers, v. 9, 10. Where that they are said; to take a pledge does not import
that they do legally pursue, or make use of any pretenses of Law; but only that
they take somewhat as a pledge from the poor Mothers, for redemption of their
Children, or take other rewards from these they reach, to deliver them our of
their hands.

3. For what is subjoyned, v. 11. some understand it of oppressing Masters, who
not only defraud laborers of their hire, Jam. 5, 4. to deprive them even of
meat and drink, and that when they are about the labors of their harvest
(making their oil, and treading their wine-presses) which is the time wherein
very beasts are not denied the plentiful use of the creatures, Deuteronomy. 25.4. But
the context leads us rather to understand it of the condition of the poor
formerly mentioned (if not of others also) by reason of these Robbers; That
though they tread their Wine-presses and make their Oil, within their walls,
for greater safety; yet they are robbed, and get not leave to enjoy the fruit
of their labors, but suffer thirst.

Doct. 1. There is no age nor condition of persons exempted from trials, but
God may exercise them therewith, when he will; For, even babes upon the breast,
and others, may be tried. No men should plead exemption to themselves; and as
they should acknowledge it a mercy when they are free, so when they have been
long spared, they should look that, possibly, they may be met with ere their
course be ended.

2. As God distributeth conditions and lots in the World as he pleases, and
makes some fatherless, poor, hungry and thirsty; So it is not to be expected
that former afflictions will exempt men from new trials, when the wicked are
let loose, or God has them to exercise: For, even the fatherless upon the
breast, the poor, the hungry and thirsty, are exposed to new trials by these
Robbers. God in his Sovereignty may so dispose of men, if he please, and men's
sins deserve all this, Is. 9.12, 17, 21. and 10.4. especially, when they
improve not former troubles, Lev. 26.21, 22, etc. Amos 4.6, 12.

3. It is a mercy to parents to get leave to enjoy their own children, and a
sad affliction to be robbed of them; As here it is a great trial that they
pluck the fatherless from the breast. Which, as it condemns the barbarous
cruelty, of those Nations who pull away Infants, that they may sell them to
others, or make Slaves of them themselves; So it should quicken Parents, who
are free of such a trial, to look well how they educate their Children, that
they may find them, their company and liberty, a mercy to themselves and others
with whom they live.

4. God will own the cause of the indigent, and afflicted, especially when they
are wronged in their very livelihood and necessary apparel: For, so Joh
supposes, that if God avenge any Injuries visibly in th^s life, he will avenge
Injuries done to fatherless babes, to the poor, hungry and thirsty. We ought to
be sober, when we are deprived of superfluities only (for that is, oft-times, a
just chastisement upon Gods part, and may prove a mercy to us, if we mortify
lusts diligently, when their fuel is taken from them) and when it comes to
extremities, God will appear and be a party against those that wrong us,
especially when we are humbled before him.

5. It is a great addition to trials, when men's endeavors to prevent them do
not avail them; That even within their walls, where they think to secure their
harvest, they get not so much as a drink of their own Wine, but suffer thirst;
and that when they have gathered their sheaf, it is taken away. Endeavors to
prevent trouble (though it be our duty to use them) will but imbitter us with
disappointments (and so augment our afflictions) till our trial be perfected;
Especially if we think to secure our selves by our own endeavors, without
turning to God, Is. 22.9, 10, 11. Mal. 1.4.

Verse 12. Men groan from out of the city, and the soul of the wounded cries
out: yet God lays not folly to them.
Here Job closes this instance of Oppressors and Robbers, showing how God
spares them, notwithstanding their cruelty. For however (by reason of the
cruelty of these Oppressors in Cities or Civil Societies, and these open
Robbers, formerly mentioned) men are heard to groan, because of oppression,
from out of the very Cities; and the soul of the robbed and wounded to death
(belike by Robbers without) do cry out of this horrid cruelty; yet the Lord
does not visibly charge this sin and folly upon the Oppressors, but suffers
them to escape unpunished in this life. Because the supplement, to them, in the
end of the Verse, is not in the Original, therefore some render the words thus,
God disposes no absurdity. But the sense of this must fall in with the former
reading, That notwithstanding Oppressors be thus cruel, yet the Lord does no
absurd or unbeseeming act in not pursuing them visibly, but permitting them to
vent their cruelty.

Doct. 1. Oppression may draw very deep, even to enter Cities; and may put the
oppressed not only to secret groans, but to crying out, through deadly wounds.
Which may teach oppressed people to observe and acknowledge Gods mercy, when
they meet with a more gentle measure.

2. Oppression is a crying sin, and as it makes the oppressed groan and cry
out, so God will hear those, though none other regard them, as he hears the
cries of the young Lions and Ravens, Psalm. 104.21. Job 38.41. For, so are we
here taught, that their groans and cries are heard, and God would avenge them,
if he did not see it fit to testify his long suffering.

3. The more they be who are oppressed, it adds to the weight and hainousness of
the sin; For, this adds to the crime, that the groaning men, and the wounded,
who cry out, are many, in the plural number. Many grievances of many persons,
it well improved, would make a loud cry.

4 Oppression and violent courses are but acts of folly, let men thrive in them
as they will; And this folly has a weight following it, let men balance or
bear it as they will for present; For, that God lays not folly to them,
imports that their way is but folly, and that God could lay on, and make them
feel the weight of it, if he pleased.

5. How foolish soever a course oppression be, yet we are not to expect that
God will always visibly charge the wicked with it; But (without any Imputation
upon his Holiness and Justice) he may let them go on, for a snare to themselves
and others, and for a trial to the godly: For, yet God lays not folly to
them, and in so doing does not order, or commit any absurdity, as the other
reading has it. Their prospering for a while, or even all their life long,
will tempt many to have more mild thoughts of them and their way, than possibly
at first they had; yea, and it may be, to join with them; Nor is it easy to
abide the trial of the wickeds prolonging their days in wickedness, Eccl.
8.11, 12. and yet their way is nothing the less odious before God.

Verse 13. They are of those that rebel against the light, they know not the
ways thereof, nor abide in the paths thereof.
From this, to v. 21. Job proceeds to give other instances of wicked men who
are cut off but in an ordinary way; particularly, of these who follow works of
darkness, such as murderers, thieves and adulterers, to whom also Pirates by Sea
may be added.

In this Verse Job prefixeth a general Character of those wicked men, that
rebelliously they shun the light, not haunting nor abiding in the paths
thereof. For understanding whereof, Consider,

1. As for the way of propounding this Character, They are of (or among) those
that rebel, etc. though the relative they, or, those, may referr to these
violent Oppressors and open Robbers formerly spoken of, that they are also
among the number of these who rebel against the light, and, beside their open
wickedness, they commit also much villainy in secret: Yet it is better to referr
it to those who are after mentioned; that those after mentioned are another
sort of wicked men, distinct from the former, who yet escape visible judgments
in this life. And this is their Character, that they do not commit their
wickedness openly, as the other sort did; but are among the number of these (of
which sort there are many more than those named here) who shun the light.

2. As for this light, against which these wicked men rebel, and the ways and
paths whereof they know not, nor will abide in them; Albeit the following
purpose do clear that it is meant of the light of the day, which those wicked
men do shun; Yet it may take in also the internal light, whether of Nature or
Divine revelation, against which they fight and rebel, and the paths whereof
they shun in their wicked courses. Whereof this is an infallible evidence, that
they shun daylight in perpetrating these wickednesses, as being conscious to
themselves how abominable they are, and that therefore they are punishable by
Law in all Civil Societies.

Doct. 1. Sinners are not all of one sort, but they may be about several sorts
of wickedness, and perpetrate them in several ways, and in diverse manners; For,
here are a new sort of sinful men, distinct from the former, who are wicked as
well as they. So that our comparing of our selves with others, and finding
them, in appearance, more gross than our selves, will not assoil us, if our
course be evil.

2. God not only takes notice of open, but even of secret abominations, as
proving men wicked; For, here those are wicked men also (for of those Job gives
instances) who rebel against the light. See Ephesians. 5.12.

3. There are few of the children of men, but they have light which condemns,
at least, their gross evils; for, therefore are they rebels against this
light, as well as they shun daylight, when they commit them. See Psa. 53.4.

4. Men's light should have authority over them, to command their practice; For,
they are rebels, against a Sovereign authority, who act against it.

5. Whatever authority light should have over men, yet it will not bind wicked
men to duty, but will rather only irritate their corruptions; For, they will
rebel against the light.

6. Such as sin resolvedly against their light, are sinners in the highest
degree; Therefore are they called rebels, even in reference to this light.

7. Men's hatred of the light may appear in their neglecting the means of light,
and not bringing their ways to be tried by it; So much may be imported (if the
words be extended to internal light) in that they know not, or, are strangers
to the ways of light. See Joh. 3.20.

8. The way pointed out by the light of God is a strait and narrow way, cross
to men's natural inclinations and carnal licentious humors; For, it is called,
the paths, or, narrow way (as the word imports) of light.

9. Wicked men's love or hatred of light must not be tried by what they are at
fits, but by the constant tenor of their walk; For, whatever they be at some
times, yet it proves them wicked, if they abide not, or, sit not in the paths
of light.

10. It is an undoubted evidence of men's sinning against light, not only when
they sin with an high hand, but when they seek to commit their wickedness
secretly, without being seen by others; For, (as has been explained) because
they sin against internal light, therefore are they rebels against the light,
they shun day light as rebels do lawful authority, they know not the ways
thereof, nor abide in the paths thereof, that is, they estrange themselves from
committing of their wickedness in the open light, as men do estrange themselves
from a way and path wherein they never walk. And, indeed, their very
endeavoring to commit their sin secretly proves their Atheism, Is. 29.15.
Ezekiel. 8.12. and their wicked sinning against light, in that they know their
works may not abide the light, and yet they will do them. Though hereby, also,
they prove their own madness and folly, in that they seek no more but to be hid
from the sight of the World; as if that were sufficient to secure them in these
courses which their light tells them are wrong.

11. The wicked works of darkness, committed by the sons of men, are very many,
and not easily reckoned up; For, though Job reckon up diverse instances of them,
yet, lest it should be thought he had numbered all, he premits this, that they
are but among those that rebel against the light, etc. or, but some few
instances of the manifold kinds of secret wickednesses committed by men.

Verse 14. The murderer rising with the light, kills the poor and needy, and
in the night is as a thief.

15. The eye also of the adulterer waits for the twilight, saying, No eye
shall see me: and disguiseth his face.


In these Verses, Job produces some instances of these Rebels against the
Light; namely, Murderers, who rise by daybreak to kill and rob men, and spend
the night in thieving, and Adulterers, who take advantage of the twilight to
hide themselves, and seek to promove their design, of being hid from the sight
of men, by masking, or otherwise disguising of their faces.

Doct. 1. Murder, Theft and Adultery are, in special, works of darkness which
prove men to hate the light, and which do highly provoke God; For, these are
brought in here as instances of that general Character of wicked men, v. 13.
and as sins which God would visibly plague, if he took that course with all
sinners which Job's Friends asserted he did.

2. In particular, Murder is a sin lying as near a stroke as any; For, he
instanceth the murderer first here. See Genesis 4.10, 11. Is. 26.21. And though
this crime be, oft-times, covered with the mask of War or Authority; yet that
will not hide it, but rather make it more odious.

3. The secret ways of committing murder will not hide it from God, but it
does rather aggravate the crime, that men think to cover it by that means; For,
the murderer that rises with the light, to kill is a sinner who is obnoxious
to vengeance, if God please to pursue. Sin will find out sinners in Gods time,
Number. 32.23.

4. Bloodthirsty men are very infatiable in their cruelty, and will cut off
men upon a very small tentation, or for very little advantage; For, the
murderer kills even the poor and needy, by whose death he can reap little or
no profit; and this he does without any compassion or regard to their miserable
and low condition.

5. Oppression, especially when it reaches the life, renders the oppressed the
object of Gods pity, so far as that he is ready to avenge it in due time; For,
in this respect, also, those whom the murderer kills, are the poor and needy,
whose cause God will own, (as his frequent promises concerning the poor and
needy do import) whatever they have been before. Thus Joab is said to have cut
off two men more righteous and better than himself, 1 Kin. 2.32 though,
otherwise, they were not very good men, but Rebels against their lawful Prince
So that it will not assoil men that these whom they cut off are naughty, if
they have not a call and warrant to cut them off.

6. Wicked men, being once engaged, are indefatigable in their course, and are
still either at one trade of sin or other; For, when this murderer is not
killing, he is a thief, which shows that there is a concatenation of sins, and
that the wicked are still at one or another of them. And their care to lose no
time in the pursuit of their sinful designs, may give a check to them who lose
many opportunities of doing good.

7. It will not assoil men that they come not the length of cruel murder, if
yet they commit other acts of injustice; For, it is a charge sad enough that he
is as a thief, a very thief, or somewhat like it. Wicked men do at some times
commit only such lower acts of injustice, not because they want a disposition
and inclination to grosser evils, but because they want a tentation and
opportunity, or power to bring them to pass.

8. Adultery is an old sin in the world, and has been looked on as a sin
deserving Gods vengeance; For, adultery was accounted a sin in Job's days, and
a sin which God would not spare, if he did always visibly plague the wicked.
The sin of uncleanness contributed toward the destruction of the old World, and
destroyed Sodom and Gomorrhah. And if it was so hateful to God, in them who had
fullness of bread and idleness to foster it, Ezekiel. 16.49. it must be much more
abominable when it abounds in time of poverty and affliction.

9. It is a plague upon sinners, particularly, upon unclean persons, when they
commit wickedness with resolution; As the eye of the adulterer waits for the
twilight, with a resolution to perpetrate his wickedness then.

10. It is also a plague upon wicked men, and especially lustful persons, that
when they are not acting sin, yet their hearts are still resolving and plotting
how to go about it; As the adulterer waits for the opportunity of the twilight,
wherein he may commit that sin upon which he is musing and resolving throughout
the day.

11. It is a Character of wicked men, that they forget the eye of God upon
them, and that their consciences (whatever light they have) do not fear nor
abhor sin; but all that they fear is the discovery of their sin, which may
bring shame and punishment: For, all that the Adulterer expects, is, no eye
shall see me; which imports not so much his presumption that he shall not be
seen by God or men (though sometimes sinners may be plagued with that also) as
his desire that it may be so.

12. An evil conscience is never truly quiet, nor thinks it self secure enough;
For, even in the twilight, he disguiseth his face, that he may yet less be
discerned; whereas they may sleep sound who are in Gods way.

Verse 16. In the dark they digg through houses, which they had marked for
themselves in the daytime: they know not the l^ght.

17. For the morning is to them even as the shadow of death: if one know them,
they are in the terrors of the shadow of death.


In these Verses, Job points out yet further, how these evil doers hate the
light, and make use of darkness; Showing, that they do nothing in the day
(which may be true of the Adulterer, but chiefly of the Murderer, especially,
when he turns Thief) but mark out the houses which they break in upon in the
night; and that they are such strangers to the light, that it surprizeth them
with the terrors of death (as if they were entering into its dark shade) if the
morning overtake them, or any body come to see and know them, while they are at
their wicked p^an^s.

Doct. 1. It is a character of wicked men to be incessant in sinning, and witty
to improve all times and seasons for it; For, in the day time, they mark, and
in the dark, they digg through houses.

2. It is also a character of wicked men, that they make all their own they can
come by; For, they mark for themselves, and then digg through.

3. It is not usual to see wicked men interrupted in their evil courses, by any
convictions or impediments from themselves; For, when they mark, they also digg
through, if they be not otherwise impeded.

4. Albeit wicked men go on in their sinful courses, yet they want not
convictions that they are wrong, nor are they free of deadly fears and
disquiets; For, therefore, they know not the light, but shun it, and, in some
cases, they are in the terrors of the shadow of death. Thus wicked men buy
some sins at a dear rate, being tortured and tossed betwixt their lusts and
their fears.

5. It argues an height of wickedness and rebellion, when men go on in sin,
notwithstanding their fears and terrors; For, though it be thus with them, and
they are often affrighted as with the shadow of death, yet they still persist
to mark, and digg through houses.

6. It is a plague upon wicked men, that, many times, their fears are
unreasonable; For, the morning is to them even as the shadow of death, as well
as they are in the terrors of the shadow of death, if one know them; and yet
the morning light may come, and they possibly not be seen or known by any. See
Prove. 28.1.

7. When the fear of God, or of offending him, is put away by men, God may
justly plague them with much torturing fear of shame and punishment; as here
those wicked men are.

8. When wicked men have cast off fear of God, and of his pursuing vengeance;
yea, and fear of outward shame also, in following many sins; Yet gross sins may
still be accompanied with some terrors and fear of shame; For, in these gross
sins, of Murder, Theft, and Adultery, it is supposed, that these wicked men may
yet be afraid of being seen, however they commit other sins openly. So that
they who commit even abominations, and are not ashamed, are in a woeful plight,
Jer. 8.12.

9. Wicked men have no longer security and quiet in their evil courses, than
they can lurk and walk secretly in committing them; For, if the morning come,
or one know them, presently they are filled with terrors.

Verse 18. He is swift as the waters, their portion is cursed in the earth: he
beholds not the way of the vineyards.
This Verse (wherein the wicked are sometime spoken of in the singular number,
as of one person, sometime in the plural number, as of many; to show, that God
eyeth one as well as many, and can, if he will, reach many as well as one) is
by some understood of the judgments that come upon the wicked, That they are
suddenly and easily hurried away, as waters fall down a precipice; that their
portion is visibly cursed, and they enjoy no fruitful and pleasant lot (like
vineyards) in the World. But this Interpretation crosses Jobs scope in this
Chapter, which is to prove that some wicked men are pursued with no visible
judgments. Others, following our Translation, understand the words of some
sort of wickedness in men, whose lusts from within, meeting with tentations
from without, do hurry them here and there, and make them unconstant and
unsettled in their manners and lives, like the fleeting waters; and keep them
from following any thrifty calling in the World, so that they do not so much as
look toward the most pleasant, easy and profitable calling, such as the
laboring of vineyards is. Such sort of wicked persons are our sturdy beggars
and vagrant persons; who are indeed remarkably and notoriously wicked persons,
for most part, being in effect neither members of the Church nor Commonwealth.
And the Interpretation may also be verified of other wicked men, in so far as
their lusts render them restless and unsettled. But the Original Text (He is
swift upon the face of the waters) seems to point at another peculiar sort of
wicked men, even Pirates, who in their Ships run swiftly upon the Sea or Rivers
to get a prey: As no doubt there were such on the Red Sea which bordered upon
Arabia. As for what follows, of their portions being cursed, etc. It may
point out, Either, That when all these wicked men (who are formerly mentioned)
their prosperity, and way of thriving by oppression, theft and murder, has
failed them on the Land, and they are pursued with curses from all; and when
they can expect no enjoyment of vineyards any longer there, then they turn
Pirates by Sea. Or (which seems to be the most simple Interpretation) That they
so follow their trade of Sea-Piracy, that they never come to land in places
where men resort and inhabit, or where there are vineyards and other fruits of
men's husbandry; But (when ever they come ashore) they lurk in some barren
place, or cursed portion, till they have occasion to go to Sea again. Thus
this instance is not unfitly joined with these formerly mentioned, who follow
works of darkness; because, in some respect, they are men who walk in darkness,
because they converse not among men, or, in the way of the vineyards, but are
either at Sea, or in some cursed portion of the earth. I shall not insist upon
what might be gathered from the first Interpretation of the latter part of this
Verse, (Namely,

1. That whatever be the indulgence of God toward sinners, as to their cutting
off; yet they want not marks of Gods displeasure against them; Particularly,
that some of their ill courses thrive not well in their hand: As this
Interpretation supposes that those Pirates portion was cursed in the Earth,
or, Land, before they went to that trade.

2. That when one trade of sin has failed wicked men, they will find out
another; As here, when their portion is cursed upon the land, they turn
Pirates. Which point out their obstinacy, that when God blasts an ill course in
their hand, they will not give over to sin.) But I shall from the whole Verse,
according to the second and more simple Interpretation of the words, Observe,

1. Many and various are the trades of sin which wicked men invent to
themselves; For, after all the wicked courses formerly mentioned, here is a new
instance of another sort of wickedness.

2. Piracy and Sea-robbery is a sin that very justly deserves a stroke at Gods
hand; Considering that where themselves are daily in so much hazard, and where
they may see so many of Gods wonders, Psalm. 107.23, 24 there they sin with an
high hand, and are inhumane and cruel: Therefore does Job instance those who
are swift upon the face of the waters, as sinners who would certainly be
punished, if his Friends assertion were true.

3. It is a plague upon wicked men, and an evidence of their obstinacy (and
should shame godly men from their unwillingness to endure in a good cause) that
they endure much vexation in following of sin, and that, at best, it is but a
vile drudgery, and yet they will not give it over; For, here they have a tossed
life upon the face of the waters, and all they come to on land is a cursed
portion, and they behold not the way of the vineyards, and yet do not weary.

Verse 19. Drought and heat consume the Snow waters: so does the grave those
which have sinned.
In this and the following Verse, Job shows how these sinners formerly spoken
of, notwithstanding all their wickedness, are cut off but in an ordinary way.
Here (omitting other readings of this Verse, not so consonant to the Original,
That in drought, and heat, and Snow waters (in all seasons) they robb, they sin
till the grave, which would intimate their assiduousness and pertinacy in
sinning) Job gives an account how these wicked men continue in the World, till
they be ripe by age, and then dye easily. Which he illustrates from a
similitude (where the Original, as in other places, implies the note of
similitude, though it be not expressed) That as Snow in some places, is not
taken away till Summer and heat come, and then the drought and heat easily turn
Snow into waters, and then quickly and insensibly consumes them; So they dye in
a great age, and Death takes them to their grave in an ordinary way, quickly
and easily, without any matter of horror, or any languishing infirmity. So
that, here, by the Grave, which consumes those sinners, we are to understand
Death, which draws to the grave, and which easily and quickly pulls sinners
away; Though it may point, further, at their being insensibly consumed in the
grave (of which more, v. 20) as an amplification of the former.

Doct. 1. Wicked men may dye, and go to their graves, without any remarkable
token of Gods displeasure against them; For, so is here supposed, as a thing
without controversy, that though (as the other reading has it) they sin
incessantly, and in all seasons, till their graves, yet they live long, and are
not soon cut off; And there is no odd thing befalls them in their life, till
they come to death and the grave. See Psalm. 73.5. And albeit this dispensation
of God breed trial and exercise to godly men, Psalm. 73.3, 13, 14. Yet it would
be considered, for breaking of that snare,

1. That this indulgence is a great snare upon wicked men, to embolden them to
sin, Psalm. 73.5, 6, 7, 8, 9.

2. It causes death surprise them, while they have not been trained, nor made
acquainted with it, by former trials, Psalm. 73.19, 20.

3. It depriveth them also of proofs of love, which afflicted Saints receive,
for sweetening of their bitter cup, Psalm. 73.26.

Doct. 2. Even the death of the wicked may be gentle, and in a common way, yea,
and in a way short of what befalls others; For, when death and the grave come,
they make an insensible and quick dispatch, as drought and heat consume the
Snow waters. See Psalm. 73.4. This the Lord does, that men may mind a judgment
after death; that they may not judge of men's state by the way of their death,
or think they are approved of God, who quickly and easily sleep away, and are
snatched away from pain and torment; and, that by this experience, they may
learn to read wrath, even in the want of rods, or, in an easy way of dying and
living, which does not stir up men to look how they are before God. Thus even
want of reproof is a judgment, Ezekiel. 3.26. Hos. 4.14.

3. How easy and sweet soever the wickeds way of dying he; yet that we be not
ensnared thereby, the Text affords several antidotes; As,

1. Let God deal with the wicked as he will; yet they must at last dye, and
leave all their enjoyments, and be content to get a grave for all. Now under
whatever mask death come unto them, or whatever they think of it; yet they are
triumphed over by it, Psalm. 49.14. and there is matter of terror in it to
them, Psalm. 73.19. See Luke 12.19, 20, 21.

2. Whatever be the way of their death, yet it is certain they have sinned
(and, as the other reading has it, they have continued to sin, even till the
grave) and it is marked they have done so, even here where Gods indulgence is
asserted; To intimate, not only that there will be an after account taken of
them for their sins, Psalm. 50.21. whatever indulgence they find in life or
death; For sin will never be forgotten, if it be not pardoned: But further, to
assure us that there is present wrath in their lot, be what it will, Is. 64.5.
and a woe upon them, Lam. 5.16.

3. There is a snatching, or, violence (as the word imports) in their death, as
the heat and drought quickly pluck away the Snow waters; Which (beside the
quick dispatch that is made in their death, without any lingering pain; and
their natural antipathy against death, which is common to them with all men;
and therefore they must be plucked violently away) may import, that they are
never ripe, nor ready for death, in their resolutions; or, if it be otherwise,
it slows only from delusion, or a surfeit of sin and pleasures, not from any
assurance of the favor of God. And however they judge or look upon death, yet
the most easy death snatcheth them away, as Executioners and Sergeants hurry a
Malefactor to the Scaffold; And in their resolutions for death, they are but
like drunken and maddmen, who regard not the danger till they be sober. Hence
it is, that their Soul is required of them at death, Luke 12.20. But they do
never voluntarily resign it, whatever their carriage seem to be.

Verse 20. The womb shall forget him, the worm shall feed sweetly on him, he
shall be no more remembered, and wickedness shall be broken at a tree.
This easy and ordinary way of the wickeds death is further amplified and
enlarged in several branches.

1. That the Mother whose womb bare this wicked man (and which gets the name
here from affection and tenderness) shall forget him; not so much because he is
not worthy to be remembered, who had been so wicked in his life; as because
death takes him away so calmly, without any violence or disaster which might
leave an impression of horror and resentment.

2. That he shall feed the worms as others do, and get an easy and sweet bed
in the grave. See Chap. 17.14. and 21.33.

3. Though he be so grossly wicked, as he may be called wickedness, in the
abstract; yet he shall leave no more memorial of any singular or remarkable
thing in his death, than there is of the cutting down, or mouldering away, of
an old rotten tree.

Doct. 1. Memorials within time (of Estates, Children, affection of Friends,
etc.) are but written on the sand, and little to be regarded, seeing men may be
forgotten by their dearest friends; For, the womb shall forget him, and he
shall be no more remembered. And if he be forgotten as to the way of his death,
other memorials of him may also perish. See Psalm. 37.35, 36. and 49.11, 12. A
name with God is much surer, Is. 56.5.

2. As some get no cure of their evils, but by forgetting of them; (The godly
may be driven upon this shift, Job 9.17 either when they are overcharged, and
not able to overtake all their sorrows, or when they are unsober, and refuse
the consolations of God, they must drive this poor trade: And it is the wickeds
frequent practice, after they have, possibly, repined a while; because they
know not how to make up their grievances in God) So, however men may be too
stupid in not observing and making use of ordinary strokes; yet, they should
not be remembered with too much resentment, were there never so much affection
to the parties who are smitten: For, the womb shall forget him, he shall be no
more remembered, but broken as a tree. Which may both import a defect that there
is (not only no resentment, but) no use made of this death, because it comes
but in an ordinary way (in which case singular trials come, Is. 26.10, 11.) And
also a duty, not to make too much noise of ordinary trials by way of
resentment, murmuring and repining, which argue the strength of lusts; though
it be our mercy to be exercised thereby, lest God do strange acts, Is. 28.21.
to rouse us up.

3. The best of men will putrify in the grave, and make a sweet feast to the
worms; For, it is here marked as an ordinary lot, that the worm shall feed
sweetly on him. So low must the highest stoop, as being but worms themselves,
Job 25.6. And then men's high thoughts will fall, when Death, the great Leveller
takes hold upon them.

4. The wicked deserve so much severity, even in this life, that an ordinary
death is an easy and great favor to them; For, it is a proof of Gods
indulgence that such sinners dye but an ordinary death, and have no odd thing
in the way of it, to be remembered when they are gone. If wicked men were
pursued according to their deservings, there would be more than these of old who
should not dye the common death of all men, Numb. 16.29.

5. No indulgence of God does prove the innocence of wicked men; nor is their
sin the less heinous in Gods sight (nor ought others to think more lightly of
it) that he spares them; For, those who are thus spared are yet even
wickedness in the abstract. It is an horrid sin to call evil good, yea, or to
have more favorable and diminishing conceptions of sin, because of sinners
success, or Gods indulgence toward them. And our hearts should rise against
prospering sin, and call it wickedness, otherwise we are in hazard to be
tempted to concur with sinners in it.

Verse 21. He evil extreateth the barren that bears not: and does not good to
the widow.
From this, to v. 25. Job returns yet to give more instances of Oppressors,
who are cut off but in an ordinary way. In this Verse, he gives an instance of
some who oppress the barren and widows, who either want Children, or Husbands
to relieve and succor them. Whence, Learn,

1. Oppression is one of the most rise and odious sins, and lies as near
vengeance as any; Therefore does Job instance that as a sin, which God would
not pass over, if he always punished notorious sinners, as his Friends
asserted. See Exodus 37. Ps. 12.5. Eccl. 4 1, 2, 3. and 5.8.

2. Barrenness is a sharp trial wherewith the Lord is pleased to exercise some
Women; For, here the barren is joined with the widow, as a person already
afflicted. Yea, among the people of Israel it was a special reproach, 1 Samuel
1.5, 6, etc. Luke 2.24, 25. And here,

1. Godly persons, who are exercised with that trial, ought to remember and
make use of the Eunuch's promise and blessing, Is. 56.4, 5.

2. They should also remember that some have been exercised with that trial,
that they might afterward receive singular proofs of love in obtaining their
Children; Thus barren Sarah and Rebekah got Sons of the promise, Hannah, a
Samuel; Elizabeth, John the Baptist, etc.

3. All ought to guard lest, being unmortified under this trial, they get
Children that will but augment their sorrow. And however it succeed, we should
beware of Abraham's tentation, Genesis 15.2. and of Rachel's distemper, Genesis 30.1.
For both sinned in it, and Rachel took a sinful course to help it, Genesis 30 3.
though God at last gave a good issue.

4. This should teach them who have Children, from the consideration of the
trial of others, to improve them as a blessing, that their name do not stink
for their ill breeding of them.

Doct. 3. Widowhood is another trial and exercise of some of Adam's posterity;
For, here the widow is a person afflicted, whom men ought not to oppress. And
by this trial,

1. The Lord would let some see how little sensible they have been of mercy,
when they were under the shadow of an Husband, who cared for them, and how ill
they have improved marriage society.

2. He would invite them to give him more employment, 1 Timothy 5.5.

3. He would also sit them for proofs of his love, who is the Widows God, Ps.
68.5.

Doct. 4. It pleases the Lord to exercise great variety in afflicting the
children of men, by withholding mercies from some, as the barren who want
children; and depriving others of them after they had them, as the widow, whose
Husband is taken away. Hereby, as the Lord fits trials, in his deep wisdom, to
every ones strength, temper and need of trials, and none ought to judge that
the trial of another were fitter for them, than their own: So he would teach
these who never had these outward mercies, to be content, considering how they
might be tried with the want of them after enjoyment; and he would teach these
who enjoy them, to be sober, considering that enjoyment (especially if they be
immoderate in their affections toward what they enjoy) may but imbitter and put
an edge upon an after-tryal.

5. When persons are already under some trials, it may please the Lord yet to
exercise them with more trials; For, here the barren and the widow, are under
oppression. Hereby (to omit how this may be procured by heinous sins, and
peoples incorrigibleness, Is. 9.12. Lev. 26.21, 22, etc.)

1. The Lord proves his absolute and sovereign dominion, to inflict upon the
children of men what he pleases.

2. He prevents security, and takes away all grounds of presumption, that one
trial shall hide us from another, Amos 9.4. But being once shaken loose in any
thing, we should loose our hearts from all things, if the Lord please to strike.

3. He discovers more of our weakness (that we may be humbled for it, and study
to amend it) by continued and multiplied trials, than would appear in one trial
only.

4. He quickens us to our duty, by a new trial, when habitual sit-fast trials
become blunt, and we fall asleep under them.

5. He teaches that, being once broken with trouble, it is sit to hold us
still going and in exercise (whatever breathing-times we get) lest our spirits
should be worse employed, if we were idle.

6. He fits his people for many proofs of his love, by the manifold trials and
times that pass over them, 2 Cor. 1.5.

Doct. 6. It is the height of cruelty and oppression to add affliction to the
afflicted; For, this is marked as an eminent oppression, to be punished as soon
as any, when men evil entreat the barren, etc. This holds true of Oppressors,
whether they oppress persons or Churches, and whole Societies, especially, if
they oppress these whom God himself has afflicted in spirit, Ps. 69.26. And
therefore it is our great advantage to be afflicted before God, when we are
injured by men. For then all our wounds will bleed before him.

7. Not to be steadable to the afflicted, in our stations and as we have power,
is oppression; For, that he does not good to the widow, is joined with his evil
entreating the barren. Where, though Job speak by a Figure, and intends more
than is spoken, yea, and says much by saying little; yet that way of speaking
is founded upon this truth, That who so do not good to the afflicted, as they
have opportunity and power, are very hurtful to them, and do oppress them, in
so far as they relieve them not of their oppressions, and do add thereunto, and
do afflict their spirits, by their inhumanity. And this may give a check to
many, who though they do not themselves oppress; yet, are not useful and
comfortable to the afflicted, but do look upon their trouble without
compassion, or laying forth of themselves for their comfort and relief.

Verse 22. He draws also the mighty with his power: he rises up, and no man
is sure of life.
In this Verse Job subjoyns another instance of these wicked men's oppression;
That not only they wrong the poor and afflicted, but do even draw mighty men
within their claws and reach, as a Fowler entangleth a bird in his net; and
that when the Oppressor bestirs himself, none are sure of their very life. Or,
the latter part of the Verse may be thus rendered; He, (or, the mighty, whom he
oppresses) rises up, and is not sure, or, believes not in life; that is, he
is not only ready to be oppressed in his goods, but when ever he rises, or
stirs abroad, his very life is in hazard.

Doct. 1. Oppressors commensurate their actings to their power, and look to no
other rule; For, if he has power, he draws also the mighty by it, as well as
the poor and afflicted, v. 21. See Mic. 2.1. This argues a very beastly
disposition, and provokes God to deal with such as with beasts.

2. Men of might, especially if they be wicked and oppressors themselves, may
meet with their match, and with power which will overtop their power; For, so
here the mighty is drawn by his power. Thus God has Northern iron and the
steel (or, metal of a stronger and better temper, such as the Chaldeans were
in comparison of the Jews) to break the hard iron, Jer. 15.12.

3. When Oppressors are aloft, it is but folly to think any thing secure so
long as life is in; One ill turn will, readily, but ripen them, and make them
thirsty for another; For, he rises up, and no man is sure of his life; So that
the oppressed cannot stir with security. This should teach us to acknowledge
Gods mercy when he moderates oppression, and to be preparing for a harder
measure of it.

Verse 23. Though it be given to him to be in safety, whereon he rests; yet
his eyes are upon their ways.

24. They are exalted for a little while, but are gone and brought low, they
are taken out of the way as all other, and cut off as the tops of the ears of
corn.


For finding out the meaning of v. 23. we need not stand upon the change of
numbers ( he, and their) in speaking of these wicked men; of which, see, on v.
18. The great difficulty is to know whose eyes those are here spoken of, and
upon whose ways they are. Some understand it thus; Though, or (since that is
not in the Original) It it given to him to be in safety whereon he may rest;
That is, inferiors, or such as are in hazard and fear of the oppressor, do
give gifts unto him, that they may live in safety by him, so that in reason
they might rest and expect to be preserved: And yet his eyes (that is, the
Oppressors eyes) are upon their ways, to see if he can catch any advantage
against them, to oppress them for all that. And this may point out both the
insatiableness and persidiousness of such oppressors. But the Text seems
rather to point at Gods eyes upon the oppressors ways, whether there be one
or more of them, as the change of the number intimates. Yet the words in this
sense may be diversely read; Either thus, It is given him to be in safety, etc.
and his eyes (as the Original will bear) are upon their ways. That is, God
heaps his favors upon them, to secure them, as if his eyes were only upon
them, to watch over them, as is said of the land of Israel, Deuteronomy. 11.12. Or
thus, It is given him to be in safety, etc. though (for the Original may be so
rendered also) his eyes are upon their ways; that is, Though God see and know
their wicked ways, yet he puts them in a secure condition. This is a truth in
it self, and agreeable to Job's scope in this Chapter. But comparing this with
the following Verse, which depends upon it, the most genuine sense may be
gathered from the words read according to our Translation; Though it be given,
or, it is given him to be in safety, etc. yet his eyes are upon their ways.
That is, though it be permitted to wicked men to prosper, yet providence is not
asleep, and not taking notice of their sinful courses; But God observes their
ways, to call them to an account for them. And so in these two Verses we have
a threefold act of providence about wicked oppressors, whom yet God suffers
to prosper.

1. That Gods eye is upon them, to mark all their debordings.

2. That after their exaltation for a little while (or, the short while of
their life) they are cut off, which is pointed out by several expressions, they
are gone and brought low, taken out of the way, and, cut off.

3. That yet this is done but in an ordinary way, as befalls all others, and as
the tops of the ripe ears of corn (or, the ripe corn on the top of the straw)
is cut down, and gathered in, in its season, Job 5.26. And this is Job's very
conclusion which he is maintaining against his Friends.

From v. 23. Learn 1. Outward safety is in it self a mercy; For, so is here
supposed, that it is a favor to be in safety, or, confidence and security. See
Psalm 144.14, 15. Deuteronomy. 28.66. And therefore men ought to improve this mercy
aright, and to be sensible of their ill improvement thereof, when they are
deprived of it, Deuteronomy. 28.27, 28.

2. Safety is from God, and gifted by him; For, it is given him to be in safety
See Ps. 4.8. No man can secure himself without God, Psalm. 127.2. Job 34.29.

3. God, in his long-suffering and indulgence, may set the wicked in safety for
a time, for a snare upon them; For, it is given to him, even to the oppressor,
to be in safety.

4. It is a plague upon the wicked, that they rest and secure in the enjoyment
of outward mercies; For, he rests, or, leans thereupon. Albeit the godly
should be satisfied with such proofs of Gods goodness, and rely upon God for
the continuance thereof, as he sees fit; yet none should be secure in such a
condition, nor should they lean their weight thereupon. See Luke 12.19.

5. It is, in particular, a plague upon the wicked, that their outward security
and safety quiets all their fears, so that they have no doubt of Gods favor,
or of their own good estate, so long as they are in such a condition: For, when
it is given him to be in safety, he rests. It is an evidence that men are of
a carnal disposition when outward favors quiet all their perplexities; And
therefore we should guard lest our exercise be chiefly, or too much about
external things.

6. God does not give safety to wicked men, because he approves of them, or
sees not their wickedness; But he has an eye upon them all the while, and,
particularly, noticeth how they abuse these Providence; For, notwithstanding
all the safety he gives them, yet, his eyes are upon their ways. This shows
how little God esteems of these outward things, which he heaps upon these who
are rebelling even in his view and sight, and what a snare it is to be so
blinded with prosperity, that (by reason thereof) men cannot see the eye of God
upon them.

7. Albeit the Lord be not still punishing the wicked, yet this is sad (if it
were well considered) that he is still observing and marking all their ways,
to call them to an account for them in a day of reckoning; For, this is added
to all the account of their prosperous condition, yet his eyes are upon their
ways.

From v. 24. Learn 1. Wicked men may be exalted, through Gods indulgence, yea,
they are too good at exalting of themselves in their prosperity; For, they are
exalted.

2. All this exaltation of the wicked is but an empty poor thing, if it be well
considered; For, so the words will read, they are exalted a little, or, it is
but a little and small exaltation.

3. When wicked men have enjoyed all imaginable outward dignity, even for all
their lifetime, yet, not only will it not continue, but they have but a very
little while of it, in respect of eternity into which they enter at death. For,
they are but exalted for a little while, though they continue in their dignity,
even till death, that they are not.

4. Death will make a remarkable change upon wicked men; and such a change as
swallows up all their former prosperity; For, they are gone, or, are not; they
are brought low, or, attenuated; and they are taken out of the way, when they
are cut off, or, they are shut up in the grave, so that they appear no more on
the stage, nor can again come at their wonted enjoyments: and then all their
dignity cease as if it had never been.

5. This change is as easily wrought upon dignified persons as upon the
meanest; For, so much may this phrase import, in part, that they are taken out
of the way as all other, or, as all, that is, as all men are.

6. Whatever be the different state of the wicked from other men, as to the
wrath of God lying upon them; yet, the outward stroke of death may come in a
common way upon them, and that not before they seem to be drop-ripe for it;
For, they are taken out of the way as all other, and cut off as the tops of the
ears of corn. And this is a part of the trial and exercise of godly men, when
they see the wicked so gently dealt with, both in life and death; yet they will
not be snared if they think little of Time, and much of Eternity.

Verse 25. And if it be not so now, who will make me a liar, and make my speech
nothing worth?
In this Verse we have Job's conclusion of this discourse and debate; wherein
he confirms the truth of what he has spoken concerning the lot of the
wicked, by turning to his Friends, and challenging them to contradict what he
has said, if they could.

Whence Learn 1. Men should be firmly persuaded of the truth of what they
deliver as the mind of God; For, so was Job of what he had said, and therefore
challenges them to refute him, if they can.

2. Truth fears no Touchstone, and the friends of Truth will decline no trial
it can be put to, as knowing it will shine the brighter, the more it be tried:
Therefore Job bids them disprove his Doctrine, if it be not so, nor as he has
spoken.

3. To teach Error is the grossest and most dangerous lying, and such Doctrine
is worthless Doctrine; For, Job grants that if they could disprove his
Doctrine, they would make him a liar, and his speech nothing worth. So that
they are ill employed, who vent, and feed upon such Doctrine.

CHAP. XXV.
In this Chapter we have Bildad's third assault upon Job, and the last that is
made by any of his three Friends; For after this they give over debating with
him, and Job speaks on till Elihu interpose to decide the controversy. In this
Discourse, Bildad does not at all meddle with Job's discourse, Chapter 24.
concerning the lot of many wicked men, but only reflects briefly upon his
complaint, and his desire to plead his own Integrity before God, Chap. 23. And
the reason why he passes one branch of the debate, and touches so briefly
upon the other, seems not to be because he was convinced by what Job had
spoken of Gods indulgence toward wicked men, Chap. 24. Nor yet is it clear or
certain that Job did interrupt him in his discourse, before he came to that
other branch of the Question, as being imbittered by the little he heard upon
the first part of it: But conceiving Job to be stubborn and wilful in his
opinions (as is expressly declared to be all their thoughts, Chap. 32.1.) he
will deal no more with him, by way of formal reply to the several parts of his
Discourse, but cuts short, and leaves him with a short word of conviction about
the matter of his Righteousness, wherein he endeavors to affright him with
these high expressions of Gods Dominion, and intimation of man's baseness.

His Doctrine is much the same with that of Eliphaz, Chap. 4.17. etc. And does
indeed militate strongly against man's pleading of perfect purity, and serves
well to reprehend Job's rash expressions, which Elihu, upon these and the like
considerations, does condemn; and so I intend to make use of the words. But all
this makes nothing for confirming of Bildad's and his associates assertion, (as
shall be cleared on v. 4.) that Job was wicked, because afflicted, or because
he pleaded that he was a godly man, notwithstanding his afflictions. But in
this Discourse Bildad proceeds upon a twofold mistake; 1. That God behoved
either to be unjust (which were blasphemous to assert) who had afflicted Job,
or else Job must be wicked, who was afflicted; which is a great mistake and
error, as has been often cleared. 2. That he sets himself to prove that which
Job denied not. For his Argument tends only to prove that no man can be
perfect, or legally just before God; And Job did never justify himself as free
of all sin, though his expressions were, sometimes, rash and inconsiderate.

In the Chapter we have to consider, 1. That Bildad did answer, v. 1. 2. The
answer it self; Wherein his scope being to prove that Job did falsely arrogate
Righteousness to himself and did presumptuously desire to plead his purity
before God; He makes use but of one Argument for this end, taken from Gods
sovereignty and dreadfulness, compared with Man's baseness and polluted
Original. In which Argument, he propounds Gods dreadful Dominion, v. 2, 3. then
he gives an account of Man's baseness, because of which he cannot be righteous
and clean before such a God, v. 4. And to confirm this Argument, he amplifieth
Man's impurity before God, by comparing Man with the bright Moon and Stars,
which yet are not pure in Gods sight, v. 5, 6.

Verse 1. Then answered Bildad the Shuhite, and said.
IN this Verse it is recorded that Bildad did yet answer; which being now the
last of their discourses; if we consider that he answered, and the way and
manner of answering, it may put us in mind of several things, which have been
formerly here and there hinted at. As,

1. Debates, once started, will not soon close among men of parts, even albeit
they be godly; For, here the ball of contention is yet kept up, after all that
has been spoken before. God, who makes peace in his high places, v. 2. must
also make peace, and put an end to debates, here below; Otherwise, flesh being
once warmed and waxing hot, even in the best men, their parts and abilities
will be ready to second it; And (beside specious pretexts and mistakes, of
which afterward, which do much evil) in such a temper, men will think truth a
poor prize, unless they carry the victory also, be their cause what it will. So
that we have need to pray against contentions among learned and able men, and
when they fall forth, men should watch over their own spirits in the managing
thereof.

2. Were a cause never so bad and false, yet men by their abilities can make it
plausible; For, here he propounds his opinion in a specious way, as if he stood
only in defense of Gods dominion, and designed to abase men. There is no
corrupt opinion but able men will thus disguise it, under one specious mask or
other; So that men have need, in their enquities after truth, not to judge by
these appearances.

3. Gods people may for a long time lie under mistakes, and be loaded with
prejudices; As here befell Job, who after all he has said, does not yet
satisfy his Friends. Their own escapes, not wisely and tenderly judged of, may
give some occasion to to those mistakes; as Job's rash expressions were so
severely censured by them, as evidences of his wickedness: and men's erroneous
principles may obscure truth very long from them, were it never so clearly and
convincingly propounded; As their fixed opinions suffered them not to admit of
any truth which Job asserted and proved, contradictory thereunto.

4. It is a shrewd evidence that men have not truth on their side, when they
shift their ground in debates, and being put to silence in one thing, they will
not cede, but do start aside to some other; As here Bildad says nothing to
that part of the debate, wherein Job had spoken so clearly, Chap. 24. But
betakes himself to that wherein he thought he had some advantage. Only this may
be said for him, that it was a part of the question in controversy (though
managed by him with a mistake) whereupon he insisteth; which may condemn them
who go further wrong, and start new questions, to cast a mist before the eyes
of the simple, in stead of debating the true question in debate.

5. When men have indeed a wrong cause, and are stiff in the maintenance
thereof, it is to no purpose to keep up the ball of contention in debating with
them, but men having exonered themselves, may let them alone, and cease from
any further dispute; For, so Bildad (upon supposition that Job was erroneous
and stubborn) does give up with him, after a short word of conviction. See
Chap. 32.1. A fool is not to be answered according to his folly, when so much
is spoken as in reason may give a check to his presumption, Prove. 26.4, 5. And
some opinions are best refuted by contempt and sleighting of them, after that
men have exonered their own consciences.

Verse 2. Dominion and fear are with him, he makes peace in his high places.

3. Is there any number of his armies? And upon whom does not his light arise?


Bildad's Argument, whereby he labors to refute Job, may be taken up in this
short sum; God is most high and absolute, and man is a base, miserable and
sinful creature; Therefore man ought not to plead his purity and righteousness
with God. The Antecedent, contains, upon the one hand, a commendation of God in
his supreme and absolute Dominion, in these Verses; and, on the other hand, a
debasement of man, considering his misery and sinfulness; (which is brought in
with the conclusion of the Argument, v. 4.

In these Verses, we have the first branch of the Antecedent, or, a Declaration
of Gods Sovereignty; Which is,

First, Propounded, v. 2. Dominion and fear are with him: That is, supreme and
absolute Dominion is so proper and essential to God, that he never wants right
to it, and never cease from the actual exercise of this right, in ruling all
things; And because of this dominion, which is attended and armed with dreadful
majesty, fear and reverence are due unto him. And for our taking up of this
assertion a right, Consider,

1. Though he name not God in it, yet the subject matter clearly evinceth that
it must be understood of him. And his way of speaking of God without naming of
him, which had been done by Job also before, serves to show how much God was
in his thoughts.

2. Although it hold true of some creatures, that they possess a dominion, and
ought therefore to be feared; yet this belongs to God in a peculiar and
super-excellent manner, and to them only in subordination to him.

3. This assertion does indeed strongly conclude, That the supreme Lord is to
be submitted unto, and not quarrelled as doing wrong, in whatsoever he does;
That he is to be reverenced and feared because of his supreme dominion and
dreadfulness; So that none can contend with him without hazard of ruin; And,
That, seeing he who is thus dreadful (and might be terrible to all his
creatures, if he pleased, as Zeph. 2.11.) does moderate his terror, therefore,
there is no cause to complain of him. Yet all this contributes nothing to prove
Job wicked, though Bildad by this consideration would affright him from his
desire to plead his integrity, Chap. 23.3.

Secondly, This assertion concerning the Sovereignty of God is enlarged and
amplified from some evidences and effects thereof. And,

1. He makes peace in his high places, v. 2. Where, by his high places,
wherein he makes peace, may be understood, either these visible Heavens, and
the Firmament, whose various motions he makes harmonious by his wise
government, and orders all the contrarieties among the Elements: Or, the very
Angels in the highest Heavens, whom he keeps in voluntary obedience and order;
So that they will not contend with God, nor disturb the peace of these
celestial habitations. So this purpose both contains a proof of Gods dominion,
and argues strongly against all murmuring and repining at whatsoever God is
pleased to do.

2. Is there any number of his armies? v. 3. Where we have both a proof of Gods
dominion, and an argument of fear and reverence, that he has innumerable
troops and armies of his creatures at his command, to employ them as he
pleases. This, I say, does strongly prove his dominion, as also that the
Supreme General of these armies must be just: (For he who has these armies at
his command, to punish the unrighteousness of others, must needs be just
himself; And he who might destroy all, by these armies, at his pleasure, and
yet exercises moderation toward sinners, cannot be unjust) And withal, does
warn men, that it is full of hazard to contend or debate with him, seeing he
has these armies (not because he needs them, for he is the guard of his
guards, and can do what he will by himself, but only) as visible demonstrations
and badges of his power, and visible matter of terror to rebels. Yet all this
does not conclude, that he will be a terror to a sincere godly man, if he do
humbly (and not passionately) plead his integrity, Jer. 17.17.

3. Upon whom does not his light arise, v. 3. Where, all the difficulty is to
know, what is meant by his light, which arises, or, stands, or, is
established upon all without exception, as this question must be resolved into
an universal affirmation. Some understand it of the Omniscience of God, and
that he sees all things clearly, Psalm. 139.11, 12. Heb. 4.13. Which being
added to that which goes before, shows that none can lurk or escape those
his armies (as they may get out of the way of other armies) if he purpose to
pursue them. But the phrase seems not to favor that Interpretation. Some
understand it metaphorically, of the light of wisdom and righteousness (as
Joh. 1.9.) whereof G^d is the Author, both in Angels and men. But this (though
it be true) seems to be too much strained here. Others understand it
generally of Gods goodness, by the rays whereof all men (as well as other
inferior creatures) are cherished. See Psalm. 33.5. Others take it properly and
literally, for the light of the Sun which arises upon all. And this is the
most safe Interpretation, and does also include the former, of Gods general
goodness, the rising and shining of his Sun upon all being an eminent proof
thereof; as is declared, Matthew 5.45. And as this his universal care and
goodness proves his dominion; so it may justly silence all quarrelling at his
dispensations.

From the general assertion, v. 2. Learn,

1. There is nothing more effectual to keep man low, and within the bounds of
his duty, than high and right thoughts of God; Therefore does Bildad fall on
this subject to humble Job. See Genesis 18.27. Job 42.5, 6. Which shows, that
our short-comming in this is a great cause of our distempers.

2. Absolute power and dominion is proper to God; For, Dominion is with him, as
his property. See Psalm. 62.11. All authority, over all things, belongs to him,
1 Chronicles. 29 11, 12. it belongs to him absolutely and without controulment, Job
23.13. and eternally and immutably, Dan. 4.34. which does not hold true of
other Potentates. This,

1. Warns men to submit to him, and not to take upon them to sit upon his
Throne, or to be more anxious about his guiding of them and all affairs, than
about their own duty.

2. It warns the highest to remember him whose dominion is absolute, and who
rules in the Kingdoms of men, Dan. 5.21.

3. It assures his people that none of his purposes will fail, seeing he has
absolute power to effectuate what he will.

Doct. 3. The dominion of God over his creatures should silence all their
complaints against his dispensations; For, Bildad makes use of this doctrine to
silence Jobs quarrellings. And though it do not conclude that he should be
silent from asserting his integrity, yet it strongly proves that he ought not
to have quarrelled God. For his absolute dominion does prove him just; seeing
the supreme Judge of all the earth will do right, Genesis 18.25. and his will is
the rule of righteousness; And being the Potter, he may dispose of the clay as
he will. This serves to reprove the Patrons of error, who argue against the
Sovereignty of God in disposing of his creatures (which he has made for
himself, Prove. 16.4.) as he will; And may warn all not to strive with their
Maker, as the clay ought not to contend with the Potter, Is. 45.9. But to
submit to his Sovereign good pleasure, without any grudge, Matthew. 26.39. Act.
21.14. remembering that when men thus submit, he will not put forth his absolute
power to crush them, Job 23.6.

4. Fear and reverence is due to God, by reason of his Sovereign dominion; For,
Fear is with him, as the result of his dominion, which calls for fear and
reverence, and is armed with dreadful terrrour, if men will not reverence him.
He is the fear of godly men, Genesis 31, 42, 53. He ought to be feared in his
Church, and by all, Psalm. 89.7. and 2.11. And enemies and wicked men will be
made to tremble before him, Is. 2.19. Rev. 6.15, 16. And he is to be feared,
both because of his power, Jer. 5.22. Luke 12.4.5. and because of his goodness,
Jer. 5.24. Hos. 3.5. This,

1. Warns men rather to tremble in their approaches to God, then to carp or
quarrel. For quarrelling argues want of reverence, and where fear and reverence
are not (which are frequently made use of in Scripture to comprehend all piety)
it is an evidence of little or no Religion, or that it is over-powred with
corruption.

2. It teaches men to make use of this fear of God, as an antidote against the
slavish fear of men, which is a great snare, Prove. 29.25. See Is. 8.12, 13. and
51.12, 13.

3. It serves to assure Gods people, that he can, when he will, secure them
from hazards by his very terror, without any visible means, Genesis 35.5. 2 King.
7.5, 6, 7.

4. It shows how terrible God will be, at last, to them who will neither know
themselves, nor him, Psalm. 9.20. whereas he will be the hope of godly men in
evil days, Jer. 17.17.

From the first amplification and instance of his Dominion, v 2. Learn,

1. God is a Peacemaker, when and where he pleases; For, his making peace,
even in his high places, assures us of his power to make it also upon earth.
See Is. 45.7. Psalm. 46.9. He can speak, and even create peace, Is. 57.19. and
60.17, 18. Act. 9 31. He can give peace in despite of trouble, Job 34.29 and
peace among our selves, 1 Cor. 14.33. 2 Thessalonians. 3.16. Which teaches us from
whom to seek peace, when we want it.

2 Gods peaceable and harmonious ordering of the Heavens, and of Angels
therein, does not only prove his absolute dominion, but may silence all men
from arguing with, or complaining of him, in the matter of his righteousness;
For, so much does Bildad's scope in this evince, though it do not prove all
that he intends. For,

1. They who quarrel Gods ways as unequal, are refuted by his good guiding and
wise government of these other creatures; which show that he is not to be
challenged.

2. His ordering of all these contrary motions of the Heavens so harmoniously,
and so as may tend to the good of the Universe, does show that he is not
confounded with the confusion that is among the creatures, and that he can make
all things work together for a good end; and therefore he is not to be
quarrelled.

3. Angels are so guided by this supreme and absolute Lord, that they have
neither cause nor will to complain; and why should men evidence their
corruption, and that they are of a low stature, and cannot see afarr off, by
not imitating of them?

4. Where God is present in a most special manner, and his creatures have most
near and immediate communion with him, there is most peace, as in his high
places, among Angels. And therefore our quarrellings do evidence our distance
from him.

5. Since peace is in Gods high places, therefore there can be no access for
the contentious there, neither for their quarrelling prayers, nor yet their
persons (if they persist in that fault) since that were to disturb the peace
that is in those high places. And therefore it may be supposed that Bildad
would here give a reason why Jobs desire of access with his complaints, Chap.
23.3, -- 8, 9. was not granted.

6. Where there is righteousness (as in Heaven) there is concord and freedom
from quarrels; Therefore where concord is not, it is an evidence of
unrighteousness, though not always of gross wickedness. All these
considerations do plead strongly against all quarrelling of God, and other
contentions, even among the best of men.

Doct. 3. Heaven is a place full of peace and sweet concord; all who are there
being fully satisfied with God and his dealing, and at concord among
themselves; For, there is peace in his high places. So that we should long to
be there, and should be comforted that such a condition abides us.

From the second amplification and evidence of his Dominion, v. 3. Learn,

1. Gods Dominion is not a bare title, but is backed with power, and evidenced
by his glorious Attendants; For, so is here imported in that he has numberless
armies.

2. There are Rebels against God, and some of the Sons of men who dare enter
the lists of opposition with him, For, so is here imported, in that he has
armies to employ against these Rebels. See 1 Cor. 10.22.

3 Quarrellers and Murmurers against Providence do, in a peculiar way, oppose
themselves to God; For, so much would Bildad hint to Job, by telling him of
armies to oppose him in his complaints. And it is true, that, upon the matter,
murmurers would pull God from his Throne, and it is because they cannot
effectuate that, that they carp and blaspheme.

4. God is sufficiently armed, and provided of Instruments, to bear down all
opposition; all creatures being is a numerous, orderly and obedient army, to
fulfill his commands: For, there is no number (not only of his Soldiers, or
Troops, but) of his armies. Thus did he employ variety of his creatures against
Pharaoh; an Angel against Senacherib; the Stars in their courses against
Sisera, Judge. 5. Worms against Herod, Act. 12. etc. Yea, he can make the very
armies of his enemies, become his armies against themselves, and cause them cut
off one another, 2 Chronicles. 20.22, 23. The consideration whereof may terrify
Reb^ls, Jer 7.19. And may encourage the Church, whose enemies may be against
her, in their endeavors of opposition, but cannot be successful against her,
Romans 8.31. And it may assure godly men, that if one or more means of relief
fail them, he can find out another; So that they need not be discouraged when
they are disappointed of many probable means.

5. Men are, ordinarily, stupid in considering that which is of greatest
concernment to them, and that which might silence their opposition and
quarrellings of God; Therefore is this (and that which follows) propounded by
way of question, Is there any number of his armies? To intimate, the certainty
of the thing, and to give a check to Job, and such as he, who (as he thought)
did not consider it.

From the third amplification and evidence of his Dominion, v. 3. Learn,

1. What refreshment men receive by the creatures, it is not their own, but
comes from God; For, it is his light, and he created the light before he
created the Sun, Genesis 1.3, 14, etc. to evidence that it is so.

2. Gods general goodness to all is undeniable, and written in the very beams
and light of the Sun; For, that his light arises upon all, is an evidence of
his goodness to all. See Psalm. 35.5. and 145.9. And this,

1. Warns all not to abuse the proofs of his general goodness, but rather to be
led thereby to repentance, that they may be fitted for better things, Romans 2.4,
5.

2. It invites sinners to come to him, who furnishes them with these good
things, which they make use of as weapons wherewith to fight against him; to
assure them that he will be much more kind to them that seek him.

3. It leaves the wicked inexcusable, when they justly perish because they
despise his goodness.

4. It teaches all his children to endeavor to imitate him in this his
goodness, Matthew. 5.44, 45.

Doct. 3. A right study of the general goodness of God, were it but in
affording the very light of the Sun to all, is an argument to stop the mouths
of all these who dare complain of him; For, it is an argument to silence Jobs
complaints, upon whom does not his light arise? For not only does this his
universal Providence prove his absolute and universal Dominion, which ought not
to be contended against; And the glory of the Sun proves it to be iniquity in
any creature to compare with God, the Author of that light, in the matter of
purity; And if men dare not directly look to the bright Sun, but their eyes are
sure to be dazzled, how dare men think to look God on the face in the terms he
supposed Job had desired, Chap 23? But further,

1. This common benefit speaks Gods common goodness so clearly and
convincingly, that it may refute all quarrelling of his justice in his
procedures, as if he did wrong to any.

2. It proves his universal dominion over all, and therefore no particular
person should seek to be exempted from subjection to him at his pleasure.

3. This of the Sun is so obvious a proof to all of his goodness and dominion,
that it may make those ashamed who have low and unsuitable thoughts of God, a
resutation whereof is not far to seek, but is written in, and with, the beams
of the Sun.

Verse 4. How then can man be justified with God? Or how can he be clean that
is born of a woman?
In this Verse, we have the second branch of the Antecedent (or, a Declaration
of man's baseness, evidenced by his miseries, being frail and infirm man, as his
name here imports, and by his sinfulness, being born of a woman) together with
the Conclusion of the Argument, or the Inference deduced from the consideration
of what God and man are: Namely, That God being so supreme and dreadful, frail
and polluted man cannot be just or clean with, or, before him. For clearing
whereof, Consider,

1. It cannot be denied, simply, that man may and can be righteous before God,
to wit, by imputation of Christ's righteousness; But this ought to be denied,
that man is absolutely pure in himself, or righteous by his own righteousness.
Far less is man to be accounted justified and clean with God, that is, However
he pass for such a one in his own or others eyes, yet he cannot be so in Gods
account; Or, he cannot be just and righteous in any degree of comparison with
God, who is perfectly pure and holy; Or, if man would offer to contend with
God, as unrighteous, because he afflicted him being godly (as he took up Jobs
design, Chap. 23.3, 4, etc.) he could be able to plead no righteousness, which
should exempt him from trial, if God please; Neither could he impeach the
righteousness of God in afflicting him.

2. As for his intended application of this to Jobs case, there is a mistake
and injury in it. For (not only is there an unsound principle in his arguing,
that Job must be wicked because he was afflicted, or else God was unjust who
had afflicted him; But) Job pleaded no such righteousness, or, cleanness as
imported sinlesness; nor yet any righteousness by works, but only the
righteousness of his person by faith in the promised Redeemer, and the
righteousness of his cause (which was, in effect, the righteousness of his
person also) or that which he maintained in the debate against them; Namely,
that he was not an hypocrite or wicked man, because he was afflicted, or
because he desired to plead his integrity before God, notwithstanding his
afflictions, when his Friends did unjustly condemn him. And as for the way and
manner of his betaking himself to God in this plea, though it cannot be denied
but Job spoke too smartly, in his own defense, of God and his dealing,
especially upon this supposition, if God would own his Friends cause; yet
Bildad censures him too rigidly.

The instructions that may be gathered from this purpose have occurred on Chap.
4.17. and 14.4. and 15 14. Only here, the general Truth propounded in this
Verse being considered abstractly from his mistakes, may teach,

1. As the study of Gods sovereign Dominion, so also the knowledge of our
selves, may contribute to lay us low, and keep us sober; Therefore is that
consideration made use of here, for that end.

2. Man can plead no perfect purity, or righteousness of his own, nor can he be
justified by any inherent righteousness; For so much is here undeniable. See
Prove. 20.9.

3. It is not to be regarded what men pretend unto of purity, if it be not so
with God, or in his account; as here also we are taught.

4. Whatever real purity men have; yet, if they enter the lists to compete with
God in that matter, or to quarrel his righteousness because of his dealing
toward them, they will be sure to lose their cause: For, thus also man cannot
be righteous, or clean with God.

5. Complainers and murmurers under rods do run the hazard of contending with
God, in the point of righteousness, and cannot be justified; For, it is upon
that account that Bildad puts Job in mind of this.

6. Men's consciences, if put to it, will say much for abasing of themselves,
and justifying of God; Therefore is this inference propounded by way of
Question, that Job's conscience might consider it, as a truth he could not deny.

7. Men may also be much helped in the study of their impurity, by studying
their misery and mortality, and their way of consing into the World, which if
men considered, their consciences behoved to be seared, if they pleaded purity:
Therefore does he infer this inference and question by putting him in mind
that man's name imports that he is frail and miserable, and that he is born of a
woman.

Beside these truths, if we consider Bildad's mistakes here (beside these that
are marked in the entry) they may further teach,

1. It is a great advantage to be well acquainted with this principle, that
some afflictions come only for trial; For, Bildad did mistake by reason of his
ignorance of this, while he would have Job wicked because afflicted.

2. Odious consequences fastened upon men's opinions breed much debate and
alienation of mind; For, his mistake of Job's meaning, in defending his
Integrity and appealing to God, made him think that he pleaded perfect purity,
and condemned God.

3. Every one cannot tenderly judge of the case and carriage of afflicted men,
nor give them that allowance which God will give them; For, he strained Job's
ill chosen words too much.

4 Men may be justified, as to the state of their persons, and right in their
cause, who yet have many infirmities; For, so was it with Job; And though
Bildad's Argument conclude nothing against the first, yet it proves the second
strongly.

Verse 5. Behold even to the moon, and it shines not; yea, the stars are not
pure in his sight.

6. How much less man that is a worm: and the son of man which is a worm?


In these Verses, Bildad's Argument, proving that man cannot be just or pure
with, or before God, is amplified and confirmed by a comparison instituted
betwixt the Moon and Stars, and Man. The comparison runs thus; If the very
bright Moon (as it is called, Chap. 31.26.) and the shining Stars do not shine,
nor are pure in Gods sight; (that is, being compared with Gods purity, they are
but vile, impure, and not bright) much less can man be pure before God, who, by
reason of misery and mortality (as his name, here again repeated, imports) and
by reason of the way of his generation (being the son of man, or, of fallen
Adam) is but a worm. This comparison is also instituted, for the same end,
betwixt Angels and Man, Chap. 4.18, 19. But Bildad brings the comparison to
things which are visible. And he mentions only the moon and stars, not
excepting the Sun upon any account of its purity in Gods sight; but because, it
seems, this discourse was in the night or evening (as Psalm. 8. seems to have
been penned in the night also) and therefore Bildad points at the Moon and
Stars, which were then in Job's view. Behold, says he, the moon.

This purpose, omitting his mistakes, may teach,

1. Man, by reason of sin, comes short of other creatures, in respect of
purity; For, so the comparison imports, that man is fallen from his purity,
while the Moon and Stars keep their natural splendor. The consideration of
this may humble man, who being made a little lower than the Angels, Psa. 8.5.
is now so far debased; And may commend Christ, in whom our natute is exalted
above Angels, and who restores his own elect of lost mankind to their wonted
state and dignity, Ps. 8.5. with Phil. 2.9, 10. Heb. 2.6, 9.

2. The purest of creatures are impure before God; not that all of them are
capable of impurity by sin (though yet the creatures be subject to vanity for
man's sin, Romans 8.20, 21.) but, that their perfections are nothing, being
compared with what God is: For, the moon shines not; yea, the stars are not
pure in his sight.

3. The consideration of the impurity of other creatures, before God, may
convince man that he is much more impure; For, if the moon and stars be not
pure in his sight; How much less pure is man?

4. The impurity of man is visible in his miseries, which are the effects
thereof; For, therefore is it intimated that he is frail and miserable man (as
his name signifies) to prove this. And therefore we should read our baseness
and especially our sinfulness, in our crosses.

5. Man's descending from Adam by ordinary generation does also prove his
impurity; and that it is by birth, and not adventitious, but common to all the
kind: Therefore, to confirm this further, he is designed, the son of man, or,
Adam.

6. Man by his sin is become a very worthless creature, Psalm. 62 9. and is not
only debased below other creatures, but even degraded below himself; For, he is
a worm, in respect of his earthly part, and his sta^e by sin: living on the
earth (like a worm) housed there, easily crushed, and unable to resist
violence. All which should humble man, and commend Christ, who stooped to take
on this nature of ours, with all its common infirmities (even to be a worm, and
not a man, Psalm. 22.6.) yet without sin.

7. It is no easy task to abase and humble man, nor will it be attained
without second and serious thoughts; For, it must be twice told man, that he is
a worm. The first name of a worm, here made use of, signifies those little
worms and rottennesses, which breed in trees or cheese, the other word is more
general; and the doubling and variety of the expression imports that man is all
that is base in a worm, and in the basest sort of them.

CHAP. XXVI.
From this, till Chap. 32. we have Job only speaking; In this Chapter he makes
a reply to Bildad's last discourse; and (finding that none of them would again
engage with him) in the rest of the Chapters, he speaks generally to all his
Friends, and to the whole controversy that had been debated among them. His
scope in this Chapter is to show that Bildad, in his short and sublime
discourse, had spoken nothing to the purpose, or to his case; and but poorly on
that sublime subject of which he had treated. And so he censures his discourse
as impertinent to the cause in debate, and unnecessary that it should be
propounded to him, who could speak more sublimely of God than he did, while he
propounded only such things as these, which were common and obvious to all
these who knew any thing of God.

In the first part of the Chapter he censures his discourse as impertinent, and
therefore to be rejected; as containing nothing which might comfort his broken
mind, or strengthen his weak faith, v. 1, 2. as containing no sound counsel to
help him in his perplexities, nor speaking sufficiently to what he undertook,
or to the truth in controversy, v. 3. and, as having little considered, in his
discourse, with whom he had to do, and spoken nothing for his relief, v. 4. In
the second part of the Chapter he declares how he esteems highly of God, and
can outstrip Bildad in what he had spoken to his commendation. For which end,
he commends the greatness of Gods dominion, and his universal providence from
several effects and evidences thereof; Namely, That it reaches even to the
depths of the Sea, v. 5. That he is omniscient, to know what is most obscure
and remote from the knowledge of men, and therefore orders all those, v. 6.
That he fixes Heaven and Earth, v. 7. That he binds up the waters in the
Clouds, v. 8. That he covers the Heavens (which are his Throne) with Clouds, v.
9. That he has set a perpetual bound to the waters of the Sea, v. 10. That he
shakes the frame of the World at his pleasure, v. 11. That he divides the Seas,
v. 12. and, That he has garnished the Heavens, and is the Creator of the
monstrous Serpents, v. 13. Unto all which he subjoyns a conclusion, showing how
impossible it is to make a full enumeration of these evidences of Gods
Dominion, or to describe his power and glory as it is, v. 14.

Verse 1. But Job answered and said,

2. How have thou helped him that is without power? how savest thou the arm
that has no strength?


Job's reprehension of Bildad's discourse is propounded in several Questions
(as had been his way before, Chap. 6.25, 26. and elsewhere) which being
resolved negatively, might point out unto him the several failings in his
discourse. And it is to be observed, that the faults charged upon him in it,
that he helped not him (or that) that is without power, nor counseled him (or
that) which has no wisdom, etc. are not to be understood in reference to their
cause, which was but weak and witless, and yet was but poorly maintained by
him; nor yet in reference to God, as if he had but poorly helped him, as one
without strength, and consulted for him as if he wanted wisdom. But they are to
be understood in reference to Job, who was both weak and perplexed in his
judgment (not only in his Friends opinion, but really) and yet was nothing
bettered by his discourse.

The first fault charged upon him, is, That he had not helped him that is
without power; That is, his discourse contained no argument of consolation to
support his infirm and crushed mind who was their friend; But he only set
before him the consideration of the majesty of God, without adding any thing
which might comfort him; thereby endeavoring to drive him into despair, and to
cause him give over his confident desire to meet with God, that he might plead
his Integrity before him, Chap. 23. As for the second fault charged upon him,
that he saved not the arm that has no strength, it may be taken only as an
amplification and enlargement of the former; that in his discourse he had not
regarded his low and weak condition, which was as an arm wanting strength. See
Psalm. 10.15. Ezekiel. 30.21, etc. Nor did he endeavor to keep him from being
crushed. But if we consider further, that weak arms, or, hands, import
discouragement through unbelief hindering men to act any thing, Isa. 35.3, 4.
Heb. 12.12. the challenge may point out, more particularly, that he had spoken
nothing to support his almost exhausted faith, that so it might cleave to God;
but rather had affrighted him from looking to God. And, indeed, faith may be
very well called the arm of the soul, whereby it exercises its strength; Not
only because it lays hold on Christ, who is the arm of the Lord, Isa. 53.1.
But because the exercise of faith is an evidence of strength, how weak so ever
we be otherwise; and because it must be our arm, first to lay hold on God, and
then to work, which is the method we should follow in our undertakings. Thus
this second challenge serves to explain the former, and shows that his want
of strength consisted in his discouragement, that he may yet more aggravate
Bildad's fault, who did not deal more tenderly with him.

From the first fault challenged, Learn,

1. Much trouble will try and discover men's weakness, and make them very weak;
For, Job is without power, both in body and mind. See Ps. 22.14, 15. and
109.22, 23, 24. and elsewhere. This,

1. Teaches men not to judge of their strength by what they have in a day of
prosperity, nor to trust to their own strength when a day of trial comes,
which may shake their resolutions.

2. It warns them not to mistake, albeit trial discover their weakness;
provided they shrink not from God, nor weary through impatience.

3. Yet those discoveries being made for our humiliation, we ought to observe
them narrowly, for that end.

4. Only we should guard lest we be accessory to the weakening of our selves, by
discouragement.

Doct. 2. Trouble is sent upon godly men, not simply to discover some weakness
only, but even to empty them, and take them clean off their own bottom; For,
Job here is without power, or, has no strength. This is not to be mistaken,
for no less will drive us from confidence in our selves, 2 Cor. 1.8, 9, 10. and
when we are thus, it is a fit time for God to appear, Deuteronomy. 32.36.

3. When Saints are thus weak, it is the duty of godly friends to put forth
their helping hand, to relieve them; For, Job implies it was his duty to have
helped him that was without power. Brethren and friends are born for adversity,
and a sympathizers task is not little, nor easy, in such a time. And therefore
every man should see how he may be steadable in such a time (else he is
useless, and as bad as no man, Isa. 59.16.) that he be not looking on only, or
careless, and especially, that he be not rejoicing at, or adding to, the sorrow
of the afflicted.

4. A special mean of the weak godly man's help, is, the right applying of the
word and truth of God, which is of saving power and efficacy; For, Job's
challenge implies that, if Bildad had spoken truth to the purpose, it would
have helped him. See Chap. 6.25. Psalm. 19.7, 8. and, 119. throughout. A godly
man so prizeth the truth and authority of the Word, that it will comfort him,
though performance be wanting; and the rod causes him have his recourse to the
Word, that he may receive instruction with his correction, Ps. 94.12.

5. The people of God may expect not only to be even exhausted with trouble,
but that, in such a case, they will be disappointed of help from godly friends;
For, so was it with Job here. And this may not only encourage after-ages, that
such a trial has been essayed by others before them; as by Job here, by David,
Psalm. 142.4. 1 Samuel 30.6. and elsewhere, and by Christ in his own person. But
the thing it self may point out,

1. How difficult it is exactly to try and humble us, so that even when our
power is gone, we need more trial from sleighting friends, otherwise some ill
root would lurk uncrushed in us.

2. How difficult it is to drive us to God in trouble; For, we are ready to
look elsewhere first, till we be disappointed every where, Ps. 142.4, 5.

3. How much trouble God can support us under, even when our selves are
crushed, and our friends do fail us, Psalm. 142.4, 5. 2 Corinthians. 12 7, 8, 9, 10.

4 How the Lord lays aside all these means, that his own help may be the more
conspicuous, Psalm. 27.10.

Doct. 6. Men may preach sound truths, who yet do no good to the afflicted
thereby, through want of their pertinency or due application; For, what Bildad
spoke was true in it self, (whatever were his mistakes and designs in it) but
nothing to Job's case, and therefore did not help him. Therefore Ministers
ought to pray for prudence, that they may speak to the condition of these with
whom they have to do, Isa. 50.4. and 61.3. 2 Timothy 2.15. And for this end they
should consider,

1. That it is a peculiar gift of God to have a word of wisdom, distinct from a
word of knowl^dge, 1 Cor. 12.8.

2. That wise and able men (such as Job's Friends were) may miscarry in the
application of truths, if left to themselves.

3. That heat and debates may draw men away from that which should be their
scope, and from judging of things aright; For, this contributed to cause Bildad
and the rest miscarry.

4. That want of experience does much hurt in men's dealing with afflicted
persons; For, Job's Friends being of whole unbroken minds, and unacquainted
with such exercises, did therefore prove so cruel to him. Therefore Priests
were compassed with infirmities, that they might be compassionate, Heb. 5.2.
and Christ himself became acquainted with our sinless infirmities, for that
end, Heb. 2.17, 18. and 4.15, 16.

Doct. 7. A good way for men to know what they are doing, is, to examine their
own consciences, and commune with their own hearts; Therefore Job, by these
questions, puts him to it, that he might impartially try how he had failed in
his duty. Here consider,

1. Self-examination, that we may know and seriously consider what we are
doing, is a great stranger among the most of men, and it is an exercise from
which they are very averse; For, Bildad must be put to it here. See also Psa.
4.4. Hag. 1.5, 7. 2 Cor. 13.5. Such as walk most untenderly, are most averse
from this task, whereby it comes to pass, that their condition is confused, and
it becomes even as the shadow of death to them to think upon self-examination.

2. It is not enough that men examine themselves what they are doing, but they
must try also how they are doing it; as is here imported. Men should try what
is the end they drive at in what they go about; what is their manner and way of
doing that which is good; and how they are useful by it. So Ministers should
not content themselves that they preach sound Doctrine, if they speak in so
high terms that they are not understood, if it be not pertinent to the
condition of the hearers, if they utter it so as may alienate affections, etc.
And professors should not please themselves with doing of things lawful, if
thereby they give offense, etc. Otherwise that which is not rightly done, in
the manner, is, upon the matter, not done at all. For these questions may be
all resolved into negatives, that h^ had not helped him that was without power,
etc.

3. Debates, by reason of men's lusts, are apt to kindle passions, and to beget
corrupt principles, so that conscience has little power, till these storms be
calmed; For, these questions, exciting conscience to do its duty, imports that
conscience had been overpowered with the heat of debate and contradiction.

4. Conscience may well be silenced for a time, but it will never be gotten so
bribed, but it will tell truth, when it gets leave to speak; Therefore he
appeals to Bildad's own conscience, in these matters, being sure it would
pronounce against him.

5. Men ought to consider what sad unfriends their consciences will be, when
they get leave to speak, and tell them what they have done amiss; Therefore Job
leaves him to his own conscience, as a tormenter severe enough, if once he
communed seriously with it.

Doct. 8. It is a great mercy, and a proof of Gods support to crushed Saints,
when they are not sunk with discouragements; but are able to discern the unjust
usage they meet with from friends: As here Job (though sadly crushed and
afflicted) discerned how Bildad had failed in his duty toward him, and
therefore answered, and challenged him for it. It is true, his courage should
be managed without passion, and in tenderness and meekness, wherein Job failed
somewhat (which yet is to be pitied, for trouble may cause even a meek Moses
miscarry; and long-continuing and sharp afflictions, may quite alter men's
dispositions, and make the meek become passionate. See Eccl. 7.7.) Yet,

1. It is not an evidence of stubbornness, but of Gods gracious support, when
Saints are enabled to endure such shakes, which are a part of the trial, Ps.
142.4, 5.

2. Though such assaults should help us to feel our crosses better, that we may
deal more effectually with God about them; Yet, whatever we have else, it is
good to have our judgments clear, to discern things as they are, and that
troubles do not cast a dark cloud upon our light; For, Job is able to discern
wherein his Friends wronged him, notwithstanding that he is so crushed with
trouble.

From the second fault charged upon him (leaving those things already marked,
which are common to the first with all the rest) Learn,

1. Godly men's resentments cannot but draw very deep, when their friends are
not only not helpful but hurtful to them in their crushed condition; For, Job
here doubleth, yea, and afterward multiplyeth expressions, about Bildad's
failings, to let him see how much he resented them. Men at ease may speak or do
that lightly, or inconsiderately, which yet will draw deep upon a tender mind,
Chap. 16.4. were it even but a look, Psalm. 22.17. or a word, Psalm. 69.26. and a
broken mind is soon hurt; For, a little thing may waken all its sorrows upon
it, and raise many tentations; as David's desertions, under his persecutions
and afflictions, do witness. And especially, ill usage from friends will sadly
affect afflicted Saints, Psalm. 55.12, 13, 14.

2. Whatever help he afforded to afflicted Saints, their Faith should
especially be helped and cherished; For, the arm that has no strength should
be saved. As the weakness of Saints is chiefly inward, so especially it slows
from their weakness in faith; So that they are never weak, how crushed soever,
who believe. Therefore Christ prayed only for Peter's faith, in his conflict,
Luke 22.31, 32. For Faith will support a Saint till more help come; It enableth
him to go about the cure of his grievances, and prevents Apostasy, 1 Samuel
30.6. and 12.20, 21. It covers all the rest of our armor, and quenches all
fiery darts, Ephesians. 6.16. It bodes and hopes well of God, and sticks close to the
verdict of his Word; It will believe and close with righteousness, when the
person is convinced of unworthiness; It rests upon the Word, whatever Sense, or
present dispensations, seem to say to the contrary; It believes Gods love and
tender heart, notwithstanding his sad and heavy hand; It trusts to his power in
improbabilities, and to his wisdom in confusions; It looks not upon Gods sad
word as his last word, to the afflicted Saint; It fixes upon this, that
cleaving to God, will make all prove well in the issue; And that manifold
difficulties are only sent to give it much work, that it may acquit it self as
becomes, etc. All which may teach how great care should be used that
confidence be not cast away in trouble, Heb. 10.35. And that when we know not
what to do else, we may only believe, Luke 8.50.

3. The faith of Saints may seem to be quite gone in trouble, for any thing
that sense can discern, or for any sensible encouragement that they reap
thereby; For, this arm may have no strength, and it may need to be saved, or,
rescued, which supposes it to be exhausted and sunk. Thus a Peter may be at
sinking, through the fainting of his faith, Matthew. 14.30, 31. For,

1. Satan's Engines are especially levelled against Faith, Luke 22.31, 32. in
the shaking whereof his victory consists. And Faith is a Warrior, which may
get sore assaults, and it must not be measured only by its triumphs, but by its
fighting.

2. Though we ought to study to have that testimony in a day of deliverance,
that we have by faith waited upon God in a day of trouble, Is. 25.9. Yet God
allows not that we should carnally glory in the strength of our Faith, as it is
ours; and therefore he will have us often emptied in this matter, and our Faith
often at his mercy, that we may know whence the strength of our Faith comes.

3. Our mistakes may cause us apprehend our Faith to be more weak than indeed
it is, of which after. For the Woman of Canaans faith was a strong faith, when
yet it was far from triumphing, and only importunate and humbly wrestling
against discouragements.

4. Our pride and peevishness may be ready to cast away our Faith, because we
have no more but naked Faith, Heb. 10.35. 1 Samuel 27.1. 2 King. 6.33. Hence we
ought to adore the immutability of God, whose purposes change not as our hearts
change, and as our Faith frequently succumbs; and the love of Christ and his
intercession, upon which (and not on our inherent stock) the support of our
Faith depends. Luke 22.32. For we are often quitting our grip, and yet brought to
renew it again, which should both humble us, and teach us (having such
experiences) to be more steadfast in believing, in times to come. Also, this
should teach us, to be humbled for our pride and passion, which contribute to
the weakening of our Faith.

Doct. 4, Even when Faith seems to be quite gone, it will yet recover, if it be
well tendered and cherished by the Word; For, Job in his challenge implies
that this arm might have been saved, if Bildad had spoken pertinently to his
condition. Here consider,

1. We are not to quit even that which seems desperate in our condition; but we
ought to hope against hope, Romans 4.18. And believe that most desperate lots
will not prove deadly, 2 Cor. 4.8, 9. and 6.9, 10. And that Faith is an
immortal seed, which God will not still crush, when he hides and obscures it;
but foiled Faith may take the fields again, and the spoiled may come against
the fortress, Amos 5.9.

2. Faith must close with the Word for its recovery, when it is like to succumb
(as Job desired Bildad might have applied it pertinently to him) remembering
that there is a blessedness in believing the Word, Luke 1.45. And that if we
will not give credit to it by faith, we obstruct other proofs of Gods goodness
to us, Matthew. 13.58. Mark 6.5, 6.

3. We are not to do at upon sensible satisfaction, for the help of our faith;
nor are we to despise weak means of Gods appointing, were it even to cast out
the net, where we have long toyled to little purpose, Luke 5.5. For, even by
the help of the naked Word Job judged it possible his faith might recover.

Doct. 5. Very many, even of Gods people, are but ill skilled in the art of
strengthening Faith; as here Job complains Bildad proved to him. And as men may
prove helpless to others, in this matter, so Saints themselves, when under
faintings of faith, may have very little dexterity in going about their own
cure and relief. Here consider,

1. Men of strong and whole minds, who are unacquainted with afflictions and
exercise, can do but little for the relief of crushed faith; as was seen in
Jobs Friends, who were strangers even to this general truth, that sore
afflictions and exercises may befall godly men; far less had they experienced
such a lot themselves. Therefore Christ was exercised himself, that he might be
a merciful and faithful High Priest, Heb. 2.17, 18.

2. It is an evidence of men's great cruelty, and of their want of skill, when
they do cry up the majesty and righteousness of God so as may discourage
crushed Faith from coming to him; For, so Bildad did study to set out God after
such a manner, as might deterr Job from thinking to draw near to his Throne:
Whereas it is still right and acceptable that crushed Saints (yea, sinners)
draw near to God, 1 Samuel 12.20, 21. Jon. 2.4.

3. It is an error (whether in crushed and fainting Saints themselves, or in
others who deal with them) to think to make things succeed better by humbling
to discouragement (which was the design of his Friends, particularly, of Bildad
in his last discourse) than by Faith: For, Discouragement weakens, and its
diligence drives backward; whereas Faith, being once strengthened, will produce
acceptable humility, and other good fruits.

Doct. 6 Saints may be mistaken in the matter of their Faith, and it may have
strength when they think there is none; For, here when Job thinks his arm has
no strength, yet there is strength in it, as appears by his pleading and
defenses. As the condition of godly men under exercise is, oft-times, better
than they think it; so, in particular, as to their Faith.

1. Its strength must not be measured by present sense.

2. Nor by our want of present deliverance after believing.

3. Nor must we trust every tentation that would contradict our Faith; For,
Saints have found many such to be liars, Psalm. 31.22. Jo^. 2 4.

4. Nor must we measure o^ judge of our Faith by what it is in it self, but by
what God can make of it, Psalm. 94.17, 18. In a word, this is true (and in some
respect, strong) Faith, when,

1. We cleave and grip to God in his Word, though in the midst of never so many
storms, and against hope and probable reasons.

2. When we do not decline to endeavor to comfort our selves in God and his
Word, though he seem not to apply any comfort to us, 1 Samuel 30.6.

3. When we discern that there is hope and ground of encouragement for us in
God, though we cannot grip it, nor settle upon it; and do see that we do evil
and sin in not believing, and do not justify our selves in it, as Jonah did
his passion, Jon. 4.9. Whosoever attain to these, should cherish them as acts of
Faith, and bless God for them.

Verse 3. How have thou counseled him that has no wisdom? And how have thou
plentifully declared the thing, as it is?
The third fault challenged in Bildad's discourse, is, That there was no sound
counsel in it, to direct him, or help to correct his folly, who was his weak
and witless Friend. This Job speaks not only by way of Irony, that Bildad and
the rest counted him foolish, and yet gave him no sound counsel, but according
to his own real sense of matters. For albeit Job profess he had understanding
in this controversy, and in these things which his Friends spoke of, v. 4. and
Chap. 12.2, 3. Yet, by reason of his exercise of mind, he was oft-times full of
irresolutions, and put to a Nonplus (as appears from his sad complaint, Chap.
23.) in which case it had been a Friends turn to have helped him with a
faithful and sound advice.

The fourth fault challenged, is, That by his short speech (on the brevity
whereof Job reflects here) he had not plentifully explained the truth, or,
sound wisdom, as it is indeed. This may indeed relate to what Bildad had truly
spoken to the commendation of God, wherein he fell short, as Job lets him see
afterward; But it may be also understood of the point in debate betwixt them;
to which Bildad had spoken little or nothing at all (as this check may also
import) which was to purpose; Or, he had uttered little of sound solid wisdom
in discussing the controversy, which might give evidence that he took up the
matter aright.

From the third fault, here challenged, Learn,

1. Afflict^ons will not only essay men's strength and courage, but their wit
and resolution also; For, Job grants, that, in some respects, he had no
wisdom. This the Lord orders, that we may not lean to our own prudence in
trials, and that we may be tried, if we will take a sinful shift when other
resolutions fa^l us. And therefore we should lay our account that troubles will
put us to perplexities and confusions in the matter of our light; and, though
we ought to have our light clear against a day of trial, yet, let us not lean
to our preparations, but to God who leads the blind by a way that they know
not.

2. Affliction may so try men's wit, that it may quite over come it, and leave
no wisdom to understand what to do; as here is also supposed. For man's wit is
his great Idol, which will be cried down by nothing less than this; And nothing
less will drive us entirely to depend upon God, 2 Chronicles 20.12.

3. Saints perplexities in troubles slow but from their want of wit and
counsel; For, so Job expresses his perplexities, that he has no wisdom, and
is not well counseled by Bildad. Saints, in their greatest perplexities, need
but open eyes to discern the out-gate and mercies which are prepared and ready
for them, as Genesis 21.15, 19. 2 King. 6 15, 16, 17. See Psalm. 77.8, 9, 10.

4. It is the duty of friends to be steadable in giving counsel to the
perplexed, and so to become eyes to the blind, as Job 29.15. For, he should
have counseled him that has no wisdom; For as men may discern things better
who are at case, than those who are confounded with trouble; So this is a duty
of love to be performed by one friend to another. And it is an act of great
kindness to speak a word in season to the perplexed and afflicted.

5. Afflicted persons should look well what counsels they embrace and follow;
For, Bildad's discourse had imported some counsel and advice, but Job rejects
it as not pertinent, How have thou counseled, etc? says he. Men in affliction
may have many consultations and advices from their own hearts or others; some
whereof may tend to persuade to discouragement, Psalm. 13.2. Some, to take any
shift which seems to promise present case. But it is a mark of sincerity to
follow only sound counsel, and that because it is sound, whatever may ensue
upon following of it, and to be tender in taking counsels about our out-gates
in trouble.

6. That is only sound counsel which is agreeable to the Word of truth; For,
because Job missed this in Bildad's doctrine, therefore he rejects it.
Delusions will prove miserable counselors, and it is an evidence of sincerity
when men in trouble cleave fast to the directions of the Word, and will not buy
deliverance at the rate of sinning to attain it.

7. It is no sound counsel that would drive an afflicted man (especially if he
be godly) from God, or would affright him from drawing near, by the
consideration of the majesty of God; For, upon this account Job judged Bildad's
counsel not to be sound, because he endeavored to affright him from God, by
telling him of his dreadful dominion and purity And by this rule are we to
judge of all other counsels; and to understand the scope of the whole
Scriptures; wherein, though there be many reproofs and arguments of
humiliation, to give a check to the presumptuous and secure; yet there is
nothing intended for discouraging the afflicted, who desire to draw near to God
in his own way.

8. Good men may miss of their aim, and come short of their purposes; yea, they
may be quite another thing than they think themselves to be, if they do not
wait upon God in their undertakings: For, these men came to comfort Job by
their counsels, Chap. 2.11. and they thought themselves very wise counselors,
Chap. 5.27. and 15.9, 10 And yet, says Job, How have thou counseled him that
has no wisdom?

From the fourth fault found in his discourse, Learn,

1. The truth of God is a very solid substantial thing, upon which a man may
lean his weight; For, so does the Original word, rendered, the thing as it is,
import. See Prove. 8.14.

2. Men should hold out the very truth as it is, nakedly, and without busking;
For, Jobs challenge imports that he should have declared the thing, as it is.
We do frequently mistake things, because we look upon them through masks, of
passion, prejudices, oratry, pretenses, etc. Yea, we oft-times feed rather upon
the flowers of Rhetoric, which are made use of to adorn solid truth, than on
the truth it self.

Men, in what they say of truth, do, oft-times, come far short of what they
ought to say; For, he had not plenteously declared the thing, as it is, nor
spoken fully to the truth he undertook to publish. It is true, all men will
come short upon that subject, v. 14. But Bildad was eminently and singularly
defective, being one who undertook to instruct him, and yet did it so poorly.

4. It breeds great trouble in managing of debates, when the true state of the
controversy, is not fallen upon, and when men's case lies under a cloud, and
they are not seen as they are, but their afflictions are mistaken, and their
speeches wrested: For, thus also Bildad did not declare the thing, as it is, he
hit not upon the right state of the controversy, and mistook Jobs condition
and speeches, and therefore spoke not to the purpose. And as our selves are apt
to mistake our own condition; so God may let the mistakes of others loose upon
us, to help to correct these our tentations. Therefore we should bring our
afflictions to the touchstone of the Word, and reject all our carnal
apprehensions about them. And if at any time we be mistaken by others, we ought
to reflect and try whether we have measured out to others as now, in Gods
Providence, is measured out unto our selves, Matthew. 7.1, 2.

5. A great cause of mistakes, in men's cases, or in debating of controversies,
is, when things are not taken up fully and plentifully; as here Job challenges
they were not, in this debate. As the whole truth of God is to be spoken out by
those who have a calling thereto, Act. 20.20, 27. So, in managing of
controversies, men may hit upon some truth, and yet mistake, by not taking in
the whole cause* For, Bildad spoke truly of the dominion and righteousness of
God, but forgot the evidences of Jobs integrity, and mistook the state of the
controversy. See on Chap. 25 4. So men also, in the examination of their own
condition, while they look only to the truth of Gods justice, and their own
pollution, forgetting his mercy, and what evidences they have of sincerity,
they may plunge themselves in needless disquiets.

Verse 4. To whom have thou uttered words? and whose spirit came from thee?
The fifth fault, challenged in his discourse, is, That he had not considered
to whom he had spoken these words; Even to him who neither was an Ignorant, and
needed to be instructed in these common truths concerning God; but could handle
them better than he, or any of them, had done, Chap. 9.2. and 12.3. and 13.2.
Nor was he a wicked stubborn man, pleading his own sinlessness, that he needed
so to oppose and endeavor to affright him; but he was a crushed godly man, who
had need of other language to be spoken to him.

The sixth and last fault, is, That he considered not whose spirit came from
him. This may be understood of the Spirit that acted him; that he considered
not that it was not Gods Spirit, but his own spirit, and his blind zeal for
Gods glory (which he conceived was reflected upon by Job) that prompted him to
speak. And, it is, indeed, a fault incident, even to Christ's Disciples, that
they know not what manner of spirit they are of, Luke 9.55. And godly men may
have many ignorant and fiery motions, flowing from their own spirits, which
they think are from the Spirit of God. And therefore men should seriously
consider what spirit acts them, as in their walking, so, especially, in their
doctrine. For every doctrine has a spirit accompanying it, either the Lords,
or a lying spirit, Joh. 4.1. And this spirit is not easily discerned without
trial; for our passions may darken our minds, and an evil spirit may be masked
and disguised, 2 Cor. 11.13, 14. But the Original word, rendered, Spirit (which
properly signifies, the Soul, or, breath of life, in man, and other living
creatures, though, by a metaphor, it be sometime made use of to express Gods
inspiration, Chap. 32.8. and the cold air, Chap. 37.10.) leads me rather to
understand it thus; That his discourse contributed nothing to recover his
swounding and dying spirit, and to help it to breath again; nor did it teach
him how his spirit, now shut up under perplexities, might be recovered and set
at liberty again.

From these two challenges, Learn,

1. Such as would publish the mind of God as they ought, must not only consider
the matter, and what they speak, but those of their charge also, and to whom
they speak; that so they may apply the word aright, and may give milk to babes,
strong meat to grown up men, reproofs to some, and consolations to others, as
their need requires; For, this was Bildad's fault, that he considered not to
whom he uttered words. See 1 Cor. 9.19, -- 22. 2 Timothy 2.15. Jude v. 22, 23.
This presupposes that faithful Preachers should not content themselves with
speaking general truths, but they must make application thereof, however it may
be unpleasant when it touches the sore. And for this end, it is their duty to
be men of prudence, and to study the temper and condition of their charge well.

2. It is an imprudent and unjust application of Doctrine, to look upon godly
men as graceless ignorants, or to crush them because they are afflicted by God;
For, in those Bildad erred, in uttering these words to him. Such harsh dealing,
as it may be but feeding the afflicteds own inward tentations, so it will draw
to a sad account, and men may expect to pay dear for all the sad effects and
consequences thereof.

3. Afflictions and trials may reach even to men's spirits and breath, to cut
them off, and put them in peril of fainting and swounding; For, so is here
supposed, that his spirit, or, breath, was to come again to him, or, to go out
of some prison.

4. Seasonable and sound Doctrine, even in the mouths of weak men, is able to
reach and recover a swounding spirit; For, he implies that, if Bildad had
spoken right, his spirit had gone out from him, or, his Doctrine would have
recovered his fainting spirit, as if the speech had brought it along with it
from the speaker. Thus faithful Ministers by their Doctrine do pluck up and
plant Nations, Jer. 1.10. and save souls, 1 Timothy 4.16.

5. Whatever men think, yet unsound Doctrine will never refresh nor recover a
soul, or spirit; For, says he of Bildad's Doctrine, Whose spirit came from
thee?

Verse 5. Dead things are formed from under the waters, and the inhabitants
thereof.
Follows the second part of the Chapter, wherein Job shows that he thinks
highly of God. His scope wherein, is, partly, to show that he is far from
scorning what Bildad had spoken to the commendation of God, when he rejects it
as impertinent to the purpose and debate in hand. Partly to show that he is not
wicked and ignorant of God, nor will he deny and contradict that commendation
of him uttered by Bildad, but will outstrip him on that subject. And therefore
he concedes and amplifieth all his positions concerning the Majesty, Dominion
and universal Providence of God; and produces proofs and evidences thereof,
not only in the high places, or in the light, or visible things (which Bildad
had chiefly mentioned) but in things both in Heaven and Earth, Sea and dry
Land, and in things which we see not how they are formed; and shows how his
providence condescendeth even to the ordering of the drops of rain; that by all
these he may give proofs how much he observes God, his dominion and providence,
as shining in all his works, even from the highest to the lowest of his
creatures.

In describing the greatness of Gods dominion, and his universal providence, he
produces nine evidences and effects thereof, to v. 14. and then sums up all
in a conclusion, v. 14. The first evidence, and effect (in this Verse) is by
some understood of the general resurrection, when the dead shall be raised out
of the earth, which is under the waters, and the Sea shall ren^er its dead (
Rev. 20.13.) which were as the inhabitants thereof. But it is clearer and safer
to understand it thus; That Gods providence reaches even to the depths of the
Sea, to form not only the Fishes and quick monsters, which inhabit there, but
even dead and lifeless things also: such as Pearls, and other precious and
useful things, which are found there.

Doct. 1. It is the duty of all, and particularly of godly men, to have
reverend, high and frequent thoughts of the providence and dominion of God;
Therefore Job gives proof that he is versed in that study, as well as Bildad,
yea more than he.

2. Godly men may be very much mistaken in things wherein they are very sound
and right; For, Bildad speaks to Job as an ignorant in these things, when yet
he outstrips himself in the the knowledge of them.

3. Gods dominion and providence should be not only studied and acknowledged in
general, but notice should be taken of the particular acts and effects thereof,
to cause that knowledge sink into our mind; Therefore does Job instruct his
knowledge by particular instances.

4. Much of the glory of God lies hid, as under a vail, from us, who could not
overtake or comprehend it all, though we saw it; Therefore Job instanceth the
glory of Gods dominion and providence, as shining in these things under the
waters, and formed there by him.

5. As the glory of God shines much in all places, so also in the depths and
Seas, as being in themselves a wonder, and full of wonders; the inhabitants
thereof being demonstrations of his glory, in their numbers, variety of kinds,
greatness, etc. Therefore does Job instance these things which are formed from
under the waters and (or with) the inhabitants thereof, as evidences of his
glorious dominion. See Psalm. 104.24, 25, 26, and 107.23, 24, etc.

6. Gods providence reaches even to the depths of the Sea; as here we are also
taught. There providence can find out a Rebel, Amos 9.13. There the bodies of
Saints will find a resting place, till he call for them, Rev. 20.13. And there
Jonah will find a Whale to preserve him, Jon. 1.17.

7. Gods providence is to be seen and adored, not only in living, but in
lifeless creatures; even in even in every pile of grass, and in those dead
things, which are formed from under the waters. We need no wonders to
demonstrate the glory of God, which is obvious in every, even in the meanest,
thing; And he is so glorious in riches that (as it were) he casts away Pearls
and other precious things into the depth of the Sea and waters, and buries
Minerals in the bowels of the Earth; Whereby also he tells us, that our hearts
should not lust so much after these things, which his providence has set out
of our way.

Verse 6. Hell is naked before him, and destruction has no covering.
The second evidence and effect of Gods Dominion, is, his omniscience, and that
he knows (and consequently, orders) what is most obscure and remote from
the knowledge of men; So that hell, and the place of destruction (whether we
understand it of the grave, and horrid station of the dead, and under that
comprehend all things that are in the deepest bowels of the Earth, and hid
under gross obscurity and darkness; or of the place of the damned) is no less
naked before him, than if it wanted a skin or covering; For, so the latter part
of the Verse is an explication of the former.

Doct. 1. Hell and destruction are but one thing; For, here the one is
explained by the other. See Prove. 15.11. If we understand this of the grave,
death and the grave do not only destroy and cut off all our temporal
enjoyments, as to us; but do destroy our persons, and dissolve our bodies into
dust And therefore nature looks upon it as a destruction, and no wonder Saints,
sometime, look so upon it also. So that we have no cause to do at upon our
bodies which will be brought to this issue at last; and if men place their
happiness in their temporal enjoyments and life, the day will come wherein they
will have done with all of that. See Psalm. 49.16, 17. Is. 10.3. and 14.9, 10,
11. But the godly may rejoice in God, who out of that eater brings forth meat
unto them, and does warrant them to take a more comfortable look of death. If
we understand it of the place of the damned, that is a place of everlasting
destruction, 2 Th^ss. 1.9. without any redemption, or hope of recovery, as
there is in other sad conditions: and then misery will triumph over these who
have long insulted over it. So that nothing should be looked upon as a ruin,
where this is away, Mic. 7.8. 1 Cor. 11.32.

2. God is omniscient, and sees the most secret and hidden thing, were it even
in Hell or the bowels of the Earth; For, hell is naked before him (that is,
before God) and destruction has no covering. See Psalm. 139.8, etc. Heb. 12.13.
Hence,

1. If these things be naked before God, much more are men and their hearts
known to him. See Prove. 15.11. So that though men dig deep to hide their
counsels from the Lord, and seek many coverings (of secrecy, denial,
extenuations, and pretenses) yet all these will serve in no stead before him,
but will only render their courses more odious to him, who hates dissimulation,
and who is provoked to give men a sad proof of his omniscience, when they would
attempt to deceive him, Jer. 2.35. See Is. 29.15. and 30.1. Job 31.33.

2. If God know all things so well, we are bound to trust his verdict
concerning us, in his word, and not our own deceitful hearts, Jer. 17.9, 10.

3. His eye upon us is still to be remembered, and that (as was said to ^^hazi
by Elisha, 2 King 5.26.) his heart goes with us, wherever we go. See Psalm.
44.20, 21. and 139.7.8, etc. Job 31 4. and 34.21, 22. So that if our own hearts
condemn us, much more may he condemn us, who is greater than our hearts, and
knows all things, 1 John 3.20.

4. When at any time the word of God fines us out, we should not look upon it
as falling forth by chance, but as directed to us by his all seeing eye and
providence. For therefore is the Word quick and powerful, to discern the
thoughts and i^tents of the heart, because all things are naked and opened unto
the eyes of him, with whom we have to do, Heb. 4.12, with 13. See 1 Cor. 14 24,
25.

5. This, also, may comfort the godly under afflictions, Psalm. 31.7. and 142.3.
when they are sl^ndered by men, Job 16 19. and secretly plotted against, Psalm.
94 7, 8, etc. 2 King 6 11, 12, 31, 32. Is. 29.15, 16.

Verse 7. He stretches out the north over the empty place, and hangs the
earth upon nothing.
The third evidence and effect of Gods powerful dominion and providence, is,
his fixing of Heaven and Earth. As for the first part of the Verse, He
stretches out the North over the empty place; it may, indeed, be understood
thus, that he spreads that part of the Heavens, which is near the North Pole,
over the empty, or, uninhabited, place of the Earth, as that part of the Earth
under the Pole is uninhabited. But it is clearer to understand the whole Verse
thus; That the Lord stretches out the whole Heaven (which here he denominates
from the north, or Northern Hemisphere thereof, under which himself lived) like
a curious vault, above that void and empty space, which is betwixt the Earth
and it; and he hangs the globe of the Earth and Water upon nothing, causing
it hang as a ball in the air. And for further clearing of the words, consider,

1. He calls that interjacent space betwixt the Heaven and the Earth, the empty
place, because, though there be no vacuity in Nature, yet the Air (which fills
that space) to common sense seems to be nothing, and sure it is an empty place
of any thing which might support that fabric of the Heavens.

2. Though the Earth be, elsewhere, said to have foundations upon which it is
settled, Psalm. 104 5. yet that is to be understood of the deepest place^ of the
Earth, near the center thereof, which are as foundations to these parts of it
which are above them; not that the whole Earth has any foundations. Or it may
be thus understood, that the Earth is no less fixed than if it were settled upon
the firmest foundations. And whereas it is said, Psalm. 24.2. That the Earth is
founded upon the seas, and established upon the floods; the word rendered, upon,
may in that place be more fitly rendered, above, to point out the great power
of God, who has made the dry Earth stand up above the Waters (which at first
were above it) to be a commodious habitation for man. Or it may be rendered,
beside, to point out that God has founded the Earth beside, and with the Seas,
in one Globe, and beside and with the flo^ds and rivers which run through it,
Psalm. 104.10, etc.

Doct. 1. The works of Creation do set forth the glory of God, the stately
curtain of Heaven being as his Throne and Canopy, and the founded and fixed
Earth as his Footstool, Is. 66.1. For, this is one of Job's instances of Gods
glorious dominion, that he stretches forth the north, and hangs the earth.
See Psalm. 19.1. and 104.1, 2, etc. Is. 40.22. And in the close of this Book,
God demonstrates his own glory by these and the like operations of his hand. So
that they are without excuse who see not God in these things, Romans 1.20. And
men should be much in meditating upon these things, for their instruction and
edification, as was David's practice, Psalm. 8. and 19. and 104. and 148. and
elsewhere. Whose profiting by that study may tell us that spiritual minds will
still find the lessons, taught by that Book, fresh unto them, even all these
who do not drown themselves in the study of nature and second causes, in these
things, forgetting God. And the barrenness of many, who have these
demonstrations of the glory of God still before their eyes, may tell us how
formality will hide the luster of most glorious things, were they even as
visible as the Heaven and Earth.

2. It is an evidence of the glory of God, that he supports the whole Fabric
of Heaven and Earth, by the word of his Almighty power; For, by this Job
commends him here, that he stretches out the north over the empty place, and
hangs the earth upon nothing. See Heb. 1.3. This assures us that he can do
greatest things without visible means, by the power of his word; so that if he
but speak the word, it shall be done, Luke 7.7. See Psalm. 119.89, 90, 91, 92.

Verse 8. He binds up the waters in his thick cloud, and the cloud is not
rent under him.
The fourth evidence and effect of his Dominion and power, is, that he binds up
the Waters, which are in the air, in clouds, that they may not fall down but in
drops; and that, though they be very weighty, yet, the cloud bursts not under
the burden. Whence Learn,

1* It is an evidence of the dominion of God, that he has waters above our
heads, bottled up in clouds; For, this is another instance, that he has waters
in his thick clouds. Those the Lord has prepared for several ends, Job 37.11,
12, 13. Not only to have a scourge in readiness, when sinners provoke him, but
to furnish needful refreshment to the earth, which neither nature, by it self,
nor Idols could do, Jer. 14.22. and, thereby, to manifest his kindness to his
people, Psalm. 65.9, 10, etc. and, 68.9. and therefore we should see much of God
even in this, Act. 14.17.

2. It is a proof of the dominion and goodness of God, that he binds up these
waters in clouds, and lets them out but by little and little; otherwise they
would drown the earth, or make it fruitless; as appeared in the general deluge,
and particular floods, and may be daily observed in innundations by rain; For,
it is an instance of that truth which Job is amplifying, that he binds up the
waters in his thick clouds (where the clouds are called his clouds, that is,
Gods clouds, because he created them, and prepares them for his service; and
because they are his Chariots, upon which he rides, and his habitation where he
dwells, Ps. 18.11. and 97.2. Is. 19.1.) See Job 36.27, 28. and 37.11. By this
the Lord shows that moderation in dispensing of mercies (as in the sifting
down of rain) is the mercy of our mercies, and that he is a faithful God in
keeping Covenant with his people; as his Covenant with Noah, Genesis 9.9, 10, 11.
stands firm with mankind in general, however he deal with some particular
persons.

3. It commends the power of God, that he keeps us free of many hazards, by
unlikely means; A^ here, he makes a cloud, which is but a mass of condensate
vapors, hold up the heavy waters, and yet the cloud is not rent under the
weight of them. By this the Lord would put us in mind how obnoxious we are to
hazards without him (as we live under a mass of waters above our heads, held up
only by a weak cloud) and how little, or nothing, in his hand, is sufficient to
secure those who are under his protection.

Verse 9. He holds back the face of his throne, and spreads his cloud upon
it.
The fifth evidence and effect of Gods Dominion and Providence, is, That as, at
some times, he spreads out the Heaven (which is his Throne) in glorious
brightness, so at other times he covers it with a cloud, as with a curtain,
that we see it not: as he did in the Egyptian darkness, and does ordinarily in
dark days. Whence Learn,

1. God is a sovereign King and Governor, and has a Throne upon which he sits
to order all affairs; Therefore are the Heavens called his throne. See Is. 66.1.

2. Gods throne is high above all thrones; For, it is no lower than the very
heavens. See Eccl. 5.8. And therefore all ought to be subject to him, and all
will be subjected to him, whether they will or not.

3. God is pleased, sometimes, to give demonstrations of his glory and
dominion, by obscuring the face of the heavens with clouds; For, it is one
proof of his glorious dominion, that he holds back the face of his throne,
and spreads his cloud upon it. See Job 36.32. Psalm. 147.8. And by this he
teaches,

1. The greatness of his glory, and of our blindness, that he must be environed
with clouds, and dwell in thick darkness, whereby he obscureth himself, that he
may reveal himself, as we are able to bear it. See 1 Timoth. 6.16. Psalm.
97.112. 1 King. 8.12.

2. That h^s glory shines even in obscuring his glory at some times; as it is
a proof of his glorious dominion that he spreads a cloud upon the face of his
throne. And Saints are to believe that God intends to se^ forth his glory, even
when clouds are interposed, that they cannot find access unto God; as Lam. 3.44.

3. That all our joy and light are in Gods hand, to obscure them when he
pleases; as he darkens the heavens when he will.

4. That our light and comforts are not gone, when we see them not; As the
heavens are bright, and the Sun shines in the firmament, when clouds intercept
the sight thereof from us.

5 That God would have our enjoyment of light, and our other comforts, made
more sweet and refreshful to us, by their being interrupted at some times; As a
bright day is sweet after dark clouds.

6. That God brings good out of obscure and dark dispensations, whereby our
mercies are hid from us; as those dark clouds produce refreshing rain, Ps.
147.8.

7. That God is admirable in his condescendence to appear under a vail; as when
his throne is covered with clouds: And especially that he manifests himself in
Christ, who began to suffer reproach even in his conception, Mat. 1.18, 19. and
who stooped even to admiration, as when he came to be Baptized by John, Matthew.
3.14, 15.

8. That there is no permanency, but perpetual vicissitudes, in our enjoyments
within time; As the heavens are sometime clear, and sometimes darkened.

Verse 10. He has compassed the waters with bounds, until the day and night
come to an end.
The sixth evidence and effect of Gods Dominion, is, That God has, as it were
by a circle, settled the globe of Water and Earth on one center; and has
bounded the waters by a perpetual Law, till the end of time when the
vicissitudes of day and night shall have an end. Which does not import that
after that the waters shall break bounds, but only that while the World stands
there shall be no general Deluge, like that in the days of Noah, however
particular places may be overflowed. See on v. 8.

Doct. 1. Man is obnoxious to many hazards, all the creatures being armed
against him as a rebel, if God would let them loose; As here he is in hazard
of waters, which are higher than the earth, and apt to overflow it, as appeared
in the general Deluge. This should be studied, to excite us to a tender and
constant dependence upon God, and to make us sensible and thankful for his
providence and care about us. If we saw more of our hazards, it would discover
much of God daily unto us; and because we see little of him in ordinary
providence, we are put to need more special providence and preservation.

2. Gods power is able to prevent greatest hazards by small means; As he
compasses the waters with bounds, or, hemmeth in the raging waters (which at
first overflowed the Earth, Genesis 1.2, 9. Psalm. 104.6.) by his word, so that a
little sand is sufficient to stop their overflowing. See Job 38.8, 11. Psalm.
104.7, 8, 9. This, as it points out, and aggravates man's rebellion against God,
when all other creatures (even the raging Seas) do obey him; Jer. 5.22, with
23. and invites us to fear and be afraid to offend him who is so mighty and
powerful, Jer. 5.22. So it secures godly men, who are in his hand, though very
little be betwixt them and greatest hazards.

3. God is the bounder of all things, were they never so impetuous, as here he
bounds the raging waters, and so does he also bound the violence of men, and
the troubles of his people, Psalm. 65.7. and 93.3, 4. and 124.1, 2, etc. Is.
59.19. This may encourage us yet more to rely on him, without being afraid of
hazards; (For if our innocence do not protect us from violence, 1 Pet. 3.13.
yet God will keep us from getting hurt thereby, Romans 8.31. and when we consider
the greatness of our hazards, we should look, not to them only, but to him who
sets bounds to the wrath of man, Psalm. 76.10. And here also, men, who will not
be bounded by the word of God, would consider that God can otherwise bridle and
restrain them, Psalm. 32.9, 10. 2 King. 19.28.

4. Time is full of vicissitudes; For, here there is day and night, or, light
and darkness, in it. See Genesis 8.22. This shows,

1. That we are not to fix upon time, or the things of it, but to be sober and
keep a loose grip of all things, 1 Cor. 7.29, 30, 31. For our settling, and
seeking to build our nest, portends a change, Psalm. 30.6, 7.

2. That we should study to see every thing beautiful in its time, in all these
changes, Eccl. 3.11. For to have it still day, or, still night, would not be so
sweet and advantageous, as this vicissitude i^, wherein we have suitable work
or refreshment assigned to us, Psalm. 104.20, 23. as there is also for
prosperity and adversity, Eccl. 7.14.

3. That we may expect changes in our sad lots within time; seeing the World is
but a changling and full of vicissitudes (as the Church in her afflicted
condition argues, that she may plead for a change in her own condition, Ps.
74.16, 17, 18.) we need never quit hope so long as we are within time, Jer.
31.15, 17.

Doct. 5. Time and the vicissitudes thereof will come to an end, and then there
will be no changes, but an unalterable state, after that; For, the vicissitude
of day and night, will come to an end. We should think much upon this, that it
may breed sobriety and tender walking, Phil. 4.5. Jam. 5.8, 9. 1 Pet. 4.7, 8.
that the godly may rejoice in the expectation of a quiet harbor, after their
tossing, and that the wicked may look out toward the miseries of the settled
estate that abides them, while yet there is hope.

6. Albeit men be, oft-times, sore tried by the continuance of their trials,
yet the power of God is sufficient for difficulties of longest continuance;
For, he has compassed the waters with bounds, until the day and night come to
an end. His keeping of this particular Covenant, in not drowning the Earth
again, assures as that he is faithful in keeping his promise; and his constant
bounding of the waters, shows, that he will not weary nor faint, in
preserving his people, in long continued trials, Is. 40.^8. but his name is
still, I am. And therefore we should not weary of constant exercise, putting us
to employ and depend upon him.

7. Gods power and dominion may be seen, not only in extraordinary works done
at some times, but in his constant and ordinary Providence; For, here we have a
proof and instance of these in his constant bounding of the Sea. It is our sin
that we should need signs and wonders to make us believe, Joh. 4.48. And if
men will not improve ordinary dispensations and means, they will not readily
profit by what is extraordinary, Luke 16.29, 30, 31.

Verse 11. The Pillars of Heaven tremble, and are astonished at his reproof.
The seventh evidence and effect of Gods Dominion, is, That the very frame of
the World shakes at his pleasure; so that when he lets out his anger and
reproofs, the very Pillars of Heaven tremble, and are as persons astonished,
and cannot endure his displeasure. Where, by the Pillars of Heaven, we may
understand the very strength of Heaven, as Pillars are the strength of an house
and fabric; or, the Air (over which he stretches out the Heavens, v. 8.)
which is rent with Thunder; and the high hills (which seem to uphold the
Heavens, 2 Samuel 22.8. with Psalm. 18.7.) which shake from the top to the bottom,
by Earthquakes.

Doct. 1. Gods anger and reproofs are so little regarded by men, that he leaves
documents thereof upon the insensible creatures; not for their own sakes, Hab.
3.8. but for the instruction of men; For, here his reproof is let forth against
the Pillars of Heaven. See Jer. 9.12. with 12.4. And therefore wicked men
should look upon themselves as great burdens and disturbers of the World.

2. No creature is able to abide the anger and reproof of God; As here he gives
instance in the firmest, even the Pillars of Heaven, which tremble and are
astonished at his reproof, Ps. 18.7. Hence,

1. Much more cause have frail men to tremble before him, Jer. 5.22. 1 Cor.
10.22.

2. This may encourage men to serve him, who will thus reprove all the
creatures for his peoples behoof, Psalm. 18.6, 7, 16. and 114.5, 6, 7, 8. Hab.
3.8, 9,

3. His mercy shines in that he does not overturn the fabric of the World, as
he might do in his anger, when he is provoked by our sins.

Doct. 3. When Gods anger is apprehended, without any sight of mercy, it will
never produce any saving effect; As here, his reproof produces trembling
accompanied only with astonishment.

Verse 12. He divides the Sea with his power, and by his understanding he
smites through the proud.
The eighth evidence and effect of Gods Dominion, is, That by his power and
understanding he divides the Sea, and strikes through the proud. The word,
Rahab, here rendered, the proud, or, pride, is a name sometime given to Egypt,
Psalm 87.4. and 89.10. Is. 51.9. And this name is either given to all Egypt,
because they were a proud and potent Nation, Is. 30.2, 3. Ezekiel. 30.6. Or, to
the lower part of Egypt only (the upper part of it being called Pathros, Jer.
44.1.) where the River Nilus divides it self into many Channels; and then the
name signifies, either, that that was the strongest part of the Country, which
made the Inhabitants thereof more proud than the rest: Or; the name, Rahab, is
only an Hebrew pronunciation of the name Rib, or, Riph (which signifies a
Pear, and which the Egyptians and Arabians gave it, because it resembled a Pear
in its form and situation; as the Grecians called it Delta, because it
resembled that Letter in the Greek Alphabet, being of the form of a Pyramid. Or
the Hebrew name may also be given it from its shape, because, from its narrow
top it dilated and enlarged it self (as the word Rahab signifies) into a broad
bottom, as does a Pear, and the Letter Delta. If thus we understand it of
Egypt, the words might be very fitly applied to what God did to the Egyptians
when he divided the Red Sea, Exodus 14. if it were clear that Job lived after
that time. But it being more likely that he lived before that time, the whole
Verse may more safely be understood of the proud and boisterous Sea it self,
which God sometimes divides into waves and ridges (in tempests) and scatters
some of it into the air, and sometime again calms those proud waves (or,
exaltings, as the word will read) and makes them still like a man stricken
through and slain. Whence, Learn,

1. The most outrageous, unruly and restless of all the creatures, are in Gods
Hand, to raise storms and give calms, as he pleases; For, so are we here
taught. See Psalm. 107.25, 2^. Jon. 1.4, 15. Matthew. 8.23, 27. This should invite
us to employ him in hopeless conditions, and impassable difficulties, Is.
50.10. remembering that it is he who raises and calmeth storms, Job 34.29. and
who can come walking on the Sea to his people in greatest tempests, Joh. 6.19.

2. The pride of creatures will not make void Gods dominion over them; For, he
strikes through the proud Sea. It is Gods Prerogative to take such to task, and
to calm them when he will, were it even when they are at the height of their
pride, Job 40.11. Exodus 18.11.

3. In every work of God we are to adore, not only his power, but his wisdom
also; For, both power and understanding are employed here. And therefore when we
expect proofs of his power, or love, we must submit to let his wisdom carve
them out for us. And we must believe that there is infinite wisdom in every
act of his Sovereign dominion, wherein he will give us no account of his
matters; and that even in the most common act of Providence (such as this here)
his wisdom is the orderer of all, (as his mercy also shines in these common
acts, Psalm. 136.7, 8, 9, 25.) and he knows what he is doing, though we cannot
see, nor comprehend it.

Verse 13. By his Spirit he has garnished the Heavens; his hand has formed
the crooked Serpent.
The ninth and last: evidence and effect of Gods Dominion, here mentioned, is,
That he garnisheth the visible Heavens, by his Spirit, or, skill, (or, it may
be understood of the Holy Ghost, who, from the Father and the Son, was a worker
in the creation of the World, Genesis 1.2.) adorning them with lights and variety
of Constellations; and that his hand also formed the crooked Serpent. Which as
it is to be understood of Satan in Hell; So it might well be understood of the
Circles and Orbs in the Heavens, or rather that Constellation called the
Dragon, if it were certain, that, as they were Astronomers in those days, so
also, that all the names of Constellations, now in use, were then invented. But
that being uncertain^ and seeing the forming of all these Constellations may be
comprehended under his garnishing of the Heavens; nor can any reason be given
why he should particularly mention that Constellation, rather than any other,
it is more clear to understand the words of some monstrous Serpents in the Sea,
or, on the Earth. See Is. 27.1. And by the conjunction of these two instances,
in the close of this Narration, he shows that there are none of Gods works,
from the high Heavens even to the low Earth or deep Sea, which do not evidence
his glory and dominion.

Doct. 1. We are to adore the Holy Spirit's concurrent operation with the
Father and the Son, in the work of Creation; For here God acted ^n it by his
Spirit. See Genesis 1.2. Psalm. 104.30. This we should study, that he may ascribe
unto him the glory of his Godhead, equal and the same with the Father and the
Son; and may, in that mirror, read his fullness to communicate to empty
sinners, in his operations of grace, and his sufficiency to cherish what he
communicates, and to adorn their souls with it ^^ as here he garnished the
Heavens.

2. The visible Heavens; in their beauty and light, are demonstrations of the
glory of God; For, this is an instance of it, that by his Spirit he garnished
the Heavens. See Psalm. 19.1. This is a br^ad Book for Ignorants, a check to the
carnal minded, and a conviction of Atheists. And from this also we may learn,
How much more glorious and beautiful the third Heavens, or celestial
habitations, are, these visible Heavens being but the outside of that stately
Palace. There will be no need of a Sun there, but God will be all in all. Yea,
there it will be eminently true (whatever accomplishment it have in time) which
is foretold of the Moons being confounded, and the Sun ashamed, when the Lord
does reign, etc. Is. 24.23.

3. The glory of God shines no less in making the most deformed, than in making
the most beautiful creatures; as the Painters skill appears in drawing an
ugly Portraict; For, it is an instance and evidence of his glory, that his hand
has formed the crooked Serpent. So should we see his glory shining in cross
and terrible dispensations, and acknowledge him to be holy, wise and just in
all of them, Ps. 22.3. Neh. 9.33.

4. The most dreadful, subtle and dangerous creatures are Gods workmanship, and
so under his dominion and power; as here instance is given of the crooked
Serpent. So that we need not fear any of them, for even Death and Satan are in
his hand.

Verse 14. Lo, these are parts of his ways, but how little a portion is heard
of him? But the thunder of his power who can understand?
In this Verse, we have a Conclusion subjoyned to the preceding Discourse;
wherein Job breaks off this enumeration of the instances of the dominion of
God, it being impossible to absolve it, and all that he, or any other, could
say on this subject, being but some small hints of his power and glory. This
Conclusion contains three expressions,

1. These (or, those instances, of which he has been speaking) are parts (and
but parts, or, the extremities) of his ways, or, glorious operations.

2. But how little a portion is heard of him? That is, Though I have told
somewhat of his ways, yet it is even admirably little, that is heard and
revealed of him, by that, or any the like report.

3. But (or, and, by way of instance) who can understand the thunder of his
power? This some understand metaphorically, that if he should magnifickly
spread and display his power, as it is in it self, none could endure to take up
this declaration. For if his ordinary thunder do strike and affect men's minds;
certainly that thunder, which should fully declare the greatness of his power,
would utterly confound them. Or it may be understood of thundering eloquence,
declaring the power of God suitably to the greatness of the subject, which
would also confound men. Or it may be understood even of the thunder it self,
which we ordinarily hear, and which does so proclaim what God is, that none can
fully comprehend that majesty and power of God which shines in it.

Doct. 1. It is to be remembered, that the passages of Divine Providence are his
ways wherein he walks toward the children of men; For, here the former
instances are called, his ways. So that what evil constructions we have of
them, reflect on him; and we are to see him in them, and what he says by them,
and not what they seem to speak, or drive at, of themselves.

2. These ways of God should be looked upon with affection, reverence and
attention; so much is imported in this, Lo, or, Behold, prefixed to this
Conclusion. Formality in looking upon these Providence is a woeful ill moth,
and provokes God to put us to the School of more singular Providence.

3. God has condescended to let out some of his ways to men's capacities, that
he may take away all excuse from the lazy; For, says he, These are parts of
his ways, which he has enumerated, and which are obvious to men.

4. All that we can know of Gods ways is but a part, and a very little; For,
these are but parts of his ways, and it is but a little portion that is heard
of him. His Majesty is incomprehensible, and all creatures are too shallow to
take him up. It is but a little of him that is let out in these ways, and we
discern but a little of that little. And this commends his greatness, that all
we can perceive of him is but the extremities of his ways, or, his back-parts.

5. Gods ways are then rightly seen, not when the providential dispensation
only is seen, but when he is seen in it, and known by it; For, it is of him,
that little is heard by the enumeration of parts of his ways. Gods works
should lead us to see and know himself, and it is our fault that we see more of
a providential dispensation, than of God in it; yea, that we are, oft-times,
unwilling to see God in his works and operations.

6. Whatever men see of Gods works, yet hearing, especially, from the Word, is
needful for their taking up of God in them; For, this portion must be heard of
him, by such instructions concerning the works of God as Job here gives. And
this warns us to make use of the Word, to read Providence by it.

7. Such as know most of God, will see their own ignorance of him best; For,
when he sees parts of his ways, it is an admiration to him, how little a
portion is heard of him? Such as know God, and are near him indeed, will be
far from any conceit of what they have.

8. The little that men know of God would be less, if God did not condescend to
their capacity, who cannot receive, nor bear, high and glorious discoveries of
him; For, the thunder of his power (as it has been explained) who can
understand?

9. Whatever Naturalists take up of the thunder; yet to spiritual discerners it
is an incomprehensible demonstration of Gods power, and should be studied as
such; For, even of it, it is true, The thunder of his power who can understand?
See Exodus 9.28. Ps. 29.3, 4, etc. We should speak of this his glory, even in
his Temple, Psalm. 29.9. And should bless him that we hear another voice than
the voice of his power only, or such a voice (joined with a sight) as made
Moses fear and quake exceedingly, Heb. 12.21. with Exodus 19.19.

CHAP. XXVII.
JOB having now replied to Bildad, and neither Zophar (whose turn came next)
nor any of the rest, offering to say any more to him, as conceiving him to be
stubborn; He goes on (till Chap. 32.) to speak to the whole Cause in debate,
and to the Principles of all of them, in two Discourses: Wherein he clears the
Controversy, and their mistakes in it; Partly, by general Arguments, Chap. 27,
and 28. and partly, by giving them a particular account of his whole life,
lots, and carriage.

His first Discourse is contained in this and the following Chapter, Wherein he
proves his integrity by several general Arguments, and points out their
mistakes in their Principles, upon which they judged him wicked. In this
Chapter, we have, First, A Preface, which is either more general, intimating,
that, upon his Friends continuing silent, he proceeded to the following
Discourse, v. 1. Or, more special, wherein he states the Controversy, and by
solemn Oath declares his fixed resolution to maintain his own integrity
constantly till death, v. 2 -- 6. Secondly, Some Arguments proving that he was
not a wicked man, since he abhorred the course and lot of the wicked, v. 7. Nor
yet an Hypocrite, seeing he has hope in his deepest distress, v. 8. Is heard
of God in his trouble, and abhors their condition who are not heard, v. 9.
And delights in God, and calls upon him in all conditions: v. 10. None of which
Characters agree to an Hypocrite. Thirdly, A begun clearing of their mistakes,
and a refutation of these principles and grounds upon which they condemned him
as a wicked man. Wherein (promising to instruct them concerning the ways of
God, which themselves might also have learned by experience, v. 11, 12.) he
concedes that some wicked men may be plagued in their Children and Posterity,
v. 13, 14, 15. And in their Wealth, both Movables, v. 16, 17. and more fixed
Estate, v. 18. And that they may be suddenly ruined, v. 19. as by an Inundation
and Tempest, v. 20. or East Wind, v. 21. And that this shall come upon them,
because God is their party, whose stroke they shall not get declined, v. 22.
And who shall make them become a derision to all, v. 23. All which Job frankly
concedes in this debate, without any prejudice to his own opinion; Considering,
(as he subjoyns in the following Chap.) that, beside this particular way of
dealing with some, God gives proof of unsearchable Wisdom in administrating the
affairs of the World, and in the great variety of his dispensations toward man;
so that none can make a fixed Rule concerning them. Of which, see more on Verse.
13. and on Chap. 28.

Verse 1. Moreover, Job continued his parable, and said.
IN this Verse we have the general Preface, premitted by the writer of the
Book; Wherein it is insinuated that, after the former reply to Bildad, Job
waited for a time, to see if any of them would give a return: But they
continuing silent, and he thinking it hard to be given over by them as an
obstinate hypocrite, who would neither receive instruction from them, nor
correction from God; therefore he will yet speak more in his own defense, if,
possibly, they may be convinced and satisfied. What he speaks is here called a
parable, not only because there are similitudes, or comparisons, made use of in
this discourse, Chap. 28. as uses to be done in proper Parables. Nor yet only
because this is a dark sort of speech (as Parables were to many, Matthew. 13.10,
11. Ezekiel. 20.49.) not understood or taken up by his Friends (as ignorance and
prejudice will hide what is most clear; and God does humble us, by somewhat
that is dark in his word, to exercise us thereby.) But the word in the Original
signifies to bear rule, and so is applied to excellent doctrine or sentences
(such as Proverbs and Apothegmes) which bear rule, and are most excellent in
discourse. Thus it is applied to David's doctrine, Psalm. 78.2. and this name is
here given to the following discourse, because it is a grave doctrine, uttering
sublime conceptions in a sublime style, and so may be as a Ruler and Prince
among ordinary Discourses, and may captivate, and leave an impression upon, the
minds of the hearers, as witty Sentences and Parables do.

Doct. 1. It is a commendable duty for men to be sober in debates, and to wait
for what any may have to say, which may give light in them; as this preface
insinuates that Job waited till he knew whether his Friends would speak any
more in the cause. Men should seek truth rather than victory, and should not
undervalue their opposers, as not worthy to be heard.

2. An ill cause will not always bear out, but the favorers thereof will
sometime be driven from their Arguments, though not from their passions; As
here his Friends are silenced, though not quieted or satisfied in their minds.

3. Truth and a man's integrity are a quarrel never to be deserted, and a cause
which will maintain its Champion; For, here Job has, moreover, somewhat yet to
say, when they have quit the field.

4. No discouragement ought to daunt the friends of truth; For, as he
maintained his cause formerly against their reasonings, so here he goes on to
maintain it against their peevish silence, whereby they would reflect on him as
a stubborn man.

5. Godly men get this advantage (through Gods blessing) of their trouble, that
it affords them sublime conceptions, and enables them to speak sublimely of
truth; For, here he speaks his parable, or sublime doctrine.

6. Truth, especially when it is well uttered, has a commanding and
captivating power; For, so much also is imported, in its being a parable, as
has been explained. Which as it may humble them who spoil truth, in their way
of telling it, and so obstruct the efficacy thereof, so, it may condemn them
who are not taken with the commanding power thereof, but do either slight it,
or burst these bonds which it would lay upon them; as befell Felix when he
trembled, Act. 24.25. and Agrippa who was almost persuaded, but never went
further, Act. 26.28.

Verse 2. As God lives, who has taken away my judgment, and the Almighty,
who has vexed my soul.
Follows, to v. 7. a more special preface to the Discourse; wherein Job
states the controversy, showing that he will appear in the defense of his own
integrity, and by a solemn oath declares his fixed resolution constantly to
maintain it, while he lives. This purpose, as it is expressed in those Verses,
may be branched out in four particulars.

First, That he confirms his resolution, aftermentioned, by an oath, in the
beginning of this Verse; That as God lives, he will maintain his integrity.
Whence Learn,

1. An Oath, or solemn asseveration, is lawful in some cases, even among
friends; when the matter is weighty, and there are no other proofs to put an
end to controversies: For, here Job takes a solemn Oath in this weighty cause
of his own integrity, when his Friends would no otherwise be persuaded of the
truth of it, or that he had cause to persevere in defense of it. An Oath is a
part of the Worship of God, wherein men acknowledge his omniscience and his
searching of the conscience; his loving and maintaining of truth; his being the
supreme judge, and Lord of life and death, from whom there is no appeal; and,
his justice, and power to punish lying and perjury, which he hates. And
therefore, as they lie against the truth who simply condemn all Oaths; so they
profane an holy Ordinance, and the holy name of God, who spare not to multiply
Oaths, in passion; in light and trivial matters, in matters the truth whereof
may be cleared by other proofs, and especially to confirm a lie and untruth.

2. The name of God alone is to be interposed, and made use of, in an oath; as
here Job's practice is. For it is his prerogative to know, in all cases, if
truth be spoken, and to punish a lie. See Matthew. 5.34, 35. Which may condemn
them who swear by the creatures, or do even worship Satan, in their cursing and
invocating of his name in their passion.

3. Job's taking of an oath in this cause (beside what may be after marked, and
that there were no other proofs in many matters of fact, which are afterward
recorded before Elihu interpose) may point out,

1. A man's integrity is a very grave and weighty business, wherein he is not a
little concerned; For, Job judges it so weighty that he may very lawfully take
an oath about it.

2. A man should guard, not only that he really be not, but that he seem not to
be vainglorious; Therefore Job speaks all upon oath, when he speaks to his own
commendation, to avoid that imputation.

3. Men, in matters of controversy betwixt them and others, ought to speak
seriously, and not out of spleen or passion; Therefore also he takes an oath in
this matter, to show that he will speak truth exactly, and will not condemn
them and their opinions in passion.

4. Men had need to be fixed in trials against all tentations and assaults;
Therefore does Job, by this oath, fix himself against all tentations which
might assault him, to cause him quit his integrity.

5. As men upon oath ought to keep themselves within the bounds of truth (as
here is insinuated, and some Heathen States appointed no punishment for
Perjury, as supposing none durst hazard upon that sin) and sad will be the
account of them who swear falsely; So an oath should put an end to
controversies; Therefore does Job take an oath, to put an end to this debate.
See Heb. 6.16.

Doct. 4. His swearing As God lives, does teach, That God lives most
certainly, and to live is proper to him, in a peculiar way. And this, as it
shows that he lives for ^ver, to avenge perjury; So further,

1. It distinguishes him from all dead Idols whom men serve, 1 Thessalonians. 1.9.
Jer. 10.8, 9, 10.

2. It shows that all hold their lives of him, and therefore should employ
them for him.

3. It may encourage dead souls to go to him, who is the fountain of life, and
may comfort godly men in all their troubles, Ps. 18.46.

4. It calls for living service, Romans 12.1. Heb. 9.13, 14.

Secondly, (in this Verse also) unto his oath, he subjoyns a description of God
by whom he swears; where he describes him from what he had done to him, that
he had taken away his judgment, and vexed his soul, or, made his soul bitter,
as it is in the Original. By which we are not so much to understand that God
had taken away his sweet way of walking with him (imported in his judgment,
or, composed and well ordered frame of spirit) and in stead thereof, had filled
him with bitterness (which is a sad change, and matter of sad complaint, Lam.
3.9, 11, 15. Job 9.18.) As that God had not righted him in his quarrel, by
judging his cause and delivering him from misconstructions; nor had he
eventually cleared his integrity, by removing the rods that were upon him: But
by all those calamities, misconstructions and other tentations, had vexed his
spirit, and made him bitter of soul. This is an expression which is challenged,
as irreverent and passionate, Chap. 34, 5. yet not as proving him to be wicked.

Doct. 1. The best of Saints get not, readily, through their trials without
some discoveries of weakness, which may humble them; as here Job's experience
may teach, who stumbles often by the way, though the close of all was sweet. So
was it also with David, Psalm. 31.22. and 73.1, 2, etc. and 116.11, 12. This
teaches, That any good we have received should not hide our miscarriages in
managing thereof; That we should resolve so to get through trials, as we shall
have no ground of gloriation, Psalm. 73.1. with 2. That our corruption defiles
our best things, as it did Job's necessary defense of his Integrity; That
humility must be very needful, that in all conditions God keeps us so at the
study of it, and inculcates it upon us from the consideration of our failings;
and, That such as do fail in an hour of trial, may yet get a good issue of all,
though God humble them by the way; as it befell Job.

2. Mistakes and hard thoughts of God, and of his dealing, are the ordinary
failings of godly men in affliction; For, in those Job failed here. We should
guard especially against that evil in a day of trial, neither carping at his
dispensations, Psalm. 22.1, 2. with 3. Neh. 9.33. nor looking upon his service
as unprofitable, Mal. 3.14, 15. Psalm. 73.13. with 28. For right constructions
of God will keep our souls in life, and cherish hope and love in hardest lots;
whereas contrary apprehensions breed alienation, Zech. 11.8. And for attaining
right thoughts of God and his dealing; We ought to study his absolute
Sovereignty, to which we ought to submit in every thing, without any debate or
contradiction; We ought to mind much our guilt and ill deservings, which will
justify God in all he does, Psalm. 51.4. with Romans 3.4. Lam. 1.18. We ought to
judge of his dealing, not by our humor, or according as it is pleasant to our
sense, but by its profitableness, though it be bitter; and, we ought to be
sensible of our own blindness, that cannot discern the depth of wisdom which
orders our lots; whence it comes to pass that, oft-times, we forsake our own
mercies, and quarrel these lots whereby God communicates greatest advantages to
us.

3. It may please the Lord to suffer the righteousness and integrity of his
children to be over-clouded for a time, that so both themselves, and others
also, may be tried; For, so Job's Judgment, or the righteous decision of his
cause, and the matter of his integrity, was withheld for a time, and he lay
under sad imputations. This trial is supposed in that promise, Psalm. 37.6. and
is expressed in that lot of Paul, 2 Timothy 2.9. And it should warn others to
beware of putting others to that trial, by rash censures, especially of the
afflicted; So godly men should arm themselves against such a trial, which may
be the more easily born so long as the truth of their good condition is cleared
by the word of God, and, it may be, even in the consciences of these who are
most ready to traduce them.

4. As God is the orderer of this trial, so it is not for want of power, but
for other wise reasons, that he suffers his children to lie under such a cloud
in the matter of their integrity; For, Job acknowledges that he is the strong
God (as his name in the beginning of the Verse imports) and, the Almighty,
though he leave him under this trial. As sin obstructs proofs of Gods power for
the good of wicked men, Isa. 59.1, 2. So it is good for Saints to see
themselves in Gods hand, in this trial, that so they may adore his wisdom in
the continuing of it, when he could easily remove it. And if they were walking
tenderly, and shunning guilt, Is. 59.1, 2. and were studying his power and
love, they might have sweet exercise about the saddest of their lots, and a
comfortable look of them.

5. Albeit, in many cases, godly men are fortified to bear reproaches and
misconstructions; yet if they be hard put to it, and be not cleared and
vindicated, they may be ready to take it ill; As here Job complains that God
had taken away his judgment, or, had not given him an hearing, to silence the
reproaches and mistakes of his Friends. See Psalm. 69.20. and 120.3, 4. Men
should acknowledge it a mercy, when they are born out under this trial; and
though it do prove sharp unto them, yet that is not a mark of wickedness, for
godly men have been afflicted with it before them; and withal, others should
take heed that they inflict not such a trial, which may prove so sharp and
vexing to an afflicted godly man.

6. Beside misconstructions, and other outward trials (under which godly men
may be continued, and God not interpose to vindicate and deliver them) godly
men should resolve to be exercised with soul-trouble, by their outward troubles
breaking in upon their spirits to distemper them, and Gods hiding of his face
under it; For, when Job is not delivered from misconstructions, nor his cause
cleared, he is also vexed in soul. Here we are to consider,

1. Godly afflicted men may meet with more trouble, instead of being delivered
from what they are under; As Job i^ not only not delivered and cleared, but his
soul is also vexed.

2. Troubles are never sharp and searching till they get in upon men's spirits
and souls; For, Job complains of this as a sad addition to the former trial.
Then trials will become insupportable, Prove. 18.14. and they will readily
discover any scum of corruption that is within us. So that men have cause to
bless God if they be free of this, whatever their lot be otherwise. Hence,

3. Men should look well to what their souls are doing under trouble; for if
they be not vexed with sin, Jer. 2.19. they are justly made to smart under
other vexations.

Doct. 7. Bitterness is ordinarily the result of soul-trouble; For, here his
soul is made bitter, as it is in the Original. See Chap. 9.18. Troubles are of
themselves grievous and bitter, Heb. 12.11. and when they break in upon our
spirits, they work upon our bitterness, and we represent them to our selves as
more bitter and grievous than indeed they are. And therefore we should be upon
our guard, that we may possess our souls in patience and meekness, Luke 21.19.
And for this end, we ought to remember that it is our distance from God, our
pride, our harkening to every tentation, and our aversion from exercise, that
breed us all our bitterness.

8. Soul-bitterness is the great distemperer and misleader of godly men under
affliction; For, this bred all his resentment here, and whatsoever is afterward
censured in this discourse flowed from this beginning of it with a reflection
upon his soul-bitterness. Which may tell the afflicted where to find a cure of
their own distempers, even in wrestling against their bitterness.

9. It is but a tentation and fruit of bitterness, to father our distempers
upon God, or to reflect on him in what he does; As here Job complains of him,
that by his dispensations, which were most cleanly and justifiable, he had made
his soul bitter, when it was indeed the result of his own weakness. See Prove.
19.3. Yea, by calling God, the Almighty, in doing of this, he insinuates a
sharp reflection, that God had employed his power thus against him, who was a
weak afflicted man. See Jer. 20.7.

10. Godly men, notwithstanding their weaknesses under affliction, are yet
giving proofs of honesty and integrity, which may be seen by right discerners;
As here may be seen in Job, who, notwithstanding all these distempers,

1. Sees Gods hand in all, and never takes his eye from off his providence,
which was commendable, though he fathered his own distempers unjustly upon him.

2. By his swearing by God, though he thus dealt with him, he gives proof that
he will still worship him, and reverence him as the supreme Judge, the witness
to the conscience, and maintainer of truth; and so will cleave to him, and
appeal to his Tribunal, and will not suspect any prejudice from him, whatever
his sense may say of him for present.

3. He loves integrity, and will still abide by it; yea, he will swear himself
Gods servant, and that he will not deal deceitfully. And so he gives proof that
he loves piety and integrity, even when he thinks God deals hardly with him,
which may condemn them who are wicked, when they are well dealt with.

Verse 3. All the while my breath is in me, and the spirit of God is in my
nostrils.
Thirdly, unto his oath and description of God, he subjoyns an account of his
constancy in the resolution after-mentioned; wherein he swears that he will
persevere all the days of his life. Whence Learn,

1. Man's life is but in his lip and nostrils, and continues but for a while;
For, it depends upon the breath in his nostrils. See Psalm. 146.3, 4. Isa. 2.22.
So that we ought not to set up our rest upon time or the enjoyments thereof,
Psalm. 49.11, 12, etc. Luke 12.19, 20.

2. Our life and breath are from God, and consequently at his disposal; For, it
is the spirit, or, breath of God (given by him) in his nostrils. See Psalm.
104.29, 30. Act. 17.25, 28. The consideration whereof,

1. Obliges man to glorify God, upon this very account, Dan. 5.23.

2. Is an argument why man should ^ender his life as the gift of God, not
cutting it off, by intemperance, neglect of the body, wearying of it under
trouble, or otherwise.

3. It may secure us in troubles, that our times are in Gods hand, Ps. 31.15.
and 66.8, 9.

4. It is an argument persuading us to live in a continual dependence upon God,
Jam. 4.13, 14, 15.

Doct. 3. Godly men ought to be constant, and persevere to the end, in good
resolutions, not being shaken by vicissitudes, at length of time; For, Job
swears that all the while his breath is in him, etc. he will abide at his
resolution, See Matthew. 24.13.

4. When men consider the uncertainty of their life, and that it is at Gods
disposal, it should make them very serious and ingenuous in the ma^^e^ of their
integrity; For, that his breath is the breath of God, and that but in his
nostrils, may be looked on also as an argument and reason why he will be
sincere in what he has sworn to declare, concerning his integrity.

Verse 4. My lips shall not speak wickedness, nor my tongue utter deceit.
Fourthly, In this and the two following verses, he subjoyns the resolution it
self, which he swears to abide by so constantly; and that is, to maintain his
own integrity, which is the state of the controversy betwixt him and his
Friends.

In this verse he gives an account of this his resolution in general terms,
That he will not speak wickedness, nor use deceit to see off his cause, as men
use to do when they have a bad cause. Whence Learn,

1. It is a great proof of piety to take heed to the tongue; For, Job begins
his resolution to maintain his integrity, with a sincere purpose to look to his
lips and tongue. For this is indeed a touchstone of the truth and measure of
our sanctification, if we bridle our tongues, Jam. 1.26.

2. Men's great care should be, not to look so much to what concerns themselves
in matters, as to what is right or wrong; For, Job declines to speak
wickedness, because it is wickedness, let it concern him never so much; and by
this he shows that he is not biased in this matter.

3. There may be much wickedness in that which seems to be far otherwise to
ignorant or partial observers; For, Job's refusing to speak wickedness in this
matter, while he defends his integrity, insinuates that his denying of his own
piety (to which his Friends pressed him so much, as a mark of honesty, at
least, as opening a door of hope, that he might become honest) had great
wickedness in him. And so, in many other cases, great wickedness may be covered
under a fair mask.

4. Deceit and dissimulation is a special and eminent branch of wickedness;
Therefore is it here subjoyned to it, as a branch of that general wickedness,
which he resolves to decline in the following discourse.

5. It is, in particular, an abominable wickedness to make use of deceit in
laying claim to integrity, or in debates for finding out of truth and error;
For, Job declines deceit in this cause, where his integrity was the truth in
controversy. As it is wicked hypocrisy to pretend to sincerity where it is
not, and to make use of plausible pretenses, that we may appear to be what we
are not; So the Lord abhors all sort of deceit in debating of controversies,
when either men conceal part of the truth, or mix some falsehood with it, or do
set ^ut an ill cause with specious pretenses and fine discourses, or are swayed
in the matter of truth and error by prosperity or adversity, or the friendship
or hatred of men.

Verse 5. God forbid that I should justify you: till I die, I will not remove
my integrity from me.
In this Verse he gives a more particular account of his resolution, That he
will not justify them in their cause, or in their condemning of him, and that
he will not renounce or disavow his own integrity. It seems this speech (with
that, v. 4.) is reflected upon by Elihu, Chap 34.6. not because he speak an
untruth, but because he spoke it not with due sobriety and humility; as it is
usual for men thus to miscarry, when they have a good conscience in the matter
of their trial.

Doct. 1. To justify, in Scripture Phrase, does not import to make a man just
and righteous, by putting of such qualities in him; but only (in a forensick
and Court-sense) to pronounce and declare him to be just and righteous: For
here Job's not justifying of his Friends does only import that he would not
absolve or pronounce them innocent in this cause, not that he would make them
become wicked, by any change of qualities wrought in them by him. Thus to
justify the wicked is an abomination (whereas it were commendable to make them
become righteous) and is opposite to condemning, Prove. 17.15.

2. Wrong is not to be justified in any, great or small, friend or foe, godly
persons or others; but wherein men do evil, they are to be condemned, and evil
ought to be called evil; For, Job will not justify his godly Friends, in that
wherein they were wrong.

3. It is an evil not to be justified in any, when they discourage and weaken
the hands of a godly man under his troubles, and so help Satan and tentations
to brangle his confidence in God; For, this was his Friends practice, wherein
he will not justify them.

4. Evil, how cleanly soever, ought to be renounced with zeal and abhorrence;
For says he, God forbid that I should justify you. We ought to study an
hatred of all sin, Psalm. 119.104. and particularly, those sins which seem to be
less gross and more refined (such as Job's change of opinion might seem to be)
as also, sins wherein men do prosper, ought not to blunt our zeal; as being
most dangerous, unless zeal be kept on foot.

5. Though Adam's posterity cannot attain to perfection in this life; yet they
may attain, through grace, to integrity, to be sincere and to have a respect
unto all the Commandments, Psalm. 119 6. and to be sincere and righteous in
their cause: For, Job has his integrity, here.

6. Integrity is a rich prize, not to be easily quit, or disavowed; as being a
sweet Cordial in all exigents, Is. 38.3. and affording other advantages than
hypocrites know of: For, therefore Job cleaves to the defense of it, as of a
precious Jewel. See Psalm. 25.21.

7. Where integrity is, it is good service to maintain it; and as we ought not
to justify the wicked, so also not to condemn the righteous, or deny our own
being in the state of grace, if we be righteous: Therefore Job is resolute in
this, that it is good service, not to remove his integrity from him, or, to
disavow that he is an upright man. Such as are ready, upon every occasion, to
call the truth of their own grace in question, do still keep the foundation
unsettled, and so cannot make any progress, nor build superstructures upon it.

8. It is no less than wickedness to deny the truth of our grace, and our
integrity, under any pretense of humility; For, Job looks upon the removing of
his integrity from him, as an instance of that wickedness which he resolves not
to speak, v. 4. As, indeed, it wrongs both God and the truth, beside the
prejudice that redounds thereby to our selves.

9. Men's resolutions against sin, particularly, against the quitting of the
testimony of their integrity under tentations, ought to be perpetual and
constant; For, Job fixes upon this resolution, till he die, as arming himself
against any continuance of trials about his integrity, that he weary not; and
resolving to quit any thing, were it even his life, rather than his integrity.

10. Whatever assaults godly men may endure about their integrity, yet it is
not their part not to be consenting to quit it; For, says he, I will not
remove my integrity from me, nor consent that I am an hypocrite, whatever ye my
Friends, or tentations from within, may say to the contrary. And as the
misconstructions of others do not concern godly men, so as to make them guilty
of every thing that is charged upon them; So Satan's fiery darts within them are
not their sin, if they consent not.

11. Men do not then only maintain their integrity aright, when yet they are
sensible of sin and daily imperfections; For, herein Job miscarried in his
defense of this good cause, while he was not unmindful of his sinfulness, which
might have made him humble and sober in his way of pleading it; and therefore
he is censured by Elihu. This tells us, that our sight of the grace of God in
our selves needs to be balanced with a sight of somewhat that is humbling; and
when it is so, we ought not to look upon any such discovery as an impleading of
our sincerity.

Verse 6. My righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go: my heart shall
not reproach me so long as I live.
In this Verse Job goes on to give an account of this his resolution, in two
other expression. One is, that he will not let go his righteousness, or his
claim that he is an honest man, oppose it who will. The other is, that, so long
as he lives, his heart shall never reproach him, either that he is an
hypocrite, or that now he has quit his claim of being an upright man, by
reason of their importunities, or other tentations that assaulted him In both
these expressions he speaks that which was right, and his duty, though he
miscarry in the way of it, as Elihu tells him.

From the first expression, Learn, 1. A man's righteousness is no small prize
(though sometime it be ill managed) which if a godly man quit, he loses all
his labor and comfort, and cuts off all his hopes for the time to come, seeing
he can attain to no other righteousness than such as he had before: Therefore
Job stands so firmly to the defense of his righteousness, though with too much
pride and passion. See Chap. 6.29.

2. A man's righteousness and integrity may meet with much opposition, for his
trial; For, here Job has it to hold fast, in opposition to many assaults, and
endeavors to pluck it from him. And this shows that it is no sufficient
cause why we should suspect or cast away any good in our selves, because it is
quarrelled. For if any thing ought to be suspected, it is rather that which
Satan quarrels not.

3. It is acceptable service in truly godly men not to quit their
righteousness, or the testimony of their consciences that they are righteous,
whosoever, or, whatsoever oppose it, and let them be never so much reproached
for their so doing; For, Job is peremptory, say of him what they will, my
righteousness I hold fast. Thus Jacob wrestled even with God, and the Woman of
Canaan with Christ, and yet he came off an Israel, or, Prince with God; and she
with high commendations, O woman great is thy faith.

4. In maintaining of our righteousness, we ought to have an especial eye upon
our selves and our discouragements, which being once given way unto, will make
way for other enemies to give us the foil; Therefore he adds I will not let it
go, or, become remiss, (as the word is) and let my hands fall down, as befell
Moses hands, Exodus 17.11.

From the second expression, Learn 1. The heart has a reproaching and
condemning power, as being a register, witness and Judge, against a man when he
goes wrong; For, so Job supposes here, that in some cases the heart will
reproach. See Job. 3 20. Romans 2.15.

2. The most tender walkers are most obnoxious to these heart-smitings, when
they go wrong; whereas others are not moved, except when they commit some
gross evils; As here Job implies, that he, a godly man, might readily be
reproached by his own heart, if he went wrong.

3. Godly men are afraid of the checks and upbraiding^ of their own
consciences, and therefore labor to prevent the causes and occasions thereof;
For, Job is careful so to walk, as his heart may not repro^ch him.

4. Where sincerity is not, the heart may justly reproach and condemn men, let
them profess what they will, and so much the more as they have pretended to
sincerity, when they had it not; For, so Job supposes, that if he should
renounce his integrity, and grant he had been an hypocrite, his heart might
reproach him See 2 Cor. 1.12. Is. 38.3.

5. It is just cause of a conscience-reproach, if men contradict the testimony
of their consciences, and belie their own integrity; For, Job also implies that
his heart might reproach him, as a liar, if, to gratify them, he disavowed his
own integrity, whereof he was assured in his conscience.

6. Men should choose to let any other creature be their enemy, rather than
their own consciences; For, here Job resolves to endure all their ill usage,
rather than give occasion to his own heart to reproach him for letting go his
righteousness. It cost that Prophet dear, when he quit the light of his own
conscience, which he had from God, to follow the pretended light of another, 1
King. 13. As Judas found no relief among his new friends, when his conscience
wakened upon him, Matthew. 27.3, 4, 5.

7. Men, who have the testimony of a good conscience in their way, have enough,
and that which may satisfy them; For, here Job will endure whatsoever may
befall him, so long as his heart does not reproach him. See 1 Job 3.21. A good
conscience is sweet company, and they undervalue their own mercy who are not
satisfied with the testimony thereof, if they be not countenanced in the World
also.

Verse 7. Let mine enemy be as the wicked, and he that rises up against me, as
the unrighteous.
Follows, to v. 11. the second part of the Chapter; Wherein, by some
Arguments, he proves, that he was not a wicked man, nor an hypocrite. As for
this Verse, whatever may be said of his reflecting upon his Friends in what he
speaks here; not by way of Imprecation, as wishing that their lot may be the
same with that of the wicked and unrighteous; but by way of intimation, that
they dealt like wicked men in their opposing of him; and so exciting them to
consider how wicked and unrighteous a way they walked in toward him: (And so it
would teach,

1. That good men (such as they were) may do wicked and unrighteous acts.

2. Particularly, That they may condemn the righteous, oppress an honest mind,
and oppose a righteous cause, (as they did to him) all which are wicked acts.

3. That it is no breach of charity to speak home, even to godly men, and to
tell them of it, when they do wickedly; as he does here. See Gal. 2.11.) Yet it
is much clearer to understand this Verse, as containing an Argument, proving
that he was not wicked, as they judged. For however, when he spoke much of the
prosperity of the wicked, they might be ready to think that he favored their
cause; Yet here he tells, that he hated the course of the wicked so ill, that
were he to wish evil to his greatest enemies, he could wish them no worse than
the state and lot of the wicked, be what it will, Which is a strong Argument
that himself was none of them, seeing he abominated their condition at its
best. See Chap. 21.16. Psalm. 141.4. 2 Samuel 18.32. 1 Samuel 25.26. Dan. 4.19.
Where we have the like form of speech, tending much to the same scope.

Doct. 1. To be unrighteous, by the want of imputed righteousness, and by
unrighteous dealing, is a wicked estate; For, here the one explains the other,
He is wicked who is unrighteous.

2. Wicked men's condition, be what it will, is not desirable, as they have it;
their mercies being cursed and snares unto them, and much more their crosses;
For, so is here imported, that the estate of the wicked is the worst estate
imaginable to a right discerner; So that Job thinks it fit for no friend, but
only the worst of his enemies (who not only hate him, but rise up against him)
if he durst wish them so much evil.

3. It is the mark of a godly man, that, in his greatest adversity, he abhorrs
the state and condition of the wicked, in their greatest prosperity; For, so
does Jobs wish import, which is not a prayer against his enemies, but an
evidence that he detests their lot; and consequently, a proof that himself is
not wicked. See Job 36.21.

Verse 8. For what is the hope of the Hypocrite, though he has gained, when
God takes away his Soul?
In the next place (to v. 11.) Job proves that he is no hypocrite, especially
by his cleaving to God in trouble; Where he propounds several characters of
hypocrites, leaving them to gather that he was free of them. In this Verse, we
have the first evidence that he is no hypocrite; That whereas hypocrites,
though they may be full of presumption in prosperity, yet all their gain and
advantages will afford them, no solid hope when death comes upon them: He, on
the contrary, in the depth of his distress, and apprehension of approaching
death, was still full of hope; as may be gathered from his expressions, Chap.
6.10. and 12.4. and 13.15. and elsewhere. As for this, and the rest of these
evidences and arguments proving that he is not an hypocrite, they are thus to
be understood; That where those evidences are, contrary to these characters of
the hypocrite, they do infallibly conclude a man not to be an hypocrite. Yet if
some weak seeker of God find those wanting, in some of their measures and
degrees, and at some times; it should be remembered that every real Saint is not
a Job, nor can produce such eminent works of grace and sincerity as he had; nor
w^ll real Saints be measured by their infirmities, or sits of weakness, not by
the emanations of their flesh, if they renounce and mourn for them. As, on the
contrary, hypocrites will not be judged by that stupidity which they may have
in trouble, instead of faith and hope.

Doct. 1. Hypocr^sie is to be avoided, as well as gross wickedness, by every
one that would approve themselves to God; For, Job clears that he is free of
both, and having purged himself of wickedness, v. 7. he now comes to purge
himself of hypocrisy. Yea, the name here given to the hypocrite, signifies
also one that is profane, to show that God looks upon every hypocrite as such
a one, however he mask his wickedness.

2. Hypocrisy and Covetousness, of, love of gain, are evils which frequently
concur and go together; For, the hypocrite here is he that has gained. Not
that every covetous wretch puts on a mask of profession, but that hypocrites
make use of a cloak of Religion only for their own advantage. See Matthew. 23.14.
1 Timothy 6.5.

3. God may let the covetous designs of hypocrites succeed in their hand, and
so answer them according to the Idol of their hearts; whereas he will famish
these Idols, if godly men hanker after them: For, it is supposed here of the
hypocrite, that he has gained.

4. Much of men's contentment, especially of godly men, or these who pretend to
godliness, depends upon their hopes; For, here hope is supposed so necessary to
the Sons of men (their present enjoyments being so empty) especially to godly
men, that even hypocrites pretend to the hopes of godly men, as they pretend to
their piety. See 1 Cor. 15.19.

5. The Hypocrite may be so bolstered up with prosperity, that he may live in a
presumptuous dream of hope, even till his death, which is a sad snare upon him;
For, here it is supposed that he has hope, which he never questions, till God
come to take away his Soul.

6. Approaching death is the great touchstone of men's hopes; As here it is
supposed their hopes will fail, who had stood out long before.

7. It is an evidence of an hypocrite, that he is never really willing to dye;
For, God takes away his Soul, by force, as the word imports. He does not
willingly resign it, as Luke 2.29. but violence is used upon him, as Luke 12.20.

8. Death will blast all the hypocrites hopes, and will discover these follies
in them which they would not read in the Word; For, says he, What is the hope
of the hypocrite, when God takes away his Soul? See Prove. 11.7. So that they
who study not mortality well, will never be sincere, and hypocrites may expect
that their hopes will fail them when they have most need of them.

9. Though the gain and advantages of hypocrites do, in this life, delude them,
and put to silence any clamours of their consciences; yet none of these will
support them, nor keep life in their dying hopes, at death: For, What is the
hope of the hypocrite, even though he has gained, when God takes away his
Soul?

10. Those whose hopes in God are not brangled by adversity, nor by approaching
death (if they have also th^se other characters, after mentioned) are
undoubtedly no hypocrites; For, so would Job infer in his own savours, that he
is no hypocrite, seeing it is not with him as it is with them, in the matter of
hope.

Verse 9. Will God hear his cry, when trouble comes upon him?
The second evidence that he is not an hypocrite, may be thus understood, That
God hears not the cry of an hypocrite in his trouble (whether that of
approaching death, v. 8. or any other) because he does not cry to him (as is
said Chap. 36.13.) as Job now does in his distress. And it is indeed true, That
to be dumb, as to crying to God, in trouble, is a very black character, Ezekiel.
24.23. And, that hypocrites will essay many shifts, before they go to God in
distress. But this phrase, that God will not hear his cry in trouble, as it is
frequently recorded in Scripture, does rather import, that the hypocrite may
ind^ed cry in trouble, but God will not hear him; as for many other reasons, so
among the rest, for these reasons subjoyned, v. 10. Thus the Argument is of the
same nature with that, v. 7. whereby he proved that he was not wicked; That he
abhorts the condition of the hypocrite, because God will not hear him in
trouble: and therefore he was no hypocrite. And for further clearing of this,
it may be enquired,

Quest. If this be a mark of an hypocrite, That God does not hear his cry in
trouble, how will Job clear himself of it, who complains so often that he is
not heard? To which it is answered,

Answ. 1. When Job complains he is not heard, he speaks the language of Sense,
but here he speaks the language of Faith, implying that he was heard. Thus also
elsewhere Faith interposeth with a good word of God, in the midst of his
complaints. See Chap. 10.13, and elsewhere.

2. However his Sense judged of Gods hearing of him, yet his abhorrence of such
a state, wherein a man's prayers are rejected by God, proves that he is no
hypocrite; For though an hypocrite may be vexed, that he is not heard in
trouble, yet he does not so abhor that condition, and what procures it, as
the godly man does; of which afterward.

Doct. 1. God may sometime alarm prospering hypocrites with trouble, which
they cannot g^t avoided; For, notwithstanding it is supposed, v. 8. that the
hypocrite may gain, and keep up his hopes till death; yet here it is also
supposed, that trouble may come upon him, irresistably. Thus the Lord deals
with some of them, that all of them may see how little security they have for
the continuance of their prosperity.

2. Troubles do usually surprise hypocrites, and take hold of them at unawares;
For, so much also is imported in that trouble comes upon him. He has no will
to think upon troubles, and he does not look out for them, as Job did, Chap.
3.25, 26. It is true, Godly men may also be surprised, not only with the
troubles that come upon others, 2 King. 4.27, but with what comes upon
themselves also, when they are over-powred with security, Psalm. 30.6, 7. or
with impatient haste to be delivered, Jer. 14.19. Yet it is a great
disadvantage to be thus surprised. And therefore we should look out, and
seriously consider, what the condition of the times, the usual lots of Saints,
and the predictions of the Word, do prognosticate unto us, that so we may be
resolved upon it, and study to prepare for it. Only we must set about this,
with these cautions.

1. That our fears, or conscience of guilt, do not make every thing we
apprehend, real to us; For fear may create many crosses which we will never
see; We may be put to resolve upon many trials, wherein God will accept our
resolutions, and require no more; And when the condition of the times, and our
ill deservings, may threaten sad things, God, according to his Sovereignty in
grace, may mercifully disappoint us, Is. 57.17, ^8.

2. In what trouble may indeed come upon us, let us not judge of our ability to
bear it by what we have beforehand, but expect furniture to bear it when it
comes upon us, 1 Cor. 10.13. and that we shall find grace to help in the time
of need, Heb. 4.16.

3. Though there be a great difference betwixt trouble only apprehended, and
trouble really felt and smarted under; Yet as Christ felt all the trouble he
had apprehended and resolved upon, and therefore it was sad to him, and his
Soul was troubled and heavy unto death, when it came: So we may apprehend more
than we meet with, and that more bitter ingredients shall be in our cup, than
God puts into it; and so we may find it really more easy than it was in our
apprehensions.

Doct. 3. As Prayer is the kindly product of blessed trouble* and we should be
fervent (and cry) in our prayers, especially when we are in distress, Luke
22.44. Heb. 5.7. So even hypocrites, and other wicked men, may for a time pray,
yea, and seem to cry earnestly to God, in trouble; For, so is here supposed,
that the hypocrite may pretend to the practice of godly men, and cry when
trouble comes upon him. So also is supposed, Prove. 1.28. Ezekiel. 8.18. and
frequently. It is true, they do not cry always in trouble, Job 36.13. Nor do
they continue constant at it, when they have begun, as is hereafter intimated,
v. 10. Yet at some times, and for a fit, they may essay how they will speed by
betaking themselves to God. And this speaks sadly to these who come not even
this length, but by under prayerless trouble, Ezekiel. 24.23* Dan. 9.13.

4. The great ground of sinners hope, under trouble, depends upon Gods hearing
of their prayers; For, even an hypocrite will then be put to enquire, if God
will hear his cry. See Deuteronomy. 4.7. Mic. 7.7. 1 John 5.14. Trouble will not
suffer men to rest upon their prayers, as they are a work wrought; and it is
sent to chasten them for their formality in their ordinary walk, in that they
content themselves with praying, and never look after any account of the
success of their prayers. Trouble will put men to see their need of Gods help;
and how great a mercy it is to get audience of him, and how great a judgment
it is to have that door shut upon them. And therefore we should study not to be
formal in prayer, and to prize the answer of our prayers. Only we are to judge
of our success by the Word, 1 John 5.14, 15. (For, otherwise, our sense may
think, we get a cold account of the success of our prayers, when yet the issue
will be well;) And when we speed not in going to God, beware of taking an ill
shift, 1 Samuel 28.6, 7. See 1 Chronicles. 10.13, 14. where it is said, Saul enquired
not of the Lord, because, when God answered him not, he gave over to wait upon
him, and went to the Witch at Endor.

5. Though it be a lawful errand, to have recourse to God because we are
afflicted, Jam. 5.13. yet God will not hear the cry of hypocrites and wicked
men, in their trouble; For, says he, Will God hear his cry, when trouble
comes upon him? It is sufficient, to procure this, that they are not
reconciled to God, and so have not the promise of audience, and that they are
under much guilt, Is. 1.15. Mic. 3.4. But more particularly, the cause why they
get not audience, is, Because they do not hear God, speaking to them in his
Word, Prove. 1.24, 28. Because they do not employ God by prayer till trouble
come, Judge. 10.10, 13, 14. Because they have no more to do with God, but only
that he would deliver them from trouble, Exodus 10.17. but do never mind their
guilt, Psalm. 66.18. not to turn from it, Hos. 7.14, 16. And, Because they seek
good things for an evil end, Jam. 4.3. And albeit God may have some regard to
the prayers of hypocrites and wicked men, in temporal things, 1 King. 21.27,
28, 29. (as he does also respect the pressing necessities of his other
creatures) and may encourage such as are sincere, by his taking notice of
hypocrites; Yet this is his ordinary way, not to hear them, nor have they any
promise that he will hear them, Joh. 9.31.

6. Men ought seriously to consider beforehand, how empty the presumptuous
dreams of hypocrites are, and of how dangerous consequence it is, not to be
heard of God in trouble: For, this Question imports, that the consciences, even
of hypocrites, if put to it, could not deny the truth of this, whatever they
fancy to the contrary; and that they ought seriously to consider of this
disadvantage, before they feel it.

7. The Prayers of godly men, being agreeable to the will of God, are not lost,
whatever may be their present trial and exercise, or their sense may apprehend
to the contrary; For, here, Job by faith reckons that he is not an hypocrite,
whose cry God does not hear. Here we are to consider, That our tentations and
sense are not fit Judges of our success in prayer (for these made Job,
oft-times, say, he was not heard) but the Word, 1 Job. 5.14, 15. That God may
hear and approve our prayers, when yet he sends not a present answer, as is
insinuated, Dan. 10.12. Psalm. 10.17. That God delayeth to answer for our good,
that he may humble us, and exercise our faith, and may quicken our affections
yet more, by these delays; That, though he grant not our particular desires,
yet he answers us in what may be for our profit, and what may contribute to our
great and ultimate scope, to glorify God, and be fitted for our eternal
happiness: And, that when God has long delayed to answer our prayers, he will
at last plentifully rain down the answer of many prayers together.

8. It is a great mercy to the people of God, that their tentations prove not
real; For, though Job oft-times judged that God did not hear him, yet here he
reckons that it was but a tentation, and that only the hypocrite is not really
heard in trouble.

9. God can make good use of the opposition godly men meet with from others, to
cure their own tentations; For, whereas Job, when he is upon his own
complaints, regrates that God does not hear him, now when he speaks in
opposition to their censures, he believes the contrary, and leaves that
wretched portion to the hypocrite. S^e Ps. 22.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, with 9.

10. However it be as to the answering of prayer, yet it is a mark of a Godly
man to love Gods hearing of his prayers, and to be in such a state and posture
as God may hear him; For, Job hates hypocrisy, because an hypocrite will not
be heard in trouble; and so proves himself a godly man, because he hates their
course upon this account. It is true, even hypocrites may love to be heard when
they are in trouble; but there is a great difference betwixt a godly man and
them in that. For,

1. A godly man loves still to be in such a frame, as he may be heard of God,
because his life and satisfaction depends upon it; and it endears God to him,
that he is an hearer of prayer, Ps. 65.2.

2. He imployeth God much and frequently, that he may get many proofs of God's
hearing of him, and is afflicted when he wants either opportunities of prayer,
or is not receiving answers from God.

3. He is careful to walk tenderly, that he may not obstruct the answers of his
prayers: None of all which do agree to the Hypocrite, nor to his desire to be
heard in trouble.

Verse 10. Will he delight himself in the Almighty? will he always call upon
God?
In this Verse Job gives two evidences more that he is not an hypocrite;
Namely, that an hypocrite does not delight himself in God, as he does; and,
that an hypocrite will not always, and in all conditions, pray to God, but
either when he is out of trouble, he neglects God, and gives over that form of
seeking God whereof he made a show in trouble, or if trouble continue and grow
upon his hand, when he cries on God, and so his case seem to be desperate, he
gives over any more to wait upon God, 2 King. 6.30, 33. whereas Job proved
himself to be a sincere man, in that he had called upon God in his prosperity;
Chap. 1.1, 5. and persevered still to seek him, and trust in him, in the midst
of his afflictions. And by those Characters Job does not only vindicate
himself, but does also give reasons why God does not hear hypocrites in
trouble, v. 9. even because they have no true delight in God, nor are constant
in calling upon him, whatever they pretend to do, for a fit, in trouble.

From the first of these evidences, Learn,

1. It is the duty of these who would approve themselves to God, to delight in
him; For, it is an evidence of a godly man, in opposition to an hypocrite, that
he delights himself in the Almighty. See Psalm. 37.4. God tryes his people by
their affection to him, whether they love him as their portion, Psalm. 73.25.
and testify it, by their conversing much with him, Psalm. 63.5, 6. and 139.17,
18. by their thirsting after him, when they cannot enjoy him, Psalm. 63.1, 2.
and by their delight in his law Ps. 1.2. and in his ordinances, whereby they
entertain communion with him, Is. 58.13, 14.

2. Delight in God is the sweet way to supply other wants, and to come speed in
our addresses to him, in all exigents; For, here it is subjoyned to the matter
of Gods hearing of men in trouble, v. 9. to show that it is the way to prevail
in lawful suits, Ps. 37.4. and the course we must follow to make us up, when we
are not answered in other things; as we must also prove that our enjoyments are
blessed, by our continuing still to delight in God. See Isa. 29.19.

3. Whosoever would delight in God alone, even in the want of all other things,
they ought to study much his fullness and alsufficiency; Therefore he is here
designed to be the Almighty, or, Alsufficient, in whom men should delight
themselves.

4. Though hypocrites may pretend to delight themselves in God, and in his
service, Isa. 58.2. yet really they do it not; but are either filled with
delight in other things, or, if they be straightened in those, they know not how
to make up their wants in God; and if he do not answer them to their mind, or
declare himself to be angry, their pretended delight will turn into an
abhorrence of God; Zech. 11.8. For, will he delight himself in the Almighty?

5. Because hypocrites do not delight in God, and do at sometimes cry to him,
not because they love him or his service, but only because they love and desire
their own case, and to be free of trouble, therefore their cries are not heard
by God: For, will God hear his cry? etc. v. 9. because, will be delight himself
in the Almighty?

From the second of these evidences, Learn,

1. Men's sincerity in calling on God is tried by their constancy, and God
tries this by delays; For, this is the touchstone of an hypocrite, who may
sometime cry, v. 9. if he will always call upon God.

2. Such as would prove their constancy in seeking of God, must not measure it
by any other length of time, but by their continuing to call upon God, always,
or, in all times; as here is supposed. See Luke 18.1. Ephesians. 6.18. 1 Thessalonians. 5.17.
If men consider, that they cannot subsist a minute without God, that they are
environed with dangers and multitudes of duties, which require furniture and
assistance from above, that Satan is tempting, and they are continually
sinning, and so need continual pardon and renovation; And, that frequency in
prayer brings much ease and soul-refreshment. If, I say, men consider these
things, they will perceive that it is an equitable injunction, that men should
always call upon God. And therefore it should be the care of godly men, to
keep themselves continually in a spiritual and praying frame, to cherish this
frame by frequent ejaculations, which need hinder no other duties of their
calling; Not to neglect fixed times for prayer, beside occasional opportunities
which providence brings in their way; to double their diligence upon eminent
occasions, as Psalm. 109.4. Luke 22.44. Not managing singular difficulties with
ordinary diligence; and, to look upon prayer as their duty in all times (when
it wears out of fashion, and is maligned by the most of men, as well as when it
is in request, and brings a man into esteem) and in all conditions; neither
thinking their condition so good (or at least so tolerable) as they need not
trouble God about it, but can manage it themselves; nor yet so desperate, as it
is to no purpose to pray.

3. Hypocrites will not make conscience of this command to pray always; but
either when they are free of eminent trouble, or when they are desperate and
hopeless under trouble, they will give over; For, will he always call upon God?

4. Such as weary of prayer, and give it over, do not delight in God, let them
pretend what they will; For, the one of these evidences confirms the other, and
it proves that the Hypocrite does not delight himself in the Almighty, because
he does not always call upon God.

5. Such as are not constant in prayer, but do weary of it, are justly denied
audience, when at sometime they come to God; For, this is also a reason why God
will not hear the Hypocrites cry, v. 9. Because, says he, will he always call
upon God?

6. Such as continue constant in prayer, in all times and conditions, do prove
that they do delight in God, and are sincere persons, whose requests God will
answer in his own time and way; For, this is Job's scope to prove himself a
sincere man, by disclaiming this, among the rest of the Characters of an
Hypocrite.

Verse 11. I will teach you by the hand of God: that which is with the
Almighty, will I not conceal.

12. Behold, all ye your selves have seen it, why then are ye thus altogether
vain?


These Verses are by some understood as a subsumption to the former general
Characters of the Hypocrite; wherein (as they conceive) Job undertakes to give
an account of the grace of God in himself (opposite to these marks of an
hypocrite) which yet he ascribes to God, v. 11. and tells his Friends that
themselves might have seen evidences thereof, in his carriage under trouble;
and, therefore they were but vain in their reasonings against him. This
interpretation might afford useful instructions; but it seems not to be
agreeable to the Text; for,

1. The thing that he undertakes to speak of, v. 11. appears to be some other
thing than the truth of his grace, as will be seen by the interpretation of the
words, when I come to it.

2. We find not that he teaches them any thing concerning the truth of his
grace, in the following discourse, in pursuance of this promise and
undertaking; and therefore we may safely conceive that he undertakes to speak
of no such thing, but only of that which he afterward records.

3. Nor will it solve the difficulty to say, that he retracts that promise, v.
11. because they might have known the truth of his grace by other means, v. 12.
and therefore it was needless to insist upon it; For, however they might have
known, yet their inadvertency required information, especially now when he has
promised it.

Therefore I rather look upon these words as a preface to the third part of the
Chapter, and to the rest of the discourse, in the following Chapter, (of which
see on v. 13. etc.) wherein he refutes and clears the ground of their mistake
in condemning of him. And in this preface,

1. He promises to teach them by, or, being in the hand of God, (that is,
being furnished and assisted by him; as indeed men need Gods help to speak of
his ways as becomes) or, rather, of, or, concerning the hand of God (for so
the Hebrew particle does also signify, of, Exodus 12.43, 44, 45. Psalm. 87.^).
That is, he will instruct them concerning these works and operations of the
hand of God, which were now the subject matter of their debate; and will let
them see that, however some of Gods providential dispensations, in punishing of
wicked men, are visible (as he concedes in the rest of this Chapter) yet toward
many of them his way is in the dark clouds, not to be searched into by men: as
he clears a^ length in the next Chapter.

2. He declares that he will not conceal what is with the Almighty (or
purposed, and dispensed by him) in this matter, whether it seem to make for, or
against, his opinion. Hence it is that he is so frank in conceding what may
befall some of the wicked (upon which his Friends insisted so much in their
debates against him) v. 14, etc. as well as he is careful, in the following
Chapter, to evince that these particular dispensations are no rule whereby to
judge of every man's estate before God.

3. He appeals to their own experience and knowledge, in what he is to say;
seeing they had not only seen what he concedes, and themselves frequently
asserted, concerning the visible plagues of some wicked men, but they might
also have known that there is a depth of unsearchable wisdom in this matter,
if they had been accurate observers.

4. Hence he concludes that it was an evidence of their vanity to insist in
their arguments and reasonings against the truth and him.

From v* 11. Learn, 1. Dispensations of providence in the World ought to be
looked upon as the hand of God; For, so is the subject matter of the following
discourse, which treats of what falls forth in the World, called, the band of
God. As wicked men are not willing to see God their party, in these sharp
messages that are uttered by his servants (but will rather choose to father
them upon the humors and passions of men) Jer. 5.12, 13. So they are as little
willing to see his hand in the strokes that they feel, and do rather desire to
father them upon chance, 1 Samuel 6.9. and to look upon them as casual
difficulties, which they may remedy without looking to God, Isa. 9.9, 10. But
they will be made to see his hand at last; as befell the Magicians of Egypt,
after all their endeavors to counterfeit the miracles wrought by Moses, Exodus
8.19. and it is the mercy of godly men, to know in whose hand they are, in
every condition.

2. Most part, even of good men, may be ignorant of the way of Gods providence,
and his ordering of the affairs of the World; For, Job's godly Friends need
that he should teach them, in this matter. Not only are all men ignorant of
these depths of Gods wisdom, whereby God orders the affairs of the World; but
some are even ignorant that there is such a depth in providential
dispensations, as these Friends were. And from this ignorance it flows that
mistaken providence occasioneth tentations, and proves a stumbling block, and
neck-break to many.

3. It is the duty of men to communicate what light they have to others, to
help them to read and understand providence aright; For, says he, I will
teach you of the hand of God. It is a mercy when men are enabled to read them
themselves aright, that so they may not stumble at them, but improve them; But
it is a double mercy to be able to expound them to others also.

4. Irritations and provocations should not tempt men to neglect their duty,
even toward these who provoke them; For, though Job's Friends had grieved him,
yet he will not let them continue in their mistakes, but will clear the matter,
and teach them.

5. Men under affliction should be best acquainted with the mysteries of
providence, and deal most ingenuously with others in that matter^ For, Job
being under this hand of God, professes himself such a proficient as to be
able to teach them; and promises to deal ingenuously, and not to conceal what
is in it.

6. Providence is then taken up aright, when it is seen not only to be God's
hand, but, with the Almighty; as here is added. Which imports, not only, that
he purposes and dispenses whatever comes to pass, but that he is the
Almighty, and Sovereign Lord to do what he will, and that he keeps this matter
with himself, wrapped up in a mystery: So that none can set fi^ed rules about
it, nor gather any fixed conclusions concerning men's state, from outward
dispensations, as his Friends dreamed.

7. Lovers of truth will not conceal truth, even though it seem to speak
against themselves; For, that which is with the Almighty will I not conceal.
And therefore he yield and concedes what they had spoken, in so fa^ as he might
do it without prejudice to truth.

From v. 12. Learn 1. Men may know much, which yet, in the heat of passion and
contention, they do not consider nor improve; For, says he, all ye your selves
have seen it, namely, that which I am now to tell you. And, indeed, they could
not be ignorant of the various dispensations of providence in the World, which
were contradictory to their principles. For they could not but have heard of
the suffering of righteous Abel, of the prosperity of wicked Nimrod, and other
the like instances; all which they now forget in the heat of dispute.

2. It is a great aggravation of sin, when men sin against their own light and
experience; For, Behold (says he, pointing at it as a strange thing wherewith
they should be much affected) all ye your selves have seen it; and yet ye
persist to oppose me. Men's light will heighten their dittay, if they sin
against it, especially if it have been inculcate upon them by experience.

3. It is a vain enterprise for men, either to oppose truth, or censure others
rashly, especially if they do it against their light; For, he tells them, they
were thus (in their undertaking) altogether vain. For they vainly opposed
truth, and censured him when themselves might have seen, and had really seen,
or, known experiences to the contrary.

4. All arguments, or streams of Eloquence, made use of to defend error, do
but heighten the vanity of the enterprise, and are but vanity, when searched
unto the bottom; For, thus, says he (and charge it upon their consciences,
by a pressing question) ye are altogether vain, or, being vain in your cause,
ye are yet more vain in vanity, or, in the vanity of your arguments taken from
experience; which may be yielded to hold true of some wicked men, and yet not
prove your conclusion.

Verse 13. This is the portion of a wicked man with God, and the heritage of
oppressors, which they shall receive of the Almighty.

14. If his children be multiplied, it is for the sword: and his offspring
shall not be satisfied with bread.

15. Those that remain of him shall be buried in death: and his widows shall
not weep.


Follows the discourse it self, wherein Job clears and refuteth their
mistakes, upon which they condemned him. And for clearing thereof, it may be
enquired in the entry, How that which follows in the rest of this Chapter,
concerning the calamities of the wicked, serves either to vindicate himself,
or to remove their mistakes; seeing his discourse seems rather to homologate
the^ opinion, concerning the visible and remarkable ruin of the wicked. To
which it is answered,

1. Job's whole answer, for refutation of them, is not contained in the rest of
this Chapter only; but that Doctrine, Chap. 28. concerning the unsearchable
wisdom of God in the works of his providence and his administration of affairs
in the World, is to be joined with what is spoken in this Chapter, to make a
full answer; both which being put together, do sufficiently clear their mistake.

2. As for Job's scope in this narration of the calamities of the wicked; it is
not (as some conceive) to insinuate that there is a difference betwixt the
plagues which befall the wicked, and the rods wherewith the Godly are
exercised; that so, by that distinction, he might solve his Friends argument,
taken from the calamities of wicked men, to prove him wicked, who was also
afflicted. For, however some differences may be assigned betwixt many of these
judgments, that are here said to befall the wicked, and Job's trials; yet
neither is that the main question betwixt him and his Friends, whether there
may be some such differences betwixt the trials of one man and another, as,
whether such l^ts do not prove a man wicked? Nor yet does Job give any
intimation, in all his discourse, that this is his scope, nor will a difference
be found, in every particular, betwixt Job's own lot, and what he speaks here
of the lot of wicked men. Yea the Scripture elsewhere assures us that, as to
the outward dispensation, all things come alike to all, without any visible
difference in the matter or manner, Eccl. 9.2.

3. There is as little ground to apprehend that what Job speaks here,
concerning the calamities of the wicked, is only by way of repetition of their
former discourses upon this subject; As if he had said, why are ye thus vain (
v. 12) in so often repeating these discourses, that this and this is the
portion and heritage of wicked men, v. 13, etc. seeing infinite wisdom in
dealing with wicked men (as in all other affairs) is unsearchable? Chap. 28.
For, (beside that the expressions are not the same, with these they had spoken,
which were requisite in repetitions) it were to no purpose to repeat all this
at length, if there were no more in it.

4. It is not sufficient to understand it thus, that all wicked men do deserve
all this, and will be made to suffer these or the like calamities, here or
hereafter; For, neither can it be cleared what Job's scope should be in
asserting these things in that sense, nor will the words bear such a large
interpretation, seeing they do expressly speak of calamities that befall them in
this life. Therefore,

5. This part of the discourse which is contained in the rest of this Chapter,
is to be understood by way of concession, and that Job grants such things to
befall some of the wicked, at sometimes, though not all of them, and at all
times, as his Friends asserted. Thus the sum of his whole answer (in this and
the following Chapter) will amount to this; That though he had spoken much of
the prosperity of the wicked; yet all that was without prejudice to this truth,
That God dealt otherwise with some of them, as here he declares and concedes.
Only this concession and truth could not militate any thing against him, his
opinion or lot; seeing (whatever God do at sometimes, yet) his wisdom in
governing the affairs of the World is so unsearchable, and his dispensations of
providence are so various, that there can be no rule fixed for them but his
will, nor can any reason be sought (beside his sovereign good pleasure, why he
does afflict a godly man, and spare a wicked man. In a word, though some of
God's providential dispensations, and the causes and reasons thereof, be clear
and obvious; yet those must not be made a Standart, or, Rule, by which men may
measure and cognosce upon all his deep and unsearchable counsels. And from all
this, we may observe, How much debates, in God's providence, do contribute to
clear truth; For, Job, both Chap. 21. and here more at length, does speak more
clearly to the matter of the wickeds calamities, than he seemed to do in his
other discourses. And withal, this discourse, together with what he had
spoken, Chap. 21. does warrant us to interpret his Friends doctrine upon this
subject, as we have done upon every occasion; For it is clear from Job's
concessions, that he and they did not controvert, whether the wicked deserved
all they spoke of, or, whether some of the wicked felt it; but only, whether
such plagues did so universally befall the wicked, and them only, as every man
must be concluded to be wicked, who smart under the like dispensations.

In these Verses, we have, First, An introduction to the following Narration,
v. 13. or, a particular preface (the same in substance with Zophar's conclusion
of his discourse, Chap. 20.29. though with some little difference) to that part
of the Narration which is contained in the following part of this Chapter.
Wherein he concedes that what he is to speak of is the portion which wicked men
and oppressors shall receive from God, not all of them (though they all
deserve it) but some only, in this life.

Secondly, A begun account of the several sorts of calamities, which do befall
some of the wicked in this life. The first whereof ( v. 14, 15.) are calamities
which befall the wicked in their children, and in their offspring, or
posterity, which may take in more than their next and immediate issue. These,
though they may multiply for a time, shall suffer by sword and famine, v. 4.
And if any of them remain, after these strokes, or, escape these judgments
formerly mentioned, they shall be buried in death, v. 15. Whereby is not meant
their everlasting death, and that they shall never have that comfortable
morning, Ps. 49.14. however they shall rise again; for Job is speaking here of
visible judgments. But the meaning is, That they shall dye as overwhelmed by
some infamous death, where they shall lie rotting in forgetfulness, and buried
under ignominy and contempt. This is further amplified from this, that his
widows shall not weep, v. 15. where he speaks of his widows, in the plural
number, which may be taken distributively, that the widows of every one of
these buried persons (who remain of the wicked man's posterity) shall forbear to
weep for them. Or, it may be every one of them had many Wives, and yet none of
them shall weep, when they are made widows by their death. This is sometimes
verified in public calamities, Psalm. 78.64. Ezekiel. 24.16, 17. But here it
seems, more especially, to import, That they have been so wicked and cruel, and
shall be so remarkably plagued, that they shall not be lamented when they are
gone, even by their nearest relations. Or, that they shall want public funeral
solemnities, and lamentations, by their widows, and other hired mourners, as
was an ancient custom, Jer. 9.17, 18. And so that they are buried in death,
may further import, that they are presently buried after death, without waiting
for any solemnity, as being cut off by some singular judgment, and beloved by
none. In sum, they shall be so cut off, as shall bury their memory, or make it
rot above ground, and they shall dye unlamented of their dearest relations,
because of their wickedness and inhumanity; and for an evidence of all this,
they shall be presently buried when they dye, without any funeral pomp or
solemnity.

From v. 13. Learn, 1. Oppression (under whatsoever pretext it be committed) is
an evidence of wickedness; For, the wicked man is here instanced in the
Oppressor, as evidencing himself to be wicked by his oppression.

2. It pleases the Lord at some times visibly to plague some wicked men, as
here Job concedes to his Friends. It is true, he will not still plague and cut
off all wicked men; For then the World should soon be consumed, wicked men
would want a stumbling block (upon which they stumble to perdition) if
wickedness were still plagued, and did not sometimes prosper; they would also
be free of many an aggravation of their sin, in that they continue to provoke
an indulgent God; and the godly would wan^ much exercise of their faith and
patience. Yet he is pleased, by plaguing of some at some times, to declare his
hatred, and manifest his justice, against sin; that so he may confirm the truth
of his threatenings, to deterr others, who are lying under the same lash, and
therefore have cause to tremble if they go on in these courses against which
God does so signally manifest his displeasure.

3. Men, in judging of Gods dealing or favor toward them, should not so much
look to their casual or accidental enjoyments, as to what is their portion and
heritage; For, here Job lays the stress of all upon men's portion and
heritage, intimating that if this be not comfortable, it is little matter what
men enjoy for a time. It evidenceth men's great madness, when, instead of
choosing God for their portion, they take the things of this life for a
portion, which are of no worth, nor are they suitable to be the happiness of
rational and immortal Souls, Psalm. 17.14. And it speaks no less madness, when
men please themselves with a temporary portion of prosperity, even albeit it be
plenteous; when in the mean time it may prove a Belshazzars feast, at least
like the lot of the rich Glutton, Luke 16.19, 22, 23. or that of the rich man,
Luke 12.19, 20. And their real portion and heritage shall be with hypocrites
and unbelievers. And albeit all wicked men smart not under visible judgments,
yet they should judge of their portion, not by their enjoyments, but by their
deserving.

4. Men's portion and heritage are not in their own hand, either to carve them
out, or secure them, but in Gods only; who will as little ask the wickeds
advice in appointing their portion, as they consult with him in the choice of
their way; For, this portion is with God, or, purposed and determined by him,
and they shall receive this heritage from the Almighty. Men would gladly be
their own carvers, both in what they should do, and what should be their lot;
But as God is the Lawgiver, to prescribe duty, so if his authority be
contemned in that, he will make it known that vengeance and recompense are his,
and do belong to him, Deuteronomy. 32.35.

5. It were men's wisdom to read from the Word what is their portion in the
purpose of God, before this purpose break forth in execution; For, this portion
of the wicked, which is said to be from God, Chap. 20.29. is here pointed out
as with God, laid up in his purpose, as among his treasures, Deuteronomy. 32.34, 35.
that they may consider it in time. As the gracious thoughts of God should
comfort godly men, even when his dispensations are sharp; and therefore an
account of them is sent as good news to the Cartives at Babylon, Jer. 29 11. So
these purposes of God to plague for sin may justly affright wicked men, or even
godly men in a sinful course. And therefore it is a sad close to all David's
endeavors to cloak his Adultery and Murder, that yet his way displeased the
Lord, 2 Samuel 11.26.

6. What wicked men will not see in the Word, revealing Gods purpose, they are
justly made to feel in effects; For, they shall receive this heritage at last,
which is their portion with God. And albeit all of them do not receive it here,
yet they who have plenty of the means of grace, and will not see Gods
controversy against them (but do take some favorable Providence for their
Bible, and conclude that they are in Gods favor, because of these, whatever
the Word say to the contrary) he justly speaks to them in a language which they
will be made to understand.

7. God is Omnipotent, and powerful to make his purposes eff^ctual, and to
cause the wicked drink of what cup he pleases; Therefore is he called, the
Almighty, here, to show his power to cause them receive this heritage, were
there not only one, but many Oppressors of them together.

From v. 14. Learn, 1. Even those of the wicked whom God is to plague in this
life, may, for a time, enjoy mercies and special favors; As here is supposed,
that they may have Children. This the Lord does, That these mercies, in his
holy Providence, may be a snare unto them; That thereby he may try them (as
prosperity is a searching lot, as well as adversity) and they may bring forth
the naughtiness of their hearts, being emboldened thereunto by their
prosperity; That he may make use of these mercies, as witnesses for himself
against them, in the day of account, Romans 2.4. That he may give proof how he
can curse blessings, Mal. 2.2. And that outward mercies are nothing, unless he
bless them, nor does man's happiness consist in them; And, That, by heaping
benefits upon them, he may imbitter their after-miseries, when they are
stripped of all those: As here the Sword taking away their Children, after they
are multiplied, renders their case more miserable, than if they had never
enjoyed them.

2. Children, and a multiplied Offspring, are in themselves a special favor;
Therefore are they begun with in this account, that the wicked man has
Children multiplied, and Off spring, to show that they are chief benefits, the
want whereof will affect them above many trials. See Ps. 127.3, 4, 5. Of this
see on Chap. 24.21. Only, Children should be looked upon as a mercy, and a
great trust and jewel; and when men have no care of their education (especially
in times wherein errors and snares abound) it is just with God, that, among
other plagues, they prove curses and crosses unto them.

3. Wicked Parents prove, oft-times, a plague, and a cause of plagues and
judgments, to their posterity; As here ruin comes upon the wicked man's
Children and offspring, as a punishment of his sin. See Exodus 20.5. This does
not necessarily import, that the wicked man himself is suffered to dye in
peace, and leaves his posterity to reap the fruit of his sins (though sometimes
it may so come to pass, 1 King. 21.28, 29.) For himself is smitten also, v. 19,
20, etc. But the meaning is, That whatever befall the wicked man himself, his
Children also do smart under the fruits of his sin. It is true (if we except
the first sin of Adam, which is imputed unto all his posterity, and they
deserve eternal wrath for it, upon this special account, that they were in him,
and sinned that sin in him, Romans 5.12. who as a public person represented all
mankind, who should descend from him by ordinary generation in that Covenant of
works made with him in his integrity) It is true, I say, that God imputes not
the sins of Parents to their Children, unto eternal condemnation, unless by
imitation they witness their approbation thereof; Yet wicked Parents may have
influence upon their posterity, in diverse respects. As,

1. All men being sinners, and come short of the glory of God, in Adam, and God
being a debtor to none, as he may deny his grace to whom he will, so, in
particular, he may withold his grace from the Children of wicked Parents (and
the Parents may contribute thereunto by their ill education of their Children)
that so they may sill up the measure of their Parents sins, and ripen for
judgments, Matthew. 23.31, 32. Which yet is not so to be understood, but that
God (who is absolute and Sovereign in dispensing his grace) may, when he
pleases, make choice of the Children even of very wicked Parents (as indeed he
has none to choose but the Children of sinners, and is not bound to give grace
to the Children of godly men) and make them eminent vessels of mercy. As we see
in Hezekiah, the Son of Ahaz, Josiah, the Son of Ammon, and diverse others. And
thus the Lord preserves some reprobate and wicked persons, who do eminently
deserve to be cut off, that some of his Elect ones may spring out of their
loins.

2. Wicked men, by slighting of the Gospel, may provoke God to take it away
from them, and their posterity; and so their Children are left without the pale
of the Church, and given up to those sins which ripen them for judgments; As
has befallen diverse Nations upon whom the light of the Gospel shined at first.

3. Many Parents, instead of dedicating their Children unto God, and
principling them with his fear, do make Idols of them, and do at upon them;
which provokes God to plague them.

4. Sometimes, Parents sell their own Souls to make their Children great, and
God lets them see their folly, in the rods that are inflicted upon their
Children.

5. If Children follow the wicked footsteps of their Parents, it is just with
God to put their Parents sins, as well as their own, upon their account, Matthew.
23.31, 32, 33, 34, 35.

6. Though the Children of wicked Parents be godly, yet God may punish their
wicked Parents in their bodies and estates which they have from them; As is
seen in the ruin of the godly branches of wicked families, both in their
persons and estates, besides the hereditary diseases which may be transmitted
to them, by the vicious lives of their Parents. Though yet there are none truly
godly, who are under these rods, but they will see their own guilt, as well as
the guilt of their Parents, in them, and will not murmur as these did, Ezekiel.
18.2. The sum of all is, That Parents, as they love their Children, should
take heed to their way and walk; and as Children are to lay to heart Original
corruption, and their own actual sins; so they should also be sensible of the
sins of their Progenitors, Neh. 9.33, 34. Jer. 14.20. Lest, with estates and
other advantages, a quarrel from God be transmitted to them. And albeit their
immediate Parents have been godly; yet they should not stumble though they be
afflicted (as, to the documents of Gods Sovereign dominion, and for other wise
ends, so) for their own Progenitors sins; seeing the controversy may be
pursued, even to the third and fourth generation, Exodus 20.5. And that (among
other reasons) because a wicked man may live so long, by the ordinary course of
nature, as to see these branches spring of him (himself being accounted one of
the four) and himself punished in them.

Doct. 4. Among other judgments which God sends upon the wicked, or their
posterity, the Sword is a sore and remarkable one; For, here it is put in the
first place, If his Children be multiplied, it is for the Sword. This is a
judgment frequently lamented, Jer. 4.10, 19. and 47.6, 7. and elsewhere. Yea,
for, a single person (be he a great or mean person) to dye even in battle, is
accounted a favor, being compared with their condition who share in the
National stroke of a War, and those calamities which accompany it, 2 King.
21.20. with Chap. 23.29. And therefore men should look well to these sins which
precure this judgment, to avoid them; Such as, Idolatry and corrupting of
Religion, Judge. 5.8. Breach of Covenant with God, Lev. 26.25. Oppression,
whereunto men are emboldened by the Sword and power that is in their hand,
Ezekiel. 33.26, 27. See Jer. 34.17. and cruelty in the use of the Sword, 1 Samuel
15.33. 2 Samuel 12.9, 10. and many the like abominations, because of which this
judgment is threatened in Scripture. And withal, it excites those who have
smarted under this stroke, to see how they have found it, and their
preservation under it, blessed to them, Zeph. 3.12, 13. And how they are sitted
for these mercies which are promised to them who are left of the Sword, Jer.
31.2.

5. Famine is another sad stroke which God has appointed for some of the
wicked, and their posterity; For, here it is subjoyned, And his Offspring
shall not be satisfied with bread. When people have smarted under other
temporal judgments, they have yet reason to acknowledge Gods mercy, if they
have escaped this, which is so sharp and bitter, Lam. 4.9. And they ought to
avoid these evils which ordinarily draw on this stroke. Such as,

1. Abuse, and not improving, of other rods, which draws out this arrow out of
Gods quiver.

2. Men's not seeing of Gods hand, nor acknowledging him in plenty, but
ascribing it to a wrong cause, Hos. 2* 5, 8, 9.

3. Men's murmuring because of plenty, as many do look on it as their
disadvantage, when there is not a dearth and scarcity, that they may gain
thereby. And when they esteem mercies to be scourges, it is righteous with God
to make them smart under that which is a scourge indeed.

4. When men turn brutish, they are justly punished like beasts, and their
bellyes pinched, since they will not be sensible of other evils, Amos 4.1.6.
And men should read this sin in such a stroke.

5. When Gods servants are neglected, and men will not expend any thing, but
rather intervert and keep back what is due, for the maintenance of public
worship, they are justly straitened in their own particulars, Mal. 3.8, 9, 10,
11.

6. When men are not content with, nor thankful for, ordinary and competent
allowance (which may here be imported by bread) but do murmur because they get
not affluence of all things; they may be taught to know, on their own expense,
how little cause they had to grudge, when they shall not get so much as bread
to satisfy them. See Prove. 30.8.

7. Intemperance, and excess, and riot (with a neglect of the miseries of
others) does justly portend such a stroke, Amos 4.1, 6. and Chap. 6.3, 4, 5, 6,
with 7.

Doct. 6. The mercy of men's temporal enjoyments consists not so much in their
enjoying of them, as in their being satisfied and contented with their lot;
For, that is Famine, not to be satisfied with bread, which may hold true of
them which have worldly goods, as well as of them who want them, that they are
not satisfied. See Luke 12.15. 1 Timothy 6.6, 7, 8. And it is certain, that a man's
depriving himself of that satisfaction he may have, and is allowed to have,
provokes God to deprive him of that which might really satisfy him.

From v. 15. Learn, 1. Gods indulgence may be so great, as, after that several
judgments have cut off others, some wicked men, and their posterity, may yet
remain unpunished; For, here, there are who remain of him, or, of the wicked
man, after Sword and Famine. Hereby the Lord leaves them without excuse who
continue incorrigible, Amos 4.11. Especially if those who remain judge those
only who have smarted, to be wicked, as Luke 13.1, 2, etc. Ezekiel. 11.15.

2. God has variety of judgments in store, whereby to plague wicked men, who
have escaped former calamities, and ordinarily the saddest strokes abide those
who are reserved last; For, here those who remain shall be buried in death, or,
get an odd and remarkable death and burial. So fared it with these Jews who
went last into captivity, Jer. 24, throughout, Ezekiel. 11.15, 21.

3. Death is, in it self, very terrible to wicked men who are without God, and
God makes it manifest that it is so, by the remarkable way of death which
befalls some of them; As here, to be buried in death, etc. or, to dye, in an
odd way, without leaving any memorial of themselves behind them, and without
any solemnity, witnessing men's respect unto them. Death in it self is terrible
to them, as being the King of terrors, as being a curse to them without any
mitigation, a cutting off of all their contentments and happiness, and an
haleing of them, as Malefactors, before their Judge, and to eternal torments,
never to see a glad day again. And when God lets out some glimpse of this upon
some of them, in the way of their death, it should be the more heeded and laid
to heart.

4. Whatever may be the lot of godly men, yet it is in it self a misery to dye
undesired and unlamented; as here, they are buried in death, or, ignominy and
forgetfulness, and are not lamented, but even his widows shall not weep. See,
2 Chronicles. 21.20. Jer. 22.28. This may import somewhat of duty, that, in a sad
time, particular losses should be swallowed up in the thoughts of more public
calamities, as we see in Phineas wife, 1 Samuel 4.20, 21, 22. with Ps. 78.64.
See, also Ezekiel. 24.16, 17, 18. It may import, also, a judgment upon the
living, that their case is rather to be lamented, who are left behind, than
they who are cut off, Jer. 8.3. and 22.10. Rev. 9.6. And that, as their private
Interests come, ordinarily, betwixt them and the care of the Public good, So,
God may send public calamities which will make them forget their particular
sorrows. But further, consider,

1. Whatever fault there may be in others their not remembering, nor mourning
for these their dead relations; Yet, it is Gods judgment upon them, that they
want these marks of respect and favor; as, indeed, men may observe Gods
righteous judgment in that wherein instruments acts sinfully.

2. Though this also may be the sad lot of Godly men, that they are cut off as
the filth and offscouring of the earth, Ps. 79.2, 3. Yet,

1. The chief thing to be looked to in a stroke, is the guilt procuring it; and
if that be done away (as it is to godly men) all is well, whatever befall them.

2. Such as study piety do take the sure way to be remembered, Prove. 10.7. when
all other memorials of men will fail.

3. However others do esteem of godly men, yet, they may be ill wanted, as
being Pillars to uphold the world, and means of preserving the places where
they are. And it is a sad case when they are not lamented, Is. 57.1.

4. Godly men may be missed when they are gone, even by those who slighted
them, when they had them, and desired (and, it may be, endeavored) to be rid
of them. Therefore Moses dead body behoved to be hid from Israel, lest they
should Idolize it, Deuteronomy. 34.6. though they often slighted him in his life.

Verse 16. Though he heap up silver as the dust, and prepare raiment as the
clay;

17. He may prepare it, but the just shall put it on, and the innocent shall
divide the silver.


The second sort of calamities which befall some of the wicked (in these two,
and the next following Verse) is the loss of their wealth and estate; instanced
in these Verses, in their movables, such as silver and apparel, which (though
they prepare them in great abundance, yet) they shall not enjoy; but they shall
come to the innocent and righteous. See Eccl. 2.26. This does nothing favor
their fancy, who dream that Saints shall so inherit the earth, and have only
such a right to all things, as they may, without sin, deprive others of what
they have. When Saints thus mind earth, heaven (which is their true portion and
inheritance) will be forgotten, as experience does witness; and such a
principle is a ready mean to beget many hypocrites, in hopes of temporal
advantages. But (to say nothing how ill purchase may sometime, be well bestowed
and employed, by the conversion of the owners, as Is. 23.18. Luke 19.8.) Job
speaks here only,

1. Of a providential dispensation to some wicked and godly men, as Prove.
13.22. and 28.8. and that God by his providence may sometime bring the wealth
of the wicked into godly men's hands (as when Israel got the Egyptians wealth,
and the Canaanites land, by his special warrant and providence) not that this
befalls all the wicked, or all the godly.

2. He speaks of what comes to the hands of godly persons, by right and lawful
means, and no^ by ill purchases. For the eighth Command stands firm in its
authority, except when God dispenses therewith by his own immediate authority,
as in the case of Israel's spoiling of the Egyptians.

3. He speaks, most especially, of Gods providence in bringing back the wickeds
ill purchase to the righteous owners; who (whatever they be otherwise) are just
and innocent, as to those who oppressed them.

Doct. 1. Wealth is another Idol of wicked men, beside their children,
wherewith they are ensnared, as here is supposed.

2. It is not a little of wealth that wicked men aim at, and seeing they put it
in Gods room, it is no wonder they be insatiable, seeing never so much of it
will not serve their turn, to be an happiness instead of God; For they
endeavor to heap it up as the dust and clay. See Eccl. 5.10. Is. 5.8. Luke
12.15.

3. Though wicked men be most tenacious of their wealth, and sparing to make
use of it; yet Apparel is the great Idol of some of them, whereby they express
their pride and vainglory, and upon which they will spare no cost: For, with
heaping up of silver, they also prepare raiment, and so this Idol makes their
covetousness serve and stoop to it.

4. God may suffer wicked men to prosper for a time, in getting some
satisfaction to their insatiable desires; For, they may heap up silver as the
dust, and prepare raiment as the clay. This bounty the Lord rains upon them in
anger, and for a snare, for it stops the mouth of conscience, and hardens them
against all challenges and intimations of Gods displeasure, Hos. 12.7, 8.

5. Wicked men, the more they do increase in wealth, do but see the vileness
thereof the more, and do but increase their own toil; For, their heaps are but
as the dust and clay, as silver was in Solomon's days; yea; they but load
themselves with thick clay, Hab. 2.6. The deeper men dig in this dunghill, they
will find but the more vanity and vexation in it. See Eccles. 5.11.

6. Wicked men, by all their endeavors about wealth, and by their success
therein, will never reach the end they propound to themselves; As here is
instanced in some (for a document to all) who may prepare, but get not leave to
make use of what they have prepared.

7. God, in his providence, may, sometime, bring the unlawful purchase of the
wicked into the hands of the righteous owners, or of them who will employ it
better than they; For, so (as has been explained) the just shall put it on,
and the innocent shall divide the silver, either divide it among themselves, or
(because the word is singular) divide it to others who stand in need. See Psalm.
105.44. Wicked men cannot secure who shall be their heirs, Esth. 8.2. Psalm.
39.6. And therefore such as have right, and are oppressed by others, should
keep Gods way, as lying nearest the promise and blessing.

8. It is a mark of piety to use riches well; For, therefore it comes in the
just and innocent man's hands, that he may not only put on the raiment, but
divide the silver. Piety is tried, as by men's purchase and estimation, so, by
their using of riches; and therefore when godly men abuse wealth, it is just
they be also stripped of it.

Verse 18. He builds his house as a moth, and as a booth that the keeper
makes.
In this Verse Job shows that the wicked man's house, or, more settled estate,
shall be as uncertain as his movables. This he illustrates by two similitudes;
one is, of a moth, which houseth it self in cloth; but is either swept out of
it with a brush, or eats it self out of house, by eating the cloth: so the
wicked man ruins his house and estate by sin, and shall be thrust out of it.
The other similitude is, that his house shall prove but like a keepers booth,
which is set up for a season, and then pulled down, Is. 1.8. and 24.20. Lam.
2.6.

Doct. 1. Wicked men, whose names are written in the earth, Jer. 17.13. do seek
to fix and settle themselves there, without minding any higher portion; For, in
this sense it is true of the wicked man, in a peculiar manner, that he builds
his house. See Ps. 49.11.

2. Wicked men care not whom they wrong, so they may fix and settle themselves;
For he builds his house as a moth, which eats the best cloth, and that which
belongs not unto it.

3. Were the estate of the wicked never so fixed, in appearance, yet it is but
built upon the sand; and is but as a moths house, and a keepers booth. Their
very ill purchase (as the moths eating of the cloth) will eat them out, and
make the stones and timber cry out against them, Hab. 2.10, 11.

4. It is easy for God to ruin the estate of wicked men, how strong soever
they seem to be; For, he will prove but as a moth, and his house but as a
keepers booth. There is a great difference betwixt what man's estate may seem to
be; and what it will really prove, in the hand of a sin-revenging God.

Verse 19. The rich man shall lie down, but he shall not be gathered: he
opens his eyes, and he is not.
The third sort of calamities which suddenly befall some of the wicked, is,
the ruin of themselves, or their persons especially, to which the following
Verses chiefly speak, though they may relate also to his ruin in the matter of
his wealth, which may be suddenly brought to pass. And this is propounded in
borrowed terms, v. 19. illustrated by other similitudes, v. 20, 21. and
amplified from the Author in inflicting the stroke, v. 22. and from the effect
and consequent thereof, v. 23.

In this Verse, the suddenness and unexpectedness of the wicked man's ruin is
propounded. Some do expound the words thus, that though the wicked man shall
lie down, or, die calmely, yet he shall not be gathered, with the Saints, to a
blessed life after death; but then his eyes shall be opened, and he shall see
that he is a gone man, however he thought himself happy before. This
interpretation does, indeed, hold out a sad discovery which a wicked man gets
of himself at death, when he is departing from his supposed happiness, and made
to see that he is lost and gone. But it does not agree with Job's scope here,
who is speaking of these visible judgments which befall some of the wicked in
this life. Therefore the plain and simple meaning of the words is, That the
wicked man shall be as one new lien down, and not as yet gathered, or, fully
composed for sleep, but half sleeping, half waking, and then a terrible alarm
comes upon him, and as he lifts up his eyes, he is presently gone.

Doct. 1. Though riches and piety may consist together; yet, ordinarily, rich
men are under a great tentation to be wicked; Therefore is the wicked man
called here, the rich man, because, as he followed wicked courses to attain
riches, so, his confidence in his riches imboldens him to be yet more wicked.
See Luke 18.24, 25. with Mark 10.23, 24.

2. Wicked men may expect that, besides strokes upon their concernments and
enjoyments, their very persons shall not escape, which is the sharpest of
outward trials, Job 2.4. for, so is here threatened.

3. Wicked men may be very near destruction, when it appears not to be so; For,
when he lies down and is not yet gathered, he opens his eyes, and he is not.
To which also another reading agrees, he lies down and nothing is gathered,
or taken away from him; but when he opens his eyes, after his sleep, he is
not. See 1 Th^ss. 5.3.

4. It is a sad ingredient in trouble, when it comes suddenly and
unexpectedly; For, so is here intimated, that it is an aggravation of the
wicked man's ruin, that so suddenly he is not. And when a stroke comes in such
a way, it should be looked on as the just fruit of men's not looking out and
preparing for trouble, but dreaming of a perpetual happiness.

5. When God begins to reckon with wicked men, he will not do his work by
halves, but pays them home once for all; For, so is here imported in that the
wicked man is not, when God begins to call him to an account. See Nah. 1.9. 1 Samuel 3.12.

Verse 20. Terrors take hold of him as waters, a tempest steals him away in
the night.

21. The east wind carries him away, and he departs: and as a storm hurleth
him out of his place.


In these Verses the suddenness and dreadfulness of the wicked man's ruin is
illustrated by two similitudes:

1. That terrors, or terrible plagues, shall hurry him away, as an innundation
of waters, breaking in impetuously upon an house built beside it, does carry
all away with it, v. 20.

2. That he shall be surprised with destruction, as when a tempest, or
whirlwind falls upon things in a dark night, and carries them away, none can
see whither, v. 20. This last similitude is yet insisted on, v. 21. wherein he
declares that judgments, like an East Wind (which was very violent in those
countries, and made a great storm, Hosea 12.1.) shall carry the wicked man
away, and drive him out of his fixed habitation.

From v. 20. Learn 1. No one similitude is sufficient to illustrate the sad
condition of wicked men, when pursued by God; therefore are diverse similitudes
made use of here, to point out how sad their condition shall be.

2. Wicked men's ruin will be very violent and terrible, and will fill them
with terrors, seeing they have no true peace of conscience to oppose to the
dreadfulness thereof; therefore is the wicked man's lot here called terrors,
which import both outward terrible dispensations, and inward anguish and
affrightment; So that he shall have a storm both without and within.

3. Judgments sent to pursue wicked men are both irresistible, by any thing
they can oppose thereunto: (For, they take hold of them, and overtake, or,
reach, such as think to flee, and they are as irresistible as an innundation of
waters, which carries all before it, and as a tempest, which drives chaff
before it) and they are overwhelming, as an inundation of waters drowns all.

4. As circumstances of trouble are sad ingredients in it; so God will so
circumstantiate the troubles of wicked men, as may make them most bitter to
them; For, they will be not only as a tempest, but as a tempest in the night.

5. Surprizals by calamities are bitter, especially when men have no comforts
prepared against them; As here, the tempest steals away the wicked man, in the
night, when he dreams not of it, and when all is dark, and nothing comfortable
about them.

From v. 21. Learn 1. Wicked men are very unwilling to consider the sad days
which abide them; therefore must this subject be so much inculcated, and
insisted upon.

2. Wrath, and violent wrath, is the lot and portion of wicked men; even an
East Wind and storm.

3. Though wicked men will not obey the word, nor stoop to receive correction
by lesser chastisements; yet when God deals in earnest, and lets out the fury
of his wrath, they must succumb; For, if the^ East wind carry him away, he
departs.

4. The violented and tossed condition of wicked men, under trouble, is very
sad; For, as a storm it hurleth him. It is but one word in the Original, He is
stormed, or, tempested, out of his place. Calmness and tranquillity of mind
would be of much worth in such a condition. And therefore godly men should have
a care that they disturb not the peace of their own minds, in tempestuous times.

5. Wicked men have but a loose grip of all their contentments, upon which they
desire to settle, nor will their settling of themselves secure them; For, he
will be hurled out of his place, where he built his nest, and thought himself
secure.

Verse 22. For God shall cast upon him, and not spare: he would fain flee out
of his hand.
In this Verse these calamities of wicked men are amplified from the
consideration of the Author of them, who is God: For though his name be not
expressed in the Original; yet it is to be understood, and repeated from v. 13.
and here it is declared that God shall cast all those calamities upon the
wicked man, without pity or moderation; and that he shall not be able to
decline or shift God's hand, though gladly he would. Whence Learn,

1. As God has a supreme hand in all calamities, upon whomsoever they be
inflicted, so, especially, he is the wicked's party, to bring calamities upon
them; For, so is here added, by way of confirmation of all that is formerly
threatened. See Psalm. 34.15, 16. A wicked man will not want an enemy, so long as
God is all-sufficient to grapple with him, Obad. v. 3, 4. and some of them he
reserveth for his own immediate hand and stroke; and hereby teaches his
people, to leave vengeance to him, who will repay. And hence we may conclude,
that they need not much be feared, nor envied, to whom God is a party; For
their very ill-willers may see cause to pity them, ere all be done.

2. Albeit it be safest for godly men to fall in God's own immediate hand, (2 Samuel 24.14.) yet, as it is sad that any should make so sweet a portion their
party, Is. 63.9, 10. So, it is, especially, sad to the wicked, who live in
enmity against him: For, then what is comfortable to the godly in trouble (as
that it is the Lord, that they are in his hand, etc.) is matter of terror to
them; Therefore is this added, as an aggravation of all the wicked man's
miseries, and as a reason of all the former sad things that befall him, for God
shall cast upon him. See Heb. 10.31. 1 Samuel 2.25.

3. It may sadden the wickeds stroke from God yet more, that it speaks God at
distance from them; For, God casts upon him, or, sends upon him, as men shoot
arrows and darts, which do not only come swiftly and suddenly, but from a party
at a distance. Hence it is, that as their strokes flow from anger, Is. 57.17.
so God's anger is not pacified by any stroke that comes upon them, Is. 9.12.
Nor have they access to God in their troubles, as Psalm. 31.7. nor (which is a
sad mark and evidence of this distance) do they seek, or draw near to God, in
trouble, Hos. 7.10. And therefore godly men should desire, above all things, to
enjoy God and his favor in trouble, Psalm. 109.28. Jer. 17.17. and should miss
the sense of his love, and grace to seek him in trouble, above any thing else.

4. As it is sweet to find mercy remembered in wrath, Hab. 3.2. So the wicked
(and especially those of them who are cruel to others) may expect judgment
without mercy: For, God shall cast upon him, and not spare, or, pity. See Is.
27.11. we should be humble, to observe mercy in the midst of severity, Ezr.
9.8, 9, 13. Lam. 3.22. were it but even an assurance that mercy is hid in God's
heart, Job 10.13. and upon this account, godly men ought not to grudge or
repine at their own lots, Is. 27.7, 8.

5. To have to do with God, as a party in wrath, is so very dreadful, that none
can abide it; therefore fleeing is the best shift that the stoutest (of these
who flee not to his mercy in a Redeemer) can make. See Is. 10.3: 1 Cor. 10.22.

6. Wicked men had rather endeavor to run away from God under trouble (and by
that means study to be rid of trouble) than run to him by repentance; For, he
would fain flee, or, in fleeing he would flee, out his hand, that is, by any
means, or endeavors that he can use he would flee. See Is. 9.13. Hos. 5.13. It
is a searching trial of men under trouble, whether or not they seek deliverance
from trouble, rather than the blessing and improvement of it, and whether it
drives them to God, or away from him. And it is to be remembered, that it is the
natural bias of our hearts, under trouble, to run away from God, that so we
may be upon our guard; and if we find it otherwise with us, we may acknowledge
it as a gift from above.

7. It is in vain to think to escape from God, when he is pursuing a
controversy; For, he would fain flee, and that is all, for it succeeds not.
See Amos 9.1, 4. So that there is no safety but in creeping near to him, whose
rods are sent to drive us to his mercy.

Verse 23. Men shall clap their hands at him, and shall hiss him out of his
place.
In this Verse this calamity of the wicked man is amplified from the effect and
consequent thereof; That his ruin shall be matter of joy and derision to all
who shall see or hear of it, and have known his wickedness. In the Original it
is, He shall clap and hiss, in the singular number, and so some understand it
of God, who shall triumph over this his enemy, when he is thus conquered, Deuteronomy.
28.63. Prove. 1.26. But it is clearer to understand it of men, and the singular
number, being taken distributively, will import, that every one (who sees or
hears of this) shall clap his hands, etc.

Doct. 1. Prospering wicked men are no small trial and matter of grief to the
World; while some are made to suffer under them, and others are sadly afflicted
and exercised with their prospering in evil courses: For, so much is imported
in men's joy because of their ruin.

2. Wicked men are justly deprived of all pity from others, and made Butts of
public disgrace, and the subject of public rejoicing, when they fall; For, so
here, every one shall clap their hands (in sign of contempt and derision, Lam.
2.15.) and scornfully hiss him, (1 King. 9.8.) or, hiss at him, out of his
place; that is, every man, out of his dwelling shall hiss at him, or shall hiss
him out of his place, and put him away from among them. This is the fruit of
wicked men's cruelty, and of their not laboring to conciliate true respect to
themselves, upon good grounds, but studying only to be formidable, though they
be hated for it. Yea, the best way to be sure of men's pity and compassion, in
so far as is good for us, is to study to partake of Gods compassion, Psalm.
106.44, 45. Jer. 42.12. And when godly men meet with such a lot as this in the
world, they should look upon the neglect of this study, as a chief cause of it.

3. The World will sometime be getting glad days, by being made witnesses of
the ruin of wicked men; as here Job grants is sometime accomplished, that men
clap their hands at him. Now as for this rejoicing, albeit we need not dispute
the lawfulness thereof (for Job is only declaring what eventually will be,
which does not necessarily evince that lawfully it may be) yet it is certain
that this is a just ingredient in the wickeds cup, on Gods part, whatever be
man's part in it. Yea, albeit it be not lawful to rejoice at the ruin of a
private enemy, Prove. 24.17. Yet at the ruin of some we may, Ps. 52.5, 6. and
58.10, 11. Prove. 11.10. Rev. 18.1, 2, 20. namely, as they are Gods public
enemies who are destroyed; as Gods justice is vindicated and glorified thereby;
as the truth of Gods word, and his hearing of his peoples prayers, are thereby
confirmed, and, as impediments to the progress of Religion are thereby removed.

CHAP. XXVIII.
This Chapter contains the second Branch of Job's discourse, clearing the
mistakes of his Friends; wherein he qualifieth his concessions in the former
Branch of his discourse: Showing, That however some wicked men were punished,
as he has granted to them; yet, if they would look upon the whole complex of
the Wisdom of God, in the administration of the affairs of the World, and in
dispensing comforts and corrections, they must conclude it to be a depth
unsearchable by any but God himself. And therefore it was their great weakness
and mistake to gather from these particular instances of severity toward some
wicked men, a general rule whereby they would limit God in all his
dispensations, that he must afflict none other, and all such as these wicked
men were; and so to dictate, as if they had been at the bottom of this
unsearchable depth: And it was no less weakness to think, that, because a
reason of such dispensations toward some of the wicked might be found out by
men, therefore, they might also fathom the reasons of all his other strange
dispensations, such as his sparing of men no less wicked than those whom he
punishes, and his afflicting of godly men.

The Chapter treats of a threefold wisdom, 1. That wisdom which is given to men
for finding out these secret and hidden things that are in the bowels of the
Earth, to ver. 12. 2. That wisdom of God in administrating and ordering the
affairs of the World, which is inestimable, transcendent, and comprehensible by
none but by God himself, to v. 28. 3. That Spiritual wisdom, which is
attainable by man, and wherein his happiness consists, v. 28. But in reference
to Job's scope, I shall take up the Chapter in two pr^positions: The first is,
that the wisdom of God in ordering the affairs of the world, is unsearchable by
any, and can be comprehended by none but only God himself. Where he first
prosecuteth the negative part of this Proposition, That man has not, nor can
find out, this wisdom: Showing, that however man by wisdom can find out many
secret things, v. 1. -- 11. yet he cannot search out this wisdom, there being
no place of it, where man might dig for it, v. 12, 13, 14. nor has man any
price wherewith to purchase it, v. 15. -- 19 nor any abilities whereby to
attain it, v. 20, 21, 22. Next he prosecuteth the affirmative part of his
Proposition, That God has this wisdom, and it is hid in him, v. 23. who is
omniscient, v. 24. and orders and disposes all things, v. 25. and who gave
proof of this eternal and infinite wisdom, in his first creating of all things,
v. 26, 27. The second proposition is, That it is not needful for man to know
and comprehend this wisdom, since his happiness consists not in that, but in
another sort of wisdom, v. 28.

Verse 1. Surely there is a vein for the silver, and a place for gold where
they fine it.

2. Iron is taken out of the earth, and brass is molten out of the stone.


JOB's scope (till v. 23.) being to clear this negative assertion, That man
cannot find out the depth of the wisdom of God in his ordering the Affairs of
the World; he first illustrates his assertion by showing what man's wisdom can
reach in other things; particularly in searching our Minerals, which are in the
bowels of the Earth, when yet it comes short in this, v. 1, -- 11. Next, he
confirms by several reasons, that man cannot search out this wisdom of God, as
he does other things v. 12.22.

In these verses, Job begins his discourse of man's ability and wisdom to search
out Minerals, with a general Proposition; wherein a general account is given of
several Metals (of greatest use or price) about which man's industry is
exercised; and of man's industry in finding them out: Which general Proposition
is enlarged and amplified in the following verses, by pointing our several
difficulties which man's industry and skill does overcome, in searching out of
these and the like Metals. Here he mentions, 1. Silver, which discovering it
self by lesser veins, man does follow them out till it be reached. 2 Gold,
whose place they find out, where they fine it. This is not to be understood, as
if men set up their Furnace for fining of Gold, in the place where they find
it. But the meaning is, either, that they do in part refine it there, by taking
it from among the most of the dross, before they bring it out; or, That it has
a place where they (that is, Nature, and the second causes therein working) do
fine and purify it in the bowels of the Earth. Or the words may be thus read
and understood, That the Gold, which men Fine, has a place where men find it
out by Industry and Art. 3. Iron, which lies not so deep, but the Oar of it is
found near the dust and superfice of the earth. 4. Brass, which men do melt out
of a stony Oar, called by Naturalists Cadmia and Chalcitis.

Concerning all this, it is to be observed, that Job propounds this instance of
man's industry and skill, not secluding other Arts and Sciences wherein men also
give proof of their Invention and Wisdom; but because this is indeed a notable
proof of man's skill, and a task wherein Nature much resists man's endeavors,
and wherein the effects of man's wisdom and industry are sensible and obvious to
the view of all.

Doct. 1. God has stored this Earth with all things necessary, to make it a
commodious habitation for man; so that, both above and beneath ground it is
full of needful riches: As here Job instanceth, particularly, in Minerals under
ground, things above ground being obvious to all.

2. God is to be seen in what is more base, as well as in what is more
precious; and his bounty is to be acknowledged in it, as being needful for the
use of man: for he demonstrates his riches in Iron and Brass, as well as in
Silver and Gold, the one being no less needful, and of more common use than the
other.

3. God has put the choicest of the Earths and Times Treasures, not only under
men's feet, but under ground also, that they may not seek their happiness there,
nor omit their other more needful searches, while they make enquiries after
them; for, all these Minerals are under ground.

4. However men are apt to quarrel Gods allowances, yet he has so ordered,
that what is most necessary is to be had in greatest abundance, and most
easily: for, therefore Iron and Brass are nearer the superfice of the Earth
than Silver or Gold; and there is greater abundance of these, whereas there are
but veins of Silver.

5. What is most rare and difficultly attained, is most precious; as Silver and
Gold are, upon that, among other accounts. Hereby the Lord prevents that
contempt of these Mercies, which would be more vile, if they were more
plenteous, as Silver was in Solomon's days. And thus also does he commend the
excellency of Spiritual things, by their being difficultly attained.

6. Even the most precious of natural things require much art, to cause them
have a luster in our eyes; for, Gold must be Fined: which shows their
emptiness, as to satisfying of the heart of man, that they need art and
dexterity to set them off.

7. Men are incessant in their study and care to find out what is (or what they
think is) for their worldly accommodation, be it above or under ground; as here
they are supposed to be in finding out of these Metals. Which (though it be
not unlawful in it self) may bear witness against them for their negligence
about better things. See Luke 11.31.

8. Skill in Arts, and dexterity for finding out of the Secrets of Nature, is
an old and common gift; for, here in Jobs days they had skill to find out these
Metals: We find that this skill was among Cains posterity before the Flood,
Genesis 4.22. which shows how little such gifts are to be rested upon, for
attaining of happiness thereby; and what a wonder it is to see many men so
quick in these inventions, who yet are so blunt in taking up Spiritual Wisdom.
See Mat. 11.25. 1 Cor. 1.23, 26.

Verse 3. He setteh an end to darkness, and searches out all perfection: the
stones of darkness, and the shadow of death.
In the rest of this purpose, to v. 12. this general Proposition is amplified
and enlarged, by giving an account of the difficulties which man overcomes by
his industry and skill, that so he may reach those, and other precious things
in the bowels of the Earth. Wherein also is held out more of the Earths Riches,
and a commendation of man's painfulness in seeking them out; and so both
branches of the Proposition are further cleared. The first difficulty (in this
verse) is Darkness, to which man's industry assigns yet more narrow bounds, and
puts a period to it, by making it ^^de to Light coming in its place; either
when he ope^^ the Earth, to let in the light of day where darkness was before,
or by bringing in of Candles and Lamps into the dark Mines. And this man does,
because by that means he searches out what i^ precious and perfect in the
bowels of the Earth; and finds out these precious Stones which lie not only
in Darkness under the Earth, but in the shadow of Death; that is, in the deep
b^ w^l^ of the Earth, where there is a deadly shade, and where things would lie
in eternal obscurity (as buried in death) were it not for man's searching; and
where there is darkness which might affright men to death, and where many have
been actually choked and smothered to death.

Doct. 1. God has beset man with much exercise and sore toil, in his
undertakings about things of the world; as here is instanced in these who work
in Mines. And this the Lord does, partly that he may exercise, afflict, and
humble all the Sons of men in their worldly employment^, that they may remember
their happiness lies no^ there; partly, that he may cause men to find it a
dear bargain, who sell their souls for these things.

2. Men are so addicted to the things of time, that they stand upon no pains,
difficulty, or hazard, so they may reach them; for they will hazard upon
Darkness (and put an end or period to it, in that place where they work, and it
was before) and on the shadow of death, that they may find out these Minerals:
Which may make men ashamed of their negligence in better undertakings, where
they are easily damped with any darkness of discouragement, and where they will
hazard nothing; though in pursuing of these things below, they will hazard upon
deadly terrors, and upon death it self.

3. God, in his Providence, may make men succeed in their endeavors about the
world, even when their undertakings are difficult: As here, they search out all
perfection, etc. Hereby, as God recompenseth men's lawful toil and endeavors,
and encourages them to undertake higher and more hopeful employment; so he
raineth Snares upon others, who choose these things for their portion.

4. What the Creatures can afford of perfection has been already found out,
whereby it is tried to our hand, that happiness is not to be found therein;
for, he searches out all perfection, and for instance, those precious Stones
which are in darkness, and the shadow of death. See Eccl. 2.11, 12. Here he
calls those things which men find out in the bowels of the Earth, perfection,
because they are not only esteemed to be so by many who seek after them, but
because they (as every Creature beside) are perfect in their kind, and for the
use for which they are appointed, though not to satisfy the vast expectations
and desires of man. He calls these things also, all perfection, not simply, as
if these comprehended all perfections of all the Creatures (though many place
all their happiness in them) but that they are the most perfect of perfect
insensible things on Earth, whether under or upon it.

Verse 4. The flood breaks out from the inhabitant, even the waters forgotten
of the foot: they are dried up, they are gone away from men.
The second difficulty which men overcome ^n these undertakings, is that of
water breaking out in their Mines when they are at work. As for the difficulty,
it is propounded in these words, the flood breaks out from the inhabitant;
which some understand thus; the flood of water breaks out from its ancient
dwelling, or channel (or from the inhabitants who dwelt beside it) into the
Mine where they are working. But the Channel is not the inhabitant of the water
(as this interpretation would make it) but the Water is the inhabitant of the
Channel. Therefore the words may be thus read and understood; The flood breaks
out so that there is no inhabitant, or, (which the word most properly
signifies) sojourner; that is, none of these who sojourn in the Mine, can stay
there, because the water breaks out upon them in the Mine. The most simple
reading of the words is, The flood breaks out from with, or, from besides the
sojourners; that is, while they are at work there, waters break out beside them
from some secret Spring, which are ready to drown all their works. And because
of this it is further added, that these Waters are forgotten of the foot; that
is, not only come they into the Mine from secret sources, where the foot of man
never came, but they grow very deep and unpassable by the foot of man, and
therefore the Workers cannot abide there. As for the removing of this
difficulty it is subjoined, They are dried up, they are gone away from men;
that is, men by their industry and inventions (such as Pumps, Wheels, and the
like) do dry up these Waters, and put them away from men who are at this work.
Now though these particulars be in themselves but barren of spiritual
instructions; yet since they are insisted on in the Scripture, we may, from the
general consideration of the providence of God, and man's industry about these
things, learn,

1. Great undertakings are not ordinarily carried through without great
difficulties; as here is supposed in these great undertakings about Minerals:
And this is to be expected in every great and eminent work wherein godly men
are employed; otherwise many proofs of God would be misled. And hereby God
gives proof how dear these undertakings are to him, which he surrounds with
difficulties, that he may be seen in removing of them.

2. It is not one, but many difficulties, and one after another, that may be
expected in great undertakings; as here, beside the difficulty of darkness, v.
3. another from floods succeeds: And men, in other cases, are not
sufficiently tried, till they be assaulted both upon the right hand and on the
left; for they may stand in one assault, who yet will succumb under another, or
be outwearied with a continued tract of difficulties. We must not prescribe to
God, but submit; remembering* that he who gives us the back wherewith we bear,
may lay upon it what burden he pleases: That we are bound to bless him who
gives us work and service by all these difficulties, however it be toilsome and
laborious; and, that our offering to make exceptions and reservations does but
call for more difficulties.

3. After men are engaged in lawful undertakings, the Lord may fryst them with
unexpected difficulties, of which they did not dream, beside all that they
looked for; as here, beside the trial of darkness, v. 3. which they could not
but know of when they engaged, they meet with an unexpected breaking in of
waters after they are begun. Hereby, in many undertakings, God calls men to try
if their work be right, when he spreads a net upon them in it, Hos. 7.11, 12.
And in lawful enterprises, as he trains men on by not letting them see all
difficulties at the first; so further, partly he makes them reap the fruit of
their unwatchfulness, and their not looking out for these difficulties they
might probably meet with; partly, he trys their sincerity and affection in
their undertakings, and whether they will turn their back upon duty, because of
difficulties; as Israel was frequently attempting to return to Egypt when they
found toil in the Wilderness.

4. It is commendable in men not to give over lawful enterprises, because of
any difficulties; service being most eminent where difficulties are great and
many; as here they set about the removing of this difficulty also, to get these
waters dried up. See Prove. 24.10. Men lose all their former labor if they give
over because of an emergent difficulty; and whosoever would banish difficulties out
of their way, would also (upon the matter) banish many errands to God, many
proofs of his love, and many touchstones and trials of their own resolution and
honesty.

5. Not only ought men to wrestle against difficulties, but, through Gods
blessing upon their endeavors, a work may be carried on through many
difficulties; as here, those waters are dried up, and gone away from men: all
is not lost that is in hazard, if men will continue at duty, but mercies may be
recovered out of the very Jaw-bones of death.

Verse 5. As for the earth, out of it comes bread: and under it is turned up
as it were fire.

6. The stones of it are the place of Saphirs, and it has dust of Gold.


A third and fourth difficulty are here conjoined, which I do put together,
because in both of them we have a further account of the riches of the Earth
(which was the other branch of the Proposition, v. 1.2.) and because the
advantage reaped by overcoming of both is subjoined to the last of them. The
first of these difficulties (and the third in order) is that of Fire: That this
Earth, which is so fertile of Corn above ground, is underneath turned up as it
were Fire. Whereby I do not understand their taking in of Lamps, whereby they
may see, or their setting up of Furnaces under ground, to melt and refine the
Metals which they find, or that they find precious Stones and Metals there,
which are bright and shining like Fire. Nor is this the meaning only, that
these Diggers do find (among other things) Coals, of other sulphurous Mines
under ground: But rather, that in their digging for Metals and precious Stones
they meet with another difficulty of Fire; and that their Lamps taking hold of,
or their working Instruments or Tools striking upon some vein of Sulphur, do
set their Mines on Fire; as we see in Coalpits. And yet it is to be understood
here also, that they make a shift by their industry to get over that
difficulty, and to quench the Fire. The other difficulty (and the fourth in
order) is that of Stones and Dust, wherewith they are troubled in digging: and
yet they put forth themselves to overcome that, as well as the rest, in
expectation of great advantage, and that they shall find precious Stones (such
as Saphires are) and Gold lying among the Dust and Stones.

Doct. 1. God has filled this Earth with his riches, and with great variety
thereof, both for necessity and ornament: For, above ground it is fertile of
bread, or, all things necessary for the life of man; and beneath it has
materials for Fire, Gold, and Saphires. We owe much, and must make an account
to God for so good accommodation, especially that it is furnished to us who are
Rebels; and for the beams of his goodness displayed therein, to invite us to
come to him: And what thorns and briars of bitterness we find in these things,
we are to look upon them as the fruit of our sin, and as a call to invite us to
seek after a better portion.

2. Men are ordinarily so eager in seeking after things of the world, that
never so many difficulties will not hinder their pursuit: for, after the former
difficulties of Darkness and Water, they meet with new difficulties of Fire,
Stones, and Dust, all which they overcome. This is not to be condemned, but
commended rather, in men's following of lawful Callings, provided they keep
these things in their own place. Only their assiduous activity may condemn
these who are soon and easily laid by in the best Duties, especially if Clouds
return after the Rain, and one difficulty upon the back of another. Whereas we
should follow good things without being discouraged, either by the greatness,
or by the number of difficulties.

3. Beside accidental and occasional difficulties, men may look for a constant
tract of difficulties in their lawful undertakings; as here, beside that
accidental difficulty of Fire, they have constantly Stones and Dust to trouble
them. Men must look for extraordinary difficulties, when those which are
ordinary do not work upon them; and though they be delivered from these, yet
they must return to their ordinary toi^: for men can no more want these than a
Ship can sail without Ballast or Lading; yea they are needful to godly men, for
many ends and uses, 1 Pet. 1.6. Besides that they are daily witnesses and
documents of our sin, which procures us all this toil, for the improvement
whereof we must give an account to God.

4. Man by wisdom and industry will improve the Earth to all its uses, and the
advantages to be found in it; as here, man finds out bread above ground, and
materials of Fire, Gold, and Saphires, and other precious things under ground.
Which should teach us to improve our various lots and conditions better, and to
see what is in them of lessons and other advantages, wherein we ordinarily come
short both in prosperity and adversity.

5. Man's industry and diligence may find precious things, in a condition or
place where apparently they could be little expected; as here, they find
Saphires and Gold among Stones and Dust. Thus godly men may find meat in an
Eater, a sight of God where they little expected it, Genesis 26.13. and
deliverance in Babylon. Mich. 4.10.

6. God is pleased in his bounty to compense man's pains and industry in their
lawful Callings, with rich advantages; as here, they g^t Saphires and Gold.
This the Lord does, that he may much more encourage men to his service, which
will never be in vain, Is. 45.19. Thus he rewarded Ahabs hypocritical
repentance, 1 King. 21.28, 29. that he may encourage sincere penitents: And
thus he cares for the Lillies and the Fowls of the Air, that he may give a
check to the anxious cares and sollicitudes of his people, Mat. 6.26. -- 30.

Verse 7. There is a path which no fowl knows, and which the vultures eye
has not seen.

8. The lions whelps have not trodden it, nor the fierce lion passed by it.


A fifth difficulty which man's skill and industry overcomes, is the strange
ways they must follow, and their frequent turnings and windings in driving
their Mines, to find out Metals and Jewels. These are so strange and
unfrequented, that neither beast nor bird ever saw or came at them; not so much
as those of them who are most sagacious and quick-sighted, or do range furthest
for prey; such as the Vultures, who are sharp-sighted and fly far, and the
Lions, who range far and near for their meat.

Doct. 1. God has given even to some irrational Creatures, excellent
properties, whereby he demonstrates the fullness that is in him who has made
them all, and has made these to serve man as documents of his duty, Prove. 6.6.
etc. Mat. 10.16. as here the Lord points at the Vulture and Lion, as having
some excellent properties.

2. Life is so precious that Creatures will take strange pains to preserve it,
as some are put to much toil about it; as here, these Creatures are put to fly
far, and range much abroad to get prey. And here we are to consider,

1. That it ought to be esteemed a mercy if we be not put to hard shifts, to
maintain our very life, Lam. 4 10. whatever be our other trials.

2. That even such as are put to hard shifts, should neither think they are
forsaken, nor yet ascribe their subsistence to their own industry; for, in
opposition to both these, it is said, that God seeds these ranging Lions, Ps
104.21.

3. That Creatures which are noble and excellent in some respects (as the Lion
is, and the Vulture also in regard of some properties) are yet attended with
somewhat to abase them; as they are toiled with seeking their meat: Thus the
Lord ballanceth all Creature-Perfections, with somewhat that may proclaim their
emptiness.

Doct. 3. The secrets of Nature, and riches of the Earth, are so deep and so
many, that all of them will not be yet seen, even by the most rambling and
quick-sighted of Creatures; as here the Vulture and Lion do not find out this
way, where men dig for these Treasures.

4. Man is so eager in seeking after the pelf of this World, that many times he
abandons humane society, and follows ways more savage and unfrequented, than
these which wild beasts and fowls haunt in, to attain his ends; as here, they
dig in Mines where neither Lions nor Vultures come: Which makes their account
sad who have better things in their offer, and seek them not.

Verse 9. He puts forth his hand upon the rock: he overturneth the mountains
by the roots.

10. He cutteth out rivers among the rocks, and his eye sees every precious
thing.

11. He binds the floods from overflowing, and the thing that is bid,
brings he forth to light.


A sixth difficulty of Rocks or Flints is here joined with that of Waters,
formerly mentioned v. 4. where he shows that in these undertakings, men are
sometime put to cut through hard flinty Rocks, and (as it were) to overturn
Mountains, by cutting their passage through under them, even though they be all
of Stone v. 9. And this they do, either to follow the Vein of the Metals, or
(as it is v. 10.) to make Channels for Rivers through these Rocks; either that
they may come in when they need them to wash their Metals, or rather to
conveigh them away when they break in upon their Mines, v. 4. and as they thus
conveigh away the Water which breaks in, so, v. 11. -- they use means to stop
the course of other Waters which are ready to infest them, that not so much as
a drop (or tear, as the Original imports) gets in to hinder their work. The
fruit of all which pains is, that they obtain the precious things which are hid
in the Earth.

Doct. 1. No precious thing is attainable without much difficulty, as is often
inculcated here: and whenever God surrounds us with difficulties, we may expect
precious Fruit of them, if we improve them well.

2. If men be diligent, and not laid by with an apprehension of Lions in the
way, they may overcome great difficulties; as here, hard labor will get
through Flinty Rocks, and overturn mountains by the roots, and cut out Rivers
among the Rocks, See Prove. 13.4.

3. Even humane prudence may teach men to arm themselves against, and study to
prevent, these difficulties under which they have formerly smarted; as here,
having been troubled with Waters, v. 4.10. they study to prevent their breaking
in again, v. 11.

4. God gives rich recompenses to men who labor even about earthly things; not
only (as has been marked before) to encourage them to better service, but to
let see how little he regards these temporal mercies, which he gives so
promiscuously and indifferently to these who toil for them: for, the eyes of
these laborers see every precious thing, and the thing that is hid they bring
to light.

5. It is a gift of God to be wise to discern things precious from things that
are vile, or less excellent, as here they do: Much more it is a mercy, to be
able to make this difference in other things, 1 Cor. 12.31. Phil. 1.9, 10.
Grace to discern and to embrace or submit to what we discern to be good, is our
mercy.

6. Men are naturally (and without needing to be excited) more active about
worldly affairs, than about other things; as here they are eager in their
pursuit of these things: And no wonder, for these things are very suitable to
our natural inclinations, they are of constant and daily use to us, they have a
great luster in our eyes, and do raise us high in the world, and therefore we
are so hot upon the chase. And therefore we have cause to be humbled when we
find such a benfall and inclination in our hearts, when, in the mean time we
neglect that which is far better, see Luke 10.41, 42.

7. When men have an high estimation of any thing, and serious desires after
it, they will be very eager in their endeavors after it; as here, their esteem
of these things, and their desires after them, as precious, make them strive
with Rocks, Mountains, and Waters, to seek them out where they are hid: Which
may tell us, that coldrife endeavors after better things are but a proclaimed
contempt of them.

Verse 12. But where shall wisdom be found? and where is the place of
understanding?

13. Man knows not the price thereof, neither is it found in the Land of the
living.

14. The depth says, It is not in me: and the sea says, It is not with me.


Follows to v. 23. the second branch of the negative part of Jobs
Proposition; wherein he shows, that however man's wisdom and industry can
search and find out many secret things (as we have heard) yet he cannot find
out this wisdom of God, and it is more excellent than that man should
comprehend it. This he not only propounds, but demonstrates by three Arguments:
Whereof the first (in these Verses) is, That this wisdom has no place of abode
within man's reach, where he might dig and search for it and find it, as he does
Metals and other things that are hid in the bowels of the Earth. For clearing
of the words, consider,

1. This Wisdom, of which Job here speaks, is not to be understood either of
humane prudence and policy, nor yet of that spiritual wisdom which is necessary
to salvation, of which v. 18. But it is to be understood, principally, of Gods
wise Government of the World, and administration of all the Affairs thereof by
his Providence; and secondarily and consequentially, it may be understood of
man's capacity to take up this wisdom of God fully. So that Jobs denying that
there is any place where this Wisdom may be sound, or any price to be given for
it, does import, that no man by any means or industry, can elevate his own
understanding and capacity, to comprehend fully the depths of Divine Providence
in the World.

2. These two names of Wisdom and Understanding (as they are understood of this
Wisdom of God) serve to point out one and the same thing, and to intimate that
this Wisdom of God has all perfections that can be expressed by any name given
to Wisdom among men: Or the one may point (so to speak) at the habit, faculty,
or eternal purpose of God in ordering of things below; and the other at the
exercise of that faculty, and execution of that purpose.

3. While he denies that man can find this wisdom, it is not to be taken
absolutely and simply, that man can understand nothing of it; for the contrary
is insinuated, Ps. 107.43. But the meaning is, that man cannot perfectly and
fully take it up, nor has he wisdom and understanding (or complete and perfect
abilities) for that effect. As for the first reason proving this conclusion
(which is, That this Wisdom has no place where man can find it out) it is
propounded more generally, v. 12. where the questions import a strong denial,
that this Wisdom (whereby God orders all Affairs, and whereby man may be able
to understand the reasons and causes of Gods proceedings) is to be found in any
place by man. Then it is proved by induction,

1. That it is not to be found upon Earth, v. 13. where, as for the first part
of the Verse, That man knows not the price thereof, it is not to be
confounded with the second reason v. 15. -- 19. where it is said, that there is
no price to be given for this Wisdom: For the difference is obvious; There it
is said, that man has no price to give that can purchase this Wisdom: Here it
is said, that man knows not the price or worth of it, nor can prize it, which
is an evidence that he knows it not, nor is to be found with him upon Earth:
For what a man knows well, he can set a price and value upon it: Or the words
may be thus rendered, Man knows not the order or series of it; or, of Gods
wise proceedings in the administration of Affairs. And so the whole verse runs
clear, That this Wisdom is not to be found on the Earth; for neither does man
understand the whole contexture of Divine Providence and Wisdom: neither is
there any other of the Creatures, with whom man converseth in the Land of the
living, that can be a Teacher or Leader to bring man to find out this Wisdom.

2. That this Wisdom is not to be found in the Depth or in the Sea, v. 14.
which are but a little part of the effects of this Wisdom: and though the Sea
be full of Gods wonders, Ps. 107.23.24. yet it cannot fully point out this
infinite Wisdom of God: While he speaks here of the Depth and the Sea, by these
two we may understand conjunctly, the Sea from the brim to the very bottom, or
they may be understood thus separately; That as this Wisdom is not to he found
among the Creatures which are upon the superfice of the Earth, v. 13. so
neither will a man find this Jewel, though he should dig to the very depth or
center of the Earth: And though he should leave that dry Element, and go try
the Sea, he will have as little success there, either by sailing, or by diving
into it.

From this purpose, Learn, 1. All Gods administrations and dispensations in the
World, are done in infinite wisdom; and whatever excellency be found in Wisdom
under any name, it is infinitely and transcendently to be found here; Therefore
his Providence and Government of the World is here called by the names of
Wisdom and Understanding. See Job 12.13. Ps. 104.24. and 136.5. Hence, 1. Man
is dignified, in that God employeth infinite Wisdom about him and his
concernments. 2. We are hereby taught to expect proofs of Gods Wisdom, when we
find not these proofs of love which are satisfying to our sense. 3. In all
cases and intricate conditions this should still sound in our Ears, that God
who guides all is infinitely wise, which may silence our murmurings and
carpings, and cause us wait till he unfold his purposes and counsels in what he
does, as Joh. 23.7.

Doct. 2. Whatever excellency of Wit or Prudence God has given to man, yet he
has set bounds to his Wit, which he should not, or cannot transgress: For,
though he give man wisdom in other things, v. 1. -- 11. yet here, where shall
Wisdom be found? So much also does the Lord himself inculcate by the many
questions that are propounded to Job in the end of this Book. As God commends
his love by the perfection he communicates to men; so by this restraint he
affords matter of needful humility: And hereby he sets bounds to man's
curiosity, which would still be eating of the forbidden fruit, while he
neglects what is his own duty.

3. In particular, man's wisdom is not able to find out the depth of the wisdom
of God in ordering the affairs of the World, or to comprehend the reasons of
his proceedings therein; for, though man may know much of many things, v. 1, 2,
3, etc. and may know some scantlings of this wisdom also; yet, the whole of it
is incomprehensible by him. Where shall Wisdom be found? and where is the place
of Understanding? In these administrations, God dwells in thick darkness, and
clouds and darkness are round about him; some of his actings are eminently deep
and unsearchable, Ps. 36.6. Romans 11.33, 34. It is not men's task to know these
secrets, but God has put other work in their hands, about which their wisdom
and skill may be exercised, v. 28. Deuteronomy. 29.29. and, if there be many secrets
even in Nature, Eccl. 11.5. Joh. 3.8. much more are Gods deep counsels, and the
reasons of his administrations unsearchable. Hence,

1. It is the mercy of Saints that they are in such an hand, and that such
wisdom is employed about them, for their own wit and projects, were they left
upon their own guiding, would produce but poor effects, in comparison of these
which he in his Wisdom designs for them.

2. Men should not presume to dive into his secrets (as Jobs friends did by
their principles and way) in judging of our own, or others condition and
estate, by our or their lots: we should rather lament our own want of
discerning, than suspect his wisdom; for he discovers deep things out of
darkness, and precious advantages out of the humbling lots of his people, Mic.
4.10.

3. Men should trouble themselves more about their duty, than about searching
into this depth: for when they pry most into these secrets, they do most
readily neglect their known duty; yea their mistaking of Providence, or reading
of it wrong, will soon lead them upon quicksands instead of duty.

4. Enemies may soon be outwitted by him whose wisdom cannot be found out, Ps.
92.5, 6, 7. Is. 31.1, 2. Mic. 4.12.

Doct. 4. Gods discovering of some effects of his Wisdom, and some reasons of
some of his dispensations in guiding of the world, does not afford means to man
whereby he may fully comprehend all the wisdom that is in his administrations,
and all the reasons of all his dispensations: For, Job, in his concessions,
Chap. 27.13, 14, etc. yields that some of Gods dispensations, and the reasons
thereof, are obvious; and yet here, taking in the whole complex of Gods
Providence and Government of the world, Where shall Wisdom be found? Men may
search soberly, Ps. 107.43. Hos. 14.9. yet still remembering that it is but a
little portion that is heard of him, Job 26.14. For,

1. Even in those things wherein we see somewhat, there is still a depth, and
more than we can comprehend.

2. Gods dealings with some in some parts of his ways, does not warrant men to
make general rules of these, whereby to judge and condemn others, even though
they be approved by the rules of the Word of God; as Jobs friends concluded
against him, that he was wicked, from some observations and experiences of the
wickeds calamities: But men ought to know that God exercises a variety in
these things, and deals with men sometime one way, and sometime another, as it
pleases him.

3. God is pleased to exercise men with variety in these things (sometime with
dispensations wherein the reasons of his proceedings are obvious, and sometime
otherwise) for wise reasons and ends. For as by the one he encourages us, so
by the other he exercises our humility, dependence, and faith; as by the one
he gives proof of his condescendence to our weakness, so by the other he
demonstrates his Sovereignty: And as he chears up his people by his
dispensations which they can see through, and discern his heart and love in
them; so he excites them to expect more eminent proofs of him, that his
purposes about them are wrapped up in darkness, seeing choicest mercies have been
communicated by most unlikely means: And withal, when the Lord thus walks
toward his people, he does it that their Enemies may discover themselves, and
break their necks, by reason of these dispensations of Providence.

Doct. 5. Man has naturally a great conceit of his own ability, and will be
essaying to sound the depth of this Wisdom of God: Therefore Job not only
asserts, that man cannot find it out, but gives reasons to prove his assertion:
which imports that man must be disputed out of this opinion of his own
abilities. Man is a very presumptuous Creature, Job 11.12. and is better (as he
thinks) at another lesson than he is indeed at his own, and is more busy in
passing a judgment upon Gods guiding of the World, and of himself and others in
it (and that many times for this end, that he may take occasion to reflect and
carp at Gods dispensations, or abuse them to some ill end; as here Jobs friends
endeavored to defend their ill cause thereby) than at his duty. And even godly
men, through fear, sense of guilt, discouragement, love to murmuring, etc are
apt to lean to their own verdict of Gods dispensations, that so they may feed
their distempers thereby. The consideration of this should humble men, and put
them to employ God for attaining a right sight of Providence; and it should
teach godly men to beware of taking every impression that is offered of Gods
dispensations, but to hold them by that view which the Covenant affords them,
both of mercies and trials, Ps. 89.31, 32, 33, etc.

6. Jobs first argument, That there is no place where man may find this Wisdom,
neither upon earth, nor in the depth, or Sea, may yet further teach,

1. However God bless diligence and pains in lawful endeavors, and men may
find out so much as is needful to know of this wisdom, in the use of means; yet
no pains will bring them to comprehend it fully: For, men will nor find it
among themselves (since they know not the price, or, order of it) nor yet among
other Creatures beside them, in the land of the living, nor in the depth, or
Sea. In a word, they will find it neither far off, nor near hand: which may be
a warning to men, not to employ their pains where they may certainly expect no
success.

2. Wit and parts will prove foolish and weak in this search after this Wisdom;
for, man's wit, whereby he finds out many secret things, v. 1, 2, etc. will do
no more here (as to the full knowledge of this wisdom) than other Creatures, in
the land of the living, in the depth, or, in the Sea.

3. Even where much of this Wisdom is manifested (as in the Sea) yet man will
remain ignorant of it; either he will see much; and yet not perceive, or when
he perceives much, there is yet more hid.

Doct. 7. From that sentence, man knows not the price, or, order of it, we
may gather some evidences and effects of any measure of some knowledge of this
wisdom which is attained by men. And,

1. In what men study to know of Divine Providence, they must observe an order,
or, series of it; that they pass not a judgment upon what is only present, but
wait on till he discover light out of darkness, order out of confusion, a
deliverance even in going to Babel, Mic. 4.10. and till, after he has humbled
and proved, he do good at the latter end, Deuteronomy. 18.16.

2. Men's knowledge of this wisdom of God must beget affection, and what they
know they must prize and value; for, we do read Providence backward, when we do
not esteem of it, and say, Good is the Lord, and his Word, whatever the
particular dispensation be, Is. 39.7, 8.

Verse 15. It cannot be gotten for gold, neither shall silver be weighed for
the price thereof.

16. It cannot be valued with the gold of Ophir, with the precious onyx, or the
saphir.

17. The gold and the crystal cannot equal it: and the exchange of it shall not
be for jewels of fine gold.

18. No mention shall be made of coral, or of pearls: for the price of wisdom
is above rubies.

19. The topaz of Ethiopia shall not equal it, neither shall it be valued with
pure gold.


The second reason (proving both the excellency and impossibility of attaining
this wisdom) is, That it is not exposed to sale, nor has man any price which
may purchase it, though he should give whatsoever is precious and rare for it.
It is not needful to insist in describing these several kinds of Gold and
Jewels mentioned here; only the words hold out, That though men had all sorts
of Silver and Gold Coin, and of Jewels; and had the best of every kind (as the
gold of Ophir, and fine Gold, were) and those of them which were rare and far
fetched (as Gold from Ophir, and the Topaz from Ethiopia) and were the
excellency of these precious things yet further improved by Art (as fine Gold
made in Jewels, or, Vessels, as the word is) yet this wisdom is excellent above
all these, nor could it be purchased by them.

Doct. 1. God has plentifully furnished this Earth with precious and excellent
things; diverse whereof are here enumerated. Hereby God demonstrates his Riches;
his indulgence toward rebel man; lets see his rich allowances, not only for
necessity, but for ornament, if men would serve him and seek better things: and
hereby, also, the Lord tries men, whether they will be tempted to prefer these
things (which have a luster in their eyes) to more excellent things.

2. Men have naturally an high esteem of these fine things that are in the
world; for, so much is here imported, in that this wisdom cannot be commended,
but by comparing it with these things. They are indeed excellent in themselves,
but men are naturally inclined to prize them too much, while they look at the
things which are seen, rather than the things which are not seen, as the
Apostle speaks in another case, 2 Corinthians. 4.18.

3. It may point out the vanity of the best of earthly things, that they borrow
much of their luster from their being precious, rare, and far fetched; as here,
Gold is excellent, because it must be fetched from Ophir, and the Topaz from
Ethiopia; whereas, where things most abound, people will give them away in
exchange for very toys.

4. The wisdom of God in governing the world, is excellent and inestimable,
above the best things of Nature, improved by Art; as here we are taught. So
that,

1. Great is Gods condescendence, in employing what is so excellent about us.

2. We ought to silence all our quarrellings, considering how excellent and
precious this wisdom is which guides us; and we should esteem of this
privilege, that his wisdom guides us, when we want other proofs of his love,
which are more sensibly comfortable.

3. We should esteem of it above the best of wealth, when we get grace to
discern, and read any of this wisdom aright.

Doct. 5. Not only is this wisdom excellent, but man has no price wherewith to
purchase it; nor can he acquire the knowledge of it with money, Jewels, or any
thing else: as here we are also taught. God uses not to sell, but to gift,
what we get of him; and however there be a price of diligence to be laid forth
for attaining of Spiritual Wisdom, Prove. 17.16. yet, as no Spiritual gifts can
be purchased by Money or Jewels, Act. 8.18, 19, 20. so, the knowledge of this
wisdom is unattainable by men at any rate: And men do, many times, but proclaim
their folly, in thinking they know more of it than they do; and they should
learn rather to adore and trust his wisdom, than presume to comprehend it.
Hence, also, it may be concluded, That however, in worldly affairs, money
answers all things, Eccl. 10.19. yet it is of no avail here. If a virtuous
woman be precious above the choicest Jewels, Prove. 31.10. much more do
spiritual things transcend them in excellency, Prove. 3.13, 14, 15. and 4.7.
Mat. 13.44. So that even wealthy men are but poor, if they want these; and they
are but fools who suffer earthly things to draw their hearts from off things
that are spiritual, See Heb. 12.16.

Verse 20. Whence then comes wisdom? and where is the place of understanding?

21. Seeing it is hid from the eyes of all living, and kept close from the
fowls of the air.

22. Destruction and death say, We have heard the same thereof with our ears.


These Verses may be looked upon as a resumption of that question and purpose,
v. 12, 13, 14. to make way for that answer, v. 23. But they contain also a
third reason, confirming that this wisdom is unattainable by man. The assertion
is again repeated in a question, v. 20. (being the same in substance with that
v. 12.) which must be resolved negatively, that man cannot find out this
wisdom. The reason is subjoined, v. 21, 22. That men, whether they be
considered as they live upon earth, or though they could ascend nearer Heaven,
with the fowls, or go down and dive to the very pit and grave, yet they could
not find out this wisdom. So the force of the reason is, That man has no
abilities whereby to attain this wisdom. Neither will his common abilities
(such as are communicated to all living) serve his turn; nor yet will the more
elevated parts of some, above common Engines, who soar high like sowls, or men's
long experience, even unto death, and experience of many remarkable Plagues and
Destructions by the way, give them any more of this wisdom, but only a fame and
report of it.

Doct. 1. It is again and again seriously to be considered, how impossible it
is for man to comprehend the wisdom of God in the Government of the World;
therefore is this question again repeated, v. 20. to inculcate it upon us. We
are not soon convinced of our ignorance of this, and yet it is necessary to
know that God hides many of his wise counsels from all the Sons of men; that so
we may be taken off from needless and unprofitable toil; our curiosity may be
bridled, and we may be humbled and kept at our duty, and at a constant
dependence upon God.

2. Let man shift and turn himself on every hand, on Earth, in the Air, and
Depth; yet he will still return an ignorant of this Mystery; as here we are
taught. It is our mercy that this toil, of ascending and descending, is
prevented in things needful, Romans 10.6, 7, 8.

3. Men's most refined abilities will fall short in this undertaking, as well as
ordinary endowments; for, could they soar never so high, yet this is kept close
from the fowls of the Air. Able spirits are very proud of their own abilities,
yet here is a consideration that may humble them.

4. Though this wisdom of God be hid, yet some scantlings of the knowledge
thereof may be attained; for, there may be a fame, or report thereof heard.

5. It is destruction and death, especially, that afford us means of this
little knowledge which is attainable; for, it is destruction and death, that
say, we have heard the fame thereof with our ears. Not that those, to speak
properly, have ears to hear any thing, or can give an account of what they
hear. But the meaning is, that men may come the length of death, and have this
knowledge inculcated by remarkable Plagues upon themselves or others, Dan.
4.17, etc. before they attain to any solid wisdom or understanding thereof. As
it is, indeed, generally true, that men are ready to go out of the world,
before they know how to live in it; and little do they so understand as to lay
it to heart, except it be inculcated by some remarkable dispensations, to their
own cost and expense.

6. When men have passed through strange times, of terrible and remarkable
dispensations, and have been observers of Providence to their very Graves, all
that they know of this wisdom of God, is but a very little, and it remains an
unsearchable depth still; for, even in destruction and death, there is but a
fame of it to be heard.

Verse 23. God understands the way thereof, and he understands the place
thereof.
Follows, to v. 28. the affirmative part of Jobs first proposition, That God
has this Wisdom, and he comprehends it; which proves the eminency thereof,
that he alone does fully know it. In this v. we have the assertion (which is
confirmed in the following Verses) where he speaks of the place and way of this
Wisdom, that they are known to God, which does not import that this Wisdom has
any place without God; but only that he perfectly understands his own Wisdom,
and the reasons of his own dispensations, as a man knows the way where to
trace any thing, and the place where to find it.

Doct. Albeit all Creatures be short-sighted, yet God is infinitely wise, and
knows what he is doing, and has wise reasons for every dispensation of his
Providence; for, though none else can find out this wisdom, v. 12, 20. yet God
understands the way thereof, etc. Hence,

1. This proves the eminency and excellency of that wisdom whereby the world is
guided; it is the wisdom of God, whose wisdom is like himself.

2. This also discovers that what is not in the Creatures, is to be found in
God; man cannot know this wisdom, but God knows it. So that when Saints find
defects in themselves, and in all Creatures, they should look up to God, in
whom all wants are made up.

3. Particularly, Saints may conclude that they are left upon an infinitely
wise hand, to be guided thereby in every step of their way.

4. We should submit to him, who knows the reasons of all he does, though we
know them them not: we should follow him when called thereto, as Abraham did,
who went out, not knowing whither he went, Heb. 11.8. And when our hearts begin
to carp, we should remember that we are witless, and he is a wise God. And if
we will trust Physicians, and take potions from them when we know not whereof
they are composed, why will we not much more trust him?

Verse 24. For he looks to the ends of the earth, and sees under the whole
Heaven.
Several reasons are subjoined to confirm this assertion, and to prove that God
is infinitely wise in ordering the affairs of the world; and how fit he is to
be supreme Governor and Orderer of all things. The first reason (in this v.)
is taken from his omniscience, and that he sees and knows all things; which
is expressed in terms taken from among men, because we cannot otherwise
understand it.

Doct. 1. God is omniscient; as here we are taught. This should be remembered by
all men in their walk, Ps. 139.2, 3, 4, 5. Prove. 5.21. and by godly men in
their deep distresses, Exodus 3.7. Ps. 11.3, 4. And however cunning and secret
sinners do question this, Is. 29.15. and such as turn Atheists by reason of
many calamities, Ezekiel. 9.9. as also Persecutors, Ps. 94.5, 6, 7. yet they will
find their error, and that is an unsure peace which they build upon, the
denial of this Attribute of God. See, Ps. 10.11, 13, 14. and 94 7, 8, 9, 10.

2. Gods omniscience proves the perfection of his wisdom in ordering al^
Affairs; for, here it is an argument proving that conclusion And, indeed, if he
be omniscient, he knows what we know not in his proceedings, and he cannot
mistake our case and need, and so apply unfit remedies; and therefore when we
carp at his guiding, it is because we are blind and ignorant.

Verse 25. To make the weight for the winds, and he weighs the waters by
measure.
The second reason proving the wisdom of God (and a consequent of his
omniscience) is taken from his disposing and ordering of all things, even to
the least puff of wind, and drop of rain. Which strongly concludes, that he,
who is the supreme disposer of all things, must be infinitely wise, and know
what he is doing.

Doct. 1. Gods knowledge is not idle, but operative; for, he looks and sees,
v. 24. to make the weight for the wind, etc. or, to order affairs. So that we
may be comforted in his observing eye, as well as in his hearing ear, Hos.
14.8. Only we are to remember, that it is wisdom which operates, and therefore
we are not to expect that our humors will be still satisfied.

2. Gods proceedings in the world are not rash, but according to knowledge;
for, he first sees, v. 24. and then operates. See, 1 Samuel 2.3. Is. 30.18.

3. Gods Providence condescends to order the meanest things, yea things that
are most uncertain and turbulent; and he is to be eyed and acknowledged, and
depended upon in them; as here he instanceth his making weights for the wind,
and weighing the waters by measure. Not that he orders these only, but to be
an instance of his taking notice of meanest, and uncertain, and unruly things,
such as winds and rain are. Such as will not see God in every work, even the
least work of his hands, may be made to see him in more remarkable
dispensations. See, Is. 5.12. with 28.21. and godly men may reckon, that if he
feed the Fowls of the air, and adorn the Lillies, he will not neglect them,
Mat. 6.26, -- 30. and if his Providence extend to Sparrows, and to the numbering
of hairs, he will not neglect their greater concernments, Mat. 10.29, 30, 31.
nor need they fear boisterous-like lots, seeing he does weigh and measure all
of them.

4. That God is the Orderer of all things is an undeniable proof of his wisdom;
for, so is imported in this argument. If he that is Judge of all the Earth must
be just, Genesis 18.25. Job 34.17. then also he who Governs all the Earth must be
wise. So that they who carp at his dealing, and reflect upon his wisdom, would,
in effect, put him from his Throne. And they who see his wisdom in ordering the
least petty affair, ought to trust it in greater matters.

Verse 26. When he made a decree for the rain, and a way for the lightening of
the thunder:

27. Then did he see it, and declare it, he prepared it, yea, he searched it
out.


The meaning of these Verses (which contain the third reason of Jobs assertion)
is, That when God gave a law to all his Creatures (particularly to the Rain,
Lightening, and Thunder, which are among the most impetuous) and did bound and
bind them up, that they should not move themselves, nor move other Creatures
without him; then he did order and settle all things by his Wisdom, and did so
perfectly know, as he was able to give an account of all things that should
come to pass. And for finding out the strength of this reason, it must be
considered what this period is wherein God made this decree, and did see and
declare, etc. this Wisdom. For it may be understood of Eternity, when God
decreed and purposed every thing that he was to create within time, and did
also order all events that were to come to pass, in his eternal Counsel. Or it
may be understood of the beginning of time, wherein God having created, did
also set bounds and limits to every Creature, as by a perpetual decree, Job.
38.8. -- 11. Jer. 5.22. Loath these may be conjoined; For it is certain this
wisdom of God, whereby he governs the World, is eternal^ and suppose the words
do expressly ascend no higher than the Creation; yet these early proofs of his
wisdom do necessarily suppose that he had purposed all these things from
eternity. So that here we may take a twofold proof of this infinite wisdom of
God; one is, that it is eternal, and that when he first began to create and
settle the world, all his purposes concerning every future event, were so fixed
and ready, as he could have given an account of them. Another is, that by the
very first Creation and settling of all things, making them all very good, and
appointing the uses and limits of every one of them, he gave proof of his
infinite wisdom. It is further to be considered, that the expressions here
pointing out Gods wisdom, and his knowledge of his counsels to be executed in
time, are taken from among men; That he did not only see (or, exactly know)
this wisdom, or all that he had purposed should come to pass; but he did then
declare it (or gave proof of it in the works of Creation) or, (as the Word also
will read) he numbered it, and had a perfect and exact account of whatsoever he
had to do in the World: yea, he prepared, or, established it, and had proofs
and documents of this wisdom fixed and ready from the very beginning, to be let
forth, every one of them, in their due time: and he searched it out, or, was
more accurate and exact in what was to be done, in every time and particular,
and in the just reasons thereof, than a man can be in knowing any thing by his
most exact search.

From these Verses, Learn, 1. Man has great need to be disputed into an
acknowledgment and estimation of the wisdom of God in the acts of his
Providence; That he may neither presume to think he can comprehend that depth,
nor carp when he should reverently adore incomprehensible wisdom: Therefore are
so many arguments made use of to prove this assertion.

2. God has all his Creatures under a divine Law and Decree, which they cannot
transgress; as here is instanced in some, as a proof that all the rest are so.
See, Ps. 119.89, etc. and 148.8. so that we may safely lean upon his naked
word, which did create, and does uphold and settle, all his Creatures. There is
no reason why we should seek or endeavor to be above all Law (as Ps. 12.4.)
seeing all other Creatures are bound up by his Decree. And there is as little
reason why we should dote upon any of the Creatures, which can neither help nor
hurt us, without his word of command to whom they are subject.

3. It is especially to be marked, that God has the most impetuous and
terrible of his Creatures under his command; For, he made a Decree for the
Rain, and a way for the lightening of the Thunder, (when and how the Lightening
and Thunder should break forth) not that he bounded and ordered those Creatures
only; but he instanceth in these, to prove that terrible Things and Creatures
are under the dominion and government of God, as is also marked on v. 25. See
Ps. 148.8. Thunder is his voice, Ps. 29.3. and he can cause it to be when he
will, even when it is unseasonable by the ordinary course of Nature, 1 Samuel
12.17. He (and not Idols, or Nature of it self, Jer. 14.22.) is the dispenser
of Rain, Ps. 65.9, 10. Act. 14.16, 17. and sends it when, and upon whom he
will, 1 King. 17.1. Am. 4.7. So that we ought to see God supreme in whatsoever
is most impetuous and terrible, Ps. 29.10. and 76.10. and we need not fear
them, if we be at peace with him.

4. Gods wisdom in ordering all affairs is eternal, For, When he (first) made
this Decree, (that is, from the very beginning of Time, and we can follow
Eternity no further than over the borders of Time) then he did see and declare
it, etc. So that he is at a point, and has not things to deliberate and advise
upon, when the part^cular exigent comes, but he has all ready and fixed from
the very beginning, Act. 15.18. And hence it is, that as his love is to be
magnified, which thought upon us and our concernments before we were, Prove.
8.23, -- 31. and as his wisdom and counsels, being eternal, are unchangeable,
and not to be altered upon our desires and apprehensions ( Job. 34.33.) wherein
we are very inconstant, and might be ready to repent within a short while that
we got our will: So his wisdom is to be trusted in guiding us, rather than our
own inclinations; for, he has settled all things before hand, whereas we being
confounded in the heat of our distempers, might readily desire that which would
tend to our prejudice.

5. Gods creating of the world, and his ordering of all his Creatures, and all
their motions, in number, weight, and measure, at the first Creation, is a
convincing proof of his infinite wisdom in all his administrations, to the end
of the world; For, when he made that Decree, then (in, and by that work) he
declared it. And it is indeed a demonstrative proof of his Wisdom, that nothing
of what he established at the first creation of all things, is since changed or
altered, as if then it had been done unwisely.

6. God has not a confused, but a distinct knowledge of all his purposes and
providential dispensations, before they come to pass; so much is imported in
that he did then number (or exactly determine, proportion, and calculate) this
wisdom. This may give a check to our presumption, in thinking that God does not
impartially consider our necessities and condition, in what he does unto us.
For there is not a grain weight more or less in our portion, nor does it
continue a minute longer than we need; and it flows only from our casting
away of our strength and confidence, and from our lusts and love to ease, that
we quarrel his guiding.

7. God has all things prepared that his people need, and that are good for
them; for, he has prepared this wisdom whereby he governs the world, and his
people in particular. So that their issues are as ready as their trials, 1 Cor.
10.13. though they cannot discern them both alike soon; and he has an answer
ready to these questions which would perplex them in their difficulties, Ezekiel.
37.3, 4, 5, etc.

8. God does not need to alter any of his purposes upon new emergents, as
befalls the greatest politicians in the world, who are put to alter their way
and counsels, because they have not providence at command, which can soon
overturn their best contrived projects; For, he established (as the word also
imports) this wisdom. It is true, God may change (and has purposed to change)
his dispensations and way of dealing in the world, as may be most for his
glory, and for the advancing of his designs, toward both godly and wicked men,
in the world; yet, his purposes are fixed and will not be altered at the
pleasure, and to gratify the humors, of any, Job 18.4. and 23.13, 14. And
therefore his Enemies cannot make void his purposes, Ps. 33.10, 11. and his
people (however they may look for changes, in what is sad, with submission to
his will, yet) ought not to contend with him, when he reveals his will
concerning their lot, as if their foolish and peevish quarrelling could alter
him.

9. When men by wisdom have searched things over and over, they will find that
God has searched best, and that his way is still better than any other, which
they incline to choose beside it; For, so much is imported in that he searched
out this wisdom. So that the issue of all Judgments that are passed upon his
ways, ought, in reason, to be this, He has done all things well, as is said of
Christ, Mark 7.37.

Verse 28. And unto man he said, Behold, the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom,
and to depart from evil is understanding.
In this Verse we have the second part of the Chapter, containing Jobs second
proposition, which is subjoined, by way of conclusion to the former. For
whereas men might be ready to take it ill that they are secluded from
comprehending this wisdom of God; Job shows that it is not a duty required of
man, nor does his happiness consist in being able to know, and dive into the
depth of this wisdom. But that to fear God, and depart from iniquity, is man's
wisdom, and will prove him to be wise unto salvation, albeit he cannot
comprehend these depths and secrets which are not needful for him to know. In
the words, Consider,

1. The general scope of this proposition, and the preface to it, which
contains, in sum; That though wisdom to comprehend the unsearchable wisdom and
counsels of God be denied to man, yet somewhat is communicate unto him, which
is his wisdom. God alone knows the way of that wisdom, whereof we have been
speaking, v. 23. and, yet, unto man he said, etc. that is, God by various ways
and means, in all ages, has revealed to man what is his true wisdom, and will
prove him to be wise, though he know none of these secrets.

2. The proposition it self, giving this account of man's true wisdom, or of the
evidences and effects thereof; which are, the fear of the Lord, and to depart
from evil. Where it is to be considered,

1. That these two terms, Wisdom and Understanding, do signify the same thing,
even that true wisdom whereby a man becomes wise unto salvation, which is
excellent above any other wisdom man can pretend unto, under whatsoever notion
and expression. See, on v. 12. where the same names are given to that wisdom of
God, the knowledge whereof is denied to man.

2. While it is said, that to fear God, and depart from evil, are man's wisdom
and understanding; the meaning is, that these are acts and effects flowing from
a man's spiritual wisdom, and evidences thereof.

3. As for these two expressions, of fearing God, and departing from evil,
which point out these effects and evidences of wisdom, they are also the same
in substance; only this fear, or religious awe of God, may be looked upon as
the root of true piety, and, departing from evil, as an effect of the former.
See Job 1.1.

From the general scope and preface of this proposition (And unto man he said,
etc.) Learn,

1. However God humble man, by secluding him from much knowledge that he would
be at; yet it is Gods mercy to him, that he is not deprived of what is
necessary to his eternal happiness, if he be within the Church, and do not
neglect the means which he enjoys; for, enough is said, or, revealed to man,
concerning this, whatever other secrets and mysteries be kept up from him. And
albeit it may be asserted, that this has been said to all mankind, when God
did inculcate these necessary truths upon Adam after his fall, which he (no
doubt) did press upon his posterity, who lived with him, that the knowledge
thereof might be transmitted to all generations; and when Noah and his Children
had the same things revealed to them, for the same end (and we see here some of
his posterity, who were not of the seed of Israel, are well acquainted with
them, though some of them did mistake in some things:) yet now it is come to
pass, through man's sinful negligence, his perverse hatred of the light and
truth, and his apostasy from it, that saving knowledge is only to be found
within the Church, and among that select company whom God has called out of
the World, to be a peculiar people to himself. Now in this Society it is to be
considered, that, As many of these sad things wherewith man is exercised, may
be consistent with his good and happy estate; and may be so far from hindering
or crossing, that (through Gods blessing) they may contribute and promote his
eternal happiness, 2 Cor. 4.17. And, as notwithstanding the great vanity and
vexation that are in the things of time, there is still a good thing wherein
man may be exercised all the days of his vain life, Eccl. 2.24. and a sum of
all upon which he may bottom and rest, Eccl. 12.13. So, when the Lord keeps
many things secret, particularly, as to what concerns his dispensations and
reasons thereof, yet he has revealed what is man's duty, and the way to
happiness, and what may suffice to quiet his vexations about the dispensations
of God, Deuteronomy. 29.29. Mic. 6.6, 7, 8. Our ignorance is, oft-times, affected, 2
Pet. 3.5. and we know not, because we desire not to know, and because our lusts
and passions do blind us. But if the very Gentiles be without excuse in their
ignorance of some Truths, Romans 1.20. how much more inexcusable shall the
visible Church be, if they be ignorant of any Truth that is necessary to
salvation? Therefore it is our duty to study to know these things, which are
indeed our task, and not to dive into Gods counsels; especially considering,
that we may firmly believe his dispensations will be comfortable to us, if we
walk in his way, or the way of our duty.

2. It is carefully to be adverted unto, that piety be well cherished in our
studying the dispensations of Divine Providence; For, here, when men are
supposed to be upon the search of the reasons of Gods wise dispensations, this
direction is subjoined, that they forget not that wisdom which leads to the
fear of God. Not only do our enquiries and thoughts of heart about Gods
dispensations, oft-times, take us off our chief work, while we are more
troubled and anxious about what God does, or will do, to us and about us, than
about what our selves should do: But to be much taken up and affected with
outward dispensations does, oft-times, retard piety, which leads a man to look
chiefly to the things which are not seen, 2 Cor. 4.18. and to make providence
our Bible (while we judge of things by the success, or hard lots, that attend
them) is the ready way to make us reel and waver in the matter of Religion. And
withal, the fear of God will lead men to have more charity toward others, who
are under sad dispensations, than Jobs friends had to him.

From the first branch of the proposition (The fear of the Lord, that is
wisdom) Learn,

1. A Religious fear and awe of God in the heart, is the root of true holiness
and piety; Therefore is true holiness so frequently expressed by this fear of
the Lord, from which it sloweth. Where this fear of God is, it will cause men
to walk tenderly, though it be in the power of their hand to do otherwise, Genesis
42.18. Neh. 5.15. and where it is not, men are ready to run into all mischief,
Genesis 20.11. It is also an antidote against all sinful fears which drive men
from their duty, Prove. 29.25. Is. 8.12.13. and delivers from slavish fears of
troubles and sad events, Prove. 28.1. Only it is to be adverted, that this must
not be a superstitious fear of God, whereby men are prompted to offer service
unto God which is not commanded in his Word; nor is it that slavish servile
fear of God which love casts out, in so far as it prevails, 1 John 4.18. But it
is a filial fear of God, whereby men are taught to stand in awe of offending
him, because they are children who are averse from offending their Father; and
to reverence his word, Is. 66.2. Ezr. 10.3. and his works, whether ordinary,
Jer. 5.22. or extraordinary, Is. 26.9. yea, and his mercies, Hos. 3.5. And for
attaining and entertaining of this fear, we should avoid Atheism, Ps. 14.1. for
it is no wonder if men fear him not, when they believe not that he is; we
should avoid presumption, Deuteronomy. 29.19. and stumbling upon Gods patience to
sinners, Ps. 55.19. Eccl. 8.11. and, we should study much his love and
goodness, which will beget fear and reverence, Hos. 3.5.

2. To fear God is an effect and evidence of true wisdom, and a man proves that
he is wise indeed, thereby; For, the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom, see,
Deuteronomy. 4.6. for hereby men prove that they know what God is with whom they have
to do; that they are wise to discern what is their true interest, and good for
them; and that they can so try things that differ, as to approve what is most
excellent, Phil. 1.10. It is also frequently said, that this fear of the Lord,
is the beginning of wisdom, Ps. 111.10. Prove. 1.7. and 9.10. because a man does
then begin to be wise indeed, when he begins to fear God; and if a man's policy
be not founded upon, and regulated by, this fear of God, it will prove but
folly in the end. And therefore the words (the beginning of Wisdom) may be also
rendered, principal wisdom, or, the principal part of wisdom, to point out the
excellency of this wisdom, above either carnal policy, or moral prudence; and
to show that, whatever wisdom a man has beside, yet this wisdom must still be
chief, and keep the throne, to command and overruled all his projects, and to
cause him, in many things, become a fool, that he may become wise, 1 Cor. 3.18.
But more particularly, This commendation of the fear of God, as man's true
wisdom, may be considered,

1. In opposition to the simplicity and weak parts of many who truly fear God,
and the low esteem they are in among men of parts. It is true, there is a
spiritual wisdom and prudence, which should accompany and adorn piety, the want
whereof causes piety to be stumbled at, and exposes some godly persons to
tentations of miscarrying; yet men's real piety (though they be otherwise
simple) and the drawing near to God with the wit they have, is more true and
excellent wisdom in Gods account, than all parts and endowments of men without
it, Jer. 9.23, 24.

2. In opposition to men's curiosity in searching after the knowledge of deep
and mysterious things, which God has hid in himself; such as these deeps of
Divine Providence, of which Job has been speaking. A man is wise enough, if he
be wise to know his duty, and the way to happiness, albeit he know none of
those: and many men prove themselves to be real fools, while they break their
heads and spirits with Studies about things whereby they can reap little or no
profit (as Dogs gnawing upon bare bones) and yet neglect this one needful study.

3. In opposition to all carnal policy, which will prove but folly in the
issue, seeing men who follow that trade never propose the right end to
themselves (which is to know God, themselves, and their duty, and to have their
eye upon their latter end, Deuteronomy. 32.29. Ps. 90.12.) and therefore can never
steer a right course.

From the second branch of the Proposition (and to depart from evil is
understanding) Learn,

1. Sin is a real evil, as being the work of Satan, the evil one, 1 John 3.8.
the cause of other evils, Jam. 1.15. a punishment, and the saddest punishment,
to it self, Hos. 4.14, 17. Romans 1 26, 28. as wronging both God and our selves;
befooling and defiling us, coming in betwixt us and our happiness; and plaguing
all (even the very mercies) that we enjoy: For these, among other reasons, it
is called evil.

2. A fearer of God is (in so far as he is renewed) opposite to this evil, in
all the kinds and degrees of it, in every act of it, and in all the occasions
and appearances of it; for, it is supposed here, as his duty who fears God,
that he must be opposite to this evil, indefinitely; not only to this or that
particular evil, or degree of it, etc. God does not approve that men should
dally with any one sin, though they avoid never so many beside; or that they
should sport about the hole of this Serpent, and cast themselves upon occasions
and tentations to sin, when yet they pretend to abhor it.

3. Godly men will not only not pursue and hunt after sin, or embrace it, but
will run from it with detestation, both shunning it, and being afraid to be
overtaken by it, and regarding no hazard of trouble, upon which they may run by
avoiding of sin; for, it is the godly man's character, to depart from evil, See,
Job 1.1. where aversion from sin, and a godly fear and jealousy of our own
inclinations to sin, are not entertained and improved, we are half taken and
Captives, and if we have terrifying apprehensions of trouble in the way of God,
we will soon choose iniquity before it, Job 36.21. and, on the other hand, if we
be departing from evil, and endeavoring to rid our selves, it is well, even
albeit we have not yet clean escaped.

4. To depart from evil is an act and evidence of understanding in men; for, to
depart from evil, is understanding. Hereby a man proves, that he has
understanding to discern the fallacies that are in sins Oratory, when it
pursues him with fair offers, of profit, pleasure, and other advantages. And in
the end he will be found to be the wisest man who keeps himself most free of
sin. And where tentations to sin are strongest, it is the greater evidence of
wisdom and tenderness to avoid it.

From the note of attention (Behold) prefixed to this whole proposition, Learn,

1. It is an incredible thing to natural men, that men prove themselves wise by
being godly, and careful to avoid sin; therefore it is propounded as a
wonderful thing, and an assertion which more will wonder at than believe.

2. This is a truth which men ought to consider better before they reject it,
and not to trust the first reports of their own hearts prepossessed with
prejudices; for, Behold, says he, the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom,
exciting all stumblers to examine and try the matter better, before they reject
this truth.

3. Albeit men's deluding and self-deceiving dreams and principles must either
be taken upon trust, or, if they be once well tried, they will prove but like
the dream of an hungry man's eating, when he awakes, Is. 29.8. yet the real
wisdom and advantages that are in piety will abide the Furnace and trial of
most censorious and accurate spirits, if they will judge impartially: For,
Behold, says he, it is a thing to be avowed, and which will abide any trial,
that the fear of God is wisdom.

4. The advantages of piety are but little studied, even by those who deny not
the truth thereof; Behold, says he, exciting all to consider and ponder this
truth more accurately.

5. The advantages of piety will be incredible and admirable, to all those who
will take trial of it, and wait on in the way of piety till they reap them:
They who have known and found them in experience, will admire at them, and say,
Behold, the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom, and to depart from evil is
understanding.

CHAP. XXIX.
No reply being made to Jobs more general discourse, in the two preceding
Chapters; he subjoins (in this, and the two following Chapters) another
discourse, wherein he meddles no more with the geneneral Thesis, but descends
to the Hypothesis, and gives an account how himself had prospered formerly, and
was now afflicted, and yet solemnly asserts and proves that he was an upright
man. All which he insists upon, not to seek applause to himself, or to blow a
Trumpet to his own praise; but partly, that he may clear the truth, and may
from his own case and example, prove that a godly man may he sadly afflicted;
partly, that he may wipe off all aspersions that were cast upon him and his
former walking, in the day of his calamity, and may discover to his friends how
great an injury they had done to him; and partly, that he may make some Apology
for his fits of impatience, by showing how sad a change had come upon him,
which could not but have some impression upon his weakness.

The discourse contains, 1. An account of his former prosperous condition, with
some hints of his integrity under it, Chap. 29. 2. A regret that his prosperous
and flourishing condition was turned into calamity and contempt; wherein also
somewhat of his integrity is noted, Chap. 30. 3. A solemn assertion of his
integrity, confirmed by many imprecations and other arguments, Chap. 31.

This Chapter (after the preface, or, title, v. 1.) may be taken up in a
description of his former prosperous condition, which he describes and points
out, 1. From its desirableness, v. 2. 2. From the fountain causes of it,
namely, the care and kindness of God, which cleared all clouds, v. -- 2.3. 3.
From the parts of his prosperity, both as a Parent and Master of a Family, v.
4, 5, 6. and as a Magistrate, v. 7-17. 4. From the confidence he had of the
continuance thereof, and that because it was so great, and appeared to be so
well fixed, v. 18. -- 25. In most of which branches of the description, we have
some account also of his integrity, which he solemnly confirms.

Verse 1. Moreover, Job continued his Parable, and said,
THis Preface, or Title, is the same with that, Chap. 27.1. only that it is
here repeated and prefixed to this new Discourse, may teach,

1. A good conscience is a lasting Spring, and will not disappoint the
possessours thereof in a day of strait; for, here, after all that Job has
spoken, when he has drawn his breath a little, waiting for their reply, and
finds that they will speak nothing, he has yet a Parable or sublime Discourse
to utter in defense of his integrity.

2. Men's ability to debate their cause in these, or to defend their integrity
by general Arguments (wherein able parts may blind the Eyes, and overcome and
put to silence weak opponents) will not support them in troubles, unless they
have solid ground of peace in the matter of their walk and conversation:
Therefore Job is not content that he can prove by general Arguments, that godly
men may be afflicted as he was, or that he can silence all their reasonings, by
showing that Gods wisdom in governing the World is incomprehensible; but he
shuts up all his Arguments and Defenses with this strong Reserve, that he can
give a particular account of his own integrity, though afflicted.

Verse 2. O that I were as in months past, as in the days when God preserved
me.

3. When his Candle shined upon my head, and when by his light I walked through
darkness.


In these Verses, we have the first and second Branches of Jobs Description of
his former prosperity. The first, v. 2 -- does generally point it out in its
desirableness, expressed in a wish, that it might be so with him yet, as it had
been in the days and months past. By which wish (which is to be taken along, as
repeated with all that follows in this account of his prosperity) he does not
express any fond doting upon prosperity; But, partly, by way of gratitude, he
testifies how desirable such a condition is in it self; and partly, by way of
vindication, he shows that he behaved himself so in a prosperous condition,
as he is not ashamed when he reflects upon his life and walk in those desirable
and tempting days. The second branch of this Description ( v. -- 2, 3.) points
out the fountain cause from whence all his prosperity did flow; which was Gods
favor to him, and care of him. This is afterward spoken to also, when he gives
an account of the parts of his prosperity, v. 4, 5. But here it is generally
propounded, in two expressions; One is, that God did then preserve him, v -- 2.
which is not to be understood as if Job thought that God now had given over all
care of him. For as God never forsakes his Children, Heb. 13.5. so Job denied
not Providence. But it is to be understood comparatively, that then God kept
him in his prosperous condition, free of any evil occurrent (as Satan observed,
Chap. 1.10.) which had now broken in upon him. The other expression is, That
Gods Candle, or, Lamp shined upon him, v. 3. He had the light of Gods
direction, Ps. 119.105. and comfort, Is. 50.10. and was satisfied in his favor
and the light of his countenance, Ps. 4.6. and in the refreshful issues he got
of difficulties, Ps. 118.27. Mic. 7.8. This is amplified,

1. From the measure of it; it was a bright light held over, or above his head
in a dark place, to make him see well.

2. From the effects of it, By his light I walked through darkness: any cloud
of difficulty or discouragement that came in his way, and did over-cloud his
sky, he did easily dispel and get through it, being guided by the direction,
and supported by the consolations of God, and refreshed with sweet and
comfortable issues.

From v. ^ -- Learn, 1. As the whole time of men's lives, so particularly, their
prosperity ought to be measured by short periods; As here, Job measures the
time of his prosperity by Days and Months. Among other vanities accompanying
our enjoyments within time, this is one, that we can promise our selves no long
lease of them. It is true, some do imbitter their own prosperity, by vexing
apprehensions of sudden changes, contrary to Solomon's direction, that we should
enjoy good of our labor, Ecc. 5.18. Yet it is good still to have serious
thoughts of the uncertainty of all temporary things; and to know that we will
get but days of our best enjoyments here; and that, whatever we think of it for
present, yet prosperity will seem very short (like days or months) when it is
over: which may be the more easily digested, that our sad times also will
appear but short when they are gone: For David outlived many of them, 1 Chr.
29.30. See, 1 Cor. 7.29, 30, 31.

2. A prosperous condition is, in it self, a good gift of God, and a desirable
thing; for, here Job wishes it were restored to him again, though he wish for
more than simple prosperity, as will be clear from the following purpose. By
this wish he neither contradicts that command, that we should be content with
the things that we have, Heb. 13.5. Nor yet does he express an inclination
contrary to that of Agur, who declined riches, Prove. 30.8, 9. But he does only
show that (if it be Gods will to grant it) a moderate condition of prosperity
is in it self desirable; that so God may be glorified in his bounty toward us;
that others may be convinced of their mistakes of us (as he was mistaken by his
Friends) because of our adversity; and, that we may more sweetly and quietly
serve God, without many tempting distractions, See, Ps. 144.12, 13, 14, 15.
Hence it is, that we may lawfully pray for prosperity, Ps. 118.25. with
submission to the will of God: But we may not pray for troubles, though God may
make us bless him for the fruits of it. Only all this does not warrant us to do
at upon prosperity, or to say, What have we more? if we be deprived of it, or
to decline the Cross when God calls to it. But it should stir us up to be
humbled for our unthankfulness, and murmuring under prosperity, Deuteronomy. 28.47,
48. and for our ill improvement of so choice a mercy, whereby if we get hurt it
is our own fault, and ought not to be charged upon our lot; and it calls us
also to be afflicted and humbled under the disadvantages of an indigent
condition.

3. A prosperous condition is not only uncertain, and we ought to look upon it
as such, when we enjoy most of it; but, ordinarily, it actually abides not long
within time, and we are put to give proof what our thoughts were of it, when we
enjoyed it; for, albeit Job was a dear child of God, yet all his prosperity is
gone, and nothing is left, but an exercising remembrance of it, and a wish for
it. Not only have riches wings, and are that which is not, Prove. 23.5. and so
may soon be gone; but Saints are actually exercised with such a change, that
God may give proof of his Sovereign Dominion, that he may chasten them for the
abuse of these mercies, and may exercise and take trial of their graces: Hence,
we have cause to be humbled, if we suffer our selves to be surprised with any
such changes, and so make an addition to the weight of our troubles: and we
should not take it ill, though we outlive our prosperity and worldly
contentments, whereby God takes a proof of us, what we have laid up in him as a
portion.

4. The good and advantage of a prospering condition is, ordinarily, best seen
when it is gone; as here Job now commends it: ready we are all at reading our
present condition; we deprive our selves both of the sweet of our good
condition, and of the use of our ill condition, by murmuring and fretting, and
when they are over we are made to see our folly: which may afford needful
caution to us, in our looking upon our present condition.

5. It is very sweet and comfortable when a prospering condition leaves no
sting behind it, when it is gone, to make men ashamed of it, or grieved that
ever they enjoyed it; for, that is the chief thing imported in his wish, that
he could reflect upon no gross miscarriage in his former estate, to make him
afraid to desire the enjoyment hereof again: whereas it will be sad and bitter,
if men when they lose their prosperity, have also the vexation of an ill
conscience for the abuse of it.

From v. -- 2. Learn, 1. A prosperous condition is not so desirable in it self,
to right discerners, as it is desirable, because much of God, his Providence,
Love, and care, which they see in it; as here Job begins with an account of
that, as the chief thing he aimed at in his wish to be in his former condition,
that so he might again find God preserving him, etc. This is a great trial of
sincerity, if men must have and see God in every thing they enjoy, as the
Promise runs, Is. 42.16. And where this is men's chief aim, they will submit to
saddest Lots, if so be they enjoy God in and with them, Is. 43.2. They will be
afraid of the best condition without him, his presence and favor, Exodus 33.15.
and, they will not be mad upon deliverances from troubles on any terms, unless
they may have them in Gods way, and with his approbation, Heb. 11.35.

2. God is the preserver of his people, who is to be depended upon for that
end, and acknowledged in what they find of it; for, so does Job reckon here,
that it was God who preserved him, See, Ps. 121.3, 4, 5, etc. and 125.2. Is.
27.2, 3. This is our great mercy, that God condescends to watch over us, and it
gives us allowance to sleep and be at ease, Ps. 127.2. for if we once make sure
an interest in his favor, and keep his way, he will not be obliged to us that
we crush our selves with anxieties about our preservation.

3. This preservation by God is so necessary, that without it we cannot be
secure; for, so is here also imported, that he was safe, only in the days when
God preserved him; and so Satan's assertion tells us, Chap. 1.10. See Ps. 127.1.
It is God who lengthens men's tranquillity, Dan. 4.^7. and it is under his shadow
and protection only that we can rest secure, Ps. 91.1. without which we lie
daily open to all these lashes of trouble, which at any time come upon our
selves or others: And therefore men ought not to sacrifice to their own Nets,
when they are in safety; and when there comes a change in their condition, they
ought to see a change of Gods dealing before that come, Deuteronomy. 32.30.

4. Hedges of protection may be broken down from about Gods people, and
troubles let loose to break in upon them, when yet they continue Gods people;
as here it is with Job, who had days when God preserved him, which he may well
wish for, but does not now enjoy them. By this God would teach his People to
think little of the things of time, and to stumble at no lot which may consist
with love.

5. It is a sad ingredient in Saints afflictions, that God seems to give over
preserving of them, and lets loose trouble to overwhelm them; as here Job
complains of this, as a sad ingredient in his Cup, that the days when God
preserved him are gone, and he is left a naked man without protection from
trouble. Thus also are Saints troubles heightened upon them, when they compare
their privileges by Covenant with their present lot and allowance, Ps. 89.30,
31, 32, 33, etc. with v. 38, 39, etc. This puts us to try what it is that
affects us most in our troubles, whether it be the trouble it self, or the want
of a token for good, and wonted proofs of God's care and love, in it. Only,
whatever affect us, let us not, upon any pretense, loose the rains to our
passion; But let us seek after some other proof of God's love, when we want
that proof of preservation from trouble; let us admire his wonderful
preserving of us, under trouble, 2 Cor. 4.8, 9. and 6.9, 10. When he does not
preserve us from trouble; let us seek preservation from the evil of trouble,
Joh. 17.15. though we be not exempted from the trouble it self; and, whatever
befall us, let us seek to be kept unto salvation, though God should make use
even of trouble, to hemme us in from wandering out of the way that leads to it,
1 Pet. 1.5, 6.

From v. 3. Learn 1. The light of divine direction is very refreshfull to a
child of God; as Job here intimates, that it was a desirable mercy, to have
this candle shining upon him; This he compares (as also the consolations of
God) to a candle, or, lamp, not because it is a dim light, as these are being
compared with the bright Sun; But in reference to our dark condition, till this
light come and enlighten our darkness, as 2 Pet. 1.19. See Ps. 43.3. We should
beware of sleighting his mercy, when we have it; and should learn to be
thankful for it, if we know the mind of God concerning our duty, whatever we
want beside.

2. This mercy of divine direction is yet sweeter, when it is joined with
consolation, and the sense of Gods favor; For, that is also imported in the
shineing of this candle. Not that it is always to be expected that these two
will go together; For they may have their duty pointed out, who walk in
darkness, and have no light of comfort, Isaiah 50.10. Nor are we to respect or
undervalue the one, because we want the other. But it should suffice us to know
that there is such a sweet cordial, as enlightening and reviving consolations,
in Gods hand to dispense it as he will; and that these two are thus joined and
comprehended in one expression; partly, because if the light of his direction
be followed, it may assure us that we have ground and matter of comfort
(however we be deprived, or deprive our selves, of our allowance) and that it
will end in the light of comfort at last, and will not prove like these sparks
of our own kindling, which will make us lie down at last in sorrow, Is. 50.11.
partly, if the light of comfort and encouragement in God be entertained, it
will elevate our Spirits, to take up the light of direction more easily, in
dark cases; whereas discouragement does darken and fill with confusion. And
therefore David in his distressed condition, began at encouragement in God, and
then consulted about his duty, 1 Samuel 30.6, 7.

3. G^ds mercies ought to be observed and prized, not only in their kind, but
in their measures; Therefore be observes that this candle shined upon, (above,
or over) his head, to give him a fu^l and clear light it is true, a day of
small things is not to be despised, Z^ch. 4.10 Lam 3.22. And it is the duty of
Saints, to be very humble and low in their own eyes, and v^^y se^sible of their
ill deservings, that thereby they may be helped to prize every mercy, Genesis
10.19. and 32.10. Ezr. 9.13. Yet eminent and singular mercies ought especially
to be observed and esteemed. Lesser comforts and dark directions ought to be
acknowledged; yet when our way is very clear, and our comfort very full, our
guilt will be greater if such a mercy be not acknowledged and improved; For to
whom much is given, much will be required of them, Luke 12.48.

4. Where God lets forth most proofs of his favor, he may yet suffer some
dark and exercising cases to continue; whether of tentations to sin, that they
may be avoided; or of dangers, desertions and difficult cases, which may afford
needful exercise and work; For Job, notwithstanding the shining of this
candle, had some darkness to walk through; yea, it was by means of these dark
steps that he came to discern the mercy of having this candle. We must not
quarrel our conditions, because of some mixtures in them; For we must be fitted
for enjoying much of God by much work and exercise, and our best condition must
have some mixture to balance it.

5. As it is the duty of Godly men (and their property, in so far as they are
renewed) in all cases, to seek their light, of direction, comfort and issues,
from God; (For, it must be his candle that shines, otherwise they are not
satisfied) So, particularly, in dark cases, their Integrity is tried by the
light of direction and comfort to which they look under them: For, it was by
his light, that Job walked through darkness. This is indeed a searching trial,
when troubles and difficulties are pressing, and God is hiding his face, and
hedging up our way, when other issues and comforts seem to be near at hand; Yet
Piety will teach men to undervalue all these, and to wait still upon God, Is.
8.17.

6. It is an acceptable service to God, that men do not lie down and give over
all activity, when their case is dark and d^fficult; but that they get up and
be doing; For Job essayed to walk through darkness, when it came in his way.
See, 1 Samuel 30.6, 7. Discouragement is a great enemy to Duty, and though men
may pretend the conscience of sin in their fainting, yet it hinders any
effectual course for the removal thereof. See Ezra 10.2, 3, 4.

7. When God gives directions to be followed, and communicates his comforts in
following thereof, Saints will have little to do with their dark cases; But the
light of direction and comfort will quickly resolve into the lightsome estate
of issue and deliverance: For, says Job by his light, I walked through
darkness; He walked through to a speedy issue, and in the mean time, it was an
issue that he was supported in his walk, by Gods directions and consolations.
So that much of God is sufficient for any d^fficulty wherewith we can
encounter; and when we find mercy to know the way of our duty in dark cases,
and can cast our selves upon God, and encourage and comfort our selves in him,
we may walk on cheerfully, and not look sad, as was the practice of Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.18.

8. To have much to do, and much of God, and of furniture from him, wherewith
to do it, is a most desirable and sweet life, in a godly man's esteem; For, here
Job reflects on this as a desirable co^d^tion, when he had darkness, and Gods
light, whereby he might walk through it, when he had humbling steps, and God
remembering him in his low estate, as Ps. 136.23. Such a trade as that is the
most enriching trade that a Saint can drive, and far beyond ease and idleness,
with whatsoever refreshment it seem to be attended.

9. Gods people must not expect that they will always get easily and
comfortably through their difficulties; or that they shall have a lifetime of
these sweet proofs of Gods favor which they sometimes find; For now Jobs case
is altered; He may wish for the Days when by his sight he walked through
darkness, but does not enjoy them. In those days see got easily through his
difficulties, and could see through a thick cloud; but now he sticks in the
mire, and is involved in the clouds of thick darkness. Thus we find the people
of God walking in darkness, without any light, Is. 50.10. groping like blind
men, Is. 59.10. yea, foolish and ignorant, like very beasts, Ps. 73.22. This
other life is no less necessary and needful in its season, as contributing to
squeeze out our lusts and corruptions, to pluck up these weeds in us which are
apt to abound when we receive showers of refreshfull influences, to discover us
to our selves and exercise our faith, and to fit us for proofs of Gods care and
love, when we are emptied, Ps. 73.22, 23. And particularly Saints are not to
mistake, if, after they have got easily through trials for a while, they find
them stick faster afterward. For hereby the Lord trains them on in his service,
till they be so engaged that they cannot retire, and then he ministers strong
Physic, which will be more operative upon them. As they grow in grace, so
their trials may grow in sharpness and continuance: Whereas their Spirits were
fresh and vigorous at first, they may crush them afterward by discouragement,
and then difficulties, which were easy before, become unsupportable burdens,
and their Spirits growing peevish and bitter, they may make themselves an
uncomfortable life. And besides, instead of lively tenderness, security and
lazyness may creep upon them, and then they will take worse with disquiet and
exercise than formerly they did. All which should be adverted unto in this
change of Saints lot and exercise.

Verse 4. As I was in the days of my youth, when the secret of God was upon my
tabernacle.
In the third Branch of this Description (to Verse 18.) Job gives an account of
the parts of his former prosperity. And first (to verse 7.) of his prosperity
as a Parent and Master of a Family, wherein also he continues to point out the
presence and favor of God, as the fountain and cause of his good Condition.
The good condition of his Family, is generally propounded in this Verse, and
instanced in two Particulars, v. 5, 6. In the general Proposition, he wishes
to be as he was in the days of his Youth, when the secret of God was upon his
House and Family. Where consider,

1. By the days of his youth, we are to understand the time of his former
prosperity, which began early in his youth, and was very sweet then unto him.
Some, instead of youth, read winter, as the word will also bear; And it points
out that these days of his prosperity in his youth, were days of case, like a
Soldier in his winter quarters. Or, the words may also be read, the days of
my reproach, or, These days of his Prosperity, for which he was now reproached
by his Friends, as if he had been a wicked man in them; but he would be content
he had them again. All these Readings come to one purpose; but that which we
have in our Translation is clearest in this place.

2. By the secret of God, which was upon his tabernacle, we are to understand,
both that special favor of God, which the World knows not, wherewith he was
made acquainted in his youth, when God dwelt in his Family, as in his Church;
and the providence of God, which protected his Family, and made it to prosper,
Ps. 91.1.

3. He calls his House and Family, his Tabernacle, not so much because these
Arabians dwelt sometimes in Tents (for we find here a City, where he dwelt, v.
7. and his Sons had Houses, chap. 1.18, 19.) as because he looked upon his
House, as but a Tabernacle, that might easily be pulled down when God would,
and as the place of his pilgrimage, his constant Dewlling Place being above.

Doct. 1. Acquaintance with God in youth is a great mercy, and will prove
comfortable to men when they come to old age; For, Job reflects upon the days
of his youth, as desirable days, not only for the prosperity thereof, but
because of the favor of God, from which that flowed. See Eccl. 12.1. Many have
sad reflections upon the sins and follyes of youth, who did not begin to look
toward God in time.

2. Rewards of Piety will begin as early as men can begin to be godly; For,
these days were desi^able, also, upon the account of prosperity that flowed
from the favor of God. And albeit these temporal advantages do not always
accompany Piety; yet men, when ever they begin to seek God, shall find they do
it not in vain, Is. 45.19. And they who are long a beginning to seek God do
lose many precious opportunities and advantages they might have enjoyed,
especially when they had youth and vigor to have improved them.

3. Prosperity accompanying Piety is a mercy, especially when men have youth,
and health to make use of it, and it should be improved as such; For, Job
accounts his former prosperous condition in his youth, desirable. However
Prosperity in it self be still a Mercy, yet to the wicked, who want piety, it
proves a snare; and though it be a mercy at any time, yet especially in youth,
and when old age has not taken away men's pleasure in their days, Eccl. 12.1.
And therefore such as are made partakers of this mercy, ought to remember the
account they must make to God for it.

4. Such as do make right use of Prosperity, they do look upon it as an
uncertain passing thing; As Job calls it here his Tabernacle: See, 1 Cor. 7.29,
30, 31. Undervaluers of Gods bounty in a prosperous lot do proclaim their
ingratitude, and their immortified lusts, and that they are seeking happiness
in temporal enjoyments; which because they cannot find, they are therefore
discontented, and deprive themselves of that good which is really to be found
in the good things of this life. As Solomon, missing of happiness, and finding
only vanity (as to any felicity the creatures can bring to man) in his pursuits
after pleasure and delights, falls a dispairing and hating of all his labor,
and hates his very life, till he recollect himself, and acquiesce in that good
thing which God allows in the use of the creatures, though they cannot make man
happy, Eccl. 2.1, 2, etc. 11.17, 18, 21, 24. And, upon the other hand, when men
have over-weaning thoughts of prosperity, it is an evidence their hearts are
bewitched, and that they make an Idol of it, and will not improve it aright.

5. A godly man is so conscientious and careful of his concernments and
relations, that mercies to his family, and these under him, do much refresh
him; as Job looks back upon the mercy of God to his Tabernacle, as a very
desirable mercy. And here many are defective, in not seeing unto, and praying
for, the the good of their Families, who yet are otherwise blameless, as to
their own personal walk.

6. Godly persons and their families are acquainted with mercies and favors,
which the world does not know, nor can discern; For, in many respects, there is
a secret of God upon their Tabernacle. See Ps. 25.14. Rev. 2.17. There is no
way to know the rich advantages of piety, unless men will come and see.

7. Gods secret and insensible blessing is sufficient to cause godly men to
prosper; as, on the contrary, an insensible curse, like a moth, is sufficient
to blast their enjoyments against whom he has a quarrel, Hag. 1.6:9. For, the
secret of God upon his Tabernacle was enough to make it happy and prosperous.
This godly men are to believe in their difficulties, That God can put a great
blessing in very little means, as he sometime gave proof, even by a miracle, 1
King. 17.14, 15. 2 King. 4.3. -- 6.

8. Godly men do so highly esteem of Gods favor and blessing, that they will
not satisfy themselves with a general interest therein, but will be careful to
find proofs and evidences thereof in every step of their way; For, after that
general remark of Gods favor toward him, v. 2, 3. he does here, and v. 5.
observe it in the particular mercies that he received in his family, which is
also to be extended to the rest of the particulars after mentioned.

9. As some godly men may be afflicted from their very youth up, Ps. 88.15. So,
ordinarily, the comfortable and easy allowances of youth are not lasting; For,
Job has only a longing wish after these favors he enjoyed in the days of his
youth. Some may get ease enough in youth, who have much trouble before their
hand, e're they get out of time, Joh. 21.18. And though men be ordinarily very
rash in their youth, and dream of much ease and satisfaction; Yet they would
see cause to be sober, if they knew what Time were indeed, and what were before
them to be endured, even in ordinary, albeit they should never meet with any
singular disasters. And young Professors, who for present are only tasting the
sweets and comforts of piety, should be resolving for another taste of it: As
David had a sweet life in his younger days, while he followed his Fathers
sheep, and no doubt sung sweetly to God; but afterward he was called to (a more
honorable, but yet) a more difficult and tossed life.

Verse 5. When the Almighty was yet with me, when my Children were about me.
Job proceeds to give a more particular account of the prosperity of his house
and family, in two instances; The first whereof (in this verse) was in the
matter of his Children, That he had diverse of them, and those living in peace
and safety, and very observant of him, who were now all gone. The mercy he
amplyfieth from this consideration, that it was sweet, because it was an
evidence of Gods presence with him. Which is a truth, though it was but his
weakness and sense, that was apt to judge, that God was not present with him,
because they were taken away. The word rendered Children, signifies Youths, or
Young Men, as including his Servants, who were now also (for most part) cut
off. And it is true, they were also a mercy in their own kind; And godly men,
who regard the lives of their very beasts, Prove. 12.10. will certainly be
afflicted for the loss of Servants, especially dutiful Servants. Yet it is
chiefly to be understood of his Children (the Daughters being also
comprehended, though the Young Men be only named) who like Youths, or Servants,
were so ready in attending him at all occasions. And so the word is taken,
Chap. 24.5. at least for a whole family, whereof the Children are a chief part.

Doct. 1. Communion with God, and the enjoyment of his presence, is the first
and chief part of a godly man's prosperity; As here Job imports, it was the
thing chiefly desirable in his former prosperity, that the Almighty was with
him. It is true, God (who fills heaven and earth, Jer. 23.24.) is with all men,
in some respects, to conferr favors upon them, Mat. 5.45. To mark and observe
their ways, Ps. 33.13, 14. To maintain them in their being, Act. 17.27, 28.
To overruled them, etc. Ps. 76.10. But he is present with godly men by a
special presence of grace, to preserve them, 1 Timothy 4.10. To direct and lead
them (as of old he did Israel, Exodus 13.21, 22.) To assist them in doing good,
Joh. 15.5. Exodus 4.12. And in bearing of trouble, Isa. 43.2. To give them
success, etc. Genesis 39.23. And to enjoy this presence, is the great desire of
godly men, Genesis 28.20. Exodus 33.15. And it is the matter of their gloriation,
when they find proofs of it, Ps. 46.7, 11. And it is a good evidence, that men
enjoy this presence, if they be with God, by a continual dependence upon him,
and keeping of his way, 2 Chr. 15.2. Ps. 139.17, 18.

2. It may encourage men to seek after, and delight in Communion with God, that
he is the All-sufficient God, who can never be exhausted; whereas they will soon
drink all other puddles dry; For, this made that condition the more desirable,
that it was the Almighty, or All-sufficient, who was with him, and so infinitely
above all other portions. See Hos. 2.6, 7. Jer. 2.12, 13. Yea, it is an
evidence that men do enjoy God, when they have high thoughts of him, Genesis
14.19, 20, 22. and of his fullness, Ps. 4.6, 7. For Job calls him the Almighty
and All-sufficient, when he enjoyed him, or with an eye to the time when he did
enjoy him.

3. Gods favor and presence is testified to godly men, even by common and
ordinary favors; For, Jobs Children, and other contentments in his family,
were proofs to him, that the Almighty was with him. It is comfortable to godly
men, that their most common enjoyments flow from special love, and they should
be improved as proofs thereof; whereas wicked men have their best blessings
cursed to them, and they may be saddening to him, if they would consider, what
are the thoughts of the giver of these benefits, toward them.

4. Men may have a prosperous condition, and yet enjoy Communion with God; as
Job had God with him, in all this his prosperity. Which may make them ashamed,
who are debauched by their prosperity, from any Communion with God they did
enjoy, or thought they enjoyed; and who must have their prosperity overturned,
lest they should make an Idol of it.

5. As Servants and Attendants in a family, are in themselves a mercy; So,
particularly, Children are a special blessing, and the chief part of a man's
wealth; Therefore Job begins at them, as the chief part of the prosperity of
his family. See Ps. 127.3, 4, 5. We should esteem of them, and improve them as
such, lest otherwise they prove special crosses to us.

6. As it is a great advantage to have Servants, and especially Children,
preserved unto us; So it is yet an addition to the mercy, if we have them under
our own breeding and education, and the blessed fruits thereof appear in their
being dutiful; For, that he had them about him, imports not only that they were
then preserved, but that himself had the oversight of them, and that they were
obsequious, and ready at his hand, to obey his commands. As Parents should
improve this opportunity, of being continued with their Children and Families,
and they with them, Genesis 18.18, 19. Deuteronomy. 6.7. So their Children (and Servants
also) should be careful that they be not a grief to them. See Prove. 30.17. Genesis
26.34, 35.

7. God may exercise godly men, not only with the loss of Servants, but of all
their Children; For, now Job has none of these days, when his Children, or
Youths, were about him. This is a very sharp trial, Jer. 31.15. yet we must be
ready to bear it, if God make it our lot. There is nothing must be so dear to
us, as that we will not resolve to yield it up to God, when he calls for it;
Otherwise we prove that it is an Idol, which he will not spare, that so he may
keep his own room in our hearts. Particularly, in the removal of Children,
godly men are to reckon, that God may be taking them away, that they may be
kept from evils and snares to come, and that they may not leave them behind
them with many fears for them in evil times. And withal, God can soon be
better to them than many Children (as Elkanah said to Hannah, of himself, 1 Samuel 1.8.) Is. 56.4, 5. For there is no want which a godly man cannot get made
up in God.

8. As the Lord may sometime give his own children all that sense can crave, to
assure them of his presence and favor; So such a condition does not ordinarily
continue, but their sense must be crossed, and put to discover it self; For,
Job, who formerly had all he could desire, to assure him that the Almighty was
with him, is now deprived of these sensible and refreshful supports of his
faith. Since our life here is by faith, and not by sight, 2 Cor. 5.7. we must
resolve to be often put to give proof of our proficiency at that trade. And
though God sometime give proof, how able he is to give sensible satisfaction,
when it is for our good; Yet the continuance thereof is not to be expected.

9. It is an evidence of weakness to question Gods presence and favor, because
of the want of sensible satisfaction, especially in temporal enjoyments; For,
it was Jobs weakness, which made him insinuate that the Almighty was not yet
with him, now when he is thus stripped. See, Exodus 17.7. Judge. 6.13. Whereas
the contrary is made sure by promise, Josh. 1.5. Heb. 13.5. Is. 43.2. In
trials, he is with his people as a Father correcting his children, for their
profit, Heb. 12.5, 6. Yea, it is fit they become sometime weak, and be sharply
assaulted, that God may manifest his tender sympathy, and give proof of his
presence in their support. And therefore we should guard against this weakness,
considering that sense is very quarrelsome, and apt to mistake, if it want
satisfaction; Especially, if it be deprived of that satisfaction it sometime
enjoyed.

Verse 6. When I washed my steps with butter, and the rock powered me out rivers
of oil.
The second particular instance of the prosperity of his family, is in the
matter of his wealth, which flowed upon him in great abundance; Having
abundance of Cattle, which yielded him such plenty of milk for butter, as he
might (though no doubt he was not so prodigal) have washed his feet at every
step in butter, as men wash their feet in water; And such abundance of
Olive Trees on these rocky grounds (as honey also was to be found there, Ps.
81.6.) that they yielded him no less plenty of oil, than if there had been
rivers of it, like those brooks of water which run among these rocks at some
seasons. See Deuteronomy. 32.13. and 33.24. These are hyperbolike expressions,
intimating, that he had great plenty of these things; And under these two
particulars (wherein much of their wealth consisted in these days) all other
sorts of wealth are comprehended.

Doct. 1. Riches have their own room among the favors of God, in a godly man's
esteem, who, as he will not dote upon them, nor impatiently thirst after them,
Prove. 30.8. so he will not despise them; and as he will not seek to purchase
them at the rate of an ill conscience, so he will not undervalue nor waste
them, when God brings them into his hand: For, Job reflects upon the wealth he
formerly enjoyed as a desirable mercy in its own kind. It is no proof of grace
or tenderness in men, to undervalue, or not to be thankful for, such a mercy,
when God brings it to their hand in his way, and when God strips such
undervaluers of their enjoyments, he makes their case to be no other than what
they made it to themselves, by their unthankful undervaluing of what they had.

2. God has abundance of outward prosperity to give his people, if it were for
their good; As here he gave proof to Job. So that if we could trust God, we
might be at rest about our lot.

3. The most that men will get of riches, is but their meant, and means to
subsist, though in more plenty, and greater variety, than these who are poorer;
For, therefore (among other reasons) does Job comprehend all his wealth under
these two particulars, of Butter and Oil, things necessary and convenient for
man's body; because these, and others the like, are all the advantages that men
will reap of greatest richest. See Eccl. 5.11,

4. Experience has proved, that men may have much wealth, and yet not abuse
it, nor be diverted from the ways of holiness hereby; For, Job is here an
instance of that truth, who was both rich and pious, and did manage that
condition so, as he is not ashamed to wish for it again, if it were Gods will
to restore it. So that when men do miscarry under prosperity (or adversity
either) they need not blame their lots, but their own lusts, so it.

5. Godly men may be deprived of wealth, after they have enjoyed it, and may be
exercised with wants and difficulties; As here Jobs wealth is gone, and he is
left in a poor condition, so that he is afterward supplied by his friends,
Chap. 42.11. Hereby the Lord loses the roots of his peoples affections from
off the Wo^ld, chastens their abuse (at least of some of them) of wealth, takes
a proof of their grace, and how their hearts will be lifted up, in the
enjoyment of his favor, above these losses; Leads them to know him better, who
became poor for his peoples sake, that he might make many rich, 2 Cor. 8.9.
And, by these experiences of what befalls some of his people, he teaches all
to be very sober, as little knowing what strange changes may befall them. As
the Shunamite little dreamed that she would ever need friendship at Court, and
yet was put to it, 2 King. 4.13. with Chap. 8.3.

6. Albeit godly men will not (if they be in a right frame) be too much
affected with temporal things, yet they may expect it will be a trial to be
stripped of their wealth; partly, because the very change of their condition
will breed them some exercise; and partly, their low condition will readily
expose them to some anxieties and tentations; For, Jobs wish to have that
condition restored, implies that the want of it did affect him, and was a
trial to him.

Verse 7. When I went out to the gate, through the City, when I prepared my seat
in the street.

8. The young men saw me, and hid themselves: and the aged arose, and stood up.

9. The Princes reframed talking, and laid their hand on their mouth.

10. The Nobles held their peace, and their tongue cleaved to the roof of their
mouth.


Follows, to v. 18. an account of Jobs prosperity, as he was a Magistrate,
which office and dignity he had and exercised, having no less honor than
wealth. And here,

1. He gives an account of the great respect that was paid to him, v. 7. -- 10.

2. He declares what was the testimony and approbation given him by all, v. 11.

3. He subjoyns an account of the grounds and reasons of his respect and
testimony, v. 12. -- 17.

In these Verses we have an account of the great respect that was paid to Job,
by persons of all ranks, and by both young and old; That when he went to the
place of public Judgment (which was kept at the gate of the City, in the open
street) v. 7. the young men did go out of the way, and hid themselves (out of
modesty, and reverence to him, and lest they should do any thing, for which he
might reprehend them) and the aged men rose up, out of respect to him, as he
passed by in the street, or entered into the place of Judgment, v. 8. And when
he sat in judgment, the inferior Princes and Nobles were utterly silent;
partly, out of respect to him, as the chief Magistrate (as it appears he was
King among them, v. 25.) and partly, because his eloquence and prudence were so
eminent, as none would presume to speak, till he had first delivered his
opinion, v. 9, 10.

Doct. 1. Magistracy, with the due Prerogatives and Dignities attending the
same, is an Ordinance of God that is very ancient in the World; For, here Job
was a Magistrate, and had his seat of dignity, and his Princes and Nobles about
him. This Ordinance has been held up, and submitted unto, in all ages, after
that all mankind could not be governed by Parental Authority; And Magistrates
are appointed of God to be the Pillars and Cementers of humane Society, the
Shield of the innocent, the Terror of evil doers, the Defenders of peace and
order, and of the peoples properties and liberties. Hence it is, that Jeremiah
compares a Magistrate to the very breath of a peoples nostrils, Lam. 4.20. To
intimate how much of their happiness in this life depends upon the Magistrate,
as an Instrument of God. Yea, very Devils have some some sort of Government,
and a Prince of Devils over them, Mat. 12.24. So that they must be strangely
possessed, who are of Anti-magistratical and Level^ing principles and humors,
despising Dominion, and speaking evil of Dignities, Jude, v. 8. Though indeed,
many do but pretend to these principles, till themselves be once possessed of
power, and then they are as opposite to them as any.

2. It is the will of God, that Courts of Justice be patent and open to all who
have to do there; As of old (not only among the Israelites, but) in Jobs
Country, they kept Court in the gate and street. It is matter of a sad
controversy, when the course of Justice is obstructed or fore-slowed.

3. It is not inconsistent with true piety, that men have and exercise the
Office of a Magistrate; For, Job, a godly man, was a Magistrate. This is not so
to be understood, as if every godly man were fit for every Office; Far less,
that because men are godly, or reckon themselves to be so, therefore they may
usurp and assume Power, and the Office of a Magistrate, to themselves. Such
principles and practices are contrary to the Scripture, and do but serve to
bring up an ill report upon godliness, and do leave men only a show and shadow
of it, instead of substance, if ever they had any. But the meaning is,

1. That Magistrates, who have Gods call to that Office, are bound to be godly
(as Job was) and men of truth, fearing God, and hating covetousness, Exodus 18.
Otherwise, they will be ready to abuse their power, and employ it ill; and
their bad example will have much influence upon their inferiors, which will
make their account sad, in the day of the Lord.

2. That, albeit the Office of a Magistrare be attended with many distractions;
Yet, Jobs experience does witness, that men may be pious and tender in such an
employment. Which will be a testimony against these, whose high places wear
Religion out of fashion with them; and against all those, who are easily (even
in their petty employments) diverted from piety and tenderness.

Doct. 4. It is one proof of a Magistrates piety (if so be other evidences do
concur) when he declines no pains or diligence in the discharge of his duty;
As Job went out to the gate, through the City, and lay not still, loytering
within, as if Authority had been conferred upon him only for his case. And it
were good, if all sorts of people would give proof of their piety in the duties
of their respective callings; and did not pretend to it only in the acts of
immediate worship, that thereby they may palliate their unfaithfulness in their
particular station.

5. Respect and honor is due to lawful Magistrates; As here Job was reverenced
by private persons, both old and young, and by inferior Magistrates, Princes
and Nobles. Where (not to insist on the several degrees of Magistrates here
employed, that there were Princes and Nobles, and Job above them all, and that
the word rendered, Nobles, signifies, Leaders, and such as should go before
others, and therefore had need to take heed to their actions, which are,
oft-times, made the rule of their Inferiors actions) there is nothing
practiced by them, but what was afterward enjoined by the law of God, Exodus
20.12. And again pressed, Exodus 22.28. which Paul expounds to be due, even to
the wicked High Priest, being in a lawful Office, Acts 23.5. And as fear and
reverence toward this Ordinance of God is naturally imprinted upon the hearts
of all men; So piety will teach men to improve these impressions aright; As
David's carriage toward Saul, the Lords Anointed, even when he was injured by
him, does bear witness.

6. It is a commendable Virtue in young men, to be modest and bashful, and to
reverence the aged, especially when they are in authority; For, so did the
young men, here, they saw him, and hid themselves. See Lev. 19.32. Is. 3.5.

7. No privilege or advantage, of age, experience, etc. warrants men to
contemn Gods Ordinance of of Magistracy; For, even the aged arose, and stood
up before Job. Experience will teach men how good it is to reverence and submit
to order; and it is good when the Aged are, in this, examples to the younger,
in Church or State; For Age contemning Authority, and breaking Order, is a
great Solecisme.

8. No advancement or power should hinder men from paying that homage to others
which God requires of them, in their station; For Princes and Nobles, being his
Inferiors, respected him. And this also is a document to all Magistrates (even
those who are Supreme) of their Subordination to God, and of the duty they
ought to pay to him upon that account, as inferior Magistrates do to them.

9. As respect is due to Magistrates, because of their very office, which is
the Ordinance of God; So eminent graces and virtues in a Magistrate, expressed
in a right carriage and faithful discharge of his office, will enforce men to
approve of them and respect them, even albeit, otherwise, they were prone
enough to take a liberty to themselves; For, it was not only Jobs authority,
but his prudence, eloquence, zeal, fortitude, and activity in discharge of his
Office, that did conciliate this respect to him, even among the rash young men,
and that made all so silent, when he appeared and spoke. Thus also even Herod
was enforced to observe and reverence John the Baptist, Mark 6.20. Which should
teach Rulers, whether in Church or State, to seek after much of the Spirit of
their Calling, especially in times when men are prone to turn licentious, and
contemn authority.

10. It is a character of wise and discreet men, to be swift to hear, and slow
to speak, and to love to hear others who can profit them, rather than to take
all upon themselves; For though those Princes and Nobles, or inferior
Magistrates, were accounted worthy to bear office, as well as Job, yet they
give great proof of their wisdom in that, out of respect to his ability and
parts, they choose rather silently to hear him, than to appear much themselves.
Which may condemn these who envy the eminent parts of others, and can think
nothing well done, unless themselves be eminently seen in doing of it.

11. Highest dignities, and greatest respects in the world, are very uncertain;
For, Job is now stripped of all this, and may well wish for it, but cannot
find it, but rather is despised, Chap. 30.1. See Eccl. 10.6, 7. This
overturning and contempt of men in authority comes to pass, for their own sins
(as befell Nebuchadnezar, Dan. 4.) sometimes also for the sins of the people
(as God can severely punish them in the matter of their Rulers, Prove. 28.2.)
and oft-times both these concur. And yet sometimes God may send this
affliction for a trial and exercise to a godly Magistrate; As Jobs experience
does witness. The consideration of all which may,

1. Warn men not to grasp too eagerly at Power, especially by unlawful means,
seeing their advancement may but contribute to make their fall the greater.

2. It may warn them not to confide in their eminency, or the respects which
are paid them by men, if either they provoke God, or God have them to try and
exercise.

3. It teaches godly men not to look upon their abasement (were they brought
even so low as Job was) as inconsistent with a reconciled estate and God^ love.

4. It teaches others not to stumble, when such Cedars are shaken and fall,
but rather to make ready for the like lots themselves, if it please God to call
them to endure them.

Doct. 12. It is a very sweet Cordial to a man in distress, when be may with
peace of conscience, refl^ct upon his former exalted estate, and the discharge
of his duty therein; As Job here does. No cross can be unsupportable to a man
whose conscience is not bearing witness against him; And even where that is,
there is yet access to the blood of sprinkling, for pacifying and purging of
the conscience.

Verse 11. When the ear heard me, then it blessed me: and when the eye saw me,
it gave witness to me.
In this Verse, Job gives an account of a further degree of respect paid to
him, in the testimony and approbation that was given him by all men, Who, when
they saw or heard him, did pronounce him a blessed man, and wished him to be
still blessed, and did bear witness to him, that he was a godly man, and
faithful Magistrate. As for this seeing and hearing of him, which gave a rise
to this blessing and testimony, we may conceive the matter thus; That when they
saw him pass by on the street, or enter in the place of Judgment, v. 7. and
heard him speak in judgment, they did thus applaud unto him; Or, (because here
their hearing is put before seeing) when they heard him speak (for which they
waited, v. 10, 21.) and pronounce sentence, and then saw him execute it, they
blessed him, and testified that he was an honest and courageous man: Or, it may
be understood, more generally, that wherever men saw or heard him, or even
heard of him (for the Original has only saw and heard, and me is a supplement)
they give him a testimony.

Doct. 1. Albeit respect and honor from men ought not to be hunted after; yea,
in some cases, it is formidable (as one feared that he had done some ill turn,
when a wicked man commended him) Luke 6.26. Yet a good report, upon the account
of virtuous actions, is honorable, and to be desired; For Job here reflects
upon it, as a very sweet time, when the people bare witness to him, and blessed
him; not authoritatively (for so Superiors bless Inferiors, Heb. 7.7) but by
way of acclamation, and declaration that he was a blessed man. So that they who
are thus well reported of, ought to prize it as a mercy, and improve it
accordingly.

2. It is a very sweet thing, to see Magistrates so discharge their trust, as
they have the hearts and affections of the people, and they are encouraged to
wish and pray for a blessing upon them; For, so was it with Job in the days of
his prosperity; And thus was David reverenced, and highly esteemed of among his
subjects, 2 Samuel 3.36. And, on the other side, it is sad, and cannot but prove
bitterness in the latter end, when Magistrates do, one way or other, become an
unsupportable yoke and burden to people.

3. Approbation, and a good report of men, are due from others, where there is
cause for them; As here they held it their duty to bless, and bear witness unto
Job. It is a breach of the Ninth Commandment, and cruel persecution, to deny
that testimony which is due to men, and either openly to reproach them, or
secretly to malign and backbite them. See Ps. 69.20.

4. Such as would be approved in their commendation of men, ought to be sincere
in it, neither being swayed with a respect to the persons of men, nor yet
flattering them only to their faces; For so much may be imported in that it is
said, only that they heard and saw (me, being a supplement, as has been said)
when they blessed him, and bare witness to him. They did not look chiefly to
his Person (as some, out of hatred of men's persons, do malign and traduce their
best actions; and out of a preposterous love to others, will commend their
greatest failings, and lick up their very excrements) but to what they heard
and saw, abstracted from the consideration of the person, when they blessed and
commended the person. And they were as ready to approve and bless him, when
they heard of him (as the words will also bear) behind his back, as when they
were in his presence, and heard him speak. Flattery is a very hateful sin,
especially when the Flatterer is ready to backbite them whom he openly
flattereth. A faithful friend will not be like Joab with Amasa, 2 Samuel 20.9,
10: Nor like David's false friends, Ps. 55.21. And he is a good back friend to
them he loves.

5. Magistrates will not be commended in Gods sight, nor do they deserve a
testimony among men, for their fair language, and their good laws, and just
sentences; unless the due and speedy execution of them do follow thereupon;
For, it was not only upon the account of hearing what Job said, but of seeing
what he did, that they blessed and bare witness to him.

6. Such is the inconstancy of men (especially when persons are under a cloud
of trouble, or upon other selfish accounts) and so it pleases God, in his wise
providence, to order, that godly men may lose all their respect and good report
among men, and they may be buried under calumnies; For, now all this applause
is gone, and Job is traduced, as an unjust person, and an Oppressor, Chap.
22.5, 6, 7. Here we are to consider,

1. That men ought to go through good report as an uncertain thing, and a
trial, no less than an ill report, 2 Cor: 6.8. which they will find to be true
when it is gone, whatever may be their thoughts of it while they enjoy it.

2. Men ought to be sparing to raise ill reports upon others, especially upon
interest (as now, no doubt, they cried out upon him, as an Oppressor, whom he
had restrained from oppressing others, v. 17.) lest they become Scholars at
their own school, and be made to drink of that cap which they have held to the
head of others.

3. Men ought not fondly to look after a good report from others, lest it make
them sail many contrary winds to attain it. It is enough for honest men, that
they may have divine approbation, yea, and a testimony in the consciences of
their greatest enemies, when yet they are denied approbation among men.

Verse 12. Because I delivered the poor that cried, and the fatherless, and him
that had none to help him.

13. The blessing of him that was ready to perish, came upon me: and I caused
the widows heart to sing for joy.


Job having spoken of the respect paid to him, and the testimony he had among
men, does now subjoyn an account of the grounds and reasons of this respect and
testimony; which were, his righting of poor afflicted persons, v. 12. -- 16.
And his crushing of their Oppressors, v. 17. Whereby also he proves his
integrity, albeit he was now afflicted, and vindicates himself from the
aspersions cast upon him by his friends. As to his fidelity, and tender care of
the poor and oppressed, He first, gives an account of what he did for them, v.
12, 13. Next, He vindicates this his practice, from all imputations of
partiality, or vainglory, v. 14. And lastly, He gives an account of the pains
he took in this his righteous administration and procedure, v. 15, 16.

In these Verses, Job gives an account who they were of whom he had a care in
his public Office; Namely, the poor, the fatherless and helpless, those who
were ready to perish (by reason of many miseries, and particularly, of
Oppression in these Causes which came before him) and the widow: And what was
his care of them. Which is summarily comprehended under this, That he delivered
them (as from their other miseries, which is not so much to be understood here,
so particularly) from the oppression of the mighty, v. 12. This deliverance is
amplyfied from the effects thereof, v. 13. That he did so appear for these
afflicted ones, who were ready to perish, as made them bless him; And he made
the widow (whose state is a sorrowful state, and far from joy) to rejoice, and
that not in show only, but from the very heart.

Doct. 1. As men ought not to commend or bear testimony unto others, but upon
just grounds and reasons; so they who are commended, ought to be a furnace to
their own praise, Prove. 27.21. And to see that there be real ground for that
good report that goes of them; without which they ought not to sleep securely,
because they have a gale of approbation, and a testimonial from every one:
Therefore Job is careful to remark the grounds of that testimony given him, v.
11. And that it was because he delivered the poor, etc.

2. It pleases God to exercise the children of Adam with variety of trials;
There being poor, ^ a-the less, helpless widows, and those ready to perish,
among them; as here we are taught. This the Lord orders, partly, for the
punishment of sin; partly, that they may be public documents to all of man's
misery, and objects to try the compassion of others. And God does also so order
this variety of trials, that the trial of every one is fitted to their
condition, temper and strength (though they be apt to judge otherwise) and that
none have all sorts of trials upon them at once.

3. Men in an afflicted condition, may not only look to be deserted, and left
helpless (as is insinuated, v. 12. that they had none to help) but to be
oppressed also by those, who are stronger than they; For, the poor, and
fatherless, and widows, need to be delivered, and are ready to perish. When the
Lord does afflict any, he not only tryes themselves thereby, but he does also
try all others, who have to do with them, whether or not they will take
advantage of their afflictions, to desert them, or afflict them yet more. And
afflicted persons are hereby taught, not to expect that one affliction will
hide them from another, when God has them to try exactly.

4. Albeit Magistrates ought to do justice to all; nor ought they to
countenance poor men indifferently in whatsoever cause they have, Exodus 23.3.
Yet it is their Duty, by virtue of their Office, to protect the poor in their
just rights, For, Job delivered the poor that cried (or, from crying, so that
they needed cry no more) and the fatherless, etc.

5. Albeit Magistrates, in protecting and delivering the poor, can look for no
reward from them, and may expect to be much maligned and hated by Oppressors;
Yet it is a blessed work so to do, and a mean and way to be blessed of God,
Prove. 24.11, 12. And such Magistrates ought to be blessed by these who are
helped by them; For, in all these respects, it is true, that the blessing of
him that was ready to perish came upon Job.

6. It is the duty of the afflicted, when God raises up Instruments to do for
them, to be comsorted in his providence and care, even though their condition
be otherwise sad; For, even the desolate and sad widows heart did sing for joy,
by Jobs means.

7. It is no strange thing to see compassionate men meet with misery
themselves; As here befell Job, who had been a compassionate man to the
afflicted. Hereby the Lord, in his wise and holy providence, lays stumbling
blocks in the way of many, as no doubt many took advantage of Jobs misery, to
reproach him, and his justice and tenderness, as we have heard from Chap. 22.5,
6, 7. And hereby, also, God teaches godly men to be sober and denied to all
the good they are enabled to do, that they may not always expect visible
advantages thereof, but may be satisfied in the testimony of a good Conscience.

Verse 14. I put on righteousness, and it clothed me: my judgment was as a
robe and a diadem.
Lest any might object, that Job did all this for the poor, out of an affected
desire of vainglory and popularity, or as being biased with pity; He, in this
Verse, vindicates his practice, and clears, that he did all this justly, and in
righteousness; which he persevered in, and gloried in it above a robe and
diadem, and all other ornaments of his magistracy and dignity.

Whence, Learn, 1. No action can he rendered acceptable by any pretenses, unless
it be good in it self; Nor will pity to the distressed, render a Magistrate
approved, unless his actings be just, and he so relieve them, that he do no
wrong to others; For, therefore does Job clear, that his actings for the poor
and fatherless, etc. v. 12, 13. were in righteousness and judgment. Where the
two words, righteousness and judgment, may signify one and the same thing;
Or, judgment subjoyned to righteousness, may import, that he did not always
judge according to the strict rigor of the Law, but did observe moderation and
equity, when the cause required it.

2. It will not commend a Magistrate, nor be comfortable to him, that sometime
he is just, unless he be constant in it, against all opposition, For, Job put
on righteousness, and it clothed him, his judgment was as a robe and a
diadem; Righteousness and Judgment were no less conspicuous in his
administrations, and habitual to him, than his very garments; and they did
cover him, on his head as a diadem, and on his body as a robe, so that there
could be no access for injustice at any passage; and being so, it proved indeed
warm and comfortable, as men's garments are to their bodies; that good practice
being indeed commendable, wherein men are habitual and constant, and from which
they are not driven by any tentations.

3. As Magistrates have their badges of honor, and eminent persons have that
allowance in their apparel, to which inferior persons ought not to aspire (as
Job had his robe and diadem) So to a godly discerning Magistrate, the faithful
discharge of his Office, is his chief crown and ornament, without which, he is
but a Statue in all his robes and splendor; For, Jobs righteousness and
judgment, were, in his eyes, a robe and diadem. Yea, virtues are the chief
ornament of any person, without which, their gorgeous apparel does but serve to
cover so many monsters. See 1 Pet. 3.3, 4.

Verse 15. I was eyes to the blind, and feet was I to the lame.

16. I was a Father to the poor: and the cause which I knew not, I searched out.


In these Verses, Job gives a further and more particular account of his pains,
and the active assistance which he gave to the afflicted, in judging their
cause. That he was any thing to them that they needed, to set their cause
right. He helped such as had no skill in legal proceedings, with his counsel,
and so was as eyes to the blind. He was feet also to the lame, not only in
supporting those who were weak, and like to be crushed, and their righteous
cause ready to be lost, by the violence of potent Adversaries; but in directing
and helping them to act and strirr in defense of their cause; and (it may be)
going about it himself. And he was, in a word, not only a Judge, but a Father
to all the poor, and searched out the cause which he knew not; that is, he took
pains to sift it to the bottom, that he might find out what truth and justice
was in it; Or, he searched out causes, which otherwise he could not know, as
not being brought before him (because either persons were unwilling, or durst
not complain) that so he might prevent contentions, and remove secret grudges
and discontents among the people; Or, he searched out every cause that came
before him, even the causes of these persons whom he knew not, as well as the
cause of his acquaintances.

Doct. 1. It is not enough, that Magistrates do judge justly in causes, as they
come, and are presented before them; But they must have a care (especially if
they be superior Magistrates) that righteous causes be not crushed in the very
entry (and either hindered from being presented in judgment, or misguided and
misrepresented in judgment) through the simplicity, weakness or poverty of
the party wronged; but that all these defects be supplied: For, Job was eyes to
the blind, and feet to the lame, etc. He either acted all that was needful
himself, or caused others do it, and saw that it was done, and did not leave
all to his inferior Officers.

2. As variety of causes and persons come before Magistrates, and innocent
persons may lie at many disadvantages; So Magistrates must be ready to do all
that the poor need who are oppressed, and for any poor oppressed persons who
need their help, and that never so often; For he was eyes, or feet, or whatever
they needed in any cause, and he was all those to the blind and lame
indefinitely; and he was those things to them, not at some times only, but very
often and habitually, as their condition required. It is good not to weary in
well-doing, or to sit down and please our selves with doing some few acts only
of charity or justice.

3. It is not sufficient, that Magistrates do good to the poor in their
righteous cause, if they do it out of vainglory, or give them surly looks or
checks, though they do their business; But they must do for them with fatherly
affection: For, Job was a Father to the poor. He owned their cause
affectionately, and with that same solicitude that a Father has for his Child.
As men are bound to do all acts of charity, not by constraint, but willingly,
and from a principle of love, 2 Cor. 9.7. So Magistrates owe this affection to
all their subjects, especially to the poor, as being bound to be Fathers and
Mothers to them, which is the common designation of all Superiors, as well as
of Parents, Exodus 20.12.

4. As Magistrates ought to know causes well, before they give out sentence in
them, (for the Law requires, that men should hear before they judge, Joh. 7.51.
though many, even of all ranks, are ready to condemn that, out of prejudice, or
respect to the opinion of others, which they understand not; and others are
ready to speak of things, when they neither understand what they say, or
whereof they affirm, 1 Timothy 1.7.) So there is need of narrow search and
enquity, to find out the truth in causes, if either they be dark or intricate
of themselves, or darkened through the subtilty of Adversaries: Therefore Job
searched out the cause which he knew not. See Deuteronomy. 13.12, 13, 14. Prove. 25.2.
and 29.7. And though this seem to be the genuine interpretation of this place,
yet the other interpretations, formerly mentioned, may put us in mind also of
other duties o^ Magistrates, which are elsewhere commended in Scripture.
Namely, That Magistrates should be careful to prevent Contentions and
Lawsuits, so far as may be, by looking into, and studying to compose, these
differences which are not yet brought before them; That they should be careful
to try if there be any so crushed with oppression, that they dare not have
recourse to Magistrates for redress, through fear of their potent Oppressors:
And, they should have a care, that judgment proceed not according to their
acquaintance with persons, and that justice be not wrested to gratify their
Kindred, Friends, or Allies. See Deuteronomy. 33.9.

Verse 17. And I brake the jaws of the wicked, and plucked the spoil out of his
teeth.
In this Verse, Job gives an account how he took course with these Oppressors,
who had wronged the poor; and made them restore their ill purchase, and
disabled them, that they should not oppress afterward.

Doct. 1. Oppression of the poor is a beastly brutish wickedness, and the
Oppressors are more like ravening beasts, than like men; For, Job describes
them, that not only they are wicked, but that they are like beasts tearing and
devouring a prey with their teeth. See Ps. 58.6.

2. It is the duty, and will be the care of faithful Magistrates, to protect
the poor against Oppressors, and to cause the poor be restored to their right;
not turning Oppressors themselves, Zeph. 3.3. Nor colluding with Oppressors
for a part of the spoil, Mic. 7.3. For, Job plucked the spoil out of the
wick^d's teeth, and gave it to the righteous owners. See Romans 13.3. 1 Pet.
2.13, 14.

3. Not only should Oppressors be made to restore what they have unjustly
taken, but they should be punished, and cut short of their power, that they may
not be able again to oppress: For, Job brake the jaws of the wicked, when he
plucked out the spoil, that so they might tear no more. And where this duty is
neglected by these in Authority (as ordinarily petty Thieves are punished, and
great Oppressors, and grinders of the faces of the poor go free) God
interposeth, by his own hand, to destroy these Oppressors, and root them out.

Verse 18. Then I said, I shall dye in my nest, and I shall multiply my days
as the sand.
In the fourth and last branch of this description of Jobs former prosperity,
he gives an account of the apparent stability thereof, and of the confidence he
had it should continue, it being so great and well fixed. In this Verse, he
declares, what his confidence was, unto which he subjoyns the grounds of his
confidence, in a new account of his prosperity. Showing, That it was well
rooted and spread abroad, and watered with the blessing and influences of God,
v. 19. And that his honor and power were in the prime, and still growing upon
his hand, v. 20. All men having a great opinion of his wisdom, v. 21, 22, 23.
And keeping a great distance, even when he conversed familiarly with them, v.
24. And his Authority being very eminent among his people, v. 25.

His assertion of his confidence, in this Verse, contains this in sum; That,
being so settled, he expected that, after a contented life, and a life of long
continuance, (or, of many days, like the sand without number) he should have
dyed quietly and peaceably at home in his own house, as a Bird in its nest, and
not have been made a prey of, as he was. Concerning which confidence and
expectation, it may be enquired,

First, Was not this a fruit of his carnal disposition, thus to please himself
with the thoughts of a long continuance of his prosperity?

Answ. As Job is not altogether to be condemned in this his confidence; For he
is not only thinking on death, when he is at the height of it, but he might
justly be free of distempering slavish fears of a change, having laid so good a
foundation of peace and security, through Gods blessing, in Gods favor, and a
good Conscience; yea, it proved thus with him in the end, Chap. 42. And no
doubt Job would never have mentioned this, in this so calm an Apology for
himself, if he had not been certain that (at least) there was somewhat
justifiable in it: So he is not altogether free of excess in it, and his
confidence was mixed, and had some tincture of the flesh, and unrenewed part in
it. For his very complaint about the disappointment of his hopes, and the
encouragements he looked to as supports of this his confidence, v. 19, 20, etc.
do evince so much; Especially if we compare this with a parallel practice of
David, for which God did chasten him, Ps. 30.6, 7.

Secondly, It may be enquired, How this assertion, that he had been confident
of the continuance of his prosperity, does consist with his own profession,
Chap. 3.25, 26. that he had feared what was come upon him, and was not in
safety nor quiet, even before trouble came?

Answ. This difficulty has been touched on Chap. 3. And it will not suffice to
clear it, that we assert, That Job might have been looking out for some
trouble, and yet have expected to dye in his nest for all that, as never
expecting that his trial should have come to such an height. For, Chap. 3.25.
He seems to say, that he feared the very thing that was come upon him, though,
no doubt, the fever of passion, in which he then was, made him speak as
largely as might be of his former sol^citudes, to aggravate the sadness of his
condition. But they are to be reconciled thus; In so far as his confidence was
right and allowable, it might well consist with a godly solicitude about his
duty, especially when his Children feasted, Chap. 1.5. to which that passage,
Chap. 3. seems chiefly to relate. And in so far as this confidence was
culpable, it is to be conceived, that sometime that godly solicitude, and
sometime this pleasing expectation, was his exercise. And as when he was most
tender, and looked most accurately to the hazards that accompany a prosperous
condition, he was ready to apprehend there might be some faults committed,
which might provoke God to send a change: So, when, at other times, he was
taken up with his great prosperity, and the apparent stability thereof, he
began to dream of case, as David did, Ps. 30.6, 7.

In this purpose, Observe 1. If we consider what is right and allowable in this
expression of Jobs confidence, we may Learn,

1. As this is a vanity in all temporal prosperity, that if it do not leave us,
yet we must dye and leave it; so whatever prosperity a man have, or whatever be
his thoughts about it, yet it should not hinder his thoughts of dying: And a
godly man (when in a right frame) will not forget death, in the height of his
prosperity; For, his thoughts, when he abounds in prosperity, are, I shall dye.
Thoughts of mortality and death are a necessary and useful exercise, Ps. 39, 4.
and 90 12. And it is a good evidence, that we are not quite abused and
debauched with our prosperity, when it does not banish thoughts of death and
mortality, as a burden to us, nor cause us dream of an eternity of it.

2. Albeit godly men dye with Gods favor in general calamities, and when they
are cut off in evil company (as Jonathan fell with Saul) And a wicked man may
dye under Gods wrath at home, and when he has no bands in his death, Ps. 73.4.
Yet, in it self, it is a mercy to dye at home in peace, and not to be hurried
out of the world in general confusions and calamities; For, Job looks upon
dying in his warm nest, as a desirable mercy. It is a sad trial when it is
otherwise, and may be the fruit of men's ill improving of their houses and
families in their lives. Yet if men see Gods salvation before they dye, Ps.
91.16. with Luke 2.29, 30. it is no great matter where they dye, or what be the
particular way of it. And it becomes Saints, whatever be the way of their
death, not to be thereby chased out of the world, Job 18.18. but to be still
ready and willing to go, when, or wheresoever he calls them. Only this may
warn these who see their friends dye at home beside them, that they have less
cause to complain, than if they had dyed another way.

3. A long life is also, in it self, a good desirable thing; Especially, if it
be attended with prosperity; For, so does Job reckon it, to multiply his days
as the sand; which is an Hyperbolical expression of many days, as also of
other things, Genesis 22.17. and 41.49. Thus we find long life promised as a
blessing, Exodus 20.12. And the contrary is threatened as a curse, Ps. 55.23. For
godly men who live long, receive many proofs of Gods love, and many experiences
and times which pass over them, may, through Gods blessing, promote the work of
mortification in them. This should not cause men be impatiently fond of long
life, and not to be full of days, whenever God calls them; Yet it may condemn
them who weary of life; and do not improve long life as a mercy and advantage,
but even in old age they dye children.

4. Godly men lay the surest foundation, that any man can lay, of prosperity
and long life, and the tenure of their holding of these mercies is surer than
any other: For, in so far Jobs confidence and expectation was right and sound,
Godliness having the promise even of this life, 1 Timothy 4.8. See also Deuteronomy.
28.1, 2, 3, etc. Ps. 34.12, 13, 14. 1 Cor. 3.21, 22, 23. And as godly men need
not to be tormented with the fear of that wrath which hangs over the wicked's
head; So, these promises are put in their Fathers hand, to dispense the good
things that are contained therein, according as he knows they will be food,
and not poison to them: So that undoubtedly they take the wrong course, who
abandon piety, that they may enjoy any of these mercies.

Obs. 2. If we consider Jobs excess in this, It teaches, That when godly men
do prosper, they very readily exceed in their hopes and confidence about
outward mercies; For, even Job was not free of security in this. And if we
narrowly consider his carriage in this, we may observe a few particulars.

1. Such is the weakness, even of godly men, that they can hardly live in a
prosperous condition, and not be overtaken with some security, carnal
confidence, or other miscarriage. So was it here with Job, and so was it with
David, Ps. 30.6, 7. And we find Paul in hazard to miscarry, even after he was
caught up to the third Heaven, 2 Cor. 12.6, 7. And the Church falling asleep at
a feast, Cant. 5.1, 2. Experience has taught, that prosperity is ill to guide;
For David was in a better frame, when driven to the Wilderness by Saul, than
when he is lying at home and dallying with Bathsheba. And this may taech us,
how needful changes are, to keep us from settling upon our lees; and how
gracious God is, when he continues somewhat in our lot, that may be as pricks
in our eyes, and thorns in our sides.

2. As wicked men exceed in their carnal confidences, that their prosperity
shall continue, Ps. 10.5, 6. Especially because they bottom their confidence
upon their wit and policy, their power, the stability of their estates, the
friendship they have, and other the like unwarrantable grounds; So a sleep of
security is dangerous, though it pretend to a better ground of confidence; As
David pretended to Gods favor, and the experience of his kindness, when he
securely dreamt that he should never be moved, Ps. 30.6, 7. And Job, no doubt,
looked higher than to what he afterward expresses, when he was thus confident.
It is not much to be regarded, how specious the grounds of our confidence are,
if we fall asleep upon them.

3. It is a bad symptom when men's enjoyments are looked upon as very sweet and
warm, and do bulk much in their minds; For, here Job accounts his house, his
nest, not for frailty, but for warmth and sweetness. When we take too well with
our good condition, it is a token we are secure, and near to be shaken: As when
David would not leave his house, and go to the fields, when God called him, 2 Samuel 11.1. he was afterward made to quit his house with sorrow, 2 Samuel 15, 16,
17.

4. Albeit it be the property of wicked men to put thoughts of death far away,
and out of their mind; Yet even godly men, in their security, may fail in
putting these thoughts a good way off from them; For, it was some evidence of
his security, that (though he forgot not death, yet) he expected a long life
before it came.

5. When men are too well pleased with their life, because of prosperity, they
are readily as much dissatisfied with it in adversity; For, as Job formerly
looked on long life as a favor, so now he is sometime weary of his life in
trouble; Though yet he be serving God in his generation, though with less ease
to himself.

6. It is hard for the best of men, when surrounded with prosperity, to keep
constantly in one good frame; For, though Job had sometimes godly fear and
solicitude, Chap. 3. yet here we find, that now and then he falls a sleep.
Godly men must not trust to the good condition wherein sometime they are, when
their tentations are strong, and God will not judge of the truth of their piety
by these bad fits which sometime may overtake them.

Obs. 3. If we consider Jobs disappointment, and that now all his expectation
is overturned, at least to his sense, It teaches, That godly men may meet with
these trials they sometime little look for, and that is an addition to the
trials themselves; As here is imported; that these hopes, which Job sometimes
cherished, are now for a time crushed, and the contrary evils come upon him.
God may exercise his people with more troubles than have been expected, either
by enemies, Lam. 4.12. or by themselves, Jer. 14.19. So is he also pleased to
favor them with unexpected mercies, Genesis 16.13. Is. 64.3. the sweetness
whereof may swallow up the bitterness of the other lot. And this also may
persuade us to be sober in our expectations, and not to stumble, though we meet
with difficulties we never dreamed of.

Obs. 4. If we consider the issue of all this business, and that at last Job
was not disappointed of this his hope and confidence, though now, to his
apprehension, all is gone; It teaches, That, however God approve not of
security in his people, yet, after he has exercised them, he may be pleased to
fulfill all their expectations and desires that are lawful, which themselves
give up as lost: As after this trial, all that Job formerly looked for came to
pass. This may open a door of hope to Gods people, that, after many
disappointments, and overturnings of their expectations after good things, God
may yet do great things for them. For expected mercies may come, when there is
many a dark step, and many a cross to crush presumption, and rowze us up from
security, betwixt us and them, Mic. 4 9, 10.

Verse 19. My root was spread out by the waters, and the dew lay all night upon
my branch.
Job subjoyns a further account of his former prosperity, as the grounds of his
confidence formerly mentioned: Wherein, though he speak of such things as were
great mercies, and pledges of Gods love to him, and assurances that God would
continue to do what was best for him; yet, they could not assure him of the
continuance of his prosperity, as experience had now taught him.

In this Verse, he gives a more general account of his prosperity (which is
chiefly to be understood of his prosperity as a private man, and a Parent and
Master of a family, though not excluding his Grandeur as a Magistrate, to which
he speaks more expressly afterward) and illustrates it by a similitude; That as
a tree which is planted beside a water, and has the branches thereof watered
with dew, cannot choose but grow and continue long; So his prosperity was so
well rooted in Gods favor, in a good purchase, and in his great power and
respect among the people; and so great and enlarged (like the spreading
branches of a tree) in Children and Possessions; and all these so attended with
the blessings and influences of God, that he did expect the continuance
thereof. It is here to be adverted, That however such a similitude be made use
of to express, chiefly the spiritual flourishing condition of a godly man, Ps.
1.3. yet here it is safer to understand it of his temporal prosperity, of which
he is speaking.

Doct. 1. Such as would ensure a good condition (whether spiritual or temporal)
should look well to its foundation and root; For, if there be a worm at the
root of it (a worm of Hypocrisy in the profession of Piety, and of ill
purchase, or the like, in worldly Possessions) it will soon go to wrack:
Therefore Job looks first to his roots, in his flourishing prosperity.

2. It is not any thing men can do, without the favor, influence and blessing
of God, that can make them prosper, or be established in it; For, this is meant
by the waters and dew which made him grow and flourish. Without this men wither
like the heath in the Wilderness, Jer. 17.6. See Pro. 10.22.

3. The blessing and influences of God must be on every step of men's way, to
bless, and continue, and bless a blessing; For, he needed waters at his roots,
and dew upon his branch. Thus also, in exercises of piety, God must give to
will, and to do, after he has made willing, Phil. 2.13.

4. Men may be well rooted in a prosperous condition, and much blessed of God,
who yet may be overturned for a time, as here Job was.

Verse 20. My glory was fresh in me, and my bow was renewed in my hand.
In this Verse, He gives an account of his prosperity as a Magistrate (which he
instanceth and enlarges in the following Verses) That his glory, or honor and
reputation as a Magistrate, was not withering, but in the prime, and
increasing, and still fresh, or new, in the peoples esteem; and his bow, or his
power to maintain his Authority, and crush Opposers, did increase.

Whence, Learn, 1. Power is needful to uphold Authority, without which it is
but a shadow; Therefore Job marks the conjunction of his glory, and his bow, or
power to maintain his glory, as necessary for a man in his station.

2. Mercies are not sure, unless they be fresh and daily new, and be seen to
come daily by a new gift from God; For, that helped Job to confidence, that his
glory was fresh, or, new, and his bow renewed, or, changed, as if a new one had
been daily gifted him.

3. Abundance of honor and power is a very taking and ensnaring condition;
For, here this made Job fall asleep, sometime, in security, and made him dream
that his prosperity would continue.

4. Honor, and respect and power, may flow upon men, who yet may have as great
an ebb of all these; For so Job can only now say it was thus and thus with
him. Which may warn all what they ought to be preparing for.

Verse 21. Unto me men gave ear, and waited, and kept silence at my counsel.

22. After my words they spoke not again, and my speech dropped upon them.

23. And they waited for me, as for the rain, and they opened their mouth wide
as for the latter rain.


Job proceeds more particularly to instance the greatness of this his glory
and power: And First, (in these Verses) he instanceth it in the great opinion
all had of his wisdom; so that they waited for his counsel, and gave silent
attention when he spoke, v. 21. And when he had spoken, they acquiesced in his
opinion as good and profitable, v. 22. And finding it so profitable as rain is
to the dry ground, they greedily waited for more of it, v. 23.

Doct. 1. As it is a great mercy to be sharp-sighted in affairs, and able to
give advice and counsel unto others; So Magistrates ought, in a special
manner, to be endowed with abilities, that they may direct and advise the
people committed to their charge: For Job was a man able to give counsel. It
is an evidence of Gods love to a people, when he gives them such Rulers, 2 Chr.
2.11. And it is an evidence of his displeasure, and a forerunner of many
miseries, when it is otherwise. See, Prove. 11.14. Eccl. 10.16, 17. Is. 3 4.

2. It is the duty of men, especially of these whom God has placed in a
public station, to communicate unto others the gifts and talents which are
bestowed upon them; For, so did Job here. Men will find that it is no thrift
to be selfish, and lay up their abilities as in a napkin.

3. Good and faithful counsel and advice is so precious and great an
advantage, that right discerners will prize it; For, they counted it no lost
time to give ear, and wait, and keep silence at his counsel. Whereby they
witnessed, that they were free of that carelessness whereby men do proclaim
their contempt of precious truths and instructions, and of these who impart the
same.

4. As it is commendable in men to keep silence in many cases, Jam. 1.19. Prove.
10.19. especially when men better and wiser than themselves are speaking; So,
much more, is it commendable, when men do not contradict truth and sound
counsels, merely out of an humor of contradiction, and that they may decry
others: For, their silence, and that after his words they spoke not again, was
their commendation, in that hereby they witnessed their own prudence, their
respect and high esteem of Job, and that they were not ambitious to contradict
all advices (how sound soever) whereof themselves were not the most eminent
authors.

5. Good counsel, and every precious instruction, is refreshfull to discerning
hearers, as the rain is to the dry ground; For, says he, my speech dropped
upon them. Much more should we try whether Divine instruction, in matters which
concern our eternal happiness, be so esteemed by us: See Deuteronomy. 32.2.

6. Such as have experimentally found the good of Instruction, will find their
desire and appetite increased after more of it; For, since his speech dropped
upon them, They waited for him as for the rain, and they opened their mouth
wide as for the latter rain. See 1 Pet. 2.2, 3.

7. Not only men's estimation among others, but even their eminent parts and
usefulness, bottoming that estimation, are not a sure enough foundation upon
which they may build; For, all these failed Job in the matter of his confidence
and expectation, v. 18. Yea, it is a wonder if such a tide do not turn upon
men, for their trial.

Verse 24. If I laughed on them, they believed it not, and the light of my
countenance they cast not down.
Next, in this Verse, Job instanceth the greatness of this his glory and honor
in the great distance that others kept at with him, even in his relaxations of
mind, and his condescending affability. They did so reverence him, that when
at any time he gave a relaxation to his Spirit, and seasoned his gravity with
some cheerfulness, They not only were so glad to see him merry, that they
scarce believed it was so, but they could scarce believe but he was still
serious, and were sure that his mirth proceeded from no levity of Spirit. So
that, although he condescended, sometime, to be familiar and merry among them;
yet, they had not the confidence to grow familiar with him; as with an Equal;
nor did they so encroach upon him as might give him cause to think that his
familiarity had rendered him contemptible, and so make him blush and be ashamed
that he had condescended to it.

Doct. 1. It is lawful, even for godly and grave men, and men of authority,
sometime to be cheerful, and give a relaxation to their own Spirits from their
serious and weighty affairs; For, Job sometime laughed upon them, or was
cheerful and affable in his carriage, laying aside austerity. There is a
faculty of laughing given to men, which certainly is given for use, at least at
sometimes; and diversions are sometime needful for men who are serious and
employed in weighty affairs, It is true, we read not that Christ, who bare our
sins and sorrows, did ever laugh, (though sometime he rejoiced in Spirit) that
so he might fill his peoples mouths with laughter; and we find laughter
condemned, Luke 6.25. And some sort of it declared to be madness, Eccl. 2.2.
Namely, When we think to cure all our evils, and dispel all our sorrows, by
carnal mirth, and to find an happiness in it, Eccl. 2.1, 2. When our laughter
is untimous and unseasonable; For there is a time to weep, as well as to laugh,
Eccl. 3.4 When we please our selves with laughter, while the consciences
gnawing within, as not being purified by the blood of sprinkling, Pro. 14.13.
And, when our laughter proceeds from carnal levity and sensuality, Amos 6.4, 5,
6. from profane Atheism, 2 Chr. 30.10. or from unbelief, Genesis 18.12, 13. Yet
laughter is lawful, in the expression of joy and thankfulness for mercies
received, Genesis 21.6. Ps. 126.1, 2. In expressing holy confidence, Job 5.22.
and, in lawful recreation, as here. And particularly, Laughter is sometime
lawful for Magistrates and others in public charge, not only that they may
recreate themselves, but that, thereby, and by the like insinuating carriage,
they may gain the affection of the people. So that it is not to be accounted
Religion and Piety for men to become Stoics, for Religion does teach no such
thing. Nor need men to scarre at Religion for fear of that; Seeing Religion
warrants and allows unto men all lawful liberty in these things, and furnishes
them with surer grounds of cheerfulness, than they can find any where else.

2. Godly and grave men will be very sparing and moderate in the use of mirth
and recreation; For, Job insinuates, that it was his ordinary to be grave, and
that he was so sparing in his laughing, that they believed it not, and were
surprised with it. Our life must not be spent in continual mirth and revelling,
nor ought that to be made our constant trade, which should be but a diversion
and recreation.

3. Grave men will also be very cleanly in taking of their recreations; so that
their mirth will not be far from seriousness, and they will so manage it, as
it may not hinder their being profitable; For, so much also is insinuated in
that when he laughed, they believed it not, but apprehended there was somewhat
serious, and in earnest, even in his jests and mirth. See Ephesians. 5.4. Col. 4.6.

4. As it is men's duty not to take needless offense at any, but to be of gentle
and innocent dispositions; so especially, they ought to be glad of the welfare
of their Superiors, which tends so much to their own advantage; and not to
take advantage of their familiarity, to despise them; but still to reverence
and keep a distance with them: For, so did they to Job, They believed it not,
if he laughed upon them, they were so glad to see him satisfied, and they
believed it not so as to do any thing which might cast down the light of his
countenance, or make him ashamed of what he had done. It is a great sin in
people to restrain any (and especially their Superiors) in the use of their
lawful liberty, by carping at, and taking advantage of, their most innocent
carriage, or charging them with levity, who are of known gravity. In which
case, it is men's wisdom rather to forbear many things, as Job would have done,
had they not thus respected him.

5. As it is a fault in people to vilify the Authority of their lawful
Superiors, and bring them into contempt (as here they dealt not with Job) So
it should be the care of Superiors to maintain their reputation, and keep up
their Authority, for a right end: For, Job insinuates it would have cast down
the light of his countenance, and made him ashamed and sorrowful, if he had
exposed himself to contempt. See 1 Samuel 2.17 with 3.13. Tit. 2.15.

6. Godly men may find so great a change, that where their carriage was wont to
be a Law to all, they may be censured and carped at by all; For, so was it with
Job, He was wont not to be mistaken in his very mirth, now he is carped at in
whatsoever he does.

Verse 25. I chose out their way, and sat chief, and dwelt as a King in the
Army, as one that comfort the mourners.
Lastly, He instanceth the greatness of his glory and power, in his eminent
Authority, and that he was not only reverenced because of his place and
dignity, but beloved because of his tenderness therein. How he was privately
and publicly honored, because of his dignity, is pointed out in two
expressions. One is, That he chose out their way, and sat chief, which imports
not only that he took place of all, whether in walking or sitting, but that he
prescribed to every one what was to be done by them. The other is, That he
dwelt as a King in the Army, which not only imports, that he was chief
Magistrate among them (as it seems he was supreme) But that his injunctions
were obeyed as the orders of a King are obeyed in an Army, where there is
strict discipline, and ready obedience given by all. Or if we join the two
expressions together, the first may import, That in times of peace he sat in
the chief place, and ordered all affairs; and the second, That in times of war
he was followed by all, as their King and General. As for his tenderness in the
height of this dignity, it is added in the close of the Verse, That though he
sat chief, and was a King in the Army, yet in all this eminency he was as one
that comfort the mourners, or he was steadable to all in distress and
sorrow, comforting and easing them, and helping to solve their scruples and
doubts.

Doct. 1. It is a great mercy when pious men, and men of abilities, are
invested with Authority; As here God made Job to sit chief, and be King, who
was so godly, and able to discharge that trust faithfully. It is true, an
Absalom may pretend fair, that he may carry on his rebellious design, 2 Samuel
15.2, 3, 4. But it is a mercy when men really pious and faithful have power
with Gods approbation. See Is. 3.12.

2. Godly men who are in power are bound to improve their eminency for the
public good, and not for promoting their own interests; For, Job, when he sat
chief, put forth himself to choose their way, and was with them in all hazards,
in war as well as in peace. He was not like many, who aspire to places of
dignity, not for the peoples good (for whatever they pretend of that, the
people cannot see it) but for their own ends and advantage.

3. Public employments need be no hindrance to piety, if men be single and
straight in going about them; For, Job continues a godly man in highest
Authority, in greatest toil, and most serious consultations, and not only in
peace but in war (wherewith they were exercised, as well as now) for Jobs
speech, at least, alludes to war, as a known thing among them. And this may
sadly reprove many, who, instead of bettering the places to which they are
called, and making them more comfortable and refreshfull to the people, do
themselves rather become worse by reason of their dignity, and do wear out of
tenderness and familiarity with God, by reason of their many distractions. God
has not called these who would be godly, to be Eremits; and therefore they
must be far wrong, whose practice says, That Piety cannot be entertained
amidst the distractions of a lawful Calling.

4. As Obedience is due to Magistrates, so their Faithfulness in their charge
is a special mean to beget and cherish it; For this faithful Magistrate, (as
he is described, v. 12, 13, etc.) did choose out their way, and dwelt as a King
in the Army. Faithfulness will keep up a Magistrate's authority better than if
he should serve men's humors to maintain it.

5. Mourners and afflicted persons, (whether through trouble of mind, or other
crosses) are not wanting in all ages, but all times, and all conditions also,
have their own crosses and sorrows; For, even in Jobs time there were Mourners
to be comforted. See also, Chap. 4.3, 4. So that these Foords of trouble have
been already tried; and however men are apt to complain of present times,
compared with former times, (See, Eccl. 7.10.) yet, let Times change never so
often, there will still be such lots befalling the s^ns of men.

6. The eminency of Magistrates should not hinder them to stoup to comfort and
succor their people in distress; But they should respect them, and manage
their Power tenderly, as Physicians and Pastors, that so they may walk worthy
of their places, and gain the affection of their people. For Job, in all this
his eminency, was as one that comfort the Mou^ners; all that had any
grievance resorted to him, and he resolved their doubts, and comforted them,
chapt. 4.3, 4:

7. God may expose them to trouble, without comfort from any, whom he has
employed, and made tender, to comfort others; For Job, who had been a comforter
of Mourners, is now left without comfort from others in his distress. By this
dispensation of providence God leads his People to encourage themselves in him,
when these Conduits of comforts run dry, and he tryes their Faith, whether they
will believe his approbation of their Services, when yet he withholds a
visible reward thereof in this World.

CHAP. XXX.
This Chapter contains the second part of Jobs Discourse; Wherein he sally
regrates the change of his former Prosperity (of which he has spoken Chap.
29.) into Contempt and Calamity, and gives also some hints of his Integrity.

The whole Chapter may be taken up as a pathetical enumeration of his present
afflicting grievances and pressures: which may be reduced to these Heads. 1.
Reproach and insolent contempt, which were cast upon him by the younger sort of
People, verse. 1. -- who were persons descended of base parentage, verse. 1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. and who did very insolently contemn him, verse. 9, 10. now
when God had afflicted him, verse. 11. 2. Violent oppression, now when he is
brought low, verse. 12, 13, 14. 3. Terrors upon his Soul, verse. 15, 16. 4. Pain
and filthy disease upon his body, verse. 17, 18, 19. 5. His sense of God's anger
and heavy hand, in and under all these pressures; whereof h^ gives these
evidences, the ill success of his Prayers, verse. 20. God's cruelty and
hostility (as he apprehended) in his dispensations toward him, verse. 21, --
24. And, that he, who had been so tender to others in trouble, verse. 25. was
(contrary to his expectation) plunged in an abyss of evils, verses 26, -- 31.

Verse 1. But now they that are younger than I, have me in derision, whose
Fathers I would have disdained to have set with the dogs of my flock.
IN this Verse he propounds the first Branch, or Head, of his miseries, which
had now befallen him; Namely, that he was had in derision, or, despised,
scorned, laughed at, and insulted over, in his calamity. This he amplifieth and
aggravateth in the rest of the purpose, till, v. 12. And he gives such a
character of the instruments of this trial, and of their way in it, as does
clearly evince that he is not reflecting upon his three Friends in this
Discourse, as some have conceived. The first aggravation of this trial (in this
Verse) is taken from the consideration of their youth, who did thus insult over
him. They were younger than he, and of that sort who had reverenced him before,
and ought to have done so still, who now have him in derision. The second
aggravation (propounded also in this Verse, and insisted upon till v. 9.) is
taken from their base Original and Parentage who did thus so insolently abuse
him. Their Parents were so base as he would have disdained to have set them
with the very Dogs that kept his flock. This Job reflects upon, when he speaks
of their carriage, because not only their base carriage and conditions deserve
it should be remembered; whatever themselves had attained of respect in the
world; but themselves also (as would appear) continued in that same base and
low condition, being Inheritours of their Parents miseries, and their vices
too. And albeit this harsh expression, as it relates to their Parents, may be
mollified by considering what Job afterward says, that they were more useless,
and fed worse, than his very Dogs. And so the expression will point out, not
so much his disdainful thoughts of them, as how vile and wretched they made
themselves through sloth and wickedness, and that they lived miserably, and
were not worthy to have that trust, which Dogs had, of keeping his sheep; Yea
(as some conceive it) not worthy to keep the very Dogs, that kept his flock.
And so they understand that Proverbial speech, of a Dogg's head, 2 Samuel 3.8. of
a vile person, set to keep Dogs; than which these were yet viler. Yet the
terms wherein Job expresses this, are not to be looked upon as altogether free
of some excess of passion, upon which his great and generous Spirit was driven,
when he is so unworthily abused by the base Offspring of these base and
wretched Parents. Now as for the time when these base wretches abused him, it
is probable they did it at all occasions; especially when, before his Friends
came to him, he had any intermission of his pains, and went abroad; or when
they sat silent by him, Chap. 2. or in the intervals of time betwixt their
several discourses.

If we consider the scope of this whole Chapter, which is to point out the sad
change of Jobs former condition, intimated in the transition and connection. But
now, etc. It may teach,

1. As time is still in flux, so men's lots in time are very changeable, and
Saints may be exercised with notable revolutions in it; For, after all the
former sweet days Job had enjoyed, he is now made to change his note, and to
subjoyn, But now it is otherwise. Which may warn all to look for changes, and
that the wheel will still be rolling; so that men ought not to fix upon any
temporary enjoyment. And it may teach goodly men, when in a low condition, to
look upon a change to the better as possible, as Job found. For changes are
from the right hand of the most High; as the Original Text of Ps. 77.10. may
bear.

2. Simple trials are not so sharp in themselves, as when they come upon men
after they have formerly enjoyed great prosperity; For, this heightens Jobs
resentment, that now, after the former days, all the following miseries had
come upon him, which rendered his case sadder to his sense (though Religion and
right reason does teach otherwise, Job. 2.10.) than if he had never been in
another condition. See Ps. 102.10. This may teach men to be sober in their
comfortable conditions, lest former mercies contribute to imbitter a change, as
it will be indeed with the wicked, when they come down from their excellencies.

3. It may please the Lord to exercise his children with such changes of their
condition as deprives them of many mercies together; For, so much does Jobs
experience teach, who complains in this Chapter of so many sad changes that had
befallen him, in his reputation and authority, in his soul and body, etc. See
Lam. 2.22. From all which it appears, That (excepting Christ, who is God and
King of Saints) he has been more sharply exercised, than any one Saint, whose
exercises are recorded in Scripture. For these complaints recorded in the
Lamentations, give an account of the trials, not of any one person, but of the
body of a Nation. Albeit any one trial will be sad enough, when God has us to
try by it, yet many trials together will be much sadder. And when we consider
our sad changes, we ought also to consider what is left to us; It being an
undoubted evidence of humility, and of love to God (with whom we desire not to
quarrel) if we observe the mercies which are continued with us in our
afflictions, Ezr. 9.8. Lam. 3.21, 22. And if there be any who are so crowded
with a throng of afflictions, that they cannot, or have not leisure to, discern
mercies; they must remember, that such a condition is not without an example in
Scripture (for Jobs experience does prove, that such a path has been trodden)
and that they need much exercise, to try them, and to draw forth many proofs of
the grace of God in them, and of his love toward them.

4. Whatever men may think of trials, either before they come, or after they
are over; Yet in the mean time, and while God is making a trial of them, they
will be sad, and a searching exercise: Therefore Job expresses his resentment
of his condition as it now stands with him, not only after what it was before,
Chap. 29. but when it now presses him. See Heb. 12.11. If trial were not sharp
and searching, it could not try us, nor discover and purge our dross, nor fit
us for proofs of Gods love in supporting and delivering. And therefore we ought
not to judge of Gods love by the sharpness which we find, for present, in our
trials; And we should learn to pity these who are under the present sharp fits
of trial, even albeit some dross do appear. See 2 King. 4.27.

5. Albeit any thing will be a trial sharp enough, which has Gods commission
for that effect; Yet, if we speak of trials comparatively, as enjoyment of
goods and wealth is not the chief outward mercy, So the want thereof is not the
greatest trial, to a generous and godly Spirit: Hence it is, that in all this
enumeration of Jobs troubles, there is no complaint of the loss of his wealth
(though he seem to resent men's incivilities in the ways they used to take it
away, v. 12. etc.) in comparison of other losses. It is true, he does not
distinctly mention his loss of Children, either in this enumeration (though
that may be reduced to some head of his complaint. See v. 29.) as being chiefly
affected with trials on his own person, which are more sharp and searching
(even to these who are not led by a principle of sinful self-love) than trials
upon relations: And withal, his omitting many sad trials that had befallen
him, in this enumeration of his calamities, may intimate to us, that some godly
men (like Job) may be so afflicted, that when they have said much in uttering
their particular grievances and distresses, they must leave much unsaid, to be
spoken, to God or others, by their silence, and being crushed under it: Yet
this his silence about his wealth may teach men, as not to place their
happiness in wealth, when they enjoy it, so to bear the want of it soberly,
considering how soon God may send a sadder trial, which will make them forget
that. See Job 2, 3, 4, 5. Heb. 10.34.

If we consider the affliction here resented by him, that he was had in
derision, it may teach,

1. It is nothing strange, nor inconsistent with the state of the children of
God, that they fall in disgrace and contempt, after they have been highly
esteemed; For, Now, says he, (after all the respects formerly paid me) they
have me in derision. And of this David complains frequently. This comes to
pass, either when godly men make an Idol of their reputation, and are too much
affected with the applause they have among men; Or, when God has them to try,
how they will stoop to God in any trial wherewith he exercises them, and how
they will comfort themselves in his approbation and esteem of them, when they
are despised by others; Or, when God is to discover the base humors of men,
and the inconstancy of their applause, which does not follow men because of
their piety and virtue, but because of their present prosperity. Whence it
comes to pass, that so soon as a person comes to be in affliction, they change
their note of him. However, this warns godly men to build little upon the
uncertain and inconstant air of men's esteem and applause. See Act. 14.11, 12,
13, 19. and 28.4, 5, 6. It teaches them, also, to believe that such a change
as this may consist with Gods love toward them; To search what may be the rise
of such a change, or whether any folly in them have procured it at Gods hand,
or he be only about to try them, and improve it accordingly; And, To be more
afflicted, under such a change, with what may seem to reflect upon God in it,
than with their own particular grievances, as was David's practice, Ps. 42.10.

2. Contempt, reproach and disgrace, may come in among the first and sharpest
of outward trials, especially to men of great Spirits, who formerly have been
in esteem, and respected by all; Therefore Job begins with this first, that
they have him in derision, not only because he had spoken of his former respect
and honor immediately before, Chap. 29.25. but because this did much affect
him. Honor being naturally man's Darling, contempt and scorn cannot bu^^e a
sore affliction, Mat. 5.11. Heb. 10 32, 33. And they are cruel Persecutors, who
unjustly mock or scorn godly men, Genesis 21.9. with Gal. 4.29. And withal, when
men fall into disgrace and contempt, after they have been in esteem, this will
heighten the affliction. But we should study to be mortified to respect among
men (whether we enjoy or want it) and to content our selves with that honor
which comes from God only, Joh. 5.44. Which may suffice us, whether we be in
honor or dishonor, under good report or evil report, 2 Cor. 6.8. And if we
cannot command men's humors and inclinations to esteem of us, as they ought in
reason to do, or to continue their good opinion of us; Yet, if by grace we
study to subdue our own dispositions, we shall have a more easy task, than if
we made it our work to stop every reproachers mouth; And it is the greatest
affront that can be put upon revilers, to slight them, and not to be vexed
with that which is their real fault, and but our affliction.

From the first Aggravation of this trial, that they were younger than he, who
had him in derision, Learn,

1. It is to be expected, that God, in his providence, will order trials so, as
they may be most searching and trying, for measure, continuance, Instruments
employed in them, etc. For, so does Job amplify this trial from many
aggravating circumstances and considerations, in this and the following Verses.
Thus the Lord besets our trials with pricking thorns upon all hands, that they
may be trials indeed, and so may discover our weakness, and the power of his
grace upholding us.

2. As it is a sin in youth to insult over the aged ( Is. 3.5.) especially when
they are in adversity; So this is apt to imbitter that lot to our corruptions,
that it comes from such hands: For, this is recorded, both as their sin, and
as an addition to Jobs exercise and vexations, that they who were younger than
he, had him in derision. Men in their younger days are so rash and
headstrong, that it is not easy to get that time of their life spent without
miscarrying in it. And, in particular, it argues sinful rashness in them, not
to reverence old age (of which see Chap. 29.8.) or to take advantage of men's
miseries, to insult over them when they are low. Yet however this be apt to
irritate and provoke men who suffer these injuries, they should rather make it
their study to pity them.

From the second Aggravation of this trial (propounded in this Verse) that they
were of base Parentage who had him in derision, Learn,

1. It is a piece of sharp trial to the godly, when they are insulted over by
base rascals; as here it was to Job. So David complains that he was abused by
the very abjects, Ps. 35.15. But we must learn to stoop to God, and to be
exercised by any instrument he pleases to employ, as David did in the matter
of Shimei, whom Abishai, looked upon as a dead Dog, not to be suffered, 2 Samuel
16.9, 10.

2. To insult over the miserable is an evidence of baseness, and that men are
void of generosity; For, these men evidenced their base Original, by their
carriage toward him. And in that respect Job justly tells them of it, when
themselves proclaimed it by their insolent reproaching of him.

3. Reproach, especially from base persons, is very irritating, even to godly
men; For, from this does his tart reflection upon their parentage flow, that
when they did so unworthily abuse him, his great Spirit could not bear it at
their hand, without such a return as this. Saints weaknesses, as well as Gods
grace in them, will be breaking forth in trouble, and therefore they have need
to be upon their guard.

4. Some men, by their own viciousness and miscarriages, do render themselves
worse than very beasts; For, in this respect it was true, that they were not
worthy to be set with the dogs of his flock, Not that he disdained them
because they were poor, but because they were wicked, and because, being
brought low by affliction and poverty, they made themselves yet lower by their
beastly practices and manners, and became so useless and unprofitable, that
they were not fit for the meanest offices, but very Dogs were to be preferred
to them. Which may wa^n men to see how they spend the days of their vain time,
and that they become not bruit beasts (2 Pet. 2.12.) yea, worse than beasts,
for sensuality, unprofitableness, etc.

Verse 2. Yea, whereto might the strength of their hands profit me, in whom old
age was perished?
From this to v. 9. Job insists to clear what he had said, v. -- 1. of the
baseness of their Parentage who derided him; which he insists upon, Partly,
that he may clear how justly he had upbraided them, as men, in some respects,
below very dogs; partly, that he may clear how much baser these scorners of
him were, who were come of, and bred by, such Parents; And so this whole
description of their Parents baseness, and wretched life, may be understood of
themselves also (as some do so take it) who were so like them, and (be-like)
did drive the same trade of life with them. Partly, that he may intimate a
reason why their Children took him now at this advantage, when he is under
affliction. For it seems they were so insolent toward him, not only because of
their wicked disposition, but because he, being a Magistrate, had so pursued
their vicious Parents, that they were necessitated to flee from among men, as
it is recorded, v. 5. etc. Which they looking upon as great cruelty, do
endeavor now to repay him by their insolent deriding of him.

This description of their Parents baseness and vileness may be taken up in
four Branches. And,

First, (in this Verse) he declares, more generally, that it was no wonder he
did thus undervalue them, seeing they were unuseful for any good work, and
could not be so profitable to him as very Dogs. This he further confirms from
a reason, that old age was perished in them. Whereby he does not condemn age
simply as a crime in men; nor does he mean, that it is a sufficient reason to
esteem of men as dogs, or worse than dogs, because they cannot be steadable by
reason of their age; For, in such cases, men ought to be relieved, who cannot
be employed, by us. But the meaning is, That they had spent their time so, and
became such in their old age, that they could neither be employed, nor deserved
pity. For they had spent their youth so vitiously and idely, without being
employed in, or fit for, any good work, that when they came to old age (when
men's villainous pranks, as well as their strength, use to leave them, and they
become more sage and serious) that time of their life was perished, or lost as
useless, through the idleness of their youth. The word rendered, Old age, is
conceived by diverse skilled in the Original, to signify chiefly men's more
vigorous and fresh old age, when their wits are yet fresh and ripe, and their
strength not utterly decayed. Which adds to their crime, that they should so
have debauched their youth, as rendered them useless, even before decrepit old
age seized upon them, when by the course of nature men's strength and parts are
debilitate and exhausted. And it is true, there are other words made use of in
the Original, elsewhere, which more clearly signify men's being worn our, and
decrepit, and gray headed, through age. Bu^ I see no^ how that Emphasis of the
word here will agree with Job 5.26. (the only place, besides this, where it is
used) where Eliphaz promises to Job, upon his repentance, that he shall come
to his grave in a full age (for so it is there translated) but does not mean
(as would appear, nor agrees it with his scope) that he should dye in his more
vigorous and fresh old age. But whatever be the force of the word, if we take
the strength of their hands, in the beginning of the Verse, not strictly, for
that great bodily vigor and strength which may be expected in young, but not
in old persons, but more largely, for dexterity to go about affairs, the whole
Verse will import this in sum, That their ill spent youth had not only lost
that part of their life to them, but their old age also; So that they neither
would, nor could employ that part of their strength, which yet remained, in any
honest employment; nor had they learned any prudence or experience, how to
direct or manage any business, notwithstanding they had lived so long, but were
very fools, even in their old age.

Doct. 1. Men are justly accounted to be base, or of worth, according as they
are profitable in their station and generation, in the use of a lawful calling;
For, so Job argues, that he justly vilipended these men as base, because the
strength of their hands could not profit him, nor any, but they wanted both
skill and willingness to go about any employment.

2. It is a sad matter, when old age comes upon men, and they have profited
nothing in their time, but they are ready to dye foolish and vicious; For, thus
old age is perished in some, who can be only useless in it.

3. An ill spent youth will make a despicable and useless old age, unless mercy
prevent it; For, by that mean it was that their old age perished, and they had
nothing of old age but its shameful infirmities, and evidences of an ill spent
youth.

4. Whatever compassion should be showed to the indigent, or to those who are
infirm through age; Yet none is due to idle persons, and to these who have
spent their lives so viciously, that they are vo^^ of all virtue, and unwilling
to be employed in any good work; For, though Job was compassionate, and did
relieve those who were indeed objects of charity, as he elsewhere declares,
yet not only could he not employ these base men in any profitable work, but he
had no pity nor charity for them. It is true, how vicious soever persons have
been, it were inhumanity to suffer them to starve and perish, when they are
really unable to relieve themselves; yet, if idle vagabonds have any strength
left, as it seems these had, it is an act of charity, as well as of justice, to
force them to work, and to punish them if they will not. For they who work not,
being able, should not eat; to feed such, is to feed their vices, and cherish
them in them; and it is not an act of true charity, but of an irregular
tenderness of mind, to do it.

5. Such as spend their lifetime unprofitably, do leave a foul savor and
memorial behind them; As Job here does largely instance in the manners and
lots of these vicious and idle persons.

Verse 3. For want and famine they were solitary, fleeing into the wilderness
in former time desolate and waste:

4. Who cut up mallows by the bushes, and juniper-roots for their meat.


In the second branch of this description, Job instructs how base and vile they
were, by giving an account of the poverty and miseries, which they brought upon
themselves, through their own fault. Their wants and miseries did drive them
unto, (as our Translation carries it) and appeared in the solitary
habitations, and their poor shifts they made for their meat. As for their
habitations, they lived in solitary places, far from the society of men, and
places that were utterly waste before they made resort in them, v. 3. And for
their food, they lived upon wild, salt and unwholesome foot, which none would
eat of if they were not ready to starve, such as Mallows and Juniper roots, v.
4. And so they were indeed solitary in want and famine, as the beginning of v.
3. may be read. As for the word rendered, Mallows, I do rather understand it of
a saltish plant or shrub, which is called by the Greeks, either, Halimos,
because it grows in brackish or saltish places; or, Alimos, because men, by
eating thereof, do keep off hunger for a long while; though the name in the
Original agree rather with the first, as being taken from salt. Some do also
read the latter part of Verse 4. thus, They cut up Juniper-roots to warm them,
as the same word is rendered, Isa. 47.14. And we find that a fire of Juniper
wood has a great heat, Ps. 120.4. But it is not very probable that they would
take pains to digg up these roots only for fire, seeing they might have bushes
and sticks enough beside, with more case. And albeit as that plant, rendered,
Mallows here, is very salt and unwholesome food, so Juniper-roots are scarce any
foot at all; Yet the Phrase (which it may be was a proverbial speech) may
import this, that their wants and hunger drove them to make use of that which
was scarce food, and they choosed to use these poor shifts, rather than they
would work.

By what is here, and afterward, spoken of these persons, it seems they were a
sort of wandering theeving Arabians, in some things not unlike vagrant sturdy
beggars, or these who are commonly called Egyptians, among us; and the reason
of their wild kind of life seem to have been, partly, because it was fittest
for their ill shifts. For lurking in deserts, woods and bushes, they might
surprise passengers upon the way, and ^ob them, and fall in, upon occasion,
upon families about them, to steal from them, and then retire to their lurking
holes. Partly, because, wanting means, and being unwilling to work, they could
not (for poverty, and want of apparel and other necessaries) converse among
men in Civil Societies; and therefore (as our Version has it) for want and
famine they were solitary, and they choosed to take wretched fare there, rather
than appear among men, and follow a lawful Calling. Partly, because idle and
vicious persons were not suffered, but severely punished in these places where
Job lived; and therefore they, being unwilling to work, or abandon their vices,
and being afraid of punishment, did rather choose to flee a way, and lead a
miserable life in deserts, as is intimated, v. 5. etc.

Doct. 1. Albeit some men may prosper for a time in ^^l courses; Yet God may
cause others smart as visibly for them; As here these vicious Vagabonds were
oppressed with want and famine, and were solitary, etc.

2. Idleness, or want of diligence in a lawful calling, is an evil that will
very soon b^^ng men to reap visibly the bitter fruits thereof* For, this, in
particular, was the fault which was visibly plagued in them. They were vicious,
unprofitable persons, v. 2. And this drew on want and famine, or, want of all
necessaries, and particularly of meat, which is most necessary of outward
accommodations. See Prove. 18.9. and 20.4.

3. It is a great judgment upon men, when, through their own fault, they are
deprvived of the benefit of human Society; as here it was a ^l^gue upon these
vagabonds, that their vicious lives, and their unwillingness to relieve their
own necessit^es by a lawful Calling, made them seek to be solitary, and flee
into the wilderness, in former time, (or, yesterday, even till of late that
they went thither) desolate and waste, or barren and unfrequented. To enjoy the
benefit of humane Society is a mercy which men should improve while they have
it. And albeit, in some cases and times, a cottage in a wilderness were to be
chosen, if we had God's call to it, whereby we might be free of the contagion
of evil company, Ps. 55.6, 7, 8. Jer. 9.2. Yet men should take heed that, upon
no pretense, they choose such a lot without Gods warrant, neglecting those
duties to others, to which they are bound in their stations. For even
Hermitages will not cure men's vices, but they may carry those with them to most
retired places; as the experience of these persons, here designed, does
witness. If men's hearts be naught, they will find them bad enough there; and
if they mind sincerity, they may, by the grace of God, attain it in any place
where God has fixed their station, were it in never so great a crowd

4. Such is the power of vice and idleness, over these that are addicted
thereunto, that, rather than they will work, they w^ll endure greater toil and
misery than any they would readily be put to in the use of a lawful Calling;
For, these Vagabonds, being ashamed of their want and famine, did run to the
desolate wilderness, and toyled for Mallows and Juniper-roots, to fill their
hungry bellies, rather than they would work in a lawful calling, whereby they
might, probably, lodge and fare better. Withal, albeit such as labor in a
lawful calling have Gods allowance for a more liberal use of the creatures than
these wretches could attain unto; yet their practice, in living by that kind of
food, does intimate how men may subsist upon very little and course food; and
that hunger is a very pinching trial, and will drive men to feed upon that
which is scarcely food, such as these things were whereof they made use. See 2
King. 6.25. and 18.27.

Verse 5. They were driven forth from among men, (they cried after them, as
after a thief)

6. To dwell in the clifts of the valleys, in caves of the earth, and in the
rocks.

7. Among the bushes they brayed, under the nettles they were gathered together.


In the third Branch of this description, Job demonstrates their vitiousness by
this, That because thereof, they were expelled from among humane Societies. Not
only did himself, and other faithful Magistrates, expel and banish them,
because of their idleness, and vicious lives; but when, at any time, these
Vagabonds appeared among men, they were suspected that they would make some ill
shift among them, and therefore Neighbors did hurry them away, and pursued
them with clamours till they were gone from among them, v. 5. So that they were
forced to live in a miserable condition, in holes, and caves, and rocks, v. 6.
Where they brayed like Asses, being either hurt by the nettles and briars,
where they conveened to shelter themselves; or pinched with hunger, and cold,
and other inconveniences, v. 7. And as this (as was marked before) was, in
part, the cause of their solitary habitation, that they were pursued by
Justice, and driven from among men; so it was also the cause of their Childrens
spleen against Job, that he had been so severe against them.

Doct. 1. Idle persons are very ready to take an ill shift, when they have
opportunity; For, so is here supposed, that they were Thieves, and cried after
as such.

2. It is an evidence of a well-governed and ordered Society, where idle
Persons and Vagabonds are not permitted to find shelter; As here where Job bare
rule, those persons were driven forth from among men, (or, from the middle, or
body, to wit, of their Cities and Societies) they cried after them, as after a
Thief. They had that mark put upon them, that they were unworthy of the company
of men, and were hateful to all.

3. As the want of a commodious habitation is a sore affliction and trial, Heb.
11.38. So it is just that idle persons reap the fruit of their idleness in poor
and sorry accommadations: As here again is marked to have been the lot of these
persons, that they were driven sorth -- to dwell in the clifts of the valleys,
in caves of the earth, and in the rocks, and among the bushes, and under the
nettles, where they were gathered together.

4. Men who sin like beasts, are justly left to suffer like beasts; So that
though they be sensible of their misery, yet they never seriously lay it to
heart, nor study to remove the procuring causes of it; For, so much does their
braying, like beasts, and particularly, like Asses, import, that they felt the
smart of their miseries, but did not make any use of them. See Hos. 7.14.

5. Such may be the strange revolutions of time, in the holy and wise
providence of God, that these who have smarted for their crimes by the hand of
Justice, or their posterity, may have occasion to insult over godly
Magistrates, who executed justice upon them, because of their afflictions; As
here the posterity of these base men have Job in decision, who had justly
driven them forth from among men.

Verse 8. They were children of fools, yea, children of base men: they were
viler than the earth.
In the last Branch of this description, their baseness is yet further
demonstrated from their base kind and descent, That they were Children of
foolish, obscure, vile and contemptible Parents, whereof this was but too
evident a proof, that they had educated these their children so ill. This may
be indeed understood of these young men who derided Job, v. 1. That their
Parents (of whom he has already said so much) were foolish and obscure
persons. But the context leads us rather to understand it of the Parents and
Progenitors of these their Parents, that they also were vile and base, and so
they were an ill race for several Generations.

Doct. 1. Albeit grace be free, yet oft-times as Parents are, and as they breed
their Children, so do Children prove; For, these being children of fools, etc.
themselves prove like their Progenitors.

2. No low condition in the world, through want of wealth or honor, is a
discredit to men, if they want not grace and virtue also; Therefore he begins
with this, as the great reproach of these Progenitors, that they were fools;
or, men who had no virtue nor piety, wherein man's true wisdom appears; unto
which he adds, only in the second place, that they were also base men, (or, men
of no name, repute, or esteem in the world) as being th^n a reproach, when it
is joined with the former, and a reproach that might justly be charged upon
them, when, being so basely born, they had not studied to ennoble themselves by
virtue and piety.

3. Nothing can be more base and contemptible, in the judgment of right
discerners, than wicked and lewd idle persons are; For, albeit the earth be
vile, if we speak comparatively, as being the lowest and grossest of the
Elements, and trod upon by all; yet, they were viler than the earth, upon which
they trod, and out of which man was formed at first. This may be understood
both of these fools and base men, of whom he speaks in the beginning of the
Verse, and of their vicious and idle Children (of whom v. -- 1, 2, 3, etc.)
whose Offspring did now deride Job, that they were so laden and polluted with
vices, as they became most vile, and were not worthy to tread upon the earth,
as being unprofitable burdens upon it, as the Heathen Poet describes such.

Verse 9. And now am I their song, yea, I am their byword.

10. They abhor me, they flee far from me, and spare not to spit in my face.


Follows, in these Verses, the third Aggravation of this trial of contempt
and derision which Job suffered. And as hitherto he had aggravated it from the
consideration of their youth, and base descent, who thus abused him; So this
Aggravation is taken from the insolency and height of their scorn and contempt,
and their very base carriage toward him. This is pointed out in these two.

1. They were so glad of his misery, that they made songs of it, and he became
matter of table-talk to them. When they would be merry, they composed and sung
songs of his calamity, and they made him their byword, (of which see Chap. 17
6) or, their discourse and speech, which the word properly signifies; they
delighted in no discourse so much, as to repeat his miseries by way of
reproach, v. 9.

2. Not being satisfied with abusing him thus behind his back, when ever they
came in his presence (with the rest of the people, who, no doubt, flocked to
gaze upon him in his calamitous condition) they expressed their abhorrence of
him as an unlucky and ugly sight, so that when once they had seen him, they
turned away from him again; yea, and spared not to witness their contempt of
him, by spitting on his face, v. 10. This last may either be taken literally,
that they had the impudence to affront him, by spitting on his very face, as
the Jews did to Christ, Mat. 26.67. Or figuratively, that though they, or such
as they, had reverenced him before, Chap. 29.7, 8 yet now they spared not to
put some public affronts upon him, and so the phrase of spitting on the face,
seems to be taken, Number. 12.14.

Doct. 1. The taking away, or disabling of faithful Magistrates, will soon
make a strange change to the worse among a people; For, now when Job is in
affl^ction, and una^le to manage his Government, the Children of these
Vagabonds, who were before in exile with their Parents, come abroad out of
their holes, and appear among men. People, ordinarily, prove such as their
Magistrates are, as is frequently to be seen in the Books of Kings and
Chronicles.

2. It may be the lot of the Lords dearest Children, yea even of these who have
been most eminent for faithfulness in Church or State, to b^come a table-talk
to the world, and matter of mirth even to them who wish them worst; For, Job, a
fai^hful Magistrate, was the ^ong and discourse of these base m^n. See Ps.
35.15. and 69 12 Lam. 3.14. But godly men must learn to imitate Christ, who
d^spised the shame, as well as endured the Cross, Heb. 12.2. And they should
look upon popular applause as empty and uncertain.

3. It is an evidence of great impiety and inhumanity to rejoice at the
calamities of godly men, and especially of faithful Magistrates, who will be
respected by such as are truly godly, even when they are in affliction; For, it
was an evidence of their perverse disposition, that they made him their song,
etc. as judging, no doubt, that he had been an Oppressor, and therefore was
justly plagued.

4. It is an addition to the godlies trials (and a lot they should also prepare
for) not only to be reproached behind their backs, but affronted to their face;
As here they put affronts upon Job in his presence, v. 10.

5. Albeit men be apt to have strange thoughts of them who are under
affliction, Act. 28.4. And albeit affliction will shake off time-serving
friends and flatterers, Prove. 19 4. Yet men are in a great mistake, when they
look upon the g^dly in their afflictions as abominable and unworthy to be
looked upon, and they are nothing the less precious in Gods sight, that they
are under cross: For, Job was still honored and owned of God, and they did him
an injury, when they abhorred him, and sled from him, as a plagued man, and
unworthy of any company. But godly men must learn to bear what others would be
affrighted to behold.

6. Godly men ought not to set limits to their own trials of any kind, but
should reckon that there is no trial so sharp, nor ignominy so great, but they
may meet with it, As Job here was not only abhorred and fled from, but they
spared not to spit in his face.

Verse 11. Because he has loosed my cord and afflicted me, they have also let
loose the bridle before me.
In the fourth and last place, He aggravates this trial, of contempt and
derision, from the oocasion thereof, and that the hand of God gave a rise to
it. For God (who only conciliates respect to Magistrates (having loosed the
cord of his Authority, (whereby he held them in awe) by afflicting and laying
him low, they took occasion to break and loose all the reins of reverence and
subjection, and that even to his face. Whence, Learn,

1. It is God who conciliates respect and credit to men, and makes men in
Authority to be reverenced and submitted unto by inferiors; For, so does Job
acknowledge, that the cord of his Authority (for so the phrase is taken, Ps.
2.3. Job 12.18. Is. 45.1.) is in Gods hand, to loose or bind it, as he
pleases. See Ps. 18.47. and 144.2. This warns them who are in any place of
Authority, to keep near God, and mind his honor, lest he pour contempt upon
them, 1 Samuel 2.30. Mal. 2.8, 9.

2. It is the character of wicked men, that they are kept in subjection, not
from a principle of conscience, Romans 13.5. but by outward restraints, of fear
and punishments, which when they are removed, they break loose; For, when Jobs
Authority was in vigor, these base men were held in as with a bridle, like
beasts See Ps. 32.9. And now they let lo^se the bridle before him.

3. When God withdraws from his people, and afflicts them, they lie open to
many flood gates of trouble, which are ready to break in upon them; For, so Job
found in experience, that because God loosed his cord and afflicted him, they
let loose the bridle before him. Godly men are not to expect, that one trial
will come it is alone, but that deep will call unto deep. And bereby they are
also taught to hold fast by God, who, if he have mercy, can make very enemies
to have mercy, Jer. 42.12. 1 King. 8.50 2 Chr. 30.9. Ps. 106.44, 45, 46. And if
he forsake them, they will get none to own them, Jer. 15.5.

4. It is the duty of afflicted persons to see Gods hand in all their
afflictions, and the rise of all of them to be from him; As here Job looks up
to this, as the rise of their insolent carriage, that God had loosed his cord.
See 2 Samuel 16.10. This will put an edge upon trial, and make it affect us, will
press submission to him who is supreme Lord, and will open a door of hope to
godly men, that there is mercy in their lot.

Verse 12. Upon my right hand rise the youth, they push away my feet, and they
raise up against me the ways of their destruction.

13. They mar my path, they set forward my calamity, they have no helper:

14. They came upon me as a wide breaking in of waters: in the desolation they
rolled themselves upon me.


In these Verses we have the second Branch, or, Head, of Jobs present miseries
(and a consequent also of loosing this Cord, and afflicting him, v. 11.) which,
being a distinct trial from the former, contains an account of the violence and
oppression he sustained, Now after the Caldeans and others had robbed him. The
words are intricate and perplexed, as being the language of a man surcharged
with afflictions; yet, they may be taken up in this order: First, He propounds
his Case more generally, how he was oppressed and violented, v. 12. Wherein we
have to consider,

1. The actors in this trouble, the youth, or, young blossoms, as the word
purports. These were either some of those of whom he has been speaking, v. 1.
etc. Or some others who were yet younger than they, who were wont to hide
themselves from him before, chap. 29.7, 8.

2. The insolence of their attempt, they rise up, in violence and rebellion,
upon the right hand: which not only imports, that they thought themselves
better than he; for the Right hand is the more honorable place than the Left,
(unless it be when the Person on the Left hand is set upon a throne of
Majejesty; for in that case to be upon the Right, imports only that one is
next in dignity to him who is on the Throne, as 1 King 2.19. Psalm. 110.1.) But
that now they were able to assault him in his greatest strength (which usually
is in men's Right hand) and to prevail against him, his power being now
exhausted. Thus Satan is said to stand at Joshuah's right hand, Zech. 3.1. when
he had fair advantages to accuse and prevail against him, if the Lord, the
Intercessor, had not interposed.

3. A general account of their attempts against him, in two expressions: One
is, They pash away my feet; which may be understood literally, that when he
went at any time abroad to take the air, they laid blocks in his way (in
contempt and malice) to make him stumble and fall. But it is rather spoken
Metaphorically (as this part of the discourse is full of figurative
expressions) that any means of standing and subsistence he had yet remaining,
they tripped and turned him out of it; and when he would have sought redress,
they supplanted him that he could not proceed. The other expression is, They
raise up against me the ways of their destruction; Which is a Metaphor taken
from a Siege, (of which see chap. 19.12. Lam 3.5.) wherein Soldiers besieging
a place, do draw lines, and build forts, to hemme in and annoy the besieged;
and when they are about to make an assault, they do fill up the ditches, that
they may make an easy way whereby to enter in at the breaches, to make havoc
of the besieged, and plunder their wealth. So they (as the Metaphor is insisted
upon, v. 14.) did omit no skill nor activity, in falling upon him and
oppressing him. Secondly, He gives a more particular account of the effects
their violence and oppression had upon him, v. 13. Where we have to consider,

1. The effects themselves; whereof one is, They mar my path. Th^s does import
(in prosecution of the Metaphor) That as besieged persons are shut up on all
hands, that they cannot stir abroad; So they deprived him of any comfort, or
way to escape these violences; and withal, that they so disturbed his Spirit,
that he was put out of a good frame of patience, and driven from these paths of
tender walking, which would have been comfortable to him. The other effect is,
They set forward my calamity; that is, They added to the many afflictions that
were already upon him: not only by robbing him of what had been left with him,
but by their perverse judgments, false accusations, and bitter reproaches, of
him, whereof they made use as a pretense to palliate their violence.

2. The facility which was in bringing these effects upon him, which made them
successful in their undertaking; Which he sub-joynes in these words, That in
doing all this to him, they have no helper. This imports that, though they had
no persons of respect to countenance and stir them up to their violence, Yet,
these Youths were eager enough, and able enough, of themselves, to undertake
and effectuate it.

3. He subjoynes a more particular account of their proceedings against him,
which produced these sad effects, v. 14. Where he prosecutes the former
Metaphor of a Siege, v. 12. and (as our Translation has it, though it be not
so express in the Original, which has only, They came as a wide breach, or,
at a wide breach) illustrates it by a new Metaphor, of the Sea, or, a Flood,
breaking in at a breach, and overflowing all the Country: Showing, That, as
when Besiegers have levelled the way for their assault, and made a breach
whereby to enter, they do enter in at the breach in great numbers, even like a
flood of waters, and do overwhelm the defenders, as if they tumbled and rolled
themselves upon them, and do plunder all their goods; So, these Oppressors,
having now access to deal with Job, (by reason that God had made a breach upon
him, and brought him to desolation, or, a desolate condition) they break in
upon him, and overwhelm him in this day of his calamity; and seek all occasions
against him, (as the word, rolling, is translated, Genesis 43.18.) to render him
odious and suspected of Injustice, that they may spoil him of what he has.
The meaning of all which, is, That they violently invaded his possessions,
which were left by the Caldeans and Sabeans, or not taken away by the immediate
hand of God, and spoiled him of all, under a pretense of seeking reparation of
former injuries. They who either were poor, or alleged that he had wronged
them in the exercise of his office, did all come upon him and assault him;
taking what was in his House, dividing and possessing his land, and making
profit of his loss.

From v. 12. Learn, 1. When the Lord lets loose one trial upon his people, they
may look for others upon the back of it; For, here he has yet more trials to
endure, beside that of derision, v. 1. And of Gods afflicting hand upon him, v.
11.

2. Youth is but a flourishing blossom, which soon and easily fades; For, so
much does the word in the Original import. Which may warn youth not to glory in
it.

3. As youth are ordinarily prone to much ill, (as here they were) So it is an
evidence of a youthful disposition, and of unacquaintedness with the vanity and
revolutions of time, (be in whom it will) to be insolent and violent against
the afflicted: For, he complains, that the youth rise up against him, as a
prank that would be committed by none, but those who were young, either in
years, or in their dispositions and humors.

4. When God exposes a man to trouble, very weak Instruments will be able to
prevail against him; For, even the youth rose upon the right hand.

5. It is a piece of trial, to a great Spirit, to be trod upon by his
inferiors; As here it was to Job, that the youth should rise upon the right
hand, as better than he, and able to prevail against him.

6. Insolency and cruelty will pursue men, even when they are in a low
condition, with new indignities and troubles; For, to push away his feet, now
when he was afflicted, was a great indignity, and an evidence of their
insolency and cruelty, whatever way we understand it.

7. It aggravates men's cruelty and violence yet more, that they go about it
deliberately, and with resolution, As here, they made as it were a formal siege
about Job, and raise up against him the ways of their destruction, as
resolving to ruin him.

8. When Gods people are near-by spoiled and deprived of all they have, and are
thereby made objects of compassion, they may yet resolve to have more trials,
so long as any thing is left; For, so they pursued him with destruction upon
the remainders of his estate, as has been explained.

From v. 13. Learn, 1. When God is trying his people, and while it is his
pleasure that the trial continue, they may expect that all their endeavors to
redress and relieve themselves, will be in vain; For, they marred his path, and
shut him up, that he could find no out-gate, or means to be free of their
violence.

2. Disturbance of spirit, by irritations, provoking to impatience under
trouble, brings a great loss to the afflicted; For, thus also they marred his
path, and he resents it as a great prejudice.

3. Crosses upon the back of crosses, and cruel usage of the afflicted,
especially by unworthy persons, will readily disturb these who otherwise are
very calm; For, this marred his path, and discomposed his spirit, that the
youth should so violently pursue him with new injuries, who had already
suffered so much.

4. It is great cruelty, in the sight of God, to be obstructers of the comfort
or ease of afflicted godly men; For, Job complains of it as a great cruelty,
that they marred his path.

5. It is yet greater cruelty to help forward, and add unto the calamities of
godly men in affliction; For, he complains that they set forward his calamity.
It is a great sin to add to the affliction of the afflicted, were it but by an
insolent and untend^r look, Ps. 22.17. Obad. v. 12. or an insolent word, Ps.
69.26. But much more to add thereto by cruel deeds, Is. 47.6. Zech. 1.15. God
will reckon with such, not only for what they actually inflict themselves, but
for all the wounds which they cause bleed afresh, by their super-added
cruelties. And it being the usual lot of Gods people to be exercised with such
cruelty, it may invite them who find any sympathizers in their troubles, to
esteem of it as a singular mercy.

6. When God hides himself, and leaves godly men to be tried, Instruments will
be very eager, and weak Instruments will need but little help, to carrry on
their trial; For, though these were but the youth, yet they have no helper, in
doing all this.

From v. 14. Learn, 1. Wicked men are kept from doing evil by no inward
principle, but only by some external restraints; For, they are like waters,
that must be hemmed in by banks, otherwise they will overflow the Country; or
like Soldiers, that are only kept from entering a besieged place, till a breach
be made.

2. God, in his holy providence, does sometime minister opportunities to wicked
men, to discover themselves, and bring forth these dispositions, which at other
times are restrained in them; For, now a desolation makes a breach upon Job,
and then they discover their cruelty.

3. Gods people may find trials very sad, both in respect of the measure
thereof, and of their own crushed spirits, which are not able to bear much;
For, they came upon him as a wide bre^king in of waters, or, at a wide breach,
numerously, unanimously, and with impetuous violence; And they rolled
themselves upon him, when he is already desolate, or, made him feel their
weight, that they might overwhelm him, both by calumnies and unjust censures of
his former carriage and administrations, and by violent oppression, under
pretext of seeking reparation. It is not to be thought strange, albeit much
trouble, and little inherent strength, tryst together.

4. God takes notice, and will reckon with cruel persons, both for the measure
of their violence, for their timeing of it, and for the affliction it brings to
godly men, who are already crushed; All these are imported in this complaint,
as aggravations of their cruelty, to be noticed by God, that they came upon
him, as at a great breach, that they timed it in the desolation, and that they
rolled themselves upon him, and overwhelmed him.

Verse 15. Terrors are turned upon me: they pursue my soul as the wind: and my
welfare passes away as a cloud.

16. And now my soul is poured out upon me; the days of affliction have taken
hold upon me.


In these Verses, we have the third Head or Branch of Jobs present miseries;
Namely, the Soul-terrours, or, affrighting fears, which pressed him. This he
propounds, v. 15. -- That terrors are turned upon him, or, have taken hold of
him, after his peaceable frame of spirit, and do frequently recurr to vex his
Soul. The sadness of which condition is amplyfied from a fourfold effect of
these terrors.

1. That they did impetuously drive and toss his soul, as an impetuous wind
drives chaff or stubble, or a ^eeling cloud (as it is afterward) before it.

2. That his welfare (or, his strength, health, and prosperity) is gone, not
only so swiftly as a cloud is driven before the wind, but so totally as a cloud
is scattered by an impetuous wind; so that there is no more hope of recovering
it, than there is of fixing a reeling cloud, or of getting rain out of a
scattered cloud.

3. That hereby the remainder of his strength is so melted and exhausted, and
his soul (the fountain of life and courage) is so emptied of its strength, that
there is nothing left to support him, but it is rather become a burden, and
himself ready to succumb and faint.

4. That his afflictions, and his thoughts of these evils, do so gripe and hold
him fast, that he knows not whither to turn him.

From. v. 15. Learn, 1. The dear children of God, and even these who have a
good conscience, and assurance of reconciliation, may yet, in a day of trouble,
be assaulted with many terrors, or affrighting fears, about Gods dispensations
toward them, and the issue of them; For, Job, who never quit his integrity,
has terrors. It is true, Terrors are threatened to come upon the wicked, as
one of their plagues, Lev. 26.16. Deuteronomy. 32.25. Job 18.11. Jer. 20 4. and
frequently elsewhere: Yet truly godly men may come under this sad lot also; As
we see in Jobs experience, here, and Chap. 6.4. and 7.14. In Hemans, Ps. 88.15.
and others. This is not to be thought strange, if we consider, That the
dispensations of God toward godly men may be so strange, as they cannot
reconcile them with the testimony of their own consciences, which cannot but
affright them; That their being crushed with other trouble may make them
fea^fully apprehensive of everything; That while they look out to what is come
upon them, through the perspective of their present distressed condition, they
will be ready to multiply fears and terrors for the future; And, That God may
shake a rod of terror over them (as, Chap. 7.14, 15.) to exercise their faith,
and quicken them to their duty.

This, 1. Warns us to judge wisely and charitably of souls that are under
terrors; those may speak their weakness, or Gods purpose to excite them to
their duty, and humble them, but they do not evidence their being graceless, if
they run to God, and cleave to him, under them.

2. It warns us not to judge, not only of men's grace, but even of their present
reconciled and good condition, by their fits of terrors; For, Job was not only
a converted man, but his way and condition were approved of God, however
terrors did assault him.

3. It war^s us to be moderate in our apprehensions of what may befall us for
the future, when for the present we are crushed by trouble, lest those
contribute to beget and multiply our terrors and fears.

4. It teaches, That if this be done in the green tree, and if godly men,
walking tenderly, may be thus assaulted with terrors; what may be expected in
the dry tree, and what terrors may they expect who are wicked, or (being
converted, yet) do wander in sinful courses.

Doct. 2. Soul-affrightments and terrors are very sad and humbling,
especially, when men are also under other pressures; For, it is a sad branch of
Jobs complaint here, that he is under terrors, whereof he rehearses sad
effects in the rest of the purpose. And though the Noun, Terrors, be plural,
yet the Verb, To turn (as also that which follows, To pursue) is singular, to
intimate how distinctly he felt every one of them in particular. Thus they did
distract, and cut off Heman, Ps. 88.15, 16. And they put Job to choose any
death, rather than endure them, Chap. 7.14, 15. And no wonder; For terrors are
fears in their height and extremity, and therefore will confound and surcharge
men; We are apt to multiply them, even as fast as we can imagine and apprehend
things, and so every thought breeds us a new terror; And, if God be our party,
and our spirits be already crushed beforehand, what wonder if terrors carry
all before them, as will afterward be marked?

This, 1. Shows, How great their mercy it, who have a sound and quiet Spirit,
whatever their other troubles or pressures be. See Pro. 18.14.

2. It warns men to be afraid of exposing themselves to terrors, by walking in
sinful ways. See Chap. 31.23. Such will find it a fearful thing to fall into
the hands of the living God, who is a consuming fire, Heb. 10.31. and 12.29.

3. It serves to excite us to pity those who are under soul-terrours, as being
under a sharp trial, above any other pressure.

4. It warns the people of God to take heed of voluntary crushing of their own
Spirits, and that they entertain fortitude of mind, and endeavor to keep
their fears from growing to the height of terrors; lest, otherwise they breed
themselves the saddest of troubles.

5. Such as are under these terrors, may look upon themselves as special
objects of Gods compassion, if they will go to him with their grievances. Only
they should learn to seek their cure in strengthening of their own crushed
Spirits, which is the method God prescribes for relieving of themselves.

Doct, 3. Soul-terrours are so much the sadder, when they arise after a calm,
and serenity of mind, as it may come to pass; For, says he, they are turned
upon me, after my former sweet days, and do recurre, after some intermissions.
Albeit men be little sensible what a trial it is when their ill condition is
changed into a good condition (though it be indeed a trial) yet they are ready
to take it ill, if a cloud come after a sunshine, and godly-men, who have
tasted of God's kindness, will not easily digest it, if afterward he exercise
them with terrors. However, This,

1. Warns us that there will be changes in the conditions of the godly within
time; and albeit they sometime enjoy good days, yet they should not expect to
dye in their nest.

2. Hence, we should not be surprised with such changes, lest the surprizal be
worse than the trial it self: Nor ought we, having formerly tasted of
kindness, become thereby more unfit to endure an hard lot, than if we had
never enjoyed it.

3. Yet it may be expected that the trial, or terror, that comes after a long
calm and tranquillity, will have so much the sharper edge; For God purposes to
sift and search us by these changes of his right hand.

4. It is to be looked on as an evidence of our love and desire after Gods
favor, it terror from him, and our being put to that school after sweeter
enjoyments, be our burden and affliction, as Jeremiah 6.6.

Doct. 4. The Soul of man is a precious Jewel, in a right discerners account;
For, the word here rendered, my Soul, signifies, my Princely one, or,
ingenuous Princess. So David speaks of it (rather than of his animal life
only) as his Darling, or, only one, Ps. 22.20. It were a mercy if men would
once learn to set a price and due value upon an in mortal Soul; for then they
would make it their chief care to secure its interests, and would not hazard it
for trisles.

5. It is a sad and humbling fruit of Terrors, that, as the Soul of man is not
able to abide or bear them, so, they they take away the Souls rest, and do so
violently toss it, that it knows not what to do; For, says he, they pursue my
Soul, (which dare not stand, but is forced to flee, when they assault) as the
wind, even as the wind drives and tosseth clouds, and other light bodies,
before it. Thus Job was tossed throughout the night, Job 7.4. The Psalmist was
confounded with a multitude of thoughts reeling in his mind, Ps. 94.19. And
Jeremiah was not able to extricate himself from the heart-faintings that came
upon him, Jer. 8.18. This may speak somewhat to these who would be free of
drawing on this sad exercise. And,

1. As they should guard that they do not crush their own Spirits; So, they
should avoid all sin, (seeing every sin tends to disturb peace of mind and
conscience) and especially, sleeping in security, which justly provokes God to
send those tossings to awake such sleepers.

2. They should be careful to rest and acquiesce much in God, when they have
case; lest, otherwise, this restlesseness be made their lot and exercise.

3. They should also avoid idleness and vanity of mind; the bitter dregs
whereof may prove to be terror and restlesseness. Somewhat also is to be spoken
here to these who are vexed with these tossing terrors. And,

1. It is their advantage not to slay before them, but to set their faces
against them, and slight them in God; For when men flee, they pursue the more
eagerly.

2. They should be looked upon, while they are their lot, as needful to keep
them going, and to purge them from their folly and vanity of mind. And to
improve them is an effectual mean to take off their edge.

3. It must be their care, while they are thus tossed, to see if they can rest
as a Ship rests an Anchor; keeping their grip however they be tossed, though
they cannot rest so quietly, as an House rests upon its foundation.

4. Even in this tossed condition, they are bound by faith to bless God, who
will guide them through this storm, to a safe Harbor.

Doct. 6. It is not only a cause, but another humbling fruit of terrors also,
that the Soul can find no welfare, where they are; For, says he, my welfare
passes away; where, by his welfare, we are to understand, especially, his
Health and Prosperity. As it is very suitable that all things look sad and
desolate upon a Child of God, when God seems to be a terror; So here we may
also observe the emptiness and vanity of all worldly contentments, which will
fail us when we have most need, and when God comes to deal in severity with
us. Only we ought to be careful, even in the midst of terrors, to observe
and acknowledge the mercies that are continued with us, and not to undervalue
them.

7. When terrors get place, and prevail upon men, ordinarily there is a little
hope of what is to come, as there is contentment in what is present; For, Job
looks upon his welfare not only, as passed away, and gone for the present, but
that it is passed away, as a cloud, which, being once scattered, can promise no
rain for the future. Men's fears and terrors do not only make them a sad life
for present, but do bring up an ill report of all that may befall them for the
future. Yet such reports are not to be trusted, for Job was mercifully
disappointed.

8. If we consider Jobs case, we will find that these two things add much to
the disquiet of troubled Souls.

1. When they have too high an estimation of what they want; For, Job, in his
tossed condition, accounts his former prosperous and healthful condition, his
welfare, or, Salvation. And it is true, it was a great mercy which he formerly
enjoyed; yet probably in this his distress, he esteemed more highly of it then
when he did enjoy it, and that adds to his trouble. But we should learn to
live without all that which God is pleased to take from us, and should reckon
that to be our welfare, which we have (whatever it be) if we guide and improve
it well.

2. When their expectations are too much fixed upon the things of time, and
upon recovery out of trouble; For, sometime, his condition looked like a cloud
promising rain, so that when it passed away, the disappointment rendered his
condition the sadder. Sober expectations would free us of much toil and
vexation

From V^rse 16. Learn 1. As trouble in its time is very sad ( now, says he, my
Soul is powered out,) of which, see v. 1.) So Saints are not complementers in
the matters of their exercise; But the grievousness of what they complain of is
seen in the sad fruits thereof: For, he proves that his Soul was pu^sued, v. 5.
by very sensible effects, And now my Soul is powered out.

2 Whatever the spirit of a man be able to do, as to bearing of common
insi^mities and troubles, Prove. 18.14 -- Yet Soul terrors will overcome all
his spirit and courage; For, says he, my Soul is powered out, not in prayer,
(as the phrase sometime imports, Ps. 61.8.) but become faint and weak,
through irresolution and other pressures. The allusion is to waters powered out,
or to wax melted, as Ps. 22.14 As natural courage it is alone will never do well
in acting for Christ, as the issue of Peter's Resolution to dye with Christ does
witness; So they who have no more but that for bearing of trouble, and
especially Soul-trouble, will find that trouble will press the life out of it.

3. A crushed Spirit, in stead of being a supporter under terrors, does it
self become an heavy burden; For, says he, it is pow^ed out upon me, or, lies
upon me as an heavy pressure and burden, when it is powered out and becomes
faint. Thus a wounded Spirit is so far from being able to sustain a man's
infirmities, that self becomes a burden, which, who can bear? Prove. 18.14. And
a man, thus perplexed, becomes the heaviest burden to himself, Job 7.20. Which
shows how good God is, who yet supports such crushed one, Ps. 73.26.

4. As Afflictions have their time and day, and may sometime continue long, and
for many days; So, albeit, men naturally desire to shift trouble; yet when it
has God's Commission, it will seize upon the stoutest and greatest Shifter,
and arrest and keep him, as it were, in bands: For, says he, the days of
affliction have taken hold upon me. To seck to decline trouble (either the
feeling of it, or making use of it, when we must feel it,) and to be as
bullocks unaccustomed to the yoke, is the ready way to augment our sorrow and
trouble.

5. Men never knew pressing trouble (whatever they have endured) who know not
Soul-terrours, and perplexities; and where they are, other troubles will easily
get in upon Spirits, to vex them: For, in both these respects Job says, Now
being under terrors, v. 15. the days of affliction have taken hold upon me;
because those terrors were in themselves a pressing trouble, and because they
made his other troubles become pressing upon him.

Verse 17. My bones are pierced in me in the night-season: and my sinews take
no rest.

18. By the great force of my disease, is my garment changed: it binds me
about as the collar of my coat.

19. He has cast me into the mire, and I am become like dust and ashes.


In these Verses we have the fourth Head, or, Branch, of Job's present
miseries; Namely, the great Infirmities and pain of his Body, occasioned by the
terrors of his Soul, and the loathsome disease of his Body. And,

1. He points out the vehement pain he had in his Body, v. 17. That not only
his flesh, but his very bones were so pained, as if they had been pierced;
insomuch that, not only in the day, but in the night when men should rest, he
was afflicted with exquisite pain; and his sinews, being touched and affected
with his disease, had no intermission of pain, so as he could get no rest. The
words, in me, are in the Original, from above me; and so some read the Text
thus, He pierces (as the verb is singular) my bones from above me, that is,
God pierces them by these diseases which he sends from above, or so pie^ceth
them as if he would pull them away from above, or from out of his body. All
comes to one purpose, that he had great pain, inflicted by God, as if his bones
were broken and pierced, and pulled out of his flesh.

2. He points out the loathsomness of his disease, v. 18. The Original, in the
beginning of the Verse has only thus, By great force is my garment changed.
Whether we supply it thus, as in the Translation, By the great force of my
disease, or, as others, By the great force of God, all comes to one purpose;
For God employed his force here by inflicting the disease, which had so
forcible effects. And the meaning of the Verse is, That the violence and
loathsomness of his sickness was such, as the ulcerous matter, which ran out of
his boyles and sores, did foul and alter the garments which sometime had been
an ornament, and badge of his Dignity. Yea, the filthy matter, drying upon his
garments, and making them staff, or, (before it dried) causing his garments
cleave and stick to his skin, did bind and straiten his body, like the strait
collar, or neck, of his coat: where he alludes to their custom, who had long
garments, open only at the neck and foot, Which being strait above, where they
put it over their head, could not but be very troublesome, especially to these
who had any bodily pain.

3. He amplifieth this loathsomness of his disease, v. 19. from the
consideration of the hand of God in it, and from the effects thereof; Showing,
that God had hereby cast him into the mire, namely, of this filthy matter
running out of his sores, and so had laid him low, as if he had cast him upon
the ground in a mire: And, That he was become like dust and ashes, that is, his
dried scabs and filthy matter upon his body made him resemble a lump of dust
and ashes; And withal, his wallowing in the dust, in his trouble, and his
humbling of himself before God in dust and ashes (as Chap. 42.6.) made his
contract more filthy upon his body. Though it may also be understood
figuratively, that he was become base and vile in his own eyes, remembering his
base Original, and that he was but dust and ashes, as Genesis 18.27. All these may
be joined in one; For it is not to be doubted, but when godly Job considered
his own filthy and loathsome body, he was thereby led to mind his baseness.

From v. 17. Learn 1. Bodily pain and sickness is a very sharp trial,
especially when it is joined with other troubles, upon a man's mind, name and
estate; For, here, after he has spoken of the contempt, oppression and
terrors, under which he suffered, it makes a new Branch of his Complaint, that
his bones are pierced in him, and his sinews take no rest. Thus did Satan
reckon, that affliction upon Jobs body would try him to purpose. chap. 2.4, 5.
See, also, chap. 33.19. So that we are to prize it, as a great mercy, if we
have healthful Bodies; we ought to beware that we abuse not health and
strength; we ought to reckon that our trials are not complete, so long as we
want that trial, of pained and sick Bodies; and, we ought to pity these who are
exercised with it.

2. It may please the Lord to exercise his own dear Children, whose Bodies will
be eternally glorious, with much bodily pain, even amidst their other trials;
As here befell Job. This the Lord is pleased to do to his Children, not only
that he may chasten some of them for their sin and folly, Ps. 6.2. and 32.3.
But that hereby he may complete their trial, and take proof of what is in them;
that he may give proof how much trial he can support them under; that he may
let them see how much affliction may be consistent with his love to the
afflicted; that, by the lot of some, he may warn all to prepare for what may
befall them, being thankful if their trials come not to that height and
extremity; and, that he may teach all, that they ought not to judge what will
be the condition of Saints in glory, by what sometimes they are in this world.

3. Nights rest is a sweet mercy, which, sometime, God may withold from his
Children; For, Job's bones were pierced in the night season. See, also, chap.
7.3, 4. and 17.12. Ps. 77.4. As Saints, who are at peace with God, ought to
observe it as a mercy, if they get but nights rest, amidst their other trials;
and if God withold it, they ought to reckon that God denies them that
ordinary case and lenitive, to the end their support and help may be seen to
come entirely from himself: So further, Others, and even Saints in their
miscarriages, may read diverse things in this trial of wanting rest. As,

1. That it is a check for their too much rest and quietness, little regarding
how matters go in the world, which is, ordinarily, the disposition and practice
of the most guilty persons; as we find guilty Jonah was fast asleep in the
tempest, when the Mariners are awake, Jo^. 1.5, 6.

2. That it is a check for their little disquietting of themselves with seeking
of God, but either neglecting it altogether, or taking an easy way of it;
Whereas David used to be at it at midnight, Psalm. 119.62.

3. That it is a fruit of their sinful disquietting of themselves about the
world, which, often, times, takes from them the nights rest. See, Ps. 39.6. Eccl.
5.12.

4. That it is a fruit of their attempting to disquiet God with their
provocations. See, Is. 1.24. and, 43.24. Am. 2.13.

5. That it is a fruit of their disquieting of themselves sinfully and
excessively under trouble, without endeavoring to encourage and compose their
own spirits, as 1 Samuel 30.6. Ps. 42.5, 11.

From v. 18. Learn 1. Albeit the Lord be pleased to put beauty upon our bodies,
yet they are but composed of very loathsome and vile matter, as he can easily
discover by a touch of sickness; For, so does here appear in Jobs ulcerous and
loathsome Body, which defiled his Garments. See Proverbs 31.30.

2. Saints, whose dust will one day be raised in glory and incorruption, may
yet be very ugly and loathsome in this world; As here Job was, as also Lazarus
the beggar, Luke 16.20.

3. Albeit it be little matter what be the condition of men's Bodies, so the
Soul be adorned with grace; Yet it is an humbling trial, in its own kind, to
have a loathsome Body; Therefore Job here complains of it, how the ulcers of his
Body defiled his Garments, and made them so stiff, that they hurt him. And
when God makes this the trial of any, it is a Call to them to be humbled.

4. Albeit men do, ordinarily, glory too much in their apparel; yet, as it is
appointed to cover our shameful nakedness, So, God may humble, even his own
Children, with the scarcity thereof in time of need, and by its being a witness
to declare what Bodies it covers: For, so Jobs garments proclaimed how vile a
Body he had; and his complaint that they hurt him; does seem to import that he
had not variety of them wherewith to shift himself, but was forced to wear the
raiment he had, even when it became stiff and hard, to his no small trouble
and pain.

From v. 19. Learn 1. It is good to have constant thoughts of God's hand in all
we meet with, that we do not mistake and miscarry; and of his design and
purpose therein, that we be not surcharged with groundless fears: therefore
does Job over again (after what he has marked, v. 11.) observe that God did
all this, He has call me, etc. and that he did it to humble him, and make him
know what he was.

2. Gods end in humbling trials, is, to cause men know their Original, which is
a needful lesson to all, especially to dignified Saints, Genesis 18.27. So here,
God cast him into the m^re, that he might know he was dust and ashes, being so
like it, by reason of his trouble.

3. It may assoile God from all challenges for afflicting of men, that he
lays them no lower by trouble, than they are indeed in their Original; For,
Job becomes but like dust and ashes, by this affliction, the very thing which
he is by his original constitution, and which he will be at last, when dust
returns to dust, Genesis 3.19. Eccl. 12.7.

4. It is a very sweet and comfortable improvement of trouble, when, as God
humbles men thereby, so, they are humbled, and diligent in learning that
lesson; For, Job takes with the instruction, and became like dust and ashes,
the thing which his present condition spoke him to be.

5. It is not little that will abase man, and make him know himself, but God
must let him wallow in trouble, that he may learn that lesson; For, he is cast
into the mire, and left to wallow there, that he may become like dust and ashes.

Verse 20. I cry unto thee, and thou do not hear me: I stand up, and thou
regardest me not.
The last Head, or Branch, of Jobs present miseries, is, his sense of Gods
anger, and heavy hand, in all his calamities. Of this he gives three Evidences,
to the end of the Chapter, in recounting whereof, he speaks sometime to God,
and sometime of him.

The first Evidence of Gods anger in his calamities (in this Verse) is, the ill
success of his prayers; and that when he prayed, he was not heard, and when he
insisted, he was not the better, but rather the worse handled. For clearing of
the words, it is to to be considered, That the negative particle, Not, is not
expressed in the Original, in the end of the Verse, where it is only, Thou
regardest me, or, look upon me. But though it be not expressed, yet it is to
be repeated from the former part of the Verse, as is usual in this Language;
Compare Deuteronomy. 33.6. Ps. 9.18. 1 Samuel 2.3. Pro. 25.27. Isai. 38.18. and other
places, where this particle must be repeated to make up the sense. Others do
read the words without the particle, and that variously; Some thus, Thou
look upon me, and do no more, but art only a spectatour of my miseries;
but that reading does not express the Emphasis of the Original word. Some read
them by way of Interrogation (which must be resolved negatively) thus, Do
thou regard me? Or, Express any pity and compassion to me? Surely, none at all.
And some read them thus, Thou markest me, Or, singlest me out, to punish me yet
more; as is subjoyned, v. 21. All these readings are to one purpose, and do
show, that when he persevered in prayer, he was not noticed, but, instead of a
comfortable answer, his afflictions were continued and increased.

Doct. 1. Albeit, in many respects, it be sweet to Saints, that they have to do
with God in trouble; yet, sometimes, through their weakness, it wants not its
own bitternesses that it is so: For, here Jobs having to do with God, resolves
in a complaint, when he reflects upon his success.

2. Whatever complaints our sense suggest to us of God; yet it is our best not
to run away from God, but to go to him, and lay them out before himself; For,
Job here tells God the bitterest of his resentments, so also, v. 21, 22, 23. It
is a good errand to go to God, and tell him our tentations, for that is a
complaint of them, and it is Child-like, and an evidence that tentations have
not quite overthrown us, when we take that course with them.

3. It is the blessed advantage of godly men, that, as their lowest condition
does not hinder them to pray, so, their trouble leads them to leave themselves
upon God, to see the need of prayer, and of fervency in it, if they will
practice accordingly; For, says he, I cry unto thee, as knowing that he was
warranted to pray, notwithstanding his deep distress, and being careful to
improve that liberty in fervent prayer and crying. See Ps. 50.15.

4. Saints in trouble will not get resting on the work of prayer, unless their
prayers be heard also; For, so is here imported, that he was put to look if God
did here his cry. See Ps. 5.3. Yea, it is the saddest of Saints afflictions
under trouble, if their prayers be not heard, considering both their pressing
need, and that it seems to speak God angry, when he does not hear; as will be
after marked.

5. Although it may seem strange to Saints, not to be presently heard in
trouble, considering Gods promises, Ps. 50.15. and 55.17. Luke 18.7, 8. Yet,
God, in his deep wisdom, may seem not to answer, or really delay to answer,
the cries of his needy people; For, I cry unto thee, and thou do not hear me:
In the Original it is, Thou do not answer me; For, Job doubted not but he
heard him, though he did not evidence so much by granting his request; But
(notwithstanding all his cries) let his Friends, his Oppressors and Scorners
of him, deal as they pleased with him. See Ps. 22.1. and 69.3: Lam. 3.8, 44. Of
this see more on Chap. 22.27. Only, when we get not satisfactory answers to our
prayers, in being delivered from our pressures, let us labor to get it made
up, in quietness of spirit, 1 Samuel 1.18. in strength and support to bear our
pressures, 1 Cor. 10.13. Ps. 138.3. and the want of a deliverance from them, 2
Cor. 12.8, 9. in grace to make use of the delay, and to reap good fruits of it,
(such as, quickening yet more to prayer, humbling of us, purging of our dross,
meekness under such a lot, sense of our ill deservings, etc. which are better
than many answers and deliverances) and, in faith to believe that God will come
in due time, before our case be desperate, Hab. 2.3.

6. It is the duty, and will be the practice of godly men, when in a right
frame, not to give over prayer because they are not answered, but to persevere
at their duty; For, notwithstanding he was not heard, yet, says he, I stand
up, in the posture of a supplicant, Jer. 15.1. and that I may present my case
before thee. Gods not answering of our prayers is no call to us to give over,
(as we are, oft-times, ready to conclude) but rather that we should pray on,
Ps. 88.1, 13, 14. For (beside that there is hope in waiting) what should a
needy Saint resolve to do next, if he give over prayer? Present sinking, or
running to a sinful shift (with Saul) would be the issue of such a resolution.
But however matters go, the best of it is to resolve to dye at Christ's door,
rather than take our answer, and go away, as 2 King. 6.33. For whatever be our
lot, it is good if we be not deserted as to duty; and though our hands may be
weakened in going about it, and sometimes many passions may be raised, yet it is
good to get up and be doing, and to let our diligence witness how we are
affected with our wants, and how we adhere unto, and depend upon God, however
he seem not to pity us. And they who thus continue to pray, when they are not
answered, who wait on, when they are delayed, and do pursue, when God seems to
flee, are acceptably and commendably employed; as the woman of Canaan found in
the issue, Mat. 15.

7. Such as would acceptably persevere in prayer, ought to be the more earnest
at it, that an answer is delayed, or seems to be denied; For, so much also does
his standing up, as an earnest supplicant, import. See Luke 22.44. This is one
of the ends wherefore the Lord delayeth to answer the prayers of his people,
even that he may train on their affections, till they become sick of love.

8. It may please the Lord to exercise his people, even when they persevere in
earnest supplications after delays and refusals, with yet more delays and
refusals, and, it may be, with harsher usage, the more they insist: For, says
he, I stand up, and thou regardest me not; Or, markest me, to afflict me yet
more, as has been explained. Saints may not only get no answers to their
prayers, but more rods, yea, wrath, may seem to meet them in the face, when
they continue to pray on, Ps. 80.4. Without this, we will not be well enough
tried and refined.

9. Want of success in prayer, especially when men insist and persevere,
notwithstanding they are delayed, will very readily irritate even godly men;
For, here it is Jobs bitter complaint, that God did not regard him, but did
mark and single him out, to inflict more upon him, when yet he is so earnest
and instant in prayer. It is true, he does not directly quarrel Gods
faithfulness in his promises; yet his weakness appears in expostulating about
this delay and hard usage. So that godly men had need to be upon their guard in
such cases; For no answer, or a sad answer of prayers, after long wrestling
with discouragements and continuance at that duty, cannot but try them
narrowly; and they may expect that their weakness, meeting with such a
tentation and exercise, will be ready to break forth.

10. Whatever be the weaknesses of Gods people in extremities, yet it is not
their way to complain for trifles, or things of small moment; For, Job
complains not but upon this ground, That in such an extremity, when all were
running him down, God did not notice nor hear him, though he cried so earnestly
to him. So that they are far more inexcusable, who, upon every light account,
presume to be clamorous in their complaints.

Verse 21. Thou art become cruel to me: with thy strong hand thou opposest thy
self against me.
The second Evidence of Gods anger in his calamities (to v. 25.) is, That God
(as he apprehended) was become cruel and hostile in his dispensations toward
him. In this Verse, he propounds his grievance, That God, who formerly had been
kind to him, was now become cruel in his actings and dispensations toward him;
and whereas he was wont to support him, he did now employ his power, as an
enemy, in opposition to him. As for these expressions of his sense of Gods
dealing, albeit it cannot be said they flowed from wickedness, yea, it was
grace in him, that made him resent this change and dispensation of providence,
and that made him tell all his hard thoughts of God, to himself, (as Jeremiah
also does, Jer. 15.18.) which is, in effect, to complain of himself, that he
should think God cruel: Yet, in expressing his sorrow and resentments, he is
too pathetick, and expresses much passion and weakness; for which he is
reproved by Elihu. Here,

Obs. 1. If we consider this complaint in it self, It teaches,

1. It is the way of Gods people to take up God, as their chief party, in all
their troubles; For, so does Job here. See also, 2 Samuel 16.10. And though it be
very humbling to consider this, yet to lose sight of God in trouble, produces
many bad effects (such as, neglecting to go to him, betaking our selves to ill
shifts, bitterness, etc.) when we should be stooping and humbling our selves
under the mighty hand of God.

2. God may seem, for a time, not only not to hear godly supplicants, but even
to be a severe foe unto them; For, unto what is complained of, v. 20. this is
added, Thou art become cruel; which not only imports, that he accounted it
cruelty, that God did not hear him, but that he was very severe against him,
instead of giving him an answer. See Ps. 8^.4. Jer. 30.14. Lam. 2.5. Saints
must not mistake this lot; for he may have a friends heart, when his
dispensations seem to be hostile, that he may try them. And let us not count
him cruel, only because he gives us much work, and will not spare our lusts;
and whatever he seem to do to us, let us beware of turning foes to him.

3. It is a character of a godly man, that he is sadly afflicted with any sign
of Gods indignation, or even with the want of an evidence of Gods favor and
affection in trouble; For, here it is Jobs complaint, that God was become
cruel, and opposed himself against him, as an enemy. See Ps. 6.1. Jer. 10.24.
But wicked men look rather to their lot in it self, without minding Gods
favor, or anger, in it.

4. Whatever the wicked think of Gods favor, who never knew it; yet the want
of it will be sad to the godly, who have tasted by experience how sweet it is:
For, Job complains that he was turned to be cruel, as it is in the Original.
Severe dealing cannot easily be digested by them who have tasted of his love,
and none can live comfortably without the sense of his favor, but they who
know it not.

5. As Gods power, when he lets it forth in effects, is irresistible, and
insupportable for any creature to endure it, however fools do harden
themselves; So godly men will soon groan under the apprehension thereof; For,
Job resents that by his strong hand he opposed himself against him. It is
indeed the character of godly men, that they are sensible of their own
weakness, and therefore are soon made to stoop under the mighty hand of God.
See Job 7.12.

Obs. 2. If we consider Jobs weakness in his complaint, it may further teach,

1. All men by nature are apt to have hard thoughts of God in trouble; as here
Job gives proof, in his apprehensions of Gods cruelty and opposition. So also
did Jeremiah evidence his inclination to mistake God, Jer. 15.18. But unrenewed
men do come to a greater height in these distempers, Rev. 16.19. Therefore we
should guard against that evil, as being incident to men in trouble, and being
the great design that Satan drives in it, Chap. 1.11. and 2.5.

2. Tentation may over-drive, even such as are truly godly, to speak that which
is unbeseeming; yea, and worse than they think; For, here Job is over-driven by
tentations. As Saints must not be judged by what they are at fits, so they
should be upon their guard, when under tentations, and must not think that
their hard condition will assoil them, let them do what they will.

3. Sense is Faiths great un-friend, under tentation, if it he hearkened unto;
For, it was his sense that drove him to say all this.

4. When godly men are ready to complain of God without cause, or to give
credit to sense, they will readily find their complaints grow upon their hand;
For, Job being in this distemper, he proceeds from complaining that God did not
hear him, but added to his trouble, v. 20. to complain that he was become
cruel, etc. This, as it evidenceth our weakness, and should keep us from
engaging in such a way; So God makes use of it as a mean to drive us from our
complaints, when we see whether they would tend, if way were given to them.

Verse 22. Thou liftest me up to the wind: thou causest me to ride upon it, and
dissolvest my substance.
In this, and the following Verse, Job propounds two particular grounds of his
apprehensions of Gods cruelty and opposition. One is held out in terms borrowed
from Chafe tossed and dissipated in the air by a strong wind; Or, from Vapors
drawn up into the air, and there dissolved and melted into rain; Or, rather
from a person carried up by a whirlwind into the air, and tossed there till he
be overcharged and suffocated. The meaning is, That he was violently tossed
and hurried with a whirlwind of outward troubles, under which he was kept till
all his means and outward enjoyments were gone and dissolved; and with a
tempest of vexations upon soul and body, to the dissipation of his subsistence
and life, and of his wit also, as the word signifies. In sum, He who rode
prosperously, and in state before, is now made to ride in a chariot of strong
and fierce afflictions, which had ruined him; Afflictions had blown away his
substance and wealth, his body was melted (as the word imports) and ready to be
dissolved, and his soul was overcharged, so that he is at his wits end.

Doct. 1. How sure soever men think they sit, yet when God sends affliction, it
will toss and hurry them; Therefore it is compared to a wind, or a whirlwind,
because it brings sudden, violent and vehement vexation and tossing. Thus Job,
when he was first assaulted, did sit diverse charges, Chap. 1. and 2. yet at
last tentation and trouble did prevail. And it is one of the effects of
trouble, to shake those who are settled upon their lees, and to keep godly men
from fixing themselves upon the things of time.

2. As men cannot keep themselves at ease, when God has them to toss and sift;
So they can put no period to their own tossings, till he interpose: For, he not
only lifts them up to the wind, and so engages them, but he causes them to
ride, when they are thus lifted up; Or, locks them, as it were, in the saddle,
that they cannot get free of tossing. The continuance, as well as the violence,
of trouble is in Gods hand, and he is to be eyed in the one and the other. See
Jer. 47.6, 7.

3. Gods design in trouble, is, to sift man, and to discover, and let it be
known, what he is; For, so Job finds in the issue, that God designed, by
causing him ride upon the wind, to dissolve and melt, or sift him out (as when
corn or chafe is lifted up to the wind) that he may give proof what is in him,
and what he is able to endure.

4. Whatever man seem to be at another time; yet in trouble he will be found to
be light, and vain, like a feather, or chafe, in the wind; and that nothing in
him can abide the trial, but his strength, and wi^, and all, will be soon
confounded and overcharged; For, says he, Thou dissolvest my substance; or,
even that which is most substantial in me, and in my enjoyments. Learn we to
trust to nothing in our selves, as able to bear out in trial, and to try our
profiting under trouble, by our being emptied and abased in our selves.

5. God may discover those to be weak and very empty in trouble, of whom he
will yet give a good account; For, after all his tossing, and dissolving of his
substance, Job got a good issue at last. If men could wait for the end of the
Lord, they would not be ready to apprehend cruelty in his present
dispensations, and they should learn to suspend such thoughts, when they are
not able to refute them.

Verse 23. For I know that thou will bring me to death, and to the house
appointed for all living.
Another ground of his apprehension of Gods cruelty, is, That God had given him
such mortal and deadly wounds, that he is sure to dye, and to go to the grave,
which is the common lodging of all. He joins this with the former, by the
particle, For, as taking it up to be Gods design in tossing him, even to cut
him off. Or, it may be translated, Surely, to intimate how persuaded he was of
these his apprehensions.

Doct. 1. It is an useful study, especially under afflictions, to be mindful of
mortality; For, in so far Jobs exercise was right, that he minds Death, and
the grave, or, the house appointed for all living. See Ps. 90.12. Deuteronomy. 32.29.
Lam. 1.9. Men are never in a right frame, when they estrange themselves from
thoughts of mortality.

2. It is of great use to consider, that Death will truly discover what we are
in our Original; For, says he, Thou will bring me to death, and the grave; Or,
Thou will return me to death, and the grave; that is, Thou will then turn me to
be dust, as I was before.

3. It is of great use, also, to look upon death, and the grave, as the common
lot of all mankind; For, so does Job describe the grave here, that it is the
house appointed for all living; For however some get not a grave when they dye,
yet they get somewhat in place of it; and though some (as Enoch and Elijah)
were caught up to Heaven immediately, yet they had a change in place of death,
and those instances are so rare and singular, that they need not be stood upon
as exceptions to this general assertion. See Josh. 23.4. 1 King. 2.2. Ps.
89.48. Heb. 9.27. The study hereof should cause men more easily digest death,
as a common lot; and should excite all to prepare for it, it being none of
these trials wherewith some only are exercised. It may, also, let men see, that
there is no cause why they should glory in their advantages within time, seeing
death and the grave will make all equal. See Chap. 3.13, 14, etc. Ezekiel. 32.18.
-- 27.

4. It is also useful to know, that God is the dispenser and orderer of all our
trials, and particularly, that he has the supreme hand in bringing us to
death; that so we may know that our times are in his hands, and not in the
hands of men, Ps. 31.15. For, says he, Thou will bring me to death, etc.

5. Albeit godly men are not unwilling to dye, when God calls them to resign
their life to him; yet, it cannot but be sad to them, to be taken away in a
storm: For, this is the scope of Jobs complaint, that he was put to expect
death, when God was so cruel and opposite to him, v. 21. So that when men are
called to close their course in peace, they should not decline it, considering
that God, if be please, can make death more formidable to them.

6. The people of God in trouble, are ordinarily too rash in their conjectures
and apprehensions for the future; They may be more afraid than really hurt, and
when they have discovered their weakness and fears, God may be pleased
mercifully to disappoint them: For, though Job was certain that he would
presently dye, I know thou will bring me to death, yet he was disappointed. See
2 Cor. 1.8, 9, 10.

Verse 24. Howbeit he will not stretch out his hand to the grave, though they
cry in his destruction.
This Verse has a dependence upon the former, but the scope and meaning
thereof is difficult, by reason of the various readings, especially of the
latter part of the Verse. Some conceive that Job is repeating a promise then
current in the Church; Namely, That God will not stretch out his hand to the
grave (to send men to the grave) if in his destroying them, they cry. And so
the words will contain an aggravation of his complaint, that God was bringing
him to death, v. 23. That howbeit there was such a promise (and he was one who
might claim a right to it, being not only a crier unto God, v. 20. but a
merciful man, v. 25.) yet God would cut him off. This interpretation does
import, That the best way in difficulties, is, to have our recourse to the
promises, to see what grounds of hope there are there; and, that Gods
dispensations may, sometime, seem to contradict his promises; As Job is here
conceived to complain. But it may suffice to justify God, That this was but a
promise of temporal deliverance, and such promises are not absolute, but
conditional, to be performed in so far as God sees to be best for his people;
and, That Job was disappointed in his apprehensions, and was not cut off, nor
this (supposed) promise made void to him.

But I choose to follow our Translation, which carries it as a cordial against
approaching death; That however God send him to the grave (as he apprehended,
v. 23.) yet, he will not stretch out his hand to the grave (or heap, alluding
to the custom of raising up heaps upon graves, that they might be known) to
afflict him there, but death will end all his bodily pain. That in the end of
the Verse is added, as an amplyfication, Though they cry in his destruction,
that is, However they who are innocents, and cut off, do cry in the mean while
that he is destroying them; or, however their enemies cry out while they are a
cutting off, that they are wicked (as his friends and others did raise clamours
against him) yet they will be at ease there. Others read it, by way of
confirmation, thus, Is there any cry there (in the grave) of his destroying
them? Certainly, none at all; None ever heard any such cry of these who are in
the grave.

This encouragement which Job takes to himself is not so to be understood, as
if men had no joy or pain after death; but he speaks only of the ease men have,
after death, of that bodily and temporal pain, which they endure in this life.
And albeit all this, and much more, might have been expected by Job, had he
been to dye at this time; Yet he evidenceth too much weakness, that he looks
not to further comfort than simple case in the grave, which was also his fault
in his impatient wishes, Chap. 3.

Doct. 1. Every bitter lot that befalls the children of God, has its own
consolation to sweeten it, if it were well studied; As here Job finds a cordial
to sweeten his apprehensions of approaching death. If men's eyes were opened (as
Hagars, Genesis 21.15, 16, 19. and Elisha's servants, 2 King. 6.15, 16, 17.) they
might discern ground of encouragement, even in the midst of their perplexities.

2. This may sweeten all our bitterness and toil in this life, that death will
put an end to it, beside what further may be expected after death, by godly
men; For, so does Job reckon, that he will not stretch out his hand to the
grave.

3. No sad dispensations or rods upon men, while they are going to the grave,
will frustrate them of rest there; but death will make a sudden change of all
their outward and temporal troubles; For, so much does the subjoyned
amplyfication and confirmation teach, however we read and understand it. Though
men be crying and groaning in going to death, and though clamours and calumnies
be raised against them; yet the experience of none does witness, that there is
any cry there of Gods destroying them.

4. The people of God do oft-times come short in their expectation of what is
allowed upon them; For, Job comforts himself only in the expectation of that
which is common to all, as to the outward part of it; whereas he might have
looked for much more.

5. It is also an evidence of the people of Gods weakness in trouble, that they
do at too much upon simple case of their pains and troubles; For, this is all
he expresses here, though elsewhere he speak out his mind more fully.

Verse 25. Did not I weep for him that was in trouble? Was not my soul grieved
for the poor?
The third Evidence of Gods anger in his calamities (to the end of the Chapter)
is, That so many evils had befallen him, who had sympathized so tenderly with
others, and who, when he might have looked for good things (having the
testimony of a good conscience) found his prosperity unexpectedly changed into
misery. In prosecution of this purpose,

1. He gives an account of his carriage, v. 25.

2. He shows how he had been disappointed of the good he expected, v. 26.

3. He gives a particular account of the sad change that had befallen him, v.
27. -- 31.

In this Verse, he solemnly asserts his integrity, in the matter of
sympathizing with others in trouble, as a ground of the following complaint.
Whence, Learn,

1. In all ages of the world, it has been no un-usual thing to see the Sons of
Adam exercised with trouble, to make them see and feel the bitter fruits of
sin; For, in Jobs days there were men in trouble, or, hard of day, that is,
who had an hard and bitter time of it. And we are not to mistake, albeit we
find the same truth verified in our days.

2. Among other afflictions wherewith the Sons of Adam are exercised, Poverty
is a special one; which is a very sharp affliction in it self, and exposes men
to many tentations and snares, Pro. 30.9. For, the poor are here mentioned, as
a special instance of those who are in trouble.

3. It is a special evidence of true piety, to sympathize with these who are in
trouble; For, Job produces that as a mark of his integrity; and David was
afflicted with the miseries which befell his very enemies, Ps. 35.13, 14.
Sympathy and compassion is a commanded duty, Romans 12.15. Considering that we
are of the same nature with those in affliction, and are obnoxious to the same,
or the like trials, Heb. 13.2. And therefore it must evidence a sinful
disposition, when men are selfish, and idle spectatours of the miseries of
others; much more, if they do rejoice at, or add to, their afflictions, or do
account them only to be wicked persons, because they are afflicted, Luke 13.2,
3, 4, 5.

4. Albeit a bare profession of sympathy, without endeavors to relieve the
miserable as we are able, will not evidence integrity, Jam. 2.15, 16. Yet, upon
the other hand, our supplying of the necessities of the miserable will as
little evidence it, unless it flow from a principle of love and tenderness: And
where that principle is, men will be accepted who are able to do no more but to
be affected with the miseries of others; Yea, it will cause men to stretch
themselves beyond their ability, and look upon the utmost they can do, as short
of what they would do: For these causes, albeit Job was liberal, and did supply
and relieve the indigent, Chap. 31.17, 19. Yet he expresses his sympathy,
rather by his weeping, and being affected with their miseries, than by his
supplying of them. See 1 Cor. 13.3.

5. Whatever way men express their sympathy, they should take heed that it be
not counterfeit, but that it flow from inward tenderness; For his weeping
flowed from his soul-grieving.

6. Whatever imputations malice or prejudice would cast upon men's ways, to
darken their right to the promises; yet the testimony of a good conscience will
stand it out in all assaults: For, his questions, Did I not weep, etc. do
import that, however they accused him, and looked upon him as a man that had no
right to these promises, of the nonperformance whereof he complains, v. 26.
Yet he would stand to the defense of his integrity, as that which they could
not disprove.

Verse 26. When I looked for good, then evil came unto me: and when I waited
for light, there came darkness.
In this Verse, upon the former ground, v. 25. he complains that he was
disappointed of his expectation, and that while he looked (being a godly and
tender man) for good things, and the continuance and increase of his prosperity
and comfort, evil and sorrow came upon him. In sum, This complaint supposes
that upon the former ground, he had been looking for another lot than he found;
and therefore now it looks sadly upon him, and as an evidence of Gods anger,
that he was disappointed. For further clearing of this purpose, Consider,

1. If it be enquired, How Jobs expectation of good things does agree with that
solicitude be professes to have entertained? Chap. 3.25, 26.

Answ. This difficulty has been touched and cleared, on Chap. 3. and Chap.
29.18. Only in short, it is not to be doubted, but as Job had grounds of hope,
considering the promises made to godly men; So actually he did expect some
accomplishment of these promises, though his expectations were mixed with that
godly solicitude, Chap. 3. which he does not now remember, while he is in the
heat of his resentments and complaints.

2. If it be enquired, How it come to pass, that Job expected good things, and
yet was disappointed?

Answ. Piety having the promise even of this life, 1 Timothy 4.8. and there being
peculiar promises made to merciful and compassionate men (such as he was, v.
25.) Ps. 41.1, 2. Mat. 5.7. which (no doubt) were known, and observed to be
accomplished to some, in Jobs days; these were his grounds of expecting good
things. And yet, being but temporal promises, which must always be understood
with an exception of the Cross, when it is needful to try Sains, it is not to
be wondered at, that the Lord was pleased to suspend the performance thereof to
him. And this Job understood well enough, when he was in a calm temper, Chap.
3.25, 26. though now (as has been said) he forget, or does not notice it, that
so he may take the more liberty to complain.

Doct. 1. Whatever trouble be, as it comes from the hand of God, and whatever
it prove in the issue to godly men; yet, as prosperity is in it self good, so
trouble is in it self evil, and a fruit of sin; and godly men will find it
bitter to their sense: Therefore it is here designed by the name of evil. See
Amos 3.6.

2. It is also to be expected, that when trouble comes, there will much dark
and humbling perplexity and affrightment accompany it, which is wanting in a
prosperous condition; For with this evil, darkness comes instead of light. See
Amos 5.18. And therefore we should be providing light for such a lot, before it
come, and should depend upon God, who can enlighten our very darkness, Ps.
18.28.

3. The encouragement and refreshment of the people of God flows much from
the expectation of what is before their hand; As in spiritual things, they draw
their chief encouragement from the hope of glory; So albeit they are taught to
have contentment in their present temporal lot, be what it will, Heb. 13.5. Yet
the expectation of the continuance of their good condition heightens the
refreshment they find in it; Therefore does he express the satisfaction he had
in his former condition, by what he looked for. And this may very clearly point
out to wicked men the vanity of their imagined happiness, that in all they
attain or enjoy, they can never find that happiness they seek after, but it is
still before their hand.

4. Albeit hope of future good be that whereby all men, who are not drowned in
despair, do cheer up their own hearts, whether they be in weal or woe; yet only
godly men have the promises upon which they may ground this hope: And
particularly, the merciful have a promise that they shall obtain mercy; So that
it is no wonder they fall into trouble who do not show mercy, Jam. 2.13. Mat.
25.41, 42, 43. For it was upon this ground that he was a godly man, and
particularly, a merciful man, that he looked for good and light.

5. Men's expectations of good things promised are then rightly managed, when
their affections are kept lively, to prize the mercies expected, and to
esteem highly of God the giver of them; when they patiently wait Gods time and
way of conferring these promised mercies; and, when they wait on God in his way
for them, not taking any sinful shift to bring them about: Therefore does he
expound his looking, or expecting, by waiting, which imports earnestness of
affection, opposite to indifferency and security, Ps. 130.5, 6. and patience,
Romans 8.25. and is accompanied with tenderness, Ps. 37.4.

6. Not only may a sinful people, or godly men interceding for them, be
disappointed of their expectations, Is. 59.9. Jer. 14.19 But even godly men,
walking in an approved way, may be disappointed of the temporal mercies they
look for; because they out-stretch themselves, in expecting these things
absolutely, which God has promised only conditionally, with an exception of
the Cross, and needful trial, and in so far as he sees good for them: For, so
Job is disappointed here; When I looked for good, then evil came unto me; and
when I waited for light, then came darkness.

7. Disappointments of men's expectations do not only make their sad lot yet
more bitter, (As, it may be, upon this account also, he calls his sad case,
both evil, and darkness) But do otherwise look sad upon them, and seem to speak
anger from God against them, if they be godly and tender; For, this is to Job
an evidence of Gods anger, and of his being turned to be cruel to him, that he
is thus disappointed.

8. The people of God in the heat of trial do, oft-times, lose the benefit of
the sober and serious thoughts they had before: And albeit they me^t with
nothing, but what sometime they looked for, or judged probable and equitable;
Yet their passion causes them forget all this, and so they make their own
trials more bitter; For, albeit Job, notwithstanding these expectations, was
also looking out and preparing for trouble, Chap. 3.25, 26. Yet now he forgets
that, when he would complain of his sad case, and aggravate it.

Verse 27. My bowels boiled and rested not: the days of affliction prevented
me.
In the rest of the Chapter, Job proceeds to give an account of the sad change
that had befallen him, contrary to his expectation. And albeit he had spoken of
his sad case before, yet he insists here upon it again, by reason of his
passion and present resentment; and that he may more fully and pathetically
enumerate the particular evils and dark clouds that had overwhelmed him. This
account he prosecutes in several particulars, in the several Verses, to the end
of the Chapter.

The purpose in this Verse (as also v. 28) being expressed in the bypast time,
some do take them up as a Commentary upon what he had said, v. 25. Or, a
further account of his Sympathy, and that the three last Verses only do give an
account of his present trouble, notwithstanding this his Sympathy. And for this
Verse in particular, they expound it thus: That his Sympathy kept his bowels of
affection in continual motion and exercise, without any intermission; and, that
he was prevented by affliction, or seldom, if ever, did he pass a day without
sadness, in behalf of some one or other. But the words do not so clearly bear
that sense, and the Original phrase, in both Verses, may be as well read in the
present time. And therefore this Verse is to be looked on as containing the
first evidence of his sad condition, taken from a fruit of his sickness and
trouble of mind: Namely, that his pain and grief did so continually toss and
affect his bowels, or inward parts, as if he were in a fever; and that the
days of affliction did not only prevent him at first, or stole upon him,
before he thought of them (of which, see what is said, v. 26. and Chap. 29.18.)
but even now they prevent him, and come betwixt him and comfort, and all other
thoughts.

Doct. 1. Affliction will make great Orators in speaking of their miseries,
and will cause them dwell much upon that sad subject; For, here, Job cannot get
off, but must insist again upon this sad subject, as finding no case, but in
telling he wants it.

2. Much thinking upon, and repeating of the same grievances over and over, do
contribute to heighten the affliction of the afflicted, and to make new
exercises unto them; For, albeit Job had said all this before, or somewhat to
the same purpose, v. 16, 17. yet he repeats it over again, as a new trial at
every repeating thereof.

3. Albeit pain upon the outward parts of the body, and inward sickness upon
the vitals, be distinct afflictions, which God oft-time seperates, not
inflicting the one when he inflicts the other; Yet a godly man may be exercised
with both at once: For, Job had pain in his bones and sinews, v. 17. and here
his bowels, or inward parts, are affected.

4. Much Soul-exercise and grief, accompanying other crosses, will soon draw on
sickness and feverish pains; For, Job being in this case, his bowels boiled.
So that a Gospel-frame of Spirit is good medicine to prevent these wasting
Soul-pressures which accompany trouble.

5. Want of intermissions, or breathing times, in trouble, is a sad addition to
the trial, which yet godly men may taste of in their afflictions; For, says
he, My bowels boiled, and rested not.

6. God will exercise his own children till they find their trouble to be an
affliction indeed, and he may so put them to it, that their time, for a long
while, will be remarkable for nothing, but for their bearing of afflictions in
it: For these causes does he call them, the days of affliction, days of sharp
searching trials, and nothing but trials.

7. As it adds to men's affliction, if they be unexpectedly surprised with it;
So even these who are most resolved, may be surprised with it when it comes:
For albeit they resolve to meet with trouble, yet they may be surprised with
troubles shaking and pinching them more than ever they expected, and with the
exhausting of all their habitual furniture and resolution thereby, till new and
fresh supplies come from Heaven; For, in these respects, the days of
affliction prevented him, Not only had he frequent expectations that it should
be otherwise, v. 26. Chap. 29.18. But even, notwithstanding all these
apprehensions, Chap. 3.25, 26. he was surprised with finding that sharpness in
his affliction which he had not dreamed of.

8. It is also an humbling effect of trouble, that it shuts up all passages,
and hemms in the minds of men, and keeps them poreing upon it self only; So
that they can look out no where for case, but some thought of their sad case is
ready to interrupt and take them up; For, thus also the days of affliction
prevented him, as has been explained.

Verse 28. I went mourning without the Sun: I stood up, and I cried in the
Congregation.
Though some (as has been said) understand this Verse also of his Sympathy,
That he went mourning for the affliction of others, and that so uncomfortably,
as if the Sun had never shined upon him; and so seriously, that he continued it
in the night, when the Sun was down; and that, though he be now forsaken of
all, yet, he never met with company, or assemblies of people, but he complained
of the sorrows of others: Yet it is more clear to understand it as another
evidence of the sad change of his condition. And in this sense some understand
the first part of the Verse, thus, That he was black, and his skin parched and
burnt up with trouble, though without the Sun, or, albeit the Sun did not
scorch him; as it contributes to make people black in hotter Climates. But this
interpretation does not suit with his walking mourning, or, in black, as it is
here expressed; and withal, that of the blackness of his skin, is expressly
mentioned afterward, v. 30. Therefore I take Jobs scope in this Verse to be, to
point out the vehemence of his afflictions and sorrows, from two effects; One,
That they made him walk in a mournful habit and posture, even without the Sun,
that is, in the night season, as well as in the day, and in retired places,
whether he went to shun the light of the Sun, and all company. The other is,
That when he came into any Congregation, or company, out of his retirement, or
rather, when multitudes flocked about him, to behold him, he behoved to cry out
of his sorrows before them all; whereas gravity, modesty, and natural courage,
would have prompted him to keep silence, if it had been possible.

Doct. 1. The sense of Gods afflicting hand will cause men, and even stout men,
mourn and cry, and walk in a mournful posture; For, so it was with Job here.
See Ps. 42.9. and 43.2.

2. Common comforts, such as the light of the Sun, nights rest, company, etc.
will prove but poor cordials to persons in trouble, whatever lawful use may be
made of them, to divert or abate the violence of trouble; For, Job went
mourning without the Sun, being deprived of rest when the Sun was down, and
shunning the light, and all company. So that men ought to acknowledge it a
mercy, if they find case by any of these means.

3. An over-charging measure of trouble may so press men, that neither gravity,
modesty, nor courage, can cause them smother the same, even before others; For,
Job stood up and cried in the Congregation, or, his pain made him that he could
not lie, but he behoved to rise up and roar, or, when he rose up from his
mournful posture, when multitudes came to see him, that he might endeavor in
civility to keep company with them, he was forced to roar and cry out before
them all. Thus also Christ was made to cry out of Soul-trouble, before a
multitude, Joh. 12.27. with 29. So that they have a great advantage, and ought
to acknowledge it as a mercy, who get their sorrows kept secret and hid.

Verse 29. I am a Brother to Dragons, and a Companion to Owls.
This Verse, is not so to be understood, as if these were the very formal words
which he cried out in the Congregation, v. 28. But it contains an amplyfication
of both these effects of his vehement pains and sorrows, mentioned in that
Verse. Wherein he shows, That, as to his walking without the Sun, his
solitude was great, being deserted by all his friends and relations, and
himself shunning all company, like Dragons and Owls, which live solitary in
desolate places and wildernesses, Ps. 102.6. and 44.19. Is. 13.21. and 34.13,
14, 15. And that, as for his cries, he breathed out sorrows in doleful and
hideous screechings and howlings, as Dragons and Owls do cry o^t in their
solitary habitations, M^c. 1.8. In a word, he was become more like a wild man,
or, those wild creatures, than any thing else.

Doct. 1. God may exercise his people with extreme solitude in their troubles;
partly, while God takes away their nearest relations (as he cut off Jobs
children) or they do all abandon them in their affliction; partly, while they
themselves do affect solitude, which is but one of Satan* engines to help
forward their sorrows; For, here Job complains, that, in respect of solitude,
he was a brother to Dragons, and companion to Owls.

2. The mournful note of the afflicted people of God may be very doleful and
sad; as here also is imported. Their own sense may make their condition very
bitter, and God may leave them to their own weakness, till they charter like a
Crane and Swallow, and mourn like a Dove, Is. 38.14. And yet all these sad
notes may end in a song, as Job found, and Hezekiah also, Is. 38.19.

Verse 30. My skin is black upon me, and my bones are burnt with heat.
In this Verse, we have another evidence of the sad change of his condition,
taken from the effects there of upon his body; Where he shows, That his skin,
which in his prosperity and health was white, is now dried and become black;
and that his bones are burnt up with heat, arising from the sorrows and pains
both of his soul and body. Whence, Learn,

1. It is not the way of Saints to cry out or complain without weighty cause,
and when they do otherwise, it is an evidence they are in an high distemper;
For, here Job shows, that the cause of his cries and howlings, v. 28, 29.
might be seen upon his body.

2. Vexation and pain of body, especially when joined with, or flowing from,
vexation of mind, is very intolerable; As here he complains of his bodily
pains and distempers, especially, because they were accompanied with such a
surcharge of Soul-troubles, and the effects of them, in part.

3. Even strong and robust bodies of men will not be able to bear out under
Gods afflicting hand; For, Jobs body here succumbs.

4. God, when he pleases, can so universally reach men's bodies, that no part
shall be free of a stroke; For, both his skin and bones are affected here.

Verse 31. My Harp also is turned to mourning, and my Organ into the voice of
them that weep.
In this Verse, he summeth up the account of this sad change in his family and
estate; Showing that all things were turned upside down, and that instead of
Instruments of Music, whereof he made use in the days of his mirth, nothing
but sorrow was now to be heard in his family. Whence, Learn,

1. It is not unlawful for godly men to use mirth, and be cheerful, provided
they time it well, Is. 22.12, 13. Amos 6.5, 6. and be moderate, and do not
place happiness in it, Eccl. 2.1, 2. For, Job here implies, that he had not
declined mirth in former times.

2. As Instruments of Music are very ancient, (For, the Harp, and Organ, or
some such del^ctable and sweet sounding Instrument, as the word signifies,
were in Jobs days, yea, long before him, Genesis 4.21.) So they may lawfully be
made use of in the lawful expressions of our mirth; For, Job made use of them
in his days of mirth and cheerfulness. And beside the civil use of these
Instruments, they had also a Ceremonial use in the Worship of God, during the
Paedagogy of the Law; and it may be Job made such use of them also, as diverse
of the Ceremonies were in use, even before the Promulgation of the Law at
Sinai. But under the Gospel, though vocal singing be enjoined, as an Ordinance
to be still continued, Ephesians. 5.19. Col. 3.16. Jam. 5.13. Yet there is no Precept
for Instrumental Music, in the Worship of God, in the New Testament. Nor was
it made use of in Churches for diverse ages after Christ; But the Ancients do
clearly declare, that it was not to be used under the Gospel, and that it was
not used in their days. And if men bring in one Instrument into the Churches,
which was used under the Law, there can no reason be given, why they may not as
well bring in all the rest of them, as Timbrels, Harps, Psalteries, Trumpets,
Cymbals, etc.

3. Not only is the carnal mirth of wicked men justly put to silence, and
turned into doleful howlings and lamentations, Is. 24.7, 8, 9. Jer. 7.34 and
25.10. Jam. 4.9. Rev. 18.21, 22, 23. But even godly men, who use mirth
lawfully, may be exercised with such a change; For, My Harp is turned into
mourning, and my Organ into the voice of them that weep. So that men are not to
expect that such mirth will always continue; And albeit such changes call men
to examine their former ways, yet not always to quarrel their former practice
as sinful, because there is a change of their note and song.

CHAP. XXXI.
This Chapter contains the third and last part of Jobs Discourse and Apology;
Wherein (having declared, in the two preceding Chapters, what a sad change had
befallen him, now) he proceeds to clear that, notwithstanding all this change,
he was a sincere godly man. For which end, he describes, and makes profession
of, his integrity in several duties, especially of the second Table of the Law,
and confirms the truth of his assertions, partly, by giving an account of the
reasons persuading him so to walk; partly, by imprecations, or, submission to
punishments, if it were otherwise than he asserted; partly, by positive
assertions, yet seconded by a tacit Oath, or Imprecation, insinuated in that
expression, If I did so or so; partly, by appealing to God, and desiring to
have his cause discussed before him, v. 35. etc. His sco^e in all which
assertions is not to boast proudly (with the Pharisee, Luke 18.11, 12.) of his
own righteousness and integrity; but to correct his Friends mistakes, and
persuade them of his honesty and integrity, that so they might cease to
reproach and afflict him any more, and would rather pity him as an afflicted
godly man.

For further clearing of this Discourse, and his general scope in it, Consider,
1. It is not to be conceived that Job did place all his Religion and Piety in
those things only which he here professes to have been his study and practice:
But he mentions them only as so many fruits of his faith in the promised
Messiah, who alone was his righteousness and life: And he insists mainly upon
these particular practices (whatever other religious practices were observed by
him) because those were proofs of his integrity in these matters wherein they
suspected that he had been wanting, when they judged him to have been an
Oppressor, a man puffed up with his prosperity, unmerciful, etc. and proves
that he was free of these gross evils which use to be remarkably punished in
this life. Hence we are not to conceive, that Job does here enumerate all the
duties that are to be performed by a godly man, (though indeed he speak very
amply, and to most of all the Commandments, eve^ albeit he lived before the
Law was given at Sinai) for that were no easy task; and it is not to be
doubted, but he made conscience of other duties also, whereof he has been
giving some account in all his discourses, and even in the former parts of this
discourse, he has asserted his fidelity in his public Office, Chap. 29. and
his sympathizing with others in trouble, Chap. 30.25. But here he speaks
abundantly to wipe off all these aspersions which were cast upon him by his
Friends and others. 2. As for his method and order in this enumeration of the
duties he professes to have observed, we need not trouble our selves about it;
as if we were to conceive, that either he observed the order of the Ten
Commandments (which were not then published on Sinai, nor written on the two
Tables, nor is that method observed here) or, that he speaks of sins which he
avoided in such an order, as, according to his growing age, he might have been
tempted to commit them (as he begins at Fornication, because it is incident to
young men:) But we are thus to conceive, that the holy man did enumerate them
as they came to his remembrance in the discourse, and therefore, after it seems
he was about to close, v. 35, 36, 37. he vindicates himself from a new alleged
crime, which came not to be remembered till then, v. 38, 39, 40.

The Chapter may be taken up, according to the several virtues and duties of
holiness whereof he makes profession, in this order, That he was chaste, as to
the matter of Fornication with a Maid, v. 1, 2, 3, 4. That he was sincere and
upright in his conversation, v. 5, 6. And just and true in it, v. 7, 8. That he
was free of Adultery, or, chaste as to committing of Uncleanness with other men's
Wives, and lived in conjugal chastity with his own wife, v. 9. -- 12. That he
was moderate and righteous in his dealings with his very Servants, v. 13, 14,
15. That he was humane and helpful to all in distress, v. 16. -- 23. That he
was no doater upon his wealth, nor carnally confident because of it, v. 24, 25.
That he was pure in his worship, and free of Idolatry, v. 26, 27, 28. That he
was free of malice, or, a desire of private revenge, even when he was tempted
to it, v. 29, 30, 31. That he was given to Hospitality, v. 32. That he was an
ingenuous Confessor of his failings, v. 33. And, That he was full of fortitude
in prosecuting and maintaining of Justice, v. 34. Unto all which he subjoyns a
desire, That he may have a fair hearing, with any Adversary, before God, v. 35,
36, 37. And closes with a further profession, That he was just and upright in
his dealings with Laborers and others, v. 38, 39, 40.

Verse 1. I made a covenant with mine eyes; why then should I think upon a
maid?
THe first virtue whereof Job makes profession, is, Chastity as to a maid, or,
that he was free of the sin of Fornication. This he not only asserts, but
confirms his assertion, by giving an account of the reasons which pressed him
thereunto, One whereof is couched in his very profession, or assertion, in this
Verse, and other express reasons are subjoyned, v. 2, 3, 4.

In this Verse, we have, 1. His profession, or assertion, That he was careful
to avoid even thinking upon a maid, to lust after her; and that, for this end,
he made a covenant with his eyes, or kept them, as it were, under a Law, and
firm resolution and endeavor, that they might not wander after, nor dwell
upon, objects of his lust, lest, otherwise, they might prove a mean to poison
and infect his heart.

2. The Reason of this resolution, here couched, Why then? Or, Why should I
think upon a maid? This Reason concludes strongly, whether we consider it
abstractly, and in it self, Why should I think, etc. That is, I considered that
there is no advantage and profit, nor even true and solid pleasure, in such a
course; and therefore would not follow it: Or whether we consider it
relatively, and as it may have a respect to the covenant he had made, I made a
covenant, -- Why then should I think, etc. That is, being under such bonds and
resolutions, it had been a double guiltiness if he had suffered his mind to
wander. It is here further to be considered, That he makes this profession, of
being free of uncleanness with maids; not as if he had been guilty of other
kinds of uncleanness, whereof also he purges himself, v. 9. But because maids,
when they were grown up, and become marriageable (as the word here imports)
were apt to have proven a great tentation to him, especially in his youth; and
therefore he begins first to clear himself of that, and that even in his youth
he was kept free of that evil, to which men, in that period of their life, are
very prone. And withal, he does hereby testify his tenderness, in that he
kept himself from that evil, which, ordinarily, is looked upon by many as a
small sin.

In general, from the scope of this whole discourse, Learn,

1. As true piety and greatness are not inconsistent, so holiness is no
reproach, but an ornament, to men in greatest dignity; For, Job the greatest
man of these in the East, Chap. 1.3. is a very pious and tender man. Which may
reprove these, who, because of their Grandeur, do look upon piety as below
them, and must take liberty to prove their greatness, by breaking the commands
of God; It also reproves them who are ready to look upon such accurate walking
in any person (far more in great persons) as preciseness and needless
scrupulosity. It is a very great evil, and a sad prognostic to a Land, when
great persons are thus principled, Eccl. 10.16.

2. True grace, being tenderly entertained, will flourish wonderfully under
many disadvantages; For, here we see a man has so eminent knowledge, and is so
careful of the practice of holy duties, even before the Law was written, that
he makes conscience of very small things. Which may give a sad check to them,
who are more loose in times of greater light; and those who lay all the blame
of their many neglects, only upon their disadvantages, and external impediments.

3. True piety must not be measured by men's observing of any one particular
duty, or other; but it is a very comprehensive task of many duties, all which
must be made conscience of, or, at least, a respect must be be had to all the
Commandments enjoining them, Ps. 119.6. For, here Job proves his integrity
and piety, by so many particular proofs and evidences. Men's tenderness (or
seeming to be tender) in one duty, does not warrant them to take a latitude to
themselves in many other duties; as many do put on a mask of piety in some
things, that they may walk as they please in many other things. See Jam. 2.10.

4. Such as would prove themselves to be truly godly, and would have the
testimony of a good conscience, and be able to silence Calumniatours, in a day
of trial, ought to make much conscience of the duties of the second Table;
Therefore Job instanceth his integrity chiefly in those, as being undoubted
evidences of his piety, and furnishing him with arguments to refute his
Friends. See Mal. 2.13. Mat. 5.23, 24.

5. Where men have been, and are, tender walkers, that will afford them a sweet
cordial in trouble, and when they are reproached by others; For, now Job finds
it sweet, when he reflects upon his former life, that he has so many things to
say for himself. It is true, they who find, after such a reflection, that they
have deborded much, have yet a remedy, if they go to him who is exalted to
give repentance and remission of sins; Yet it is unspeakably sweet, when men's
consciences afford them such an ample testimony, in a day of trouble, that they
have walked uprightly in the general course of their life, Is. 38.3. And for
attaining of this, men should examine their own ways frequently and seriously,
that so they may be distinct in giving an account thereof, as Job is here. For
confusion and indistinctness is a great obstructer, whether of humiliation and
amendment of faults, that they may come up to such a testimony; or of comfort,
if they have walked uprightly. And men should remember, that times may come,
when applause may fail them, and prosperity abandon them, which bear up many
against challenges, Hos. 12.7, 8. And that they will be driven to try what
testimony their consciences will afford them, without which they will be in
peril to sink, as here it was with Job. And therefore they should be accurate
and sincere, that their consciences do not spting a leak upon them in their
greatest storms.

In particular, from this Verse, Learn, 1. Fornication is an evil condemned by
God, and which has been hateful to godly men in all ages, when in a right
frame; For, Job here avoided it. If we speak generally of unlawful lusts, they
brought judgments upon the Old World, upon Sodom, and upon the Benjamites,
Judge. 20. They draw men to other sins, as Uncleanness drew the Israelites to
commit Idolatry with the Midianites, Number. 25.1, 2. And they waste men's bodies
and estates, Pro. 5. And even Fornication is a transgression against the Law of
God, and is a wrong done by men against their own bodies, while they make them,
being members of Christ, to become the members of an harlot, 1 Cor. 6.15, 18.
And this sin of Fornication, or other uncleanness, is yet more abominable, if
it be committed when the people of God are, or should be weeping, as Number. 25.6.

2. Fornication is an evil, which even the people of God, who are sincerely
seeking him, had need to guard against; For, holy Job was put to guard against
it, and the Apostle bids us flee it, 1 Cor. 6.18. Even godly men have the root
of all evil in them, and are prone to commit even the vilest sins, if they be
left to themselves. And if there be any evil whereof we are least suspicious,
that may most readily surprise us, And particularly, Fornication, and other
Uncleanness, is a bewitching sin to corrupt nature, and may tempt men very
violently, either in their youth (when lusts are very impetuous, so that it is
no easy task to get safely through that part of our life) at which time,
especially, it seems Job was upon his guard against it; or even afterward, when
men live in ease and plenty, as may be seen in David, 2 Samuel 11.1, 2, 3, etc.
and Sodom, Ezekiel. 16.49. with Gen 19 4, 5. Yea, some may be so strongly
possessed with a Devil of Lust, that it will rage in them, even when they are
in misery and poverty.

3. Such as would avoid other uncleanness afterward, would begin at avoiding of
Fornication in their youth; and such as think lightly of Fornication,
especially in youth, may be given up to more gross uncleanness afterward:
Therefore, Job, who afterward was kept from Adultery, v. 9. begins with
guarding against Fornication.

4. Such as would be free of uncleanness in the sight of God, and would prevent
the actual committing of it, ought to watch over their very hearts, that they
be not polluted with unchaste thoughts; For, Job did guard that he should not
think upon a maid. There is, even in this, a filthiness of the spirit, as well
as of the flesh, 2 Cor. 7.1. which is a sin before God, Mat. 5.28. And in
respect of this, men may indeed be called filthy dreamers (as those Jude, v.
8.) because they act more filthiness in a short time, in the vile
contemplations and dreams of their mind, than many bodies would commit in their
life time. Whereby also they waste their own spirits, and so kindle the fire of
lust, that it cannot smother, but must break out, as Jam. 1.14, 15. Hence there
is so much need to take heed to our spirits in this matter (even to these
transient thoughts that are antecedent to the consent of our wills, or to our
purpose to perpetrate the evil, as well as these that are subsequent) Mal.
2.15. See also, Jer. 4.14.

5. Such as would keep their hearts free of these sinful and polluting
thoughts, as they ought to avoid idleness (whether through the want of a
calling, or not being diligent in it; or idleness of mind, and not keeping it
busy with spiritual and useful thoughts) intemperance and pampering of their
bodies, Prove. 23.31, 32, 33. Ill company, etc. So they ought, particularly, to
set a guard upon their eyes, that they do not wander after enticing objects:
For, Job resolving not to think upon a maid, as he, no doubt, made conscience
of other means, which might keep his mind from admitting, or fixing upon these
thoughts; So he made a covenant with his eyes, that they should not entertain
themselves with these objects which might let in, or give a rise to these
thoughts in his mind. For as covetousness is called, the lust of the eye, 1 John 2.16. because the covetous man is never satisfied with riches, but he
would have every thing he sees (See Josh. 7.21. Pro. 27.20. Eccl. 4.8.) So
wandering and wanton looks are the ordinary Panders to the heart, in the sin of
uncleanness, and draw men to the committing of it, Mat. 5.28. Pro. 6.24, 25. 2
Pet. 2.14. And therefore Job proved his piety by submitting his senses to the
obedience of God, and by making conscience even of an unchaste and wandering
look of his eyes. And who so do not keep this guard upon themselves, will find
the sad effects of it.

6. Men's Senses, and particularly, their seeing, are so corrupted by sin, and
so prone to wander and debord, that they will not get them fixed in a right way
without solid and settled resolutions; For, Job made a covenant with his eyes,
in this matter, (or, cut a covenant, alluding to the ancient custom, of
parties cutting, and passing between the parts of a divided calf, in making
Covenants, Jer. 34.18.) which does not only import, that he did not quarrel or
repine at the Law of God, which sets limits to men's very looks, but did
heartily approve and consent to it, in his own particular practice; But that he
engaged in fixed resolutions and vows, to guard against the violation of that
Law, and, for that end, to use his utmost endeavors in the use of lawful
means. See Ps. 119.106. This should be the care of all, and, considering the
instability of their inclinations and resolutions, they should depend upon God
who can fix them, 1 Chr. 29.18.

7 Men's resolutions and engagements to holy duties should tie them firmly to
the performance thereof; For, since Job made a covenant with his eyes, why then
should he think upon a maid? Or, commit that evil which by that Covenant he had
engaged himself to endeavor to prevent? Such practices contrary to men's
engagements do speak them to have made Apostasy from their principles, as Paul
speaks in another case, Gal. 4.14, 15. Or they do speak the great violence of
their lusts and corruptions, which cause them burst all bonds, and transgress
in those things wherein they had subscribed their own consent to the Authority
of the Law of God; And they do leave men under a sentence of condemnation with
their own consent, seeing their consent to the Law implies their consent also
to the penalty, if they shall contraveen it.

8. The small benefit and advantage that is reaped by sin and lustful
pleasures, might, in reason, deterr men from them; For, thus also it concludes
strongly, Why should I think upon a maid? Or, what contentment is to be found
in it, to compense the hazard of the offense of God, and the many snares that
follow it? It is true, men's corrupt hearts are prone to the vilest and emptiest
evils; But if men will consult their very reason, they will judge it folly to
buy so unprofitable a delight (which though it seem to be sweet, yet it is but
an empty pleasure) at so dear a rate.

9. Men do therefore rush upon unprofitable and sinful courses, because they
want serious deliberation, and because they do not reason with themselves, and
seriously ponder what they are a doing; which is an evil to be amended by all
who would order their conversation aright: Therefore does Job, that he may
avoid this evil, solidly reason with himself, Why should I think upon a maid?
So also does the Psalmist in other cases, Ps. 42.5, 11.

Verse 2. For what portion of God is there from above? And what inheritance of
the Almighty from on high?
Follows, to v. 5. a further account of these reasons which persuaded Job to
avoid even these lustful looks and thoughts. And as in the former reason
(couched in his resolution) he looked to the unprofitableness of that sin, and
his engagements against it; So in this next reason (contained in this and the
following Verse) he looks up to God, and considers the portion assigned by him
to these who follow it, as a strong argument to dete^r him from it. Some do
take up the scope of the Verses thus, That in this Verse Job looks to that
eternal portion in Heaven, which he would fore-fault by this sin of
uncleanness; and in the next Verse he considers the sad portion of punishment
which it deserves, and the hazard he would incurr by it. So the force of the
reason in this Verse would be this, That he abstained from this sin, because he
knew of a better portion, which he would not hazard for that empty carnal
pleasure. And it is indeed true, That, however Satan hide the snare, yet, even
an unchaste thought or look (for of those he is speaking) does hazard a man's
portion and part of Heaven, Mat. 5 28. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. And, That such as eye
their eternal reward, will not hazard it for transient sinful pleasures; and
such as mind the sweetness of Heaven, will judge no pleasure in sin sweet like
that; and will judge it an infinitely sad loss to hazard Heaven for it, though
they should avoid all miseries in this life.

Yet it is more clear to understand this Verse more generally, thus, That there
being a portion and heritage from God to all the ways of men; he considered
what his portion might be, if he committed this sin; or, what God would think
of it, or do upon it: And finding that no good would follow upon it from God
(as these questions do import) but rather much prejudice (as is more
particulary resolved, v. 3.) he durst not meddle with it. Hence, in general,
Learn,

1. Acceptable obedience, or abstinence from evil, must flow from rational and
solid principles; For, here Job gives an account, not only of his abstinence
from this sin, but of the acceptable grounds upon which he walked, in this
resolution and practice.

2. No shame, or fear of inconveniences from men, will recommend men, as
walking acceptably in their forbearing of evil, unless they have also an eye to
Gods recompense, and be led by a principle of love and awe of God, in it; As
here the consideration of a portion of God, either of evil to be incurred, or
good to be lost, prevails with Job, to make him walk tenderly.

3. It is an evidence of grace and tenderness, when solid principles and
reasons do command men's practice, and their lusts and affections are not like
an impetuous torrent, which breaks over all banks; For, here it prevailed with
Job not to think upon a maid, when he considered what portion of God there is
from above, etc. appointed for such courses.

More particularly, Learn, 1, It is to be seriously studied, that, however men
take liberty to choose their own ways wherein to walk, yet, God will choose
their portion and reward, without asking their consent; For, Job considered, in
choosing, his way, that the portion, or reward thereof, is of God.

2. It is also to be studied by men, that Gods rewards and portions are
permanent and eternal, as those baits which allure men to sin, are not; For,
this portion is an inheritance.

3 Men ought also to remember, that God is Almighty, or, All-sufficient, to
render portions to men according to their ways, and that from above, and, from
on high; So that he can effectually cause men receive them, and make them
complete, be they good or bad; For, so did Job reckon here. And it is, indeed,
of great use to consider, That though men could not reach us when we sin, yet
God can; though the bewitching promises and allurements of sin may disappoint
us; and the terrors of men, if we will not sin, may be made of none effect;
yet neither will Gods promises, nor his threatn^ngs fail; And as his eternal
comforts are full and satisfactory, so also are his eternal judgments complete.

4. Such as study the portion and heritage provided by God for sinners, will
read no encouragement, but much terror, from them, if they do sin; For, so
much do Jobs questions import, What portion of God is there, etc. that should
encourage me to think upon a maid, and not rather persuade me to avoid it?

Verse 3. Is not destruction to the wicked? And a strange punishment to the
workers of iniquity?
In this Verse, Job insists more particularly to explain the force of this
reason; and having intimated, v. 2. That he looked to what might be Gods
portion and reward of his walking, and having insinuated in general, that the
portion appointed for this sin was not desirable; He proceeds now in particular
(as it were in answer to that question, v. 2.) to shew^ that destruction, and
some tragical calamity, are the portion that are due to such sinners. Where it
is to be considered,

1. That he propounds this assertion by way of question, intimating how certain
and undeniable it is, and what need men have to be excited to consider it well.

2. Instead of speaking particularly of Fornication, or unchaste thoughts and
looks, (which are the subjects he is treating of) he expresses, in more
general terms, that this portion is due to the wicked, and, workers of
iniquity. Not only because indeed this is the portion of all wicked men, though
they fall not into this particular sin; But hereby, also, he would show, that
he looked upon these evils which he declined, v. 1. as wickedness, and working
of iniquity.

3. By this strange punishment (or, strangeness, as the Original has it only)
some understand an estrangement from God by their sin; which, indeed, is a
plague sad enough. But it is safer here to understand it of some stroke of
justice (all of which, particularly, when they are inflicted upon the godly,
are called Gods strange act, Is. 28.21.) not every ordinary stroke, but some
odd and singular stroke, whereby destruction is brought upon such, and not like
these strokes which are inflicted upon the people of God. For such a stroke is
the desert of all such transgressors, though it be not inflicted upon all of
them.

From this Verse, Learn, 1. It is the duty of men to abhor and avoid all sin,
and not these sins only which, possibly, are most odious, and prejudicial to
their interests, in the times wherein they live; Therefore does Job here speak
in general, of the wicked, and, workers of iniquity, and not of that particular
sin only of which he is now purging himself.

2. Even wanton looks and thoughts, if men delight and persist in them, are
wickedness, and works of iniquity, and so prove men to be wicked; For the scope
of Jobs discourse does import, that he avoided these evils, v. 1. left he
should run the hazard which the wicked, and workers of iniquity do incurr, as
judging that, by these acts, he would have put himself among the number of
such. This is not so to be understood, as if truly godly men were not obnoxious
to tentations and failings of that kind; But that such practices, being
delighted and persisted in, do argue a wicked disposition, and will draw men to
act visible wickedness. Hence vain thoughts are accounted wickedness, from
which the heart should be washed, Jer. 4.14. And it were good men would give
sins their right names; For then these courses would appear to be ugly,
wherewith they are less affected, because they have learned to extenuate them,
as if they were only infirmities.

3. Though men use to forget the hazard that follows upon sin, while they
dally with sin it self; Yet sin, and destruction for sin, are inseparable in
Gods appointment (unless the mercy of God in Christ interpose, which is only in
the case of repentance and faith) nor are they to be separated in our thoughts;
And, particularly, we are to believe, that, as all the wicked, so, they who
give way to uncleanness in wanton looks and thoughts, do deserve destruction
from the Lord; For, Job asserts it as an undeniable truth (and therefore
propounds it by way of question, as defying any to disprove it) That
destruction is to the wicked, etc. Which he speaks here with a particular eye
to the sin of uncleanness, as has been said.

4. Beside eternal destruction, or bodily death, it pleases God, sometimes, to
testify his displeasure against wicked men, and particularly, unclean persons,
by some remarkable judgments; such, as bodily diseases, and odd plagues upon
Persons and Nations; For, there is a strange punishment to the workers of
iniquity, and to these in particular. Sodom, Benjamin, Judge. 20. Zimri and
Cosbi, etc. are remarkable instances and proofs of the truth of this. Yea,
David, though a Saint, and a penitent, smarts for this fault, 2 Samuel 12.

5 Such as consider the punishment due to sin, and particularly to uncleanness,
will tremble and be afraid to run so great a hazard; And men do therefore rush
upon sinful courses, because they forget to study this hazard: For, these
questions (Is not destruction to the wicked? And a strange punishment to the
workers of iniquity?) do import, not only the evidence of the truth it self,
but, that many have need to be excited by such rowzing questions, to consider
it; And that these who seriously do so, will be afraid to sin, as Job was, v.
1. when he considered this. And it is a sad case, when men have nothing but
inadvertency, and forgetfulness of these and the like considerations, betwixt
them and dreadful horror, which the conscience of their sinful ways would
raise in them.

Verse 4. Does not he see my ways, and count all my steps?
In this Verse, we have the last Reason whereby Job was persuaded to this
resolution, which confirms the former; Showing that God knows and observes
all the ways of men, and particularly, their sinful courses; and therefore he
who hates such courses, will punish them where he sees them; And the
apprehension of this all-seeing eye of an holy and just God, being still in
Jobs mind, made him careful to bridle his lust, and to watch over his eye and
heart. This Argument is made use of to press this same Conclusion, Pro. 5.20,
21. And as for the various words here made use of, if we make any difference
betwixt ways, and paths, the first may point out men's counsels and purposes
for atttaining such ends; and the second, their deeds and practices tending
toward these ends, be they good or evil. Or, the first points out the general
course, or courses of life, to which a man betakes himself; and the second,
these particular acts, steps and progresses (as the word signifies) which a
man has in these courses; and therefore they are designed in their
universality, all my steps, because there are many of them, in comparison of
these ways, or courses of life, which a man chooses. As for the other two
words, Gods seeing and counting, they point out, that this knowledge, which God
has of men's ways and actings, is particular and distinct, so that no vails of
darkness and secretness (wherewith unclean persons, especially, please
themselves, Chap. 24.15.) can hinder him from seeing, nor can any numbers of
men's actings and deviations mar his exact counting of them all.

From this Verse, Learn, 1. God is Omniscient, to see and know all things,
particularly, the things of man; For, what Job says concerning his ways and
paths in particular, that God sees and counts them, is an universal verity.
See Pro. 5.21. 2 Chr. 16.9. Job 34.21. Only Job does not satisfy himself, as
many do, with an acknowledgement of this truth in general, while they forget it
in their own particular walk; But he takes notice of Gods Omniscience, as
knowing and noticing his own ways in particular. So also does David, Ps.
119.168. and 139.1. -- 5.

2. God is very accurate and distinct, in his taking notice of men's way; and
looks not only to the general scope of their lives, but to every particular
step thereof, and not only to their practices, but to their principles from
which they flow; whether they be wicked, or miscarry only through infirmity,
simplicity and ignorance; whether they be hypocritical, or sincere, in the good
they do, etc. For, God looks to his ways, and all his paths. Thus God
pondereth, or weighs, all the goings, or turnings, of man, and his life, Pro.
5.21.

3. As no darkness, or secrecy, nor coverings and plausible pretenses, will
hide men's way from God, nor hinder him to see them as they are; so the
multiplicity of their courses will not confound his knowledge; For, however men
seek to hide themselves, and do run into confusion, so that they can keep no
account of their ways, yet, says Job, He sees my ways, and counts all my
steps. The consideration whereof may alarm loose walkers with the fears of a
sad after-reckoning, Ps. 50.21.

4. Albeit unclean persons do satisfy themselves with the secret conveighance
of their ways; Yet they do not run these courses without a witness, but God
has a special eye upon them, while they go about them; For, that is the
particular here, in reference to which Job considered that God did see his
ways, etc.

5. It is usual for men to forget the all-seeing eye of God, when they are upon
an evil course, especially, if it be closely conveyed; For, Job propounds
this reason also by way of question, Does he not see my ways, etc. Which
imports, (as has been said on the former Verse) not only the evidence of this
truth, but that men need to be rouzed up to consider seriously upon it, they
being ready to forget or slight it. See Is. 29.15.

6. Such as do seriously mind the all-seeing eye of God upon them, will be
afraid to sin in his very sight; For, this Argument persuaded Job to avoid
Uncleanness, v. 1. because God did see his ways, and count all his steps. As
gross sinners seek to secure themselves against hazard, by denying of God, Ps.
14.1, 2. and his Omniscience, Is. 29.15. Ezekiel. 8.12. So it evidences an height
of impudence and obduration, when men do acknowledge there is a God, and that
he is Omniscient, holy, just, etc. and yet they dare sin against him.

Verse 5. If I have walked with vanity, or if my foot has hasted to deceit;

6. Let me be weighed in an even balance, that God may know mine integrity.


The second Virtue, whereof Job makes profession, is, Sincerity and uprightness
in his conversation, That in his words and deeds, and particularly in his
dealing with others, he followed right things rightly and sincerely, without
guile or dissimulation, v. 5. This he propounds by way of supposition, If I
have walked with vanity, etc. which may be read by way of Interrogation, Have I
walked with vanity, etc. Surely not; Or it may be looked upon as a tacit Oath
and Imprecation if he had done otherwise. But here it seems rather to join this
with v. 6. wherein he confirms his profession by an express desire that God may
be judge, whether (for so that, If, v. 5. may be rendered) he has walked with
vanity, or not; And then he is sure, that his integrity will appear in the
sight of God. Here we are to consider,

1. That this even balance (or, balances of justice) wherein Job desires to
be weighed (or, that God would weigh him there, for it is, Let him weigh me) is
not to be understood of that rule of perfection, to which no mere man, in this
life, can come up; but that rule whereby God judges of the sincerity of his
Children.

2. While he professes this as his scope in this desire, That God may know his
integrity, he does not suppose God to be ignorant what he is, till he weigh and
try him. For though he be bold enough in this desire, yet we are not to think
that he had such Atheistical thoughts of God. But he speaks of God in terms
borrowed from among men; And as men use to try and weigh things, that they may
know their worth and weight, so he desires that his integrity in this matter
may be tried, that so God, who is Judge, may approve of it, and make it appear
that he does so, in so far as is needful. Thus God is said to know men's ways,
and their integrity or unsoundness in them, when he takes a proof of them, and
manifests them to be what they are, Genesis 22.12. Deuteronomy. 8.2.

From v. 5, Learn, 1. Among many courses of men which are an abomination in the
sight of G^d, this is one, when men turn deceivers, pretending to be what they
really are not, in the sight and matters of God, or pretending fair and
honestly to men, that they may cheat and deceive them; For, Job looked upon
deceit as an heinous evil, which therefore he made conscience to avoid. This
name of deceit may be given to all sin, in so far as it deceives all these, in
the end, who follow it, whatever pleasure or advantages it promises for the
present, Romans 6.21. Yet here Job is only speaking of the particular sin of
dissimulation and deceit, and especially of fraud and deceit in his dealing
with others. And as the Lord abhorrs dissimulation in the matter of Religion,
and the profession thereof; guile and deceit, and the false confidences
resulting thereupon, and accompanying the same, being inconsistent with true
grace, John 1.47. Ps. 32.1, 2. an hinderance to the Words success, 1 Pet. 2.1,
2. and to conversion, Jer. 8.5. and 19.6, So he abhorrs men's dissimulation, and
want of ingenuity, toward others, Ps. 12.1, 2. and 36.3. Pro. 12.5. and cheats
and deceits in bargains, Hos. 12.7. All which are contrary to the Law of God,
do make void the end and benefits of humane Society, do render men more
dangerous than very Thieves, and, in the issue, do tend to deceive the
deceivers themselves, whose nimble wits will at last leave them in the mire.

2. As all sinful ways are but vain, in regard they will do men no good, but
much evil, 1 Samuel 21.21. And as men do but hunt after vanity, in these designs
which they drive by deceit, Ps. 4.2. Is. 44.20. Particularly, in their
deceiving of others to gain the World, Ps. 62.9, 10. Pro. 21.6. And all their
pretenses, whereby they think to justify their courses, and silence their own
consciences, will prove lighter than vanity, Ps. 119.118. So the great snare
enticing men unto, and intangling them in, deceit, is, the pestering of their
hearts with these vanities, or a fancy of felicity to be found in these things
which they hunt after: For, here a walking with vanity (or, a musing and
frequent contemplating upon the advantages they propose to themselves, and the
excuses whereby they think to justify themselves, which are all but really
vanity) is premitted, as leading to this deceit. For, the dis-junctive, Or,
should be read, And, to point out this deceit as an effect and evidence of
walking with vanity, So that here wise and serious consideration might avail
much, if men would but ponder, that they do but labor for the wind in all
those undertakings, Eccl. 5.16. Yea, that they labor in the very fire, and
weary themselves for very vanity, Hab. 2.13. For when a man has used all
deceits to gain the World, he does reap only vanity; if ever he come to repent,
he must restore all his purchase; if he repent not, God can easily blast all
his enjoyments, and bring him to shame for them; And though God do not thus
plague him, yet he will still find himself far enough from true happiness.
From all which we may see, what self-deceiving hearts men have, which drive
them upon such unprofitable, yea, hurtful courses.

3. It is an evidence that hearts are plagued with vain imaginations, when they
become violent and furious in driving men to evil courses; For, upon walking
with vanity, it follows, that the foot hastes to deceit. Not that it is
lawful for men to use deceit, though they should walk at leisure to it; but
that it is a great aggravation of their sin, and an evidence that their hearts
are poisoned with vanity, when they run to it. See Pro. 6.18. Romans 3.15. And
this is abominable, especially, in a Child of God, who, though he may, through
infirmity, step aside unto vanity, yet should not walk with it, as his
companion and delight; and though his heart, sometimes, be haunted with vain
thoughts (which yet he ought to hate and mourn for, Ps. 119.113.) yet they
should not have such power with him, as to drive him to sinful actings, far
less, to be violent in them. Therefore men ought to look, not only to the evil
which they do, but, to their violence and impetuousness in doing of it; which
(though, sometimes, it prove Satan's last fits, before he be dispossessed, as in
Paul, Act. 26.11, 12, 13. yet in it self it) is an evidence of strong
corruptions, and that men are posting to Hell. See Pro. 4.16. Jer. 50.38. Mic.
7.3.

4. Men may be very upright and sincere in their way, who yet are little
believed in the World that they are so; For, it is here made a question, If,
or, Whether, Job have walked with vanity, etc. And he is put to prove his
uprightness (if not by Oath, as some understand this form of expression, yet)
by an express desire that God may be judge, and by arguments and reasons. Thus
David is put to vindicate his own integrity, Ps. 7.3, 4, 5. And Paul was
accounted a deceiver, though yet he was true, 2 Cor. 6.8. And it is not to be
thought strange, though godly men be oppressed with calumnies and mistakes, and
be put to make Apologies for themselves. For hereby the Lord leads them to eye
him, and his approbation, which they usually forget when men are satisfied with
all they do; and self-seekers may read Gods mercy in such a lot, if they
improve it well.

From v. 6. Learn, 1. It is not men's opinion, or conceit of their own
uprightness, that will bear them out, unless God do see it, and approve it;
For, says he, Let him weigh me, as it is in the Original. See 2 Cor. 10.18.
Men had need to try well their condition, before they rest satisfied, and they
have cause to suspect their own blindness and self-love in this trial.

2. It is an evidence of true piety and sincerity, when men are willing to have
their condition tried, as knowing the deceitfulness of their own hearts, and
being unwilling to be deceived, in that matter; For, says he, Let him weigh
me. See Ps. 139 21, 22. with 23, 24.

3. That wherein godly men are able to approve themselves, and which God
noticeth in trying of them, is, not their perfect conformity to the Law of God,
but, their integrity and sincerity; For, it is his integrity which here he
offers to trial. And this may be attained by these who are not perfect, if so
be that, having fled to Christ for righteousness, they endeavor a sincere
obedience and respect to all the Commandments, Luke 1.6. Ps. 119.6. do mourn
for, and set themselves in opposition unto, the remainders of corruption in
themselves, Romans 7. And do close all these endeavors with a renewed closing
with Christ, in whom they are complete.

4. Sincerity will be judged and tried, not by the great bulk, or fair shows of
duties; but by their real and solid worth; Therefore he desires to be weighed,
alluding to the practice of skillful Merchants, who will not be cheated with
the bulk of Commodities, but will try their real weight in balances.

5. There is a Standard of the Gospel, according to which a godly sincere man
needs not fear to be tried; For, this, Let him weigh me in an even balance,
or, in balances of justice, imports, not only his desire to be tried, but, his
confidence that, being tried, his integrity shall appear. See Ps. 17.1, 2, 3.

6. If God know and approve men's integrity, it is the less matter what men do
think or judge; For, this satisfies Job, If God know his integrity. It is true,
when godly men are misconstructed by others, it cannot but be an exercise unto
them, even albeit they have the testimony of Gods approbation; Yet if Gods
approbation, and the testimony of a good conscience, do not support them under
that exercise, it is just they be deprived of these also.

Verse 7. If my step has turned out of the way, and mine heart walked after
mine eyes, and if any blot has cleaved to my hands:

8. Then let me sow, and let another eat; yea, let my Offspring be rooted out.


The third Virtue, whereof he makes profession, is, Justice and Righteousness
in his conversation, and particularly, that he was free of unjust purchase and
gain. He professes, in general, That in his practice he did not debord from
the way, or rule, set before him; and that his heart did not follow the lust of
his eyes, when they were allured with any pleasant or taking object. And
particularly, he professes, that no blot of unhonest gain, or what was not his
own, did cleave to him, v. 7. The confirmation whereof ( v. 8.) is by way of
Imprecation (or, consenting to it as equitable) that another should eat what he
had sown, and pluck up what he had planted, if he had done otherwise than he
says. As for what he says, v. 7. that his heart had not walked after his
eyes, it must be understood of a full consent of his heart; For no doubt he had
tentations, and might sometime be overpowered with tentation, though it
prevailed not to make him do unjustly. And for his Offspring, v. 8. if we
understand it of his Children, as some do, the meaning must be, That if he had
been unjust, he grants it had been equitable his Children had been cut off in
wrath and judgment; which way of their being cut off he did ever deny, as
being conscious to himself of his own integrity: Or, That if yet he had any
Children, it were just they should be cut off, if he had be^n an unjust person.
But the word seems more clearly to point at his plantings, which in justice
might be rooted up, if he had deprived others of (...) lawful possessions.

From these Verses, Learn, 1. Men are not left to walk at random, and as they
please, but have a way prescribed wherein to walk; For, here Job acknowledges,
there was the way whereof he was bound to take notice.

2. It is the duty of such as would approve themselves to God, not to walk
presumptuously, as if they had not a Lord over them; but to keep themselves, in
all the steps of their practice, within the bounds of the rule presc^bed to
them; For, Jobs step turned not out of the way He looked to ev^ry particular
step, that he might not debord in it God is supreme Lord, and if we acknowledge
him not to be so in his directions, he will prove himself to be supreme in his
providential d^spensations, punishing our presumption.

3 It is not sufficient before God, that men look to their outward practice,
unless also they guard their hearts, the enslaving whereof, by corruption and
lusts, is both a sin in it self before God, and may tend to grossest
out-breakings; Therefore, as he looked to his step, so, also to the walk (or,
frame and inclinations) of his heart. See Pro. 4.23.

4. Beside the inward corruption and inclination of men's hearts toward evil,
they are obnoxious to baits and tentations from without, which their Senses,
and particularly their eyes, are ready to let in to their hearts; For, so is
here intimated, That as the heart does sometime command and draw the eye, Ezekiel.
20 16. with 24. So the eyes may draw the heart, to walk after them. See Ezekiel. 6
9. This is too frequently seen in experience, in the matter of wantonness and
covetousness (of which see on v 1.) and in the administration of Justice, when
men are swayed by their eyes, or respect to the persons of men, whom they see
or notice mainly in judging their causes.

5. As men should watch over their own Senses, and particularly, their eyes,
that they debord not; and, for that end, should be much in prayer to God, Ps.
119.5. and should keep them employed about better objects, Number. 15.38, 39. So
it is a proof of men's integrity, when they keep their hearts from wandering,
even when their Senses present alluring tentations to them; For, so did Job,
his heart walked not after his eyes. It evidenced his integrity, that he was
not led by his Senses, as wick^d men are, but walked upon better grounds; and
that his heart was straight, not only when he wanted tentations, but in the
midst of them.

6. Out-breaking in sin, particularly, in injustice, is a blot and reproach,
especially in godly men; For, therefore does Job call miscarriages a blot.

7. Whatever humbling toil men may have about the corruptions and inclinations
of their hearts within; yet, it is good when they are so far victorious, that
their practice is not defiled with any scandalous miscarriage, or, injustice;
For, no blot cleaved to his hands, or, was to be seen in his practice. Where
this general, of a blot, is to be understood particularly of dishonest gain, by
taking away of other men's goods unjustly, or receiving of bribes to pervert
Justice, as the following Verse clears, where a retaliation is submitted
unto, in the taking away of his goods. And so some instead of a blot, do read
it thus, If any thing (to wit, which is another man's, and not my own by just
right) has cleaved, etc. And whereas he says, this did not cleave to his
hands, it does not import, that ever he took any such thing, when he was
over-powred with tentation, but he kept it not, at such ill purchases use to
cleave fast to wicked men; but that he would never touch nor meddle with such
purchases; Whenever he had to do with other men, he was sure nothing that was
theirs stuck to him; and whatever bribes might be offered, or thrust upon him,
he would receive none of them. See Is 33 15.

8. Such as are unjust to others, do deserve that utter and bitter ruin should
come upon themselves, in all their enjoyments; For, Job acknowledges it to be
just, that such sow, and another eat, (which is a very bitter trial, Lev.
26.16. Deuteronomy. 28.30.38) and that their Offspring (whether Children, Cattle, or
Planting) be rooted out, without hope of restitution or recovery. Thus God
frequently uses retaliation in punishing of sin, Is. 33.1. Hab. 2.8. Rev.
16.5, 6.

9. Though men, in following sinful courses, would desire to sin, and yet be
free of punishment, and may be ready to murmur, if they be afflicted; Yet
Consciences, when put to it, cannot deny but it is equitable that punishments
follow upon sin; and it is an ev^dence of true piety, to justify God when he
corrects for sin: For, Jobs consenting that he sow, and another eat, etc. if he
had sinned, does import, that he submitted thereunto as just and equitable, and
that he was ready to justify God under such a dispensation of providence. See
Neh. 9.32, 33. Lam. 1.18. Dan. 9.7, 8.

Verse 9. If mine heart have been deceived by a Woman, or if I have laid wait
at my Neighbors door?

10. Then let my Wife grind unto another, and let others bow down upon her.

11. For this is an heinous crime; yea, it is an iniquity to be punished by the
Judges.

12. For it is a fire that consumes to destruction, and would root out all
mine increase.


The fourth Virtue, whereof he makes profession, is, Conjugal Chastity, and
that he was free of Adultery. His profession, v. 9. is, That his heart was not
so drawn away with the unlawful desire of a Woman, or his Neighbors Wife, as
to seek opportunities to perpetrate folly with her. This profession he confirms,

1. By Imprecation, or consenting that his wife should requite him in the like
kind, not with one, but many others, v. 10. Where this grinding is not to be
understood literally, of his wifes serving as a slave to others, as Judge.
16.21. Lam. 5.13. But it is a modest expression of the conjunction of man and
woman (as the upper and nether millstone) for production of issue; and so it is
more clearly expounded and expressed in the latter part of the Verse. And this
he wishes, or consents unto, not that he would approve of this sin in his
wife, or wish that the punishment of his Adultery should fall upon her; But to
show that he thought it just and equitable, if he had been an Adulterer, that
God should serve him in this kind, which would bring him much shame and grief.

2 He further confirms this profession, by giving an account of the reasons
dissuading him from this sin; which were taken, partly, from the nature of the
sin, being an heinous crime, to be punished by the Judges, v. 11. partly from
the effects thereof, that it would kindle a fire of Gods anger and vengeance,
which would destroy him and his substance, v. 12.

From v. 9. Learn, 1. Even such as have got cleanly through their youth, and
have been kept from lesser debordings, have yet need to be upon their guard
against grosser evils, especially in the matter of uncleanness; For, Job, who
had avoided Fornication, v. 1. does here also purge himself of Adultery;
intimating, that it was an evil he was in hazard of, if by grace he had not
been enabled to resist tentations to it.

2. The rise and spring of all evil, particularly of Adultery, and other
uncleanness, is from the heart; As here he intimates, that his perpetrating of
this wickedness would have begun at his heart. See Pro. 4.23.

3. Whatever men's deceitful hearts promise to them in sinful courses; yet they
are but deceived and cheated themselves, and the enticements of sin are but
deceits, and will prove so in the end: For, in these courses, the heart (which
is the great deceiver, Jer. 17.9.) is it self deceived by a woman. This is not
only to be understood of the woman's active deceiving of the man, by her wanton
looks, alluring speech, whorish dresses, and apparel, and gestures, Is. 3.16.
Pro. 2.16. and 7, 10, 13, 21. But of the man's active deceiving of himself, by
admitting of these allurements, by being taken with a woman's beauty, Pro.
31.30. and, especially, by promising to himself great contentment and
satisfaction in those sinful pleasures; whereby a man may deceive himself,
though the woman contribute nothing to it by any act of hers.

4. Whatever vain thoughts may arise in the hearts of most godly men, for which
they ought to mourn, and be humbled; Yet, it is an evidence of honesty, when
conscience is made of smothering them, that they break not out in practice:
Therefore Job subjoyns that he gave no evidence of his hearts being deceived,
by laying wait at his Neighbors door.

5. It is an unquestionable evidence of an heart over-powred by lust, and
proves a man to be guilty before God of a sin, when not only there are
inclinations to it, but fixed resolutions to follow it; and when he is so
vehement in his desires, and pertinacious in his resolutions, as he watches
all opportunities to fulfill his desires; Therefore Job describes the
adulterous attempts of those whose hearts are deceived, by this, That they lay
wait at their Neighbors door; which imports, not only their endeavor to
conveigh their design closely, as Chap. 24.15. But, their vigilant observing of
all opportunities to enjoy their Neighbors wife. This argues strong
inclinations to sin, when men go about it with deliberation, and take so much
pains for these forbidden pleasures; and it proves them guilty of Adultery,
when they set themselves in a sinful way to go about it, although they have
not actually committed it.

From v. 10. Learn, 1. It is just with God that men's sin be written in their
punishment, and that they be requited as they have served others; For, Job
subscribes to it, as just, that his wifes Adultery were a punishment of his
committing Adultery with other men's wives. See 2 Samuel 12.10, 11. Thus also does
it justly fare with Oppressors, Deceivers, and other sinners, Is. 33.1.

2. It is a sad, though a just, punishment, when sin is punished with sin,
either by giving up the persons who sin to commit more sin, Romans 1.26, 28. Ps.
81.11, 12. or by giving up their nearest relations to bring dishonor, shame,
and other miseries upon them, by their sinful miscarriages; For, thus his wifes
Adultery would be a punishment of his uncleanness, as Absoloms rebellion and
incest were the punishments of David's sin. If this were considered, many who
see no punishment of sin, if they be free of outward plagues, would find
themselves sadly plagued of God, even in that they are permitted and given up
to sin.

3. Unlawful lusts are violent and growing, where once they get access; For, if
once his wife grind to another, others, in the plural number, will be admitted
to bow down upon her.

4. It is the will of God that men be modest, particularly, in their
expressions about uncleanness; For, so much does Jobs expression of his wifes
Adultery teach us. See Ephesians. 4.29. and 5.4.

From v. 11. Learn, 1. No other consideration will be so effectual, or
acceptable to God, in restraining of sin, as when men study the sinfulness
thereof, and, upon that account, avoid it; Therefore Job subjoyns his
consideration of the nature of this sin, as a strong and acceptable motive to
keep him from it.

2. As there are degrees of sin, so Adultery with with another man's wife, when
it is well considered upon, will be found one of the most gross acts of sin,
and a very horrid and flagitious evil; Not only because it is contrary to an
express Law of God, and is supposed here ( v. 9.) to be committed with
deliberation (for these are common to it with many other sins;) but because it
is a violation of the strict bond of a Marriage-Covenant; it breeds discord and
want of peace in families; abuses men's families, by substituting a spurious
issue to succeed them in their inheritance or possessions; and, breeds many
quarrels among men: Therefore it is here called, an heinous crime. See Pro.
6.30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35.

3. It is one proof of the hainousness of Adultery, that in all ages and
places, even before the Law was written, and where it bare no sway, it was
punishable by the Magistrate in all Societies which pretended either to piety
or civility; For, in Jobs time and country (who lived before the Law) it was an
iniquity to be punished by the Judges, or, an iniquity of the Judges, that is,
which belongs to the Magistrate, to cognosce upon, and punish it. Thus was it
also looked upon by Judab, Genesis 38.24 and in Babylon, where the written Law of
God had no place, Jer. 29.22, 23. And where this sin is not punished by a
Magistrate, God justly causes a Land smart for it, Hos. 4.2.

4. It is a great evil, and a shreud proof that men have no integrity (or, at
least, that it is dreadfully over-powred) when men commit even these gross
evils which are punishable by the Magistrates; For, as Job made conscience of
all sin, that thereby he might prove his integrity; so particularly, of
iniquity to be punished by the Judges. So that it must be very sad, and
evidence a very sinful frame, at best, when men make no conscience even of most
scandalous or abominable sins, were it even of these which are abhorred among
the very Heathen, 1 Cor. 5.1.

From v. 12. Learn, 1. The sense of Gods anger against sin, and his vengeance
which will pursue it, is a very special motive, above the fear of hazard from
men, to persuade men to avoid it; Therefore, after his considering what this
sin might produce from the hand of Judges, v. 11. he subjoyns this, as yet a
stronger motive, that it kindles a fire of Gods anger.

2. Though some may commit Uncleanness and Adultery whom the Magistrate cannot
reach, and Magistrates may be prone to spare others; yet, God will be about
with all of them for it; So much does this argument, subjoyned to the former,
import. Thus many other evils which men do not notice (such as disobedience to
Parents, profanation of the Sabbath, etc.) do provoke God, either to punish
them by his own more immediate hand, or to give them up to other sins which
will bring them under the lash of justice.

3. Gods anger against sin, particularly, Adultery, is formidable, in that it
is never quenched (except the sinner repent, and flee to Christ) but in the
destruction of the sinner; For, it is a fire (or, this burning lust kindles a
fire of Gods anger, and judgments flowing there from) that consumes to
destruction, alluding to the destruction of Sodom, which was destroyed by fire
from Heaven, as a meet recompense of their burning lusts.

4. As Adultery is justly punished, not only with eternal, but temporal
consumption and destruction of men's bodies, Pro. 5.8, 11. their reputation,
Pro. 5.8, 9. and 6.32, 33. and of their understanding, Hos. 4.11. So,
particularly, with the destruction and ruin of their estates, Pro. 5.8, 10 and
6.26. Therefore he remarks, in particular, that this fire, which consumes to
destruction, would root out all his increase.

5. To shut up this purpose, it would be considered, that though this, with
these preceding, were arguments to dissuade Job from committing this folly;
Yet, we see by experience that many are so madd, that (though they know and
cannot deny these truths) they are not thereby deterred from these wicked
pranks, but do rush into them upon all hazards. Which may be a document to us
of the corrupt nature of man, who will hazard upon sin, though he purchase his
imagined satisfaction at never so dear a rate, unless the grace of God renew
and restrain him.

Verse 13. If I did despise the cause of my manservant, or of my maidservant,
when they contended with me:

14. What then shall I do, when God rises up? and when he visits, what shall
I answer him?

15. Did not he that me in the womb, make him? and did not one fashion us in
the womb?


The fifth Virtue, whereof he makes profession, is, meekness, and his
moderating of his power and authority in the exercise thereof. He has
asserted, Chap. 29. That he was just in the exercise of his Office as a
Magistrate; Here he asserts, more particularly, his justice and moderation in
his carriage toward his very servants and handmaids, whereby he refutes, in
part, that charge of injustice which was fastened upon him, Chap. 22.5, 6, 7.
The sum of his assertion, v. 13. is, That, however servants were then
bondslaves, who had no power to enter into judgment with their masters; yet,
he would not deal as he pleased with them, but did give them free liberty to
plead their cause against him, when at any time they thought he wronged them.
This is not necessary so to be understood, as if Job had at any time wronged
his servants, or they did ever conveen him (who was a supreme Magistrate)
before an inferior Judge; But, that when, at any time, they desired himself to
hear them make their complaints of his carriage toward them, though it was not
required by God that he should endure their saucy gainsayings, Yet he meekly
heard what they had to say, and did endeavor to satisfy them as justice and
equity required. Unto this assertion he subjoynes an account, of the reasons
persuading him to this meek and moderate carriage; which were,

1. His fear of Gods judgments, to whom he and his servants were equally
subject, and who was more high above him, than he was above his servants, v.
14. He considered when God should arise to visit him (whether by death, and
judgment following upon it, or, by some trial and affliction in this life) he
could expect no favor from his supreme Judge, if he, because of his eminency,
should slight these his inferiors; nor could he stand in judgment, if God
should visit him for his neglect of duty

2. His consideration of his Original and way of conception, common to him with
his meanest servants, v. 15. When he considered that both he and they were
formed by one God in the womb, and that in one womb, (as the Original may
read) not the same individual womb, but the same for kind; When, I say, he
considered this, he durst not abuse his power to hurt them, how mean soever
they were.

From Verse 13. Learn 1. Distinction of stations and degrees, as betwixt other
Superiors and Inferiors, so also betwixt Masters and Servants, has been in
all ages of the world; as here Job had man-servants and maidservants, who were
subject to him, and so it still continues, though the condition of servants be
not so servile, and low, in many places, as then it was. And as this
distinction of estates is for the good of human society, and the low condition
of some is a document of man's misery, and matter of humiliation to all, seeing
God might have laid others low, as well as those with whom he so deals: So all
ought to keep their stations, 1 Cor. 7.20. Considering, that it is in so doing
they are allowed to expect a blessing, that they may do service to Christ in
the meanest station, as well as if it were more eminent, Ephesians. 6.5, 6, 7. Col.
3.22, 23, 24. And, that every station is blessed to these who are in Christ, 1
Cor. 7.21, 22.

2. Even godly men, when they are in eminency, may expect to meet with
provocations, and irritations from very mean persons; For it is supposed here,
that these his servants were ready to contend with him. Not so much because he
was apt, through infirmity, to do them wrong (though godly men have need to
take heed how they walk, especially in their families and toward their
inferiors, and how they manage any power they have) as because, that might be
his lot which is common to others, that the humors of some servants may prove
sharp trials to godly Masters and Heads of Families; Yea, they may take the
more liberty, that they have to do with masters who are tender walkers. Hence,
godly men, had they never so much power, must resolve not to want trials, but
that some will be raised up (even within their own doors, if others be wanting)
to scowre and exercise their graces; And servants should take heed how they
walk, that they disturb not the peace of families, especially if they profess
piety themselves, and have to do not with froward Masters (to whom,
notwithstanding their frowardness, they owe subjection,) but with godly men,
who are unwilling to interrupt their own peace, and the peace of their
families, by meddling with them. S^e 1 Pet. 2 18.

3. Grace will teach men to walk tenderly, even where usually men take most
liberty (as in their families and retirements,) as considering that God
especially remarks what their carriage is there; For so was Job here.

4. Grace will teach men to walk tenderly in their families, not only by
studying to have their servants acquainted with the ways of God, but by
avoiding insolency in their families, among their Inferiors, not doing them
wrong, or refusing to hear their complaints, because they are under their
power; For Job would not despise the cause of his very servants and slaves; as
being sensible of his own proneness to miscarry toward them, And not being
willing to persist in it, if it were found to be so; and, desiring to satisfy
them with reason, if they complained without cause, rather than to bear them
down with authority. A tender conscience will not suffer a man to oppress the
meanest by his power, and will be a strong bond upon him, when no other can
reach him. See, Genesis 42.18. Neh. 5.15.

From Verse 14. Learn 1. Godly men do avoid evils upon religious accounts and
motives, and with an eye to God, and his approbation, and condemnation, and are
not carnal Politicians in their walk; For, Job here was restrained from this
evil by the fear of God.

2. Godly men are taught to entertain serious thoughts of being called to an
account by God, and of an enquiry to be made, what their ways have been,
either in this life, or at death; For, Job is put to think of Gods rising up,
and visiting him. See Eccl. 11.9. and 12.14. The consideration whereof may
excite men to call themselves frequently to an account, and to judge
themselves, that they may not be judged, 1 Cor. 10.31.

3. Piety also teaches men to consider, that their miscarriages (unless they
prevent them, or repent of them) will not only meet them in their greatest
straits, and take them at a disadvantage; but, may provoke God to arise and
visit them with judgments: Therefore Job mentions Gods rising up, and
visiting, in case he had failed in this, and puts a perplexing question, What
he shall do, or, answer, if God do rise up? To intimate, not only that such a
miscarriage might sadly trouble him, when God rises up to visit, Jam. 2.13.
but, that it might justly provoke God to arise and plague him, Ps. 12.5.

4. It is also seriously to be studied, that, however some men be set on high
above others, yet, God is infinitely more high above them, and able to reach
them; For, so much does the scope of Gods argument import, that though he
needed not regard what his servants could do to him, though he wronged them,
being so eminent above them; Yet he durst not grapple with God above him, when
he should arise to plead their cause. See Eccl. 5.8. No eminency of men should
make them forget the super-eminency of God, or cause them say, Who is the Lord?
Exodus 5.2. But they should abase themselves daily before him, lest he make them
know, upon their own expenses, that these that walk in pride he is able to
abase, Dan. 4.37.

5. Such as do rightly study the super-eminent Majesty of God, will tremble to
do wrong to the meanest; as considering that all sinners, and particularly
Oppressors, will be at their wits end, when he calls them to an account; For,
this persuaded Job not to despise the cause of his manservant, etc. v. 13. For
if it had been otherwise, What then (says he) shall I do when God rises up?
And, When he visits, what shall I answer him? See Is. 10.1, 2, 3. Ephesians. 6.9.
Col. 4.1.

From v. 15. Learn, 1. God is the curious framer of man in the womb, as well as
he created man at first; For, says Job, He made me in the womb. This does
demonstrate the perfection of God (this little World, Man, pointing out what a
God he is who made him, as well as the greater World, is full of his glory) Ps.
139.13, 14, 15, 16. is a ground upon which we may claim an interest in him,
when other grounds do disappear, Ps. 22.9. and 119.73. Job 10.8. etc. and an
argument why we should not employ what he has made, as weapons wherewith to
fight against him.

2. God is the framer of all mankind, the small as well as the great, and that
equally of the same kind, and in the same way, whatever difference of state
there be afterward; For, He that made me, made him, and one did fashion us in
the womb, or, in one womb. The meanest have favors of this kind, which they
should acknowledge, albeit they want other things. See Pro. 22.2.

3. The greatest of men, if they be gracious, will not forget their Original,
common to them with others, though they differ in degrees of Civil dignity from
them; For, so did Job here, and propounds it by way of question, as a certain
truth, and a truth which he seriously thought upon. Humility is the Ornament of
Eminency, and it is sweet to see men a base themselves, when God exalts them,
and not swelling up with pride, because they are raised out of the dust, and
set above others.

4. Such as do seriously consider their Original, common to them with others,
will bear a low sail toward the meanest; as considering they are their own
flesh, Is. 58.7. That by sleighting or wronging them, because they are mean,
they reflect upon God who made them, and who carved out their lot, Pro. 14.31.
And that God can soon cause those who are insolent, because of their eminency,
know themselves, and that they are but men, Ps. 9.19, 20. Ezekiel. 28.9. For, this
was an argument dissuading Job from sleighting or wronging of his servants; Did
not he that made me in the womb, make him, etc.

Verse 16. If I have withheld the poor from their desire, or have caused the
eyes of the widow to fail.
The sixth Virtue, whereof he makes profession (whereby also he refutes that
challenge of injustice, Chap. 22.6, 7.) is, Humanity toward all distressed and
indigent persons, and that he was so far from wronging any of them, that he
was helpful to all of them. This he instanceth in several particular branches,
to v. 24. according to the several sorts of distressed persons, and their
several necessities, which he supplied: Confirming those several assertions by
tacit asseverations (intimated in the form of expression, If I have done so
and so) which imply an Imprecation, or submission to Gods judgments, if it
were not as he said; and subjoyning to the last an express Imprecation and
Argument.

In this Verse, we have the first branch of that Humanity, whereof he
professes to have made conscience; That not only he appeared for the righteous
cause of the poor, and of widows; but having promised to assist them in their
cause, he did not disappoint and kill them with delays, but cheerfully and
speedily performed what he had promised. Or it may be understood more
generally, That whatever were their lawful desires, whereof rationally they
might expect satisfaction from a man of his piety, wealth, prudence, or
authority; or wherein he had promised to give them satisfaction, he cheerfully
and readily satisfied them. Whence, Learn,

1. Men's Consciences, in a day of distress, will find as much peace in their
humanity and tenderness toward others, as in any other fruit of faith, and act
of piety: Therefore does Job insist so much upon that here. See Jam. 1.27. When
men are thus tender and compassionate, it evidenceth that they are humble, and
have a sense of the common miseries of mankind that have entered by sin; and
that they do read their own deservings in the sad lots of others. It is also an
evidence that they are sensible of Christ's kindness to them, which kindles
these bowels of compassion. Yea, this is the touchstone whereby men will be
tried in the last day, Mat. 25.54, -- 55. And therefore it cannot but be
refreshful, when men find this fruit of the Spirit in themselves.

2. The Lord has so ordered, that poverty, widow-hood accompanied with
distresses, and other miseries, will not be wanting among the children of men;
both for the trial and exercise of those who are under these lots, and to be a
trial to others also, and a touchstone of their sympathy and humanity: For, so
were there poor and widows in Jobs days, who were afflicted with their
miseries, and driven to seek relief from others, and who gave Job occasion to
give proof of his disposition. See Deuteronomy. 15.11. Crosses, of all kinds, will not
be wanting in any time, and who so are free of these particular afflictions
here mentioned, may yet look for others, no less searching and trying to them.

3. Albeit poverty, or widow-hood, or any other affliction, does not warrant
any to countenance men in an ill cause, Exodus 23.3. Lev. 19.15. And albeit men
may pretend many excuses, why they should not pity such, even in a just cause
(such as, their multitude, unworthiness, ingratitude, etc.) Yet it is the will
of God, that men who have wealth, skill to advise, power or authority, do help
them in what is right, and as they need; For, so did Job here satisfy the
desires of the poor, and the expectation of the widows. Men ought to consider,
that they are advanced, not for themselves only, but, for the good of others
also, as Mordecai said to Esther, Est. 4.14. And as it is an evidence of the
grace of God in them, to be helpful to those whom God does compassionate, Ps.
68.5. So the neglect thereof is a cause of Gods controversy against great men,
especially, Is. 1.23. And does provoke him to cause themselves smart under the
like difficulties, Pro. 21.13.

4. It is not sufficient in Gods account, that men do somewhat for the poor,
widows, or others in distress, unless (as the desires and expectations of the
indigent are earnest and pressing, so) it be cheerfully and speedily done; For,
Job was so active in doing good, that he caused not the eyes of the widows to
fail, or did not out-weary them with expecting and looking for relief, before
he gave it (for so this phrase signifies in Scripture, Ps. 69.3. and 119.82,
123. Lam. 4.17.) nor did he cause them weep out their eyes with complaining of
his backwardness. See Pro. 3.27, 28.

5. Men should walk so straightly, and deal so ingenuously in the matter of
their carriage, as if they were to give an Oath upon it, that they are what
they declare themselves to be, and as if they were to undergo a present curse
and judgment, if it be otherwise; For, so much is imported in this taci^e Oath
and Imprecation, If I have withheld, etc. whereby he confirms this
assertion, and many others in this Chapter. Which is both a tacit Oath and
appeal to God that he speaks true, and implies a consenting to what God shall
please to inflict, if he do lie; though he do forbear to express it, as
elsewhere he does. Men's want of seriousness, and their putting of an evil day
far from them, make them very loose in their walk and professions. But if they
would look upon Nadab and Abihu consumed by fire, Lev. 10. Zimri and Cozbi cut
off by Phinehas, Number. 25. Jeroboams hand withering, 1 King. 13. Uzziah smitten
with leprosy, 2 Chr. 26. All of them in the very act of their sin; If, I say,
they would look upon these as beacons warning all what they deserve, and (for
ought they know) what they may meet with, they might see cause to look better
to their way.

Verse 17. Or have eaten my morsel my self alone, and the fatherless has not
eaten thereof:

18. (For from my youth he was brought up with me, as with a Father, and I have
guided her from my Mothers womb)

19. If I have seen any perish for want of clothing, or any poor without
covering:

20. If his loins have not blessed me, and if he were not warmed with the
fleece of my sheep.


The next branch of this profession of Humanity (confirmed also by a tacire
asseveration) is, That he was a liberal Communicator of his own substance to
the indigent, both in food and apparel. As for his meat, he professes, not
only that he did not eat it alone, but Orphans shared with him in it, v. 17.
But, that he had been habituated from his youth to tenderness, and fatherly
care of Orphan boys, and had also been a Guide, Conducter, and Patron to
Orphan maids (whose weak Sex exposed them to many hazards) even from his
infancy, v. 18. Where it is to be considered, that Job speaks of persons of
both Sexes, of whom he had been tender and careful, He was brought up, and, I
guided her. Which some understand thus, That by the first are meant the
fatherless, spoken of, v. 17. and by the second, the widow, of whom he had
spoken, v. 16. And it is not to be doubted but Job was liberal to all those,
and many others in distress. But the words run more smoothly, if we understand
them of fatherless boys and girls who were poor, and that, having spoken in
general of the fatherless, v. 17. here he points out, more particularly, his
tenderness to every sort and sex of them. It is further to be considered, that
while he professes he was thus tender, not only from his youth, but, from his
mothers womb, the meaning of that hyperbolick expression is only this, That as
the grace of God began early to work in him, and (which probably was a mean of
that) his parents began soon to instruct him in the principles of piety,
compassion and charity; so the fruits of his tenderness appeared very early, as
if it had come into the world, and been born, with him. As for his humanity and
liberality in the matter of clothing, he professes that he gave apparel to
the naked and poor, who were ready to perish through want, v. 19 So that they
had cause to bless him, being warmed by the apparel that was made of the fleece
of his sheep, v. 20. It is said, the loins of the poor blessed him; where, the
loins, are put for the whole body, that was clothed (possibly, because their
garments were girded upon their loins;) and the meaning is, that the poor man
was excited to bless him, when he found his loins, or body, warmed with the
apparel he had given him. Or, whatever the poor man did, the very covering of
his loins and body spoke Job to be a blessed man, who had done that act of
compassion.

From Verse 17. Learn, 1. It is not enough that men be liberal of their power,
credit, and authority, to do good thereby unto others, unless they expend of
their wealth, and meat also, as need requires; without which, neither
professions of love, ( Jam. 2.15, 16.) nor of piety, ( Isa. 58.5, 6, 7.) will
avail; Therefore, beside what is professed, v. 16. Job adds this, that he had
not eaten his morsel alone.

2. As it is the commendation of great men, if they be sober in their diet; So
albeit, men had never so little, they are bound to communicate of it to others,
as their need requires; In both these respects he calls his allowance his
morsel, because he was sober in his diet, and because he was charitable, Not
only because he was a great and rich man, who might well spare somewhat to
others, but he was ready to have given a share, even of a little. Nature needs
but little to maintain it; and charitable men will straiten themselves much,
that they may be beneficial to others. And if men would indeed be sober, their
very supersluities might relieve many who are in distress.

3. As hospitality is a commanded duty, Romans 12.13. and ought to be performed
to these who are really indigent, not to the rich only, who are able to
requite us, Lu^e 14.12, 13, 14. far less to sturdy vagrants and idle persons, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10. So especially poor Orphans and fatherless persons are great
objects of charity and hospitality, seeing their distress is great, and we know
not what service God may have for them in the world; Therefore he adds, in
particular, that the fatherless did eat thereof, or, of his morsel. Not that he
did always bring every one of them to eat with himself, or, fare as well as
himself, (for that is not required by God as the hands of great persons to be
done to every orphan) but that they had a share of what he had provided for his
own and his families maintenance.

From Verse 18. Learn 1. It is not enough that men at some sits be charitable,
especially to the fatherless; but it is required that they be constant in such
undertakings, as they are able, and as the need of such distressed persons
shall require: For, says he, from my youth he was brought up with me. As men
are tried how really they are in every duty, by their perseverance, so,
particularly, in the duty of charity, Gal. 6.9, 10.

2 As good education is oft-times (though not always) blessed with good fruits
(as here Job begins early to do well, who probably was well ed^cated; which
condemns them who neglect the education of their children^, and concludes them
under double guilt who are not answerable to the good education they have
received:) So it is good to begin early in youth to do well, which will make it
still the longer the easier, that men are habituated unto it; For Job began to
be charitable and tender, from his youth, and, from his mothers womb, and he
gives this as a reason why he was so constant in it, and had hitherto
continued, v. 17. for from my youth he was brought up with me. See, Eccl. 12.1.

3. It is not enough that men perform duties of charity and compassion, unless
they be done tenderly and affectionately; For, the fatherless was brought up
with him, as with a father. Without this, men do lose the benefit and free
reward of the good things they do, and they make them bitter and grievous to
others, who cannot well digest their grudging in doing of them.

4. A special regard is to be had, by compassionate men, to these of the weaker
sex who are in distress, be they widows or orphan maids; For Job speaks of his
care of these in particular, I guided her, etc.

5. It is the duty of compassionate and charitable persons, not only to allow
of their means for the relief of orphans, but to see, so far as can be, to
their education, and to afford them conduct and counsel, protection and
defense, especially to these of the weaker sex; For, says he, He was brought
up with me, and, I guided her, that is, I took the managing of all her affairs,
and defended her against all injuries. The variety of their necessities must
not deter us from meddling, nor will warrant us to weary in well doing.

From Verse 19, 20. Learn, 1. Many are the necessities of the children of men,
every one of which will easily ruin them, if they be not relieved and
supplied; For, as some are ready to starve for want of meat, So, here, others
are ready to perish for want of clothing, or some covering to put upon their
nakedness: Hereby the Lord humbles man; considering how many ways there are
to make him miserable, and what need he has to depend upon God for every thing.

2. Such as would prove themselves to be truly compassionate and charitable,
ought to put forth themselves in supplying all the necessities of the poor, as
they are able, and that indifferently to all sorts of them who are real objects
of charity; For, as Job relieved them with his meat, v. 17. So here also with
apparel, he could not see any (whatever they were, so they were really
indigent, and unable to help themselves) perish for want of clothing, nor any
poor without covering. The more men give out this way, (so it be given
prudently, according to a man's ability, to fit objects, and for a right end)
the more they lend to the Lord.

3. As all men ought to be content if they have food and raiment, 1 Timothy 6.8.
So the Poor especially, who are beholding to the charity of others, ought to be
sober, and content with a mean allowance of those, that they may not burden
others needlessly; For, he supposes the poor were bound to be satisfied, if
they did not perish for want of clothing, or, wanted not a covering.

4. Such as taste of the charity of others ought to be thankful, and bless
their benefactors, when they feel the good effects of their bounty and charity;
For, that the Poors loins did bless Job, or the warmth of his body did excite
him to bless his benefactor, does import, that it is the Poors duty so to do,
and not ingrately to forget these who have been beneficial to them.

5. Whatever be men's ingratitude, yet Charity is a blessed work, and speak, the
charitable man to be blessed, if he have been sincere and single in what he
did; For, thus also, the Poors loins blessed him, or proclaimed him to be a
blessed man, as has been explained. See Mat. 5.7.

6. Truly charitable persons will not be liberal upon the expense of others, or
of what they have unjustly taken from others, (which they they ought to restore
to the true owners, if they can be found, Luke 19.8.) But of their own means
and lawful purchase; For, says Job, he was warmed with the fleece of my sheep.

Verse 21. If I have lift up my hand against the fatherless, when I saw my help
in the gate:

22. Then let mine arm fall from my shoulderblade, and mine arm be broken from
the bone.

23. For destruction from God was a terror to me, and by reason of his
highness I could not endure.


The last branch of this profession of his Humanity is, That he was no
oppressor of the poor and fatherless, nor took any advantage of them, to wrong
them, because he saw the Judges in the gate were ready to favor him, v. 21.
This branch of his profession (especially, though not secluding these that have
preceded) he confirms,

1. By an imprecation, or, by his consenting that his arm were broken, or
rotted from him, if he had lift up h^s hand against the poor, to strike, vex,
or threaten them, v. 22.

2. By giving an account of the impulsive cause of his tenderness; which was,
that he stood in awe of God, who is a party against them who inhumanly neglect,
much more, who proudly oppress, the poor and fatherless, whose supereminent
excellency cannot be prevailed against, no^ can men endure to make him a party,
who consider it.

From the Verses, Learn, 1. As to neglect Orphans is a sin, so it is a much
more heinous crime to oppress them, or any way to carry insolently toward them
to vex them; For, Job declined to lift up his hand against the fatherless. The
phrase, when spoken of Subjects, imports a rebellion and hostile opposition
against their sovereign, 2 Samuel 20.21. Here it imports any malicious
opposition, or act, o^ threatening to strike, vex or oppress them. All which Job
avoided, even the least shadow of oppression.

2. Even these who sometime have been compassionate and charitable to the poor
and fatherless, have need to be upon their guard that, in an hour of tentation,
they do not crush and oppress them; For Job, who had been a very charitable
man, v. 16, 17, etc. does here purge himself, that he did not lift up his hand
against the fatherless, not only to refute his Friends mistakes, but to
intimate that sometimes he had tentations to that evil, if the fear of God had
not restrained him, as his argument, v. 23. does show. Thus Asa, a godly man,
is sometime overtaken with an oppressing humor, 2 Chr. 16.10.

3. It is not unusual to see Judges swayed with partial respects to great men,
whose causes come before them; so that they are apt to pronounce sentence in
their favors, against poor men or orphans, even albeit their cause be not
just: For, Job intimates that he saw his help in the gate, or, the Judges were
ready to favor him, who was a great man, if he would have engaged against the
poor, or had already wronged them. Judges ought to look upon this as a very
great tentation, when such causes come before them.

4. Albeit power and opportunity to do evil be a a great tentation, to drive
men to act it, Mic. 2.1. Yet grace will teach men not to make use of their
power and credit to do wrong to any, and it is an evidence of piety to walk so
tenderly: For, Job would not lift up his hand against the fatherless, even when
he saw his help in the gate, or, in ^he courts of judgment, which were kept in
the gates of ^^ties. He was a faithful man, who would not satisfi^ him self
with the countenance and concurr^nce ^f men in any course which he knew the
Lord did not approve.

5. Whosoever employ their power to oppress others, are justly crushed
themselves, and bear the marks of it; For if Job had done so, he consents to it
as just, that his arm fall from his sho^lderblade, and his arm be broken from
the bone. Th^s may be understood, figuratively, of his Power, (which was
already gone) that if he had been an oppressor, it behooved to have been taken
from in justice, and as a punishment, which he would never grant; But rather
literally, that if he had lift up his hand against the fatherless, it were
just he lost his whole arm, and that the flesh rotted from the bone, or one
bone of it were broken from another, See Is. 33.1. Jer. 50.23.

6. God is a party to see oppressors crushed, and the poor righted, though all
men else should neglect them; Therefore does Job subjoyn, v. 23. That God was
ready to appear in this Cause. See Ps. 12.5* Eccl. 5.8.

7. As God is able to destroy whomsoever he is pleased to oppose, J^m 4.12. So
oppressors of the poor and fatherless delerve not only to be crushed in their
power, but utterly to be destroyed; For, unto what he submits to, as just. v.
^2. he adds, that he apprehended acstruction from God, as the due desert of
this sin. And God may suspend to bridle the power of some oppressors, till he
pay them home with this destruction once for all.

8. Such as ponder the dreadfulness of Gods vengeance against oppressors, may
be terrified from it; And it is not unbeseeming the piety of Saints, nor
inconsistent with their love to God, that they study his dreadful power, to
deter them from sin: For, Job found destruction from God a terror to him.

9. God is super-eminently glorious and high, having an universal and absolute
jurisdiction over all; For, highness does belong to him, See Is. 57.15. Which
calls for humility before him, a low esteem of all other things in comparison
of him, and an endeavor to perform services in such a way as it becomes
creatures to serve such a Majesty.

10. Gods super-eminent excellency is no impediment to his noticing of the poor
who are oppressed; But because he is the high and sovereign Lord, therefore he
will see to the wrongs they sustain: Therefore does he mention Gods highness as
concerned in in this matter. See Eccles. 5.8. Psalm. 107.41. and 138.6.

11. Such as do study the highness of God, will find that they are not able to
withstand his power and vengeance (as the presumptuous do dream) and so will
tremble to engage against him, were they never so high; For, says Job, by
reason of his highness I could not endure, that is, neither durst he sin, nor
could he think to subsist, if God plagued him for it. See, Exodus 18.11. Psalm.
75.4, 5. Isaiah 2.11, 12.

Verse 24. If I have made gold my hope, or have said to fine gold, Thou art my
confidence:

25. If I rejoiced because my wealth was great, and because mine hand had
gotten much.


The seventh Virtue whereof he makes profession, (and which also he confirms
by a tacit oath and asseveration) is, his contempt of wealth, and that he was
not covetous, or an Idolizer of great possessions; which he evidenceth by his
not confiding, nor rejoicing in his wealth. Whence Learn,

1. God is, sometimes, pleased to allow wealth upon godly men, when it is for
their good; For, Job, a godly man, had gold, and fine gold, and great wealth.
When it is otherwise with godly men, they have, oft-times, too much lusting
after the things of the world to blame for it. Yet they are bound to believe
that God knows what is best for them, and to improve their lot to the best
advantage.

2. Wealth is a very great snare to men's corrupt hearts, and an idol upon which
they are ready to dote; For Job looks upon his wealth as that which was his
trial, to get well through the snares of it. Which shows that men will not
want trials, though they be not poor.

3. Wealth does then, especially, become a snare, and men make an Idol of it,
when their confidence is taken off God, and placed upon it; So that they have
an high esteem of riches, and an eager desire and serious endeavor after it;
they are filled with anxieties if they speed nor in their endeavors, and do
set up their rest upon it, if they prosper, Luke 12.19. For, Job declined this,
as a snare, to make Wealth his hope and confidence. This is the practice of
wicked men, Ps. 52.7. whereas godly men have not their hope in this life, 1
Cor. 15.19. And the Scripture does frequently dissuade men from such a carnal
confidence, 1 Timothy 6.17. Ps. 62.10. Not only because it is injurious to God,
who should be our hope, and can only prove a refuge in a day of trouble, Jer.
17.17. But because it is a great vanity and folly for men to place their
confidence so low. For Riches are uncertain, 1 Timothy 6.17. Prove. 23.4, 5. They
cannot satisfy men, nor make their lives comfortable, Eccles. 5.10. Luke
12.15. They cannot relieve men in a day of distress, Prove. 11.4. and are apt to
hinder them in every good work, Mat. 19.23, 24. Luke 14.17, 18, 19.

4. No excellency of worldly enjoyments warrants men to place their confidence
in them, nor is any degree of this carnal confidence allowed by God: for fine
gold (as there were different kinds of Gold, see Chap. 28.15. -- 19.) did no
more warrant Job to make it his confidence, than if it had been but simple
gold; and he declined to place the least hope, as well as the strongest
confidence, upon these things. Where it is also to be marked, that he speaks of
hope in reference to gold, and of confidence in reference to fine gold, (as
afterward, of rejoicing in reference to great wealth, or abundance of gold and
other riches;) To show that it is an evidence of carnal confidence, when men's
hope and trust grows, as they increase in wealth.

5. Albeit there be a lawful moderate joy in the enjoyment and use of the good
things of this life, Deuteronomy. 12 7. Eccles. 2.24. and 3.12, 13, 22. and 5.18. and
8.15. when men are so satisfied with Gods bounty, as take them off from
murmuring and anxiety; Yet carnal joy and cheerfulness, because of worldly
enjoyments, is sinful, and an evidence of carnal confidence: Therefore Job
subjoynes rejoicing because his wealth was great, as an evil following upon the
former, which he also declined. This is an evil to which men's carnal hearts are
prone (and therefore Job noticeth it, as a fruit of the grace of God in him,
that he was delivered from it) Luke 12.19. Jam. 5.1, 5. And it may easily be
discerned to be sinful, by men's abating of their joy in God, and their
tenderness, when they prosper, Deuteronomy. 6.10, 11, 12. by their wanton kicking
against God, Deuteronomy 32.15 and studying only to satisfy their lusts, Romans 13.14.
and, by their want of patience and submission when, at any time, God strips
them of their wealth; For, Job proved he had been no carnal rejoycet because of
his wealth, by his patience when God took it away, Chap. 1.21. All these are
clear evidences of a carnal joy, and do prognosticate that dis-satisfaction and
vexation will follow upon the back of it. And who so would keep free of it,
they ought to acquaint themselves with rejoicing and encouragement in God; For,
if the heart of man seek not satisfaction there, it must either crush, or else
delude and spott it self with some carnal delight or other.

6. Carnal confidence and joy in wealth are never alone, but attended with
other evils; and particularly, with a sacrificing to their own net, and an
ascribing of all their success and wealth to their own diligence and
endeavors: For, Job also avoided rejoicing because his hand had gotten (or,
found) much. See Deuteronomy. 8.17, 18. Hab. 1.16.

7. It is possible, through grace, for a man to enjoy wealth, and yet be kept
from carnal confidence and joy, or satisfaction, in it: For, here Job seriously
asserts, that it was so with himself, and that with a tacit Oath, If I have
made gold my hope, etc. If I rejoiced, etc. So that men need not blame their
condition, or lot, for their miscarriages under it.

Verse 26. If I beheld the Sun when it shined, or the Moon walking in
brightness:

27. And my heart has been secretly enticed, or my mouth has kissed my hand:

28. This also were an iniquity to be punished by the Judge: for I should have
denied the God that is above.


The eighth Virtue, whereof he makes profession, is, Purity of worship, and
avoiding of Idolatry. Where, we have to consider,

First, The Object of this Idolatrous worship which he declined, The Sun
(called here, the Light, by way of eminency, being the great Luminary of this
visible World, from which the lesser Luminaries borrow their light) and the
Moon. The worshipping of these Creatures is an Idolatry that has been ancient
in the World, among many Nations; for which they wanted not specious pretenses,
that they were glorious and splendid things which they worshipped, that they
were very comfortable and refreshful to this inferior World, by their light
and influences, etc. Hence this way of Idolatry was so taking, that frequently
in Scripture we find the Church of Israel infected with it, so that they are
worshipping all the host of Heaven, and particularly, the Sun, Ezekiel. 8.16. and
the Moon, Jer. 8.2. which is conceived to be called, the Queen of Heaven, Jer.
7.18. and 44.17.

Secondly, The Idolatrous acts of worship performed to these Creatures, which
he avoided; where he gives also, an account of the several degrees of this
Idolatry, or of the gradual procedure of men in exhibiting undue reverence to
them, As,

1. When they do seriously study and contemplate these Creatures, in their
excellency, brightness and beauty, contemplating the Sun when it shines, and
the Moon walking in brightness, or, going forth precious, for they esteemed it
precious because of brightness. Hence it was that Idolaters did ordinarily
worship the Sun at its rising, and the Moon when full, because then their
brightness and splendor were more taking and alluring.

2. When this study and contemplation of these Creatures does affect the heart,
so that it is allured with the thoughts of their excellency, and drawn to
admire them for their beauty, and other properties, and to attribute Divine
power to them. This is meant by the hearts being enticed secretly, or, in
secret, whereof Job was free. Where some do understand his assertion (That his
heart was not enticed secretly, or, in secret) thus; That he was not enticed to
perform religious service and worship to them (such as that kissing of the
hand, after-mentioned) in a secret and clandestine way, Deuteronomy. 27.15. while yet
he made open and public profession of the true Religion, with, and before
others. And it is, indeed, a truth, that godly men (such as Job was) are no
time-servers in the matter of their Religion, so as to be in public what may
please others, while they are what themselves please in secret. But the meaning
of the phrase here seems rather to be this, That he was not secretly, or,
unawares, and as by stealth, enticed to have an undue estimation of these
Creatures; or, so enticed, as secretly, or, inwardly to Idolize them.

3. When these inward deviations of the mind and heart break forth in external
signs of religious worship, such as, the mouth kissing of the hand, before
them; or, (as it is in the Original) the hands kissing of the mouth, because
the hand made the travel in this business, and was brought to the mouth, to be
kissed. Where we are to consider, That kissing is a sign (as of affection, Ruth
1.9. 1 Cor. 16.20. and of Civil subjection, 1 Samuel 10.1. so) of religious
worship, Ps. 2.12. And in the performance of Idolatrous worship, if the Object
were near the worshippers, they kissed it, as was done to the Image of Baal, 1
King. 19.18. and to the Calves of Dan and Bethel, Hos. 13.2. But if the Objects
were further off (as the Sun and Moon are) the worshippers first held out their
hands toward these objects, and then brought their hand to their mouth, and
kissed it, in testimony that they honored these objects, and that they
acknowledged they held their breath of them.

Thirdly, We have to consider the reasons persuading Job to avoid compliance
with this Idolatry, v. 28. Namely, because it was a capital crime, and a denial
of the most high God, in giving that glory to the Creatures, which is due to
him only.

From these Verses, Learn, 1. Albeit some men little regard Principles of true
Religion, in doctrine or worship; and albeit many make use of a blameless civil
conversation, to commend their errors and superstition: Yet God requires
purity of Religion, as well as of conversation, without which, men will never
be truly pure in their conversation (for faith must purify the heart, Act.
15.9. that the conversation may be pure) nor will God accept of what they
pretend to of it; Therefore Job finds it necessary (in proving his integrity)
to vindicate himself in the matter of his Religion, as well as in the duties of
the second Table. Hereby showing, that faith, and a good conscience, must not
be separated, 1 Timothy 1.19.

2. So far have the posterity of Adam degenerated, that not only many of them,
who have some knowledge of him by his Word, do corrupt his instituted service
and worship, by their own superstitious devices and inventions; But others of
them are so far blinded and plagued, that they worship the Creature instead of
the Creator; For, Jobs Apology intimates, that to worship the Sun and Moon was
frequent in his days. Yea, not only did they worship these more glorious and
excellent Creatures, but even the basest of them, and the very herbs in their
Gardens. See Romans 1.23, 25. This is the just fruit of men's not retaining God in
their knowledge, and of their not glorifying him as God, when they know him,
Romans 1.21, 28. And a sad document of the bruitishness of man, and what he will
prove, if he be given up to his own hearts lusts. And it should be matter of
Humiliation to us, that God is so little glorified in the World, and the
Creature put in his room.

3. Even the most godly men have need to be upon their guard, lest the grossest
Idolatry infect them, if it prevail where they live, and be set off with
rational and specious pretenses; For, Job purges himself of this, as an evil
to which he had strong tentations, if grace had not restrained him, considering
that it was generally in practice in the Countries about, and that the
splendor of these Luminaries, and the light and influences that come from
them, were specious reasons to plead for religious respects to be paid to them.
However men at this distance may think Pagan-Idolatry no tentation, and may
wonder that Israel was so often infected with it; Yet if it were our tentation
and trial, we would find it more taking, and men within the visible Church, who
are taken with the evils prevailing in it, have just cause to fear, that they
might be overtaken with that also, if they had a strong tentation to it. And
particularly, as in the Church of the Jews, formality in performing Gods
instituted worship drew on superstition, Is. 29.13. and from that they fell
oft-times into gross Idolatry; So every formal and superstitious person does
witness his inclination to follow these abominations, if he were tried. And if
a covetous person be an Idolater, Ephesians. 5.5. Col. 3.5. he would readily (being
tempted) worship the very creatures, rather than be deprived of his Idol. And
therefore Job joins Idolatrous confidence in wealth, v. 24, 25. with
worshipping of the Creatures, v. 26, 27 because they are evils which have some
affinity, and because the one would readily draw men to the other.

4. Albeit the Sun and Moon (as well as other creatures of God) may and ought
to be studied and meditated upon, for profitable ends and uses, Ps. 8.3. Yet
men ought to guard, lest, in contemplating of them, their minds be diverted and
drawn off God, and be fixed upon them as the fountain of these benefits they
receive by them; For, Job declined thus to behold the Sun when it shined, and
the Moon walking in brithtness, as the first degree of Idolizing them, and
tending to draw him to perform religious worship to them.

5. Albeit men be not come to that length of declining, as to commit any
outward Idolatrous act; yet they may commit Idolatry inwardly, if their hearts
and affections be so taken up with any excellency in the Creatures, as to dote
upon them; For, Job was careful that his heart should not be enticed secretly,
or, inwardly, though as yet it appeared not in any external practice. For when
the heart is thus possessed (as when the World wondered after the Beast, Rev.
13.3.) it is Idolatry in the sight of God, and draws men to outward acts of
Idolatry, Deuteronomy, 11.16. And God, who searches the heart, and looks to the
heart, especially, in worship, is provoked to jealousy, when he finds an Idol
placed there. See Ezekiel. 6.9.

6. Men have so much more need to guard against Idolartry, especially in their
hearts, that is of a very insinuating and enticing nature, and, men by nature
liking it better than the right way of worship, they may be easily stolen off
their feet by it; For, Job intimates that the heart is apt to be enticed in
this matter, and that secretly, er'e men be aware.

7. Albeit some be ready to think that they are not guilty of Idolatry,
whatever communion they have with Idolaters in the external performances of
their worship, so long as they keep their hearts free from approving or
concurring with them; Yet these very external practices are Idolatry in the
sight of God; For, Job not only kept his heart, but was careful that his mouth
should not kiss his hand, otherwise he would have judged himself guilty of
Idolatry. For it is upon this, and the like practices, only, that Judges do
cognosce, and for th^se do they punish men as Idolaters, v. 28. Such practices
are sufficient to evidence men's obedience to injunctions of Idolaters, Hos.
13.2. and therefore cannot, be free of Idolatry. And if it were otherwise, the
three Children, Dan. 3. had very foolishly exposed themselves to such an
hazard, for not falling down before the Image; seeing they might easily have
pretended to worship before the Image, but without any respect to it.

8. External signs of respect and reverence, g^ven to any Creature upon a
religious account, is Idolatry; For, so did Job account of kissing of the hand,
from a religious respect to the Sun and Moon. So also, 1 King. 19.18. Men may
when their wits, to invent distinctions, which are but little (if at all)
understood by the most part of those who are engaged in these practices; But
the Second Commandment does clearly condemn all such religious expressions of
reverence performed to the Creatures, or, with a respect to them.

9. That corrupters of Religion, especially Idolaters, ought to be punished by
the Magistrate, as well as transgressors of the second Table of the Law, is
not an injunction peculiar only to the Mosaica Paedagogy; For, in Jobs days
(who was not an Israelite, and who lived before the Law was given upon Mount
Sinai) it was a received Maxim, That Idolatry is not only an heinous iniquity,
but an iniquity to be punished by the Judge, as he had said before of Adultery,
v. 11. It is also fore-prophesied that such will be punished, when the Spirit
is powered out, and the Fountain made use of which is opened for the people of
God, Zech. 12.10. with Chap. 13.1, 2, 3, etc. And it will be eminently
accomplished when the Kings shall hate the Whore, Rev. 17.16.

10. Such as do choose the most excellent of Creatures for their portion, or
the object of their worship, they do pre-judge themselves by their choice, and
forsake an infinitely better portion; Therefore is God here designed to be the
God that is above; not only to terrify Idolaters with the apprehensions of his
vengeance, who is above all, and who can reach them, even where they deal most
proudly, Exodus 18.11. But to show, that however the Sun and Moon, which these
Idolaters do worship, be high and glorious, yet, God is infinitely above them,
and therefore they make a foolish choice, who forsake the Fountain of living
waters for any broken cisterns, Jer. 2.13.

11. As it is an heinous crime to deny the true God, in words or thoughts, Ps.
14.1. or, in practice, Tit. 1.16. So, Idolaters, in special, are guilty of this
crime; As Job intimates here, that, by committing this Idolatry, he should have
denied the God that is above. For,

1. It is the Prerogative of God alone to be adored and religiously worshipped
by the Sons of men, Mat. 4.10. And therefore they who withdraw this worship
from him, and give it to any other thing, do in effect deny him.

2. It is Gods Prerogative to institute all the means and ways of his own
worship, and not to let men devise them out of their own hearts; And therefore
when men do institute objects of their worship (though pretending ultimately to
direct it to God, as the wisest of Pagans did also, in worshipping their Images
and Idols, and do devise Ordinances of worship, they are guilty of
laese-Majesty, in counterfeiting the Kings Coin, or setting their stamp upon
false Coin; and they do deny the true God, and confess another God, while they
fancy such a Deity as will approve and accept those their inventions; which
certainly is not the true God, for he will accept no worship but what himself
prescribes.

3. The true service of God, and those inventions of men, are incompatible and
inconsistent, however men think otherwise, Josh. 24.22, 23. 1 King. 18.21. Mat.
6.24. 2 Cor. 6.16.

Verse 29. If I rejoiced at the destruction of him that hated me, or lift up my
self when evil found him:

30. (Neither have I suffered my mouth to sin, by wishing a curse to his Soul)

31. If the men of my Tabernacle said not, Oh that we had of his flesh! we
cannot be satisfied.


The ninth Virtue, whereof he makes profession (and which he confirms by a
tacit Oath) is, Freedom from private revenge, or a vindictive Spirit; So that
he durst neither rejoice, nor behave himself insolently, when his enemies were
ruined, v. 29. Nor durst he sin, by wishing a curse to them, before their ruin
came, v. 30. As for that which follows. v. 31. it is diversely understood.
Some understand it of some wicked Slaves in his house, who were so malicious,
when at any time he corrected them, that no less could satisfy them, than the
tearing of his very flesh, if it had been in their power; And yet Job bare all
this, as well as he bare injuries from others, v. 29, 30. Others referr it to
what is spoken of his Hospitality, v. 32. and understand it thus, That his
servants, being toyled with preparing meat and other accommodations for
strangers, wished they had his flesh to tear, because they could not get
leisure to satisfy and refresh themselves with meat, by reason of their
attendance upon others; Or, they wished they had that flesh to eat which he
gave to others, fearing to want themselves, because he was so profuse in
providing for others. But (however it is supposed, that sometimes his servants
were ready to contend with him, v. 13.) none of these are very probable; either
that Job (who was so kind to strangers) was so cruel to his servants, or so
careless in providing for them, or that his servants were so malicious against
him. Therefore I look upon these words, as containing an amplyfication of what
he has professed in the preceding Verses; That he was so free of
maliciousness, and a vindictive spirit, that when his Domestics were so
enraged at his enemies, that they wished they had their flesh to tear, and
would have eaten them (as we say) with their teeth; nor could they be satisfied
that they were not destroyed, and so provoked him to revenge himself; Yet he
remained unmoved in his resolutions.

From v. 29. Learn, 1. Even most tender and straight walkers will not want
un-friends, nor will the seed of the Woman want a seed of the Serpent to malign
and oppose them; For, Job had enemies, who not only dis-liked, but hated him;
which they would have evidenced further, if his power and authority had not
secured him against their malice. See Ps. 69.4. Gal. 4.29. Godly men must
resolve to be persecuted, 2 Timothy 3.12. For however a conscientious and upright
conversation prove, sometime, a mean of making men friends, as Abraham found,
Genesis 21.22, 23. and 23.5, 6, etc. And in reason it should be so, 1 Pet. 3.13.
Yet, ordinarily, it proves otherwise, that even a man's nearest friends become
his enemies, upon the account of his piety, Mat. 10.34, 35, 36. So that
ordinarily it speaks men to be in a woeful condition, when all men speak well
of them, Luke 6.26. And godly men should look upon such a lot as useful, not
only to prove that they are not of the World, Joh. 15.19. and to put them to
try if they be indeed right in that wherein men oppose them; but to be a mean
to quicken them in their journey to Heaven, where they will be above the malice
of enemies.

2. As troubles are incident to all the Sons of men; So, in particular, such as
malign and oppose godly men, in the course of piety and righteousness, and
because they are godly, do lie very near destruction and ruin: For, Job
intimates, that not only some evil, but, destruction, befell him that hated
him. It is an evidence that men are abhorred of the Lord, and near to ruin,
who are left to themselves, to hate righteous and godly men, Ps. 34.21.

3. Wicked men, and particularly, such as do oppose godly men, may expect to be
surprised with destruction, and that they shall not be able to shift or avoid
it, when it comes; For, this destruction and evil finds him, when he little
dreams of it, 1 These. 5.3. and finds him out in all his hiding places, whether
he thinks to flee for refuge. See Number. 32.23. To be thus surprised with trouble
is a sad addition to it; and however wicked men seem confident enough before
trouble come, yet all refuge will fail them when it seizes upon them, Is. 10 3.

4. Albeit the Pharisees thought that men might lawfully hate their enemies,
Mat. 5.43. And albeit some do look upon that injunction, to love our enemies,
etc. Mat. 5.44. as a Counsel only, and not a Command; Yet even in Jobs days, a
vindictive Spirit, or to thirst after private revenge, was looked upon as a
sinful transgression of the Law of God: For, therefore does Job purge himself
of it, as such, in this and the following Verse; where he shows, That
whatever the Lord was pleased to inflict upon his enemies, yet he was not
malicious nor revengeful against them. See 1 Samuel 24.12, 13. We find Christ and
his followers very exact in this, Luke 23.34. Acts 7.60. And when the Disciples
gave evidence of such a malicious frame of spirit, they are very severely
rebuked by Christ, Luke 9.54, 55, 56. Men might see the evil of such a
disposition, if they considered, That, thereby, they encroach upon Gods
Prerogative to take vengeance, Romans 12.19. and do take their cause out of his
hand, who can give them a better account of it, than they can make to
themselves, Pro. 20.22. That they obstruct their own success with God in
prayer, by it, Mat. 6.14, 15. That they evidence they will be but cold in Gods
matters, while they are so hot in resenting injuries done to themselves; and,
That they declare that they little consider Gods hand in their trouble, and are
little careful to improve it, while they are so much taken up with thoughts
about the instruments employed in it. See 2 Samuel 16.1^, 11.

5. Not only to seek or procure the ruin of our particular enemies, but even
to rejoice and insult when God brings them down, is an evidence of
maliciousness, and of a vindictive Spirit; For, Job would not rejoice at the
destruction of him that hated him, nor lift up himself (or, express his inward
joy by any insulting speech or carriage) when evil found him. It is true, godly
men may rejoice at the ruin of the public, obstinate, and incorrigible
enemies of God and his people, Ps. 52.5, 6, 7. and 58.10. Not at their
destruction simply, but because God is glorified in his justice, and the Church
of God fares the better that they are destroyed: Yet it is unlawful, and an
act of revenge, to rejoice at the destruction of men's private particular
enemies, Pro 24.17, 18. Obad. v. 10, 11, 12, 13. Withal, it is to be
considered, that Job, by asserting only that he did not rejoice, nor lift up
himself, does not deny that he had these other evidences of a Spirit that is
not vindictive, which God requires in his Word; Such as, mourning for enemies
in their distresses (as David mourned for Saul, 2 Samuel 1.17, etc. See also Ps.
35.13, 14.) which may be comprehended under his not rejoicing; and relieving of
them when they are in misery and distress, Romans 12.20 Exodus 23.4, 5. But he
mentions this especially, to show that men are apt to fall in that evil of
rejoicing upon such an occasion, Mic. 7.8. Even albeit they should palliate it
with some specious practices which might seem to speak the contrary; and to
show that he made conscience of ordering his passions and affections, as well
as his external conversation.

From Verse 30. Learn, 1. It is not enough that men pretend to sobriety and
moderation when their trial is over; unless also they be sober when the trial
is incumbent and pressing; For, as Job did not rejoice when evil found his
enemy, v. 29. So he did not wish him evil, before it came. Both of these are
times wherein men's sobriety and meekness is tried.

2 It is an evidence of maliciousness, and an act of revenge, for men to curse,
or wish the ruin of their particular enemies, whom they ought to bless, and to
do them good, and pray for them. Mat. 5.44. Romans 12.14. For, Job durst not wish
a curse to his soul, or person; or, he durst not desire his soul (or his life
to be taken away) by a curse, or imprecation. Whatever he thought such
deserved, yet he durst not use curses and imprecations, as desiring them to be
cut off. We find, indeed, many imprecations of godly men in Scripture; But
these are directed against the wicked courses of public incorrigible enemies,
and flow from a prophetike spirit, and so are prediction rather than prayers;
and consequently, are not to be imitated by men in reference to their private
enemies.

3. As these who curse, and wish evil to their enemies, do sin against God, (as
here Job intimates;) So the consideration of the sinfulness of a course is the
most cleanly motive to dissuade men from it; For, this was an argument which
prevailed with Job, He would not sin, by wishing a curse to his soul. If men
make not conscience of sin, as sin, (abstracting from their interests, or the
cons^quents that may follow upon it) they will not be sufficiently armed
against every evil course.

4. Godly men want not corruptions pressing them to sinful courses, and
particularly, to maliciousness; In which case, it is their duty to resist their
own inclinations, and suppress them; For, Job would not suffer (or, give up)
his mouth to sin, which is contrary to the practice of many, who, instead of
wrestling, or resisting what they might, through grace, avoid, do suffer every
tentation to carry them away, Do tempt tentations by rushing upon snares, do
give themselves to evil, Ps. 50.19. Yea, and fell themselves to work
wickedness, 1 King. 21.20.

5. Whatever boylings of corruption there be within; Yet it is good if it be
kept from breaking forth, And particularly, it is a great mercy, if passion be
not let loose to break forth in bitter and malicious speeches; For, Job did not
suffer his mouth to sin, in this, whatever stirring of passion were within; See
Ps. 39 1. and, 141.3. Not that men should approve themselves in any sinful
frame of heart, so long as it breaks not forth in practice; But that, having
mourned for, and wrestled against, that which they find within them, if they
cannot get it totally subdued, their care should be that it break not out
publicly, to the dishonor of God, and the scandal of others. And
particularly, men should take heed to their mouth, or tongue. Jam 1.26. and,
3.2, etc. as being the instrument of much evil, in idle discourses, Mat. 12.36.
unseasoned and unsavory language, Coll. 4.6. Ephesians. 5.4. proud speeches, Ps. 12
3. flattery, Job 17.5. unjust censures and malicious slanders, Ps. 50.19, 20.
malicious imprecations (as here) and many the like debordings.

From Verse 31. Learn, 1. It is a commendable practice in servants and
domestics, to be affectionate to their masters, faithful to them in their
just and lawful interests, and to resent injuries done unto them; For,
whatever excess was here, yet it is praiseworthy, that the men of his
tabernacle, (or, domestics, who dwelt with him in his house, which he accounts
but a tabernacle) love him so well, that they cannot endure that any should
wrong him. So was Abraham's servant faithful to him, Genesis 24.

2. As the sons of men are apt to miscarry in all they do, and to mix their own
corruptions with what they go about; So they are in greatest hazard to
miscarry, when they manage a good cause, and have cleanly pretenses for their
debordings; For, they exceed here, in their vindictive humor (as revenge is
always violent and cruel) in that they said, O that we had of his (that is,
Jobs enemies) flesh, we cannot be satisfied. See Ps. 27.7. And this was their
pretense for it, that they stood for an honest master, and in a just quarrel.
But it is to be remembered, that a wrong done to us by man, does not warrant us,
to wrong him again, far less, to wrong God. And therefore we have especial need
to be upon our guard, when, in our contending with men, our cause is just.

3. There is no good course, wherein a godly man engages, but he may expect to
meet with tentations to divert him from it; For, Job, having resolved not to be
vindictive, wants not tentations to set him on edge. So that men must not lie
by from a good course, because of difficulties and tentations, but must resolve
on a fighting life in all the good they undertake.

4. Among other tentations, to divert or retard men's progress in a good course,
ill counsel from friends and relations is most dangerous and ensnaring; For,
the men of Jobs tabernacle are here spoken of, as a strong tentation to drive
him from his resolutions of meekness. Thus, frequently, the servants of David
were a trial to him (as too often the servants of great persons prove snares to
them,) 1 Samuel 24 4. and 26.8. 2 Samuel 16.9. Thus also Ahabs wife was Satan's
instrument to prevail with him, 1 King. 21.25. And Satan thus assaulted Christ
himself, by borrowing Peter's tongue to give him an evil counsel, Matt. 16.22,
23. which may assure them who are thus exercised, that their Head Christ
knows such a lot in his own experience.

5. It is not commendable, nor an evidence of grace, that men simply abstain
from an evil course, unless they abstain when they have strong tentations to
the contrary; For, by this Job proves his integrity, that when his enemies
provoked him, and his domestics, by their clamours and resentments, would have
set him on edge, yet he stuck by his resolution not to be revengefull. Thus
David also overcame the solicitations of his Servants and Followers. So that
they have but a poor excuse, who cast the blame of all their miscarriages upon
their tentations, whereas tentations are let loose to be touchstones of their
honesty.

Verse 32. The Stranger did not lodge in the street: but I opened my doors to
the Traveller.
The tenth Virtue, whereof Job makes profession, is, Hospitality. In those
Times and Countries they had (as yet in some Countries there they have) but few
public Innes, wherein Strangers and Travelers might be lodged and
accommodated; So that Travelers behoved to carry their provision with them,
and were necessitated to lie without, unless some Hospital persons did invite
and receive them into their houses, as we may read in several passages of
Scripture-history, and, among others, Judge. 19.15. -- 21. Now Job was a very
charitable man to such, so that he did not let strangers lodge without in the
open streets; yea, he opened his doors to the Travelers, or, toward the way,
where Travelers used to pass by; that is, he not only secluded them not who
came and sought lodging, but he kept open house and open doors for all that
pleased to come in, and waited, or caused some wait, at his doors that looked
toward the way, to invite Travelers to come in, as was the practice of
Abraham, Genesis 18.1, 2. and of Lot, Genesis 19.1, 2.

Doct. 1. Among other exercises of the Sons of men, this is one, That they are
put to travel and wander through the World, either to avoid persecution and
other hazards, or, upon their lawful affairs; whereby they come to be
strangers, and to want these accommodations which they had at home; For, here
there were Strangers and Travelers, who were objects of his Hospitality,
otherwise they were likely to lodge in the street. These were of those who
traveled in these Countries about their callings; For we read not of any
persecutions which might drive men then to wander in exile; And in his days
that humor of traveling, out of curiosity to see other Countries and People
(whereby, oft-times, men improve their vices more than their virtues, and many
going abroad full of prejudices against the true Religion, they return open
enemies to it) was not, probably, come in fashion. As all men are but strangers
and pilgrims upon earth, even when they are at home; as godly men do well
discern, 1 Chr. 29.15. So strangers and travelers have a special opportunity
to learn and improve this lesson well.

2. It is the duty of all (particularly of the Office-bearers in the Church of
God, 1 Timothy 3.2. Tit. 1.7, 8.) to be Hospital, and it is an evidence of piety
and tenderness to be so; For, Job produces this his practice as an evidence of
his piety and honesty. See Romans 12.13. And albeit Job was a rich man, yet the
command to be Hospital does not reach such only; For albeit the Hebrews were a
persecuted and spoiled people, Heb. 10.34. Yet this is enjoined them, as they
are able to perform it, Heb. 13.2. Where also a sweet encouragement is
subjoyned, taken from the consideration of the noble guests, even Angels, whom
charitable persons have had occasion to entertain.

3. Such as would approve themselves to God in the matter of their Hospitality,
and would prove their piety thereby, ought to be Hospital; not to their
acquaintances and relations only, but especially to strangers: For, so did Job
here, It was the stranger who lodged not in the street (or, without, and
abroad, in the open air, whether it were in the street of a City, or not) and
it was the Traveller, to whom he opened his doors. So much does Gods command
intimate, Heb 13.2. And by such practices as this will men be judged in the
last day; Mat. 25.34, 35, 41, 42, 43. And all those will make conscience of it
who have had, and do sincerely improve, experiences of the heart of a stranger
themselves, Exodus 23 9.

4. It is not sufficient to prove men's piety, that they use some Hospitality,
even toward strangers, unless they do it readily, cheerfully, and so as may
witness no constraint or unwillingness in the matter; For, Job opened his doors
to the Traveller, or, toward the way, to witness how willing he was to receive
them, and to wait upon them, that he might invite and bring them in. As men
ought to be ready to every good work, Tit. 3.1. So, in particulars in their
charity, they ought to be ready to distribute, willing to communicate, 1 Timothy
6.18. And they ought to use Hospitality without grudging, 1 Pet. 4.9.

Verse 33. If I covered my transgressions, as Adam, by hiding mine iniquity in
my bosom.
The eleventh Virtue, whereof he makes profession (the truth whereof he
confirms by a tacit asseveration) is, Ingenuity in confessing of his faults,
when at any time he fell into them. So that he was no fosterer of sin, as a
bosome-darling, nor did be hide and palliate, extenuate and excuse his sins,
but did freely confess them before God (and before others also, as the cause
required) in all the aggravations thereof, and did judge himself for them.
While he adds, that he did not thus cover his sin, as Adam, the name Adam may
be taken properly, for the name of the first man, whose fall, and the covering
of his transgression ( Genesis 3.12.) were not unknown to Job, nor yet his own
natural inclination (derived to him by that fall of Adam) to imitate him in the
like course; though by grace he was enabled to overcome that his inclination.
Or, the name may be taken appellatively, as the common name of all mankind, who
(being infected by the fall of Adam) do generally use to palliate and cloak
their sins. And so the meaning is, That he did not act after the manner of men
by nature, in confessing and acknowledging his sins, but acted upon a principle
of regeneration, whereby he became a new man. Both those readings may be joined
together, for as Adam first began, so all mankind, descending from him by
ordinary generation, do follow his footsteps, in cherishing and hiding of their
sin.

Doct. 1. As the most righteous of mere men, in this life, are not free of sin;
so they make conscience to remark their failings, For, Job had, and can here
tell he had, transgressions and iniquity. Whereby, also, he obviates an
exception that might be put in against this Apology and vindication of himself,
as if he delighted only to found his own praises, and boast of his perfections,
therein. To obviate this, he clears here, That he asserts not his perfection
and sinlessness in all things, but only his sincerity, in this his Apology; and
that he looks upon it (as indeed it is) as a part of a godly man's integrity,
and proof of his righteousness, to be sensible of his failings.

2. It is the mark of a godly man ingenuously to take with his faults, neither
denying or hiding them, nor defending, excusing, or extenuating them; For, Job
did not cover nor hide his sin, or, did not cover it, that it might be hid, and
not appear at all, or not appear in its true coloers. As for the sins of other
men, it is our duty to cover them, by endeavoring to turn them from them, by
admonitions, Lev. 19.17. with Jam. 5.20. by forgetting and digesting wrongs and
injuries in love, Pro. 10.12. 1 Pet. 4.8. by constructing as tenderly and
charitably as lawfully we may, of their failings, 1 Cor. 13.5.7. by not blaz^ng
abroad their infirmities, Genesis 9.21, 22. and other the like acts of love. But
as for men's own sins, Albeit it be not required that they should uncover all,
even their secret sins, to men, nor is it possible that they can distinctly
overtake and enumerate them all, in their confessions to God, Ps. 19.12. And
albeit it should be their desire and endeavor to have their sins covered
before God, by a free pardon, Ps. 32.1. Jer. 50.20. Yet they should beware of
sinful coverings of their own, whereby they think to spare their sins, or avoid
the punishment which they deserve. Hence, Men should not conceal their sin, as
thinking it enough if they get them hid from the eyes of men, as Achan did,
Josh. 7.20, 21. They should not deny their sin, as Ananias and Saphira did,
Act. 5.2, 8. They should not justify their sin, with Jonah, Jon. 4.9. They
should not extenuate their sin, with Aaron, Exodus 32.24. nor excuse it, with
these who are mentioned, Luke 14.18, 19. They should not cast the blame of
their miscarriages upon others, as some father them upon Satan, as Evah did,
Genesis 3.13. Whereas, however Satan be a cunning and active Seducer, yet men's own
dispositions are the great movers in their debordings; Others do blame others
with whom they have to do, as Aaron did, Exodus 32.22, 23, 24. and Saul, 1 Samuel
15.13, 14, 15. as many say, they swear only, because others will not believe
them; that they are passionate and do injuries to others, because they provoke
them; and that they do such and such evils, because they see others (who, it
may be, are better men than themselves) do so, or worse; all which are but
fig tree leaves, since we are bound to live by rules, and not by examples, and
since no miscarriage of others warrants us to sin against God. Others do not
spare to cast the blame of their sinning, even on God himself, and his
dispensations, at least indirectly, as Adam did, Genesis 3.12. Thus many do blame
ill times, their poor and mean condition, their callings, etc. for their
miscarriages and debordings. All these are sinful ways of covering sin; unto
which this may be added, That men knowing themselves to be guilty, and not
being willing to defend their sin, should not cover it by not confessing of it,
or repenting for it, as David did, Ps. 32.3.5.

3. As godly men may fall even in gross faults, and many of them; So if they be
indeed tender, they will not think light of them, especially if they should
endeavor to palliate and hide them; Therefore Job not only supposes that he
had transgressions, in the plural number, but he calls his transgressions,
iniquity; Whereby he not only intimates his own tender frame of heart, which
made him aggravate all his miscarriages, but does further show, that if he did
endeavor to cover his least failing, this were a way to make it more sinful,
and even an iniquity, Thus David speaks of an iniquity of that sin which he
long concealed, Ps. 32.3.5.

4. Men, by concealing or extenuating of their faults, do not only aggravate
them before the Lord, but do also evidence their great love to them; For, so
much is imported, in hiding of covered sins in his bosom, that men do cover
their sins, because they delight lovingly and warmly to embrace them. And so
the words may also be read, hiding mine iniquity in my love, or, because I love
it. In this respect the phrase, my transgressions, and, mine iniquity; will
import, not generally, every iniquity committed by him, and whereof he was
guilty, but more particularly, these evils which were as his Dalilahs, and
wherein he delighted most, as David had his iniquity, from which he kept
himself, Ps. 18.23. As, indeed, beside men's general inclination to all sins,
every person has a peculiar inclination to some particular bosome-sins, which
their own constitution and education, the custom of the Time and Nation
wherein they live, and their particular callings, do either prompt them unto,
or minister occasions of them. And these are specially the evils about which
men should prove their sincerity, in not covering or hiding of them. For,
otherwise, they may be ready to abandon many evils, while yet these cleave
close to them.

5. Even in Jobs days, the fall of Adam, the way of it, and his carriage in
it, together with the sinful inclinations and practices of all men following
thereupon, were well known; As here appears from his reflecting upon the
practice of Adam, and of all mankind descending from him in the ordinary way of
Generation.

6. It is natural to fallen Adam, and all his posterity, to conceal, extenuate
and excuse their sins; So that when any do otherwise, it is grace that makes
them differ from others; For, to cover transgressions, is to do as Adam, both
as the first man did, and as it is now natural for all men to do, till grace
make a difference.

7. Sincere walkers must not follow the common practices of mankind, nor their
own, or others, inclinations; but they should suspect that to which they are
naturally inclined, and which is the common path wherein most part do walk;
For, Job proves his sincerity, in that he would not do as Adam.

Verse 34. Did I fear a great multitude, or did the contempt of families
terrify me: that, I kept silence, and went not out of the door?
Some read this Verse thus, Though I could have affrighted, or, (violently
oppressed) a great multitude; yet the contemptible of the families should have
deterred me, so that I should have been silent, and not gone out of the door.
And they take up the meaning thus; Either as pointing out his great tenderness,
that he could have deterred the greatest, and crushed them, if they had put any
affront upon him; Yet if the meanest and most contemptible in a family had
admonished him of any failing, it was enough to put him in a fright, so that he
went not abroad for shame and fear. Or, (seeing it is not likely that Job was
thus checked in his prosperity for any miscarriage, who was applauded to by
all, as a just man, and not mistaken by any in his recreations, Chap. 29.11,
12, 24.) as pointing out his respect to justice, that though his power and
authority could have over-topped the greatest, and never so many opposers; yet
when the meanest had right on their side, he was so overawed with a fear of
injustice, that he durst not speak a word, nor stir abroad, to do them wrong.
But I shall follow our own Translation, which also is agreeable to the
Original, And so the Verse contains an account of a twelfth Virtue, whereof he
makes profession; Namely, that he had much courage and fortitude in prosecuting
and maintaining of justice, so that he was not afraid (for his questions import
a denial) of never so great multitudes opposing him, nor did the fear of
contempt, or other inconveniences, from never so many or great families,
hinder him to sit in judgment, and minister justice impartially; nor did any
terror cause him keep silence, when he ought to have spoken, or lurk when he
should have gone abroad. Whence, Learn,

1. It is not simply commendable, that men do right things (and, particularly,
that Magistrates administer justice impartially) when all men commend them for
so doing; but then is men's integrity tried, in doing these things, when they
have strong tentations to the contrary: As here Job had, and yet was a just man.

2. It is nothing strange to see the multitude against a good course, and
families of note prove a terror to good works; For, Job had a great multitude,
and families (or, houses of note and quality) to cross him in doing good. He
calls them families, because it is probable their hatred went by Clans and
Kindred, so that when any one of them was engaged, all the whole family and
tribe of his relations concerned themselves in the quarrel. And it seems those
were his enemies, because it was against them he defended the cause of the poor.

3. Were men never so great, they may expect not to want tentations and hazards
in serving of God, and doing duty; For, Job, who was so eminent and great, had
them.

4. Fear of the multitude, or of great men, and fear of opposition from them,
is a great tentation to hinder men from proceeding in a good way; For, Job
looks upon a great multitude, and these families, as things that were apt to
make him fear, (or, violently to oppress and confound all his resolutions) and
to terrify him, if he should proceed to do justice. They are under a trial
indeed, who are forced to be singular and alone in doing well, having an
enraged multitude against them, and great persons a terror to good works.

5. Even dis-respect and contempt is a trial to men, and will sufficiently
terrify them from a good course, if they be not upheld by grace; For, though
these men could not well reach Job, to do him any other harm; yet he intimates,
that the contempt of these families, was a tentation to hinder him from good,
if he had not been otherwise supported. Thus ill report is a trial that needs
the grace of God to bear it well, and to make men to steer a steady course
under it, 2 Cor. 6.8.

6. It is the duty of men, (particularly, of Magistrates) and a proof of their
sincerity, to do what is right, though never so many, and never so great
persons, were against them; As here Job, in the administration of justice, did
not fear a great multitude, nor did these families terrify him.

7. It is not enough to prove men's honesty, that they do no evil to others,
unless also they do all the good that is in their power, and have courage to
bear testimony in a trial, and appear for what is right, in their stations;
For, Job did not only not oppress, nor pronounce any unjust sentence,
notwithstanding these tentations, but he would not keep silence, and not go
out of the door. He would not silently lye^y and lurk, and let men do what they
would to the poor, but he would appear to see them get right, as became a
courageous and faithful Magistrate. Albeit men do but seldom mourn for their
om^ssions, so they keep themselves from gross commissi^ns; yet their
consciences, in a strait, will put them to try, not only what evil they have
done, but what good thing, which was their duty in their stat^on, they have
omitted, As Job was here put to it.

Verse 35, O that one would hear me? Behold, my desire is, that the Almighty
would answer me, and that mine Adversary had written a book.

36. Surely I would take it upon my shoulder, and bind it as a Crown to me.

37. I would declare unto him the number of my steps, as a Prince would I go
near unto him.


Job having made this fair Profession and Apology, wherein he ha^h produced so
many evidences of his integrity, so solemnly confirmed and proved, and being
now about to c^ose this discourse; He breaks out (for further confirmation of
all he has said) in a solemn wish and desire, That One, even the Almighty
would hear and answer him, v. 35. The meaning whereof is not, That he would
have God appearing as his Party, either as Plaintiff or Defendant, as Chap.
13.22. (For here he speaks of another Adversary, or Party.) But that God would
appear as a Judge, to give him a fair hearing, and to judge of his whole Cause,
that so he might be vindicated from all calumnies and aspersions that were cast
upon him. On this condition he professes,

1. That he would contemn the accusations of all forts of Adversaries, and
would be content they should write a Volume of them, and produce all they had
to say against him, v. 35.

2. That he is sure these accusations would tend to his commendation, and
should be an ornament and crown, and not a reproach, to him; and he would bring
them as such before his Judge, v. 36. For he was sure their accusations would
prove him a just man, seeing he had made himself no enemies, but such as
opposed him for his justice, and for his fortitude in prosecution thereof, of
which he has been speaking, v. 34. Or, his Friends could charge him with no
real crime, but he might glory that he was innocent and free of it.

3. That he would not only defend his integrity against all accusations of
Adversaries; but he would generally lay open his conscience, and give a reason
of all his actions, to his Judge, v. 37.

4. That he would not behave himself as a guilty man, but as a Princely
confident man, in so good a Cause, both before his Judge and Accuser, v. 37.

This his confident desire and profession (somewhat like unto that he had
desired before, Chap. 19.23, 24.) does indeed say more to prove his integrity,
than all the particulars he has mentioned before. For what guilty man, being
in his right wits, and already, so sharply afflicted, durst wish God to be a
Judge, and to have a quick Accuser, and would not rather seek to decline
judgment? Yet he carries the matter too confidently (for which he is
afterward reproved) and without that submissiveness which is due to such a
Judge; though the pressure of his miseries, and his unjust vexation from his
Friends, plead some excuse, or extenuate somewhat his failing in it.

From this purpose, Learn, 1. As sincere men will decline no trial, so it is
oft-times their lot to lie buried under mis-constructions, without fair hearing
and judgment; For, his general desire, O that one would hear me! imports both
that he declined not, but earnestly desired, to have his cause heard, and his
integrity tried before any Judge whatsoever, so he were impartial and
indifferent; and yet that he could not get a fair hearing, that his integrity
might be cleared.

2. God is the Judge who is most eyed by godly men in the matter of their
integrity; As being he whose testimony alone can be leaned unto in this matter,
whose Tribunal (when he proceeds according to the tenor of the Covenant of
Grace) a righteous man needs not fear, and who is the Patron of those who are
unjustly judged by others: Therefore does Job thus instance his general desire,
My desire is, that the Almighty would answer me, or, It is my sign (or,
evidence of my righteousness and integritry) that the Almighty would answer me,
or, that I desire him to answer, not to his questions or pleadings, but to his
suit, that he would give him an hearing as a Judge. See, Ps. 26.1. and 43.1.

3. The support of a good conscience, in a trial, is admirable, and to be
marked by all, both to invite others to be sincere, and to terrify accusers;
Therefore he prefixeth a, Behold, to this desire, that all might remark how
confident he was of his integrity, and how it supported him.

4. Even these who are most righteous, and approved of God, must expect not to
want opposers and calumniators; For, Job intimates, that he would have an
adversary.

5. When a man is sincere and upright, though he may expect that observers will
notice and mark his ways, yet he may slight all they can say, when God sits
Judge; For he cares not though his adversary had written a book. So long as the
Book of a Man's conscience is right, he needs not care what books others write
against him. See Acts 23.1.

6. Unjust accusations are so far from prejudging the integrity of the
righteous, that, when they have vindicated themselves, they clear their
righteousness the more, and are matter of their gloriation; For, not only
would he not smother them, but take them openly upon his shoulder, as no
burden; but he would bind them as a crown to him, or, crowns, in the plural
number, even so many Crowns as Accusations. This will be the issue of all
calumnies cast upon godly men, when either they are aspersed with the evil they
have not done, or when the good they do is called evil; and therefore they need
not lie drooping under them.

7. Such as are truly godly men, are exact numberers of their steps, that, in
so far as can be, nothing may escape them, and they do not huddle up their walk
in confusion; For, he has the number of his steps, to declare, at least all
the kinds of his steps, though he could not overtake every particular.

8. God should be ingenuously dealt with, by such as would approve themselves
as righteous, in laying out their way before him; For, says he, I would
declare unto him the number of my steps, at least he would not hide any fault
whereof he knew he was guilty.

9. Whatever pain there be in circumspect walking, yet the comfort of it will
be as great, when men look back to it in a day of trial; For, now it affords
Job peace, that he may declare unto God the number of his steps. See Ps. 44.17,
18, 19, 20.

10. The godly man may have much confidence in coming to God; For, says he, as
a Prince would I go unto him. A godly man, who is justified, is Israel, a
Prince with God, and may come boldly to the Throne of Grace, in full assurance
of Faith; and when he is calumniated, he is a Superior and Prince over his
adversaries, as having the better of them in the quarrel, and he may come
forward to God with an heroical spirit. See, Romans 8.33. Heb. 4.16. and 10.22.
Prove. 28.1:

11. It is hard for godly men, when under tentations and afflictions, to manage
a good cause rightly, and without passion and excess; For, Job is too violent
here; and albeit he was righteous as to the matter in controversy, yet it
became him to have been more submissive before such a Judge, before whom he
could not have given such an account of the number of his steps, if he had
entered in judgment with him, Ps. 143.2. When men are managing the best cause
in dispute, they have need to take heed, lest they miscarry, and fall into some
excess.

Verse 38. If my land cry against me, or that the furrows likewise thereof
complain:

39. If I have eaten the fruits thereof without money, or have caused the
owners thereof to lose their life:

40. Let thistles grow instead of wheat, and cockle instead of barley. The
words of Job is ended.


In these Verses, Job closes all this discourse and apology with the
profession of a Thirteenth Virtue, which is, his equity toward all those with
whom he had to do in the matter of his Land, whether former Possessours,
Tenants, or Laborers for himself; for to all these it may be extended. In
general, he professes that he was not an oppressor, whose very land might cry
out for vengeance upon him, when men durst not, v. 38. In particular, He
professes, that he did not eat the fruit of his land without money, either to
the former owners, from whom he had it; or present laborers, who manured it
for him; nor did he make the owners thereof to lose their life, that is, he did
kill none (as Ahab did) that he might possess their land; nor did he rack his
rents, to the undoing of the Tenants; nor did he oppress and wear out the
spirits of poor laborers, by withholding their wages. Or, (as some, though
without clear ground, understand it) of poor widows, and strangers (who were
owners, in so far as somewhat of his increase was due to them in charity) whom
he did not kill by defrauding of them, v. 39. All this he confirms by an
imprecation, or consenting to it as equitable, that, in that case, his land
should bear no fruit, but what is evil and noisome, such as thistles, and
cockle, or, noisome weeds, v. 40. Unto all which a conclusion is added by the
writer of the History, that Jobs words here ended, both what he has spoken in
the whole dispute, and particularly, this his large Apology; So that he speaks
nothing after this, but only have some few words to God, toward the close of
the Book, v. -- 40.

From these Verses, Learn, 1. It is not enough that men be just in their
public actings in Judicatories, unless they be just also to these who are
under them, in their more private relations; For, as Job was courageous in the
public administration of Justice, v. 34. So here he makes conscience also of
justice in his dealing with his inferiors.

2. Albeit oppressed men dare not mutter against oppressors, because they are
mighty; yet their oppressions will cry to God, and the very creatures will get
a mouth to witness and complain to God against them; For, if he had been an
oppressor, he intimates that the very Land would cry, and the furrows thereof
complain, or, weep. See Exodus 3.7. Hab. 2.10, 11. Which imports that the sins
of men, especially when not punished, are a burden under which the creatures do
groan.

3. It is a crying oppression to wrong righteous possessours, to enlarge our
heritage, or to wrong laborers, or tenants; For, Job would not eat the fruits
thereof without money. See, Jer. 22.13. Man. 3.5. Jam. 5.4.

4. As oppressors may become so cruel, as even to wring the life out of their
inferiors, if not also to cut them off; 1 King. 21.19. So this is a very
heinous sin; For, so Job accounts it, to cause the owners thereof to lose their
life.

5. Albeit men think to enrich themselves by oppression; Yet it is just they be
plagued, that God change the very natural course of things to them, and that he
defeat all their expectations of advantage, and take that (and much more) from
them, which they have withheld from others: For, Job subscribes to it as just,
if he had been an oppressor, that, contrary to the course of Nature, and to his
expectations, thistles grow instead of wheat, and cockle in stead of barley.

6. When men have said enough in defense of a good cause, it is meet to give
over, and not to trouble themselves with every calumny and aspersion; For,
after Job has thus vindicated himself, it follows, The words of Job are
ended.

CHAP. XXXII.
Here begins the third part of this Book, containing a decision of this
Controversy betwixt Job and his Friends; which is begun by Elihu (a Young man
who had stood by all the while, and heard the dispute) to Chap. 38. and brought
to a close by God himself, to Chap. 42.10. And albeit both Elihu, who speaks
first, and God himself, do find, that Jobs Friends were in the wrong in the
main Controversy betwixt them, as is declared here, v. 3. and Chap. 42.7. Yet
they insist most in reproving and refuting of Job, because he was the Patient
to be cured of his distemper, that so his trial might be finished. And withal,
their better and more effectual way of dealing with him was sufficient to
inform his Friends also of the error of their way. And accordingly Elihu
(after he has laid by the three Friends, in this Chapter) spends the rest of
his discourse in dealing with Job, in four speeches. The first, Chap. 33. The
second, Chap. 34. The third, Chap. 35. And the last, Chap. 36, and 37.

The State of the Controversy, or a true and exact account of that which he
maintains, both against Job, and his Friends, is propounded, v. 2, 3. of this
Chapter, where we will have occasion to speak of it. Only it will be necessary
in the entry (as was also done in the entry to the former dispute, Chap. 4.) to
premit somewhat in general, which may help us to aright understanding of his
procedure with Job. For albeit he find fault with Jobs Friends, that they had
found no answer, and yet had condemned Job; yet it should seem he run the same
way with them, in condemning him, and that with as much sharpness as they did:
Yea, he seems not only to fasten expressions upon him, which we find not in
this Book, but even to charge him with wickedness, while he asserts, that he
went in company with wicked men, etc. Chap. 34.8.

That I may make way for removing of this difficulty, and for clearing what was
Elihu's scope, I must premit these general truths. 1. Whatever identity seem to
be betwixt his discourses, and the discourses of the three Friends; yet himself
is to be credited, who expressly asserts, that he will not answer him with their
speeches, Chap. 32.14. Which imports, that his sense and scope was not the same
with theirs, let the expressions seem to be never so much the same. 2. This
godly and able young man did not utter any thing here recorded out of any
passion and heat, but he spoke as he was furnished and directed by the Spirit
of God; as he expressly asserteth, Chap. 32.18, 19. 3. The two former Assertions
are further confirmed from this; That Job, who understood what he said well
enough, finding that he was directed by God to hit him upon the sore, and to
speak to purpose (and not as his Friends had done) does not make any reply to
him, as he had done to them, even though Elihu invited him to it; waiting (as
would seem) to see if he would say ought in his own defense, Chap. 33.32. with
34.1. 4. This also puts the matter above all controversy, that God, having
humbled Job, does not reprove Elihu, nor require him to offer a sacrifice for
any fault in his speeches, as he did to the rest, Chap. 42.7, 8. Which evinceth
that he spoke right, and by Gods direction, and not as the rest did.

These things being premitted, the difficulty will be removed, and Elihu's
scope known, if we consider these particulars. 1. As to the State of the
Controversy, Elihu and the other Friends maintained different Theses, or
Opinions: For they conclude Job to be wicked, because of his great afflictions,
and his miscarriages under them. But Elihu does not meddle with the state of
his person, to question his being justified and reconciled to God; Nor does he
accuse him of wickedness in the course of his life, before he was afflicted:
Only he maintains, that, as the Sovereignty of God ought to be stooped unto
without murmuring, in his afflicting the most righteous and holy of Adams
posterity: So, the sinfulness which Job granted to be in himself, though he
still maintained his integrity, did not only deserve all this he had suffered,
and worse, but this sharp usage was necessary for the cure of these remainders
of sin in him, and for preventing the bitter fruits that (otherwise) might flow
therefrom: And that therefore he was to blame, who had complained so much, and
had not carried meekly under the trial. And (which is another branch of his
quarrel, and a miscarriage which highly incenseth him, Chap. 32.2.) however he
might have vindicated his integrity against his Friends, yet he ought not to
have reflected upon the righteousness of God who had afflicted him, as we have
found he did in his several passionate complaints and expostulations. In sum,
Elihu insists to check Job for his failings; They labored to prove him wicked;
He insists mainly upon his miscarriages under this trouble, and in the heat of
dispute (not neglecting to speak of these infirmities which are incident to
Saints at all times;) They strongly endeavor to prove, that he had led a
wicked life before he was afflicted, and that because it was so, God had sent
these afflictions upon him. And though they, as well as Elihu, took notice of
his passionate miscarriages in his trouble; yet it was upon different accounts
they did so. 1. They took notice of these only in the by, and as a further
confirmation of their opinion concerning him; For though he had not so
miscarried, their principles led them to condemn him however, as one who had
been wicked, or an Hypocrite, because he was afflicted. But Elihu insists upon
these miscarriages as his main quarrel, that so he might humble Job for them,
and for his walking so little humbly before God who had afflicted him. 2. This
being Elihu's scope and design, it is not to be thought strange, if, in
prosecuting of this challenge, he make use of several things which the other
Friends had spoken. For as they had some false principles, so they had others
that were true and sound, if they had been well applied. So that vision, Chap.
4. was given by God to Eliphaz, that thereby he might clear that dark
controversy; And it contained sufficient light for attaining that end, had it
been well understood and applied by him, as it is, for the substance thereof,
by Elihu. And beside, they expressed many truths, concerning the sinfulness of
the best of men, their unprofitableness to God, etc. which are repeated by
Elihu, and Job had granted to be truths, ( Chap. 9.2. and elsewhere) though
still he contradicts them in their design in uttering these truths, and in
their inferences from them. Yet it is still true, that Elihu answered him not
with their speeches, even when he repeated and inculcated these truths, because
he made use of them to prove another conclusion than theirs was. They made use
of them to conclude him a wicked Hypocrite, as to the state of his person,
which Job would never assent unto; Elihu makes use of them to convince Job that
Gods Sovereignty ought to be submitted to in afflictions, and that Saints ought
to be affected and humbled with the remainders of sin that are in themselves;
and to clear that Jobs carriage under afflictions, and in the heat of dispute,
was faulty, while, instead of improving his trouble, he did carp at Gods
providence who had inflicted it. And this Job is convinced of, as appears by
his silence. 3. As to his citation of Jobs words, and his inferences thereupon;
We are not to conceive, that he does cite them falsely, or fasten upon him what
he said not; Or that he does allege Job was a wicked man. Only he so cites his
speeches, as he does not repeat all in his own very words, but gives him such a
sum of them, as might let him see in what sense men might take them, however
he meant in speaking them; And what hard constructions of him they might (upon
the matter) breed in men's minds, who might (and that not without cause)
conclude, when they heard him speak so rash and unsavory speeches, that,
however his person was righteous, yet in these pranks, he did but too much
homologate the practices of wicked men. 4. His sharpness in dealing with Job,
(much beyond what God himself used toward him) does evidence him (not to be in
passion, or acted by his own Spirit, but) a man of sharp Spirit, whereof God
makes use to humble Job, that himself might deal more mildly, when he came to
speak.

As those Considerations will help to clear Elihu's general scope, so far as is
necessary in the entry to his discourses; So they afford us a needful caution
and instruction concerning the exercises of Saints. For however God do here
begin to put an end to Jobs trial from his Friends, in order to his deliverance
from his troubles; (As there will be an end of the Lord put to all the tossings
of his people:) Yet Job, who was a godly man, and had the better of his Friends
in the dispute, is so brought off, as yet he is humbled for many failings. To
show, That, however the Lord deal with his people yet they will never find
cause of glorying in themselves; but even when they are justified in their
persons, and righteous in their cause; And when God owns and delivers them as
such, it is still their advantage humbly to lie in the dust; And if they
neglect so to do, God will use means to bring it about.

Having premitted this Key for facilitating se^^ progress in opening up the
following purpose, I come to speak to this Chapter in particular; which may be
reduced to two Heads. First, An Historical Transition of the Writer of this
Book, or, An Introduction to Elihu's following discourse; pointing out some
antecedents or occasions of his entering the lists; Namely, That Jobs Friends
made no return to his former discourse, v. 1. That Elihu finds faults on both
hands in this debate, v. 2, 3. and, That having waited for their return, to no
purpose, his zeal is kindled, v. 4, 5. Secondly, Elihu's general Preface;
Wherein, 1. He gives a reason why he spoke no sooner, v. 6, 7. 2. He offers
diverse reasons why he now interposes in this quarrel, and offers to speak;
Namely, That God endoweth whom he pleases with wisdom to determine such
controversies, v. 8, 9, 10. That what they had spoken was insufficient to
convince Job, v. 11, 12. Which God had ordered so for wise ends, v. 13. That he
had some new matter to speak in this Controversy; And would follow a method
different from the other Friends, in his dealing with Job, v. 14. That they
were become silent with amazement, and therefore he might lawfully take his
turn, v. 15, 16, 17. And, That the Spirit having furnished and inspired him, he
might not hide that Talent, but will refresh himself by speaking, v. 18, 19,
20. 3. He gives an account of the way wherein he resolves to manage this
Controversy, entreating for liberty to deal freely, v. 21, 22.

Verse 1. So these three men ceased to answer Job, because he was righteous in
his own eyes.
THis Transition, or Introduction, premitted by the Writer of this Book (to v.
6.) contains three Antecedents or occasions of Elihu's speech. Whereof the
first (in this Verse) is, The blunt return Jobs three Friends made to his
former long discourse, which spoke so cleary to the Controversy in debate
betwixt them. They return him only silence, in stead of any answer; As judging
him to be a man filled with a conceit of his own righteousness, and therefore
no more to be dealt with, but (after their former endeavors) now to be given
up, and left to himself, as a stubborn and obstinate man.

It is not to be questioned, but this supposed fault of Jobs, is an heinous
evil in it self, and that it is to no purpose to deal with men who are
possessed with it; yet they do mistake Job, while they charge it upon him. For
however he was a righteous man, and knew, and avowed that he was such (wherein
he exceeded in reflecting upon God, as Elihu tells him) yet he never pretended
to be so righteous, as that he was free of all sin, but expressly confessed the
contrary Chap. 7.20. and 31.33. and frequently. Nor was he so filled with a
conceit of his righteousness, as they need to give over dealing with him; For
he was still ready to take with any just reproof, if they had given it; As his
entertainment of Elihu's discourse does witness.

Doct. 1. For men to be righteous in their own eyes, or wedded to a conceit and
estimation of themselves, their purity and perfections, is a great fault; For,
so do they here suppose, and that justly. See Prove. 30.12. Luke 16.15. and
18.9, 14. This is an evil so incident to men, by reason of their self-love,
that many troubles, yea, and discoveries of their folly and weakness, will
hardly drive it from them.

2. It is one evidence (amongst others) of a man wedded to a conceit of his own
righteousness, that he is not easily convinced of any evil in his way; For, so
is here also supposed. They held him to be such a one, because he would not be
convinced by them. And albeit they wronged Job in this, who had rejected no
found information they had offered him, yet the general Principle they walk by
is true, That persons who will not be convinced of real truths, particularly of
real faults, are righteous in their own eyes. See Prove. 26.12.

3. As there are many means and ways for putting an end to controversies and
contentions; so this is one, That men having to do with obstinate and
self-conceited persons, should (after due means of conviction) let them alone;
For, these three men ceased to answer Job upon this account, wherein they
walked by a right rule, had their cause been just. For as we are bound to
answer a fool, lest he be wise in his own conceit, so we are also to take heed,
lest by insisting we become like to him, Prove. 26.4, 5. Thus also God gives up
with his people, when they become obstinate, Psalm. 81.11, 12.

4. The dear people of God may suffer very sadly in their reputation, even by
their dear Friends; As here Job suffers in this cause. For,

1. They may be accounted obstinate and self-willed (as Job was by them) when
yet they are never solidly convinced to be in the wrong, nor have they indeed
defended a wrong cause. These Friends could not prove their charge, v. 3. And
yet they will conclude him obstinate, because he will not quit the truth, or
change his opinion, without any reason given why he should do so.

2 They may have a continued trial, even when their exercise changes; For, he
has both been spoken to formerly, and is now given over by them, with a
reflection and reproach, as if he were a wicked and stubborn man. All this
comes to pass, to be a trial and exercise to honest men, when they are thus
tried and tossed on the right hand and the left, and reflected upon both by
speeches and silence. Only in this case, godly men should be upon their guard,
lest they be provoked, by such harsh usage, so to miscarry, as will make their
right a wrong, or prove them guilty before God; which was Jobs fault, as Elihu
tells him.

Doct. 5. Ordinarily the darkest hour of the people of Gods trial goes before
Gods appearing on their behalf, and proves a forerunner of it; For, whereas
Jobs Friends had hitherto taken pains on him (which spoke them not to be
desperate of his case, however they judged him wicked, and were angry that he
would not grant it) now they heighten his trial by their resolved silence,
concluding him a man not worthy to be taken pains upon; But this comes to pass
immediately before God, sent Elihu to begin his cure, to better purpose than
they had attempted it.

Verse 2. Then was kindled the wrath of Elihu the Son of Barachel the Buzite,
of the Kindred of Ram: against Job was his wrath kindled, because he justified
himself rather than God.
A second Antecedent, and more near occasion of Elihu's speech (in this and the
next Verse) is, His reflecting upon the faults he had marked upon both hands in
this debate, whereby he is provoked to anger, or, just zeal and indignation,
and excited to offer his jugement, for clearing of the whole matter. And so
here we have his verdict of the whole preceding debate, and his thoughts of
what was faulty in it; whereby (as has been said in the entry) we are helped
to understand his scope in the following discourses.

In this Verse, we have to consider,

First, A description of this Umpire, which is taken,

1. From his Name, Elihu, which signifies, My God is He, or, the same, that
is, My God is that only excellent One to whom that Name is due.

2. From his Parentage, he was the Son of Barachel, which name signifies, One
blessed of God. And by the imposition of these names it would appear, that
Elihu was descended of a pious race, whose Father had given him a name
favoring of piety, as the like had been given himself before.

3. From his Progeny and Kindred, His Father was a Buzite, of the Kindred of
Ram. As for Buz (from whom he is denominated a Buzite) we find a Country
bearing that name, Jer. 25.23. lying amongst those Arabians and Idumeans. It
seems to have that name from Buz the Son of Nahor, Abraham's Brother, Genesis
22.20, 21. Of whom, in all probability, Elihu was descended. While it is said,
that his Father and he were of the Kindred of Ram, this Ram, cannot be that Son
of Judah, Judge. 4.19. for he lived after Jobs days, nor (suppose he had lived
before) is it likely that he would have left his own County and Nation, to go
dwell (he and his Kindred) among these Idumeans. It can with little show of
probability be alleged, that Ram is to be taken appellatively, for Aram, or,
Syria, and that he was of that Country. For (though it be granted, that Ram may
be the same with Aram, of which afterward, yet) it cannot in propriety of
speech be said, that a man is of the Kindred, or Family, of such a Country. It
is with as little probability asserted, that Ram is the same with Abraham, who
(they say) was first called Ram, signifying High, before he got the name of
Abram, an high Father, which afterward was changed into Abraham. Therefore it
is most probable, that this Ram, was some Kinsman of Elihu and Barathel, who
was famous in these times and places, and therefore mention is made of him in
this description. And we find mention of one Aram, (who may as well be called
Ram, as Ram the Father of Amminadab, 1 Chro 2 9, 10. is called Aram, Matthew.
1.3, 4) the Son of Kem^el, who was Brother to Buz, Genesis 22.21. who it may be
was the person here mentioned, and a person famous in these days. Though it be
more probable (and agreeable to the Scripture-way of reckoning Progenitors, in
the direct line) that this was another person, of the posterity of Baz (though
ment^oned no where else in Scripture) who was a famous man, and therefore
mentioned in this description of Elihu and his Father, who (it seems) were
descended of him. However, there is no necessity to determine any thing
positively in these circumstances, if we take up a right the reasons of this so
exact a description of Elihus; which are, partly, to assure us that this is a
true History (and not a Fiction or Parable) and a very ancient History; and
partly, because Elihu was younger, and more obscure, than Job and his three
Friends; and therefore his descent and pedigree is more fully described than
theirs was, who were so eminent men in these times and places. I shall only, in
the close of this description, pass in a word their groundless conjecture, who
say, this Elihu was that Balaam, of whom mention is made in the Book of
Numbers, and elsewhere in Scripture; who (say they) was a Prophet of God, and
had these Revelations here reco^ded, before he came to Balak, where he made so
soul Apostasy, and was cut off amongst the Midianites, Numb. 31.8. It is easy
to multiply conjectures, where the Scriptures are silent, which may with the
like facility be rejected. But this is not to be admitted, that a Child of God,
and a Prophet also, may make so total and final a defection as he did, for any
thing we can find in Scripture.

Secondly, In this* Verse, we have to consider, Elihu's verdict and censure of
Jobs part in the debate, and of his carriage under his trouble. He is angry at
Job, not, that he asserted himself to be a righteous man, or that he just^fied
and vindicated himself in the cause debated betwixt him and his Friends; But
that he justified himself rather than God, or, more than God; that is, He not
only pleaded his righteousness and integrity before God, (which may lawfully be
done, if it be gone about in a right way, Isa. 38.3. and elsewhere) but
pleaded it even against God, expostulating with him that he should deal so
severely with a righteous man, and so reflected on the righteousness of God in
defending, his own righteousness; As God also tells him, Ch^p. 40.8. And he
was more careful to defend his own righteousness in his debates with his
Friends, than to acknowledge and ascribe unto God the glory of his
righteousness in afflicting him, by subm^tting to his Sovereign good pleasure,
stooping under his hand in the sense of his own baseness and sinfulness, and by
making use of his corrections, improving them to his own spiritual advantage.
From all which Elihu does justly conclude, That, however Job never said
expressly, that he was more just than God, or just rather than God, neither did
Job ever mean or intend any such thing, by any thing be uttered in his
complaints and defenses; Yet, upon the matter, it was imported, and by
necessary consequence it might be interred from what he said, that he ^ustified
himself rather than God.

Thirdly, We have to consider, Elihu's resentment of this injury, that was
offered unto God; and the measure of his displeasure and zeal against it. It is
said in the beginning of the Verse, that his wrath was kindled, which is
relative both to Job and his Friends; And for Job, in particular, it is again
repeated, that his wrath was kindled against Job upon this account. Whereby we
are not to understand, that he was over-powred with any carnal passion, but
that he was filled with a large measure of zeal and indigna^ion against Job,
because of this his fault.

From this Verse, Learn, 1. The grace of God is not confined to persons or
places, but he can raise up to himself servants in any place, or among any
people he pleases; For, here (beside Job and his Friends) we have another
godly man amongst these Arabians, whose name (and his Parents name) do
intimate, that a stamp of the fear of God had been in that family, for some
Generations. Of this see on Chap. 1.1. Only, however after the Covenant made
with Israel at Sinai, salvation was of that people (as is said of the Jews,
when the rest of the Trib^s were gone, Joh. 4 22.) and they were the only
people of God, and visible Church in communion wherewith salvation was to be
expected, till by the death of Christ the wall of partition was broken down;
yet before that time (and even after the promise was made to Abraham) we have
here godly men in other Countries, Abraham found a Melchizedech in Salem, and
some of the fear of God in Gerar, where he little expected it, Genesis 20.10, 11.
beside many other instances that may have been, which are not recorded in
Scripture. During the time of that dispensation toward Israel, the grace of God
was not so confined to that people only, but he found means to draw in
Proselytes of diverse Nations, to join with them. And now after the sound of the
Gospel has gone through the World, Grace is pleased to make a conquest where
it would be little expected; So that Paul found Saints even in the household of
persecuting Nero, Phil. 4 22. These instances, of the piety and abilities of
this young man, and others recorded in this Book, as they do commend the
riches, freedom and power of the grace of God (which speaks sadly to them, who
seek not to partake of it, nor do feel the effects thereof) and will be a
witness against these who come short them, though they enjoy more means than
they had; So they may encourage gracious men, whose lot may fall to be in wild
and barbarous places, since God can cause his grace to flourish there under all
disadvantages.

2. It is an evidence of the truth of men's grace, to be on truths side, and to
appear for it on all occasions, and against whatsoever opposition; As here
Elihu evidenceth his honesty by his anger, and his opposition to Job and his
Friends, in defense of truth, which they had wronged. Thus David witnessed his
zeal by his opposition to these who were against God, Psa. 139.21. And it is a
duty enjoined us, that we contend for the faith, Jude, v. 2. And God quarrels
them who are not valiant for the truth, Jer 9.3. Here it is to be considered,
upon the one hand, that this is but one evidence of a man's being gracious, and
therefore if it be alone, it will not sufficiently clear a man's estate to him.
For it is not to be doubted, but an unregenerate man may be a Professor of the
truth, and a maintainer of truth by dispute against Adversaries, if not also a
sufferer for it, in some degree. Yet it still remains true, that it is the duty
of all be for truth, and the duty of godly men, in particular, to evidence
their piety by their loye to truth, and their zeal for it; and when men do so,
it is a good evidence of their good estate, if there be other evidences
concurring with it. Upon the other hand, this is not so to be understood, as if
every thing were a truth, which good men, or even many of them, do own; For all
men are liars, And truth is not to be tried by the quality of its followers,
but by the rule of the Word; And if that opinion be always true, which is
owned by most good men, in a time or place, then Jobs three godly Friends had
carried it against Job. But the meaning is, that (as has been said) it is the
duty of honest men to be for truth; So that it is a shame for them to let
others be upholding that cause (possibly against themselves) which they should
be defending; And they do very much reflect upon themselves, who cry up their
piety to commend their errors.

3. Truth may be so far^ lost, in debates amongst godly men, that there may be
errors and mistakes on both sides; and an obscure man may see further than
they do (though both able and godly) in the heat of dispute: For, here it is
marked in general, that his wrath was kindled, even against both parties for
their errors and mistakes, as is particularly instanced in this and the next
Verse. So that an obscure young man (who must be so largely described from his
Parentage, that he may be taken notice of) is better able to discern and judge
in this controversy, than both parties are; yea, he finds them both to be in
the wrong. It is, indeed, but a poor shift for men, in times of debate, to
condemn both parties, while themselves lie by (which is the way of too many,
who either Atheistically under-value the truth, with Pilate and Gallio, Joh.
18.38. Act. 18.14, 15, 16, 17. Or are lukewarm in their love to the most of
truths, or do politickly endeavor to carry as Neutrals, that they may offend
none, though ordinarily such do offend all) For it may be both parties are not
wrong, though in this case it fell to to be so, at least in some degree and
respects; and if it were so, men^ z^al should move them vigorously to oppose
what is wrong, and own what is right, on every side; As is the practice of
Elihu here, far contrary to the way of such politic men. Yet this instance
does show us, how dangerous debates are, and warns disputants to be watchful,
that heat and passion do not blindfold them, and to pray that God would stir
up some, who will impartially decide the controversy. Only, whoever else be
employed, God himself must appear (though not in so extraordinary a way as here
he did) before a controversy, once started, be fully decided.

4. For a man simply to maintain his integrity (it he be a justified man, and
upright walker) though afflicted by God, and to wipe off unjust aspersions, is
not a sin; but a duty commanded of God, who allows us not to bear false witness
against our selves, more than against our Neighbor; For, here Job is not
challenged simply for this, that he justified himself, or, maintained that he
was a godly man, and did vindicate himself against the exceptions of his
Friends, but only for his miscarriage in the way of performing that duty. Thus
we find Paul frequently making Apologies for himself, and David defending his
own integrity and innocence. It is true, such a task, when men are necessarily
put to it (and do not take it up out of vainglory and self-seeking) should be
gone about with much fear, lest they miscarry in it, and with much humility,
that they should be necessitated to be at that work, especially in a time when
God calls them to mourning and abasing of themselves; and who so do not manage
it with this humility and fear, will readily miscarry in it: Yet it is a duty
that cannot be omitted without sin, and this is a truth for which men are bound
to stand, That men may be afflicted, yea, and calumniated under their
afflictions by godly men, who yet are righteous and upright.

5. As men may many ways fail in justifying themselves, and defending their
own righteousness (as, when they seek themselves in so doing; when they pretend
to be what they are not; when they deny or extenuate their evils, which do
contradict that testimony which they give themselves; when their holy walking
does not bear witness to that righteousness by says, to which they claim,
etc.) So this is their great miscarriage in this undertaking, when, in
defending their own righteousness, they reflect upon Gods righteousness,
because of cross dispensations which they meet with, being righteous, or in his
way: For, herein Job failed, justifying himself (or, his Soul, which is here
taken for the whole person, being that part of man which is chiefly to be
noticed in this business) rather than God: And this was it which Jeremy guarded
against in his complaints, Jer. 12.1. Hence all men's bitter complaints an
murmurings at Gods dealing, their not humbling of themselves under afflictions
(even albeit they be righteous and innocent,) their not improving at them, to
discover and purge out the naughtiness that is in the best of men, their not
adoring and crying up of the righteousness and faithfulness of God, when their
passions would rise upon them, Psa. 22.1, 2. with 3. These, and the like
miscarriages of godly men in trouble, are foul reflections upon the
righteousness of God.

6. When the people of God have the testimony of a good conscience in their
suffering, and are overdriven by temptations, and imputations from others, they
are very ready to miscarry in defending their own integrity, by not giving unto
God the glory due to him; For, so did Job miscarry in this case. So frail are
we, that we are ready to wrong our good cause, and to give our own good
conscience a wound, and so strip our selves of our defenses and comforts, and
provoke God to give us up to less cleanly trials at another time. Hence men
should advert to this, that the better their cause and condition is under
trouble, their trial is the greater to manage it well and soberly; And others
should beware lest they put afflicted men upon such a tentation and snare.

7. God, in judging of men's carriage and way, does not look only to what they
expressly do, or say, or intend, but to what may be interpretatively, and upon
the matter, gathered from their practices and speeches; For, Job did no where
expressly say, and in terminis, that he was juster than God, or righteous rather
than God, nor was this Jobs sense in h^s words; yet Elihu (and God afterward)
finds all this in his expressions and carriage. For when he desired to enter
the lists with God, and to plead his cause with him, as if he had not
considered it well before, when he afflicted him; when he complains so much,
that the great God had dealt so severely with him a worm; when he spoke so much
of his own integrity, and so little of Gods righteousness; when he complained
so much, that he could get no account of the reasons of Gods dealing with him;
when he desired to be cut off, as if he had known what was good for him, better
than God did; When, I say, he did all these things, he did, upon the matter,
deny the righteousness of God, however he thought no such thing. Thus men may
wrong God, when they little intend it, and many things may justly be fastened
upon their way, which they would scarcely own; As, that unbelief speaks
blasphemy, 1 John 5.10. that discouragement reproacheth God, Anxiety denies a
Providence, Isa. 51.12, 13. Impatience under trouble reflects upon his
righteousness, etc. This we would look unto, considering how deep our evils may
draw, and that we may really be doing that which is contrary both to what we
say and think.

8. Albeit sad case, and strong tentations of Saints, under trouble, do plead
for pity to their weaknesses, 2 King. 4 27. Yet no trouble pressing them, nor
any provocations from men tempting them to miscarry, allows them to be spared
in any sin; Particularly, in any miscarriage toward God: For, albeit Job was in
sore trouble, and albeit his Friends wronged both God and him (as Elihu and God
himself tell them;) Yea, his trouble, and their carriage was an hot furnace,
and sore tentation to him; Yet his folly is not spared, but Elihu's wrath is
kindled against Job, and afterward he takes him up sharply for his faults, as
God himself also does. This was a mercy to Job, that such pains was taken upon
him, that so he might not go on in his miscarriage, but might be cured of it,
and so fitted for a deliverance. Withal, this being a furnace, whereby God
tried what metral was in Job, he deserved a sharp rebuke that he had not
carried better, nor were his failings to be suffered upon this account, that
they flowed from weakness (for even Saints infirmities must be mourned for, and
their care endeavored) Particularly, seeing ^e failed in mistaking and
misconstructing of God, for which we find Saints have been deeply humbled, Psa.
73.11, etc. with v. 21, 22.

9. In defending of truth, particulary, in pleading for God and his honor,
against the imputations and reflections of passionate men, albeit the wrath of
man will not work the righteousness of God, Jam. 1.20. Yet a zeal of God, or,
an holy indignation against these mistakes, is necessary; For, his wrath was
even kindled against Job, in this quarrel. Thus are we earnestly to contend for
the faith, Jude, v. 2. Where Truth seats it self on^y in the brain and
understanding, it will be but poorly defended, and no less poorly stuck to, if
a trial come; But where it gets place in the heart and affections, and is
received and entertained with love, it will be zealously maintained, and the
contrary errors abhorred. So that when men are not zealous against error,
they evidence themselves to be in a wrong frame, and have made (at least) one
step toward defect on.

Verse 3. Also against his three Friends was his wrath kindled, because they
ha^ found no answer, and yet had condemned ^ob.
In this Verse, we have Elihu's verdict and censure of the Friends part in the
debate; where he is angry at them, that they had found no answer, and yet had
condemned Job. The Particle, Yet, is not in the Original, but is added to clear
the sense, though the Copulative, And, may be so rendered, They found no answer,
yet, or, nevertheless, they condemned Job. And the meaning of the words so
translated, is not, that they had justly charged him with wickedness and
hypocrisy, only they had not strongly proved their charge; For Elihu does not
undertake to prove any such charge against him. But the meaning is, They had
condemned him as a wicked Hypocrite, without producing any solid Argument to
prove it, and without giving any sufficient answer to those convincing
evidences of his integrity, and other arguments, which he had produced for
himself. And so, upon the matter, whatever flourishes of discourse they had,
yet they had condemned him unjustly (in asserting him to be a wicked man)
merely upon a prejudicate opinion and principle of their own; whereas he is
resolved to accuse him for these things whereof he is indeed guilty, and which
he can prove against him, by convincing arguments, that they are sins, and sins
committed by him. The words may also be read thus, word for word from the
Original, They found no answer, and they condemned Job. And so they will
contain his censure of a double fault whereof they were guilty; One is, that
already mentioned, That they had unjustly condemned Job* And the other is, That
by their finding no answer to Jobs Apologies, they had quit Gods cause (which
he is now about to maintain against Job) as overcome; And by their silence in
what they might and should have spoken in answer to his discourses, they had
condemned God, no less than they had unjustly condemned Job by what they had
spoken. Though the former reading be most agreeable to the scope here, yet both
may very well be joined together; For as they were faulty in condemning Job
without a reason, and without answering his defenses for himself; So they were
no less guilty in finding no answer (such as he afterward produces) on Gods
behalf, against Jobs complaints and quarrellings.

From this Verse, Learn, 1. It is an evidence of a truly sober and gracious
Spirit, so to be taken up with one evil or error, as not to be blind in
discerning others also, upon another hand; For, Elihu discerns exactly the
errors of both parties, and on both hands, in this debate, and passes his
censure upon both; And did not as the three Friends, who, to avoid the error
upon the one extreme, of impeaching the righteousness of God who had afflicted
Job, do run to an error on the other extreme, and conclude Job to be wicked
because afflicted. As it is too usual for men, while they are eagerly opposing
one error, to rush into another on the other hand.

2. As men's light should be universally clear, in discerning errors and
mistakes; So their zeal ought to be uniform, and against every one of them:
For, against his three Friends was his wrath kindled, for their error, as well
as against Job, for his; Not as many, who, in their heat of opposition to one
error (which it may be is their present exercise, and in so far it is
commendable that their zeal is most bent against it) do look with more
indifferency upon another which seems to be opposite unto it, as being upon the
other extreme.

3. It is a very great, and yet a very usual fault in many, to condemn men, and
bury them, and their opinions and way, under imputations and calumnies, which
neither are nor can be proved and made out: For, this was their practice, and
Elihu is angry because of this, that they condemned Job, when they had found no
answer to his discourses proving his integrity, as he tells them, v. 12.
Malice, prejudices, serving of designs, etc. as well as ignorance and error
(which were the cause of their miscarriage) may drive men to take such courses,
whereby they commit great cruelty, and do justly provoke the anger and zeal of
godly men against them; As Elihu is hereby provoked to anger against Jobs
Friends.

4. Though it be a fault, at any time, or in any case, to condemn men unjustly;
yet this fault is much aggravated, and true zeal and indignation is provoked
thereby, when men deal so with afflicted men, and so add to their affliction:
For, this was an addition to their fault, and helped to kindle Elihu's anger,
that they had so condemned Job, who was now so sadly afflicted, as himself
states the case in this very particular, Chap. 19.5, 6, etc. It is very sad,
when men are so cruel, as to give a godly man a load above a burden. See Psa.
69.26.

5. Albeit a multitude of words and fine discourses may blind many, who think
they have the best cause who talk most, and who are easily deceived with good
words and fair speeches, Romans 16.18. Yet that will not satisfy conscientious
and rational men; For, these Friends spoke enough (as themselves thought, to
purpose) and seemed to plead much for God, and against impiety; and yet Elihu
discerns that they found no answer, even to clear these things they intended to
conclude against Job; far less did they hit upon the true answer, which should
have been returned to Job. See Prove. 18.17. Men have need of solid wisdom,
that they may discern what is truth or error in well-busked discourses, and
they who would speak to purpose in a debate, ought to beware that unsound
principles, and heat in dispute, do not blindfold them, and so cause them miss
their mark, as befell these Friends.

6. In whatever case silence be lawful, in some debates; yet it is a great
fault, in any case, to desert a cause of God, when it is controverted and
opposed; For, thus according to the other reading, it is a fault by it self,
that they found no answer for God, as well as that they condemned Job.

Verse 4. Now Elihu had waited till Job had spoken, because they were elder
than he.

5. When Elihu saw that there was no answer in the mouth of these three men,
then his wrath was kindled.


The third Antecedent, and a more near occasion of Elihu's speech, (which
explains and enlarges that Antecedent, v. 1.) is, That having patiently kept
silence so long as they spoke (however they spoke not right) as reverencing
their age, now he must break off his silence with indignation, considering that
they gave over without any reply to Job which was to purpose, and particlarly,
without speaking a word to his last discourses. It is said only, He had waited
till Job had spoken; but it imports also, that he had waited, and hearkened to
what all of them had spoken, all the while of the dispute (For when a reason is
given of this his silence, they are all of them spoken of in the plural number,
They were elder than he, to intimate, that he had waited on them all) Only it
is here said, that he waited till Job had spoken, or, expected Job in his
words, because Job spoke last, and because this is spoken more particularly
with a reference to that last discourse which closed that debate upon which he
is now to pass a judgment; And so it imports, That he waited patiently in
hearing Jobs long discourses, and waited also after Job had spoken, to see if
they would say ought in answer to him; And finding them silent, his zeal breaks
forth in the following discourse.

This purpose will come to be spoken of afterward, when Elihu himself mentions
it; Here, Learn,

1. True zeal is not furious, but bounded with sobriety, and drives not a man
without his station; For, such is Elihu's zeal here, who silently waits all the
time they spoke, however he was dis-satisfied; and lets not h^s zeal and wrath
break forth, till they have all given over, whereby a call is given him to
interpose. It is true, there are some heroic acts of zeal, which fall not
under ordinary rules; As when Phinchas, a Priest, slew Zimri and Cazbi, Numb.
25.7, 8, 12, 13, 14. Samuel (then only a Prophet) slew Agag, whom the
Magistrate had spared, 1 Samuel 15.32, 33. And Elijah slew the Prophets of Baal,
1 King. 18.40. But these are not to be imitated, and we are to take heed to
wildfire instead of true zeal. And particularly, well managed and sober zeal
has those properties which may be gathered from the Text.

1. It will nor drive men rashly, and in an headlong way, to engage in quarrels
and debates which they can avoid; For, he waited long to see if these mistakes
might be cleared and rectified without him. This rule is transgressed by all
who do precipitantly rush and engage in debates, and particularly, by private
men, when they do needlessly engage in Controversies and Church quarrels which
lie out of their way. See Prove. 26 17,

2. Right and sober zeal proceeds according to knowledge (see Romans 10.2.) and
will not pass judgment upon any thing, but after a fair hearing, and serious
trial of the matter; For, before his anger was kindled, and brake forth, he had
waited and heard them patiently, that he might take up the business well, as he
professes, v. 11. See Prove. 13.10. and 18.13. This is little observed by an
any, whose wit is all in their forehead, and their heart at their mouth; And
therefore they rush upon courses before they ponder them, they are beguiled
with fair masks and pretenses, and they look not to the consequences of courses
before they do engage in them.

3. True and sober zeal will never lead men to seek themselves, but makes them
content that a good turn be done, though they be not seen in it; For, he waited
upon them, as minding, if the matter were otherwise cleared, not to appear.
Hence it may be concluded, That boasters of themselves, and extollers of
themselves, do reflect upon their own zeal, as not found.

4. True zeal teaches men to reverence those with whom they have to do, for
their age, parts, and experience; For, he waited and heard them patiently and
reverently, because they were elder than he. Of this afterward; Only, it argues
passion, and not zeal, when men leave the defense of their cause, to reflect
upon persons, and do behave themselves unsoberly toward them.

Doct. 2. Though true zeal ought to be managed with sobriety (as has been
said) yet it is no evidence of sobriety, or of a right temper of zeal, for men
not to see the errors that are in the best of men, and not to defend truth,
were it even against never so many godly men; For, Elihu marks errors in Job,
and here also (and v. 3.) in his three Friends, and argues against them all.

3. It is also no kindly mark of zeal, for men to be furious at a fit, and then
to cool, if they be not taken at first, but true zeal is constant in its heat
and fervor; For, here, after all his long waiting, his wrath is kindled.

4. Men, and even good men, may have that opinion of themselves, and their way,
which differs very far from truth; For, v. 1. they judged they had said
enough, and that Job was obstinate, and yet Elihu finds, there was no answer in
their mouth, as has been fully cleared, v. 3.

5. They are justly censurable, in the judgment of all zealous men, who
deserts cause of God, and (either in a neutral way, or otherwise) lie by from
defending it; For, this kindles his wrath, that they had no answer to Job,
especially on Gods behalf.

Verse 6. And Elihu the Son of Barachel the Buzite, answered and said, I am
young, and ye are very old, wherefore I was afraid, and durst not show you mine
opinion.

7. I said, Days should speak, and multitude of years should teach wisdom.


The rest of this Chapter contains Elihu's general Preface, directed to both
parties, but chiefly to Jobs three Friends. And he insists the longer in
Prefacing, Partly, because he was a young man, in which case it was necessary
to clear, that he appeared not in this cause out of any arrogance or impudence,
but merely out of love to truth, and to plead that it was equitable they should
lay aside all extrinsick advantages (of age, experience, wit, etc.) which they
had on their side, in this debate, and that none of these should pre-judge his
cause, but let naked truth carry it. Partly, that he might here, once for all,
condemn and lay by the three Friends (with whom he deals no more after this
Preface, but leaves them to see the error of their proceeding, by taking
notice of that right way which he followed) whereby also he might insinuate
into Jobs affection, and invite him to hearken more patiently to what he was to
say, seeing he did not take part with his Friends against him.

In these Verses, we have the first branch of this Preface; wherein he g^^^ a
reason, why he had kept silence so long, and had not interposed sooner to end
this difference: Namely, That the conscience of his own youth, and his respect
to their age, and opinion of their wisdom, made him afraid to speak in so
grave an audience, upon such a subject, v. 6. As reckoning and judging within
himself (for so this phrase, I said, is to be understood here, as Genesis 20.11.
where it is, said, and not, thought, in the Original) that it became such aged
men, and they were only fit, to speak to such a matter, seeing their long
experience should teach them more wisdom, which they might communicate to
others, v 7.

In general, Learn, 1. Albeit zeal should be managed with sobriety; yet that
zeal is not approved which burns only in men's breasts against an evil course,
or, error, unless it break forth also, as need requires, in their station;
For, he whose wrath was kindled, v. 2, 3, 5. now answered and said, etc. and
spoke when he was called to it. Not as many, who dislike evil courses (if men
may trust their professions and discourses) and yet they never appear to do any
thing against them in their stations.

2. Zeal, in defending of a good cause, may yet suffer prejudices in men's
opinions, by reason of disadvantages in the person who manageth it; As here,
his youth might readily cause them mistake his zeal; and frequently we find
many ready to except against, and reflect upon, the persons of men, that
thereby they may render their cause suspicious. And therefore men who would
find out truth, had need to try a cause impartially, abstracting from the
consideration of persons who manage it.

3. Albeit real disadvantages in men's persons do not warrant them to desert a
good cause; yet they should teach them to manage it with soberness and fear; As
here Elihu does, considering his youth, wherein he is imitated but by very few
young men, who have any thing of zeal and honesty in them.

In particular, Learn, 1. Youth, considered in it self, is attended with many
weaknesses; For, so does Elihu grant, That his youth gave him cause to fear,
l^st he run into mistak^s in speaking of so weighty and grave matters, and that
their age gave them many advantages which he wanted. Who so will consider the
heat of young blood (which makes young men rash and precipitant, and their zeal
to outstrip their knowledge and light) their youthful lusts, want of
experience, etc. will easily perceive that youth is not easy to manage aright.
Whereas to men of age, many of these snares are broken; Time and experience
will let them see many things to be but folly and vanity, which youth will not
believe that they are such; Those strong passions which do often times master and
overpower, even true grace, in younger persons, may be more subdued and cooled
in them, etc. This may let us see, that it is a great mercy to be helped well
through a time of youth, and to be kept from the snares of it, and the sad
effects of these disadvantages which attend it.

2. One great advantage of age above youth, is, in the matter of wisdom
gathered by study and experience, and in the cooling of their heat and
passions, which usually represent things to men through false Perspectives;
For, this is the advantage intimated here. On his own part, he was afraid, and
durst not show his opinion, considering that he was young, and they old: Not
only was he afraid lest he should go without the bounds of his station, in
offering to speak before them; but lest, being but a young man, he should
miscarry in speaking to the matter it self. And on their part, he reckoned this
their advantage, That days (or, men of days) should speak, (that is, Not only
is it their privilege to speak, when young men should be silent and hear; but
it is expected they should be able to speak to purpose, on such weighty
subjects) and that multitude of years should teach wisdom, that is, their long
life should be so improved, as they may be taught much experimental knowledge,
by living long in the world, which also they should teach and communicate to
others. It is true, this difference betwixt age and youth does not universally
hold, as Elihu afterward tells them; yet many times it proves true, that age
out-strips youth in these things, as Rehoboam found by experience in the matter
of his Counselors, 1 King. 12. And however it hold eventually, yet the
characters here assigned, of youth and old age, do point out, that it is a
great defect in young men, not to be well acquainted with their own
precipitancy and want of experience; And that it is a great shame for aged
persons, if (as they have place to speak, so) they be not wise and able to
speak to purpose, and if the long time they have had, has not so taught them,
as makes them both able and willing to communicate their light to others, who,
possibly, are not so able, or sensible of the good and evil of courses, as
themselves are. But they themselves are no less rash and headstrong, than if
they were still children.

3. It is an evidence of grace, and a great mercy to young persons, when they
are made to discern and take notice of the disadvantages they lie under; For,
so is Elihu sensible here of what might rationally be expected from his youth
and their age. Thus Solomon is sensible of the disadvantages of his youth, 1
King. 3.7, 8, 9. When young men are not sensible of their disadvantages, they
cannot but run headlong on snares, while they think themselves wise enough, and
so prove, in effect but mad fools: Whereas these who are afraid l^st they do
miscarry, and so are not rash to do or speak any thing, they prove themselves
to be most able, and do seldom miscarry.

4. When God gives young men a blessed sight of their own disadvantages, it
will produce much sobriety; As here it does in Elihu. See Tit. 2.6. And if we
consider the words, we will find these evidences of sobriety in young men.

1. They who are sober, will have no conceit of themselves; For, Elihu here is
free of that. And where conceit is, it is an evidence that the weaknesses of
youth are not well studied.

2. Sober young men will have a good esteem of aged men and their opinions,
till they find very clear cause to judge otherwise; For, he judged that such
should speak and teach wisdom.

3. They will still be modest, and respect age, even when they are
dis-satisfied with their opinion; As here, he waited till they had spoken out,
and reckoned that days should speak, or, had place to speak before him.

4. They will be far from presumptuous boldness, and full of humble fears, in
their undertakings, especially when they are called to oppose others who are
elder than themselves; As here, he enters with much fear upon this undertaking.

Verse 8. But there is a Spirit in man: and the inspiration of the Almighty
gives them understanding.

9. Great men are not always wise: neither do the aged understand judgment.

10. Therefore I said, Hearken to me, I also will show mine opinion.


Follows, to v. 21. the second branch of this Preface; wherein he gives five
Reasons, why he now interposeth to speak in this cause. The first Reason (in
these Verses) is more general, containing this in sum; That the fountain of
wisdom, not being in man himself, but from God, who gives it to whom he
pleases, v. 8. And who does not always give it to great men, and men of
experience, v. 9. Therefore, though he be a young man, yet, they having given
over, he will hazard to speak somewhat in that cause, v. 10. Which he might
well undertake, being indeed inspired by God (as he tells them, v. 18, 19.
though here he speak of that inspiration only in general and abstractly, v. 8.)
which might supply his want of years and experience.

For clearing of this purpose, Consider, 1. These terms, of Wisdom,
understanding, and Judgment, are here to be taken promiscuously, for a gift of
discerning, to judge betwixt right and wrong, and truth and error, in matters
and opinions, together with a gift of prudence, or ability to speak rightly and
pertinently to a cause. For these are the particulars of which Elihu is
treating, which he expresses by all these words.

2. As for that Spirit which he says is in man, Some understand it of the
reasonable Soul of man, and take up the purpose thus; That all men have a
reasonable Soul, which by the special inspiration of God may be so elevated,
that even young men, by that assistance, may comprehend these things which aged
and experienced persons cannot know without it. Others understand it of the
Soul of man, yet they take up the scope of the Verse thus; That though there be
such a Spirit in man, yet it is not that, but the inspi^ation of the Almighty,
which makes truly wise. But it is clearer to understand it of the Spirit of
God, and so the latter part of the Verse is exeget^ke, and explains the former;
That it is by that Spirit in man, even by the inspiration of the Almighty, that
any attain to this understanding here spoken of.

3. As for this Spirit, or, inspiration, as it is not given to all (as Elihu
here asserts, v. 9. And so it is in man, not universally, but indefinitely,
even in those who have this understanding) nor in alike measure to all these to
whom it is given (For Job and his Friends were not destitute of it, though they
were not so right and able as he in this cause.) So it is best to take it here
generally, for that inspiration and furniture, (whether ordinary or
extraordinary, whether by way of common gift only, or accompanied with saving
grace also) which is given unto men.

4. As for those great men, who are not always wise, v. 9. We may understand
the phrase of those who are aged, or, of great years, and so the latter part of
the Verse will be an explication of the first; Or it may be understood of great
men in respect of birth or state, who have means and opportunities of
education, to teach them wisdom; And yet neither those advantages, nor their
age (as it after follows) will make them wise, unless God by his Spirit and
inspiration interpose to work it in them. In sum, however we understand it,
under these two, greatness, and age, all ordinary means of attaining this
wisdom are comprehended, and all declared ineffectual (however they ought not
to be neglected) unless the blessing and inspiration of God concur with them.

5. Whereas Elihu speaks, v. 10. in the singular number, Hearken thou to me,
(as it is in the Original) the singular number may be put for the plural, by a
figure not unusual in this language, and to show that every one of them was to
hearken, as if all had been spoken to him only. Or it may be conceived, that he
directs his speech particularly to Job, who was in greatest need of a
seasonable word, considering his present pressures, and with whom he has only
to do after this Preface.

From v. 8. Learn, 1. As wisdom and understanding is an excellent gift; So
they who do esteem and commend it, do thereby evidence, that they have it in
some measure: For, Elihu's scope in all this argument, is, to point out the
excellency of Wisdom, by showing, that it is not a common g^ft conferred upon
all, and by pointing out the Divine Fountain from whence it flows; And by this
commendation of it, he gives proof, that he has it in such a measure, as he
may confidently speak in this cause before them, being a young man, v. 10.
though as yet he has given no particular account of his furniture and skill,
which he speaks of afterward. Wisdom is indeed an excellent gift, whether we
take it more generally, for Piety (which is frequently commended under the name
of Wisdom, in the Book of Proverbs) Or for that wise consideration which
begets patience, Jam. 1.4, 5 Or for that Wisdom, whereby men discern right and
wrong, and truth and error, and are enabled to know what to do or say, in
difficult times and cases (as here, and 1 King. 3.7, 8, 9. 1 Chro. 12.32.)
without which they will but run upon snares: But how excellent soever it be,
none can prize or esteem of it, but they, who, in some measure, have
experienced the good and advantage of it.

2. Whatever natural faculty of understanding men have (which also comes from
God) yet the furniture and exercise thereof is from God, who enlightens the
mind, directs the judgment, and gives counsel what to do or say: For, it is a
Spirit in man, and the inspiration of the Almighty, that gives them
understanding. See Job 38.36. Prove. 2.6. Eccl. 2.26. Dan. 2.21. There is indeed
a Wisdom which is not from above, Jam. 3.13, 14, 15, 16. But all true and good
Wisdom is from above, Jam. 1.5. and 3.17. Hence, they who have any of this
Wisdom, should acknowledge God in what they have, not glorying in it, while
they want other and better things, Jer. 9.23, 24. Nor proudly boasting of it,
and despising others, when yet it is God who by his free gift has made the
difference between them and others, 1 Cor. 4.7. They who want this Wisdom in
that measure which others have received, should not envy them, nor should their
eye be evil, because God is good; But they should rather run more diligently to
the fountain, where there is enough to be had, in so far as is good for them
to receive; and they should adore the Dominion and Wisdom of God, who
dispenses those gifts as he pleases, and does so order the body, as every
member has its own complete furniture, in the improvement whereof it will be
useful and accepted of him. And they who would attain to any of this Wisdom,
ought to be jealous of their own wit and understanding, Prove. 3.5. and 28.26.
not judging by what is most likely and probable to them, without employing God;
And as they ought not to neglect means (particularly, the study of the Word,
Psa. 119.98, 99, 100, 104.) and wait for Enthusiasmes and immediate
Revelations; so in the use of means, they are to exercise much dependence upon
God, who alone can bless means.

3. The Spirit of God is pleased to communicate unto men excellent common
gifts, to invite them to seek better; For, this gift of wisdom and
understanding, of which Elihu here speaks, is in its own nature, but a common
gift of the Spirit, (whether it be communicated by extraordinary and immediate
inspiration, or in the use of ordinary means only) though it be sanctified and
accompanied with saving grace, in some who receive it; As it was in Elihu
himself and others. Thus Bezaleel and Aho^iab had a Spirit of wisdom and
understanding to make the Tabernacle, Exodus 31. Daniel and his Companions had
skill in all wisdom and learning, beside what Daniel himself had, in knowing
visions and dreams, Dan. 1.17. And all ages afford instances of this bounty of
God, in one measure or other: And yet all these are in themselves but common
gifts, as this phrase is taken in contra-distinction to saving graces. And as
all these instances proclaim the fullness and bounty of God; so those who
partake of these gifts should beware, lest they rest upon them as marks of Gods
special favor: But should rather remember, that their tasting of these fruits
of the Spirit, will be a dittay and witness against them, if they be not
thereby invited to seek more and better things. And they who want them, should
so much the rather seek to have that loss made up by saving graces, which will
comfort them in the want of all those common endowments, Jer. 9.23, 24.

4. As the Spirit of God can furnish the weakest, and make them very able; So
those gifts should humble men, and not suffer them to forget themselves, as
they will do where they are sanctified: For, Man, here, gets the name, Enosh,
or, frail man, to point out that his frailty will not hinder God to give him
understanding, when he pleases; And to intimate, that when men have received
such gifts, they should still remember their frailty, as Elihu, a godly man,
here did. See Isa. 6.5.

5. It is not enough that men receive gifts from the Spirit of God, unless they
receive also continual influences, to quicken and excite those gifts, and keep
them fresh and in vigor; For, there must be a Spirit in man, and the
inspiration (or, breathing) of the Almighty, to give understanding. See Cant.
4.16. Without this, most eminent gifts, yea, and habitual graces, will soon
wither, and fall into a decay.

6. As Gods bounty, in giving gifts to men, does proclaim his All Sufficiency;
So those to whom these gifts are sanctified, will have high thoughts of him,
and his fullness: Therefore is he called, the Almighty, or, All-sufficient,
here, to intimate, that this gift proclaims him to be such, and that he to whom
it was sanctified, esteemed of him as such.

From v. 9. Learn, 1. Albeit men, generally, have a great conceit of their own
Wisdom (and readily they have most conceit, who have least of wisdom) yet it
is not a gift given in common to all men; For, here some have it not.

2. Albeit ordinarily God blesses the use of means; yet in some cases it is
verified, that wisdom and sound judgment does not follow upon greatness and
good education, nor is attained by age, or by men who might have had much
experience: For, Great men are not always wise (or, are not wise, that is,
there are great men found who are not wise) neither do the aged understand
judgment. There are great men who have had much pains taken upon them in their
education, and aged men who yet have not been wise men; And what wisdom they
had, it did not slow principally from their greatness and age, but from the
gift and inspiration of God. This point does more particularly import,

1. When men have any wisdom, they must not sacrifice to their own net, as if
they had acquired it of themselves, by the improvement of their means and time,
but they should ascribe the glory of all to God.

2. Because this is much forgotten by men, and God little seen and acknowledged
by them; therefore God makes it visible, that he is the Author of all they
enjoy, by withholding wisdom from great men, and men of years; which stroke
is the just fruit of the want of self-denial.

3. (Which is the case in the Text) When men are indeed other-wayes wise and
great men (as Job and his Friends were) yet, in some things and cases they may
be found destitute of wisdom, and in an error and mistake; As all of them
were in this debate. This the Lord orders, not only that he may declare that
he is tied to no condition or age of men; but that we may not take things upon
trust from any men, or pin our faith upon their sleeve, but may be careful to
try and examine all that men say or do, by the rule, laying aside the
consideration of their persons. And as we should not reject truth, though it be
offered by obscure, young and unexperienced persons; so we should not
implicitly give credit to men in every thing, because they are known to be
wise and holy persons. For that may be our very trial, and that whereby God
takes proof of our sincerity and respect to his Word, if we will call no man
Rabbi. Only, in this case, men should walk in much sobriety, as has been
formerly marked. For as God is not tied to great, able, and experienced men, so
neither is he tied to others. Far less are men to be cried down by their
inferiors in parts and experience, upon this account, that great men are not
always wise, when yet they are never able to refute them, as Elihu solidly
refutes both parties here:

From v. 10. Learn, 1. When God has given abilities to men, they should
communicate their Talents to others, for their edification and clearing of
mistakes; For, says he, I also (as well as ye) will show mine opinion. As it
is a sin for men to be idle, and not put forth their Talents to use, especially
when there is great need of them, as here there was; So no bashfulness and
modesty (which were ready to hinder him, being a young man) will warrant them
to lie by from that work to which they are called.

2. Such as undertake to clear controverted truths, and, particularly, to
contradict holy, able, and experienced men, themselves being young, had need to
be well grounded, fitted, and called to such a work; For, this resolution to
show his opinion, comes in with a Therefore, or by way of inference from what
he has said, That being inspired and excited by God (as he hints in general,
v. 8.) and having noted their mistakes (as he also insinuates in general, v.
9*) therefore he may well hazard to take his turn, having the call and
assistance of God, and being able to instruct wherein they had erred. This
young men had need to advert unto in debates; For however it may encourage men
to stand for truth, if it be on their side, that the gifts of God are free, to
bestow them upon whom he will, and in what particular exigents and
controversies he pleases: Yet, as it is a sin to have a partial and implicit
respect to the persons of great and experienced men, as has been marked; So it
is a double sin for young men to engage against them without cause, and to cry
them down, and the truth which they maintain.

3. Whoever they be that speak (having a calling) to matters in controversy,
they ought to be heard with attention (without stumbling through prejudices at
their persons) till what they say be tried; For, even this young man, when he
is speaking to old and grave men, bids them hearken unto him.

4. Then do men hear aright, when every one does not pass what is spoken to
many together, as nothing concerning them, but is careful to apply to himself
what is spoken, as if none else were present; Therefore is this exhortation
directed in the singular number, as has been explained.

5. It evidenceth wisdom in speakers, when they single out those to deal with,
who stand in greatest need of help; and when they are careful to speak what may
tend most to edification; On this account, also, it may be conceived, that he
will not insist to deal with the three Friends, but singles out needy Job in
particular, to whom it was to good purpose to speak. And this is indeed an
evidence of a man who is guided by the Spirit of God in speaking, when he minds
edification, and the need of Souls much.

Verse 11. Behold, I waited for your words; I gave ear to your reasons, whilst
you searched out what to say.

12. Yea, I attended unto you, and behold, there was none of you that convinced
Job, or that answered his words.


The second Reason of Elihu's interposing to speak (which is more special and
particular) is, the insufficiency of what they had spoken to convince Job: So
that, having marked all that they had said and searched out, all that long time
that the dispute continued, he finds that none of them had convinced Job, or
convincingly proved what they had asserted against him, that he was a wicked
Hypocrite. Nor yet had they answered his words; which imports not only that
they had not refused his arguments, and repelled these evidences of his
integrity, which he had produced in his own defense; ^ut further, that they had
not made that reply to Jobs miscarriages in his discourses, which was necessary
for his humiliation and casting down, as he speaks, v. 13. And so Job is
declared to be Victor in the debate betwixt him and his Friends, concerning the
calamities of godly men, (of which, v. 3.) And yet somewhat remained to be
answered to Jobs words, which they had not hit upon.

From these two Verses, Learn, 1. When Debates are once started, they may
continue very long; For, not only have there been long discourses among them,
but it seems they have taken time to study this controversy, and search out
words, or, what to say, whereby the debate was much lengthened. Debates may be
soon begun, but they are not so easily composed again. For men's wilfullness may
continue debates long; And God in his holy providence may permit them to
continue, that men may be fully tried.

2. It is men's duty to search into Controversies, and to be well advised in
what they speak to a weighty cause; For, in so far they did right, that they
searched out what to say. Men do sin hainously when they engage in debates
before they understand them, and before they consider to what they may tend.

3. When men are once engaged in Debates, if they be non plust, they are ready
to bend their wits to maintain their cause, rather than they will yield and
quit the plea; For, thus also they searched out what to say, when Job put them
to it, but it was but words (as it is in the Original) and somewhat wherewith
to flourish and make a show, that they studied or found. Thus when men are once
engaged, and grown warm with passion, they will readily seek victory rather
than truth.

4. It is men's duty, when Debates are started and agitated, not to be idle
spectatours, but diligent observers, that thereby they may be edified, and may
be able to know what is truth; For, Elihu professes, he was not sleeping, but
diligently attending, all the while of the debate; and no doubt this debate did
edify many Auditors, as well as him:

5. It is a duty also to let men say their minds to the full, before we judge
of their Doctrine and Opinion; For, he heard them out, and did not halve their
discourses, by interrupting them.

6 It is also men's duty to ponder well what is said, that they do not wilfully
nor negligently mistake the discourses of them who speak; For, Behold, (says
he, inviting them to consider how seriously he had proceeded) I waited, I gave
ear, yea, I attended unto you.

7. It is a clear and determined case, and a truth to be much remarked and
improved, That a man may be afflicted, and yet righteous; For, here the
Controversy is determined in Jobs favors (who had maintained this truth
constantly) against his friends, and that with a Behold. Not that every man may
claim to this, that he is righteous when afflicted, if he want evidences of his
integrity; For a wicked man may be plagued, as well as a godly man afflicted,
in this life. Nor yet does this warrant godly men not to be sensible of their
failings, when in affliction, because their persons, or cause, are righteous:
But that which it imports, is, That godly men may see love in rods, and that
they are consistent with love; and, That they ought not to suffer the weight of
their afflictions to light upon their state and personal reconciliation with
God, to call that in question, because they are afflicted.

8. Not only may men think they have refuted their Adversary, when it is
nothing so; (as they gave Job over as an obstinate man, v. 1. when yet Elihu
tells them, they had neither convinced, nor answered him:) but God may,
sometime, be pleased to raise up some to own them who are for a right cause,
when they are over-powred with multitude of opposers, and lie under many
disadvantages; As Elihu here takes part with Job, who had so many godly men
against him. Let men abide by truth, though they were even left alone in that
quarrel; and God will send them friends at last, when their trial is perfected

9 Men may be very able, and express great abilities in what they say, who yet
do err; For, he acknowledges, they had reasons, or (as it is in the Original)
understandings, and gave proof of their great abilities, and yet they did not
convince nor answer Job.

10. So weak are men, that before they be convinced, they must not only have an
assertion proved, but their objections against it answered; otherwise they will
not heartily embrace a truth, how clearly soever it be proved; For, he
desiderates both these in their dealing with Job, and intimates that they ought
both to have convinced him, by strong arguments, and answered his words, or,
objections, if they would have brought him to be of their opinion.

11. Men may prevail against men, and have the righter cause, and the better of
them in debate, who yet are faulty before God, even in that cause, and deserve
a reproof from him; For, here Job is assoiled and declared Victor in the debate
with his Friends, and yet Elihu intimates there was an answer, which should
have been given to his words, but they had not touched upon it, as he resolves
afterward to do, v. 14. Men had need to look to this, that their righteous
cause, and the errors and miscarriages of their Antagonists, do not blind
their eyes, that they see not their own failings.

Verse 13. Lest ye should say, We have found out Wisdom: God thrusts him
down, not man.
In this Verse the former Reason is amplyfied from the consideration of Gods
end and design in ordering this business, which also was his end in passing so
free a censure upon their Doctrine. This is propounded in general, in the
beginning of the Verse, That whatever were Jobs failings, yet God had so
ordered the matter, that Job had got the victory in the debate, and they had
succumbed in their undertakings against him, that they might not glory in their
wisdom, nor might ascribe it to their abilities and experience, that they had
found out what was sufficient to put an end to this Controversy: And he had
freely told them so much, v. 12. that they might no longer entertain that good
opinion of themselves. As for that which follows, God thrusts him down, not
man, Some take them to be the very words whereby they might be ready (if not
prevented) to express their thoughts of their own wisdom, to this purpose;
That they by their wisdom had found out so much for convincing of Job, that
they had left him nothing wherewith to defend himself, but only his wilful
obstinacy in persisting still to adhere to his own opinion, from which only God
(and no man, by any Arguments) could drive him. And therefore as they had dealt
wisely in their disputes against him, so they had dealt no less wisely in that,
when they found him obstinate; they had given him over, v. 1. concluding that
they had done what man could do to convince him, and what remained to be done,
even the cure of his obstinacy, behoved to be performed by God himself. I do so
far agree with this interpretation, as to conclude, that Job was to be indeed
humbled by God (which I take to be the sense and scope of these words) though
not upon the account they imagined, because he was a wicked man, and
obstinately persisted in his opinion, after that he was sufficiently convinced.
And therefore they ought to have been far from such an opinion of their
doctrine and abilities, as the scope of the interpretation carries it. But
most part of Interpreters do lo^k upon these words as containing their account
of that principle of wisdom, in the finding out whereof they might be ready to
glory, to this purpose; He had freely told them the truth concerning their
Doctrine, and how God had left them to themselves to give proof of their
weakness, that they might not glory of their wisdom in finding out that Maxim
which they so frequently insisted upon; Namely, That it was God, and not man,
who had afflicted Job, and therefore he behoved to be wicked, seeing God was
righteous who had afflicted him. According to this interpretation, as in the
former Verses Elihu had condemned their opinion in general; so here he repells
their great (and almost only) Argument, taken from Jobs afflictions, whereby
they endeavored to prove their opinion. And it is indeed a truth (as has been
frequently marked) That Gods hand in afflictions does not prove the Sufferer to
be wicked, and the righteousness of God who afflicts, and the ^ntegrity of the
person affl^cted, are not inconsistent.

The word rendered, To thrust down, does not contribute much to determine the
Interpretation. It signifies, To cast down, or, to drive a thing from its
place, and that with violence, as the wind drives smoke or chafe, Ps. 1.4. and
68.2. And so it will very fitly express, how Job was violently hurried and
tossed by his trouble. But it may also as well be applied to the casting down
of Job from his passionate humor and distemper, which was done with violence
and tossing enough, Elihu reproving and tossing his expressions very sharply,
and God himself appearing in a Whirlwind to abase and humble him, and
affrighting him with sad challenges, and refusing at first to take his
submission off his hand, till he is brought to abhor himself in dust and
ashes. Therefore, when I consider, That many Supplements in the Translation are
required to make out that other Interpretation from the Text, That, however God
have a hand in all afflictions, and was eminently seen in Jobs trials, and many
of them were inflicted by his own immediate hand; yet it cannot so universally
be said, that God had thrust him down, and not man. (For the Sabeans and
Chaldeans, beside others of whom Job complains in his discourses, were
eminently active in some of his afflictions:) And, That the word is in the
future time (though indeed in the Original language, one time is frequently put
for another) God shall thrust him down; When, I say, I consider those things, I
incline rather to understand the words of Jobs being afterward humbled by God
for what he had really said amiss in his discourses. Thus the whole Verse will
run very smoothly, to this purpose, They had no cause to talk of their wisdom,
for (as he had told them) they had mistaken all along, and had never hit the
mark, or touched upon that for which Job was to be humbled: And God had ordered
it so, and reserved the humbling of Job to be done by himself, that they might
not boast and glory, as if their wisdom and experience had done it. And for
further clearing of the words, while he says, God thrusts him down, not man,
the meaning is not, That what himself was to say did not tend to cast him down
also, but that was to be done only by God, when himself appeared, Chap. 38. For
it is not certain that Elihu knew God would afterward visibly appear, when he
spoke this. But he speaks this because he was employed by God, and appeared in
his stead, to do this work; as he tells Job, Chap. 33.6. And he ascribes all to
God, partly, out of his modest and low esteem of himself, who could contribute
nothing of himself to this great design; and partly, to point out the great
odds that should be betwixt their doing of that work, and his being employed in
it: For he was not a man of eminency, parts, and experience (as the name here
given to man signifies, oft-times, an eminent and great man) and therefore if
he were assisted to find out that which might humble Job, or, to point at his
real miscarriages for which he ought to be humbled, it should clearly be seen
that it was God, and not he, who had done it. Whereas if they had done the
business, God would readily have been less seen, and their wisdom, abilities
and experiences, more cried up, in it.

This Interpretation affords us these following Instructions (most of which,
beside what is already marked in expounding the words, may also be gathered
from the other Interpretation)

1. Men who are in trouble, being righteous in their person and cause, may yet
expect to come off the Stage humbled, especially, if they miscarry in their
trial; For, as Job had been afflicted, though righteous, so it remains yet that
he be thrust down, and that with some violence and sharpness, before he be
delivered, and that even albeit he defended a righteous cause against his
Friends. Whatever men be, or how just soever their cause be, yet God will not
wink at their miscarriages, and their dross which appears in the furnace, nor
will he have any to come off the Stage of trial, but in an humble posture and
lying in the dust.

2. Much wisdom is required, either in refuting of men's corrupt principles (as
the Friends looked upon the business) or in humbling them for their
miscarriages; For, he supposes that wisdom was necessary for this thrusting
down, and such a wisdom, as must be found out by much search, however they had
not succeeded in the search they made after it, v. 11. And it is indeed a
truth, whether men have to do with erroneous persons, or with persons who have
miscarried through passion under trouble, That much wisdom is necessary, to
discover and drive them from all their subterfuges and defenses, to humble
them, and yet not to crush them, and so to reprove their errors and
miscarriages, as they do not thereby alienate their affections from the truth,
or the wholesome counsels they give them. See 2 Timothy 2.25.

3. Men are very apt to exalt themselves in any good services they do, or think
they do; For, so he supposes here, That if they had hit the mark, and thrust
him down, they would have been ready to speak bigly of themselves. Men
naturally hunt after glory, and do desire to be taken notice of, 2 King. 10.26.
And even those who are humbled and have some self-denial, in their entering upon
difficult undertakings, may yet readily be puffed up, if they have success in
them.

4. Men are apt to be proud of nothing so much, as of their wisdom and parts,
especially if they shine in bringing about some great enterprise; For, this was
the hazard in particular, if they had succeeded, Ye would say, we have found
out wisdom. Men's wisdom, or their opinion of wisdom, is their great Idol, so
that to be self-denied in that matter is a rare art. See 1 Cor. 8.1. Job 11.12.

5. Men's inclination to boast of themselves does justly obstruct their success
in their undertakings; For, God thrusts him down, not man, and they had no hand
in humbling Job, lest they should say, we have found out wisdom. Thus God
lays men by, and blasts them in their best undertakings, that he may hide
pride from them. Which ought to humble them, that they should thus render
themselves unfit for service, and should obstruct their success and comfort in
what they go about.

6. Gods care of his people appears, not only in curing those evils into which
they fall, but in preventing their falling into many evils to which they are
very prone; For, here was a preventing mercy (however they discerned or
improved it) that God ordered the business so as he did, lest they should say,
we have found out wisdom. Though Saints may discern delivering mercies more
than they can reckon, yet when they come to think of preventing mercies, they
will find those a depth into which they cannot dive.

7. Men may account themselves very wise, in their actings and discourses, when
yet wise discerners will perceive that it is nothing so; For, though they
judged that there was great wisdom in their way, yet Elihu gives them a
watchword, that they should not say, we have found out wisdom.

8. As God may employ weak Instruments in great works, that the Instruments may
not boast, but he alone may be seen in what is done; So men who are sincere and
humble, will see much of God, and nothing of themselves, in all they do: For,
says he, God thrusts him down, not man. He was not an eminent man who was
employed, that so God might be seen to do it by him, and he ascribes it
entirely to God, and denies himself in it. See Genesis 41.16. Dan. 2.30. 1 Cor.
1.27, 28, 29. and 3.5.

Verse 14. Now he has not directed his words against me: neither will I answer
him with your speeches.
The third Reason of his interposing to speak (wherein also he points a little
at the way and manner of his answer) is, That (as he is not engaged in the heat
of mutual reflections, as they were; nor had Job given him any provocation, as
they alleged he had done to them; so) he had some new matter, not yet spoken
by them, which was useful to clear the Controversy; And therefore he will
bring it forth, and that without all irritating reflections, which had been too
much their way. And by this he insinuates upon Job, and prepares him to hearken
to what he was to say; seeing he tells him he had something to inform him of,
which had not been spoken before; and assures him that he will not deal with
him as they had done. It has been already cleared, in the entry to this
Chapter, in what respect it is true, that he answered not Job with their
speeches. In sum, Not only did he differ from them in the manner of his reply,
answering with reasons, and not with passion, as they had done; but in the
matter also. For he never maintained their Thesis against Job, That he was a
wicked Hypocrite; nor did he own their Argument (taken from Gods afflicting
hand upon him) whereby they endeavored to prove it, but looked upon that as a
mere Sophism. And what he repeats of their Doctrine (in so far as they had
spoken truth) he makes use of it to prove another Conclusion than theirs was,
and to press that upon Job which he was bound to receive and admit,
notwithstanding his personal integrity, which he intends not to pre-judge by
any thing he says.

From this Verse, Learn, 1. Men may bear out in a debate against others, who
yet may be faulty in some things, which their Antagonists do not discern; and
men may be able to prove their integrity, as to the state of their person, who
yet may be guilty of many failings: In both these respects, there is cause to
answer Job, but not with their speeches. For Job was indeed a righteous person,
and yet he had real failings to be reproved, though his Friends discerned them
not.

2. One main cause of men's mistakes in Controversies, is, the height of their
passions, and their being engaged in mutual reflections; which not only takes
them off the cause, but blinds their judgments, that they cannot well discern
what is right or wrong: For, this (beside their unsound principles) was a great
cause of their mistake; that Job had directed his words against them (or,
ordered his speech so as it might sharply check them for their failings) which
produced speeches on their part which were full of mistakes, and not to be
imitated by any who would speak to purpose in that cause.

3. Men are bound to communicate, in their stations, what light God has given
to them, for clearing of truth, and composing of debates; For, this is an
Argument why he may speak to this cause, that, even for matter, he has an
answer not according to their speeches, which may help to put an end to the
Controversy.

4. As it is men's duty not to speak untruths in debates; so also not to bring
passion instead of reason, or to irritate those with whom they deal; and
especially the afflicted, who have been formerly wounded by others: For, he
will not answer with their speeches, because they were false, and because they
had, by their reflections, already grieved the afflicted man's spirit too much.

5. It is not sufficient to justify men in an ill course, that they do but
imitate others therein, who, possibly, are godly and able; but these examples
should rather warn them to look better to their way: For, though they had gone
before him, he will not follow them, but (having observed wherein they failed)
he is the more careful, not to answer him with their speeches.

6. As none are warranted to irritate others by their passionate and provoking
speeches; So those, especially, would avoid that evil, who have had no
provocation given them thereunto: For, this has a special influence upon
Elihu, That since Job had not directed his words against him, therefore he will
not answer him with their speeches.

Verse 15. They were amazed, they answered no more: they lest off speaking.

16. When I had waited, (for they spoke not, but stood still and answered no
more)

17. I said, I will answer also my part, I also will show mine opinion.


The fourth Reason of his interposing in this cause, is, That they, being
provoked now to answer, were silent with amazment, v. 15. And therefore he
(having waited on till he saw it was their fixed resolution to say no more, v.
16.) might lawfully take his turn in speaking, v. 17. It seems that in speaking
this, Elihu turned from the three Friends (to whom he had been speaking last)
to Job, or to all the Auditory then present, desiring them to mark how these
men came off in their undertaking. And whereas he says, They were amazed, etc.
It is not necessary to conceive, that it was only at his appearing to speak in
the cause they were thus amazed; and that after the admonition he had given
them, in the former Verses, he waited and kept silence a while, to see if they
would yet take this task off his hands; but they, being astonished at him,
continued silent, which laid a necessity upon him to speak on. But the words
seem rather to contain a further account, given by Elihu, of what the Writer of
the History had touched upon, v. 1.5. That when they were provoked by Jobs last
discourses, and ought to have made a reply to them, in defense of their own
opinion; they fell a wondering, and were astonished and amazed (not so much at
the strength and evidence of his defenses, as at his supposed absurdity in
them) and would answer no more. And therefore having waited (as it seems he had
also done before, in the intervals betwixt their discourses, having been an
Auditour all the while) till he found they would make no more replies, he
begins to speak.

From these Verses, Learn, 1. It is no strange thing to see men, who are
engaged in debates, put to many perplexities upon one account or other; For,
here they are amazed, at Jobs absurdity, as they judged of it, and so
perplexed, that they know not what to do next with him. And it may be expected,
that many the like distempers (be they just or unjust) will attend that
unpleasant task of debating and disputing.

2. It is no new thing to see men, who have truth on their side, cried down by
their Antagonists, who may be ready to wonder and be astonished at them, and so
much to abominate them and their way, as they will even disdain to give them an
answer, or speak to them any more; For so were they amazed at Job, they
answered no more, they lest off speaking, or, they removed speeches from
themselves; Not only did their passion render them unable to speak or argue,
but resolvedly they removed all purposes of speaking any more to such a man as
they judged Job to be. But such a behavior is not a right way to answer men's
reasons, or satisfy their consciences.

3. It is not unuseful for Spectators to take notice of men's weakness and
passions in debates, for diverse reasons; As here he turns him to others, in
speaking of this matter, and tells them, They were amazed, etc. This he does,
not to insult over them, by pointing out their weakness unto others; But,
partly, because men, while they are in a distemper or passion, are very
incapable to notice their own weakness, and therefore he must appeal to others;
Partly, to convince the Auditory, that he did not rashly engage in this
business, nor take their work out of their hand, so long as they would follow
it; and, chiefly, that he might edify the Auditory, by leading them to study
the weaknesses of good men in the heat of debates, that so they might learn to
avoid these contentions which have such sad effects, or, to avoid those
weaknesses, if they were necessarily called to contend.

4. Men should not be taken advantage of in their fits of passion, but they
should be meekly waited upon, to see if they will cool and come to themselves;
For, when he saw them thus amazed and silent, he waited on them, to see if yet
they would speak.

5. Passion may be very tenacious and sticking in the best of men, especially,
when they have a wrong cause, or do differ in principles from those they are
angry at; For, when he had waited, they spoke not, they stood still and
answered no more; They persisted in their passionate humor and resolution, as
judging, according to their principles, but unjustly, that he was an obstinate
wicked man.

6. As men should have a clear call before they engage in a debate; So it is no
presumption to appear, in their stations, when they have a call; but it is
their duty not to hide their Talent, nor desert wronged truth: For, when they
have given over, he finds himself obliged to answer his part, or, take his
turn, and to show his opinion, as they had done.

7. Truth and a good cause will never want friends, but when some fail, or are
laid by, God will cause others appear; For, when the Friends had all along
failed in speaking what they ought in this debate, and were now wholly laid
aside, so that it was not to be expected they would speak any thing for God in
this quarrel, I, says he, will answer also my part, I also will show mine
opinion.

Verse 18. For I am full of matter, the Spirit within me constrains me.

19. Behold, my belly is a^ wine which has no vent, it is ready to burst like
new bottles.

20. I will speak that I may be refreshed: I will open my lips, and answer.


The fifth Reason of his interposing to speak (which is connected with the
former, by the Particle, For,) is, The instinct and impulse of the Spirit,
which did so fill him with matter, and so press him inwardly, that he must
speak to refresh himself, and answer for God. This he illustrates from a
similitude of wine in a bottle, wanting vent; Where the matter, wherewith he is
furnished, is compared to wine; his mind and spirit, to a bottle containing
this wine; his silence, to the stopping of the bottle, and its want of vent;
his grief of mind and distemper of body by his silence, to the br^^king of the
bottle, and its being bursted with the working of the wine; and his speaking,
whereby he would refresh himself and profit others, to the giving of a vent to
the wine in the bottle. By all which we are not to understand any vain itch in
this young man to speak in so grave an audience, but a real impulse of the
Spirit of God. Nor yet are we so to understand it, as if the Spirit did
furiously act and over-drive him, that he was not master of himself, As the
Heathens were put in the posture and condition of madd men by their Diabolical
Enthusiasmes; but only that he had such abundance of useful matter, and such a
fervent inclination to speak, that he could not, without grief and trouble,
forbear. And while he says, his belly is ready to burst like new bottles, he
means not new bottles (for these are not so ready to burst, Mat. 9.17.) but
bottles filled with new wine, which, by its working, is ready to burst the
bottles wherein it is put, if they be not very strong.

From this we may not only gather, that this Doctrine of Elihu slowed from the
Spirit of God, but further, Learn,

1. It must be the Spirit of God in men, furnishing them with light, and
accompanying what they say, that will clear Controversies, and bring them to an
happy close; For, the Spirit is given him here for that end.

2. As men may certainly know that it is the Spirit of God, and not a delusion,
that acts them; So they have need to make it sure that it is so, especially in
debates, wherein it is not easy for men to know of what Spirit they are: In
both these respects he confidently asserts, That it is the Spirit of God, and
not the fury of a rash young man, which moves him to speak, I will answer, --
v. 17. For I am full of matter, the Spirit within me constrains me.

3. Such as have the Spirit of God, may, without vanity, assert that it is so,
in the maintenance of truth, and of what is right; For, so does Elihu assert of
himself, though a young man, when he is to deal on Gods behalf with so eminent
parties. See 1 Cor. 7.40.

4. Albeit the Spirit of God, where he dwells, keeps men humble and empty in
themselves; yet he does not make an empty sound and noise only, but supplyeth
men with furniture for the work he calls them unto; For, says he, I am full of
matter, or, of words, that is, of words pertinent to the purpose, and not empty
words only. And he expresses his furniture, by being full of words, to show,
that the Spirit of God did not only furnish him with pertinent matter, but with
fit words whereby to express it; As he must do to all those whom he assists.

5. Though the Spirit of God do not lead men to be rash and furious; yet he
fills them in whom he dwells with an holy fervor in the cause of God, and
with an earnest desire and zeal to appear for it, especially when others have
wronged it: For, this is the Spirit within him, or, the Spirit of his belly,
that is, the Spirit which has taken his seat in, and has wakened up his zeal
and affections (which in Scripture Phrase are said frequently to be seated in
the belly, or, bowels) in behalf of God and his truth, so much wronged by them:
And so this Spirit constrained him, that he must appear and speak, as wine in a
bottle seeks a vent. See Psa. 45.1.

6. The Spirit of God leads men to look upon the want of an opportunity to
serve God as their greatest burden, and on his service, as their greatest
delight and refreshment: For, so much does this similitude import, Behold, my
belly (or, affections moved and excited by the Spirit of God) is as wine that
has no vent, it is ready to burst like new bottles: I will speak that I may be
refreshed, or, may breath, as the bottle gets air when it is opened. See Jer.
20.9.

7. Whatever fervor men have, yet it must not be their own case only (far
less the setting out of their gifts in a way of ostentation) but edification,
they should mind; Therefore, unto his own being refreshed, he adds, I will open
my lips, and answer, or, speak to the cause, and on Gods behalf, so as ye may
be edified.

Verse 21. Let me not, I pray you, accept any man's person, neither let me give
flattering titles unto man.

22. For I know not to give flattering titles, in so doing my Maker would soon
take me away.


These Verses contain the third branch of this general Preface (relating
chiefly to Job) wherein he gives an account of the way he resolves to follow in
managing this cause. Some do take up the words as Elihu's wish and prayer to
God, that he may be helped to manage that cause well and impartially. But it
seems rather that he expresses his resolution in a desire to Job, and to the
whole Auditory, that he may have liberty and allowance to deal freely, as in a
cause of God, and a cause concerning man's salvation; And that it be not
expected that he should yield to any man's humors and affections, or authority,
in this matter, but that he will faithfully and freely speak what he thinks, of
the whole cause, or of any man concerned. Which course he resolves to take, not
only because it is not his custom to flatter, nor does he approve of it; but
because he was restrained from such courses by the fear and awe of God. As for
the two expressions, to accept man's person, or, face, and to give flattering
titles to men, they may be taken for one and the same thing, for the one is
repeated for both, v. 22. Yet it may be gathered from the same repetition, that
the giving of flattering titles, is the evil he would avoid, and the accepting
of man's person, is the cause or tentation which might drive him to commit that
evil. And so, for clearing and applying this purpose, I shall consider four
Particulars in the words.

First, Consider the evil which he declines, and is careful to avoid, he will
not give flattering titles to men. The word is only used in these Verses, and
Isa. 44.5. and 45.4. and it signifies, to give Titles, Epithetes, a By-name,
or, Surname, to things; And so it is translated a Surname, in the forecited
places of Isaiah, where it is taken in a good sense. But here it is taken in a
bad sense for flattering titles, or, designations, which he declines, not only
in reference to their persons, that he will use no Rhetorical or flattering
compellations or insinuations to them, by way of Preface, to conciliate their
attention to what he is to say, but will fall roundly to his work: But in
reference to the matter it self, he will not go about the bush (as we speak)
nor mince the truth, but speak it out plainly and freely, and give things their
right names, without flattery or circumlocution. And in this respect also, they
are said not to be given to man, because regard to their persons did not cause
him flatter them in their sin. And if he had done otherwise, he had spoken
rather to their persons to please them, than to their condition, as it was in
it self. Of which more will be spoken on the next word. Some Learned men do
take the word to signify, the naming of a thing obscurely, as by some
Enigmatical By-name, or Epithete, and not by its usual, proper, and known name.
And this notion suits well to this purpose; That as he would not flatter them,
so he would not give a By-name to things, nor change their names, either by
calling them what they are not, or not clearly and plainly what they are. This
teaches,

1. It is not sufficient that men do right things, for the matter of them,
unless also they be done in a right way and manner; So much, in general, are we
taught by his example, who would not only debate for God, but he will do it in
a right manner. Hence we find in the Scriptures frequently, that not only
duties are prescribed and enjoined, but the qualifications of duties and
performances also; That Love be without dissimulation, and flow from a pure
heart with fervency; That men do give cheerfully what they bestow in charity;
That Faith be unfeigned, etc. Thus the Lord distinguishes hypocrites from
others, not so much by the substance of external duties performed by either, as
by the manner of doing them, and the end for which they do them, Mat. 6.1, 2,
etc. Yea, saving grace is not simply necessary for the simple performing of
many external duties (For they may be gone about by unrenewed men, and by the
strength of common gifts; yea, their very corruptions, such as self-seeking,
and the desire of applause, may fill their sayls to let them on work) But to
perform them in a right manner, necessarily requires saving grace. This may
check them who silence their consciences with the external performance of
duties only, while yet they have never employed Christ for grace to go rightly
about them.

2. It is the will of God that men be ingenuous, plain, sincere, and
downright, in the matters and cause of God, and in dealing with men and their
condition, when they have a calling thereunto; whereby they do indeed witness,
that they respect the honor of God, and the weal of their Neighbor; For,
this, in particular, was his resolution here, and is the positive assertion
included in that negative, that he will not give flattering titles to man. For
further clearing whereof, Consider,

1. The meaning is not, that titles of honor should not be given to those to
whom they are due, or that due respects should not be paid to men, even when we
reprove their faults, or that reproofs should not be dipped in love. For the
contrary is enjoined, 2 Thessalonians. 3.14, 15.

2. Nor is it the meaning, that men should not use prudent insinuations, to get
in upon men with their reproofs; Such as Nathan used in reproving David, 2 Samuel
12. But,

3. The meaning is, that for the fault it self, it should be plainly and
sincerely reproved, without mincing, and without flattering of the person
guilty. And men need to be thus faithfully and freely dealt with, because their
own interests, passions, self-love, etc. do, oft-times, hinder them from
dealing faithfully with themselves. And as it is the duty of some, by reason of
their office, thus to give a certain sound; So all are obliged, by the Law of
love, not to suffer sin upon their Brother, Lev. 19.17. Yea, and to rebuke them
sharply (as they have a calling and opportunity) if it be needful, Tit. 1.13.
See Gal. 2.11. Hence,

1. They are culpable who make no conscience of free dealing, in admonishing
one another, As if (as Cain said) they were not their Brothers keepers; But do
either choose to talk of men's faults behind their backs, rather than admonish
themselves; or harbor prejudices and alienations from their Neighbors, and do
intend them a mischief, upon the account of some faults (real or supposed)
which they never labor to clear or remove by admonitions. See 2 Samuel 13.22.28.
Or do reprove them, but bluntly, as Eli did his Sons, 1 Samuel 2.23, 24, 25. with
3.13. Or (which is worst of all) do flatter men in their sin, to their hurt; if
not to their ruin. See Prove. 28.23. and 29.5.

2. They are also culpable, who cannot endure to be freely dealt with by
others, but do make it a quarrel, if men freely admonish and reprove them, Gal.
4.16. It is an evidence of love to admonish where there is cause, and of grace,
to admit of it, Psa. 141.5. Prove. 17.6.

Secondly, Consider the impediment to this duty, or that which might (if he d^d
not avoid it) tempt him to give these flattering titles; which is, the
accepting of man's person, or, face. Job complained that his Friends had thus
wronged him in their pleadings for God, Chap. 13.7, 8. But Elihu is resolved
against this, and intimates, That, in the debate, he will not look to their
age, abilities, goodness (for they were good men) nor any other adjunct
extrinsick to the cause, but would consider the matter abstractly, and in it
self, and rather speak to the advantage of truth, than to please and gratify
man. It may be taken up in this one Instruction, That in speaking to truth or
error, right or wrong in persons, Men ought (as to pay all due respects to
men's persons, and other qualities, so) to abstract from all things in the
person, extrinsical to the cause, and deal with it singly and abstractly; As
considering that (otherwise) men's authority, and other by respects, may be a
great tentation to hinder men's faithfulness: For, here E^ihu will not accept
any man's person, that he may not give flattering titles to man. Thus dealt Paul
with Peter at Antioch, Gal. 2.11. etc. And did not think it inconsistent with
his being (in his own esteem) less than the least of all Saints, and not worthy
to be called an Apostle, to withstand such a Pillar to his face. And as truth
should be dearer to us than our nearest relations, and it should be owned
against whatsoever opposers; So, on the other hand, it is a character that men
are declining in their love and zeal for truth, when they have men's persons in
admiration, in judging of Doctrines or courses, as is foretold, Jude, v. 16
And men may be thus swayed, in matters of Opinion or Doctrine, by their respect
to persons, Either upon the account of good or evil that they may receive from
persons of such an opinion and way; and so they will be on their side, and
flatter them, who have power to do them good or evil; which seems to be that
admiring of persons, because of advantage, Jude, v. 16. See Prove. 29.26. Or
they are thus swayed out of their ignorance and simplicity; And therefore when
they look upon men who are godly, and (it may be) straight in other things,
they resolve to follow them implicitly in all things, and do conclude that
what they do must be right, because they do it; which is in effect to put them
in Gods room. Thus Barnabas, and others, were carried away with Peter's
dissimulation, till Paul removed that undue respect that way paid to his person
and eminency, Gal. 2 11, 12, 13. To clear this point a little further, Consider,

1. Wrong is wrong in any person, be who they will; yea, men's wrongs are the
greater, because of these respects (of eminency, piety, experience, etc.) which
they usually dote upon who are mis^led by their example. God has given that
Prerogative to no person, great or good, that what they do must be right,
because they do it.

2. God has not given us any rule of our walk but his Word; So that we must
not receive any thing from the hands of any man, but as it agrees with that
rule. See Isa. 8.20.

3. As to the matter office dealing with men about their errors and
miscarriages, those by-respects, if well studied, do plead rather that we
should deal faithfully with them. If they be great persons, not only are they
subject to God, and to these who have his call to speak to them, but their sin
is the greater, and more apt to ensnare and infect others, and therefore they
should be freely dealt with, for their own and others good. If they who are
wrong be good and pious persons, it is their greater fault to miscarry, and
their example may be apt to draw others to imitate them, if they be not
reclaimed by free-dealing; And it is a great cruelty to them, not to help them
out of that snare, and to bring them back to the way of God, wherein they may
enjoy his favor and presence. If they be our friends and relations who are in
an error, and so we dare not deal freely with them, lest we lose their
friendship, or grieve them; what greater kindness, love, and friendship, can we
express to them, than to be faithful to them? If they be enemies, we are to
consider, that if the Lord will not suffer us to let their beast be lost, or
perish in a pit, Exodus 23.4, 5. what cruelty must it be to take any advantage
of their sin, and not to seek to reclaim them in our stations? From all this we
may infeir,

1. That men should take heed lest any thing in them (power, goodness,
kindness, etc.) be an engine to advance any evil course among others, which may
make their account sad, and provoke God to blast them.

2. That faithful men, in judging of courses, should abstract from all these,
and hide these tentations from themselves.

3. That all men should be careful not to be implicit in their way, nor to
Idolize any man: And that they study not to be of Paul, Apollo, or, Cephas, nor
to call any man Rabbi; Otherwise a jealous God may be provoked, both against
the Idolizers, and the Idolized.

Thirdly, Consider the way how he expresses this resolution; Not by insolent
bragging, but by way of humble request, that with their good liking he may use
this freedom. Let me not, I pray you, accept, etc. says he, requesting them,
that they would not allow of such unfaithful dealing. It teaches,

1. Even the best of men will hardly admit of free and faithful dealing, when
they are in their fits of passion, or when they have personal advantages of
these who deal with them; For, here he must humbly request, even of those good
men, and particularly of Job, that they will allow him to use freedom: And
thus Asa, a good man, takes ill with a free message from the Prophet, 2 Chronicles.
16.7,-10. For (to say nothing of wicked men's arrogance in this matter, 1 King.
22.8.24.) even the best of men are, oft-times, rather ready to look to
Instruments, and visible parties, who deal with them, than to God who employes
them; And their present passions and interests may cause them relish that
freedom ill, which yet afterward may work upon them. And as this warns men to
consider well with whom they have to do, when they come to use freedom (which
may excite them to put themselves in Gods hand, when they touch a sore of that
kind;) So it warns godly men, when they are admonished, to remember that they
have corruptions, as well as grace, to entertain free-dealing; that so they may
be upon their guard also, and may reckon that, probably, they need that most
which they entertain worst, and that that is the good Physic which makes them
sickest.

2. Were men considerate, they would relish it very ill, if they were not
freely and ingnuously dealt with; For, says he, Let me not accept any man's
person, etc. Which, though it intimate chiefly his resolution not to follow
that way, yet, it imports also, that they would not suffer it, if they were
well advised. It is but a poor evidence of men's prudence (to say nothing of
their piety) when they can admit of flatterers, backbiters, ( Prove. 25.23.) and
such as fawn upon them, and do never miss faithful freedom from their Friends.

3. The zeal of God in men ought to be tempered with much modesty, discretion,
and due respect to those with whom they deal; For, he humbly entreats for this
liberty at their hand. The more there be of the zeal of God, humility will
abound the more, passion will be the more calmed, and love and mutual respect
entertained. Which assures us, that that is bastard zeal which is furious,
uncivil, and disrespective of those we deal with.

Fourthly, Consider the Arguments whereby he confirms himself in this
resolution, and persuades them to admit of his freedom, v. 22. One reason is,
because he knew not to give those titles, that is, it was not his custom to
flatter, nor does he approve of it, and therefore he will not begin that trade
now. The other reason (which also persuaded him never to use or approve of that
way, more than at this time) is, In so doing my Maker would soon take me away;
that is, the apprehension of Divine vengeance, which hangs over the head of
flatterers, made him afraid to hazard on such courses. Whence, Learn,

1. Men ought to do right things, not at adventure, but from serious and sound
principles; For, he will deal freely, not because it is his present humor so
to do, but because he knows not to do otherwise; he had not learned that
trade, nor did he approve of it. This is a special proof of men's sincerity,
when they do right things from a right principle; for many do but run with the
crowd to a good work, and are like Saul among the Prophets.

2. It is commendable when men of sound principles do not condemn themselves in
that which they allow; but do put their light and principles in practice; For,
as he knew not to give flattering titles, so he did give none; and though he
request for their approbation in not flattering, v. 21. yet he is fixed and
resolved not to flatter, however they take it. Wherein he is not like many, who
are soon broken and driven from their resolutions; and yet they would do well
enough if others would let them alone, or if they might do it with the good
liking of others.

3. Men who would be honest, and fixed in their good resolutions, should fix
themselves in their principles and way, by arguments and serious considerations
of the consequences thereof; For, he fixed himself in that resolution not to
flatter, by looking to God and his sentence against them who shall take another
way.

4. God has a sad quarrel against them who are unfaithful to the Souls of
others, which he will severely and speedily pursue, as he easily can; For, he
reckons that by giving flattering titles, he should not only wrong these whom
he flattered, but he should also run upon his own ruin, in so doing my Maker
would take me away, or, cut me off, and he would do it soon, both speedily;
without delaying to execute vengeance, and easily without any difficulty. Thus
we find that Watchmens Souls are laid in pawn, to be answerable and smart for
it, if they deal not faithfully, Ezekiel. 33 7, 8, 9. The study of this, may not
only be an antidote against the slavish fear of great men, whom men may be
called to deal with, (as Christ speaks in the matter of confessing the truth,
Mat. 10.28.) But may persuade men to be faithful, when they consider, how much
it concerns them to be so, for then, they will not dare to daily in so
important a business. And others may see, that they have no cause to be
offended at men for their freedom and faithfulness, when they consider their
hazard if they do otherwise.

5. Though such as have a calling to speak to others, should flatter them, and
gratify their^ humors; yet that would tend nothing to the advantage of those
who are so flattered, seeing God would not approve of what is said to them, and
would witness his displeasure by punishing the flatterer: For, this is not only
an argument persuading himself to deal faithfully, but perswad^ng them, also,
to admit and allow of his freedom, As consider^ng how little it would avail
them, that he flattered them, since God was ready to witness how ill pleased he
was with them and their way, by punishing him for flattering them in it.

6. While he calls God, his Maker, in this business,

1. He points out that God, for whom he and all faithful men do speak freely,
is on high (...) the highest of men, against whom they may be called to speak;
and therefore there is no cause to fear them, if men keep his way, and b^ in
his service.

2. He points out, how easily God can ^^^^h unfaithful men, who are but his own
creatures, and have their being of him? So that stately will ^ind no shelter
against him, even under the wings of the greatest of men.

3. He points out this as an Argument, why he should not be unfaithful to God,
were there no more but that he had his being of him. So his being a Creator,
is a motive to piety, Eccl. 12.1. And it aggravates men's faults, that they sin
against their Maker, Hos. 8.14. Though the word may import more than his giving
them a simple being, even that he made them his people. However, it is
certain, that such as are willing and affectionate to do well, will not want
arguments to pres^ them to it, if they do but consider their very being which
they have from God. For God having ma^e all things for himself, Prove. 16.4. Our
being should not be employed against him, but in his service.

CHAP. XXXIII.
After the former general Preface, Elihu comes now to deal more particularly
with Job, without meddling any more with his Friends. This he does in four
speeches; in the first three whereof (contained in this and the two following
Chapters) he more particularly reprehends some of Jobs rash expressions. And in
the last ( Chap. 36. and 37.) he more generally taxes his complaints powered
out against God. In all which discourses, as he does not quarrel the state of
Jobs person, but only his faults, especially, his impertinent language under
trouble; so he divides what he has to say in so many speeches, not only that
he may draw his breath between them, but also because he gives Job leave, at
the end of every one of them, to answer for himself, if he had any thing to
say; as appears expressly from the close of his first speech, v. 31, 32, 33.

In this Chapter (which contains his first speech) his scope is to instruct
that Job had unjustly taxed the Dispensations of God toward him a righteous
man. The Chapter may be taken up in three Heads, First, A particular Preface to
this speech, directed to Job; wherein he craves his attention, v. 1. And that
for weighty reasons and considerations, v. 2. -- 7. Secondly, The Speech it
self; wherein we have, 1. An Accusation, or, a rehearsal of those discourses of
Job which he is to refute, v. 8. -- 11. 2. A refutation of those his
discourses, by two Arguments, One, taken from the Sovereignty of God, who is
greater than all, and accountable to none, v. 12, 13, The other, taken from
Gods condescendence to instruct men by various means, whereof they make but
little use; Which is generally propounded, v. 14. Instanced (on Gods part, and
as to the means he uses, and the end for which he uses them) in visions and
the like extraordinary ways of revealing his mind, v. 15, 16, 17, 18. In
afflictions, and particularly sickness, v. 19, 20, 21, 22. And, in the ministry
of men accompanying those afflictions, v. 23. -- 28. And summarily
recapitulated, v. 29, 30. Thirdly, The Conclusion of the speech, wherein he
again craves Jobs attention; v. 31. Being willing to hear if he had any thing
to say for himself. v. 32. And (if he had not) to instruct him yet more, v. 33.

Verse 1. Wherefore, Job, I pray thee, hear my speeches, and hearken to all my
words.
AFter the general Preface, in the former Chapter, Elihu, being to take Job to
task, does yet premit a particular Preface to him; craving (in this Verse) not
only simple audience, but attention, and that not to a part only, but to all
his speech, and till he had ended what he was to say: Which request he presses
by several Arguments, to v. 8. This course of prefacing Elihu insists upon, to
prepare Job for what he is to say, lest, otherwise, being a great Prince, he
should slight him, who was but a young man; and having to do with an afflicted
man, who had been already irritated by his Friends, he deals thus warily and
circumspectly, lest, otherwise, he should be suspicious also of him in the very
entry.

Doct. 1. There is a godly prudence required, in managing thorny debates so as
may tend most to edification; For, of this Elihu gave proof, here, in that,
albeit the three Friends vented many errors in their condemning Job, yet, he
will rather spend his time in rectifying Jobs mistakes, than in debating with
them, because it was more for edification. And therefore he betakes himself to
deal with Job here.

2. As it is a great mercy when God sends a seasonable word to needy men,
especially after they have been irritated and unskilfully handled by others (as
here Elihu is sent to Job) so audience is due to such a message; For,
Wherefore, Job (seeing I am sent to thee, to speak as I have promised, Chap.
32.14, 21.) hear my speeches.

3. It is not sufficient that men hear only what is said (especially if it
concern them) unless also they be very attentive, and ponder what is said;
Therefore he adds, Hear, and hearken to my words. As many men are not careful
at all to hear, which is the fruit of their Atheistical contempt of God, or, of
their proud conceit that they know already any thing that can be said; So very
few of those who do hear, are serious in that matter, or do close with, and
feed upon, what they hear, till it leave an impression upon them.

4. As men ought always to avoid idle speeches, Matthew. 12.36. and particulary,
in dealing with afflicted persons, they should be careful to speak nothing but
that which is to the purpose and useful; So, it is a duty to hear men out, and
take what they say altogether, before a judgment be passed upon their
Doctrine; For, says he, Hearken to all my words, as being all profitable, and,
when taken together, they will be found clear and pertinent. As it is men's duty
(if we speak in general, and abstractly, of this matter) to hear and receive
all that God speaks to them, and not what pleases them only; (considering that
it is all alike true, and of equal authority, and that a contempt of God in any
thing he speaks, shakes loose that authority which binds all his Word upon
them, Jam. 2.10.) So, particularly, in debates men ought to be heard till they
speak out their mind; not crying them down when they speak any thing we like
not, how true soever (as the Jews did to Paul, Act. 22.21, 22.) nor judging of
their opinion by any one unsafe expression, which the rest of their discourse
may either clear, or make it appear that they have no unsound meaning in it.
Thus also all the truths of God should be joined in our practice, making use of
directions, encouragements, reproofs, etc. all of them in their own place and
order, wherein both the secure and presumptuous, and the discouraged and
crushed, do fail and mistake.

5. It is not easy to persuade, even wise and good men, to hear instruction
and reproof patiently, and without slighting the messenger and message; For, he
must entreat Job here, I pray thee, hear. So peevish are we, that we must be
entreated to admit even of that which is necessary and good for us.

6. General resolutions, or, our allowing of things in our judgment, will not
always bear us out when it comes to particulars; For, notwithstanding that
general request, that he might be allowed liberty to use freedom, Chap. 32.21.
he must yet renew his request to Job to hear him, when he comes to put that
resolution in practice; as knowing that, however Job could not but approve of
this general, that it was fit and just he should use freedom; yet, he might be
ready to startle when he should touch him upon the sore. And therefore we
should be jealous of our selves, and of our good general resolutions, if ever
we be put to a particular trial.

7. Men irritated by trouble, and by ill usage under it, become readily broken
minded, peevish, and ill to deal with; For, so is here also supposed of Job,
that he is so broken with his troubles, and his Friends miscarriages, that he
must be entreated and prayed to hear.

8. Honesty and kindness will teach men, not only to be gentle and discreet in
making way for their addresses; but, even to pity and follow the peevishness of
men who are under trouble, that they may gain ground upon them* For, so does he
deal with afflicted Job, following him with entreaties that he would hear him.
And it is of general verity, that as men do themselves an ill turn who harbor
prejudices at them who should do them good; (for Satan begins with prejudices
at Messengers, that the Word it self may at last be disrelished also) So
Messengers sent by God should be careful to do nothing which may justly
alienate men's minds from their message, and especially those who are in
trouble. For, oft-times, those are like sick persons, who reject even necessary
Food and Physic, because they have a prejudice at the Cook or Physician.

Ver. 3. Behold, now I have opened my mouth, my tongue has spoken in my mouth.
The following purpose, to v. 8. may be reduced to two Arguments persuading Job
to hearken to him.

1. Because he will speak truth sincerely and clearly to him, v. 2, 3.

2. That being his fellow creature, v. 4. he will deal equitably, and on equal
terms, with him, giving him liberty to answer for himself, v. 5. and proceeding
with him according to his own desire, when he wished that he might plead his
cause with God, v. 6, 7. But that I may unfold this purpose more fully, I shall
speak to it more distinctly, as containing five Arguments of attention.

As for this Verse, albeit it seem to be but a transition to that which
follows, and a part of the following Argument, v. 3. (both the Verses
together importing this, that being now to speak, v. 2. he will speak sincerely
and clearly, v. 3.) Yet if we consider it more narrowly, it contains the first
Argument pressing attention, to this purpose; That if Job will consider that he
is now at last speaking, and how he entered upon it, he will find himself
obliged to hear him. The strength of this Argument will better appear, if we
consider the words particularly. And,

First, He points it out as remarkable that now he speaks; Behold, says he,
now I have opened, etc. He had not spoken before, till now that his time came
to speak. Yea, he had not only forborne to speak till they had given him place,
and he had heard all the de^ate, and so was more able to speak to purpose; but
he had not spoken till he had well digested and meditated upon that which was
suggested to him by the Spirit of God, Chap. 32.18. And now, after all this, he
has the confidence to speak his mind. It teaches, That a modest man, who is
not rash in his discourses, nor presumptuous in his undertakings, ought to be
respected; For, Elihu, carrying so, craves that Job will hear him upon that
account.

Secondly, He was now begun to speak, Chap. 32. and was willing to proceed if
he would hear him; yea, now, after that general Preface, he is coming to the
very matter which particularly concerned Job; and he had already assured him
what course he would follow in dealing with him, Chap, 32 21. And therefore he
desired audience. It teaches.

1. The opportunity of having one fitted to speak to our condition is not to be
slighted; For, he, being now to speak, as the Spirit inspired him, ought to be
heard. A Messenger, one of a thousand, is not always ready it hand; and
therefore it will be sad if men let such an opportunity slip.

2. Men, who are known to be modest, ought to be trusted upon their word, and
to have credit, so long as they have given no evidence of falsehood; For, having
modestly entered upon this debate, and having promised to deal faithfully, he
presses that he may be credited and heard. As men ought to walk so uprightly,
as their word may be credited; so it is a fault to be jealous of men who have
given proof that they are such.

Thirdly, To open the mouth, in Scripture Language, does frequently import to
speak like a wise man, and gravely, to a purpose. So it seems to be taken, Chap
32, 20. See also Judge. 11.3^. Psalm. 78.2. Prove. 24.7. and 31.8, 9, 26. Matthew.
5.^. A fools mouth is always open, but a wise man shuts his mouth, and only
opens it when there is just occasion to speak. It teaches,

1. Men who would prevent alienation of mind in the afflicted, ought to deal
very seriously and gravely, in handling and speaking to their condition As here
Elihu resolves to do that he may persuade Job to be attentive: Whereas they
who do but tr^fle in dealing with such, do justly breed alienations, and bring
themselves in contempt.

2. The more seriously men deal with others about their condition, their guilt
will be the greater if they slight them; For, Elihu's Argument conclude, this,
that since he was to speak so seriously, Job could not in reason, nor without
guilt, decline to hear and hearken attentively.

Fourthly, We are also to remark how he doubleth his expressions, and in the
end of the Verse repeats the same thing in other words, My tongue has spoken
in my mouth, where he describes his speech from the Instruments employed
therein, his tongue, and his mouth, or, palate. This repetition, or
diversifying of expressions, is made use of, not only to make up the Verse (for
this Book is written in Poesy) as we see Poets usually do; or to show Job that
he is even now upon the very act of speaking, and his tongue moving to bring
forth what does concern him; and consequently, that he should be careful not to
lose the tide and opportunity, through his own inadvertency. But further, he
would show Job, how considerate he was in this enterprise; His doubled
expressions serve to assure him that he had thought again and again upon it
that he was now going to speak, and to loose the tongue, that unruly member, in
a weighty and important cause; and therefore would be sure to speak advisedly,
and only that which he had tried well, as the tongue and palate taste meats,
before they let them down to the stomach. It teaches, That wise men will not
think it an easy task to order their speech well, especially to afflicted
persons, and in weighty causes; (as here, Elihu is again and again upon it.)
And when we find men circumspect, and humbled in such an undertaking upon the
account of its difficulty, we may hear them with the greater confidence: As
Elihu presses this as one Argument of attention.

Verse 3. My words shall be of the uprightness of my heart: And my lips shall
utter knowledge clearly.
The next Argument of attention (in this Verse) is taken from his purpose to
deal faithfully with him, as he had resolved, Chap. 32.21. He promises that he
shall deal sincerely in speaking to him, without passion or partiality; and
that he will speak truth clearly, or without any dross or chafe (as the word
may import) like metal that is purified, or corn that is winnowed; that is, He
will deal plainly and clearly with him, without dissembling, or going about the
bush; and will not speak upon conjectures and surmises, but will speak
demonstrative clear truths, and things whereof he had certain knowledge. It
seems that, in making this promise, he reflects upon the three Friends, who had
dealt with Job out of passion and prejudice, and made use of general, ambiguous
and parabolick sentences, in their reflections upon him, and took surmises and
false reports from others, and charged them upon him, as if he had been guilty
of them.

Doct. 1. It is men's duty to deal sincerely and uprightly with others,
especially in speaking of matters which concern their Soul, wherein it is great
cruelty not to speak truly and uprightly to them; For, says he, My words (upon
this subject) shall be of the uprightness of my heart, or, shall be the
uprightness, etc. that is, I shall speak sincerely my very heart in this
business.

2. Men have need of an upright heart who would speak sincerely and rightly to
the condition of Souls; and they should be careful that they be not biased
with prejudices, or with fear to offend them with whom they have to do: For, he
professes uprightness of heart, as the principle of his speaking right to him.
If many did examine themselves, they would find that their hearts do not go
along with what they say. They do not believe and then speak, 2 Cor. 4.13. If
they speak truth, it is but from a false heart, or coldly, and not from the
heart. And their byasses and prejudices, rather than their solid convictions,
make them speak what they speak.

3. It is not sufficient that men be of upright hearts, in what they say,
unless there be sound Doctrine and knowledge in what they say; For, says he,
My lips shall utter knowledge. See 2 Timothy 4.2.

4. Men should also speak clearly in what they say, and make the truth plain
and clear, not leaving people in the dark, or publishing surmises in stead of
verities; For, says he, My lips shall utter knowledge clearly.

5. Men ought to examine well what they are to speak, and ought to refine it in
their own minds (without taking every thing upon trust, and without trial) that
so their Doctrine may be pure and free of mistakes; For, thus also will he
utter pure and refined knowledge, as the Metaphor imports.

6. Such as speak truth freely, clearly and uprightly, ought to be heard and
attended unto; For, this is an Argument pressing attention upon Job. If even
good men consider that they may err, and need admonition, they will allow of
freedom, and will account it an act of love and kindness not to let them go
away with their faults. And they are cruel to themselves, who cannot endure to
be freely dealt with, but would still be prescribing how others should teach
and admonish them.

Verse 4. The Spirit of God has made me, and the breath of the Almighty has
given me life.
This Verse, abstracting from what follows, may contain a third Argument of
attention, That, being sensible that he is a Creature formed and quickened by
the Spirit of God, as the first man was, he will be faithful to God, his Maker,
and to him, his fellow creature; and therefore should be heard.

Doct. 1. The Holy Spirit is a Worker, with the Father, and the Son, in the
creating and forming of man; For, as all the persons of the blessed Trinity
concurred at the making of the first man, and in breathing into his nostrills
the breath of life, Genesis 1.26. and 2.7. So Elihu here acknowledges, The Spirit
of God has made me, (which seems to be understood especially of his Body) and
the breath of the Almighty has given me life, or, a reasonable Soul. This is a
work of God wherein much of him is to be seen, Psalm. 139.14.

2. A man sensible of his own infirmity, when he goes about a work of God, is
like to prosper, and ought to be attended unto; it being an evidence he will
not despise them with whom he has to do, and that he will not provoke God:
For, he propounds that he is sensible he is but a weak creature, as an Argument
why Job should hear him.

3. Such as consider their obligations to God, were it but upon the account of
their being made by him, will be faithful in their serving of him; For, this is
his motive, and an Argument that he will be faithful in publishing the truth
of God; as he professes, Chap. 36.3. that he will ascribe righteousness to his
Maker.

4. Such as do consider how easily God makes man, will from thence also gather,
how easily God can enable him, and endow him with gifts, if he please; For,
this also is an Argument why Job should not despise him, because of his youth,
seeing he was Gods workmanship as well as himself, and the Spirit, who made
him, and gave him life, could as easily furnish him with abilities.

Verse 5. If thou can answer me, set thy words in order before me, stand up.
The fourth Argument of attention (and a consequent of the former) is, That,
being sensible they were fellow creatures, he would not take advantage of his
afflictions, nor quarrel at what he should say in his own defense, so as to
interrupt him (as it seems his other Friends did) but if he had any thing to
say, he will allow him to stand up and answer, or, to take courage, and stand
to it, and reply if he can. This his frank offer does neither proceed from
insolency, nor from any doubt he had of the truth of his own cause, but serves
to testify his patience and meek condescendence to Job, that thereby he may
engage him to hearken more attentively.

Doct. 1. It is an evidence of honesty, when men desire not to prevail in their
cause, unless it be just and right; For, here he desires not Job to be of his
opinion, unless he can convince him by reason in a fair dispute.

2. Equity ought to be observed in all Disputes; and whatever respect be
otherwise due to men's eminency or gifts, yet in Disputes Parties are Peers, as
in Games all are Equals: Therefore he desires, here, that reason may only carry
it, and that neither Jobs advantages over him, in respect of eminency in
dignity or piety, nor his advantages in having to do with an afflicted man,
might bear any sway.

3. It does evidence a sound and sober Spirit, when men, how clear soever their
own light be, are content to hear the judgment and light of others; For,
though he doubted not of the truth of what he was to speak, yet, says he, If
thou can answer me, set thy words in order before me, or, order them the best
thou can, to defend thy self against my accusations.

4. A man that has a good cause, and an answer to return to what is objected
against him, may stand to it, and take courage; For, says he, Stand up, or, be
courageous and resolute, intimating that he had cause so to do, if he had truth
on his side.

Verse 6. Behold, I am according to thy wish in Gods stead: I also am formed
out of the clay.

7. Behold, My terror shall not make thee afraid, neither shall my hand be
heavy upon thee.


Some read the first part of v. 6. thus, I am, as thou, of God, the same in
substance with what follows in the Verse, and an intimation that he is his
fellow creature. But our Translation rendereth it better, and so it is the last
Argument pressing attention, and an amplification of the two preceding
Arguments, That Job could not now decline to hear him, and plead his cause with
him, if he had any thing to say, seeing, in his appearing, God had granted him
that which he had so often desired. For he had often desired to plead his cause
with God himself, provided that he would not appear terrible to him, nor bear
him down with his great power, and sad afflictions. See Chap. 9.32, -- 35. and
Chap. 13.18, -- 22. And now he had his desire; For he is ready to appear as a
Champion for God, and in his stead (having his Commission for that effect, from
an impulse of the Spirit upon him) and being of the same metal and mould with
himself (being formed out of the clay, in the creation of the first man, as
well as he) he needed not fear his terror, nor would he crush him with his
power.

Doct. 1. Men may obtain many of their passionate desires, and yet be much
humbled when they are granted; For, here Job gets his will, Behold, I am
according to thy wish (or, mouth, that which thou spoke and desiredst with thy
mouth) in Gods stead; and yet when all this is granted, he loses his cause, as
to any thing he had to plead against God, and is humbled for his miscarriages,
however he prevailed in his cause against his Friends.

2. God needs not (except he please) appear in terrible Majesty, to put
passionate men to silence; seeing he can make a weak man, like themselves, beat
them; For, however Job thought he might hazard to debate, even with God, and
might expect to prevail; yet, Elihu, a man like himself, offers to put him to
silence in Gods stead; as indeed he did, however God thought fit to appear
himself at last, that he might put the cap-stone upon what Elihu had begun to
do.

3. It is man's great mercy, that, seeing he could not endure that God should
appear in glorious Majesty, to speak to him, ( Exodus 20.18, 19.) nor the more
glorious ministry of Angels; God is pleased to employ weak men in his stead;
For, says Elihu, as a Messenger sent of God upon this business, Behold, I am
in Gods stead. Which should both teach these Messengers to deal with those with
whom they have to do, as in Gods stead, 2 Cor. 4.17. and 5.20. And should teach
others to reverence them as the Ambassadors of Christ, 1 Cor. 4.1. Gal. 4.14.
And not to despise them, because they are men of like passions; considering
that God, in employing such, condescends to the weakness of men, who cannot
admit of other Messengers.

4. Those who are employed in that eminent trust, of speaking in Gods stead,
ought to be well balanced with humility, lest, being puffed up, they fall into
the condemnation of the Devil, 1 Timothy 3.6. For, so is Elihu sensible what he
is, even formed out of the clay, when he is thus employed in Gods stead.

5. Men will be helped to humility, by considering their base and vile
Original, common to them with all men; and that (however God put some luster
and beauty upon all men, and more eminently upon some, by conferring special
gifts and employments upon them, yet) men are nothing else but (as it were) so
many bitts and parcels of that clay of which Adam's body was formed, and a
parcel of that breath which was breathed into him; For, (says he, pointing at
a special motive of humility) I also (as well as thou and others) am formed,
or, cut, out of the clay, as v. 4. he had spoken of his Soul and Life in terms
taken from the creation of the first man.

6. Such as study their base Original well, will not abuse their eminency in
any Office, to deal untenderly with persons, or to be terrible to those who are
of the same Original with themselves; Therefore he subjoynes, Behold, my
terror shall not make thee afraid; whereby, as he intimates that Job would get
satisfaction to his desire, when he wished to plead with God; So, he gives an
account of his own resolution to manage his employment equitably and tenderly.

7. It is the will of God, that no greatness, power or dreadfulness, of one
party in a debate, do prejudge truth, or the freedom of the other party in
managing their defenses; For, so much is intimated (beside his reflection on
Jobs proposals when he desired to plead with God) in this promise, My terror
shall not make thee afraid, neither shall mine hand be heavy upon thee.

Verse 8. Surely, thou have spoken in mine hearing, and I have heard the voice
of thy words, saying,

9. I am clean without transgression, I am innocent; neither is there iniquity
in me.

10. Behold, He finds occasions against me, he counts me for his enemy.

11. He puts my feet in the stocks, he marketh all my paths.


Follows, to v. 31. the Second part of the Chapter, or, the Speech it self,
to which Elihu has prepared the way by the preceding Preface. And in these
Verses we have the first part of the Speech, containing an accusation of Job,
or, a rehearsal of some of his discourses which he is to refute. Where (if we
speak of his accusation negatively, what it is not) he declines to quarrel the
state of his person, or to accuse him of any gross faults before his
afflictions, as his other Friends had done; Nor does he censure him for any
thing he had said of the greatness of his afflictions, or to the commendation
of God; Only he censures him for some unsavory expressions, of his own
integrity, and Gods dispensations toward him. And (having told him that he is
to accuse him of those expressions which himself had distinctly heard, v. 8.)
he propounds the sum of Jobs words, which he is to refute, in an excellent
method. For,

1. He propounds how Job had asserted his own integrity, both negatively and
possitively, That he was clean and innocent, and free of transgression or
wickedness, v. 9.

2. He adds how Job complained, that, notwithstanding he was thus righteous and
innocent, yet, God sought and took all occasions and advantages against him, to
deal with him as an enemy, or in an hostile way, v. 10. The word rendered,
Occasions, signifies also, Breaches, or breakings off, and it imports. That
God picked quarrels at him, and took advantages of any breach or failing he
could find in him, to break off his friendship and wonted favor, and that he
might deal with him as an enemy. He alludes to the practice of uncharitable
men, who, contrary to the Law of Love, do seek all occasions and advantages
against others, that they may ruin them. See Genesis 43.18. 2 King. 5.7. Dan. 6.5.

3. He subjoynes how Job, to prove this his complaint, had produced evidences,
taken from Gods arresting of him by painful and disgraceful afflictions (like
as a Malefactor is put in the Stocks) and his marking of all his paths, to
punish him for what should be found amiss in him, v 11.

For further clearing of this purpose, Consider,

1. This is but a part of his accusation, and of that which he has to lay to
Jobs charge; for afterward he produces more and sharper accusations against
him. Yea, his desire to argue his cause with God himself, (which Job joined
with these his complaints, here mentioned) is here also to be understood, as
afterward we will find. And so, under those expressions, here recorded, all
other the like expressions are to be understood as comprehended.

2. We are not to conceive, that Elihu cites these expressions of Job,
concerning his purity and integrity, v. 9. as minding to charge Job that he
looked upon himself as sinless, and meant so by these expressions. For Job had
professed the contrary, both of himself, Chap. 7.20, and of all men, Chap. 9.2.
and 14.4. And we will not find that Elihu did charge any thing falsely upon
Job. He only cites those as the words whereby he had expressed and maintained
his integrity; which (albeit it was a truth that he was righteous, yet these
expressions) being joined with the following complaints, did sound too high of
perfection, as if he had not so much sin in him as might silence all his
complaints of Gods severe dealing.

3. In these citations, Elihu does not stick close to Jobs words, or repeat all
those very same expressions which Job had used; He only repeats the sum and
sense of them. And (which is to be well marked) whatever was Jobs meaning in
them; yet, he repeats them so, and in that sense, which an ordinary hearer
might put upon them. Thus an ordinary hearer (hearing Job speak so much of his
righteousness, and against God who afflicted him) might be ready to interpret
his words so, as if he had said he was sinless. And albeit Jobs meaning was
good, yet his expressions were unhappy, both in his asserting his integrity,
and in his complaints subjoyned; whereof Job himself is convinced, and
therefore does not quarrel Elihu for mis-citing his words, or mistaking his
meaning in them.

4. As for those Speeches which he cites, they will be found, for the
substance of them, in Jobs discourses. We find that Elihu, v. 6, 7. alludes to
a proposal of Jobs, Chap. 13.20, 21, 22. Where in the complaint immediately
subjoyned, v. 23, -- 27. we will find the substance of what is here repeated.
His avowing of his purity, here repeated, v. 9. is there propounded by way of
question, v. 23. His complaint against God, here produced, v. 10. is there
deduced at large, v. 24, 25, 26. And his resentment (in confirmation of his
complaint) here challenged, v. 11. is there set down, v. 27. And beside, we
will find those, or the equivalent expressions, scattered throughout his other
discourses. For what is here charged upon him, v. 9. See Chap. 9.17. and 10.7.
and 13.18. and 16.17. and 19.7. and 29.14. and 27.5, 6. In all which (and
diverse other) passages, he asserts his integrity and purity, to aggravate his
complaint against God, who had dealt so severely with him. For what is here
challenged, v. 10. See Chap. 16.12, 14. and 19.11, 12. And for that, v. 11. See
(beside what is already marked from Chap. 13.) Chap. 14.16, 17.

5. It is also to be remembered, that however Jobs three Friends did challenge
him for all those speeches, and, particularly, for his pretending to purity (So
Zophar, Chap. 11.14. Eliphaz, Chap. 15.14. and Bildad, Chap. 25.4 reprehend him
for it;) Yet, they went the wrong way to work as judging either that Job meant
he was sinless, which he had often denied; or, that Job could not pretend, even
to integrity, being afflicted by God;) and therefore they could not prevail to
convince him, as Elihu did by charging those upon him only as rash and
unfitting expressions, and expressions which others might be apt to mistake,
however himself understood them.

Having already spoken, in the proper places, to this purpose as it is Jobs
complaint and resentment of the hard measure he had received; and his faults
and failings therein coming afterward to be marked from Elihu's refutation; I
shall here speak more generally to those words, in a twofold respect and
consideration.

First, We have here a pattern of a right way of reproving others, to be
gathered from Elihu's practice, who professes, that he will speak to what he
has heard, v. 8. and cites Jobs expressions in the way already spoken of, v.
9, 10, 11. And so this purpose teaches,

1. It is most safe not to meddle with the state of a man's person (whether he
be regenerate or not) or to decry all that is good in him, upon the account of
some faults; For, Elihu does not here meddle with his person, nor rejects all
his discourses, but only singles out the faulty expressions in them. So does
Christ also deal with the Churches to whom he writes, Rev. 2, and 3. commending
what is good in them, as well as reprehending their faults. It is true, Elihu
does not expressly commend Jobs state, or, assert him to be a regenerate and
justified man (his scope being only to humble him for his faults, which
required not that he should tell him so much, seeing himself knew it well
enough already, and, in some respect, but too well.) But his very restricting
of himself to the quarrelling of Jobs faults only, (and that after the former
Dispute of his Friends against his integrity, which he declines to own or
approve of) is a commendation of Job in that matter controverted betwixt him
and his Friends. The study of this may be of use, both in reference to our
selves, and to others with whom we may have to do. As for our selves, Albeit
men can warrantably take no comfort in their regenerate state, while they
please themselves in any fault; Yet, it is not good, upon conviction of faults,
to quarrel the truth of our grace, seeing the assurance and comfort that we
have a seed remaining in us, should encourage and help us to amend our faults.
And for others, As it is very hard to judge of men's estates, seeing there may
be true grace where there are many faults; So God has not made us Judges of
their estates (though many are ready to account them graceless who do not
please them in every thing) but of their visible faults; and we should cherish
any good that is in them, so far as prudence requires, that reproofs for
faults may be the better taken off our hands.

2. It is also commendable, that, in dealing with others, we be distinct, plain
and clear, in our reproofs and challenges; For, here he condescends and tells
out the faults wherewith he is displeased. It is a very great fault when men
keep their quarrels at others in a cloud; so that, though they know they are
offended, yet, they cannot know for what. This will rather contribute to the
breeding of alienations, than to the amending of faults. And albeit it be to no
purpose to use freedom with some, (where there is no hope to prevail, and men
have exonered themselves, and given up with them as incorrigible) yet,
generally, faithful freedom is good.

3. It is, also, a point of great wisdom, to deal tenderly with afflicted and
crushed men, when we have their faults to reprove; and, in prudence, not to
fall upon all their faults at once, nor on the worst first; but so to manage
reproof, as may both prevent further irritation and crushing, and yet may reach
the end: For, Elihu in this first speech, touches only upon a part of those
discourses of Job which he is to refute, and that not the worst and grossest
part. Such Patients need (as we say) a Ladies hand to touch their sores, and a
spiritual man to restore them, Gal. 6.1. for others may very readily make the
wound worse than they found it.

4. It is not only a point of wisdom (if we would have men convinced and
reformed) but even an act of justice, to beware of quarrelling men upon
jealousies, rumors and hear-sayes; For, Elihu will not meddle with Jobs
supposed faults before his afflictions, which his Friends took upon trust from
others, but were real untruths; He only reproves and refutes what was spoken in
his hearing, and those words whereof he had heard the voice; it being safest,
and most effectual for convincing of Job, to walk upon so sure a ground. Even
zeal against the greatest of faults should be guided with certainty, Deuteronomy.
13.13, 14, 15. And it is a sin, lightly to take up a reproach against our
Neighbor, Psalm. 15.3. Whereas too many make others suffer merely upon
hear-sayes, while they take every report they hear for current coin.

5. Albeit it be hard to burden men with consequences, and with that they
expressly say not, as if it were really their meaning; Yet, it is not enough
that men's sense and meaning be good, if their expressions and way be apt to be
mistaken by others, and to found such consequences: Therefore does Elihu manage
the debate thus, He holds him by Jobs words indeed, yet so as he does not
repeat them all in terminis, but in equivalent expressions, and draws
consequences from them, as if he were thereby reflecting upon the Sovereignty
of God, as is after subjoyned, and propounds them so as others might be apt to
interpret them. By which way of procedure,

1. He shows, That he will not be censorious in judging of his meaning, if he
will not own these consequences; As charity to men, in the matter of their
intentions and meaning, is very good, where it has any ground to go upon.

2. He shows, That it is but folly to jangle about words (whether it should
be Jobs expressions or his) if the matter be kept in both expressions. See 1 Timothy 6.3, 4.

3. He teaches, especially, That whatever men's meaning be, yet, they should
guard against what may be mistaken in their very way of expressing their mind.

Secondly, We may look upon these words as pointing out Jobs faults to be
refuted, and as they do let us see him to be a weak man, though his honesty
appear in the midst of his weakness. And so the words do further teach,

1. However it be hard to judge of the state of men's persons; yet, best men may
have foul faults, in their language, or other carriage, which ought not to be
palliated or passed over, because the men are good; For, here he finds faults
even in holy Job. So that it is the duty, even of good men, to be frequent in
the study of their infirmities.

2. Men ordinarily do not easily discern their faults, nor are they easily
convinced of them; For, Job had vindicated those expressions against the
exceptions of his three Friends, and yet Elihu finds him faulty in them. Men of
able parts, meeting with an unskilful Reprover, may soon acquit themselves of
what he can say, whereby they do but ensnare themselves in an opinion that they
are right. And therefore, in judging of our way, it is good to eye God and
Conscience much, which would put an end to many debates.

3. However men carry in ordinary, yet, sore trouble and sharp trials may
discover weaknesses in the best; For, it is in the time of Jobs trial that
those faults are found. Trouble is a Furnace which will discover dross; and
they who are not upon their guard then, will find the snare the greater. And as
it is good to watch and mark our failings then; so we must be careful not to
reject all as Reprobates whose weaknesses break forth at such a time: Only,
whatever pity God have for the weakness of his Children under tentation; Yet,
no humble man will give himself a dispensation to miscarry or prove weak.

4. Godly men do then most readily miscarry under trouble, when they look only
to their own integrity who are afflicted, For, albeit men may lawfully maintain
their integrity, yet Elihu, by citing Jobs expressions about it, v. 9. would
intimate to him, that he had managed that cause ill, when he looked not more to
Gods Sovereignty, and to the remainders of sin in himself. It is needful that
men under trouble have an eye upon their guilt and sin, even albeit God be but
exercising their faith, and other graces; and where there is much sincerity,
the sight of sin must not be lost, as Elihu tells him afterward. And when it is
not so, men get sinful crosses, because they do not manage more cleanly trials
well, Psalm. 51.4.

5. Men do then manage their integrity ill, when, because they are sincere,
they will not submit meekly to needful exercise and trial; For, herein did Job
miscarry, while, looking upon his integrity, v. 9. he takes it not well that
God exercised him as he did, v. 10, 11. Upright men should have no more to say
against Gods exercising of them, than if they had not such a testimony of their
integrity; but they should rather bless God that they have that testimony to
support them. A querulous and murmuring good Conscience, is, in so far, not
good.

6. Men under trouble are apt to have hard thoughts of God, and his dealing;
For, Elihu, by citing his words, v. 10, 11. does intimate that he quarrels him
for his complaints, as an injury done to God. It is not easy to keep up right
thoughts of God in times of trial; and therefore men should be upon their guard
as to that evil, and if they be kept free from it, they ought to acknowledge
that they are preserved from a great snare.

7. Godly men cannot but be sadly affected when they find God opposite unto
them, and watching over them, to mark their faults, and take all advantages
against them; For, this his complaint (though he bitter in it, yet) testifies
his honesty, that he resents that as his great affliction. Men ought to try
what affects them most in trouble, for thereby they may get a proof of their
sincerity or unsoundness.

8. It is a very great mistake to suspect God of cruelty and severity toward
his Children, under never so sad trouble; For, he quarrels Job that he should
say, God sound occasions, and counted him for his enemy; For if it were so, it
would have produced sadder effects than any he had yet felt. Godly men should
mourn when they commit so horrid injustice against God, and should be convinced
that they are in the wrong, when they hearken to such tentations, See Psalm.
77.7, 8, 9, 10. And it is the greatest have to bring us first to mourn for
these miscarriages, before we be delivered out of trouble.

9. Though Gods sharp dealing be a lesson ill to read, yet, it will not warrant
men's quarelling of him, more than if they complained without the least probable
cause; For, all those evidences, which he produces; v. 11. are no proof, nor
give him warrant to say, that God counted him for an enemy, v. 10. For even the
saddest of dispensations will not prove his enmity against Saints, but they may
consist with, and slow from, his love to them.

Verse 12. Behold, In this thou art not just: I will answer thee, that God is
greater than man.
Follows, to v. 31. the second part of Elihu's Speech, or, his refutation of
these assertions of Job; concluding this in sum, That there is no cause why a
godly man should complain, or querulously seek a reason of such dispensations;
Seeng God is not only Sovereign and absolute, v. 12, 13. but does clearly speak
more to men, by those lots, than they do well perceive or mark, v. 14, -- 30.

In this Verse, we have, 1. Elihu's general censure of Jobs speeches,
intimating, That, whatever he was as to the state of his person, or in other
things; Yet, in this he cannot but account him unjust, that (as was marked,
Chap. 32.2.) he should so justify himself, as to complain of Gods dealing
toward him a righteous man; and that he should not only desire to argue with
God (as is insinuated, v. 13.) upon that matter, but because he saw not a
reason of Gods dealing, therefore he will presumptuously conclude that there
was no reason, nor could God give any reason for it; all which may be gathered
from the following dispute.

2. We have the first Argument (whereby he refutes Job (propounded in general;
Namely, That God is greater than man. Which is to be understood, not only in
respect of his being, power, authority, etc. but also in respect of his
holiness, wisdom, and every other Attribute. And albeit Jobs Friends made ill
use of this Argument, to prove Job wicked; Yet, it proves Elihu's conclusion
strongly; Namely, That the best of men should be more humble than Job was,
before, and under the hand of, so great a God, and in their pleading with him;
and should deferr more to his wisdom and holiness, than to their own. For
whereas Job talked so much of his righteousness, and complained that he was
afflicted, being such a man; Elihu answers, That God, who had afflicted him,
was infinitely above him in the matter of righteousness, and every way greater
than he; and therefore he should have been more sober in his discourses

From this Verse, Learn, 1. In clearing of marches betwixt right and wrong, or
truth and error, men should not only make use of clear light and Arguments,
but they should set affection on work also, and strive to put conscience to it,
which would help much in debates; Therefore, before Elihu produce his
Arguments, he begins with a sharp censure of Jobs injustice in this matter;
Partly, that he may testify his own detestation of, and that he is not
dallying with, such a fault; and partly, that he may rouse up Jobs conscience
to go along with him in hearing his reasons, without which they would not
readily take deep enough impression; For if men's eminent parts and abilities
only be yoaked together in dispute, they may debate a Controversy endlesly.

2. Great meekness, prudence and wariness, ought to be observed, in judging of
men and their carriage; that as their goodness should not shelter their faults,
so their faults may not unjustly bring their real goodness in question:
Therefore does Elihu here qualify his censure, In this (whatever thou art in
other things) thou art not just; Intimating, that, as his being righteous could
not justify or assoyl him in this his unrighteous carriage; So, he would not
urge this accusation to invalidate the righteousness of his person. Of this,
and other Rules to be observed in reproofs, see more on the preceding Verses.

3. As the people of God may have foul faults, and act very unjustly; so these
faults ought to be looked upon by them in their ugliness; For, here he tells
him, he was no less than not just in this, however he was a just, and not a
wicked, man, In some cases, the faults of the people of God are less than the
faults of others, as when grace keeps them from gross miscarriages, and from
the dominion of any sin; But when they loose the reins to gross faults, their
being godly will rather heighten, than extenuate, them. Yea, some faults (such
as quarrelling of God, of which after, and diverse others) are more unseemly in
them, than any other.

4. As trouble may cause unjust things break forth, even in just men; So, in
particular, however we think we have reason for our passions, and will take a
dispensation for them to our selves, when we please, Jon. 4.9. Yet, to quarrel
and complain of Gods dispensations is an act of extreme injustice, and should
be resented as such: For, this is it, in particular, wherein he censures him as
not just. See, how the Psalmist was grieved for it, Psalm. 73.21, 22. with v.
11, 12, 13.

5. Conscientious men ought to be serious and attentive, both in marking, and
in pondering, their own carriage under trouble; For, he prefixeth a Behold, to
this censure, both to prevent Jobs inadvertency, through the heat of his
passion, and his inconstancy, or light passing over the sight of the sinfulness
of his way.

6 Albeit men, in managing of reproofs, should work upon their own affections,
and labor to rouse up the affections and consciences of those with whom they
deal; Yet, means should also be used to convince their judgments, that they
may solidly take with, and reform, what is amiss: Therefore does Elihu subjoyn
an answer (or, solid Arguments) to what he has already spoken for putting of
Jobs conscience and affections to it. Though it be good to have our affections
tender, yet they who are led and acted only by their affections, may readily
fall in snares, and do seldom prove solid in any good course.

7. A special mean of curing many evils in men, is, the knowledge of God, and
to take him up aright; For, so much does Elihu's practice teach, who, to refute
and convince Job of his miscarriages, does direct him to take notice of God,
what he is. That we serve an unknown God is the cause of much distemper, and of
many failings in our way. For hence flow distrust, especially in great
d^fficulties, Psalm. 9.10. 2 Timothy 1.12. Slavish fears, Isa. 51.12, 13. Slight
services, Mal. 1.14. and many the like evils. Yea, our ignorance of God should
be looked upon as the root of our follies and miscarriages. For when we are
taken up with delight in other things, vexed with our temporal lots, etc. we
proclaim that we do not know him, who is an All-sufficient portion, a Rock of
refuge, and infinitely more than we miss in the Creatures.

8. It is a special point of the right study and knowledge of God, to take up
his greatness; Which is so transcendent, that we can follow it no further than
to speak of it by way of negation, declaring him to be free of those
infirmities and basenesses that are in the Creatures; or by way of comparison
and eminency, declaring that he is above all; For, this is the point here
inculcated upon Job, God is greater than man. See Chap. 36.26. The study of
this,

1. Would lay man low before God, and make him appear to be Enosh, or frail
man, as here he is called, See Chap. 41.5, 6.

2. It would banish the fear of man, or apprehensions of hazards from man,
Matthew. 10.28. or any fear of his attempts against God, Exodus 18.11.

3. It would call for eminent service, Psalm. 48.1. Mal. 1.14.

4. Yea, it would encourage men in their sincere service, though it be weak,
seeing he is great, and so needs not us, or our service.

Doct. 9. A special use to be made of the greatness of God, above men, is, to
press men to stoop under Gods afflicting hand, and to beware of murmuring
against his dealing; For, here this Doctrine is brought in to refute and
condemn all his complaints, ^ven albeit he should not be able to see through
all the particulars of Gods dealing about him. If we take Gods greatness in its
full latitude (as it comprehends his infinite greatness in every Attribute, as
well as in power and authority) we will find that it may silence all our
quarellings. And albeit this be a principle commonly known and acknowledged
(and Job has often acknowledged it in this Book) yet it is not strange to see
men, in their practices, contradict what they acknowledge, and even, upon the
matter, raze the very foundations; As Job did here by his ill improvement of
this principle in his practice. Thus men will acknowledge, That God is great,
yet what worm is there (for the most part) that will submit willingly to him,
any farther than themselves please? They will acknowledge, that he is
infinitely wise; yet, who do lay their hand upon their mouth, and adore, when
they cannot see a reason of his dealing? Or who trusts his wisdom in guiding
of them, and in carving out their lots, better than their own understanding?
They will acknowledge, that he is infinitely holy above men; yet, who are not
ready to grudge (as if he acted unjustly) when they see him afflict the godly,
and suffer the wicked to prosper? And who are not more ready to quarrel his
dispensations, than to see their own faults, which need exercise to purge them
out? In a word, how few do submit to his precepts, as the sure and compendious
way to happiness? Or submit to his will in lots, accounting them good and
necessary, even because he dispenses them? How few do commend his goodness,
wisdom and righteousness, in all things; and do not rather carp when they are
not satisfied? Who ascribes to him Sovereignty in wisdom, to guide all
affairs? And Sovereignty in grace, to be free in his Communications, and to
work for his Names sake in behalf of his people, etc? Hence,

1. We should mourn for our short coming in those and the like practices, and
that we should thereby, upon the matter, deny our very common principles.

2. When we cannot see into the particular reasons of his dispensations, it
becomes us to give him glory, by our submission and acquiescence in his will,
were it but upon this general account, that God is greater than man.

3. If our weakness do over-drive us into passions and complaints, we should
mourn for them as our sin, and endeavor to retard the current of them, by
ascribing unto God the glory of his Attributes, even when we cannot reconcile
his Dispensations with those Attributes; As the Prophet proclaims God to be
righteous, even when his weakness would quarrel his dispensations, Jer. 12.1.

Verse 13. Why do thou strive against him? For he gives not account of any
of his matters.
This Argument, taken from the greatness of God, is here specially pressed and
instanced in the matter of his supreme Dominion and Sovereignty over all his
Creatures; so that he is bound to give no account of any of his proceedings.
From which he infers, That it was Jobs folly to strive and contend with God
as he did. This is the great Argument so frequently pressed afterward by Elihu,
and insisted upon by God himself, That God has not tied himself to observe any
Rules (especially those which men would presume to prescribe unto him) in his
dispensations, but has absolute and uncontrollable authority to dispose of all
things according to the pleasure of his own will; and consequently, he may
afflict even godly men, not only for chastening and purging out the remainders
of sin in them, but that he may give a proof of his absolute dominion, and put
their graces to a trial; and he may also permit wicked men to prosper, without
giving an account to any of the reasons why he does so. For further clearing of
the words, Consider,

1. To strive, or, contend, with God, does here import not only not to submit,
but even to complain and murmur at his dispensations, as the words cited, v.
10, 11. intimate to have been Jobs practice; and to seek to have an account of
the reasons thereof, as Job frequently desired to know why God dealt so with
him. See Chap. 10.2. and 23.3, 4, 5.

2. The word here rendered, Matters, signifies also, Words, and accordingly
some read thus, He speaks not all his words, or, tells not all his mind in
his dispensations. The scope of this is the same with our reading; but seeing
the word rendered, to give an account, properly signifies, to answer, or, give
a return to a question or a proposal, the other word is here more fitly
rendered, Matters; and the whole purpose imports this, That he is not bound to
be accountable to man for his matters and proceedings, or to stand at his Bar,
and answer all his cavillations and exceptions against them.

3. Where it is here said, that he gives not account of any of his matters, the
Original has it, He gives not account of all his matters. But that phrase, in
this Language, is equivalent to an universal negative, That he gives not
account of any of all his matters, or, affairs in the World. And so the phrase
is used, Psalm. 147.20. where, that he has not dealt so with all Nations (as it
is in the Original) beside Israel, who are excepted, v. 19. does not import,
that he has dealt so with some Nation beside them, though not with all; but
that he dealt not so with any Nation beside, as it is well rendered. See also,
Psalm. 143.2. and 103.2. and 76.6. Romans 3.20. and many the like, in the Original
Language. And if we take the Original phrase here as it sounds, it will both
conclude what is here expressed, and intimate something further for clearing of
this purpose. For it may import,

1. That if he give not an account of all his matters (and that because he is
the Sovereign and great Lord, v. 12.) then certainly, upon the same reason, he
is not bound to give account of any of them, whatever he condescend to do in
some cases, as is intimated, v. 14. And if he be not bound to give an account,
and his giving an account (where we must take the phrase in a large sense, as
also afterward) or pointing out the reasons of any of his proceedings, flow
merely from his own good pleasure; it will necessarily follow, that if any will
put him to it, as Job did, he will maintain his Sovereign Dominion by giving no
account of any thing.

2. That though he give an account of the reasons of some of his proceedings,
whereby he testifies his gracious condescendence to man; Yet he still
manifests and keeps up his Dominion, by not giving an account of all things he
does, but wrapping up many of them in thick darkness, as the instances,
afterward produced by God himself, do make manifest; among which mysteries of
Divine Providence, his afflicting of godly men (which is the case here in
debate) is a remarkable one.

3. Even where God condescends to give an account of his matters in part, yet
men see not all these matters, but there are still depths and mysteries, even
in what is most obvious; and therefore God puzzle^h Job with questions about
common things, Chap. 38. and in the rest of his speeches. But it is not needful
to insist upon any of these, seeing (whatever God condescend to do) this phrase
(as has been said) does not import any such condescendence. Only, it is to be
remembered, That Gods not giving an account of any of his matters, does not
import, that he reveals nothing of his mind concerning any of his
dispensations; For the contrary is clear from the tenor of the Scriptures, and
from what is subjoyned, v. 14. etc. But the scope of the phrase is, to point
out his Sovereignty, and that he is above all Law, nor will he submit himself
to man's Tribunal or censure in any thing that he does; however carping man
presume (upon the matter) to put him to it.

From this Verse, Learn, 1. It is a sure and undoubted truth, that matters and
transactions are Gods, and that all that is done in the World is of him; For,
that is fixed here, That all are his matters. We should not lose a sight of him
and his Providence in the World, and in what comes to pass, seeing he
condescends to number the very hairs of his peoples head, Matthew. 10.30.

2. The true state of the question betwixt God and carping man, is, not,
whether Gods dispensations in the World, and toward the Carper, proceed upon
holy and wise reasons; But, whether God be bound to reveal those reasons, and
submit them to his censure, and, whether he be capable to comprehend and take
them up, if God should reveal them? For, the question here is not, whether
there be a sufficient account to give, but whether he should give this account
to Job, or any other, or not? And, indeed, however God be pleased to exercise
his Sovereignty, in keeping up his counsels, and however man be incapable and
unable to comprehend them, if they were revealed; Yet were the reasons of his
dispensations seen and considered, they might silence all our cavillations and
complaints.

3. God is Sovereign and Supreme to do what he pleases, without being
accountable to any; For, here it is his Prerogative, not to give account of his
matters, nor to be called to an account by any for them (as Inferiors are
accountable to their Superiors) seeing he owes nothing to any, nor can do
them wrong (as being Supreme above all Law) nor has he any Superior, to call
him to an account. This may not only condemn them, who presume to bring all the
deep counsels of God, about man, to the Bar of their corrupted reason (a
presumptuous undertaking, checked by the Apostle, Romans 9.19, 20.) But it may
teach the people of God, that it is their duty to study well, that they have to
do with an absolute and uncontrollable Lord. Hence,

4 The study of Gods Dominion and Supremacy is sufficient to quiet the minds of
men, under dispensations for which they can see no other reason; For, here,
that he gives not account of his matters, is an Argument sufficient to silence
all his murmurings. Thus Eli submitted, considering this, It is the Lord, 1 Samuel 3.18. It is true, there are many other reasons (as Elihu urges other
Arguments afterward) which may refute men's passionate complaints; Namely. That
we deserve nothing but what is evil at Gods hands; That temporal afflictions
are not of that moment, that we should quarrel God about them, or complain of
them, considering that they are but temporal, and do Saints good, and are their
common and usual lot; That those murmurings and complaints (beside that they
dishonor God) do expose us to manifold tentations of further sinning, do
hinder the exercise of grace, and indispose us for duties, etc. Yet when all
those other reasons are obscured (as may come to pass in an hour of tentation,
or under cleanly trials) this Argument remains still, written as with a beam of
the Sun, to refute all those miscarriages. Yea, those other Arguments will not
so effectually prevail, till this be also taken along. It is also true, that,
notwithstanding the Sovereignty of God do shine in his dispensations, men may
warrantably pray to him for deliverance from a sad Lot, and may use lawful
means to have it removed; Yet still they ought (in all humble respect to his
Sovereign Dominion) to forbear quarrelling, albeit he do not only afflict them,
but render all the means of deliverance ineffectual. And for this end, it
should be considered, That all boisterous thoughts of heart under trouble do
reflect upon his Sovereignty, and do evidence that men have forgotten that God
is the Potter, and they are the clay. And if men will not submit to Gods
Sovereignty, as a sufficient reason why he may afflict them when he pleases,
they may get the conscience of their own gross miscarriages to grapple with,
which may stop their mouths under saddest afflictions. In a word, such as
acknowledge Gods Sovereignty, will learn to be made and marred as God pleases,
and will make it their work, not to dispute or quarrel, but to obey, stoop and
submit in all things, wherewith he is pleased to exercise them.

5. Whatever be the absolute Sovereignty of God, or his infinite wisdom about
man; Yet, man has no will to yield and submit to him; but would be carping and
quarrelling; For, so was it with Job here in his complaints, which calls for
this refutation. Man naturally has no will to be afflicted (no oratry or
motives will easily persuade him, to stoop to it) or to be at the disposal of
another. Yea, since the fall of Adam, it sticks in man's throat (as a Pill he
cannot easily swallow) to acknowledge a Lord over him, Psalm. 12.4. And he is
bent to follow forth that design, hatched by our first Parents, Genesis 3.5, 6. to
be a God himself, not only in knowing good and evil, but in every other thing.

6. Whosoever will not stoop and submit to the Sovereignty of God, and to his
wisdom in carving out their lots, they make God their party, and do fall a
striving and contending with him; For, here Job is charged with striving, or,
contending against God, because he submitted not to his good pleasure, who
gives no account of his matters. As men are naturally bent to strive with God,
Numb. 20.13. in the matter of his commands, provoking him by disobedience, 1
Cor. 10.22. and in the matter of his promises, by unbelief, Exodus 17.7. so also
in the matter of his dispensations, by impatient murmuring. All bitterness of
Spirit under trouble (let us pretend to direct it as we will, against
Instruments, etc.) is, in effect, an opposition to God, and a striving with
him, yea, and worse than the affliction it self. For,

1. It will neither mitigate, nor remove, the trouble, it may well continue and
augment it. See Job 34.33.

2. It hinders our making use of trouble, by reason of that fruitless exercise.

3. God is too hard a party for us to grapple with, Is. 45.9. 1 Cor. 10.22. And,

4. If we make him our party and enemy, to sadden us under trouble; who will
make us glad, and comfort us over it?

Doct. 7. When men come to themselves, their own reason and consciences will
tell them, that to contend with the Sovereign Lord, is an irrational and absurd
course; For, he puts Job to it, Why do thou strive against him? For he gives
not account of any of his matters. Intimating, That (upon the former reasons
and considerations, and others like them) God has a party to plead for him,
within every man's bosom, which he can waken and employ when he pleases; That
every contender and complainer against God is self-condemned, if he would but
exercise his wit and conscience to consider of his way; and, That a contender
and complainer is so far transported with his own passion, that he has not
the use of his reason, but needs to be put to it, to ponder what he is doing,
and why he does it.

Verse 14. For God speaks once, yea, twice, yet man perceives it not.
Follows, to v. 31. the second Argument, whereby Elihu refutes Jobs
complaints, of Gods severe dealing with him, who was a righteous man. And as in
the former Argument, he showed, That God, by reason of his Sovereignty, was not
bound to give an account of his matters; So, here he shows, That, however God
be not bound, yet, he condescends to give a better account of his mind and ends
in his dispensations, than men take notice of, or improve; So that they have
rather cause to complain of themselves, their uncapableness and unfruitfulness,
than to complain of God. And this Argument he prosecutes at length, that he may
take occasion to give some further account of Gods mind in troubles and
afflictions.

In this Verse, we have this Argument more generally propounded, both as to
Gods condescendence, and man's unfruitfulness, That God speaks his mind oftener
than men perceive it. And for clearing of the words, Consider,

1. For the matter which God is here supposed to speak to man, it is of his
matters, v. 13. so far as it concerns, or is profitable for, man to know, in
order to his Souls good, as the enlargement of this Argument makes clear.

2. For the manner of his speaking, or the means, whereby he communicates his
mind to man, the following instances clear, that he speaks both by his Word
(extraordinarily revealed by visions, v. 15. or dispensed in ordinary way by
Ministers, v. 23.) and by afflictions, v. 19. Under which (though Elihu's
present scope lead him to speak only of afflictions) all other dispensations of
Providence are to be comprehended, by which God speaks his mind to men.

3. As for his frequency in speaking, while it is said, God speaks once, yea,
twice, and that he works twice, thrice, (which is translated, oftentimes) v.
29. it is not to be restricted to any certain number (though afterward three
means of Gods speaking be instanced, by Visions, Sickness, and a Ministry) but
the meaning is, That (which soever of these ways he speak) though it were
enough if he spoke but once, yet he is pleased to speak more frequently, though
after frequent warnings, (once, twice, or thrice) he may give over to warn any
more. Some understand it thus, That if God speak once, and men perceive it not,
he will speak again, till men take it up. And it is true, that God does pursue
his people with instructions, till they learn their lesson; yea, God will also
speak at last to the wicked, in a language which they will understand, however
now they slight many warnings and instructions. But that is not the scope which
Elihu aims at in this Argument; but rather to give a check to man's quarrelling
of God, while himself is rather ignorant, even after all those admonitions.

4. For man's not perceiving, when God speaks, albeit, in the first place, it be
meant of his ignorance, or inadvertency, in taking up those frequent warnings;
Yet it includes also (as a consequent and effect of the former) his not
improving, or making use of that, which, possibly, he may perceive of Gods
mind, when he speaks.

In this Verse (that I may more distinctly speak to it) we may consider,

First, The connection and dependence of this Verse upon the former, held out in
the Particle, For. Some do here translate it otherwise (as judging there is no
connection betwixt this and the other Argument) and instead of, For, they read,
When, or, Albeit, which the word does also signify. And so the whole Verse
will run thus, When God speaks, or, Albeit God speak -- yet man perceives it
not, or, he (that is, man, as is well supplied in the Translation) does not
perceive, or, contemplate it. But I shall follow our Translation, as conceiving
that this Argument serves not only to prove the principal Conclusion, but is an
amplification of the former Argument also. And the Connection may be taken up in
these two,

1. Why should God give an account of his matters, v. 13. seeing man does not
perceive, what he is pleased to reveal, and give him some account of? Which
teaches, That the ill use men make of what they receive, is the ready way to
obstruct and hinder their getting of more.

2. If men perceive not what is obvious, and revealed to them for their
instruction, v. 14. why should God give them an account of his deep counsels?
v. 13. This is Gods own Argument, which he afterward presses by many
instances, to convince Job of his presumption and folly, in desiring to plead
with him. And it teaches, That our blindness and inadvertency in many obvious
things may silence our quarrellings, when God keeps us in the dark in other
things.

Secondly, Consider the general scope of this Argument, which is, To lead Job
from quarelling of God about his afflictions, and his being kept ignorant of
the reasons thereof, to accuse himself of ignorance and inadvertency. It
teaches,

1. It is an usual fault in men to complain of God and his dealing, when
themselves are to blame; For, here he shows, That, however Job complained of
Gods way, and that he could not see a cause of his dealing toward him, yet, God
had rather cause to complain, that he saw so ill what he had revealed
concerning it. Thus the hearts of many fret against the Lord, when their own
foolishness has perverted their way, Prove. 19.3. And the Lord, Ezekiel. 18.23.
declares, That that people reasoned ill, when they said, His ways were not
equal, when indeed their ways were unequal. Thus also men are apt to complain
of sharp rods, when they should complain of their own boily skins, or, their
want of mortification, casting away of strength, etc. which make the rod
grievous. In a word, as Hagar had a Well near her in her distress, though her
eyes were not open to discern it, Genesis 21.15, -- 19. So in many of our
distempers and grievances, we have a cure very near us, if we saw it, even
within, by the change of our dispositions, more mortification and encouragement
in God, etc.

2. Whatever needful humbling there be, through want of light, under trouble;
yet light is not men's greatest want in such a case; For, that is the particular
wherein Elihu asserts, that Job wanted not instruction and means of light,
however he complained. Thus the Lord answers the question of Hypocrites, Mich.
6.6, 7, with 8. So that when Saints do mistake troubles, or mistake God because
of their troubles, or when they think they have cause to run away from God
because he has afflicted them, or do sit idle under the Cross, as not knowing
what to do, etc. they do but evidence that their own petted and peevish Spirits
have bemisted themselves. For Gods mind has been often spoken to those
businesses, if men would employ his Spirit for grace to take it up.

Thirdly, Consider the matter of this Argument, as it contains this general
challenge against man, That God speaks and reveals his mind to him, (by his
Word and Dispensations) and yet he perceives it not. It teaches,

1. Albeit the Lord will have men to acknowledge his Sovereignty, yet he deals
not always at that rate with them; For, albeit he be not bound to give account
of any of his matters, v. 13. yet he condescends to speak of those things to
man Albeit he keep up mysteries, yet so much is said to man, as is needful for
him to know, Job 28.28. And even when dispensations are dark, yet something of
Gods mind concerning them is revealed. We need not fear Gods exercising of his
Sovereignty, where we do meekly stoop, Job 23.6. and 37.23. Psalm. 99 4. We may
hazard much upon him, and stoop to dark dispensations, when we consider how
much is made clear unto us.

2. There is nothing can make a dispensation intollerably sad, if it speak and
have a lesson to us; nor is ou^ condition hopeless, so long as God is in
speaking terms; For, whereas Job complained of it, as a sad case, that he knew
not what God said or meant by all he did to him, Elihu gives him this as a
comfort, that God speaks, or was in speaking terms, and inculcating some
lesson thereby. See Psalm. 94.12 Dispensations are very terrible when they are
dumb, and nothing is said by God under them, as 1 Samuel 28 5, 6. Which they have
need to look to, to whom neither word nor rod speak any thing.

3. As God is still speaking by his Word, to them who enjoy it; So there are
none of his dispensations, if they be well read, but they say somewhat to us;
and even those of them which are most dark and wherein his Sovereign dominion
shines most, have lessons in them, if it were but to teach us submission; For,
he asserts it as universally true, that God speaks to man. Thus all the works
of Creation and Providence, Mercies and Crosses, do preach some instruction.
See Ps. 19.1, 2. Mic. 6.9. Eccles. 7.14. And therefore we should not only see
what God does, but observe what God says by it, as his Messenger. Nor are we
to mistake, though it seem to speak reproof only, and no comfort; for if that
be well improved, it will produce comfort at last.

4. It is nothing strange to see God say much, when yet man does little
perceive it; For, that is the challenge here. As for men's perceiving of what he
speaks by the Word, it will come to be spoken of in its own place, v. 16. But
as for his dispensations (and particularly, afflictions, which are principally
intended here, and afterward instanced) not only are they, oft-times, not at
all considered, Is. 42.25. Hos. 7.9. but read wrong, when they are considered,
2 Chronicles. 28.23. Jer. 44.17, 18. And hence it comes to pass, that dispensations
are but ill improved, and the bad fruits thereof are but answerable to men's
inadvertency, ignorance, or error, in observing of them, Is. 1.5. and 9.9, 10.
and 22.12, 13. Hos. 5.13. and 7.14, 16. Now it is nothing strange, as to see
the natural man not perceive the things of God, 1 Cor. 2.14. So, even to see
godly men ignorant of, or mistaking God in his dispensations (like Samuel, who
ran to Eli, when God called him) as Job did here mistake, perceiving somewhat,
but not rightly, and because of that did miscarry. Hence we find Saints made
sensible of their own bruitishness in the things of God, Prove. 30.2, 3.
particularly, in reading and ^mproving the dispensations of God, Ps. 73.21, 22.
with v. 11, 12, 13, 14. Now these mistakes, ignorances, and the fruits
following thereupon, may flow from those (among other) causes,

1. An aversion to affliction, or to the dispensation under which we are. This
so stupifieth and distempers some, that when once that is made their lot, they
can advert to nothing else, but are madded like wild bulls in a net, Is. 51.20.

2. Inadvertency and levity of Spirit; Whence it comes to pass, that men lay
not their condition to heart, Is. 42.25. especially, if the matter wherewith
they are exercised be light.

3. Selfishness; Whence it comes to pass, that, if dispensations do not nearly
touch men themselves (even though they concern the Nation, or common interests
wherein they are also concerned) they do not lay them to heart, Is. 5.11, 12.
Am. 6.3, 4, 5, 6. So that if the goad be not still in their own sides, they are
sensible of nothing.

4. Idols, byasses, and unsound principles; Whence it comes to pass, that (as
the Proverb has it, As the Fool thinks, so the Bell clinks, or sounds that in
his ears) men do read Providential dispensations, not as God speaks by them,
but as themselves are affected, and according to the Idol of their own hearts.
Thus Ahaz, 2 Chronicles. 28.23. and those Jews, Jer. 44.17, 18. being possessed with
this principle, That the prospering way was only right and approved, they put a
wrong Commentary upon Gods Providence.

5. Ignorance; Whence it comes to pass, that men run away from God because of
some dispensations, which he has sent of purpose to bring them to him.

6. Atheism, and men's losing a sight of Providence in what occurrs in the
World; Whence it comes to pass, that men read what they please in their lots,
and never enquire after Gods mind in them. See Ezekiel. 9.9. and Zeph. 1.12.

7. When men go not to the Word, and gather Gods mind in his dispensations
from it, they will walk in the dark, and multiply mistakes? For they to whom
chastenings are blessed, must be taught out of the Law, Ps. 94.12.

8. Men do, oft-times, involve themselves in darkness and mistakes, because
they make use of false Perspectives, in reading Gods dispensations; Thus many
do look upon their lots, as their passion, and pride, and the conscience of
their own ill deservings, do represent them unto them; Yea, they look more to
what the dispensation says, or is like to produce, of it self, than to what
God says, or will do, by it.

9. While men do not consider that God speaks diverse lessons by one
dispensation (as in Jobs case, God preached both submission to his Sovereignty,
and humiliation for sin, thereby; and frequently humiliation and comfort may be
designed in one and the same dispensation) they do lose or neglect one part or
other of their lesson. From all this we may gather, That men should be humbled
for these causes of their mistakes; That they should employ God much, for light
to help them to understand his dispensations, otherwise they will wander; and,
That they should make much use of the Word, which only is the true Commentary
to expound dispensations.

Fourthly, Consider this Argument as it is amplified, and the challenge
aggravated, from this consideration, That God condescends to speak once, yea;
twice, or frequently, and yet man comes no better speed in perceiving of it. It
teaches,

1. It proclaims the Lords great condescendence and kindness, that he does not
take neglecters of means of instruction at their first word; but follows them
with mean after mean, and with frequent renewing of the means, to cause them
learn their lesson, and receive instruction: For, he not only speaks once,
but, yea, twice; where a certain number is put for an uncertain, importing,
that he speaks frequently. See Is. 28.13. Ps. 62.11. It is great mercy, that
God (who is not bound to any) speaks, if it were but once, and men should be
afraid to neglect the very first admonition, Heb. 3.7, 8. seeing they have no
assurance, that, after he has spoken once, he will speak any more; and the way
of propounding this here, first once, then twice, or, the second time, imports,
that men should be serious to hearken at every time he speaks, as not knowing
if they shall meet with the like again: Yet, such is the graciousness of God,
that he overcomes men's evil with his goodness, and waits upon those who neglect
his warnings, till there be no remedy. See 2 Chronicles. 36.15, 16. Is. 65.2. And
this he does, partly, to reclaim his own elect, whom he will not lose; partly,
to render others inexcusable. Yea, what should become of the World, if he did
not wait upon it, and by his long suffering lead it to repentance? Romans 2.4.
Would it not have been consumed and destroyed long ago, as he dealt with the
old World before the flood? And therefore men should consider, how often he
would gather them, Matthew. 23.37. And they should look upon his chastening of
them seven times, and yet seven times more, as speaking his love, if they will
at last accept the punishment of their iniquity, Lev. 26.

2. It is man's great sin, and an evidence of the power of corruption in him,
that many means, and those frequently applied, do not prevail with him; For,
though God speak once, yea, twice, yet man perceives it not. It is a sin, if
we consider it in it self, not to consider the works of the Lord, or those
dispensations whereby he reveals his mind to man, Ps. 28.5. And therefore it
must be an heinous sin, not to improve those means, when they are frequently
repeated, as 1 King. 11.9. Which, as it may humble godly persons, who are
guilty of it, and may aggravate the fault of all, who neglect frequently
inculcated lessons; So, such despisers of their own mercy would beware lest the
long-suffering of God wait no longer upon them. For though he condescend to
speak not only once, but twice, or thrice, (as it is v. 29.) that so he may
fully declare his mind, and leave men without all excuse; yet, he will not
speak always. See Genesis 6.3.

Verse 15. In a dream, in a vision of the night, when deep sleep falls upon
men, in slumbrings upon the bed.
Elihu proceeds to prosecute this Argument, (to v. 30.) as to Gods part in it;
instancing some of those various means whereby he speaks his mind to men: Such,
as dreams and visions, and the like extraordinary ways, to v. 19. Sickness, to
v. 23. and a Ministry concurring therewith, to v. 29. And withal, he not only
clears, that God speaks by these means, but shows also what he speaks, even
to draw men to repentance, to cure their pride, and teach them to make more use
of imputed righteousness. His scope in all which, is, not only to prove what he
had said, v. 14. of Gods speaking to man; but, that by declaring, what God
speaks, he may make out the other branch of that assertion, v. 14. that man
does little perceive what God speaks to him. For albeit he speak nothing
expressly to this challenge; Yet if the lessons here propounded, which are
inculcated by those means and ways of Gods speaking, shall be compared with
the practice of most of men, and even of godly men, it will easily be seen, how
deficient they are in observing and improving those instructions. And withal,
he does hereby give an account of Gods method in speaking to men, that he comes
to speak by rods and afflictions, when visions are not hearkened unto.

The only difficulty to be cleared here, is, Whether in all this long
discourse, concerning the various ways and means of Gods speaking to men, and
the instructions communicated by these means, Elihu do reflect upon Job? And he
seems indeed to point at his sickness, and at himself as sent a Messenger and
Interpreter to him, and there was a vision also concerning him, Chap. 4.12, 13,
etc. had it been well applied. To clear this a little, Consider,

1. Albeit it be true, that unrenewed men may have dreams and visions from God,
to warn, reprove, or restrain them from evil, Genesis 20.3. and 31.24. Matthew.
27.19. to warn them of things to come, Genesis 40, and 41. Dan. 2. and for other
ends; and albeit God may make use of visions, afflictions, and the Ministry, to
convert men to himself; Yet, in those instructions here given by these means,
Elihu must be understood to speak with relation to godly men; otherwise he
should not speak to Jobs case and complaint.

2. As Job and his Friends did, oft-times, speak to the matter in Thesi, and
Elihu's Argument, v. 14. is also general; So those instances may also be looked
on in Thesi; as relating to godly men in general; and although all that is said
here should not agree to Jobs case, yet it is sufficient for confirmation and
illustration of the Argument, if it hold true in general, of godly men.

3. Whatever of this purpose may be applied to Job, yet it is certain that Gods
great end in afflicting him, was not to chasten him for any notorious
miscarriage formerly committed; but only to give a proof of his own Sovereign
dominion, and to take a trial of Jobs faith and other graces. And accordingly,
God himself (when he comes to speak) never quarrels Job for any fault before
his trouble, but only for his miscarriage under it; and argues with him upon
the point of Soveraign^y and wisdom, as Elihu had done in the former A^gument.

4. This being laid as the chief business in all this trial of Job, we may yet
look upon what Elihu says here, as very suitable to Jobs case. For albeit God
was pursuing no quarrel against Job, yet he had infirmities, and needed to be
humbled, to renew his repentance, and close more with Christ for righteousness,
as the fruit both of extraordinary visions, afflictions, and the documents he
was to give him as a Messenger sent from God to him. And had Job been busy
about this exercise, he would never have complained of his afflictions as
causeless, nor that God was an enemy because of them. In sum, However some of
these instructions after-mentioned, yea, all of them, may reach and concern
unrenewed men, in their full latitude; Yet here they are propounded as lessons
to be daily learned by every godly man, which if Job had perceived, he might
have seen cause to forbear his complaints.

In this Verse, we have the first mean whereby God speaks his mind to man (unto
which the teaching and instructions communicated thereby, are subjoyned in the
three following Verses) and that is, Dreams and Visions in the night, either
when men are in a deep sleep, or slumbring only betwixt sleeping and waking. We
find in Scripture (and frequently in the writings of the Prophets) that Visions
were Revelations given to men when awake, and so are distinct from Dreams,
whereby God reveals his mind to men when they are asleep, Numb. 12.6. But here
a Vision is joined with a Dream, and is given unto men, when they are sleeping.
And albeit it may be conceived, that the dream comes when men are in a deep
sleep, and the vision when they are slumbring; Yet it seems rather, that the
vision here is only an apputenance of the dream, and does signify those
representations of things (such as Joseph, Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezzar, and others,
had) which men have in their dreams, whether they be in a deep sleep, or
slumbring only. However, under this mean, here mentioned, all the extraordinary
ways (beside that of Gods sending extraordinary Prophets, or Messengers, of
which, v. 23.) of Gods revealing his mind, then in use, are comprehended. And
here also it appears, that this Book contains an History of things that were
before Moses time. For here there is no mention of a written Law, or Word of
God; but those extraordinary Revelations (whether immediately, to the persons
who were themselves concerned, or mediately, to his Servants and Messengers,
who did reveal the same to others) past for the Word of God. See Chap. 6.10.
and 23.12. and 28.28.

Doct. 1. It is the great mercy of the people of God, that they want not
manifestations of him, nor revelations of his will, within time; For, here is
supposed, that God had, from the beginning of the World, and before the
Scripture was written, his his mind one way or other communicated, and an
intercourse kept up betwixt him and his people; which is a mercy to be much
prized, Ps. 147.19, 20.

2. It speaks, also, the great mercy and kindness of God, that when he has any
thing to say to his people, he speaks it first by his Word, before he make use
of other means; For, Elihu propounds this as the first mean whereby God speaks
to man, and when God comes to make use of other means, it is because this is
not well entertained, as we will hear afterward.

3. Such is Gods love to his people, that when they need a manifestation of
him, or of his mind, he will make use of extraordinary means, before they want
it; As here God spoke in an extraordinary and immediate way, before the
Scriptures were written. Now it has pleased the Lord to change this way, not
only to teach us to submit to make use of ordinary means, and that he may
magnify his power, in working by ordinary means what at any time was wrought
by extraordinary means, and making a word of the Scriptures no less effectual
to shake or comfort an heart, than if he yet spoke immediately, by visions and
dreams, or above from Heaven. But because these extraordinary ways were
terrible (as Job 4.12, 13, 14. and we read how Daniel was affright^d and
affected with them) and more apt to be corrupted by delusions, and were
actually imitated and counterfeited by Satan; Therefore God made choice to
speak more mediately by his written Word, which is a way more familiar and
sweet, more sure, 2 Pet. 1.19. and more fit to perpetuate truth in the World,
than the transmitting of these Visions, and immediate Revelations by Tradition,
John 21.23. and yet speaks no less particularly to them who are concerned, than
when visions and dreams were given to particular men, and directed to them by
name; as the Spirit by Solomon speaks particularly to the persecuted Hebrews
(to you) who were not in the World many ages after the Book of Proverbs was
written, Heb. 13.5. However, Gods way then with his people (though changed now)
intimates, that, though he need not make use of extraordinary means, nor should
we tempt him by looking for them, John 4.48. yet God will not leave his
promises unfulfilled, nor his peoples necessities unsupplyed, though he should
do it in a singular way.

4. It is also to be observed, that God has variety of ways and means,
whereby he can communicate his mind to his people; As here (beside those
after-mentioned) he has dreams, and visions sometime joined with dreams; under
which (as has been said) all the extraordinary ways of Revelation, then in
use, are comprehended; whether they were internal illuminations, without any
visible representations, or visions to men awake, or dreams (and those
accompanied with visions) to men asleep, or voices from Heaven, etc. In all
which, we are to observe, That God (so to say) kept many doors patent, that
he might be frequent, and throng in his converse with his people, and might
make them ashamed for their conversing so little with him, which we are also to
observe and make use of, in the means yet continued with us. Withal, this
variety and change of means (God sometime sp^^king one way, and sometime
another) served to keep men from formality, or looking only to one mean, that
they might wait upon him in all of them. And it may teach us, that when known
issues do fail us, in that way wherein God ordinarily walks toward his people,
we need not be discouraged, seeing he has variety of means whereby he can do
us good; And when he deals not with us, as he was wont to do, we need not fear
but he will do us no less good in another way.

5. The Lord would also have it most conspicuous how little of his peoples
activity is to be seen in the kindnesses whereof they are made partakers; As
here a sleeping man can contribute nothing to such an immediate Revelation. And
this holds good in other things also, That we may expect that from God,
according to his word, which nothing in us can assure us of; and, That God
delights to manifest much of himself, where little of us, or of our activity,
does appear.

6. The Lord also is pleased to tryst his people with surprizals, and
inexpected proofs of himself; As those dreams and visions came when men had no
thoughts of them. See Genesis 16.13. and 28.11, 16. Luke 5.5, 6. Mic. 4.10, 11,
12. God delights to make his people ashamed of their unbelief, and to
disappoint their fears, by proofs of his love in unlikely times and lots. And
withal, though such Revelations are not now to be expected, yet, this
teaches, That men should always be in a spiritual frame, and particularly,
should go to sleep in a good frame, seeing God (if he please) can communicate
his mind to them, even then.

7. This also may be marked, That when God made use of these means (especially
dreams, and some visions) though they left some impression upon the mind, yet
sometime men understood not the things pointed at thereby; as we read of
Pharaoh and Nebuchadnezzars dreams, Daniels visions, and others the like.
Hereby (as the Lord sometime made way for advancing some of his servants, for
the good of his Church; as Joseph was advanced in Pharaohs Court, and Daniel in
Nebuchadnezzars Court, because they interpreted their dreams. See Dan. 2.30.
So,) the Lord would point out, that his lessons are very deep, and not soon
perceived; that their being dark to his people, that they may be humbled, and
put to employ him, is no evidence of his displeasure; and that we should
observe the double mercy there is, in getting his mind revealed, and in our
getting the understanding thereof.

Verse 16. Then he opens the ears of men, and seals their instruction.
Elihu, having propounded this first mean of Gods speaking, proceeds (in
pursuance of his Argument, v. 14.) to show both that God speaks thereby, v. 16.
and what he speaks, or designs by his speaking, (whereby also he informs Job
what that is which men perceive not when God speaks, v. 14.) whether more
immediately, as the lesson he would have men to learn, v. 17. or more mediately
and ultimately, as the fruit of their learning and profiting by what he speaks,
v. 18. So that here we may consider a threefold fruit, or consequent, of those
dreams and visions, when they are given to men, so propounded as the latter
does depend upon the former.

1. More generally, That God by that mean designs man's instruction, v. 16.

2. More particularly, That this instruction tends to humble men, and to cure
the evils that are in them, v. 17.

3. That where instruction is effectual for that end, it tends to man's
advantage, and saves him from greater inconveniences, v. 18.

In this Verse, Elihu asserts, more generally, that God speaks and affords men
instruction by this mean. The word rendered, Instruction, signifies also,
Correction; and, accordingly, some take up the purpose thus, That by visions
God reveals to man, and assures him, that he will correct and chasten him, if
he repent not. This is a truth in it self, and may be some part of that
instruction which God affords to man. But I incline rather to follow the
Translation; and so the words do more generally point out, That God, by these
means, affords some instructions to men's ears, for promoving these ends
mentioned, v. 17, 18. As for the two expressions, of opening, (or, revealing,
or, uncovering) the ear, and sealing of instruction, the latter seems to
explain the former, and does import, that God by visions and dreams reveals
instructions to men's ears in so authentic, serious and authoritative a way
(as if it were sealed with the Great Seal of Heaven) as may leave an impression
upon them, as the Seal leaves a print upon the Wax.

And here the Question is, Whether Elihu speak here of such an opening of the
ear, and sealing, as is eventually efficacious upon the Spirits of men, and
does prevail with them?

Answ. As by these means light was communicated to those who had them; so it is
not to be doubted but these extraordinary visions and dreams had some more than
ordinary impression upon th^se who had them. But as to the efficacy of this
mean, to draw men to repentance, for their own good, as it is, v. 17, 18. it is
more agreeable to Elihu's scope (who complains, v. 14. that men perceive not
when God speaks, and intimates, v. 19. that afflictions follow upon this mean,
when it avails not) to understand the matter thus, That those visions and
dreams tend (if we look to the nature of the things themselves) to open men's
ears, and seal their instruction; as they use actually to rouse up men, and put
(at least) some temporary impression upon their Spirits, above what is commonly
produced by more ordinary means of revealing the will of God: And that they are
sufficient means to produce these effects of instruction and repentance, and
are blessed to produce them in some, though many may have those means, who yet
are never so effectually instructed, as to be withdrawn from their purpose. For
not only do we read that men have had strong impressions upon their Spirits, by
reason of their dreams and visions, who yet knew not so much as what God spoke
by them, till some other did interpret them, as has been marked before: But it
is expressly said, That God opens men's ears in affliction, when yet those
saving effects do not always follow, Chap. 36.10, 12.

From this Verse, Learn, 1. It is the will of God that men profit by the Word,
and that, for this end, they do not satisfy themselves with this, that God
condescends to speak to them, and is in speaking terms with them, nor rest
upon this, that Gods way of speaking does somewhat affect them (as men were of
old affected with these extraordinary dreams and visions:) But that they be
careful to produce solid fruits of his pains taken upon them; For, therefore is
an account here subjoyned of Gods ends in speaking to men, that they may study
to attain them. And where this is not studied, it will not avail men that they
seem to be somewhat affected, as Ezekiel. 33.31, 32. or as Christ's hearers were
sometime affected, Mark 1.22, 27. and elsewhere. See also Matthew. 13.20, 21.

2. It is a sweet fruit of Gods speaking to men, when they are thereby
instructed (whether by corrections, or sharp reprehensions, as the word will
import, or otherwise) and made to learn their lesson; For, this is the scope
and end of Gods speaking, to communicate instruction, or correction and
reprehension. It is most necessary that men's judgments be well informed by the
Word, otherwise it will be to small purpose that their affections are sometime
warmed and tickled thereby: And directions, yea, even reprehensions, are no
less necessary in their kind, than comforts are in their own time and order. As
some are enraged at reproofs, so it is but the same corruption in others that
makes them be discouraged, and without comfort, because of them. However, if
men were more busy at improving of directions and reprehensions, they would be
more fit for other messages, and profit better by them, Matthew. 11.29. 2 Cor.
7.8, 9, 10, 11.

3. A special mean to make the Word speak home to men, is, to consider well
their own frailty to whom God speaks; Therefore here, in the matter of
instruction, man is called, Enosh, frail man. Albeit man in the ruff of his
pride be, in his own eyes, Geber, a strong mighty man, as he is called, v. 17.
yet, he is still but Adam, (as he is there also designed) a bit of red earth.
And as all our near converses with God should make us see our frailty, and be
low in our own eyes, Genesis 18.27. Job 42.5, 6. So, especially, this should be
minded, when he condescends to speak to us, that his condescendence may affect
and ravish our hearts (as Is. 66.1, 2.) and that, remembering we are but dust,
we may be afraid to dally with the most high God, or to dispute his commands.

4. Albeit God, who speaks, be the most High, and man, to whom he speaks, be
but dust; Yet, he has naturally a deaf and shut ear to the instructions of
God, For, here the ears must be opened, or, revealed and uncovered, before men
receive instruction. All men by nature are ignorant of the things of God, 1
Cor. 2.14. and have uncircumcised ears, as well as hearts, Act. 7.51. And,
beside what is natural and habitual, men's ears are stopped, with pride, Jer.
42. with 43.1, 2. with prosperity, Jer. 22.21 with trouble, Exodus 6 9. with
itching and curiosity, 2 Timothy 4.3, 4. with wilful aversion and stubbornness,
Deuteronomy. 29.18, 19. Psalm. 58.4, 5. and other the like impediments. All those men
should mourn for, and study to have those impediments removed; For the day is
coming wherein all men, even the most stubborn, will be made to hear, whether
they will or not. And that woeful comfort, of hardening ourselves against what
the Word can say, will fail the most stubborn and stout-hearted at last. Nor
need men entertain prejudices at the Word, because it speaks always sad things
to them; For if they would hear and improve what is unpleasant, it would speak
comfortably to them at last.

5. As God can remedy this evil of a stopped ear in man, and must be the
Physician to cure it, Act. 16.14. Is. 50.4, 5. And does sometime employ sharp
means to cure it in his Children, Job 36.10, 15. and therefore is to be looked
unto, for what we want, and acknowledged in what we have, of this mercy; (For,
so much does this phrase, of opening the ear, import, when it is made use of to
express Gods effectual operation upon his people) So, God has given to his
people sufficiency of external means to cure this evil, and the more singular
the means are, they should hear the better; For, so much does this phrase
import, That God afforded this as a sufficient mean to open the ears of men,
and that that extraordinary mean contributed to that end. When God speaks to
the Creatures, he should find patent doors; and albeit we want those
extraordinary means, yet the Word preached ought to be no less effectual, Luke
16.29, 30, 31. And when God comes to speak by his rods (of which after) to
press home his Word; or when he makes his Word more lively, than is usual, in
the mouths of his Servants, or continues his Word with us in sad times, it
should rouse us up so much the more.

6. It is not enough that men hear and understand, and be affected for the
present, unless what they hear leave a constant impression upon them, For as
God seals his doctrine, by his authoritative publishing thereof, so this
instruction, should be sealed, and leave an impression upon us. See Heb. 2.1.
Jam. 1.23, 24.

7. When God reveals his mind, especially in a more singular and eminent way,
men have sufficiency of means to cause what God says take impression upon
them; For, those means are here held out as sufficient to seal men's
instruction. Thus did Daniel's Visions affect him. And albeit men have not now
extraordinary Revelations; yet, (as has been marked from Luke 16.) the
consideration of Gods Authority speaking in his Word is sufficient (in its own
kind, as a mean) to cause men tremble, Ezra 10.3. Is. 66.5. For men will not
readily slight what a Prince says unto them; far more should the Word of the
great God have impression upon us. And where the Word prevails not, he is
provoked to write his mind in deep and sad characters of affliction, Chap.
36.8, 9, 10.

Verse 17. That he may withdraw man from his purpose, and hide pride from man.
In this and the following Verse, Elihu gives a more particular account of what
God says by dreams and visions, and what is the scope of that instruction
which he seals thereby, v. 16. In this Verse, we have an account of the more
immediate scope thereof; Namely, to humble man, and bring him to repentance. As
for the first part of the Verse, if we take the word, Purpose, in a strict
sense, it will import, That man naturally is a purposing, projecting Creature;
who would lay down his own settled way which he means to follow and prosecute,
neglecting dependence upon God; That man chooses this way, that he may exalt
himself in pride (as is supposed in the latter part of the Verse) as Master and
Orderer of his own affairs; and, That God does overturn all these fine projects
of proud men. Not only do the messages of his Word speak against this evil (and
his rod does actually overturn these projects, if the Word be not obeyed) but
even the variety of ways whereby God then manifested his mind (all which are
comprehended under these mentioned, v. 15.) served to abase man, and keep him
in a continual and humble dependence upon the pleasure of God in his purposes.

But the word must be taken in a larger sense, for Work (as it is in the
Original) or, some evil work and undertaking, from which God withdraws and
calls men by his Word, which was then revealed in dreams and visions. Thus man's
work, is all one with his transgression, Chap. 36.9. And as for the latter part
of the Verse, And hide pride from man; To hide pride, here, is, to take it
away, and withdraw man from it, so that it becomes as a thing that is hid and
lost, which appears not, and cannot be found; or, by taking away that which
pride feeds upon, to prevent man's pride, and so to hide it from him, that he
shall never find it, nor any thing whereof to be proud. And this is added to
the former, either as a particular instance of that general, of man's work,
which is to be abandoned, Pride being an especial evil work whereof God would
have his people free; or, as Gods end in instructing man to abandon his evil
work, and that, by letting man see his work to be mourned for and amended, he
lays his pride, and lets him see there is no cause for it. In sum, the
meaning of the whole Verse is, That the messages of Gods Word, even when
directed to godly men, tend to lead them to renew their repentance daily, and,
by what they see of their own evil works, to make them have a low esteem of
themselves.

To clear this yet a little more, Consider,

1. The first part of this Verse is concisely expressed in the Original; For
the words, From his, are a Supplement, and the Original has only, word for
word, To withdraw (or, cause to remove) man's work. Hence some render it thus,
That man (as the Agent) may remove work; and so the purpose will run very
smoothly, That God instructs man, v 16. that may remove work, or, abandon evil
courses. But as in the following part of the Verse, it is God who hides pride;
so it seems clearer to understand the first part of the Verse of him also, That
he, by instructions, withdraws man, etc. And as for the Supplements required
to this reading, the Particle, From, is here brought from the latter part of
the Verse (as is not unusual in this language) to clear the reading, that he
withdraws man from work, as well as he hides pride from man. And as for the
relative, His (which must be supplied also in the other reading) it is not only
expressly added, Chap. 36.9. their work; but the subject matter necessarily
implies it. For, that God withdraws man from work, is not to be universally
taken, that God turns men idle from duties of a lawful calling, or, from good
works, but only from these evil works, which are not the works of God, but
their own, as they are corrupt men.

2. It being Elihu's scope (as has been cleared, and otherwise he could not
speak to Jobs case and complaint, whom he acknowledges to be a godly man) to
give an account of the instructions which God gives to godly men by his Word,
which was then revealed in these extraordinary ways; We are not to conceive,
that this is all, and the only instruction which Gods Word affords to such,
that they should repent, and be humble: For, his Word is sent also to comfort
god^y men. But the meaning is, Partly, that whatever else Gods Word speak to
godly men, this lesson, of daily humiliation and renewing of repentance, is
still to be taken along with it; Yea, the more God speak of comfort, and
things refreshful, they should learn this lesson the faster, as we find Saints
have done in their familiar addresses to God, Genesis 18.27. and in Gods special
manifestations to them, Is. 6.5. Job 42.5, 6. Partly, and especially, when good
men are in Jobs temper, complaining that God should afflict them who are
righteous, then this lesson is most proper for them, to silence and put them
from their clamours.

3. I see no cause to apprehend, that Elihu, in propounding this instruction to
Job, does intend to charge Job with any particular evil work, such as
Abimelech, Genesis 20. and L^ban, Genesis 31. were upon, when God restrained them by
a dream or vision; But his scope is, more generally, to point out, that this
holds true of all the godly (and so of Job) that they have daily works, or,
out-breakings, from which they need to be withdrawn; and if Job had minded
this, he would not have swelled so high as he did, in his complaints and
resentments about his condition.

From this Vese, Learn, 1. Even the best of men, within time, have corruptions,
their crooked byasses, works and projects, which are not good; For, so is here
supposed, even of godly men, to whose condition Elihu is speaking. Godly men
should mind this much, and study their filthiness, notwithstanding their
privileges, which will let them see, that they are Adam still (as he is here
called) or have somewhat of old Adam in them. They should also remember, that
this is their own work, as has been explained. They can neither charge it upon
God, Jam. 1.13. nor does Satan (though a busy tempter) deserve all the blame
that, oft-times, is cast upon him; but the true rise of man's miscarriage is
from his own lust, Jam. 1.14.

2. Not only have Saints Original corruption to look to, but out-breakings and
works also, which should be grievous to them, when their weakness comes out,
and above ground; For, here a godly man has even a work which is not good;
which though it may be extended to signify man's inward projects and
machinations also, yet most properly it signifies those visible fruits which
flow from that inward root of corruption.

3. It is the will of God, that his people do daily renew their repentance for
their infirmities and miscarriages, and that they go daily to the opened
Fountain to be cleansed from them; For, Man should be withdrawn from this work,
and should remove it from him, and turn from it by repentance. Where this is
neglected, and we do not call our selves daily to an account, it may tend to
great confusion in a day of distress, and may even bring our reconciled estate
into question.

4. It is the great scope of the Word, whereby God speaks to his people, to
draw them to this daily renewing of their repentance; For, God instructs by
dreams and visions, to withdraw man from his work. The Doctrine of God approves
of no sin, even in Saints, but teaches them so much the more to aggravate
them, as they are committed by them. And as the saddest messages tend not to
drive us away from God, but rather to invite us to him; So, most comfortable
messages should quicken and promove our repentance. Therefore we should try our
profit^ng by the Word, by our frequency in the exercise of repentance; and when
messages are any way odd and singular (as here it was extraordinarily revealed)
they should speak the louder to invite to this exercise.

5. Repentance for failings should be joined with reformation, and abandoning
of those evils for which men are grieved; For, this dispensation tends to
withdraw man from, or, cause him remove his work. It is sad when this
reformation follows not upon convictions; and yet it may be so with Saints,
either because their convictions are not deep and solid enough, or because they
do not put them in Christ's hand, who only can g^ve a good account of them.

6. Among other evils incident to the people of God, Pride is a special evil;
as here is instanced. This is an evil which in others feeds upon empty shadows,
such as their birth, riches, honors, bodily perfections, successes, natural or
acquired endowments, etc. But in Gods people it is ready to feed upon their
best things, their gracer, privileges, singular mercies and deliverances. See
Jer. 7.3, 4. 2 Chronicles. 32.24, 25. 2 Cor. 12.7. 1 Cor. 4.7.

7. Whosoever are not daily calling themselves to an account for their
failings, and renewing their re-repentance daily, but, possibly, are murmuring
and complaining because of their sad lots; they are not free of pride, how much
soever they are crushed; For, so much may be gathered from the connection and
scope, that till men be withdrawn from their work, Pride will not be hid from
them, and that Jobs complaints evidenced that he was not free of this evil, and
that he neglected the better work, of repenting daily, which would have kept
him humble. And this is a certain truth, that no afflictions will humble a man
(however they crush him) unless he be exercised with the conscience and sense
of sin.

8. God is a great enemy to pride, and his Word has sufficiently declared, how
ill he is pleased with it; For, the scope of this instruction, is, to hide
pride from man. See Psalm. 138.6. Dan. 4.37. Jam. 4.6. Prove. 6.16, 17. It is a
sin, which in it self is a folly, 2 Cor. 12.11. a sin, for which there is no
cause, seeing we do but our duty in our highest seize, yea, not so much
as our duty, Luke 17.10. and an evil which declares men to be nothing in
reality, Gal. 6.3. It robs God of his glory, Romans 11.36. and crosses his great
design, of abasing all flesh before him, 1 Cor. 1.29, 30. And therefore must be
hat^ful to him.

9. Albeit proud men bulk much in their own eyes, and great men are much
subject to this evil of pride; Yet no greatness, real or imaginary, does
warrant men to entertain it. For, even Geber (as it is in the Original) the
mighty, or, great man, ought to have pride hid from him. If even greatest of
men consider, that they are vanity at their best estate, Psalm. 39.5. that they
will not long continue what they are, but death will level them with others,
Psalm 49.10, 11, 12. that the more they have received, they have the stricter
account to make, Luke 12.48. and, that pride does blast and provoke God to take
away all their excellencies; If, I say, they did consider these things, they
would find how little cause they had to be puffed up with pride.

10. It is the will of God, and the scope of his instructions by his Word, that
men do not pretend to abominate pride, while yet their practice declares that
they hugg it in their bosoms; But that they endeavor to remove it, and rid
themselves of it; For, Pride must be hid from man. Which does not import, that
it is sufficient, that pride be hid and lurking, though it be not mortified and
subdued; but that it must be so hid from man, as he shall not find it. The
phrase, to hide, signifies sometime to take a thing quite away, as Job 3.10.
It seems to be a Metaphor taken from men's burying of these things which they
desire not to be seen, as Moses hid the Egyptian whom he slew, Exodus 2.12.
Thus that is said to be hid, which is destroyed and brought to nothing, Is.
29.14. with 1 Cor. 1.19. Now men's sin is said to be hid two ways; One is, by a
free pardon, when a sinner hiding himself under Christ's shadow, gets his sins
pardoned and covered, Neh. 4 5. Psalm. 32.1. and 85.2. And it is certain that
such as repent of their pride, must have pardon for their bygone pride,
whatever reformation there be for the futu^e. But this is not principally meant
here; For by a pardon, sin is properly hid from Gods revengeful eye, not from
man, save in so far as a pardon hides him from the penal effects of his sin.
The other way of hiding sin, is, when it is hid from the man himself; not by
keeping him from seeing his guilt and inclinations to sin, but by removing of
the sin from him. And in this sense it is taken here; and it imports, That the
man who heeds the instructions of the Word concerning his pride, will,

1. Not satisfy himself with claiming to a pardon, when he is convinced of his
guilt in it, but will endeavor to have it removed from him, that the
mortification of the evil may be a comfortable evidence of the pardon of ^t.

2. He will endeavor to remove it from him with detestation, as an evil which
he cannot endure to look upon, but it must be hid out of his sight, as is said
of the Idols of penitents, Is. 30.22.

3. Being sensible of his own propensity to that evil, he will study to prevent
it, by hiding from himself all causes and occasions of it, and tentations to
it. He will not study his graces and his privileges, without studying his
infirmities, which may be a counter-ballance to him; he will be sparing to
reflect upon his afflictions, at least he will be careful not to aggravate
them, lest his corruption and pride be thereby irritated; and, in studying of
his sad lots, he will be careful also to study his ill deservings, and the
mercies which are continued with him, and the mercies remembered in wrath, which
may keep his Spirit sober.

4. That all these endeavors may be effectual, it should be his care to abide
under Christ's shadow, that virtue from him may prevent the budding of that evil.

Doct. 11. It may encourage men to hearken to the voice of God in his Word, if
they consider that his quarrel is not against their persons, but their sins,
that he intends not their destruction, or to crush them, but only their
humiliation and reformation; and, that the only loss they will sustain (if they
manage his instructions well) is the hiding of pride, and the causes and
occasions thereof, from them; For, this is declared to be the scope of his
instruction, which he seals unto, and upon man, To withdraw man from his work,
and hide pride from man; and men do wrong themselves, when they make another
use thereof.

Verse 18. He keeps back his Soul from the pit, and his life from perishing
by the sword.
In this Verse, Elihu gives an account of a further and more mediate scope of
the Lords dealing with his people by dreams and visions, and a result of the
former; Namely, That the Lord leads them to renew repentance, and to be
humbled, that so he may prevent their further hurt, if they do it not, even the
pit, and some violent death by the sword, or the like violent means. The words,
Soul, and, Life, being different in the Original, the first part of the Verse
may be understood of the Souls going to Hell at death, and the latter part, of
the manner of their death, that it shall be violent. And albeit godly men (of
whom Elihu's scope is chiefly to speak) will not actually go to Hell (nor does
Elihu say that here, but rather, on the contrary, that God prevents it) yet
their failings, of their own nature, do deserve it; and therefore God makes use
of the Word here to prevent it, and if that succeed not, he has the rod, etc.
(as after follows, to effectuate it. Or, the phrases may be taken
promiscuously, the latter explaining the former, That God keeps their Soul, or,
Life, from the pit, or, grave and death, and that not an ordinary, but a
violent death, which, otherwise, they would incurr, if they hearken not to the
Word, or lesser rods. As we find God dealt with Josiah, whom he cut off in his
presumptuous attempt against Pharaoh Necho; and thus did he chasten some of the
Corinthians for their miscarriages, 1 Cor. 11.30.

From this Verse, Learn, 1. The people of God do therefore run on in their
miscarriages and follies, and do neglect the renewing of their repentance,
because they consider not the hazards which they run by these courses;
Therefore are they informed of their danger here.

2. Albeit the eternal state of the godly be secured by Christ, yet, their
failings (and particularly, their pride) do deserve the pit; and albeit God
prevent that hazard to the godly; yet (beside the fears of their eternal
destruction) they may be sharply chastised, and even taste of a violent death:
For, so much is here intimated, That by their miscarriages, and particularly,
by their pride, they run the hazard of the pit, and of perishing by the sword.

3. It is one great cause of men's mistaking Gods dealing toward them, that
they can easily feel and resent the want of some mercies, which they have
enjoyed, but they do not study and remark preventing mercies; Therefore here,
lest men should mistake Gods disquieting of them with visions and dreams, and
his putting them to the unpleasant task of humiliation and repentance, Elihu
lets them see what hazards are prevented thereby, and that he keeps back the
Soul from the pit, and the life from perishing (or, passing, namely, out of the
body) by the sword, by these means.

4. There is nothing so sad, which befalls the people of God, but it tends to
prevent somewhat that is sadder, which otherwise would befall them; For, here,
all this trouble by visions and dreams, and the toil of repentance and
humiliation, are put upon godly men, to prevent sad strokes. See 1 Cor. 11.32.
Ps. 94.12, 13.

Verse 19. He is chastened also with pain upon his bed, and the multitude of
his bones with strong pain.

20. So that his life abhors bread, and his soul dainty meat.

21. His flesh is consumed away that it cannot be seen, and his bones that were
not seen, stick out.

22. His soul draws near unto the grave, and his life to the destroyers.


Follows, to v. 29. the second and third means whereby God speakth his mind
to men, though they perceive it not; Namely, by Sickness, and by the Ministry
of the Word. I join these together, because they must go together, that Gods
mind may be known in them. For however Sickness, blessed of God, fit men to
hear what God will speak, yet it is by the Ministry here, that Gods mind,
concerning the sick person, is revealed. And withal, these two, as they are
here put together, do very well agree to Jobs case, who was now afflicted in
his body, much like to what is here recorded (only we read not of his keeping
his bed constantly) and had Elihu, a Messenger from God, with him, to expound
Gods mind, in that dispensation, to him. And albeit Jobs Friends urged his
sickness also, as an Argument against him, Chap. 5.17, 18. and elsewhere; Yet
they urged it as an Argument to persuade him to repent of his supposed
wickedness. But Elihu drives another design, as we shall hear. We may take up
the whole purpose, to v. 29. in this order.

1. He propounds the means whereby God speaks to man, Sickness, v. 29, -- 22.
and a Ministry, v. 23.

2. He declares what it is that God speaks by these means, v. 23.

3. He gives an account of the blessed effects of the trial, when this lesson
is well learned, v. 24, -- 28.

In these Verses, we have a description of a sore Sickness, whereby God speaks
to man; which is propounded,

First, In general, v. 19. Where it is held forth, in its conjunction with the
former mean, of Visions and Dreams, whereby God speaks (intimated in the
copulative, Also) in its scope and tendency, which is to chasten, or, argue,
and reprove; and, in its vehemence and extremity, assaulting the Patient with
pain, till he must take his bed. From which it appears, that Job was much upon
a Bed, or, Couch, as Chap. 7.13. though at other times he sat up and went
abroad.

Secondly, The greatness of this affliction is pointed out by several effects.

1. That it reaches not only the sick man's flesh, but his bones, and affects
all of them with great pain, v. 19. Thus we find that Job complained often of
his bones and sinews. See Chap. 30.17, 30.

2. That (as is usual in sickness, Psalm. 107.18.) his sickness makes him loath
all meat, even such dainty meats as use to be prepared for sick men, v. 20. And
of this Job had also some experience, Chap. 3.24.

3. That it wastes and consumes his body, v. 21. So that his plump flesh
disappeareth, and his bones stick out. Of which also Job complains, Chap.
16.8.

4. It brings his life to the gates of death, or near to the grave, and to the
destroyers, v. 22. that is, His diseases are deadly, and threaten him with
destruction; or, they bring him near to the worms which destroy men in the
grave. And Job had this frequently in his mouth, that he was near to death. See
Chap. 17.13, 14.

From v. 19. Learn, 1. It pleases God, beside the messages of his Word, to
visit his people with the rod; For, here pain also, (beside those dreams and
visions, v. 15.) is sent, that God may speak thereby. Even when men profit by
the Word (as Job did in his prosperity) God may yet send a rod for their
further exercise, and to take trial how they will keep their feet under such a
dispensation; as the question is stated betwixt God and Satan about Job, Chap.
1, and 2. And godly men should stoop and submit to this. And further (which
comes nearer to Elihu's scope) The Word its alone has not, ordinarily, that
operation which were to be desired; but even where it works most effectually,
it may leave the rod somewhat to do further. And much more, when the Word is
ill improved, the rod will follow; for God loves his people better than to let
them pass on with their faults, uncorrected and unreclaimed.

2. Among other trials which befall the people of God, they will find personal
trials, pains and sicknesses, among the most searching; For, Elihu instanceth
those as very speaking messengers, and searching trials; and so did Satan truly
argue, though upon a wicked design, Chap. 2.4, 5. So that they who are free of
that trial, may bear other difficulties the better; and those who are exercised
therewith, should prepare for much humbling trial by it. They should also
remember, that God calls them thereby to be humble and sensible of sin, from
which the craziness of men's bodies does flow; and, in particular, that God
calls them to be sensible of their little prizing or improving of bodily
health, when they enjoyed it; which they ought to mourn for, and amend, if ever
God restore them to health again. And who so do thus improve their sickness,
may find that God has visited them, that he may give them a proof of his power
and love, in their recovery.

3. As God does not intend the destruction of his people by their afflictions
and sicknesses (even though they be taken out of the World by them) but their
chastisement and instruction; So, they may need to be sharply reproved, and
argued out of their subterfuges and defenses, before they receive correction
and instruction as becomes: For, the word rendered, to chasten, signifies
properly, to reprove, or, argue with one. Which imports,

1. That even Gods dear Saints may have much folly, which needs correction and
reproof.

2. That afflictions may speak chastisements and reproofs to godly men, for
this their folly, when yet their persons are accepted and approved of God.

3. Even godly men are, sometimes, not easily convinced of their folly, and of
the evil thereof, but they must be argued with, to bring them to a sense
thereof.

4. That sharp trials are sent upon this errand, to waken them out of their
dreams, and subdue their stubbornnesses; which effects, those rude messengers
are very apt means to produce.

Doct. 4. Under trial, men ought to observe and prize even common mercies; As
here it is supposed to be a mercy, that this pained person has a bed to lie
upon. Albeit the phrase may import no more but this, That they are not able to
stir, whether they get a bed or not; Yea, Saints may sometime come to want a
bed, when they are sick and sore: Yet, humility will teach men not to
undervalue that common mercy, if it be afforded them.

5. Whatever outward accommodations God provide for afflicted, and,
particularly, for sick persons, which they are bound to prize and acknowledge;
Yet, none of these will afford relief, so long as God has the trial to
continue: For, even upon his bed, where men use to get rest, he is chastened
with pain. See Chap. 7.4.13, 14.

6. When God afflicts his people, they may expect that it will be an affliction
and trial indeed; lest, otherwise, if their trouble were more easy, their
exercise under it should languish: For, this pain reaches the very bones, as
well as the flesh, which is a measure of trial whereof David frequently
complains, Ps. 6.2. and 32.3. and 38.3.

7. The love of God to his Children must not be measured by the degree of their
affliction; For albeit in the issue there will be a difference betwixt them and
others, as they have also secret supporting strength in the mean time, which
others want; Yet they may be no less sharply afflicted than others: As here, he
has strong pain in his bones. The Original has only, strength, or, strong,
instead of strong pain; which some make an Epithete of his bones, thus, He is
chastened, -- even the multitude of his strong bones. But the Grammatical
construction of the words will not so well bear that reading. And therefore the
word, pain, must be repeated from the former part of the Verse. For, such
strength, or, strong thing, must be understood here, as affects the bones of a
sick man, which can be nothing else but pain.

8. When God is about to try men, nothing in them will be of force to resist
him, or support them, but their only recourse must be to himself; For, his
bones, which are strong, are assaulted with strong pain.

9. The people of God may expect that all, as well as any one, of their
supports, will be reached, and succumb, in a trial; whereby God drives them to
himself, whither men of themselves are loath to come, but would gladly shift
from one shelter to another, so long as they can find any thing to give them
ease: For, even the multitude of his bones are reached, and he gets a skin-full
of sore bones.

From v. 20. Learn, 1. As it is a mercy to have food in sickness, and choice of
food, suitable to men's weak condition, (as here is employed, that he has bread,
and dainty meat, or meat of desire; So it is a duty to tender those who are
sick, in providing what may be most comfortable to them: For, here, there is
supposed to be provided, dainty meat, meat desirable for sick persons, and
which they use to desire, if they have any appetite. God may have tender
respects for such afflicted persons, and therefore we should tender them.

2. It is an evidence of the vanity of creature comforts and contentments, that
they fail men most when they are in greatest need, whereas the sufficiency of
God does most appear in distress; For, here meat will do the sick man no good,
when he is in a decay, and so has most need of it.

3. Among other mercies to be observed in our food (as, that God provides it,
puts a blessing in it, etc.) this is one, that God gives us ability, and an
appetite, to make use of it; For, this is seen to be a mercy, when it is taken
away from sick men, so that their life and soul (that is, their living body and
appetite) abhor bread, and dainty meat.

From v. 21. Learn, 1. It is a truth to be much studied, that nothing in man is
able to bear out against Gods afflicting hand; For, here men's bodies succumb,
and fall under a consumption, in sickness.

2. Though men dote much upon their bodies, and are careful to make provision
for their flesh, Romans 13.14. Yet sickness and other troubles can soon make a
change upon them, and leave them nothing but a Skeleton of skin and bones; For,
His flesh is consumed away that it cannot be seen, and his bones, that were not
seen, stick out. See Lam. 4.8. Men should not be indulgent to their own bodies,
to spare them in the duties of Gods service, lest he spare them not in the
matter of afflictions.

3. When men will not see their own frailty by contemplation, or what they see
takes not a solid impression upon them, God can make it conspicuous in humbling
effects; For, here this lesson is inculcated by sickness. And it is for the
godly's behoof that God does experimentally instruct them in those lessons,
which, otherwise, are not enough laid to heart.

From v. 22. Learn, 1. As men carry mortality always about with them, so the
Lord sends sickness to put them in mind thereof; and albeit they may now and
then escape the hazard, yet they should remember, that death will come at last;
For, for this end does the sick man's soul (or, life, as it is after added) draw
near unto the grave.

2. When God gives a commission, there are many destroyers, or sicknesses, to
take away a man's life; any one of which will serve the turn; For, there are,
destroyers, to assault his life.

3. As death and the grave do lay men's bodies low, and under the power of
destroying worms; So they are not in themselves comfortable, as being a
destruction of men's persons, Psalm. 90.3. and leaving poor dust to be triumphed
over by sicknesses, which have deprived it of life, and by worms, which destroy
it: For, thus also is his life brought near to destroyers. So that they have
reason to bless God who get a more comfortable sight of this lot.

4. Gods people may be alarmed with threatened destruction, when yet God minds
only their chastisement and instruction; And it is no strange thing to see them
brought to a low and deadly posture, before they get the right use of their
trial, and before what they learn be solidly stamped upon their hearts: For,
here, His soul draws near unto the grave, and his life to the destroyers,
that he may hear what God speaks to him thereby, and may be in a capacity to
entertain that Messenger and his message, of which in the following Verses.

Verse 23. If there be a Messenger with him, an Interpreter, one among a
thousand, to show unto man his uprightness.
Follows, the third mean, whereby God speaks to man, together with an account
of Gods mind, uttered thereby, to the sick and afflicted person, and of the
consequents of man's entertaining this message. In this Verse we have to
Consider,

First, The third mean, which God joins with affliction, to declare his mind
in it; Namely, Some Messenger sent of God to the sick man, to be with him in
his low condition. This Messenger is here described,

1. From his Authority, that he is a Messenger, sent by God, and authorized by
a Commission, to speak in his name. Some do understand it of an Angel (as the
word in the Original is indeed the name given to those blessed Spirits) and
some of Christ, the Angel and Messenger of the Covenant. But as the word is
frequently taken in Scripture for men who are employed and sent upon an
Embassage or message; so here it is safer to understand it of some Minister, or
man extraordinarily inspired, who is present with the sick man, as here Elihu
was with Job.

2. From the nature and scope of his Work, that he is an Interpreter, to
expound the dispensations of God to the sick man, and to be a trench-man, both
from God to him, and from him to God, as men who understand not one another
language make use of Interpreters between them.

3. From his Rarity, that he is one among a thousand, or, a person rarely to be
found, even among many who are employed in that work; as this phrase imports,
Eccles. 7.28.

Doct. 1. However trouble may contribute to humble man, and lay his pride, and
may bring him to desire to know the mind of God concerning him; Yet, trouble,
its alone, and without the Word, will do no good; For, here another mean must
be added, to clear from the Word what God speaks by that affliction. See Psalm.
94.12. We must not mistake albeit afflictions do not produce all the good
effects we desire; it is well if they send us to the Word, and cause us study
it better.

2. Albeit men's own Spirits should be the Candle of the Lord, to let them see
what they are, and ought to do, Prove. 20.27. and especially it should be so in
a time of trouble; Yet ordinarily (as afflictions cannot be read without the
Word, so) men need help to read Gods dispensations aright, and what God speaks
in his Word concerning them: For, the godly man needs a Messenger, for this
end, in his sickness.

3. It is a great trial of men's submission, when they are put to stoop to
ordinary means of comfort and instruction, even when their need is greatest:
For, now, under affliction, God sends not visions to the sick man himself, as
v. 15. nor does himself immediately appear, as Job often desired, but reveals
his mind by the ministry of his Messengers, whom he sends and employes upon
that errand.

4. That these Instruments employed must be Messengers, does not seclude that
assistance which every godly man is bound, in charity, to afford to the
afflicted, for his direction and comfort; But it shows, That none ought to
act those things in a Ministerial and authoritative way, but only they who have
a Commission from God for that effect. In no age of the Church was it lawful
for men to intrude themselves upon the Ministerial calling; Nor would any
Prince endure that a man should behave himself as his Ambassador, without his
Commission; nor would a Master endure such Servants. And withal, it shows,
That they who are authorized by such a Commission should carry as the
Messengers of God, and should be received and entertained as such. See 1 Cor.
4.1, 2. Gal. 4.14.

5. That this Messenger is an Interpreter, or, trenchman, may teach,

1. That Gods dispensations toward his own Children need, oft-times, an
Interpreter, or Commentary, as having more in them than can be seen at first,
and some other thing than sense will easily discern.

2. That such as are employed about this work, have need of much skill and
ability, to interpret that which cannot so well be read, even by those who are
concerned. See Is. 50.4.

3. That in their expounding of Gods dispensations by, and according to his
Word, and generally, in revealing the counsel of God, we should seriously
ponder their authority; that they are Messengers, sent of God, to be
Interpreters; So that God speaks by them, and they speak in Gods stead, as his
Ambassadors, 2 Cor. 5.20. Upon which account they are rather to be made use of
than private Professors.

Doct. 6. That this Messenger, and Interpreter, is, one among a thousand, may
teach,

1. That faithful Ministers are very rare; The Ministry it self is a difficult
task, for which none are of themselves sufficient, 2 Cor. 2.16. And beside, it
is Calling that brings small worldly profit, and is attended with great
opposition; So that it is no easy task for men to acquit themselves faithfully
in it.

2. That it is b^t scarce one of many Messengers (even though they be otherwise
able and honest) that is fit and able to deal effectually with troubled
consciences and afflicted persons; which is the work here to be undertaken by
this Messenger. So that it is a singular mercy when many of those are in a Land.

3. That such Messengers ought to be esteemed of as rare Jewels, Is. 52.7. They
are the fruit of Gods married love, Jer. 3.14, 15. and may sweeten bitter lots,
Is. 30.20, 21. And therefore should not be the object of men's contempt.

Doct. 7. This Supposition is also to be marked, If he be with him; Which does
not import, That sick persons should not send for faithful Ministers, and will
make use of them only if they come of their own accord, or be providentially
present with them; For the contrary is enjoined, Jam. 5.14. But it imports,

1. That Ministers should be careful to attend persons in sickness and
affliction, to see what good they can do, and whom of them they can get gained
to Christ.

2. That it is a mercy to have such faithful men near us in our distresses; As
Elihu was to Job. The Church found it sad when she wanted her Signs and
Prophets, in the time of her trouble, Ps. 74.9.

3. When God in his providence strikes a godly man, he will be careful to
provide comfort for him some other way; As here he provides a Messenger to be
with the afflicted man.

Secondly, In this Verse, Consider, also, the account that is given of what God
speaks by his Rod, and this Messenger, and what this Messenger should speak as
the mind of God in such a dispensation; He should show unto man his
uprightness, or, his rectitude, righteousness, equity. Where the great Question
is, Who is meant by this relative, His, or, whose uprightness it is that this
Messenger is to show and declare? The antecedent immediately preceding is, Man,
which should seem to import, that it is man's uprightness that is showed; and
yet the context takes in God also, as he in whose name the Messenger speaks,
and who, in the following Verse, gives him a further Commission; and,
accordingly, some do understand it of Gods uprightness, and some of man's. I
conceive that where such things are left undetermined, we may take the words in
the fullest latitude, so as we keep by the scope of the words and purpose. And
therefore if we consider, that, when what is here showed and declared takes
effect, man is brought to need a ransom, and God finds it for him, v. 24. He
is also brought to be sensible of his sin, v. 27. upon which God renders unto
him his righteousness, v. 26. If, I say, we consider this, we may make up the
tenor of this Messengers errand in these particulars,

1. He is to show unto man Gods uprightness, that he is just and upright in his
afflicting of him.

2. That man maybe convinced of this, he must show that he is a sinner who is
afflicted, which he may do by pointing out the holiness and righteousness of
God who afflicts him, and by pointing out to man what is the uprightness which
God requires of him, which will easily discover unto him his deviations from
that rule.

3. He is also to convince man concerning the uprightness and equity of God, in
his dealing with him, since he has laid down a sure way of reconciliation
betwixt himself and man, and for man to attain to a good account of all lots
that befall him; even by repenting of his sin, v. 27. and fleeing to that
ransom, v. 24.

4. By pointing out those, he shows unto man wherein his uprightness and
rectitude consists, or what may set him right in Gods favor, and is his
duty, to prove himself an upright and righteous man; even to repent, and lay
hold upon that ransom which God has found. So this direction will comprehend
both Repentance, and Faith in the Messiah, or, closing with his imputed
righteousness. And albeit the word here rendered, Uprightness, does no where
(that I can observe) signify the righteousness of Christ imputed to us; Yet,
it may well signify, that it is man's duty (if he would be upright, and stand
right in Gods favor) to lay hold upon that righteousness. This I take to be
principally and ultimately meant in this p^ace, That this Messenger is to show
to the afflicted man, that it is his uprightness, and the way to set him right
again, to repent and believe: Yet this cannot well be inculcated and
demonstrated to a godly man in affliction (who is the person here spoken of all
along) unless he be first convinced of Gods uprightness in afflicting him, of
his own sin and deviation from the rule of righteousness which is prescribed to
him, and of Gods equity in all his designs and actings about him. And
therefore I take in all those, as the full exposition of the words, which
comprehends a man's being laid low, in the sense of his sins, whereby he is made
to justify God in all that befalls him, Neh. 9.33. Lam. 1.18. and his being
lifted up and encouraged through faith in Christ; which were the sum also of
Paul's doctrine, Act. 20.21. So the sum of all is, That whereas even godly men
are, oft-times, sliding, and do forget to renew their repentance and faith, God
lays them low under his afflicting hand, and by his Messengers tells them
that they ought to be humbled in the sense of their sinfulness, and to renew
their repentance, and lay hold upon the ransom which God has found.

From these words, taken in their full latitude, as has been explained, Learn,

1. Such as have a calling to deal with the Souls of afflicted persons, have
need of Gods direction and assistance in managing that undertaking; For, they
have much to show, or, declare, unto them, as has been said, which requires no
little furniture to find it out, and to propound it in the due order.

2. Albeit even Gods people be ready to mistake him under trouble; Yet it is
their duty to study the uprightness of God, in guiding them, and ordering their
lots; As here we are taught. It is a blessed fruit of trouble, when men are
made to grow thereby in their commendation of God, and when the sight of their
own sinfulness, and of his holiness, who afflicts them, does contribute to lay
them low, and to justify and exalt him in their hearts.

3. When afflicted persons are laid low in the sense of their own sinfulness,
and of his holiness, who afflicts them, their work is not yet done; but they
should be further convinced of the rectitude and equity of Gods procedure, and
that he seeks no advantage of them, but to drive them to their duty, and
(thereby) to their happiness; For, this also is to be showed unto man, as has
been explained.

4. The sum of afflicted godly men's duty, is, by renewing their repentance and
faith, to close with Christ, and imputed righteousness; For, it is the result
of all other instructions, to point out this as man's uprightness, or,
rectitude. So that they mistake Gods mind in his humbling dispensations, who
run away from Christ, or think to work out a righteousness of their own,
wherewith to satisfy God. And though men should preach and press the Law never
so much upon afflicted man; Yet they have not done all their work, if they
leave them there, and do not point out Christ unto them.

5. Even godly men are so much ignorant of the righteousness of God, and taken
up with a desire to establish their own righteousness, Romans 10.3. and do so
frequently forget to humble themselves, and make use of Christ, that they need,
not only to have their duty pointed out to them, but to be brought to the gates
of death, that they may hearken unto the doctrine of humiliation, repentance
and faith; For, this must be declared, or, showed, unto man, and he is brought
to that low condition, v. 19, -- 22. that he may hearken to it when it is
declared. And as men have themselves to blame that they are put to such
difficulties, to stir them up to learn this lesson; so they who profit at that
School, are great gainers, even by saddest afflictions.

Verse 24. Then he is gracious unto him, and says, Deliver him from going down
to the pit, I have found a ransom.
This Verse is made difficult to understand by reason of the various
conceptions that men have of that relative, He, and who should be meant
thereby. Some referr it to the Messenger, formerly spoken of, v. 23. and read
it thus, He speaks to him (that is, to the sick man) of grace, and says, (to
wit, to God) Deliver him, etc. that is, he instructs him in the Doctrine of
free grace, and prays that God would preserve him from destruction, because
of that ransom which he has found, or, published. But neither does the first
word signify, to speak of grace, but only, to be gracious; nor can this
phrase, of finding a ransom, be well spoken by a Messenger of himself,
especially, when he is speaking to God. Therefore (to pass also the conjecture
of others, that Christ in person is that Messenger, v. 23. who here favorably
interceeds for the afflicted man) I take this relative to point at God, who
has been spoken of before. And so here Elihu begins to give an account of the
sweet and comfortable effects that shall follow upon the sick man's learning
that lesson, ^.23. The first whereof (in this Verse) is, That God will be
gracious to the afflicted man, because of the ransom found in Christ (who was
known even then, to be the Redeemer, Chap. 19.25.) and will deliver him from
the pit. So that here we have, the fountain-cause of this change wrought upon
the afflicted man's condition, even Gods grace; the meritorious cause thereof, a
ransom; and the effect of those, or the change it self, which is here
expressed by his being delivered from going down to the pit.

For further clearing of this purpose, Consider,

1. As for the connection betwixt this and the former Verse, we are not to
conceive, that God is thus gracious upon the Messengers showing, only, unto man
his uprightness, but it must be so showed as the afflicted man does learn the
lesson, before these evidences of Gods love break forth, of which more
afterward.

2. If it be enquired, What a deliverance from the pit is here meant?

Answ. It is not to be doubted, but deliverance from eternal destruction (which
even a godly man deserves, because of his sins, for which he is chastened) is
the fruit of that ransom, on which the penitent man lays hold by faith; and
so that may be included here. Yet since Elihu is principally speaking of men's
bodily sickness, and their deliverance from that, v. 25, 28, 30. I incline
rather to understand this of the preservation of the man's life, opposite to
that destruction wherewith he was threatened, v. 22. Yet so as this must be
looked upon as a pledge of his everlasting deliverance from Hell. And albeit
such a temporal preservation and deliverance be not always afforded to godly
penitent men; Yet the sense will run clear enough, thus, That the penitent
afflicted man, closing with Christ, shall get temporal deliverance from his
affliction, according to the tenor of the Covenant of grace about those
things, (namely, when it is for Gods glory, and his good to get it) and that as
a pledge and earnest of his eternal deliverance.

3. If it be enquired, To whom it is that God says, Deliver him?

Answ. The phrase may import no more but this, That his effectual providence
and operation shall be forth coming to deliver, and to remove all impediments;
and so he may command sickness to spare him, as when he spoke at the Creation,
and the thing spoken was done. But more (particularly, this Commission seems to
be directed to the Messenger, who instrumentally saves and delivers men, 1 Timothy
4.16. and who must intimate these glad tidings to the afflicted man, for his
encouragement. In sum, this Verse imports, That if this afflicted man repent
and close with Christ, (according as Gods Messengers reveal to be his duty) God
for Christ's sake will spare him, and will give Commission to his Ministers to
intimate so much unto him.

From this Verse, Learn, 1. The first thing that men should be careful to learn
under affliction, is, their own duty, before they come to know more of Gods
mind in it; For, first, man must be showed his uprightness, v. 23. and brought
to repent and believe, and then God is gracious, etc. It is true, God has
preventing mercies and grace, whereby he brings his people up to their duty; he
may also see the way of his froward people, and heal them, Is. 57.17, 18. Yet
we are bound to mind our duty, that he may appear for us, and our neglecting of
this method makes our troubles oft-times stick long with us.

2. It is supposed here, that the Messengers instruction, v. 23. has had
success upon the afflicted man, otherwise a step of this procedure should be
wanting here. For (as has been said) it is not to be conceived, that upon his
showing only unto man his uprightness, God will be gracious, till he understand
and improve that lesson wherein he is instructed. And this comprehending of the
success of the message under ehe publication thereof, may not only point out,
That, however faithful Ministers will be approved when they have done their
duty, though it have no success, Is. 49.4, 5. Yet, as to the hearers part, that
message is as good, as not told (yea, much worse) which produces not suitable
effects; That may be said, in some sense, not to be showed, which they see not,
and whereof they make no use. See Jer. 8.8. But further, this may import,

1. That God, who has instituted a Ministry, has also promised to bless it,
and that if they declare their message, he will bless it, at least to some; and
therefore honest men may go about their work in faith, even in most difficult
times.

2 That imputed righteousness, when it is preached in a right and lively way,
is very apt to gain ground upon hearts, especially upon godly men, to draw them
to repent and close with it, and to every other duty; For, that is the Doctrine
here, the showing, or publication whereof, is supposed to be successful.

3. It is the duty and property of godly men, when in affliction, especially,
to be tender, and learn Gods mind from his Word; and to be then humbled in the
sense of sin, and affected with the offer of grace; For, it is here supposed,
that when this godly man is chastened with sickness, a Messenger from God shall
not show his message to him in vain. See Ps. 119.67, 71.

4. That when God condescends to take pains upon any of his Children, by
Sickness, and by his Messengers, he will in mercy follow them with those means
(however they may prove stubborn for a time) till they take effect upon them,
that so he may be gracious to them; For, it is supposed, that those means will
certainly have this effect at last.

Doct. 3. Whatever be the care and diligence of godly men, in affliction, to
follow their duty; Yet, it is grace, and grace only, that must do their turn,
and the more diligent they are, grace will be seen to be the more free; For,
whatever success the message have, yet God is gracious to him, in delivering
him. And this may be another reason, why no mention is made of the afflicted
man's profiting by the message; even because what he does is not worthy to be
mentioned in the day when grace appears to do him good, and because this is
one evidence of his sincerity in profiting by the Word, that his diligence is
nothing in his eyes, and grace is all in all.

4. It may encourage miserable sinners and, particularly, afflicted Saints,
that there is graciousness in God, which will condescend to stoop and reach
them, even in their lowest condition; For, even then, when he is lying at the
gates of death, and made sensible of his sinfulness, and need of a Savior, he
is gracious to him.

5. No graciousness in God can be expected to be let forth unto sinners, but in
Christ, and because of that ransom which he has paid for satisfying of
justice; For, this ransom, or, atonement, is given here, as the reason and
procuring cause of all this gracious dispensation. Not that Christ did
purchase, that God should be gracious in himself, for that is one of his
Attributes; nor yet that God should have a purpose of grace and favor to his
Elect, for it flowed from his gracious purpose and eternal love to them, that
Christ was sent to dye for them. But the meaning is, that Christ, by his
ransom, has purchased the communication and effects of his love and grace to
sinners, in a way agreeable to his justice. And this does not only evidence,
that the Gospel was savingly (though not fully) revealed in Jobs days; But
further, it serves to direct us to look upon our deliverance as costly, and our
mercies as dearly purchased by Christ, however we receive them freely; and to
remember, that God is not only merciful, but just also, and that his justice
must be satisfied by Christ, otherwise no good can come to us.

6. The ransom of Christ is sufficient to purchase the greatest of blessings
and mercies, to those who flee to him; For, here this ransom is given, as a
sufficient reason of all this deliverance and mercy conferred upon the
afflicted man. We need not be afraid to lay much we^ght upon Christ's merit, if
we make use of it in the right order.

7. Christ's merit, and the ransom paid by him, ought not to hide from us the
freedom of the grace of God in his dealing with us; Considering that (beside
his hand in providing this remedy) of which after) it is of free grace that
Christ is accepted in our stead, and his purchase is applied to us; For, here
the ransom, and Gods graciousness, are conjoined together, and God is gracious
to the man, though he has found a ransom.

8. It commends the free grace of God, and speaks all to be grace which is done
to us, that, though God will have his justice satisfied by a ransom; yet, this
way of satisfaction has been found out by God himself, and not devised or
found out by Men or Angels; For, says he, I have found a ransom, or, devised
it, and accepted of it in the man's stead.

9. The grace and love of God toward lost man does not lie lurking in his
bosom, but flows forth in comfortable effects, as he needs them; For, being
gracious to him, comfortable effects and messages fellow.

10. Gods people, for whom he finds and accepts a ransom, may expect not only
to be delivered from the pit, and eternal destruction, but to get deliverance
also from their temporal distresses, were they never so deadly, in so far as
is good for them; For, He deliver, him from going down to the pit, even when he
is drawing near to it, v. 22. Not only are the spiritual and eternal
deliverances of Saints, but even their temporal deliverances also, a fruit of
Christ's purchase, and an effect of Gods love and graciousness.

11. It may heighten the Saints hope and encouragement in God, that he not only
wishes his people well, but has all things at his command which may either
hinder or promove their welfare; For, if he say, Deliver him, Sickness, and all
things else, will obey. See Matthew. 8.8.

12. Gods mind concerning his people, who flee to Christ for refuge, is to be
sought in his Word, and from the public Dispensers thereof; For, thus also he
says to the Messenger, Deliver him. See 2 Cor. 5.20.

Verse 25. His flesh shall be fresher than a Child's: He shall return to the
days of his youth.
The second effect of the sick man's hearkening to the message, is, That not
only shall his life be preserved, but he shall recover his health, so that he
shall come out of that languishing condition wherein he was, v. 21. Yea, so
great shall be the change, that he shall be as fresh, or fresher, than a very
young Child, and as he was in the days of his youth. See 2 King. 5.14.

Doct. 1. As bodily health is a great mercy, so that also is in Gods hand, to
dispense it as shall be for the good of his people; So that even deadly
discases will not get their will of them, without Gods Commission; For, here
the godly man has a promise that he shall recover of his disease.

2. The afflictions of godly men are made up to them with rich advantages, when
they come to Christ with them; and their loss proves their gain in the issue;
For, here he gets not only health, but, His flesh shall be fresher than a
Child's, he shall return to the days of his youth.

3. A sound Spirit, and the sense of Gods favor in Christ, is Sovereign
medicine and health to the body; For, upon his closing with, and Gods finding a
ransom, v. 24 this follows, that his flesh shall be fresher than a Child's,
etc. See Psalm. 103.3, 4, 5. Is. 33.24.

Verse 26. He shall pray unto God, and he will be favorable unto him, and he
shall see his face with joy: for he will render unto man his righteousness.
The third effect, is, renewed communion and sweet intercourse and fellowship
with God; which is here spoken of, not on^y as the mean of attaining a
deliverance from his sickness, but, as his practice and carriage after that God
has been gracious to him. The sum is, That he shall pray, and find
acceptance, and get a comfortable sight of Gods reconciled face; And that
because God shall render, or, restore his righteousness unto him. Where, by
righteousness, which is restored, we are not only to understand the effects of
Gods fidelity, and the righteous performance of his promises, but especially
that imputed righteousness which is Gods, as being of his finding out, and man's
also (and so the relative, His, being ambiguous, we may referr it to both)
because it is imputed to him, and so accounted his. Now this is said to be
restored, not that a godly man's justification can admit of an interruption, or
intercision, and be restored o^ new again; but the sense and comfort of it may
be suspended in a time of trial, and afterward clear up again. And this promise
seems to be relative to Jobs deserted condition, whereof he so frequently
complained.

Doct. 1. As Prayer is a blessed fruit of a successful Ministry upon an
afflicted person, and a mean of bringing about Gods gracious purposes for his
good, Ezekiel. 36.37. (For, here it is supposed, that this afflicted person, to
whom the Messenger has spoken, does pray. See Jam 5.13. And though God may
prevent our prayers, yet it is sad, when, in times of distress, our mercies are
readier than our prayers, and are retarded, only because we pray not.) So a
godly man will have to do with God by prayer, even after his affliction is
over: For, when he is recovered, he shall pray unto God. A godly man wants not
daily necessities, though he be delivered from eminent and singular
afflictions; his delight in Gods company will cause him make many errands to
him; and his nearness unto God will discover many wants to him, which he could
not see at a distance; nor will he be able to entertain that nearness and
communion without much prayer. In sum, this is a touchstone whereby we may try
a blessed deliverance, if it do not put us out of the need of prayer, nor be
accompanied with the neglect thereof. And this may also serve for caution, that
we do not mistake a condition, as if it were not good, so long as many errands
to God is the worst of it.

2. As the prayers of godly men are never what they should be, so they are not
alike at all times; For, though, no doubt, he prayed before; yet now (when he
is afflicted, but especially, when he is delivered) he begins to pray to God,
to some purpose, and prospers in it. The prayers, even of Saints, in the time
of their ease and prosperity, are, oft-times, dead and lazy, and offered up
without any sense of need; but now they become earnest and vehement
Supplicants, as the word imports. And albeit afflictions, tentations, and sense
of Gods anger, may rouse them up to pray with more fervency; Yet even then
their prayers are, oft-times, muddy, and full of passions, doubts and fears; as
may be seen in the Disciples prayers, when they are in a distress, Mark 4.38.
and in the many passionate complaints of afflicted Saints. But when a man comes
to close with imputed righteousness, and to taste of the love of God in
deliverances, then he is in the best frame for prayer. This may warn us,

1. Not to take every thing for prayer, which looks like it, where humility,
meekness, fervency, etc. do not shine in our addresses.

2. To suspect our own hearts, and to look well to our prayers, when we are in
fits of trouble.

3. To close with the love of God, and an interest in Christ, if we would pray
to purpose.

Doct. 3. How poor soever an account the Children of God may get of their
passionate complaints; Yet when they repent, and close with Christ for
righteousness, their prayers shall not fall to the ground, nor be l^st; For,
here they have a promise of success. See Matthew. 7.7. God takes so much delight
in the prayers of humble believers, that he will not reject them, Cant. 2.14.

4 Whatever bad success Saints seem to have in their prayers, when they are
thus qualified; Yet they are bound to believe that their persons and prayers
are accepted with God; For, He shall be favorable to him, or, well pleased
with him. So that,

1. God has no quarrel at them, whatever they get in an answer to their
prayers.

2. It is very comfortable, that, however they be exercised about some petty
concernments of lesser moment, in their prayers, yet the state of their persons
is secured.

3. They may expect favor and love in all they meet with, and are bound to
believe it, though they cannot discern it.

Doct. 5. As the joy of Saints depends upon the sight of Gods reconciled face,
Psalm. 4.6, 7. or, upon the hope of it, Psalm. 42.11. and not upon trifles; So,
however this sensible joy may be interrupted, and Gods face hid from them (for
their trial, or chastisement, and till they repent, and close with Christ:)
Yet, it may come again after much sadness; they may become favorites again,
and be admitted to see the Kings face, and that will renew and heighten their
joy: For, he shall see his face with joy. It is enough that this rich allowance
is in Gods hand, who will dispense it as may be for his peoples good.

6. Saints ought not to suspend their assurance of Gods favor and good will
upon their sensible satisfaction and joy, so as to question the one, if they
want the other; For Gods being gracious, v. 24. and favorable, here, are
distinct from the man's getting Joy, and this is but an effect and fruit of
those, and a fruit which does not at all times flow from them. So that they are
in a great mistake, who can see no favor but in sensible satisfaction.

7. Saints true joy, and sense of Gods favor, must depend upon, and flow from,
their justification and righteousness in Christ, and not their sanctification
only, or chiefly; For his joy in seeing Gods face flows from righteousness, as
the ground and reason of it, He shall see his face with joy, for he will render
unto man his righteousness. See 1 Pet. 1.8. Ps. 32 1, 6, 7.

8. The righteousness of God, imputed unto sinners, is sufficient to remove all
that could hinder our reconciliation and joy; For, it is here given as a
sufficient reason of what is promised.

9. As this righteousness is indeed Gods, who found it out, and impureth it,
and who is engaged in his faithfulness and righteousness to accept those who
make use of it; All which shows, that it is not an empty notion and fancy; So
he who flees unto Christ, may reckon it to be his own righteousness, by virtue
of that legal union that is betwixt Christ and him; Thus in a sound sense, this
relative, His, when it is called, His righteousness, may be referred both to
God and man, who are spoken of in the sentence, and we may safely look thus
upon it, when the Text does not determine, which of them is to be understood.

10. A justified man's righteousness may, at some times, be obscured and out of
his sight, by reason of his afflictions, guilt, tentations, sense of wrath,
etc. So that it may seem to himself to be lost; For, so is supposed here, that
it may be to be rendered, or, restored again. As we should entertain this
precious Jewel warily and tenderly, so we should not suspect it, because of
such changes and alterations.

11. When a deserted and bemisted Saint does renew his repentance, and flee to
Christ, he will find that his good estate is not lost when he wants the
evidence of it, but the clouds will clear again; For, he will render, (or,
return, or, restore) unto man his righteousness. See Ps. 51.12.

12. Albeit the good condition of Saints be irrecoverable by any diligence of
theirs, and so it may seem hopeless, when it is gone; Yet God himself can, and
will, clear all these clouds; For, he will render it. Which speaks much for
their encouragement, who find that they can do nothing but multiply and augment
clouds by their activity.

13. As it is sad to the Children of God, when their good estate is obscured
and hid from them; So they may expect that their joy shall be as great, when
their Sky clears again: For, then there is joy, when he renders to man his
righteousness.

Verse 27. He looks upon men, and if any say, I have sinned, and perverted
that which was right, and it profited me not:

28. He will deliver his soul from going into the pit, and his life shall see
the light.


These two Verses, as they are translated, contain a summary account of man's
duty in this matter, and of Gods kindness following thereupon; Who observes
men, and if he find any man penitent, and confessing his sin, v. 27. he does
deliver him from the pit; which imports not only, or so much, his deliverance
from eternal death (though that also be secured to the penitent) as from bodily
death, as the whole context, and the following words (which are added by way of
explication) do clear. But the Original, v. 27. has only (as in the Margin of
our Bibles) He shall look upon men, and say, I have sinned, etc. And v. 28. may
also be read (as our Margin has it) He has delivered my soul -- and my life,
etc. So these Verses will contain the last effect of all this proceeding
betwixt God and the afflicted man; Namely, The recovered man's confession and
acknowledgement (to the honor of God, and edification of others) both of his
sin, v. 27. and of Gods goodness toward him, notwithstanding his miscarriage,
v. 28, I take this to be the right reading of v. 27. That the afflicted man
shall confess his miscarriage, before others. And for the next Verse, all
comes to one purpose, whether we read it as the man's acknowledgement of what
God has done for him, or, as Elihu's intimation, in Gods name, that this shall
be done to him, upon his confession and repentance for his sin.

From v. 27. Learn, 1. The transactions that are betwixt God and his poople,
the changes that are in their condition, and the variety of his dispensations
toward them, are worthy to be marked by all; For, so is here supposed, in that
it is fit to tell all this to men.

2. It is the character of persons whose afflictions are sanctified, and who
are penitent, that they are public minded, and mind the good and edification
of others; For, He shall look seriously (as the word imports) upon men, and
seek to edify them. See Psalm. 51.12, 13. Luke 22.31, 32. He sees the evil of
men's security, and insensibleness of Gods kindness, as having smarted himself
for that folly; and he sees men to be but frail creatures, (as their name here
imports) and ready to fall into such evils, and therefore he would have them
remedied and prevented.

3. Albeit closing with Christ's righteousness be the great work of godly men,
yet renewing of repentance must go along with it; For, here this man is a
penitent.

4. Repentance (especially for public sins) must not be huddled up in corners,
but publicly avowed, as we have opportunity in our stations, and as the nature
of the offense requires, that so it may be exemplary; As here his repentance
is publicly professed.

5. As even the regenerate have sin, and must be sensible of it under trouble
(that so they may justify God who has afflicted them, and may make it their
greatest task to remove sin under the cross, Is. 27 9.) So a blessed
deliverance continues the sight and sense of sin, and repentance for it; For,
both when he is afflicted and delivered (as the words may relate to both) he is
at this, I have sinned.

6. A true penitent will not care to shame himself, that he may glorify God by
the confession of his sin; For, looking upon men, he will say, I have sinned.
See Josh. 7 19. Dan. 9.7, 8, 9.

7. It is not enough to see or confess sin, unless it be seen in the
aggravations thereof; As here, it is subjoyned, I have sinned, and perverted,
etc. See Romans 7.13.

8. Repentance will make a strange change in men's judgments, in approving what
is excellent; For, what he before neglected and slighted, is now found to be
right, and the Law, which enjoynes it, to be just and good, Romans 7.12.

9. It is a sad aggravation of sin, in a penitents esteem, when he has not
only done wrong, but perverted that which was right, as it is here expressed,
either by being stubborn in an evil course, or by wresting his light, and the
rule of right and wrong, to make what is wrong seem right; much more (if that
can be incident to a renewed Child of God) by opposing and resisting what is
right in others, as Act. 13.8, 10.

10. Whatever sinful courses do promise, or, sinners do fancy, yet penitents
will find sin an unprofitable course; For, says he, It profited me not; Which
imports also (for it is a diminutive expression) that it is destructive, and
had proved so to him, if grace had not prevented. See Romans 6.21.

11. Albeit the offense committed against God should most sadly affect a
penitent; yet his own folly, in taking such an unprofitable course, may
aggravate his crime, and contribute to the heightening of his sorrow; As here
it is taken notice of, upon that account.

From v. 18. Learn, 1. True penitents will find a sweet account of the change
of Gods dealing toward them; As here is intimated (whether we read it as a
promise, or as the man's acknowledgement) that, in stead of chastisement, there
comes a great deliverance.

2. A penitent will not only get deliverance from eternal wrath, but even from
temporal judgments, in so far as is for his good; For, his soul, or, life, is
delivered from the pit, or, grave, and his life shall see the light, and shall
not go through that dark trance of death, in a cloud. And albeit our temporal
life be not much worth; Yet it is a mercy not to be despised, especially in
such a case: And even common mercies will look sweetly upon a penitent.

3. As mercy does good, even to them who have been evil, and grace will pardon
and cure, even the perverseness of Gods people; (as this Verse compared with
the former does teach) So this should set forth the praise of God, and
encourage them to repent yet more; For, so much does this import, as it is the
delivered man's speech, that he blesses God, who had delivered him,
notwithstanding he had sinned.

4. The greater the difficulties of Gods penitent people are, they will
contribute to make the praises of God sound the louder, for his delivering from
them; For, this heightens the song, that he delivers even from the pit, or
grave.

Verse 29. Lo, all these things works God oftentimes with man.

30. To bring back his soul from the pit, to be enlightened with the light of
the living.


In these Verses, Elihu briefly recapitulates this second Argument, which he
propounded, v. 14. and has been instancing in the following Verses hitherto;
And shows, That God makes frequent use of those various means of instruction,
formerly mentioned, for man's good, that he may be excited to renew his
repentance, and so may not be cut off, but recovered out of trouble, and made
to live comfortably. In the Original, instead of, oftentimes, it is, twice,
thrice, whereby he does not so much point at the three ways of instructing
man, which have been formerly instanced, as names a certain number for an
uncertain, and intimates, that God even frequently renews all or any of those
former means, to the same godly man, or to diverse of them diversely, that he may
prevent their ruin. This Elihu recapitulates for Jobs information, to clear
his mistakes about his own case, and to give him a check for his ignorance of
what was so frequently and ordinarily done about godly men.

Doct. 1. Gods dealings about his people should be seriously looked upon, and
pondered, again and again; For, so much does Elihu's recapitulation of this
matter import, that Job should look, and look again, upon it. See Ps. 28.5.

2. Whatever good be done to, or about, Gods people, by whatever mean or
instrument, God is to be seen as the worker of it all; For, God works all
these things, formerly mentioned, with man.

3. Gods condescending to take notice of men, and even of his people, is
admirable; Considering that man is nothing to him, Psalm. 8.4. and that his
dispensations toward them are wonderful; For, Lo, says he, God works all
these, etc.

4. It is, in particular, admirable, that God should condescend so frequently
to be at pains about his people; and that, after they have abused mercies, and
slighted means, yet, he will follow them; For, this heightens the admiration,
that God works these, oftentimes, with man; that when Visions succeed not, he
will send Affliction, and a Messenger with it, and will repeat every one of
these so often as need requires.

5. Gods dispensations should be studied and looked upon, not only in
themselves, but with an eye to his end and design in them; Therefore he
subjoynes for what end God works all these things,

6. Whatever the godly may apprehend; yet God, by all his dispensations, minds
their good, and they will find that it is so, if they improve them well; For,
such is his end in all his working, here subjoyned, v. 30 See Romans 8.28.

7. God may bring about his peoples good by means that are not very likely;
For, all that working tends to bring back from the pit; Not only visions, but
even deadly afflictions, are sent to prevent (not only eternal, but temporal)
death.

8. Gods kindness to his people, and his designs in strange dispensations,
would be better seen, if men would study preventing, as well as delivering,
mercies: For, here God not only delivers out of trouble, but brings back from
the pit, and prevents his death.

9. As the mercies whereof the godly are deprived by trouble, are restored to
them with advantage; So those mercies should be more precious in their eyes,
when they are thus restored: For, man recovered out of deadly trouble, is
enlightened with the light of the living. He gets as it were a new life, and he
esteems it so, and it is very comfortable and lightsome to him. See Is. 38.18,
19.

10. It is a fault, when godly men complain of their lot as singular, and so
make it bitter to themselves, when it is but ordinary; or, to be ignorant of
what ordinarily befalls godly men, and to quarrel, when their lot is but
ordinary: For, thus does he shur up his Argument, refuting and quarrelling Jobs
complaints, and his professing of his ignorance of Gods mind in his trial, by
showing, that God works these things, oftentimes, for these ends, and
therefore he needed neither have been ignorant of it, nor ought to have
quarrelled it.

Verse 31. Mark well, O Job, hearken unto me, hold thy peace, and I will speak.

32. If thou have any thing to say, answer me: Speak, for I desire to justify
thee.

33. If not, hearken unto me: Hold thy peace, and I shall teach thee wisdom.


These Verses, contain the Conclusion of Elihu's first Speech (after which it
seems, he was silent awhile, to see if Job would make any Reply) and a
preparation to his second Speech. Wherein,

1. In general, he craves that Job would seriously remark what he had said, and
attend to what he was yet to say, v. 31.

2. He explains this his desire, Showing, That he desired not, by speaking on,
to hinder him from saying what he could in his own defense, as the rest had
done. For he was neither engaged in this quarrel out of any malice against his
person, nor was he a contentious man; but desired to justify and absolve him,
if he could show him good grounds for it, v. 32. But if he had no more to say,
he craves audience, and promises to teach him wisdom, v. 33. And so Job,
finding that he spoke to purpose, keeps silence, and he proceeds in the
following Chapter.

From these Verses, Learn, 1. It concerns men so much to see how they entertain
what men say unto them from God, wherein they have taken much pains; Therefore
does Elihu so often, in the beginning and close of his discourses, put Job to
this task.

2 Afflicted men have need, especially, to look how they entertain those
messages, which touch them nearly, and do point out their faults; For,
afflicted Job is called to mark and hearken, unto what he had told, and would
tell him, concerning his miscarriages.

3. Simple audience is not enough, but serious attention and observation are
required, when God by his Messengers speaks to us, particularly, in affliction;
For, says he, Mark well, and heaken unto me.

4. Such as make conscience of right hearing, will not in passion interrupt
them who speak; For, says he, Hold thy peace, and I will speak. It is not very
certain, that Job was interrupting him till he forbad him; For, in the next
Verse, he gives him free leave to speak. Yet, as it is certain, that Job was
not yet fully convinced or satisfied, and therefore so much is said to him
after this; So, it may be that Job was offering to except or propound somewhat,
till Elihu desire him to hear him out; offering, notwithstanding, to hear if he
had any thing to say to the purpose, as being his true friend. Which kindness
(among other things) possibly, did so work upon Job, that he gave over his
purpose, and choosed rather to hear, than to speak. However, passionately to
interrupt the Messengers of God, is a very great sin; And however men do
forbear that practice, yet they may interrupt their own edification, if they
keep not their own Spirits composed, and be not as men dumb and deaf (as the
word, Hear, signifies) as to any thing they think irritating in the message.

5. They who would refute and convince men, who are in an error, ought to give
them a fair hearing, however they interrupt their impertinencies; For, though
he desire he will hold his peace, yet, says he, If thou have any thing to say,
answer me, either now, if thou please, or after I have spoken all my mind.

6. Men will never give others a fair hearing, nor speak a right to a cause, so
long as they are contentious, and do entertain prejudices against persons, or,
being once engaged, do strive more for victory, than for truth, and so do cast
iniquity upon men, Psalm. 55.3. For, says he, giving a reason of his offer, for
I desire to justify thee, in so far as is possible, or, if there were ground
for it.

7. As men should thus give a fair hearing to those with whom they deal; So,
upon the other hand, when men have no solid answer, they should not jangle in
their own defense; but hear and take reproof; For, says he, If not, hearken
unto me, hold thy peace.

8. It is their duty who deal with others, especially those in distress who
give them an hearing, to teach them solid wisdom, and not empty notions; For,
says he, I will teach thee wisdom.

9. As there is no man so wise, but he needs to be more wise, and may need
instruction to know God and himself, when he is in trouble; So, a just cause
gives a weak man great advantage of a st^^ng party: For, in all these respects
he says to Job, I will teach thee wisdom, intimating, that Job, a great and
wise man, needs instruction that he may be more wise; especially now when he is
in the dark through much perplexity and trouble; And though Job was a great
Prince, and Elihu but a young man, yet he counts it no arrogance, having truth
on his side, to say, that he is able to teach Job in this matter.

CHAP. XXXIV.
This Chapter contains Elihu's second Speech; wherein he proceeds (as would
appear, after some pause, to deal yet further with Job. For, Job (by not
replying) evidencing that he liked him better than his other Friends, he goes
on to teach and improve him ye more. The Speech is much in substance like the
former, as tending to reprehend Job unhappy expressions under trouble: Only, he
is more sharp in this, than in his form discourse. And having gained audience,
he speaks freely, and home to his faults; no denying him to be an honest man,
but asserting that he had said things which were no honest.

The Chapter may be taken up in the four parts, First, A Preface, wherein he
calls for attention from the judicious Auditory, v. 1 -- 4. Secondly, A Charge,
or, a Proposition of those expressions in Jobs discourses, which, at this time,
he intends to refute, v. 5, 6. Thirdly, A Refutation of these expressions, by
showing the absurdities thereof, and the gross consequences which might justly
be fastened upon them, v. 7, 8, 9. And by Arguments taken from the Justice and
Dominion of God; which he, First, propounds to the Auditory, v. 10 -- 15. and
then presses them home largely upon Job himself, v. 16 -- 30. Fourthly, A
Conclusion, wherein he advises Job, and reprehends him sharply, desiring that
he may be yet further tried, v. 31 -- 37.

Verse 1. Furthermore Elihu answered and said,

2. Hear my words, O ye wise men, and give ear unto me, ye that have knowledge.

3. For the ear tries words, as the mouth tastes meat.

4. Let us choose to us judgment: let us know among our selves what is good.


THese Verses, contain the Preface and Introduction to Elihu's second Speech;
wherein (after a transition made by the Writer of the Book, showing that Elihu
proceeded to speak, v. 1.)

First, He desires attention from judicious and understanding hearers, v. 2.
This he does not speak Ironically, as thinking there was no wisdom among them;
but because he really judged so of their abilities. And we are to conceive,
that he propounds this desire generally to such understanding persons as were
present, whether the three Friends (who were wise men, though they erred in
that particular in debate) or others. Only, it seems, he secludes Job in this
desire, as being a Party, and therefore speaks of him in the third person, v.
5, 7. Though yet he does not simply seclude him, for he speaks of his cause in
his hearing, and afterward speaks to him; Only he desires that judicious men
may hear the matter debated betwixt Job and him.

Secondly, He subjoynes reasons pressing this desire.

1. That they were able to discern what was true or false in this matter, v. 3.
It is expressed in a common Proverb (and therefore it was made use of by Job.
Chap. 12.11.) the meaning whereof is, That God has given men an ear (which
includes the discerning faculty) to hear and try doctrine, as he has given
them a mouth to receive and taste meat. And therefore Elihu might well press
them to give an hearing; For since all Doctrine is to be tried, they who were
wise and judicious were most fit to do it; and they could easily discern if he
wronged Job, seeing he had not appealed to Idiots, but to them who had greatest
abilities.

2. That he was not seeking victory in this debate, but only that in a friendly
way they should commune and seek out what is just, and right and good, v. 4.

From v. 1. which is the transition, Learn,

1. Godly men are not soon convinced of all their failings in an hour of
tentation; For, Elihu has yet more of Jobs miscarriage to answer and refute.

2. Albeit even godly men may be hard to convince, when they are under
tentation; and albeit unskilful usage may distemper and irritate them more; Yet
those who are called to deal with them should still continue, hoping they may
at last prevail with them; And wise managing of reproof, will, through the
blessing of God, convince them at last, and cause them take with sharpest
reproofs: For, here Elihu's proceeding was not only his duty, though Job had
not yet been convinced in the least; But Jobs allowing him, by his silence, to
go on, does evidence, that he had taken with his wise reproofs, though he
could not relish nor digest what his other Friends had said.

3. When men have opportunity and hope of doing goods it should so much the
more encourage them to go on without wearying; For, finding no resentment, nor
reply from Job (as he had wont to do to his other Friends) he goes on, and
furthermore answered and said.

4. When men begin to be sober, and somewhat convinced of their miscarriages,
their work is not yet all done who deal with them; but they need that their
convictions should be rivited upon them: For, though Jobs silence (and possibly
his other carriage) witnessed how he relished what Elihu had said, yet he
proceeds furthermore to answer, not only because he had yet more faults to
charge him with, and more expressions of his to condemn; but because he would
have what he had heard and received take deeper impression upon him.

From v. 2. Learn, 1. Albeit godly men become somewhat tractable in trouble,
yet they are not at first so fit as others to judge of their own way and
carriage; Therefore, though Job do hear him silently, as liking what he said
better than what his Friends said, yet he calls to others also to hear his
words, and what he has to charge upon Job.

2. There are many passages of Divine Providence, and many truths concerning
his way with his people, which require all the skill and experience of men to
judge of them aright; For, he requires not only men that have knowledge or
light, but wise men (or, men who have experience, which many want who yet have
knowledge) to hear his words, and give ear, and judge in this matter. There are
depths of wisdom about the people of God, which, without much light and
experience, they will readily mistake.

3. Such as are for truth will not huddle up their opinions among the simple,
(as is the practice of Seducers, Romans 16.17, 18. 2 Timothy 3.6, 7.) but will not
decline that even the most able hear and judge; For, not only did the
weightiness of the matter require such Auditors, but even his confidence in his
cause makes him appeal to them.

4. It is the character of these who are truly wise and understanding (and not
filled only with a conceit of their own abilities) that they are never above
the means of instruction; but are most willing to be taught, and helped to
promove in knowledge: Therefore also, when he is to teach wisdom, Chap. 33.33.
he calls unto wise men, and them that have knowledge, as persons who would most
readily hear and give ear.

5. Even when men are about most grave and serious matters, and among grave and
wise men, there is such a dullness, that they need to be seriously excited to
give attention; For, therefore does Elihu make use of this Preface, exhorting
the Auditors to hear and give ear, at the beginning of every one of his
Speeches, and sometime repeats it also in the midst of his discourse, as we
will hear.

6. It is their duty who are called to deal with others, to carry respectively
toward them, that so they may prepare the way for their message; Therefore
also, albeit some of those to whom he speaks had erred, yet, he does call them
wise men, and they that have knowledge, that thereby he might conciliate their
affections, and make them willing to hearken unto him.

From v. 3. (omitting what is marked upon Chap. 12.11.) Learn,

1. Men receive great benefit, particularly, in sacred and holy things, by the
ear; For so is here imported, that the ear, receives words, or instructions
from others, particularly, concerning the things of God, such as he is now
treating of. As the truths of God depend upon Divine Revelation, so our own
observation of what he reveals is not sufficient to take it all in, without the
assistance of information and instruction from others. And therefore they who
employ not their ears to hear, do no less prejudge their own souls, than they
do wrong their bodies who make not use of their mouths for eating. Yea, the
very constitution of their bodies, and the ear, which God has made for that
use, Prove. 20.12. will bear witness against their negligence.

2, As God requires that we do hear, so also that we try and discern of what
we hear, with a consequent approbation or rejection of it, as there is cause;
For, so the ear tries words, as the mouth, (or, palate,) tastes meat, and it
is swallowed down, or cast out again, according as the palate relisheth it, ill
or well.

3. Whatever defect there be in others, in the matter of discerning; Yet men of
experience and knowledge should have their senses exercised to discern good and
evil; Heb. 5.14. For, therefore does he appeal to these wise men, seeing their
ear, could try words, etc.

From v. 4. Learn, 1. It is the duty of such as would prosper, or do good to
others, to aim singly at truth; For, in his disquisition and enquiry about this
matter, he would be at judgment, or, an equitable and just determination of
this controversy, and what is good.

2. Men ought not to follow, or, enquire after, truth, upon any carnal or
crooked design, but because it is their delight, and they esteem it only good
and worth the knowing; For, because it is judgment and good, and so worthy the
knowing, therefore he would have it chosen, affectionately and with delight.

3. It is men's duty, and will be the practice of sober men, as to aim at truth,
so also to study to bring up others, in a calm and friendly way, to the
acknowledgement thereof, without insulting over, or derogating from them, or
affecting emicency to themselves: Therefore, albeit some of them were wrong,
yet he is content to go about this work in a friendly way, and as it were with
common consent, Let us choose, etc. Let us know, etc.

Verse 5. For Job has said, I am righteous: and God has taken away my
judgment.

6. Should I lie against my right? My wound is incurable without transgression.


These Verses contain the second part of the Chapter, or, a Proposition of
these expressions of Job, which he intends, at this time, to refute. The
challenge is the same in substance with what was propounded in the former
Chapter; Namely, That Job had wronged God by his complaints; but this is more
sharply refuted and spoken to. He charge him to have said,

First, That though he was righteous, yet God had taken away his judgment, or,
he got not a fair hearing and decision of his cause, v. 5. As for that part of
the Charge, That Job said, he was righteous, he has had it so frequently in
his mouth, in his discourses, that it is needless to instance any particular
place for it. See Chap. 13.18. and 23.10, 11, 12. and 27.6. and 31.5, 6, 7. And
for the second part of the Charge, That God had taken away his judgment, we
find it expressly spoken by Job, Chap. 27.2.

Secondly, He charge him with obstinacy in those complaints, and that he
said, That it was no less, than a lying against his own right, to say any other
thing of his condition, than that his affliction (caused by those arrows of the
Almighty, Chap. 6.4. as the word here is) was mortal and incurable, even though
he was a man free of transgression, v. 6. This Charge seems to be the same, in
substance, with what Job had said, Chap. 27. -- 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. though it may be
gathered also from his frequent complaints of the fad strokes which had
befallen him an innocent man, Chap. 9.17. and 19.7. and 16 13, 17.

For clearing of this Charge, Consider,

1. As Job did never assert his sinlessness (as may appear from his frequent
confessions of sin) but only that he was righteous, as to the state of his
person, and the cause debated betwixt him and his Friends; and consequently,
that phrase, v. 6. to be without transgression, will import no more, in Jobs
sense, but that he was free of gross wickedness: So Elihu does not charge it
upon him, as a crime, that he had simply seen and asserted his righteousness;
but that he took occasion thereby to aggravate his complaints.

2. He does not charge him, that he had directly taxed God as unrighteous; but
only, that, in his passion, and being put to it by his Friends, he spoke too
much of his own righteousness, without a due remembrance of what sinfulness yet
remained in him, and what it deserved; and so complained too bitterly of God,
that he did not vindicate and clear him, when he was not only sore oppressed
with trouble, but unjustly censured by his Friends. Thus, albeit Job was sound
in the main cause, and his expressions (upon some accounts) pleaded for pity;
Yet, they were not so suitable and reverent, as became him. And therefore Elihu
gathers together what he had spoken at several times, and charge him
therewith, that he may be convinced of his rashness and folly in them.

Those expressions have been spoken to in their proper places, and the
subjoyned refutation will discover more particularly his failings in them; And
therefore I shall here only observe a few things.

1. The dearest Children of God, when they are hard put to it by troubles and
tentations, may discover more weaknesses, and fall into more faults, than one;
As here he finds faulty expressions, beside those formerly marked. Tentation
and trial may discover what we would little dream of, and will let us see, that
(as it was with Hazael, 2 King. 8.11, 12, 13.) we are little known, till we be
tried. And therefore we should not presumptuously rush, or cast our selves upon
tentations; and when they are made our Lot, we should watch and be sober, and
should observe those ugly sights of our selves which then may be discovered
unto us.

2. Albeit the people of God think little of their faults, when they are in
passion, especially, if they do but drop out now and then, and some good is
mixed among them; Yet, when they are impartially reviewed, and put together,
they will appear ugly. Therefore, however the sum of what is here challenged
may be gathered from Chap. 27.2 -- 6. Yet it is Elihu's scope to gather
together also the sum of Jobs speeches, scattered here and there, that he may
look upon them all together, and be convinced of the evil of them. This may
give, even unto godly men, a sad and humbling sight of their ways; and
therefore they should study to avoid relapses, and should call themselves
frequently to an account and reckoning, lest, otherwise, all their accounts
come at once upon them: Yet it will be much sadder to the wicked, when all
their faults shall be gathered together, and laid to their charge, Ps. 50.21.

3. It is good service to God, and a kindness to godly men, not to flatter
them, but to lay open their faults till they see them in their ugliness; and
when they are humbled in part, to humble them yet more, that they be not too
soon satisfied with themselves; Therefore, albeit Job was silent at his former
charge, yet he goes on with this new charge against him. Thus when men are
even pricked in their hearts, there is yet need that they should repent, Act.
2.37, 38.

4. It is not enough, that godly men mean well, or have good intentions, in
what they do or say, but even their very disorderly language, or the least
other defect, ought to be mourned for; Therefore he challenges what Job had
said, or seemed to say, albeit he thought not so ill. Even the least defect is
a blemish in good actions, and unadvised language in our passion, should not be
lightly passed over, but repented of. See Ps. 106.32, 33.

5. Any reflection upon God and his dealing, though never so indirect, ought to
be mourned for; As here he challenges Job, that he said, God had taken away
his judgment, or, obscured his integrity, and gave occasions of suspicions
against him, by his afflicting of him, and not appearing to clear him. High and
right thoughts of God under trouble are not easily attained, and yet the want
of them is not justifiable.

6. Though righteous men may lawfully maintain their integrity, notwithstanding
their afflictions, or, when it is called in question; Yet, ordinarily, this
defense is but ill managed under trouble, especially when the righteousness of
God is not exalted: For, albeit Job spoke true, when he said, I am righteous,
yet he took occasion from this to complain of Gods dispensations. Men have need
to look how they manage the testimony of a good conscience under trouble; and
they have cause to suspect themselves, when they are only complaining, and
forgetting to praise and commend God.

7. As the integrity of godly men may, sometime, lie long under a cloud, and
not be cleared; so this is a very sad trial in a time of affliction, though no
just cause of complaint; For, however Job sinned in complaining of God, yet,
this was really a sad affliction, that, being righteous, his judgment was
taken away, and he lay buried under the misconstructions and censures of his
Friends: And therefore they are cruel, who put afflicted godly men to this
trial, by their uncharitable censures. And those who are thus put to it, ought
to be upon their guard, that they may bear it well; and, for this end, they
should comfort themselves in Gods testimony.

8. It is, indeed, a sin for men to lie against their right, or to deny the
goodness of God to them, and his grace in them, or to acknowledge a wrong where
there is no cause; For, this Question, Should I lie against my right? imports
so much in general. And many doubters and raisers of quarrels and jealousies
about their own condition, should take heed to this.

9. Saints may be right in the main cause which they defend, who yet may
over-act in the defense of it; For, though Job was right, and his Friends
wronged him, yet this is laid to his charge as a presumptuous expression,
Should I lie against my right? because his presumptuous and passionate defense
of the right put him in the wrong. And here we may observe, Partly, That Saints
are never more ready to miscarry without discerning it, than when they are
right upon the matter in what they are about; They will not so openly wander in
ways of open provocation, and (at least) not see it, and be sensible of it, as
when they are about right things, and do only fail in the way of going about
them; As Job, having a right in this debate, does not so easily discern how
unhappily he expressed his defenses of it. Partly, That irritations and
injuries, received from others, will easily hide from us our miscarriages, in
seeking to vindicate and repair our selves; As Job is so eager in looking to
his Friends injustice, in bidding him renounce his integrity, and so lie
against his right, that he does not heed how his passion, in resenting that,
does mis-lead himself.

10, Boisterous willfulness is an ordinary distemper of Saints under tentation,
and an addition to their sin; For, this vehement Question, Should I lie, etc,
and an addition of a new complaint, My wound is incurable, etc. instead of
retracting any thing he had formerly said, argues him to be resolute and
wilful in his undertaking, and Elihu charge him therewith, as an addition to
his dittay: Sins are so much the more heinous, as there is much of will in
them; and they are not free of this who have been much dealt with, and yet do
not amend.

11. Men do heighten their own resentments at Gods dispensations, by mistaking
their own condition; For, though it was true he was wounded by Gods arrow, who
may pierce and wound whom, and when, and where, he pleases; it was true, also,
that his wound was incurable by himself, or any other creature; Yet it was his
error to pronounce it simply incurable, whether in respect of the power of God
(which he never meant) or his good will, as the issue proved. Therefore, if men
would prevent much vexation and miscarriage, they would study to read their
condition aright; remembering that a case may seem incurable which really is not
so, nor will prove so; and that we may well see what our trial is, but we
cannot tell, what God will make of it, as Job found in the issue.

12. Were the condition of Saints never so sad, and even desperate as to any
hopes of a temporal issue, yet that is no just cause to complain, or quarrel
God, and reflect upon his dispensations; For, suppose it had been as Job
thought, yet Elihu charge it upon him as a crime, that he should so bitterly
complain, My wound is incurable.

13. It is the great sin of Saints, when, because they see no gross
transgressions in themselves, they see no cause, wherefore God may humble and
afflict them; seeing their other faults may deserve all that, and God may put
them to give proof of their graces under the cross: For, this was a fault in
Job, that he said, My wound is incurable without transgression.

Verse 7. What man is like Job, who drinks up scorning like water?
Follows the third part of the Chapter, or Elihu's Refutation of those
expressions; which he does,

1. More generally, by pointing out the absurdity and gross consequences
thereof, v. 7, 8, 9.

2. More particularly, by commending and demonstrating the Righteousness and
Sovereignty of God, which those expressions seemed to contradict. And these he
both propounds to the consideration of all unbyassed persons, v. 10 -- 15. and
lays them before Job, in particular, so amplifying and enlarging them, as
might convince him of his miscarriage, v. 16 -- 30.

So in the first place, and before he proceed to the proper Arguments for
refuting of Jobs expressions, he premits (in this, and the two following
Verses) a more general acount of his thoughts of them, and how much he detested
them; as evidencing Job to be an odd man, who so greedily followed so
ridiculous a course, v. 7. and who did strengthen the hands of the wicked too
much by what he had spoken, v. 8. Particularly, by his speaking to the
disadvantage of piety, v. 9. In this Verse we have to Consider,

1. Jobs singularity in this fault, What man is like Job? The meaning whereof
is, not that there was none so gross and wicked as he, even in this particular
miscarriage; (For wicked hypocrites have reviled Gods providence and
dispensations more directly and grossly, Is. 58.3. Mal. 3.13, 14, 15.) but, that
there was none like him, all things considered, in miscarrying so far, being a
man so eminently godly.

2. A general account of his ill carriage, in this, that he drinks up
scorning like water. See the like phrase, Chap. 15.16. Here I do not take
scorning actively, that Job was turned a scorner, (though indeed he did
sometime taunt his Friends, and did speak it reverently of God and his
providence; and to be such a scorner, or any thing like it, is a very heinous
sin, Psalm. 1.1. Prove. 1.22.) But passively, and as a due Epithete of the matter
which he spoke, that it was scornful and ridiculous; As it was indeed
ridiculous to offer to decry the righteousness of God, and to ascribe
righteousness to himself, while he denied it to God, in the sense which has
been often cleared. This his fault is further aggravated, that he drank this
like water; that is, as a thirsty man will drink water (which was their
ordinary drink in those times and places) greedily and abundantly, to refresh
himself, and quench his thirst; so Job very greedily, earnestly and frequently,
persisted in this course, and the more he was irritated by his Friends, the
more he went on in it, as if it had been a refreshful subject, and an ease to
him to vent his passion against God and his dispensations.

From this Verse, Learn, 1. It is a great kindness to deal freely and fully
with Gods people, in telling them their faults; to prevent their being so
blinded, as not to see them, or their being cheated and deluded with a conceit
that they are but small faults, when indeed they are gross: Therefore does he
deal so roughly with Job, that he may drive him from those fits of folly and
passion. Wherein he does not evidence any want of charity, in putting his
expressions upon the rack, and putting the hardest construction upon them that
any mistaker could fasten upon them (which is his scope in these sharp
expressions, and foul consequences which he draws from his words, in these
Verses; for he does not charge Job with all these, as if he intended them) but
does evidence his love, in letting him see what might be made of his
expressions, that so he might mourn for them. It is better that Friends deal
thus in time, than that God and men's own consciences do it afterward, little to
their comfort.

2. Even sins which seem small, when well ripped up by a spiritual discerner,
or tender conscience, may appear very gross and heinous; For, so does Elihu
construct of Jobs complaints.

3. Sins are nothing the less heinous, that they are committed by godly men;
but their falling in sin does aggravate it, and the more eminent they are,
their sin is the greater; For, says he, What man is like Job? When godly men
do that which other Saints, or the generation of Gods Children, use not to do;
or when they speak to the prejudice of God, or of holiness, which they should
commend; or when they persist in any fault (all which were Jobs faults here)
their being godly persons, does not extenuate, but aggravate, those
miscarriages.

4. Albeit sin be but a sad sport, yet even the wise and solid children of God
may, in their fits of tentation, be very absurd and ridiculous in their
miscarriages; As here is charged upon Job, that he did drink scorning, or, did
that which was scornful and ridiculous. Yea, Saints may, in such cases, prove
very beasts, Psalm. 73.22. Which may very much humble them, when they consider
it.

5. It is, in particular, a very scornful and absurd thing, for a man to offer
to bear out his own righteousness, to the prejudice of the righteousness of God
in his dispensations, or to contradict our profession by our practice; For,
thus did Job drink scorning, by crying up his own righteousness to the
prejudice of the righteousness of God, by which practice he contradicted what
elsewhere he spoke to the commendation of God.

6. When men once engage in a sinful course, it will easily grow upon their
hand; and godly men may persist long, and be very eager, in their miscarriages,
if their tentation continue: For, Job drank scorning like water.

7. Men's eagerness and obstinacy in an ill course is a great aggravation
thereof; For thus does he aggravate Jobs fault, that he did not only meddle
with scorning, but did drink it like water.

Verse 8. Which goes in company with the workers of iniquity, and walks with
wicked men.
In this Verse, Elihu does yet further point out the evil of Jobs complaints,
showing that, consequentially, and upon the matter, he joined issue with wicked
men. Not that he will fasten upon him that he is wicked, or, that he intended
wickedness in his complaints; But that, if his complaints were narrowly
examined, they could not but be found scandalous, and to homologate the
principles and opinions of profane men, as is further cleared in the following
Verse. Hereby, as he explains how scornful Jobs way was, it being a repugnancy,
and a ridiculous thing, that a man should be asserting his righteousness, and
yet walking in the wickeds way: So he affrights him from such courses, and
invites him to be humbled for them, by leading him to consider, that, whatever
he might say for his complaints, yet they seemed to sadden godly men, and to
harden the wicked.

Doct. 1. Albeit all men be sinners, and even the wicked may pretend that their
faults are but infirmities; Yet there are wicked men, or, men of wickedness,
contradistinct from simple sinners; as here is insinuated.

2. It is the character of wicked men, that they make no conscience of any kind
of sin, were it even iniquity, and that they make a trade of sin, and are
workers af iniquity; as here we are also taught.

3. It is a great sin, and will be so esteemed by godly men, when they are in a
right frame, to join, in any measure, with wicked men in their ill courses;
For, he would rouse up Job to abhor his way, by showing him that it was, a
going in company with the workers of iniquity, and a walking with wicked men.
Whereby he means, not so much a fellowship and keeping company with wicked men's
persons (which is not simply unlawful, if men have a calling thereto, however
it be full of snares) as a joining with them in their courses.

4. Even godly men, in an hour of tentation, may go out of their way, and play
odd pranks; whereby they may seem to justify, or join issue with wicked men,
or do or say that which may occasion their hardening in their way; As here Job
seemed to join issue and walk with wicked men, while he wronged the
righteousness of God, and saw not the advantages of piety so well as he ought.

5. It is good service to let godly men see the evil of their way and
complaints, to humble them, and drive them from them; For, therefore does Elihu
point out Jobs carriage to him in so ugly a shape, to make him abhor such a
course, which did so much gratify wicked men in their way.

Verse 9. For he has said, It profits a man nothing: that he should delight
himself with God.
In this Verse, Elihu does not so much point at any particular expressions of
Job (as he did, v. 5, 6.) as prove and confirm, these general accusations, v.
7, 8. by showing what, consequentially, might be gathered from these his former
expressions, and others like them. For when he complained so hard of Gods
dealing with him, a righteous man; and had elsewhere said that God destroyed
both the righteous and the wicked, Chap. 9.22. and had spoken so much of the
wickeds prosperity, Chap. 21.7, 8, etc. and of his own sad adversity, Chap.
30.26. and frequently elsewhere; What could any hearer gather, but that he
reckoned that there was no advantage to be reaped by piety? It is true, Job
spoke only of temporal events, that they come alike to all, Chap. 9.22. which
was a truth he had warrantably maintained against his Friends; Nor is it to be
conceived, that Job meant that there was no advantage in piety, even in this
life, though godly men be afflicted: But Elihu puts him to consider how that
assertion, attended with so vehement complaints about his lot, to which he was
driven through the heat of contention, did so overcloud all, as the Auditors
might conceive he saw no advantage in piety, since he, a godly man, complained
so bitterly, as if all were gone, because he was afflicted.

Doct. 1. It is the duty of those who would prove their piety to be real, to
converse, and be much with God; to do this, not only out of necessity, but to
delight in God, and to keep communion with him; And (for this end) to study to
be well pleased and satisfied with God, and his dispensations; as the word also
signifies.

2. Whatever men think, either in prosperity, Chap. 21.14, 15. and 22.17. or in
adversity, Mal. 3.14, 15. yet there is a real advantage in piety, 1 Timothy 4.8.
and 6.6. For, he quarrels Job, as contradicting this truth without cause. For
(beside the eternal reward) piety has advantage in this life, that it brings a
man solid peace in all conditions, and that all things are sanctified, blessed,
and done in love, to godly men.

3. As it is a sin in any, so a godly man, especially, will think it so in
himself, to speak or do any thing to the disadvantage of piety; For, he uses
this as a strong Argument to convince and humble Job, that he said, It
profits a man nothing, that he should delight himself with God.

4. Even godly men may fail and come short in their due esteem of piety, when
either, for a time, they slide, and cast out with piety, as Psalm. 73. or when,
in an hour of tentation, they cannot see the advantages of piety, by reason of
their present pressures; As here he charge upon Job. So that to love piety in
weal and woe, and not to regard our profit, so God may be honored, is a noble
victory, and an evidence of a man in a good frame.

Verse 10. Therefore hearken unto me, ye men of understanding: Far be it from
God, that he should do wickedness, and from the Almighty, that he should commit
iniquity.

11. For the work of a man shall he render unto him, and cause every man to
find according to his ways.

12. Yea, Surely God will not do wickedly, neither will the Almighty pervert
judgment.


Follows, a more particular refutation of these expressions, by showing how
injurious they were to God. All his discourse may be summed up in one or two
Arguments, taken from the Justice, and the Sovereignty and Dominion of God;
which sometime he calls the Auditors to observe, to v. 16. and sometime Job
himself, to v. 31. and clears and confirms those Arguments, and the Justice and
Dominion of God asserted therein, from several effects and evidences, that they
may the more effectually convince. We find that Jobs Friends had also insisted
upon this Argument, taken from Gods justice. See Chap. 8. (...) But they
inferred another Conclusion from it, That Job was wicked, because a righteous
God had afflicted him, which Job rejected and oppugned. We find also, that Job
has frequently acknowledged and commended the righteousness and dominion of
God; and yet Elihu (and God himself afterward) insists upon this Argument in
refuting of his complaints; to let him see, that, however he acknowledged, that
God was righteous, and the Sovereign Lord; yet his complaints could not be
reconciled with that acknowledgement.

In these Verses (after a repeated invitation to the Auditory, and discerning
persons among them, to hearken unto him, v. 10.) we have the first Argument
whereby he refutes Jobs complaints, taken from Gods righteousness and justice,
who does not deal wickedly, nor pervert judgment; And therefore he is not to
be quarrelled and complained of, as if he did wrong, and did take away men's
judgment, and smote them without cause, as Job had said, v. 5, 6. In unfolding
this Argument,

1. He declares, how inconsistent it is with the nature of the Almighty and
All-sufficient God to do wickedly and unjustly; and that therefore all such
thoughts of him should be rejected with abhorrency and indignation, v. 10.

2. He asserts, possitively, that his way of rewarding men according to their
works, does abundantly clear his justice, v. 11.

3. This his just procedure is yet further confirmed, by assuring men that he
will do no wrong; For being God, even the Omnipotent and All-sufficient God, he
not only cannot be unjust, his nature being infinitely holy, and his will the
rule of righteousness; but he cannot be pressed with any necessity of doing
wrong, which would speak him to be impotent, and not Almighty, v. 12. Withal,
as that positive assertion, v. 11. points out what will be his righteous reward
to all men, at last; So those negatives, v. 10, 12. assure us, that not only he
will judge righteous judgment at last, when men shall receive their final
sentence, but that at no time he is doing wrong to any, however they cannot
discern so much at some times, which was Jobs weakness and fault.

From Verse 10. Learn, 1. Men have frequent need to have their attention
excited and quickened, when they are hearing the things of God; Therefore, here
again (after that exhortation, v, 2.) they are exhorted to hearken unto him.

2. Wisdom is required to judge aright of God, and to read all his
dispensations as becomes; and it speaks men to be truly wise, when they attain
to this: Therefore, Men of understanding (or, men of heart, which in
Scripture Language is the seat of understanding; because men's light should
affect their hearts) are called to hearken in this matter.

3. Whatever be the practice of those concerned, or how slow of heart soever
they prove in receiving convictions; others ought to hear truth, and to join
with those who are for it, to convince the stubborn: Therefore does he call to
wise men to join with him, that Job may be yet further convinced.

4. Whatever be the thoughts of men's hearts under tentation; Yet, it is
certain, that God can do no injury and wrong to any: For, this is a fixed
truth, That wickedness and iniquity, or, the committing thereof, are far from
God. See Deuteronomy. 32.4. Psalm. 91.15. Romans 9.14. He is just in his dispensations,
and true in his promises, and that immutably. See Psalm. 145.17. 2 Thessalonians. 1.5,
6, 7. Heb. 6.10.

5. Gods Almighty power needs not affright men, as if he would abuse it to
injustice; For, though he be the strong God (as the name here signifies) and
the Almighty, yet, he will not do wickedness, nor commit iniquity; or, he will
not do injustice, which were both wickedness and iniquity. See Chap. 37.23. Ps.
99.4.

6. Men's low thoughts of God contribute much to their mistakes and quarrellings
of his dispensations; Therefore also does he call him, the Almighty, to
convince Job how injurious he was in reflecting upon so high and All-sufficient
a Lord.

7. Whoever they be that complain of Gods dispensations, they do, upon the
matter, quarrel God as unjust; For, so is here insinuated, that Jobs complaints
said, God was not just.

8. Men should hold that principle of Gods righteousness so fast, that they not
only quit it not, whatever suggestions there be to the contrary, Psalm. 22.3.
with v. 1, 2. But do entertain all contrary thoughts with detestation and
abhorrency: For, says he, Far be it from God, etc. intimating, not only, how
contrary that was to the nature of God, and so Abraham presses this Argument,
Genesis 18.25. But that he abhorred to think so of God; and so Paul entertains
such a thought, with a, God forbid, Romans 9.14.

From v. 11. Learn, 1. Gods recompense will, in due time, abundantly clear his
justice and righteousness; Therefore he subjoynes, by way of confirmation of
what he had said, v. 10. For the work of a man shall he render, etc.
intimating, that the righteousness of God will not need always to be evidenced
by dispute, but will at last speak for it self in his public actings, though
sometime his dispensations may be so wrapped in a cloud, as we cannot discern
(by reason of our weakness) that righteousness which is eminent in them. See
Psalm. 62.12. Prove. 24.12. and many the like places, marked in the Margin of our
Bible.

2. Albeit no good works of men do merit a reward, but only evil works; Yet,
all rewards are according to men's works: For, the work of a man shall he render
to him, and every man shall find according to his ways. This does not seclude
Gods Sovereignty in free grace, who does make them who are evil become good,
that he may, through Christ, reward and crown his own grace in them; and who
may pass over the ill deservings of his people, and do them good, Psalm. 103.10.
But the meaning is, That God is not injust, if he reward men according to their
works, and consequently, none of Adam's posterity have cause to complain of any
hard Lot, seeng they deserve much more; and, That his full and final reward at
last will be according to men's works.

3. God, in rewarding men, does not look so much to every single act of men, as
to their ways, (as here, man's work, which God renders to him, is expounded to
be, his ways; that is, to the tenor and general course of their lives, and to
their end in their undertakings, as men choose a way to lead them to some
place. So that, however every the least sin deserve eternal wrath, and no
multitude of good and excellent things beside can expiate or cover the least
fault in men; Yet, according to the tenor of the Covenant of grace, when men
have closed with Christ, and their hearts are sincere, and the general course
of their life is straight (which necessarily imports repentance for their
deviations) the reward of free grace will be according to their better actings,
and not according to their failings and escapes. And, upon the other hand, it
will not avail men, that they have some good practices, if their hearts be
unrenewed, and the general course of their life abound with sinful actions.
Withal, if God look to men's end in the good they do, their doing of good
things for evil and sinistrous ends will come in among the rest of their sinful
actions, and will be rewarded accordingly.

4. God will make his rewards according to men's works effectual; For, he will
cause every man (or, man, where the indefinite expression is to be taken
universally, in this necessary proposition) to find according to his ways. He
will cause the wicked find their reward, whether they will or not, and it shall
find them out in all their lurking places; and he will find it for the godly
(as the word may also read) and bring it to them, and them to it, when they
know not how to attain it.

From v. 12. Learn, 1. Thoughts of Gods righteousness are not easily admitted
and received, in every time and condition; Therefore this truth must be again
asserted and inculcated. So that men should not only be growing in the
assurance of truth (and of this truth, in particular) after they have given
some assent to it; but, they should not give over to press truth upon their own
hearts, albeit they do reject it at first.

2. Let men quarrel never so much; yet it is an undoubted truth, that God is
just in all things, and unjust in nothing; For, surely he will not do wickedly,
nor pervert judgment. And we should walk according to this principle,
observing that all the wrongs and faults are our own, in whatsoever is grievous
to us.

3. Who so do quarrel the righteousness of God, they bewray their ignorance of
his Nature and Attributes; Therefore, again is he called, the strong God, and
the Almighty, to refute all these jealousies and surmises.

4 Men may really acknowledge the righteousness of God, whose practices,
notwithstanding, are not suitable to their professions; For, Job said much to
Gods commendation in this particular, and yet he did not justify God in his
dispensations toward himself as became. Men may be very clear about general and
abstract truths, who yet may be far enough from acknowledging and submitting
to them, when they are verified in their own particular lots. And whosoever do
quarrel, or not submit to, the dispensations of God, or do neglect praise, even
in a sad condition, they reflect upon the righteousness of God, let them
otherwise never (...) much commend it.

Verse 13. Who has given him a charge over the Earth? Or who has disposed the
whole World?
The second Argument, whereby he refutes Jobs complaints (in this and the two
following Verses) and confirms also the former Argument, is taken from Gods
Dominion; That, because he is the Sovereign King of all the Earth, and
accountable to none, Therefore, he is most just; and consequently, Job ought
not to have quarrelled him because of his dispensations. This Argument is
propounded, in this Verse, by way of vehement Interrogation, intimating, That,
seeing God has made, and still does order, the whole World, and all things
therein, and that by an absolute and uncontrollable Dominion, (as having
obtained power and authority from none, by whose Laws he must be directed, or,
to whom he must be accountable;) therefore none can quarrel him, or call him to
an account, as doing unjustly in any thing; but, being the Judge of all the
Earth, he will do right, as Abraham argued, Genesis 18.25.

Doct. 1. As the making and first ordering of the whole World was Gods own
work, without the concurrence of any Instrument; So the constant disposing,
ordering and guiding thereof, is so managed by instruments and second causes,
as all of it is still in Gods hand: For, he has the charge over the Earth,
(which comprehends the whole World, and all persons and things therein, though
he mention only the Earth, because man is most concerned in what is done there,
and he quarrels most about these) and he disposes the whole World, or, the
World, all of it, all that is done on Earth, and particularly, what man is
ready to quarrel. We should not lose sight of Providence, as wicked men use to
do in evil times, Ezekiel. 9.9: but should study to see him in all things.

2. God administrates the affair of the World in great and infinite wisdom, so
that all things are well ordered; For, all is well disposed or placed. See
Psalm. 104.24. And therefore we should be ashamed of our blindness, and sensible
of our weakness, when we cannot discern this.

3. This Dominion of God is absolute and supreme, underived from, and without a
dependence upon, any other; For, says he, Who has given him a charge over the
Earth? None at all. See Dan. 4.35. He is absolute to command and prohibit, to
permit evil, and do good, to reward and punish, as he will. And therefore no
Creature should usurp absolute Supremacy, which is due to him only; We should
stoop to his Sovereign will in all things, and should fear him more than any
petty dependant power, reckoning our selves secure in his favor, against all
their fury.

4. This Dominion of God is also universal, over all persons, things, and
times; For, it is a charge over the Earth, indefinitely, without exception, and
a disposing of the World, all of it. See Psalm. 47.7. and 83.18. and 97.9. And
therefore the greatest of persons should acknowledge their subjection to him,
Psalm. 2.10, 11, 12. And his people should comfort themselves in this, that the
God whom they serve rules over all.

5. Gods supreme Dominion over the Earth proves that he can do no wrong; For,
by this Argument, he proves God to be just, and refutes Jobs complaints. Not
only does this evidence Gods perfection, but that he is above all Law, and
accountable to none. And the dominion that God has given to man over his
fellow creatures, so that he may kill and destroy Beasts, Birds, and Fishes,
for his meat, may convince us, that, much more, may he dispose of his own
Creatures at his pleasure. Stone of the same quarry have no cause to quarrel
that some of them are better hewed than others, and put in more eminent places
of the building. Nor should men, who are of the same Mass with others,
quarrel, though God deal with them otherwise than he deals with others.

6. Albeit there be exact justice in every action of God, and he may easily
convince the best of men that they suffer less than they deserve; Yea, in his
dealing with his people, (and even with his enemies, in this life) his mercy
and long-suffering rejoices over judgment: Yet when our weakness cannot
discern this righteousness of God in some particular cases, we should look to
his Supremacy, to keep our thoughts right; and till we stoop and submit to
that, we do justly get no further account; Therefore is this Argument here, and
frequently elsewhere, inculcated, to keep Job from quarrelling his justice:

Verse 14. If he set his heart upon man, if he gather unto himself his spirit
and his breath;

15. All flesh shall perish together, and man shall turn again unto dust.


This Argument is further amplified, in these Verses, from this, That if God
should purpose to take away the breath which he has lent to men, all of them
would quickly return to dust. In the Original, v. 14. it is, upon him, not,
upon man, but that is to be supplied fom v. 15. That man shall return to the
dust, if God set his heart upon him. Hereby is held out, not only the
irresistableness of Gods dominion, that nothing can impede what he intends; and
the equity and justice thereof, that if he should take away even the lives of
all, he did but recall his own gift and loan: But his goodness also, in
suffering man to live, yea, and maintaining his life, when he is at his mercy
daily. So that Job had no cause to complain of his afflictions, seeing God
might proceed further against him, even to the taking away of his life.

Doct. 1. Man's breath and life is a borrowed loan, which he holds by Gods gift;
For, it is his spirit and breath, Man's indeed by use, but Gods, as the Author
and Giver of it; and therefore, he gathers it to himself, when he recalls it as
his own gift. Both the words, Spirit and Breath, may signify one and the same
thing; or the first may signify his rational soul, and the second, his animal
life, common to him with beasts. However, this should teach men, to make good
use of their life and breath, and not employ it against God. They who look upon
their enjoyments as their own, will readily abuse them, Ps. 12.4.

2. God may, when he will, take back his own loan, and that easily; For, he can
gather unto himself his spirit and breath. See Psalm. 90.3. and 104.29. And
therefore we should not promise unto our selves long tacks of our life. See
Luke 12.19, 20.

3. Albeit God be not moved with any thing about man, as if it were a great
business; Yet as he does nothing at randone, so we should look upon the taking
away of life, as a very serious and important business: Therefore does he
express this act thus, as Gods setting his heart upon man. Not that he is so
taken up, as we are, with weighty businesses; nor yet only because he does not
proceed to do this at random, but acts in it as a weighty matter, however we
do not always see that; or, that he sets his heart in love upon his own
people, even when he is cutting them off; But he speaks thus of God, that we
may learn to set our hearts, and be serious about this change.

4. Men by death return to God, either to appear before him in judgment, to
receive the reward of their sin, or to be absolved by him, and to abide with
him for ever; For, he gathers the spirit and breath to himself, Eccles. 12.5,
6, 7.

5. Gods Dominion over the lives of men is irresistible; For, if God gather
these unto himself: man must perish, his unwillingness will not help him.

6. No person has any privilege against a sentence of death, when, or,
wheresoever, God shall be pleased to pronounce it; For, All flesh shall perish
together, if he please.

7. Whatever man think of himself in his life, yet death will give him an
humbling sight of himself; For, then he is found to be flesh, and turns again
to dust, from whence he was taken, Genesis 3.19.

8. However men quarrel Gods exercising of his Dominion, in some cases; yet,
upon a serious review, they may rather find cause to admire his goodness, than
to quarrel his severity; For, in answer to Jobs complaints, that God had
afflicted him, Elihu lets him see, that God might cut him off, and not him
only, but all flesh together. And it should be our work to study such mercies
in our saddest grievances.

Verse 16. If now thou have understanding, hear this: hearken to the voice of
my words.
Elihu having propounded these Arguments to the Auditory, does now, to v. 31.
lay them more distinctly before Job himself. And,

1. He turns himself to Job, and calls for his attention, v. 16.

2. He propounds the Argument, taken from Gods dominion and justice, v. 17.

3. He amplifieth and instanceth it in several particulars, wherein the
exercise of dominion and justice are conspicuous; Namely, his dealing with
Kings and Rulers, v. 18.19. with People and Nations, together with their
Rulers, v. 20 -- 23. and with mighty men, v. 24 -- 28.

4. He recapitulates the Argument, pointing out the efficacy of Gods
administrations, v. 29. and his end in some of those acts of his dominion and
justice, formerly mentioned, v. 30.

In this Verse, Elihu turns himself from the Auditory, and expressly and
particularly addresseth his speech to Job, craving that he would give him an
hearing, and that he would apply this Doctrine to his case, whereby he should
give a proof of his wisdom and understanding.

Doct. 1. General Doctrine is not sufficient to do Souls good, without
application; Therefore does Elihu tell over again to Job, what he had already
spoken to the Auditory.

2. Men's case may be very plainly spoken unto, who yet need to be rouzed up to
make application; For, though he has been speaking to this very business
before, yet he must direct his speech to Job, end call upon him to hearken to
the voice of his words, and apply.

3. In order to application, men should be attentive hearers, to which they
need frequently to be excited; Therefore again (after all the former
excitations) he calls him to hear and hearken, that so he might apply, and be
convinced.

4. As men do evidence their wisdom by being willing to be taught; (For, so is
here supposed, that, if he have understanding, he will hear, of which also
before) So it is not enough to hear, unless we understand; For, here
understanding is required with hearing.

5. There is great wisdom required in taking up the mind of God in his dark
dispensations, toward his people, and in the World; For, this is the particular
subject, in hearing whereof he requires understanding.

6. Not only are natural men incapable to perceive the things of God, 1 Cor.
2.14. and weak Saints unable, while they continue such, to comprehend many
points of truth, Joh. 16.12. But even men eminently wise and godly may have
their wits to seek, in some difficult and trying cases, and when they are under
the power of affliction and tentation; For, this Supposition, If thou have
understanding, imports no denial that Job was wise in an eminent measure, but
that his understanding had need to be quickened, and he had need to rid himself
of those mists, which involved and darkened his judgment, if he would take up
this matter well.

Verse 17. Shall even he that hates right govern? And will thou condemn him
that is most just?
In this Verse, he summarily propounds the Argument taken from Gods Dominion
and Justice (for he joins them both together) to which he desires he may
hearken. As for the first part of the Verse, Shall even he that hates right
govern? The word, govern, in the Original, is, to bind up, as a Chyrurgion. And
so it may point at a particular act of his government, that he binds up, and
heals those whom he has smitten, upon their repentance, as it is, Chap. 5.18.
Which speaks, that he cannot be unjust, or hate right, seeing he is content,
upon repentance, to heal those whom he has smitten. But the word is taken more
generally, for governing, and a Ruler is called an Healer, or, binder up, (for
it is the same word that is here) Is. 3.7. because government, in the exercise
thereof, should tend to prevent, or to heal and bind up breaches that are made
upon, or among, a people. And thus the Argument runs well, That God, being the
supreme Governor, cannot hate right, or abhor to do right. And the
propounding thereof by way of question, imports, That to assert of him, that he
hated right, was, in effect, to overturn and deny his Government, or, to say,
that he was not worthy to govern; And so this part of the Verse concludes
strongly from his Dominion, as the latter part of the Verse concludes from his
Justice, that he who is most just ought not to be condemned.

From the first part of the Verse, Learn, 1. It is the duty of Magistrates to
be healers and binders up of the breaches of the people; neither seeking only
their own advantage, neglecting the people, Ezekiel. 34.2 -- 6. nor oppressing
those whom they should protect, Ezekiel. 34.21. For, so much does the word, to
govern, here import. See Ps. 82.1 -- 4.

2. Whatever men do, yet God in his government is a tender binder up of the
wounds and miseries of those who subject themselves to him; For, of him it is
true, that he binds up whom he governs. See Psalm. 146.7, 8, 9. He is good unto
all, and his tender mercies are over all his works, Psalm. 145.9. And among his
own people; he delights to give proof of his skill and tenderness, in curing
their grievances, Ps. 147.2, 3. Is. 30.26.

3. It is the duty of Rulers to do that which is right, simply, and to be led
by no byas nor interest; For, he that governs should be for what is right. See
Deuteronomy. 16.20.

4. It is not enough, that men, and particularly Rulers, do right, unless it be
done out of love to it; For, so is imported in that it should not be hated. For
if men do not delight in it, they do, interpretatively, hate it.

5. It is yet worse, and a very hateful sin, and ill qualification in Rulers,
when they not only do not right, but do hate it; As here, it is very heinous,
that any should hate right, and it renders men very unfit for government. See
Psalm. 36.4. Mic. 3.1, 2, 9.

6. God, the supreme Lord and Governor, does always right, and that out of
love to it; For, this Question imports, that God, who governs all, does not
hate right, but loves it, his eyes being still upon the truth, Jer. 5.3. So
that righteous and upright persons cannot but be well, and in safety under his
protection, Ps. 11.7.

7. Men do little consider how much their quarrellings do reflect upon God, and
how little able their consciences will be to abide it, when those are charged
upon them; For, by this Question, he would let Job see that his complaints
said, that God was an hater of right, and unfit to govern; and he charge this
upon his conscience, as a crime that would be very grievous to him, if once he
did consider it seriously.

From the latter part of the Verse, Learn, 1. It is not enough that men have
ordinary thoughts of Gods Attributes, particularly, of bis righteousness, or
that they forbear to quarrel him, unless they have high thoughts of him; For,
he intimates, that God should be looked upon as most just, or, much, eminently,
and mightily just.

2. It adds to the commendation of God, that he is not only just in his
determinations, but powerful, to make his determinations effectual, which just
men, oft-times, are not able to do; For, so much is imported in this, that he
is mightily and powerfully just. And this is a great comfort to his people,
Psalm. 94.14, 15.

3. Albeit Gods Justice be unquestionable, and his powerful execution
answerable to his just determinations; Yet men, in some particular cases, do
not well discern this, and so are prone to carp and quarrel, and censure and
condemn his procceedings: For, he charge Job with condemning (by his censures
and complaints) him that is most just.

4. Men need no severer censurers of their reflections upon God, than their own
consciences, if they were put to it; For, so much does this Question import,
Will thou condemn him, etc. So that men's consciences are certainly asleep, when
they are querulous and full of complaints.

Verse 18. Is it fit to say to a King, Thou art wicked? And to Princes, Ye are
ungodly?

19. How much less to him that accepts not the persons of Princes, nor
regards the rich more than the poor? For they all are the work of his hands.


Follows the enlargement and amplification of this Doctrine, concerning the
Dominion and Justice of God, from several instances wherein the exercise
thereof appears. As those Verses are translated, they contain a confirmation of
the former Argument from a comparison instituted betwixt God and Kings and
Princes, That if they may not be reproached by any, much less God, who is above
them, and respects not them more than the meanest. And so the words would
import, That, however the greatest of men have faults, and they have been
sharply reproved for them, by men who were employed by God so to do; (See 1
King. 18.18. 2 King. 3.13, 14. Is. 1.10. Ezekiel. 21.25. Matthew. 14.4. Luke 13.32.)
Yet not only, de facto, are men sparing to meddle with the faults of great men;
but, de jure, men ought to carry very reverently toward them; So, as their
power and authority should still be acknowledged, and reverenced, and submitted
unto, notwithstanding their personal faults. Good Rulers should not be
reproached, and unjustly slandered; Men should not presume to reprove their
real faults, unless they have a call to it; and, when men have a call, and are
bound to speak home to their faults, they should go about it with much
reverence to their persons and authority. See Exodus 22.28. Withal, this
reading, and the scope of the Argument, will import, That men, oft-times, stand
more in awe of great men than of God, and they will be afraid to speak evil of
them, when yet they spare not to quarrel God; which their own consciences
cannot but condemn. See Mal. 1.8.

The first of these Verses may very well be read according to this sense,
without a Supplement. For the Verb, to say, being in the Infinitive Mode, with
a note of Interrogation prefixed, we may very well read it, Is it to be said to
a King, etc? But seeing so great a Supplement is required in the following
Verse, to make up the comparison to this sense; I choose rather to read it
without any Supplements, as carrying on the sentence from v. 17. and continuing
the Interrogations till the end of v. 19. thus; Will thou condemn him that is
most just? v. 17. Even him who says to a King, Thou art wicked, (or, O Belial,
and wicked man) and to Princes, Ye are ungodly? v. 18. Who accepts not the
persons of Princes, etc? v. 19. And though the Verb in the Infinitive Mode, v.
18. cannot so well be rendered, Who says; Yet with the supply of a Preposition
(which is oft-times to be supplied in this Language) it may very well be
rendered to the same purpose; Even when he says, or, Though he says, that is,
Will thou condemn him, even notwithstanding he is so just as not to spare
greatest persons, but says, they are wicked?

The words thus rendered, do contain a clear instance of the Dominion and
Justice of God, taken from his dealing with Kings and Princes. The instance is
held out in two assertions.

First, (Which proves both his Dominion and Justice) That he reproves even
Kings and Princes for their faults, v. 18. As is clear from Psalm. 105.14, 15.
and from what he did by his Prophets and Messengers, in the places above cited.

Secondly, (Which illustrates his Justice, especially) That he does reprove and
deal with them impartially, respecting the greatest no more than the meanest,
v. 19. Both which assertions (and especially the last) are confirmed from his
equal interest in all sorts of men, as being the work of his hands, v. -- 19.

From, v. 18. Learn, 1. Diversity of ranks of persons, and particularly, the
eminency of Rulers over people, is an Ordinance of God very ancient in the
World; For, here they were in Jobs days, though at first Parents had supreme
authority, till people were multiplied upon the Earth.

2. Prople are under a right constitution of Government, when the Supreme
Magistrate has others under him, to join with him and assist him in that
weighty charge; For, here, there were both Kings and Princes.

3. Great and eminent places, do, ordinarily, prove great snares to men, to
make them the worse of their places, and not their places the better of them;
As here is supposed. So that men would not be tempted with an inordinate desire
of eminency, if they considered how full of snares such a condition is.

4. The greater men's eminency be, they have the greater tentations to prove
worse than others, and, being evil, their miscarriages will be the more gross;
For, so is here also supposed, that Kings may be tempted to be wicked, or,
Belial, lawless, and casters off of all yoaks, and Princes, only ungodly, or,
wicked.

5. Albeit none else can, or, dare deal with the faults of great persons; Yet
it is a proof of Gods Dominion and Justice, that he will take them to task;
For, he says to a King, Thou art wicked, etc. See Ps. 76.12. and 107.4. And
this he does, especially, in behalf of his people, Psalm. 105.14, 15. Isa. 43.3,
4.

6. The greatest of men will find it sad enough when God comes to lay their
faults home to their consciences, and speaks to them in his wrath; For, he will
evidence his Dominion, by saying to a King, Thou art wicked, etc. See Ps. 2^ 5.

From v. 19. Learn, 1. It is necessarily required in those who would be just,
that they have no respect of persons in judgment; As here is supposed, in that
a proof of Gods justice is taken from his not accepting the persons of Princes.
See Lev. 19.15. Deuteronomy. 10.17.

2. Albeit God be free to bestow his own gifts (of whatsoever kind) upon one,
and not upon another; Yet he is not partial, nor moved by any by respects to
any thing in the Creatures, to do so; and his administration, in dispensing
rods or rewards, is without respect to persons: As here is asserted. See 2 Chronicles. 19.7. Act. 10.34, 35. So that they who have right upon their side, (be
what they will) may come to him; and when we are wronged by men's partiality, it
may comfort us that God judges not so, and that they who are partial and
unjust do make God their party.

3. It is a clear proof of Gods not respecting of persons, that he deals with
the greatest as well as the meanest, with the rich as well as the poor; For, he
accepts not the persons of Princes, nor regards the rich more than the poor.

4. As it is sad to see men poor, (and even extenuate, as the word is) and yet
sinning; (as no outward affliction, of it self, will cure or remove sin) So the
faults of the meanest are not to be excused, nor will be forgotten in the crowd
of great men's miscarriages; nor will their poverty, or other tentations, be a
cover to hide their sin; For, so is here also imported, that poor men are not
regarded more than the rich, when God comes to reckon with them.

5. As all men, and even the greatest, are but Gods workmanship; Yea, it is he,
who (having given them a being) makes them poor or rich, great or small: So,
his dominion over them is founded upon this right and title, That, having made
all, he should have the command and disposing of all, and should deal according
to justice with the greatest as well as the meanest, seeing they are all but
his Creatures; And, That his making some to be eminent, while he lays others
low, should not exempt them from being subject to his dominion, or from finding
the effects of his justice and righteousness, as well as others; Therefore is
this subjoyned, as a reason of his justice and impartiality; For, they are all
the work of his hands. Which, as it sets forth the power and glory of God, who
made even the greatest, and sets them in eminent dignity; So, it imports, that
they who renounce his dominion, in their carpings and complaints, do forget of
whom it is that they hold their being.

Verse 20. In a moment shall they dye, and the people shall be troubled at
midnight, and pass away: And the mighty shall be taken away without hand.
The exercise of Gods Dominion and Justice is further instanced (to v. 24.) in
his dealings toward Nations and People. Which is not to be understood of people
only, or abstractly from their Rulers; But that, in his prosecuting of that
reproof against Rulers, v. 18. he, oft-times, smites them and their people
together, both the people, or, the Nation, and the mighty, or, their Rulers,
for their sins. In this Verse, this act of Dominion and Justice is propounded,
and ascribed to God, that he does strike them. Where, the object of this stroke
is, the people, and their mighty men; the stroke it self is, death, or,
off-cutting, and passing away, and being taken away, eithet by captivity, or to
the grave by death; the manner of the stroke is, speedy, or, in a moment,
inexpected, or, that they are troubled at midnight, when people are most secure
and unfit to help themselves (which might very well be applied to what befell
Egypt, Exodus 12.29. if it had been before this time. See also 2 King. 19.35.)
and by immediate strokes from the hand of God, they are taken away without
hand, or, without any help of man. See Dan. 2.34, 35.

Doct. 1. Gods quarrels against sin, if not hearkened unto, will go a further
length than reproofs; As here, after saying to Kings, Ye are wicked, it comes
to punishments.

2. Gods contending with great men, ordinarily, brings sad ruin upon a people,
who join in sin with them; For, when he is saying to Kings, Ye are wicked, v.
18. the people smart also. So that a people are not a little concerned in their
Rulers, and in their being right or wrong.

3. God can reach a Nation, as well as particular persons, and he has national
plagues for national sins; so that the multitude of sinners cannot secure
themselves in their sin against God; For, they shall dye, that is, both rich
and poor, v. 19. and the people, and the mighty, as after follows.

4. When God reckons with Nations, no particular persons will be able to secure
themselves, by any personal privileges and advantages; For, even the mighty
shall smart with the people. See Is. 3.1, 2, 3.

5. God may justly pursue his quarrel against a Nation, not only to the
impoverishing thereof, but even to the cutting of many of them off, and to
sending of them into captivity out of their Land; For, they shall dye, and pass
away, and be taken away. So that an afflicted Nation have reason to acknowledge
God in what they suffer less than this.

6. Let a people seem to be never so strong, and sure rooted; Yet, a short time
may make a great change upon them; For, in a moment shall they dye. Death can
soon sweep multitudes of them away.

7. Surprizals are sad ingredients in trouble, and they are justly the lot of
an impenitent people: For, their sin deserves that they should be surprised at
midnight. See 1 These. 5.3. So that, as the people of God are, oft-times,
surprised with unexpected deliverances, Is. 17.14. So, the wicked may meet with
plagues which they discern not before they come.

8. National strokes are full of darkness and discomfort, far beyond personal
trials; Therefore, also, do these strokes come at midnight, and are very dark.

9. Perplexities, which attend such dark strokes, are very bitter to them who
smart under them; For, being at midnight, the people are troubled. So that we
should guard against perplexity of spirit (providing we be not stupid) at such
times, lest, if that door be once opened, we be overwhelmed therewith.

10. The Lord needs no help, nor probable means, to bring about the greatest
changes; For, they shall be taken away, (or, they, that is, the judgments
inflicted by God, shall take away) even the mighty without hand.

Verse 21. For his eyes are upon the ways of man, and he sees all his goings.

22. There is no darkness, nor shadow of death, where the workers of iniquity
may hide themselves.

23. For he will not lay upon man more than right; that he should enter into
judgment with God.


In these Verses, the equity and justice of this proceeding is held out,

1. In general, from the ground thereof; Namely, the Omniscience of God, who,
as he is careful to observe man's ways; so, he actually sees all of them, v.
21. And that so exactly, as nothing can hide man's wickedness from him, v. 22.
And therefore he cannot do unjustly, through ignorance and mistakes, as men
often do.

2. In particular, from his inclinations and proceedings, upon his seeing man's
ways, (and therefore it comes in as a reason, that he who sees all will be
just, and proceed against the workers of iniquity) That he will not excessively
and unjustly afflict man, that so he may prevent man's quarrelling with him,
which Job had often essayed, v. 23.

From v. 21. Learn, 1. All Gods proceedings in the World are upon sure and just
grounds, though we do not discern them; For, here a reason is given of these
proceedings, v. 20. For his eyes are upon the ways of men, etc.

2. Gods perfect knowledge is a proof of his justice in his procedure; For,
that is the reason given here, to prove the equity of the former proceedings.
Which not only teaches Judges to try well, before they come to give sentence,
and see it executed, in imitation of this Sovereign Judge; but warns us, when
we quarrel Gods proceedings, to suspect that we see not things so well as he
does.

3. Gods knowledge is certain and effectual, to reach and take up what he
intends to observe; For, not only are his eyes upon them, but he sees things
as they are, without mistaking. So that we should trust his verdict of things,
rather than our own.

4. Gods knowledge is also universal, of all the things of men, of all sorts of
men, and in all times and places; For, his eyes are upon the ways of man, and
he sees all his goings. See Chap. 31.4: and the parallel places marked in the
Margin, both here and there. So that he will not judge of men by their fits;
and we should remember his eye upon us in all places, and should believe that
he sees his people, even when he seems not to notice their condition, as he
saw the affliction of Israel in Egypt, before he appeared to deliver them,
Exodus 3.7.

From v. 22. Learn, 1. Men, and especially wicked men, are not easily convinced
of Gods Omniscience; Therefore it must be here told again, and inculcated.

2. Men also have their subterfuges, whereby they seek to hide their courses
from God, and whereby they do deceive themselves and others, and think to do so
with God also; For, so is here supposed, that they seek darkness, like the
shadow of death, where they may hide themselves, not so much from punishment
(for that is not the scope here) as from being known or seen. Hence it is, that
they seek to conveigh their designs secretly, and make use of fair pretenses,
handsome conveighances, etc.

3. All men's subterfuges and lurking holes will not avail them at Gods hand;
But as no shelter can secure them from his pursuing vengeance, Amos 9.1, 2, 3,
4. So no darkness nor shadow of death will hide them from his All-seeing eye.
See Psalm. 139.7, 8, etc.

4. As Gods Omniscience is for the comfort of godly men, walking in his way, 2 Chronicles. 16.9. So, it is matter of terror to the workers of iniquity; As here it
is inculcated for their terror.

5. Every worker of iniquity carries his own dittay and doom in his bosom,
however such do seem to carry with a high hand; For, while they seek to hide
themselves, they do openly profess, that if they be not hid, they are undone,
for they are neither able to defend their cause, nor to resist that vengeance
which they are convinced they deserve.

From v. 23. Learn, 1. God is the Imposer and layer on of men's lots and
exercises; as here we are taught. So that his people should know that they are
in a Friends hand, they should stoop to him, and not add loads of their own
(through unbelief, mistakes, discouragement, impatience, etc.) with his burdens.

2. God does exercise and afflict man in great moderation and equity; For, he
will not lay upon man more than right. The words, than right, are a Supplement,
the Original has only, He will not lay upon yet, or still; that is, he will
not inflict, and inflict yet still more, and so impose excessively, or too
much, either above men's deservings, Neh. 9.33. Ezr. 9.13. or above the strength
which he is ready to give them, or more than he will do them good by, or so as
there is no moderation to be seen in his dispensations.

3. Man is a very querulous Creature, and full of discontents; so that he is
ready to complain of his lot, when he should be improving it; As here is
supposed.

4. Man is ready to come to that height in his complaints, as even to quarrel
God, and to presume to think that he will call him to an account; For, that is
the height of his impatience, that he will enter into judgment with God.

5. The Lord takes pleasure to keep up a right understanding betwixt himself
and man, particularly, betwixt his people and himself, and does use all
necessary means which may prevent their quarrels with him; For, here he does
what may prevent their entering into judgment with him.

6. Whatever men think, yet none of Gods dispensations gives them any cause to
quarrel him; For, he lays not that upon man, that he should enter into
judgment with God. Hence it is, that the people of God have retracted their
complaints, upon second thoughts, Psalm. 77.7, 8, 9, 10. Lam. 3.18 -- 22.

Verse 24. He shall break in pieces mighty men without number, and set others
in their stead.
The exercise of Gods Dominion and Justice is yet further instanced (to v. 29.)
in what he does to mighty men; whereby he clears further, what he had said of
Kings and Princes, v. 18. That he will reckon even with the most mighty of
them; and prosecutes what he had spoken of mighty men, v. 20. In this Verse the
instance is propounded, That he breaks multitudes of mighty men, and puts
others in their places. Whence, Learn,

1. It is seriously and much to be studied, that men's might cannot resist Gods
hand; Therefore is that truth here again repeated. Wherein we may read the
vanity and uncertainty of all earthly power and might, especially if men abuse
it to the dishonor of God, who can so easily reach them. And Gods people may
comfort themselves in this, when they are oppressed by mighty men, that the God
whom they serve is able to break that yoke of oppression.

2. The more eminent wicked men be, the more conspicuous will Gods hand be in
plaguing them; Therefore also is this instance so much insisted upon, because
the glory of God shines eminently in it. And therefore eminent examples of Gods
power and justice should be well marked.

3. It is not an ordinary stroke, but even ruin and crushing, that wicked
great men may expect from God, who, when he begins, will also make an end, 1 Samuel 3.12. For, he shall break in pieces mighty men.

4. God can reckon with many mighty men, as well as with one; For, he shall
break in pieces mighty men without number. The word is, without searching out,
and so it may import, That he needs no search to find out a quarrel against
them, nor should we dipp and search into the reasons of such dispensations. But
it rather imports, That he will break so many, that there is no searching into
the number of them. So that the multitude of those that combine against him,
will not secure them against him, and the multitude of those who have been
crushed by him, may assure those who follow their footsteps, that they shall
not be able to stand.

5. As God may raise up whom he will, and conferr power and authority upon
them, Psalm. 107.40, 41. and 113.7, 8. Dan. 2.21. Psalm. 75.6, 7. So when God
has crushed many mighty men, he will yet have a care of the government of the
World, and will not want others, to serve him in those stations; For, he sets
others (raises them up, and establishes them) in their stead.

Verse 25. Therefore he knows their works, and he overturneth them in the
night, so that they are destroyed.

26. He strikes them as wicked men in the open sight of others.


Follows, a threefold Amplification of this calamity of mighty men.

First, More generally, from the cause and rise of it, v. 25. That God does
this, because he takes notice of their wicked ways. The words are not, Because
he knows, but, Therefore he knows their works; but the sense is one: Either
thus, He destroys them therefore, because he knows their works, and brings
them to remembrance; Or, however they think that God does not notice their
ways, yet his judgments will demonstrate the contrary, from which it may be
concluded, that therefore it is certain he knows their ways, because he
overthrows them:

Secondly, From the manner of it.

1. That he overturns and destroys them in a dark night of trouble, and
inexpectedly; or, turns about the night, that is, he turns their day of
prosperity into a dark night of trouble, so that they are destroyed, v. 25.

2. That he punishes them visibly and exemplarily, as being eminently wicked
men, v. 26.

Doct. 1. However wicked men will not believe that God noticeth their ways;
Yet God will, in due time, give proof that he does know and observe them: For,
therefore he knows their ways, or, gives proof of it, by smiting of them.

2. The calamities of wicked men will sadly overturn all their enjoyments and
projects; For, he overturneth them, or, simply, overturneth, and makes a
dreadful revolution.

3. Hence it comes to pass, that the wickeds trouble is very dark and terrible
unto them, as it is not with godly men; For, it is a night, or, in the night.

4. Wicked men may expect not to be threatened only, but to be actually and
thoroughly destroyed; For, he overturneth, so that they are destroyed, or,
crushed.

5. There are strokes peculiar to wicked men, which all the wicked do deserve,
and may in justice expect; For, he strikes them as wicked men, not that he
strikes them as if they were wicked men, when yet they are not such; nor yet
only because they are wicked; but, that he inflicts those calamities which are
the common desert of all wicked men.

6. How high soever wicked men be, yet God (who is no accepter of persons) will
reach them for their wickedness, as well as others; For, thus also he strikes
them, even those mighty ones, as other wicked men.

7. God sees it meet, sometime, to make the calamities of wicked men public,
exemplary and remarkable, that others may fear; For, he strikes them in the
open sight of others, or, in the place of beholders, as at a public execution.
And the word, to strike, imports such a striking as will cause men admire, and
clap their hands, and whereby God will openly triumph over them, who so often
insulted over his Law. See Prove. 1.24, 25, 26.

Verse 27. Because they turned back from him, and would not consider any of his
ways.

28. So that they cause the cry of the poor to come unto him, and he hears
the cry of the afflicted.


The third Amplification of this calamity is taken from a more particular
account of his Justice in it; which is cleared from the consideration of their
sin. Wherein,

1. The fountain and root of all their sin, is, Apostasy from God, and their
not considering of his ways, or, the way which he had prescribed to them to
walk in, and the ways of his providence toward them and others, v. 27.

2. The effects flowing from this fountain, or, their particular miscarriage,
is, oppression, and causing the poor to cry out, which God hears, and
therefore punishes them, v. 28.

From v. 27. Learn, 1. Want of union and communion with God is the root of men's
miscarriages; For, because they turned from him, (or, from after him, in a
close cleaving to, and following after, him) therefore they do sin, and are
punished.

2. This distance from God is the more odious, when men make Apostasy from what
they have enjoyed, or, do not accept his offers of keeping fellowship with
them; For, thus wicked men do turn back from him, when they turn their backs
upon his offers and invitations, and when they make Apostasy from any
profession of goodness, and any degrees of moral goodness, they sometime had.

3. Men do prove that they turn their backs upon God, when they do not follow
his directions, nor observe his ways; For, so is here held out, They turned
back from after him, whom all are bound to follow in his prescribed directions,
and would not consider his ways.

4. Gods ways, which he has prescribed for us to walk in, would be better
followed, if it were well pondered of what importance and concernment they are
to us, and if we would also take notice of the ways of his providence; For,
they turn from after him, because they consider not his ways, neither his
directions, nor his providence, Psalm. 28.5. As it is distance from God that
makes men not to be serious in his matters (if they turn back, they will not
consider) so their being little serious confirms them in their distance, and
augments it, so that their whole life is but a continual turning more and more
from God.

5. The sins of wicked men, and particularly, of backsliders from God, are so
much the more heinous, that they flow not from simple ignorance, but from
inadvertency, and from the power of their lusts, which makes them not seriously
consider what they are doing; For, so is it here, they consider not, or do not
wisely ponder what it is that God says and does to them. Thus the wicked cast
Gods Laws behind their back, Ps. 50.17.

From v. 28. Learn, 1. Men's loose walking with God will appear in their
miscarriages toward men, which will write their neglecting of God upon their
foreheads; For, this follows upon the former, They turned back, etc. v. 27.
So that they caused the cry of the poor to come, etc.

2. As great men's oppression of the poor (and especially of Gods poor people)
is a grievous sin; so it does evidence the Oppressors great distance from God;
For, they who turn back, v. 27. do cause the cry of the poor to come unto him,
that is, unto God. See Psalm. 14.4. And the meaning here is not, that the
Oppressors intended any such thing, as to cause the poor cry unto God, or to
cause their cry come unto him; but only that this is a consequent of their
oppression.

3. Such as are oppressed, and can find no remedy upon Earth, ought to cry and
make their moan to God; As here is supposed.

4. God is an hearer of prayers, Psalm. 65.2. and particularly, of the cries of
oppressed persons; For, their cry comes unto him, and he hears the cry of
the afflicted, See Exodus 22.27.

5. God will give proof that he hears the cry of the oppressed, by taking
vengeance on Oppressors; For, his hearing of the cry of the afflicted, is here
subjoyned as a reason of his crushing of these mighty men. See Ps. 12.5.

Verse 29. When he gives quietness, who then can make trouble? And when he
hides his face, who then can behold him? Whether it be done against a Nation,
or against a man only:

30. That the Hypocrite reign not, lest the people be ensnared.


In these Verses, Elihu summarily recapitulates the Argument, and those
instances formerly mentioned. Pointing out,

1. The efficacy of Gods procedure in those things, and that none can resist or
remedy what he is pleased to do, whether toward Nations or particular persons;
So that none can obstruct the peace which he gives to the oppressed, nor resist
his crushing of Oppressors, or ruining of sinful Nations, v. 29.

2. His end in all these revolutions, particularly, in breaking of great men,
Namely, to pull down wicked and hypocritical Rulers, whereby the people are
kept from being ensnared, either in sinful snares, by their authority and
example, or entangled in oppression by their power, v. 30. This purpose in the
first place must be understood of outward peace or trouble, seeing it is
applicable to whole Nations; yet, the expressions being general, it may be
taken more largely and comprehensively.

From v. 29. Learn, 1. God has variety of dispensations in his hand, to be let
forth for several ends and uses, either as men do deserve, or the condition of
his people requires; As here he has quietness, and hiding of his face. All
that we need, and all that our several conditions call for, is in his treasury.
Our weal and woe are in his hand. See 2 Chronicles. 25.8. Is. 45.7.

2. All the dispensations of God, good or evil, are effectual and irresistible;
As here we are taught. They are not purposes and inclinations (such as may be
in men, and come no further) but effectual operations. So that we may easily
lean to what good he undertakes to do, and may be afraid of the evil which he
threatens.

3. Quietness and peace (whether inward or outward) is at Gods disposing, and
in his hand, to give it to whom he will; For, he gives quietness, both to
people and particular persons, and that both inward and outward peace. See
Psalm. 46.9. Is. 26.12. and 45.7. So that they do forsake their own mercy, who
run from God, or forsake his way, to obtain peace and quiet. See 2 King. 9.22.
Is. 57.21. And if it be his gift, we may come and seek it freely, when we
deserve it not; when we have received it, we should improve it as a special
gift, not to be abused, as Jer. 48.11. Zeph. 1.12. and should beware to
interrupt it by needless anxieties, Ps. 127.1, 2, 3.

4. They who have quietness from God, will not want opposition, to endeavor
their trouble; For, so is here supposed, that there will be who would make
trouble, if they could. Enemies without will not be wanting to disturb outward
peace, and Satan and tentations will not fail to assault inward peace. This we
should not mistake, as if, because our peace is assaulted, it were not found,
or would not be effectual. Yea, our peace with God will be joined with trouble
from the World, and opposition from Satan.

5. When God gives peace, he makes it prove an effectual gift, against all
opposition, during his pleasure; For, when he gives quietness, who then can
make trouble? None can hinder outward peace, nor will a Dog move the tongue,
so long as he pleases; neither policy nor power will be able to make his gift
void, seeing God has a negative voice in that matter, Prove. 21.30. Lam. 3.37.
And he can make inward peace triumph over all attempts, Psalm. 4.8. Phil. 4.7.
Joh. 16.33. Hab. 3.16, 17. Romans 8.33, 34, 35, etc. Is. 26.3. So that we need
not fear the fury of men, if God command peace; and however he dispense as to
that, inward peace with God will make trouble prove no trouble: And as God,
sometime, irresistably bears in spiritual peace, so we should be careful
always to cherish it. For, sometime he forbears to work irresistably, that he
may take trial of our carefulness and activity in entertaining of it.

6. As God has quietness, so also trouble, in his hand, to let it forth upon
Nations or persons, as he pleases; and not only may he exercise some with
trouble, while others are in quietness (wherein the wisdom and good pleasure
of God ought to be submitted unto) but may even change the exercise of the same
persons, and give them trouble after quietness, either as the punishment of
sin, or for the trial of faith: For, here is supposed, that after quietness,
God hides his face.

7. As the root of all trouble is Gods hiding of his face, so that, in it self,
is a sad enough stroke to right discerners; Therefore that which is opposed to
quietness, is, Gods hiding of his face; Partly, because Gods hiding of his face
(as he may desert whole Nations, and leave them without counsel or strength,
and not care for them, or hear them, but leave them to their own counsels; as
well as he deserts particular persons) is sad enough in it self, and therefore
has been much lamented by godly men, when it was their own, or the Nations
lot, Psalm. 44.24. Is. 64.7. And when that stroke is not laid to heart, God
sends other troubles: Partly, because, when God deserts a people or person, all
their quietness will soon be overturned.

8. Men under trouble are in a sad and hopeless plight, as to any help, till
God help them; For, when he hides his face, who then can behold him? Which may
either be understood, thus, Who shall get a comfortable look of God when he
hides his face, to ease them of their trouble (as Psalm. 34.5.) till himself
shine through that cloud? For though it be a duty to wait upon and look for
God, even when he hides his face, Is. 8.17. Yet they will reap little sensible
comfort thereby, till God himself appear; Yea, his angry face will be terrible
and affrighting: Or (which agrees better with what is said in the former part
of the Verse, that none can trouble those to whom he gives quietness) the words
may be thus understood, That, as none can make trouble when God gives
quietness; So, when he sends trouble by hiding of his face, who will look
favorably upon the afflicted man, or, by their looking favorably, will be
able to comfort him, till God himself appear?

9. A Nation is all one with a particular person, as to ability to resist God,
and to make his purposes ineffectual; For, he does all this, whether against a
Nation, or against a man only, where the phrase properly relates to his hiding
of his face, last spoken of, though it hold true also of his giving quietness,
so as none can make trouble. All men must stoop to him, as well as any one, for
he can raise up broken Nations, and ruin others, as well as if they were but
one single person. Hence,

1. We should have right thoughts of Gods providence, that it is so extended
toward whole Nations, as yet he does not neglect any particular person; For he
does notice and deal with every one, as if there were no more to be noticed or
cared for in all the World.

2. The glory of Divine Providence shines in the variety of his dispensations;
For, he has national strokes for national sins, wherein he can yet single out
particular persons, either to show them favor, as he did to Jeremiah, Baruch,
and Ebedmelech; or to exercise them with trials beside what is common. So when
he conferrs favors upon a Nation, some may be dignified with peculiar favors
beside those, and others may be exercised with trials, when the Nation is well,
etc. In all which, his dispensations are effectual, and cannot be impeded by
any.

From v. 30. Learn, 1. Gods ends in his working (in so far as they are
revealed, and can be taken up) should be remarked, as well as his operations in
themselves; whereby we may be kept from mistaking what he does, and may be
excited to promove his ends, in so far as they fall within the compass of our
duty: Therefore is this account of his ends, in the dispensations formerly
mentioned, here subjoyned.

2. Whatever masks hypocrites wear, whereby they may deceive men, yet in Gods
account they are the worst of men; Therefore, is the hypocrite here mentioned
as a very wicked man, whom God will cross in the dispensations of his
Providence. And he is called, in the Original, the man, or, Adam, the
hypocrite, to intimate, that it is a wonder, how mortal man, or any of Adam's
posterity, should dare to dally with the great God. This should be adverted
unto by all those who pretend unto, and make show of, that goodness which
really they have not; and who pretend to Religion for by-ends, of gain, Genesis
34.21, 22, 23. Matthew. 23.14. Joh. 6.26. for revenge, 1 King. 21.9, 10. Matthew.
2.8. or for praise, Matthew. 6.5. All those, however they be masked, yet are seen
by God, Heb. 4.12, 13. And as such are but rarely converted, Matthew. 21.31. Luke
7.29, 30. So God will, in due time, take the mask off them, and cause them be
seen in their own colors, 1 Cor. 4.5.

3. As it is a Character of hypocrites, that they look after great things, and
are covetous and ambitious, Mark 12.38, 39, 40. (for they would be at reigning
and power) So it is a very hateful sin in Rulers, to drive a trade of
dissimulation, either in pretending only to Religion, or in pretending the
public good, when really they do oppress; For it is a fault when they are
hypocrites who do reign.

4. People are not a little concerned in the matter of their Rulers, who, if
they be wicked, prove great snares to them, drawing them to sin, by their
example, and their Authority and Laws, Mic. 6.16. and crushing them by their
power; For, when hypocrites reign, the people are in peril to be ensnared. See
Hos. 5.1.

5. Magistrates ought to mind the good of their people, and to look upon
themselves as set up for that end; For, God minds the peoples good in his
dispensations toward Rulers, and prevents the peoples being ensnared by them:

6. When men raise themselves, or carry on their power, by hypocrisy, to the
ensnaring of the people, God is provoked to cut them off for the peoples good;
For, he will not let the hypocrite reign, lest the people be ensnared. It is
true, God sometime punishes Nations by the wickedness of their Rulers, yet
when they cry, as it is v. 28. he will deliver them from their snares.

Verse 31. Surely it is meet to be said unto God, I have born chastisement, I
will not offend any more.
Follows, the Conclusion of this Discourse, Wherein,

1. Elihu directs Job in what terms he should speak to God, and whereof he
should make use, in stead of these ill ordered expressions which he has been
refuting, v. 31, 32. and presses his advice by a strong Argument, v. 33.

2. He appeals again to judicious hearers, whether Job can be assoyled, and do
not rather deserve to be sharply reprehended for his discourses, v. 34, 35.

3. He desires that Job may be yet further tried, till he be humbled, v. 36, 37.

As for Elihu's direction, in this and the following Verse, the conciseness and
various significations of the Original expressions do occasion diversity of
readings. Some read them thus, Surely thou should address thy self unto God,
who says, I pardon, (which relates to the guilt of sin) and will not destroy,
which relates to the punishment of sin. And so the following Verse only will
contain the advice to Job, what he should say; and this Verse will contain an
encouragement to go to God and say it, taken from his graciousness, whose
Prerogative it is to pardon sin, and take away the punishment thereof. Others
read this Verse, as a direction to Job, that he should profess and say unto
God, I have pardoned, and will not destroy, or, take a pledge, that is, that he
has passed over injuries done to him by others, and will not ruin any, and
take a pledge of the poor; and yet he should desire (in the following Verse)
that God would discover his secret faults unto him. These readings might afford
ground of many profitable thoughts; but I shall follow our own Translation,
which agrees with the Original, and comes as near the scope, as any. And so
this Verse contains the first part of the direction (or what Job should
profess to God, as the next Verse shows him what he should desire) and how
Job, laying aside his quarrelling complaints, should utter his mind to God;
Namely, that he should profess his sense of Gods afflicting hand, and stoop
under it; and in the sense thereof should engage himself not to offend, or,
(for the word has diverse significations) corrupt, (namely, his way) or,
destroy, (to wit, himself, by corrupting his way) and so should profess his
willingness to amend any faults whereof he was guilty, and for that end, should
seek light to know his miscarriages, as is added in the direction, v. 32. While
he advises him to promise that he will amend his faults, it may be generally
extended to all the faults and infirmities of his life, and particularly, to
his faults and miscarriages under trouble, and in the way of his defending of
his innocence. And so it is to be marked, that this corrupting, or, destroying,
(as the word signifies) which he resolves against, may relate, especially, to
his corrupting and spoiling this fair opportunity of a trial to do him good,
whereby he should indeed destroy it, and himself by abusing of it. It is yet
further to be observed, that some read the first part of the Verse thus, Surely
has Job said to God, I have born -- That which I see not, etc? by way of
check, that he had not done so hitherto. But that difference need not be stood
upon, seeing that may very well fall in with our reading. For a check for his
former neglect is an advice for the future, and that so much the more pressing,
as former negligence should be a spur to future diligence.

From this Verse, Learn, 1. As no afflictions from God are dumb; So God
requires that we should be put to some exercise by them; As here is imported,
That, when we are afflicted, we should say somewhat, and resolve to do somewhat.

2. Albeit, in our exercise and expressions under trouble, we are ready to run
to any other party sooner than to God; Yet it is most fit to go to God
himself, and pour out all our grievances in his bosom, as knowing that his
hand is supreme in all our troubles, and that he alone can give us relief, and
without him nothing can help us; Therefore is he directed to say this to God.

3. Even when men are come the length of going to God with their trouble, yet
it is not easy under distemper to order their speech, and understand what is
meet to be said, or, should be said unto God; Therefore is he directed and
advised in this.

4. Ordinarily Spectators are fitter Judges of men's duty under trouble, than
themselves; For, it is told him what is meet to be said to God.

5. It is the duty and property of faithful Friends, so to reprove faults, as
not to cast off love, or forbear to counsel those who are faulty, for their
good; For, here, after all these sharp reproofs, Elihu gives his friendly
advice to Job.

6. Sound counsels are so contrary to the present inclinations of distempered
men, that they can hardly be persuaded to accept of them, when they are given;
Therefore the wholesomeness of this advice must be so gravely asserted, Surely
(as the word here used is oft-times rendered, though properly it signify,
Because) it is meet to be said unto God, etc.

7. There is no right going unto God under trouble, nor can men evidence that
they have learned any other lesson in the School of affliction, till first they
can speak to God of their sense of his hand in their stroke; For, that is the
first step of a right deportment, to say unto God, and acknowledge, I have
born, Namely, the chastisement, as it is supplied, or the trial We have the
more need to look to this, that, ordinarily, men are first stupefied and
confounded with trouble, before they lay it sensibly to heart, and that ill
managed sense and exercise may draw to a relapse in stupidity.

8. It is not enough that men be sensible of trouble, unless they also meekly
submit to the trial, which is the first evidence that men are beginning to get
good of it, for till that once be, their distempers will mis-lead them; For, so
much also is imported in this, I have born, or, taken it up meekly. It is not
enough that men be only under trouble, or feel the smart of it, or bear it
because they cannot help it; nor should men bear it stoutly, contemning it; or
discontentedly, or despondently in a fainting way; But they must bear it
sensibly and submissively, and willingly, as seeing that it is the Lord. See 1 Samuel 3.18. 2 Samuel 15.26. and 16.10. Joh. 18.11. To which they may also be
excited, if they consider that trouble is for their good, Psalm. 119.71. Heb.
12.10. and that, without submission and exercise, trouble will do them no good,
Heb. 12.11.

9. When men have begun meekly to submit to trial, then their work will be
about sin, to discover and purge it out; which they will look upon as a greater
have, than to be rid of trouble; For, then he is advised to be exercised about
offending, as the consequent of the former step.

10. When men are rightly exercised about sin, especially under trouble, they
will look upon it as a very abominably corrupting and destroying evil; As the
word, also signifies.

11. It is not enough that men (especially under trouble) discover sin, or
contemplate the abominableness thereof, unless there be strong resolutions and
endeavors to amend it, and turn from it; For, he is advised to promise, I will
not offend. Not that men can undertake never to sin, though that be their duty;
but, especially, that they should oppose all sin, and should never purpose to
commit any sin; And they should be as careful of this, as they are about the
pardon of sin committed.

12. It is, in particular, a great evil to be avoided, that men do not corrupt
and lose the opportunity of a trial, which otherwise might do them much good,
by their miscarriages under it; For, this may be particularly intended in this
engagement, not to offend, or corrupt, as has been explained. And it is
certain Jobs miscarriages under trouble were the evils which he was bound
especially to amend, and for which Elihu did quarrel him especially.

13. Men, even by their managing of the testimony of a good conscience too
hotly under trouble, may spoil their own cause, and lose a fair opportunity of
good; For, therefore was Job, a godly man, to engage against offending thus.

Verse 32. That which I see not, teach thou me; if I have done iniquity, I will
do no more.
This Verse contains the rest of the Direction, or, what he should desire;
Namely, That, being resolved not to offend; though he knew not his particular
miscarriages, yet he should seek light from God to inform him of his failings,
and should renew his resolutions to avoid what should be discovered to him,
particularly, of his miscarriages under trouble. Whence, Learn,

1. As the people of God, when they are well exercised, are sensible of their
own sinfulness; So they should have their eye upon it; For, the Original
expression, Beside what I see, or contemplate, imports, that he should always
be seeing some sinfulness in himself. See Is. 59.12. As none will neglect
examination, and daily observing of their own ways and miscarriages, but they
who are ignorant of themselves; So it is better we see our failing this way, by
daily observation, than that our consciences be wakened by the terror of God,
and made to dwell upon that subject, Psalm. 50.21. and 51.3. And it must be sad
also, when men, who know many other things, yet, are ignorant of themselves.

2. Saints who know themselves best, will be sensible of their ignorance and
short coming, in taking up their defects; For, when Job comes to be right, he
supposes that he will apprehend there are evils beside what he sees. See
Psalm. 19.12. Saints are not soon or easily satisfied with their own sight of
their sinfulness; but, knowing the deceitfulness of their own hearts, Jer.
17.9. when they have seen most, they will know there is yet more to be seen;
for their ignorance whereof they will mourn, as well as for the evils which
they discern.

3. As simple ignorance, inadvertency, unfound principles, self-love, the
multitude of escapes, etc. are reasons why many of the people of Gods faults
pass unobserved by them; So, in particular, passion and distemper under trouble
may bring them into many snares unawares: For, it is of these miscarriages
under trouble, especially, that Elihu supposes Job to be ignorant. Thus did
Moses miscarry at the Rock, Psalm 106.32, 33. David spoke often amiss in his
have, and Jonah in his passion justifies his fault, Jon 4.9.

4. It is the property of the Child of God, when he is sensible, that ignorance
and inadvertency do not satisfy his conscience; as knowing that he is bound to
know the Rule of his duty, and to try all his actions thereby; and that sins,
even of ignorance, need an expiatory sacrifice and pardon, Lev. 4.2, 3, etc.
And therefore he desires not to be deluded, but to know what really he is,
although he see it not for present; For, so much does this desire, to be taught
what he sees not, import, that a sensible Soul is teachable, and earnestly
desires to be well informed concerning its own condition. See Psalm. 25.4, 5.
and 139.21, 22, 23, 24. It is sad when men do skin over their own bad
condition, and so long as they are not disquieted, they will not trouble
themselves, but sport themselves with their own deceivings.

5. It is not the testimony of any, but of God alone, that will quiet an honest
conscience about its guilt or honesty; For, it is to God this desire is put up,
What I see not, teach thou me. Without Gods approbation, all David's shifts to
cover his Adultery availed nothing, 2 Samuel 11.27. And as God is the effectual
teacher and convincer of men; So, in every thing, we should see what he says,
Exodus 18.23. 1 Chronicles. 13.2. And what he says, the conscience must rest upon;
neither taking with guilt, if he do not charge it upon it, nor resting secure
in any course (how plausible or successful soever) if he approve it not. See
Luke 16.15. 1 Cor. 4.4. 2 Cor. 10.18.

6. However God may give up, sometimes, with a stubborn people, and will
reprove them no more, Ezekiel. 3.26. Yet, it is his way with his own people, not
to let them go away with their faults; but, either by their own consciences,
or some other means, to bring their sin to their remembrance, and be a reprover
unto them; which is their great mercy: For, this desire is grounded upon this,
that it is Gods ordinary way with his people, to teach them what they see not;
as he made David's heart to smite him, and made Joseph's brethren remember their
cruelty toward him. So that Saints had need to prevent such after-games, when
their sin shall find them out, Numb. 32.23.

7. As the faults of the people of God, especially, under trouble, may be very
gross, and yet not seen by themselves; So they will not extenuate their faults,
when they do discern them; In both these respects he is to call that whereof he
can but suspect himself, till it be discovered, iniquity, as being committed
against professions, and manifold engagements, against mercies, and under
corrections, beside the grosseness of it in its own nature. Thus David was
sensible of the iniquity of his sin, Ps. 32.5.

8. Discoveries of sin are then rightly improved, when reformation, or a
serious resolution and endeavor of reformation, follow thereupon; And the way
to keep the conscience tender, and to have Gods light shining upon it for
continual information, is, to take heed to those faults, which it points at:
For, so is here subjoyned, If I have done iniquity, I will do no more; and on
these terms he beggs light. Our darkness flows, oft-times, from our ill
improvement of light; and Rebellion takes away reproofs, Ezekiel. 3.26. as
unfruitfulness turns corrections into destroying plagues, Isaiah 1.5. Jer. 2.30.

9. Even sincere and honest resolutions against sin had need to be often
renewed, lest we become remiss in them; Therefore, after that resolution and
engagement, v. 31. this is added.

10. Even very sticking sins, which cleave fast to us, and do resist many
resolutions, may, through grace, be prevailed over, if we follow forth our
resolutions; For, though he should find need to double his resolutions, yet
reformation is not hopeless. Therefore we should not set about this work in a
discouraged way, nor should difficulties in it cause us give it over.

11. Who so will consider, not only that there can be no true repentence for
bypast sins, without a resolution and endeavor of reformation for the future;
and that it is inconsistent with a gracious state, to continue in any known
sin, without serious endeavors against it: But, what has been the grosseness,
and the present folly and emptiness, and subsequent bitterness, of their former
debordings; they will see cause to fortify their resolutions against them for
the future; Therefore, this is premitted, If I have done iniquity, as a strong
Argument to engage him to do no more. For beside the adding of sin to sin, Is.
30.1. and that what men have already committed is more than enough, 1 Pet. 4 3.
it must argue strange madness, when men hazard again upon these courses under
which they have smarted. See Prove. 23.34, 35.

Verse 33. Should it be according to thy mind? He will recompense it, whether
thou refuse, or whether thou choose, and not I: Therefore speak what thou
know.
In this Verse, Elihu presses the former counsel and advice by a strong
Argument, which some do strangely put upon the wrack, by looking upon some of
the words as spoken by Elihu in his own person, and some of them as spoken by
him in the person of God, as if God himself, were immediately speaking of
himself. But the Translation comes nearest to the Original, and the sum of the
Argument is, That it was best for Job to follow his advice, seeing, otherwise,
God would not be at his disposal, but would take his own way to recompense his
folly, whether he liked it or not. To this the words do well agree. Wherein,

1. He propounds a very pungent Question to Job, Should it be according to thy
mind? Or, Should it be from thee? That is, whether thought he it just that he
should have the disposal of himself and his lots; so that God should deal with
him according as the prescription should flow from himself, or according as he
did carve out and were satisfied, and no otherwise.

2. He answers the Question himself, by an assertion, He will recompense it
(namely, Jobs folly and rashness) whether thou refuse, or whether thou choose:
That is, whether he consent or not, or be well or ill pleased, God will requite
his folly and miscarriage, unless he follow the advice he has given him.

3. He subjoynes a Negative, and not I; which may relate, either to that of
recompencing, that it is God, and not Elihu, who will recompense him, and
therefore he should consider, who is his party; Or, to that of refusing and
choosing, and so it imports, that Elihu would be far from taking Jobs way of
it, to be a chooser and refuser, or, a prescriber unto God.

4. Upon all this he inferrs a Conclusion, Therefore speak what thou know;
that is, See if thou can defend thy self against those former challenges
mentioned in this debate, and give reasons why God should not recompense thy
folly; and if thou find thy self unable for that, then follow my advice. So
that this provocation and challenge imports, That when Job had said all he
could, he would produce nothing which might warrant him to expect any safety
but in taking his counsel.

From this Verse, Learn, 1. It is naturally incident to the Sons of men, that
they presume to be carvers of their own condition, and would have their will in
every thing; For, he supposes, that Job, among the rest, aimed at this, to
have things according to his mind, or, from with him. As men naturally incline
not to be subject to the Law of God, in the matter of their duty, Romans 8.7. So
neither to the will and good pleasure of God, in the matter of their lot. And
hence flow their pride, coffeehouse, impatience, etc. when they get not
their will.

2. Whatever be men's inclinations that way, yet their own consciences, when
seriously put to it, cannot own nor approve of such presumption; For, Should it
be according to thy mind? says he, referring the matter to the impartial and
serious verdict of Jobs own conscience.

3. God will not cede or be subject to men's passions and humors; but, whether
they will or not, he will take his own way; and so, will make them patient
perforce, and let them see that they will gain nothing by impatience; For,
Whether thou choose, or whether thou refuse, he will recompense.

4. So long as men are impatient, and submit not to the will of God, their
afflictions are not simple trials, but chastisements, if it were but for that
their folly and presumption; For, therefore does he tell Job, that God, by the
continuance of his affliction, is recompencing those his miscarriages. So that
impatient persons should look upon this their guilt as pursued, even in their
(otherwise) most cleanly trials.

5. Impatient persons should consider that God is their party, who will prove
too hard for them; and when Messengers are sent to them with hard tidings, they
should look to God, and not to the Instruments, in them; For, says he, He will
recompense, and not I.

6. It is also to be pondered, that, whatever men do in their passion, yet,
sober minded men will be afraid to presume to prescribe unto God; Therefore
does Elihu decline that, as has been explained.

7. When men have said never so much in defense of their own presuming to
prescribe unto God, they will lose their cause; For this Conclusion, Therefore
speak what thou know, is a defiance to Job to produce any thing, which might
infringe what he has said, as the following Verses do further clear.

Verse 34. Let men of understanding tell me, and let a wise man hearken unto me.

35. Job has spoken without knowledge, and his words were without wisdom.


These Verses contain the second part of the Conclusion; wherein (as before) he
appeals to wise and judicious men, whether Job can be assoyled and declared not
to have spoken imprudently, in his complaints against God? And albeit Elihu
propounds this by way of desire, that such may resolve him whether it be so, or
not; Yet, it implies a confident assertion, that wise men will tell him, or,
hearken, and assent to what he has said concerning Jobs folly in his
discourses: And so some read the words, Men of understanding will tell me, etc.
This is here subjoyned with relation to what he said in the end of the former
Verse, to intimate, that, however Job might endeavor to say much for himself;
yet men of undestanding would not agree with him.

Doct. 1. Albeit men should stand for truth, were they left alone; Yet it is no
small encouragement to be countenanced in the maintenance of truth; And this is
a duty, which men owe to the friends and lovers of truth; For, he appeals to
others, not because he resolved to submit the truths, which he had learned from
God, to the verdict of any man, but because it was their duty to own him, for
the truths sake which he defended, and because it would not only be an
encouragement to him, but a more effectual mean to convince Job, if many wise
men concurred in opinion against him.

2. Whatever be the opinion of weak and witless persons, even though,
otherwise, they have some goodness in them; Yet, it is enough to the friends of
truth, if godly and wise discerning persons (who are best able to judge of
intricate cases, and are bound to employ their parts and abilities for God) do
own and countenance them and their opinions; Therefore does Elihu appeal to men
of understanding, or, heart, (See on v. 10.) and to a wise man.

3. Even wise men, in their fits, may speak and act very foolishly; For, so Job
spoke without knowledge. Yea, they may play the very beasts in an hour of
tentation, Ps. 73.22.

4. Wise men, when they are not engaged in a debate, and so over-powred with
passion, will never justify men's passionate carriage toward God under trouble;
For, in this he is sure, Men of understanding, and a wise man, (be there one or
more of them) will condemn Job, and will tell him, and hearken, or, assent to
him, that Job has spoken without knowledge, etc. So that it is no wisdom to
bear, even with wise and godly men, in their follies. Yea, when godly men play
the fool, it is an act of wisdom, as well as of pity and charity, to admonish
them; As Elihu here does, and calls to wise men to concur with him in it.

5. Such as would convince men of faults committed in their passion, will need
to inculcate the conviction much upon them; Therefore Elihu tells this reproof
twice, repeating and diversifying the expressions, Job has spoken without
knowledge, and his words were without wisdom. Where it is intimated, that both
knowledge, or, light, and wisdom, or, prudence, are necessary in men's walk;
and that prudence may correct much, wherein simple light will be ready to
miscarry.

Verse 36. My desire is that Job may be tried unto the end, because of his
answers for wicked men.

37. For he adds rebellion unto his sin, he clappeth his hands amongst us,
and multiplyeth his words against God.


The last branch of the Conclusion shuts up the discourse with a desire that
Job may be further tried, till he be humbled for his miscarriages. In it we
have,

First, The Desire it self, My desire is that Job may be tried to the end. Some
read it, by way of prayer unto God, My Father, let Job be tried unto the end;
and so this trial, which he desires, must be understood of his affliction, and
the continuance thereof, till he be humbled. Nor is it simply evil in Elihu to
wish that the rod be not taken off, till he be humbled. Neither yet would it
have flowed from any vindictive Spirit, though he had desired and prayed for
this; For he desires nothing but what is only a trial, and that from a Father.
But it seems clearer to understand this trial of the searching and sifting out
of Jobs folly in his discourses and carriage, in a further free debate; And
that Elihu (perceiving that Job was not fully satisfied, or, it may be, not
taking well what he spoke last) desires the matter may be yet more fully
debated, as he does in the following Chapters, and God also after him. However,
it suffices us, in general, that Elihu is content the matter be tried to the
bottom, that so Job may be thoroughly convinced; and he propounds this, either
by way of simple desire, evidencing his inclinations and his resolutions to
follow them forth; or by way of prayer to God, that he would assist him in this
undertaking, and would himself interpose to decide the difference, as afterward
he does.

Secondly, We have the Reasons of this Desire, or the matter wherein he would
have Job tried and sifted. This is propounded in general, as to the matter
thereof, that he spoke answers for wicked men; that is, when wicked men heard
him speak so much against Gods dealing toward himself, a godly man, they might
be hardened thereby in their wicked courses, and take occasion to slight piety.
It is also instanced more particularly, and as to the manner of his acting in
those miscarriages.

1. He was stiff and stubborn, in his persisting in his complaints, whereby he
added rebellion to his sin.

2. He insulted over his Friends, and clapped his hands among them.

3. He spoke many high words against God. Our Translation of v. 37. reads these
as things already done by Job; Some read it, That if he be not tried, v. 36. he
will do them yet, and will add rebellion to his sin, etc. But both those may
be joined together, That as he had already so miscarried, so he will persist
yet more in that course, if he be let alone; and not convinced and humbled.

From these Verses, Learn, 1. Men do not always appear as they really are, but
do need to be tried, what they and their principles are, whether by rods, or
debates, or both; For, Job needs to be tried here.

2. Men are not soon tried or discovered, whether by afflictions, or debates;
But there is more in them, than they will easily see or lay to heart: Therefore
he must be tried to the end, or, fully, till the victory (as the word will also
import) be obtained over him.

3. Men's skinning of their own sores, or a superficial view of what they are,
will never do them good; For, it is their advantage to be fully tried to the
end.

4. It is a friendly act to wish that men do not get away with their faults,
but that they may be ripped up, yea, that use may be made of the rod, if need
be, to squeeze out their folly; For therefore does Elihu desire that Job may be
tried, whether by God exercising him, or by himself in a free debate.

5. They who would have the godly well tried and discovered to themselves, and
the means blessed for that end, should depend much upon God; So much will this
desire, as it may import Elihu's prayer to God, teach us.

6. Even the escapes of godly men, especially under trouble, may be found to be
very gross, when they are well sifted and looked upon by a tender conscience;
Therefore are Jobs miscarriages represented in so black characters.

7. It is a fault intolerable in any, especially in a godly man, to say or do
any thing to the advantage of wicked men in their evil courses, or to the
prejudice of piety; For, it was Jobs great fault, that he had answers for
wicked men. See Psalm. 73.11, 12, 13.

8. When godly men do not bear afflictions patiently, or do reflect upon God
because of them, they harden wicked men in their way; For, thus did Job answer
for wicked men.

9. As any sin is odious in any, especially in godly men; So much more when
they are stubborn and rebellious in it; For, here was his crime, to add
rebellion to his sin, or, by persisting in his sin, to turn it into rebellion.
Which men ought to advert unto, that there be not much of will in their sin,
whereof Paul was free, Romans 7.19. That they sin not against light, that when
they sin, it may be their burden, and they may endeavor to amend it, Romans
7.24, 25. And that they persist not in any sin, notwithstanding any reproofs,
or warnings, or corrections, sent to reclaim them; which was Jobs fault.

10. When godly men are sore afflicted, and ill guided under it, they may have
foul fits of stubbornness and rebellion, before they become tame, and their
trouble may break and crush them, before they come to bow and stoop under it;
For, so Job added rebellion to his sin, and grew worse and worse in his fits;
As Asa also did in another case, 2 Chronicles. 16.10. And when men under trouble are
not thoroughly convinced, but, it may be, mistaken, as Job was, they will
readily grow worse and worse.

11. When men carry insolently, even in a good cause, it is an evidence they do
manage it ill; For, albeit Job had the better of his Friends, yet his clapping
of his hands among them, was not right, and argued that there was more dross in
his defenses. By such miscarriages men lose the advantage of their good cause.
See 1 Pet. 3.15.

12. It is the cap-stone of men's miscarriage under trouble, when they reflect
upon God because of his dispensations; For, this is the last challenge, that he
had words against God.

13. The more there be of those reflections upon God, it is the worse; For, his
multiplying of his words against God, is an aggravation of the fault.

CHAP. XXXV.
This Chapter contains Elihu's third Speech, which is shorter than the rest,
and in substance much like the former. In it (after the Transition, v. 1.) We
have, First, A Proposition of what he is to refute, v. 2, 3. Secondly, The
Refutation thereof; Wherein he taxes a threefold fault in Jobs discourses and
complaints. 1. A conceit of his own righteousness, which he refutes, v. 4 -- 8.
2. An useless and unprofitable sense of affliction, which he propounds and
clears, v. 9 -- 13. 3. Hopeless carriage under his trouble, which he desires
him to amend, v. 14. considering how he had smarted for it, though yet in great
moderation, v. 15. Thirdly, The Conclusion of the Speech, v. 16.

Verse 1. Elihu spoke moreover, and said.
IN this Verse, we have the Writer's Transition to the following Speech;
Wherein is insinuated, that Elihu, having expected a while, to see if Job would
answer, and finding him continue silent, goes on to refute his expressions,
and to check him for his failings. Whence, Learn,

1. It is no easy task to discover unto godly men all their failings in a day
of trial, or to convince them solidly of the sinfulness thereof, when they are
discovered; For, so much does this renewed pains, which he takes upon Job,
intimate to us.

2. It is the duty of such as have a calling to it, not to weary in taking
pains upon distempered Saints, to set them right; For therefore does Elihu
insist in this, as his duty and task.

Verse 2. Think thou this to be right, that thou said, My righteousness is
more than Gods?

3. For thou said, What advantage will it be unto thee, and, What profit
shall I have if I be cleansed from my sin?


Follows, a new Accusation, or, a Proposition of what he is to refute as
faulty in Jobs expressions. Wherein we have,

1. The way of propounding the challenge, v. 2. which is by way of appeal to
Jobs own conscience, if he thought that right (or fit to appear in judgment
with it, as the word will signify) which he is to mention.

2. The fault propounded, v. 2. That he had cried up his own righteousness
above Gods; which (because he had not said so much in express terms, in any of
his discourses; Therefore)

3. He proves from his words, v. 3. That he had said, It (or, his
righteousness) did not profit him, nor had he any advantage by being cleansed
from his sin. Where, in repeating Jobs words (or at least the sense that might
be put upon them) he changes the person, and in the first part of the Verse
directs his speech to Job, in the second person, and in the close of the Verse
he repeats the formal words, as they are supposed to be spoken by Job: Or, this
change of the person may import, That Job spoke these words both to himself,
(What advantage will it be to thee?) in his secret resentments and
communications with himself: And to others, in his open complaints, What profit
shall I have, etc?

For clearing of the words, Consider,

1. That the word, Righteousness, is to be repeated from v. 2. in v. 3. for it
is of the unprofitableness of his righteousness that Job complains.

2. In the close of v. 3. instead of, cleansing from sin, there is only, sin,
in the Original. But because in this Language, expiation of sin, or, sacrifices
for sin, are sometime called only, Sin, therefore the word is so rendered here.
Though the phrase (repeating the word, Righteousness, from v. 2. as has been
said) may as well be rendered thus, What profit shall I have (or, have I) by my
righteousness, more than by my sin? That is, I would have met with no sharper
measure, if I had been a gross sinner. Both these readings agree in one, that
he complained that he reaped no profit by his study of piety, though the last
reading expresses it more bitterly and grossly.

3. Though Elihu charge Job with saying this; yet I find not that he uttered
those express words in any of his complaints. This gives no ground to their
conjecture, who think that Job said more in his complaints than is written in
the former part of this Book: And that this is one of these expressions that
are omitted by the Writer of the Book though it was well remembered by Elihu in
the mean time. But though Job uttered no such words, yet Elihu might infer,
from what he said, Chap. 9.22. and diverse other places, wherein he had
asserted, that himself and wicked men were alike dealt with; He might, I say,
infer (not that Job spoke untruth in maintaining that Thesis against his
Friends, that all things come alike unto all; but) that such as narrowly marked
his complaints, or were but weak persons and less able to distinguish, would
readily stumble at them, as suspecting that he cried down all advantages that
were to be found in piety. And it is not to be denied, that, however Job, in
debating with his Friends, spoke clearly enough of the eternal reward of piety,
(whatever might befall godly men in this life, in common with the wicked, or in
an harder measure than they felt) yet, in his fits of complaining, he sometime
forgot that eternal reward, and complained too much that his righteousness and
integrity were not regarded, seeing he was afflicted.

4. It being thus cleared, how he said this, it does sufficiently make out that
charge, v. 2. which it is produced to confirm, or, that he said also (upon the
matter) that his righteousness was more than Gods. For when he spoke so much of
his own righteousness, and complained of his afflictions, he was more careful
to maintain his own righteousness, who was afflicted, than the righteousness of
God, who had afflicted him; which was, in effect, to cry up the one above the
other.

5. It is also to be considered, that, though Elihu mention only this challenge
in the entry, yet in the progress of the refutation he reflects upon more of
his speeches, which were to the same purpose, and had a dependence upon this
great mistake and failing; Namely, upon his complaints that God heard not his
cry, though he was a godly man, v. 9, etc. and that he could not see God, when
he desired to find him, v. 14. Of which in their proper places.

From v. 2. Learn, 1. Such is the gracious condescendence of God, that some of
Adam's unrighteous posterity do attain to be righteous in their persons, and in
some particular causes which they maintain; For, so is here supposed, that Job
had a righteousness, for the asserting whereof he is not quarrelled, if he had
done it modestly.

2. Not only may men attain to be righteous, but they may come up to know and
be assured that it is so; As Job here was.

3. So much corruption and infirmity does attend the most righteous of mere
men, in this life, that very rarely do they manage their righteousness, and the
testimony of their good consciences well under trouble; For, herein Job did
miscarry.

4. It is an heinous abuse of men's righteousness, and of the testimony of their
consciences, when, because thereof, they do any way reflect upon God, or his
righteousness in his dispensations; Which was Jobs failing here.

5. When men, because they have a good conscience, do not stoop meekly under
Gods afflicting hand, they are guilty, upon the matter, of crying up their own
righteousness above Gods; For, so Elihu affirms, that Job, in effect, had
said, My righteousness is more than Gods.

6. However men may be furious in their passion, yet their consciences in cold
blood will condemn their reflecting upon God, and their want of meekness and
submission, in their carriage toward him; For, therefore does Elihu appeal to
himself, Think thou this to be right, that thou said, etc? So that they
may expect a sad after-game in their own bosoms, who fall into those evils.

7. When passion is up, readily conscience is asleep, even in most tender
walkers; For, here there is a necessity that Elihu do put Jobs conscience to
it, to condemn his own way.

From v. 3. Learn, 1. It is great injustice to raise calumnies, or cast
reproaches upon men, but we should be able to prove what we allege against
them; Therefore does Elihu subjoyn a proof of his former charge; For, thou
said, etc.

2. Men, in their passions, are so little masters of themselves, that they will
fall in evils, which not only they do not see, but their hearts do even abhor
them, and yet they are committing them; For, so was it with Job. When any of
his Friends laid any such reflections upon the righteousness of God to his
charge, he not only denies them, but out-strips them in commending his
righteousness, and Elihu proves that charge, v. 2. from his words, or, what he
had said, not to prove him wicked, (which was his Friends design) but to humble
him.

3. When men let loose the reins to their passion, they must answer, not only
for what they expressly say, or intend in their words, but, for all the
consequences that may justly be fastened upon them, and for all the mistakes of
others, occasioned by them; For, it is upon these two accounts that Elihu thus
cites Jobs words, and makes use of them to prove that he had said, that his
righteousness was more than Gods, as has been cleared. When men are in
passion, they little consider what they say, or what may be made of it; and
being out of Gods way, and the way of their duty, they are justly made to
answer for all those consequences and effects.

4. Albeit God will not enter into strict judgment with his people, for all
that may be justly fastened upon them; Yet it is the part of a friend
faithfully to lay their faults before them, in their worst colors, that so
they may be humbled; For, it is upon this friendly account that Elihu deals so
sharply with Job, and charge upon him, that his words imported (or might seem
to others to import) no less than that he saw no advantage nor profit in his
righteousness and purity, more than if he had been a gross sinner. And, indeed,
it is better that a faithful friend do this unto us, than that either our
enemy, or our own consciences alarmed with wrath, should do it.

5. It is one great evidence of passion in godly men, when they look too much
to temporal events and rewards, forgetting what is eternal; And this may be the
fault even of godly men; For, this made Job say, What advantage will it be,
etc? Because he measured his advantages by his present temporal lot.

6. It is also an evidence of distemper, when godly men do not ponder and prize
the advantage of a good conscience under trouble, seeing the conscience of sin
would be much more bitter than simple trouble; For, in this also Job was
faulty, that, though his righteousness gave him no privilege to be exempted
from trouble; Yet, the mercy of being free from the challenge of
unrighteousness was but too little prized by him: But when he should have
blessed God, that he was righteous, and free of the checks of an evil
conscience, however he was afflicted, he was complaining and quarrelling, that
he, who was a righteous man, should be afflicted.

Verse 4. I will answer thee, and thy companions with thee.
Follows, Elihu's Refutation of these expressions; To which (in this Verse) a
Preface is premitted, Wherein he undertakes to answer those his speeches, v. 3.
upon which he had grounded that challenge, v 2. He says, he will answer also
his compan^ons with him. (See also, Chap. 18.2.) Where, by his companions, we
are not to understand his three Friends, for some of them spoke to this same
purpose with Elihu, though upon a wrong design. But we are to conceive, either,
that there were some present, who (owning him rather in joining with what was
faulty in him, than otherwise) by their gestures, or otherwise, declared they
were of Jobs opinion, and encouraged him in it; Or (seeing it is most probable,
that, till his trial was perfected, few or none did own him at all) by way of
supposition, that though never so many took his part, he would enter the lists
against them all.

Doct. 1. It is not enough to censure and challenge men for their faults,
unless they be refuted also, and solidly convinced of the evil of them;
Therefore he subjoynes an answer to the challenge.

2. As a wrong cause does oftentimes get most followers, so it is nothing the
better, nor to be spared the more, for that; For, I will answer thee, and never
so many companions with thee. What is culpable in one, is faulty in never so
many, yea, so much the more faulty, as many are engaged in it.

3. As men who are honest and zealous will engage in defense of truth, were it
against never so many; So one for truth is sufficient against never so many who
are for error; Therefore does Elihu undertake this cause his alone, should
never so many join with Job against him.

Verse 5. Look unto the Heavens, and see and behold the Clouds which are higher
than thou.

6. If thou sinnest, what do thou against him? Or if thy transgressions be
multiplied, what do thou unto him?

7. If thou be righteous, what give thou him? Or what receives he of thine
hand?

8. Thy wickedness may hurt a man as thou art, and thy righteousness may profit
the Son of man.


These Verses contain the first Argument whereby he refutes Jobs complaints, or
the first fault which he finds in his discourses; Namely, A too great conceit
of his own righteousness, the very fault which the former accusation expressly
bears. And this he refutes by laying before him the super-eminent excellency of
God, who cannot be reached by our good or evil. Whence it follows, that men
should not look upon God, as obliged to regard them, or what they are, if he
please to give a proof of his Sovereign Prerogative; and they should be sober
in complaining of his dispensations, seeing he is neither bound to notice or
reward their goodness, upon the account of any benefit or advantage he reaps
thereby, nor to fear their evil, as if it could hurt him. Eliphaz had made use
of this same Argument, Chap. 22.2, 3, 4. but his scope being unsound in it, Job
(however he denied not the general truth, yet) could not digest his speech.

This Argument and Challenge is prosecuted in this order,

1. It is ushered in, v. 5. by a general Proposition, containg a comparison
from the less to the more, That, if, when he looked up to the Heavens, or
Skies, and the Clouds, he would find them so high above him, that he could not
reach them either to hurt or help him; (for none can reach the very Sun with
his dart, or arrow, or offering) how then could man think to reach the most
high God, who is exalted above the Heaven of Heavens, with his good or evil?

2. It is propounded in both the branches thereof, v. 6, 7. Where he speaks of
man's sin, as well as of his goodness and righteousness, that he may illustrate
the one by the other; and he doubles the expressions concerning every one of
them, to show the certainty of the thing, and to show that our want of good
thoughts is not our only fault, but we are unfixed in them, unless they be thus
frequently inculcated. In sum, he asserts, that men's evil can do no hurt or
prejudice to God, v. 6. and therefore he needs not be afraid of them, nor
afflict them for fear they should hurt him; Nor can their goodness profit him,
v. 7. and therefore he is not obliged to reward it. This does not import, that
men, by sinning, do not offer what indignity they can to God, while they
contemn his Law and Authority, and cause his Name to be dishonored; Nor yet,
that he is not well pleased with, nor will reward piety, according to his
gracious and faithful promise. But the meaning is, That no real prejudice nor
profit redounds by these to God, who is infinitely blessed in himself; And
therefore men should not entertain a conceit of their goodness, as if thereby
they obliged him; which is, upon the matter, the fond conceit of every one who
complains of his affliction upon the account of his righteousness.

3. It is further amplified, v. 8. from this, That man's good or evil may tend
to the benefit or prejudice of a man like himself, but cannot reach God: And
this is not only true in respect of the man himself who is good or evil, who
will be rewarded by God according to his ways; (and so they should not be
emboldened to sin; but encouraged to holiness, considering the rewards of both)
but, especially, in respect of others, to whom a man may do hurt, by his sinful
practices, and may do good, by his righteous walking. And this debaseth man
far beneath God, seeing he can be hurt or benefited by others, as God cannot.

From v. 5. Learn, 1. It is man's duty to study the Book of the Creatures, which
God has set before him, for good and spiritual uses; For, so is Job directed
to learn some lesson by looking unto the Heavens, etc.

2. Men are not only negligent to set about this profitable study, but very
superficial, when they have set about it; For, so much are we taught by the
repetition of this Exhortation, and by his requiring him not only to look, but
to see, and behold, or, contemplate, till what he sees take impression upon
him.

3. It is one proof of the usefulness of this study of the Creatures and of
man's short coming therein, that he has that daily before his eyes, which might
refute his folly in his exercises, and yet he discerns it not; For, Elihu
brings a refutation of Jobs complaints from what he might see and behold in the
Heavens and Clouds. Thus the study of the vicissitudes of day and night, and
Summer and Winter, may refute the fears of Gods people that their sad condition
will never change. See Psalm. 74.16, 17, 18

4. It may demonstrate the glorious excellency of God, that man cannot take it
up, but by way of comparison with other things; As here it is compared with the
height of the Heavens and Clouds, which it transcends.

5. It may abase man also before God, and silence his proud complaints, that,
in some respects, he is inferior (not only to God, but) to other Creatures
made by God; As here, he abaseth Job by letting him see that the Heavens and
Clouds are higher than he, and much more is God infinitely above him. See Ps.
8.3, 4.

From v. 6, 7. (the subject matter whereof has already been spoken to, in
part, Chap. 22.2, 3.) Learn,

1. Truths must not therefore be cast away, because they are not seasonably
applied; Nor must we reject them upon the account of any prejudices, or because
we do not like them: Therefore Elihu bears in upon Job those truths which
Eliphaz had propounded to prove a wrong Conclusion, and therefore had been
rejected by Joh.

2. Whatever be men's thoughts of their own ways, or however God do recompense
their attempts and endeavors in evil or good; Yet, neither of them do reach
God, to hurt or advantage him; For, that is the Doctrine of these two Verses,
That his sinning, and even multiplied transgressions, cannot do any thing
against him; and that his righteousness gives him nothing, nor does he receive
any thing thereby. Whence it may be inferred,

1. That God is All-sufficient, who seeks men to be holy, only for their own
good, when himself cannot be benefited thereby. See Ps. 16.2. Romans 11.35.

2. That when men have attempted to do their worst against God, by great and
many sins, yet all those darts will fall back upon their own heads; For, What
do they against him, or unto him?

3. That the consideration of this transcendent excellency in God should abase
men, and make them sober in their complaints; and humble also, notwithstanding
the good they are helped to do; For, Elihu's scope in this Doctrine is to abase
Job, and to check him for his complaints, and his conceit of his own
righteousness.

4. It is not easy to keep even good men from somewhat of conceit, as if God
were obliged to them; And as a day of trial will discover conceit and pride
where men little dreamt of it; So wherever men complain of their trials,
because they have a good conscience under them, there wants not such a proud
conceit: Therefore must this Doctrine be inculcated, to humble Job, though he
was a godly man, and walked soberly in the day of his prosperity.

5. Whatever be Gods gracious condescendence, yet when men are proud, and full
of a conceit of their own righteousness, he will plead his Prerogative against
them; Therefore, albeit he stoop to others, to assure them he delights in their
piety, yet to a proud and passionate Job, he speaks in other terms, and tells
him that he is not profited by his righteousness.

From v. 8. Learn, 1. It is an evidence of man's low and empty condition, that,
as he needs and is capable of profit and advantage; So he is also obnoxious to
hurt and prejudice; As here we are taught.

2. How little soever man's good or evil can do to God; yet they are of no small
importance or concernment to himself; For, thus also his wickedness, or
righteousness, may reach himself, being but a man, and the Son of man.

3. A man, by his wickedness or righteousness, may not only hurt or profit
himself, but others also; For, thus he may reach a man who is like himself. So
that men should look wherein they are hurtful to others, and what good they
might do, which yet they neglect.

Verse 9. By reason of the multitude of oppressions, they make the oppressed to
cry: they cry out by reason of the arm of the mighty.
Follows, to v. 14. the second Argument of refutation, or the second fault
which he finds in Jobs discourses and carriage; That not only he conceited much
of his own righteousness, of which before; but that he took not a right way of
dealing with God, to get deliverance, while he did only exercise himself in
useless complaints. This has not so much a relation to what Job had spoken, of
men's groaning under oppression, Chap. 24.12. as to all Jobs own complaints
about his afflicted condition, and that he got not access nor audience with
God. Those he frequently joined with what is censured, v. 3. and this challenge
is well added to the former, because men's proud conceit of themselves does
usually produce such unprofitable complaints in trouble.

This Challenge is held forth in a general account of men's carriage under
afflictions, and of the reasons why men so exercised are not regarded, leaving
to Job to apply it, in so far as he was guilty. So that we need not be careful
to charge all the faults that may be found here, upon Job, though he had some
of them; yea, he might be concluded guilty, in some measure, of all of them.
And although it be true, that God may delay to hear honest men in trouble, for
their trial; and this was Gods chief design (next to his own glory) in Jobs
trial: Yet what is here recorded, is his ordinary way of dealing with the Sons
of men; and Job had need to look to it in some respects. And if we look upon
Elihu's way of dealing thus with Job, it may teach in general, Not only how
necessary prudence is, in dealing with men, general Doctrine, in some cases,
being most effectual, and always more taking than bitter reflections; and,
That the consciences of hearers should examine what they hear, so as they
discern how far they are concerned in it, and accordingly apply, though it be
not directed to them so part^cularly: But, That it is useful, even for godly
men, to consider Gods dealing in common with men, wherein they may read many
spots that are upon their own faces.

The Discourse may be taken up in this general sum, That men are oft-times
taken up with an useless sense of their affliction, v. 9. which is accompanied
with no thankfulness, v. 10, 11, nor humility, v. 12. but is a vain empty
exercise, and therefore not regarded by God, v. 13. But I shall take it up in
four branches; In the first whereof (in this Verse) is held out, both what is
the lot of many men, and their usual carriage under it; Namely, That, being
under much oppression (which also clears how men may hurt others, v. 8.) they
cry out, but unprofitably; as is not only cleared in the following Verses, but
is also insinuated here, in that it is only because of the oppression, and the
arm of the mighty, that they cry out. Whence, Learn,

1. Oppression is an usual sin, and a suffering wherewith the Sons of men are
frequently exercised; As here is supposed. See Ps. 12.5.

2. Ordinarily one oppression comes not its alone, but many of them come one
after another, and deep calls unto deep, Psalm. 42.7. For, here is supposed,
that there may be a multitude of oppressions.

3. Men are so corrupt, that readily if they have any power, they employ it to
the oppression of others; For, so is here also supposed, that, if they have the
arm of the mighty, they oppress, and cause men to cry. See Mic. 2.1.

4. To be sensible under affliction and oppression is no fault, for to be
stupid is a sin, and God sends oppression to rouse men out of their Lethargies;
For, in this men are not guilty, that they cry.

5. All the sad consequents of oppression will lie at Oppressors doors; For,
it is charged on them that they make them to cry who are oppressed.

6. There may be much sense of affliction, and men may make much noise under
it, when yet they are not right; For, they cry, and cry out, and yet are faulty.

7. Among other faults and miscarriages of men under trouble, these are
particularly to be reprehended; When either they are excessive in their
passions about worldly losses (as, when they cry, and cry out, or shout by
reason of oppressions:) Or, (which is the cause of the former) when all they
resent, is, their outward loss, envying the prosperity of others; As here, the
arm of the mighty, or, their smart under their hand, and their envying that
they are mighty, while themselves are impoverished, causes all this noise.

Verse 10. But none says, Where is God my Maker, who gives songs in the night?

11. Who teaches us more than the Beasts of the Earth, and makes us wiser
than the Fowls of Heaven.


In the next branch of this Discourse, a more distinct account is subjoyned of
what is faulty in their crying.

1. In that, though they cry under trouble, yet, they enquire not after God.

2. That they take not God up aright in any address they make to him; while
they take him not up as their Maker and Creator, who gives songs even in the
night (which may be understood, either properly, that he gives matter of songs
by night, such as David had in contemplating the Moon and Stars, as would
appear, Psalm. 8.3, 4. See also, Psalm. 42.8. Or, rather figuratively, that he
gives matter of praise, even in a night of trouble) and who has endowed man
with the gift of reason, above beasts and fowls. In all which description of
God, and oppressed ones their not enquiring after him as such, several faults
may be pointed at in their way, either in not coming to God, or not coming
rightly: Such as,

1. Unthankfulness, not only for common benefits, but special deliverances.

2. Not exercising of Faith to come now to God, who has encouraged them to
come to him by all these benefits and favors; which also speaks their want of
humility, of which afterward.

3. Their giving little proof of that wisdom and reason, wherewith they are
endowed above beasts and birds, to walk more fruitfully under trouble.

From these Verses, Learn, 1. It is a great fault, when men, under oppression,
make more noise of their trouble, than they make errands to God; For, they cry,
v. 9. but say not, where is God? See Ezekiel. 24.23.

2. As this fault is very universal and rife, so this heightens the evil of it;
For, this adds to the challenge, that none says, Where is God? Or, this
exercise is generally neglected. In the Original it is, He says not,
intimating, that every ones carriage is marked, and that it is rare to find one
of these many who are oppressed, v. 9. about this exercise.

3. Such as mind to employ God in trouble, should be very serious and
affectionate in that undertaking, For, they should say, Where is God? Which
imports, That God is their only refuge, who say so as they ought; That trouble
may so confound them, as God may be a missing, and they left in the dark, in
their distress; and, That they will have much earnestness to find him, and be
at him.

4. Were there never so much of affection in seeking after God in trouble; Yet
without thankfulness, men will not make a right address; For, they should
enquire after God, having a sense and thankful acknowledgement of mercies. See
Phil. 4.6. Col. 4.2.

5. Humble persons will find matter of praise in very common ben^fits; For,
here it is matter of praise, that he is a Maker, and teaches us more than the
beasts of the earth, etc. Which imports, Partly, that those are great benefits
in themselves; As, indeed, Man is a notable piece of work, the product of the
whole Trinity (For, it is Makers, in the Original. See Genesis 1.26.) and the gift
of reason, and use of wit, is a special mercy: For, God might have made us
beasts or birds, when he made us men; And it is lamentable, when men so abuse
that excellent gift, that it had been good they had been made bruit beasts (who
are gone, and have no more to suffer, when once they are dead) rather than men.
Partly, it imports, that humility will prize even these common mercies, to get
matter of praise. Thus, also, the mercies of every day, may sweeten the nights
rest with songs; As his giving us rest by night, and preserving of us in our
sleep, are also matter of praise.

6. Were common mercies well studied and improved, that would fit men for
proofs of special kindness; as here there are songs to be given in the night of
trouble.

7. God freely allows on his people, not only songs after dark trouble, but
even in the midst of it, and if he were employed, will bring them about: For,
of this they might have remarked experiences, he gives (not only does he
allow, but is active in bringing about, and freely bestows matter of) songs in
the night.

8. It is peoples duty, when they get mercies, to make songs of them, and to
bless for them; For, here God is said to give songs, when he gives matter of
songs, to teach men their duty: Though it be also true, that when he has given
us matter, he must also give it to us to sing of them as we ought.

9. It is not unusual to see men, under trouble, not only full of diffidence,
but forgetting even signal mercies, which have been conferred upon them in sad
and dark times, and not undervaluing common favors only; For, None says,
Where is God, who gives songs in the night? Which does not only import their
little believing that God can give them songs in the present night of their
oppression; but their forgetting the songs that God has given, even in the
night. So naughty are men, and full of self-love, and so little reason have we
to give credit to our own verdict of Gods kindness in a day of distress, seeing
then, we are ready to forget and undervalue all.

10. It is also necessary, that men, in enquiring after God in trouble, do
believe and lay hold on him by faith; For, this description of God, does not
only point out matter of praise to be joined with our prayers, but grounds of
faith, to encourage us to come to him; Which men do little consider how
necessary it is in their addresses, both for bearing them up to their duty, and
for being successful in it. See Jam. 1.6, 7.

11. Faith should make use, not only of former experiences of spiritual
favors, but even of common mercies, to strengthen it self in coming to God;
For, Faith must enquire after him as our Maker, and he who teaches us more
than the beasts of the Earth, etc. as well as because he gives songs in the
night.

12. Faith and Praise live and dye together; Faith entertains the promise with
thankfulness, till the performance come, and is so humble as to praise even for
a promise, or any ground of hope; and Praise does elevate men's spirits to
believe yet more: For, here both of them have common grounds, upon which they
stand and are supported.

13. It is one special act of men's prudence, in expressing their faith and
praise, to remember, in a day of trouble, the special gift of reason bestowed
upon them, and to improve and make use of it accordingly; For, therefore is
that special proof of Gods kindness mentioned, that he teaches us more than
the beasts of the Earth, and makes us wiser than the fowls of Heaven, to show
that men do never believe Gods kindness in that mercy, nor praise him for it,
so long as they carry like bruit beasts under trouble, being only troubled
about that which affects beasts, looking up no higher than the visible hand
that hurts them, and carrying under trouble as bruit beasts use to do, Is.
51.20. Jer. 31.18.

Verse 12. There they cry, (but none gives answer) because of the pride of
evil men.
In the third branch of this Discourse, he subjoynes an inference, That,
because of these faults, God will not hear their cry, Our Translation reads it
so, with a Parenthesis, as if they cried by reason of the pride of evil men (or
because of their oppression, which flows from their pride) but are not heard.
But if we set the Parenthesis aside, it may as well be understood of their own
pride who cry; that, though they cry, yet, they are not heard, because of their
pride. And so the Verse contains not only an inference, that they are not heard
because of their faults formerly mentioned, but an account of a new fault
concurring with the former, to obstruct their success. Some fault may be hinted
at in that indefinite expression, None gives answer, which may intimate, that
they long after help and relief, get it from whom they will, or whatever way it
come; but do not look to God alone for it. But the Original gives no ground for
this, where it is, He, that is, God (of whom he has been speaking, v. 10. and
speaks of him, v. 13.) answers not; and therefore I shall take notice only of
that one fault, of pride, which hinders their success.

Doct. 1. Men may be bad enough under trouble, though yet they make some cries
to God because of it, and do neither neglect prayer altogether, nor weary of
it, if they have used it formerly; Yea, men may be far enough wrong, though
trouble for a time put them to cry, whereas they had neglected it formerly;
For, so is supposed of those who are here found faulty, that there (in their
oppressed condition) they cry. See Psalm. 18.41. Hos. 7.14.16.

2. When men will not see the faultiness of their crying to God, in the glass
of the Word, nor have they any checks and convictions of conscience to tell
them of it, God does justly cause them read it in the want of an answer and
relief under sad pressures; For, so is here intimated, They cry, but he does
not answer.

3. Men may be under much oppression, and yet continue proud, their spirits
being broken, but not humbled, and their evils crushed, but not subdued; For,
here there is pride, though they be made to cry.

4. Wherever there is pride, men are in so far evil, whatever they be
otherwise; For, it is, be where it will, the pride of evil men.

5. Unbelief, Unthankfulness, and irrational brutish Carriage under trouble,
do evidence men to be proud; For, wherever those evils are, v. 10, 11. there
is pride.

6. Pride, thus evidenced in men's carriage under trouble, is ^^^eat obstruction
to audience and relief from God, ^^^o respects the lowly, Psalm. 136.6. Is.
66.1, 2. Jam. 4.6. For, He does not answer, because of the pride of evil men.

Verse 13. Surely God will not hear vanity, neither will the Almighty regard
it.
In the last place, This Discourse is summed up in this Conclusion, That there
being so much of vanity and em^^^ness in that exercise which he has before
described, God will not hear, nor regard it. See Chap. 27.9. Prove. 1.28, 29,
etc. Is. 1.13, 14, 15. Jer. 11.11.

Doct. 1. Vanity and emptiness is a great fault in men's exercises and addresses
to God, when they are frothy, and not solid and hearty, in what they do; For,
here it is a sad character of men's exercise, formerly described, that it is
vanity.

2. Where Faith, Thankfulness and Humility are wanting in men's exercises, they
are but empty, seem what they will; For, it is because of those faults, marked
in the former Verses, that this exercise is concluded to be vanity.

3. It is not easy to drive men from a presumptuous conceit that they will
come speed in a faulty way of addresses to God; Therefore it must be asserted
over again (after what is said, v. 12.) that God will not hear. Thus the
visible Church are apt to rest secure in their worst condition, Jer. 12.4. Mic.
3.10, 11.

4. Let men presume as they will, yet faulty addresses, and particularly, empty
prayers, will not be heard; For, Surely God will not hear vanity. It is true,
he hears whatsoever men say, yea, and may give men what they desire, in wrath,
Psalm. 78.29, 30, 31. and 106.15. Yet he does not so hear, as to grant their
desire in love.

5. It is the sad lot of those who are vain and empty in their addresses, that
as their desires are not answered, so by this God evidenceth that he approves
not of their way; For, neither will God hear, nor regard vanity. These two are
distinctly mentioned, because there is a difference betwixt them, which is to
be well observed in his dealing with his people who seek him in an approved
way. For he may delay to hear or grant their desires, when yet he does accept
and regard them and their services; and they are bound to believe that it is
so, and to comfort themselves in the faith and assurance thereof. But men in
their vain addresses need expect neither of them; and Elihu mentions both here,
Partly, to show how uneasily such persons are driven from their delusions, and
that if God grant not their desires, they may, notwithstanding, yet fancy that
he accepts and regards them; Partly, to show that the more lying refuges and
delusions they run to, they will get but the more disappointments; if they look
for hearing, he will not hear; if they fancy that he approves of them
notwithstanding, yet, he will not regard.

6. Who so take up God aright, will see that (as he needs none of their
service, and is above our best service, so particularly) he will not regard
empty vain service; For he being God, a Spirit, how can he relish carnal
addresses? And being Almighty, or, All-sufficient, how should he accept vain
and empty service, when men presume to offer it to him? Therefore is he thus
designed here, to enforce this Conclusion.

Verse 14. Although thou say thou shall not see him, yet judgment is before
him, therefore trust thou in him.
The third Argument of Refutation, or, the third fault he finds in Jobs
discourses and carriage, is, his hopelessness under affliction, and that he
despaired of seeing God under it, not simply (for he looked to see him in
glory) but in this life. This is the usual result of useless exercises and vain
addresses under trouble, that when men have wearied themselves in these;
without success, they sit down at last discouraged and hopeless. The Challenge
relates to that Complaint, Chap. 23.8, 9. and others the like, wherein he
regrated that he could not have access unto, nor a sight of God. It is true, he
sometime desired an odd way of access unto God, as a visible Judge, to decide
this Controversy: But this Challenge does relate more generally to what was at
the bottom of that and his other complaints, that he could not see through that
cloud of his trouble, nor had any hope of temporal relief from God; For Elihu
would never bid him trust, but rather be humbled for his presumption in
desiring God to appear in such a way, and for his complaining that it was not
so. This fault Elihu tenderly reproves (and refutes his mistake) in a direction
to trust in God, notwithstanding this his hopelessness and diffidence. Which he
presses from the consideration of what God is, even a God of judgment, in
this Verse, and of the sad effects of the want of this confidence, v. 16.

In this Verse, Consider,

First, The Fault here challenged, Thou say, thou shall not see him. He had
not a comfortable sight of God in his trouble, nor expected to get it, which
made him speak it out, and complain of it. Whence, Learn,

1. To be bemisted and lose a fight of God under trouble, is a very sad and
humbling Ingredient in it; As here it was to Job, not to see God. Hence are
those complaints of darkness under trouble, Lam. 3.2, 6. Is. 59.9, 10. Mic.
7.8. And God being his peoples refuge in trouble, it must be sad when they can
have no sight of him. See Chap. 23.3, 4, etc. Now not to see him in trouble
(omitting men's want of hope to see God in glory, when their temporal troubles
are over, and their not seeing his hand and providence in all their troubles;
For, Job was clear enough in both these) may import,

1. Men's being in the dark about Gods mind in trouble, and the causes of their
affliction; as Chap. 10 2. Yea, when godly men see some causes of it (as they
cannot but see sin, which deserves more than all they suffer) they may be yet
ready to wonder, why the Lord suffers his people, whom he has freely chosen
and loved, to go to ruin, especially, if their stroke be inflicted by
Instruments more wicked than themselves, as Hab. 1.13. And that he should give
them up to be destroyed, when yet no advantage redounds thereby to him, as
Psalm. 44.12. In which case, we must learn (if we can see no more) to submit to
his Sovereignty, who gives no account of his matters.

2. It may import the want of his sensible and comfortable presence, as Chap.
13.24. In which case, we are not to think, that one trial will hide us from
another, or, that God is engaged to give us sense, because he sends trouble.

3. It may impart no probable appearance of any issue, o^ of Gods appearing to
clear the cause of his people, and to rid them out of trouble, but their night
growing still the darker, and all the means of their relief being invisible, as
Chap 23.8, 9. Of this afterward; Only it would be remembered, that this is made
our lot, to heighten the trial of our faith, Hab. 3.17, 18.

4 It may import want of light in the matter of men's duty, and that, when they
would resolve to follow their duty, in most difficult cases: whatever God do to
them; yet they are left in the dark, and know not what to do. This is imported
in these perplexing questions, Act. 2.37. and 9.6. From all these it may be
inferred, that, however it be sad to be in such a case, yet it is our mercy to
feel it a burden upon us, and to miss a sight of God most, in our saddest
exercises. Only we should not only feel the smart of this, but should search
out the causes thereof; Such as, Desertion from God, Chap. 34.29. Security and
formality in the days of our ease, Is. 29.13, 14. and 59.9 -- 13. The
astonishing power of great trouble, Psalm. 60.3. Jer. 13.12, 14 Our abuse of,
and sinning against, clear light, in known and ordinary cases and duties; and,
our prescribing unto God that he may appear, and be seen by us, in some odd
way, as Job did, which makes us vilify and not discern his ordinary way and
means wherein he appears to be seen by his people. If those causes were laid to
heart, and the removal of them endeavored, the sad effects thereof would soon
cease.

Doct. 2. Ordinarily Saints do judge of their future condition by what is
present, and if it be evil, they make it worse by their apprehensions and
diffidence; For, as Job did not see God for the present, so he concluded his
case would continue so for the future, Thou say, thou shall not see him. As
in prosperity, even Saints are apt to promise to themselves a perpetuity of it,
Psalm. 30.6. So in adversity, they are no less ready to heighten their trouble,
by fearful apprehensions of the continuance thereof, Psalm. 77.7, 8, 9. Saints
have still somewhat of a principle of fainting, and of a Spirit of bondage of
their own making; And hence flow their great mistakes, either in passing their
verdict upon the times that pass over them; (See Eccles. 7.10.) Or in making
their present condition sadder and worse than indeed it is, by their reading it
wrong; Or in their sad apprehensions for the future. This we should be sensible
of in our perplexities, and should know that a change in the frame of our own
hearts, and our getting of open eyes to discern things as they are, would case
us of our greatest pressures. And particularly, in our apprehensions for the
future, (...) should not judge by our present condition, for (...) can make a
change, Psalm. 77.7, 8, 9. with 10. not by our fears, Is. 51.12, 13. nor by
probabilities, Zech. 8.6. nor even by our ill deservings, if we be sensible
thereof, Ezekiel. 20.8, 9.

3. Though it be a great fault to entertain discouraging and fainting thoughts,
though they should be smothered within men's own bosoms; and a much greater
fault, when they are brought forth and expressed to others; Yet, they may be
dear to God, and may get a good issue at last, who may be so over-powred with
tentations, as they must speak out their fears and apprehensions; For, so was
it with Job, though it was his fault, Thou say, thou shall not see him. Thus
he was made to cry out in the Congregation, Chap. 30.28. as Christ did also
among the multitude, Job. 12.27. with 29.

Secondly, Consider, The Refutation of this Mistake, or the remedy prescribed
for cure of it, Although thou say, etc. Yet trust thou in him, or, hope for
him, and expect him, which are the effects of faith and trust.

Doct. 1. Trust in God is the Sovereign remedy of distempers, fears and
darkness, under trouble; Therefore is it here prescribed as the mean of Jobs
relief in such a case. As Faith is the commanded duty in most sinking and dark
times and cases, Is. 8.17. Luke 8.50. So it is thereby that men come to be
established and prosper, 2 Chronicles. 20.20. Is. 7.9. To clear this truth, it will
be necessary to clear three Questions.

Quest. 1. Is this all that the people of God may expect in their sinking and
hopeless condition? Shall they have no sensible refreshment, nor actual
deliverance, but be lest to naked Faith, and closing with the naked Word of
God, and that, it may be, with much wrestling?

Answ. Whatever else God allow upon his people, either in the time of their
trouble, or in delivering from it; Yet they must first give glory to God by
believing, in the hand whereof sensible comfort and deliverance will spring
forth in due time. Therefore we must hope upon the account that we shall yet
praise, Ps. 42.5, 11. and 43.5.

Quest. 2. But is there nothing else to do but presently believe, when God is
chastening so sadly? When Gods afflicting hand, especially in so singular a
way, is upon any of his people, should not they (as Elihu has already been
instructing Job) be sensible of their miscarriages, and repent of them, and
turn from them, without which, their pretending to lay bold on God by faith
will prove but presumption?

Answ. This direction here given is so far from warranting men to neglect and
omit any of those other duties, that it sets them upon the only right and
possible way of attaining them. For in such desperate cases, unless men do fix
themselves by faith in God, they will get but a woeful and sad account of the
fruits of unbelief, Psalm. 27, 13. for they will be quite laid by from all duty.
But when they cherish Faith, it is the mean to produce Repentance, Reformation,
and every good fruit. For Faith looks to Christ, who is exalted to give
Repentance, Act. 5.31. and draws virtue from him for purifying of the heart,
Act. 15.9. which will soon reform the conversation. And when a Child of God
does essay Faith for attaining of those benefits, of Repentance and Reformation
(as also of comfort and refreshment) and yet is not the better; that should
indeed humble him, but does not warrant him to cast away his confidence. For it
is unquestionable, that unbelief will never help any of these faults. And
therefore there is no remedy, but he must believe, and though he find not
himself the better, yet he must believe and wait on, resolving to lie at that
door till his relief come.

Quest. 3. But what shall a Child of God believe in such a case as Job is now
in? When he has lost a sight of God, and all probability of getting it helped,
what has Faith to fasten upon? And may not a man think that his believing then
is nothing else but a blind guess and conjecture, and a cheating of himself
with a delusion?

Answ. I confess, in such a sinking case, it is hard to determine the
particular encouragements to be believed and expected; Yet, there is still
ground enough to trust, or, hope in him. And albeit we know not what particular
mercies may be believed and expected; Yet, there are general principles and
foundations (to allude to David's phrase, Ps. 11.3.) which, if they be believed
and held fast, will support the believer, whatever his particular case be. Thus
when our Faith knows not what to expect, we may yet believe,

1. That we are still in Gods hand, and that whatsoever befalls us, comes to
pass by his especial Providence, who numbereth the hairs of our head, and
carveth our all our lots. The lose of a sight of Providence emboldeneth wicked
men to sin, Ezekiel. 9.9. Zeph. 1.12. But the faith of it is comfortable to the
godly in deepest distresses. See Deuteronomy. 33.3. Joh. 6.20.

2. That go matters as they will, it will certainly be well with them that
fear God, even because they fear him, were there no other evidence or proof of
it; as it will be ill with the wicked, even though they prosper, Eccl. 8.11,
12, 13. Is. 3.10, 11. When this is believed, we need fear nothing, if we find
grace to keep the way of God, and to continue waiting and depending upon him.

3. That though we do not see him in our dark conditions, yet he sees and
noticeth, and takes care of us; as Job believed, Chap. 23.8, 9. with 10. and
the Psalmist found in experience, Ps. 73.22, 23. So that, though we be like the
blind men who could not see Christ, yet if we call upon the Son of David in our
blind and dark condition, he will own and answer to his own name.

4. That our hearts are liars, and will be made to recant what they say in
their have, as David often found in experience, Psalm. 31.22. and 116.10, 11,
12. Which if we do believe, we will not be so easily alarmed with those fears
and apprehensions which tentations do suggest unto us.

5. That we may be well enough, though we obtain not all our desires (not only
in temporal deliverances, but even) in spiritual things. Thus David was made up
by the everlasting Covenant, though his house was not such with God as he
desired, and it ought to have been, 2 Samuel 23.5. The faith of this will comfort
Saints, sensible of their short commings, when they get but humbling sights of
their own condition and walk.

6. That it is Gods way, oftentimes, to bring about his peoples mercies by very
improbable, yea, and contrary means; as when he gave Sampson meat out of the
eater, and sweetness out of the strong, and sent his already-afflicted people
out of the City, yea, even the length of Babylon, that there they might get
deliverance, and gathers enemies about her, as sheaves to be threshed by her,
Mic. 4.9, 10, 11, 12. When we believe this, it will help us to look upon great
and growing difficulties, as things which may be made means of great good to
us, and as a presage of deliverance, as the dark hour before day is a
forerunner of the morning.

7. That God is concerned in the condition of his people, as well as (if not
more than) themselves. They do not suffer, but he sympathizeth, Is. 63.9. Yea,
a touch upon them, be where it will, touches the apple of his eye, Zech. 2.8.
He is concerned in his glory to make them monuments of his praise, and to give
proof of that infinite wisdom and love which has taken them in guiding. And
Christ is concerned to see to their condition who are committed to his care,
not only to bring them safe to glory, but to order and prescribe every step in
their journey, and every lot which may befall them by the way. All which, if we
do believe, may encourage us to entrust our selves to him, and to sleep in his
bosom, in our sad and dark lots.

8. That it is Gods glory and prerogative to have the sole guiding of his
people; So that either we must commit and resign all to him, or do all our
selves, for he will not share it with us. The belief whereof will persuade us
to resign our selves entirely to his will, as we would not be wholly left to
our selves, and so become a burden to our selves.

9. That it is the will of God we never cast out with him, but believe his
love, whatever he do, Psalm. 77.7, 8, 9, 10. Job 10.13. The faith whereof will
make us shut our eyes upon whatsoever would breed mistakes and quarrels with
God. These are some few of the common principles, which may feed Faith in most
dark and sad conditions.

Doct. 2. Our Discouragements ought not to give a check unto, nor impede our
Faith, in relying upon God, in dark and sad conditions; Therefore, says be,
Even although thou say, thou shall not see him, yet trust in him. Faith is
still a commanded duty, whatever difficulties and discouragements interpose;
and therefore Christ pressed faith upon the Ruler of the Synagogue, even albeit
his Daughter did dye, while he is employing him to recover her of her sickness,
Luke 8.49, 50. And Faith is called to step over all improbabilities, Psalm.
46.1, 2. Hab 3.17, 18. Yea, difficulties serve to stir us up to believe, Faith
being given us for such a time as that, and then especially called for, Psalm.
56.3. Rev. 13.10. and the want thereof at such a time being especially
culpable, Prove. 24.10.

Thirdly, Consider, The Ground upon which he presses this Direction, and
encourages to believe; Judgment is before him, therefore trust thou in him.
Some read it, Do judgment, and trust in him, or, expect him. But if we take
the phrase, To do judgment, strictly, for judging and dealing righteously with
others (as it is, 1 King. 3.28. and 10.9. Prove. 21.3. though the words in the
Original be different from that which is here) that cannot be the right reading
here. For, whatever was the opinion Jobs Friends had of him, yet I find not
that Elihu ever judged that he had been an unjust man, that he needed advise
him to amend that fault. Others read it thus; Judge (to wit, thy self, which
they add) before him, and trust in him; that is, repent and believe. And it is
true, That none can warrantably believe, but those who are self-judgers, and
who do abase and condemn themselves before the Lord in the sense of their
sinfulness; And, That even those who find cause thus to judge themselves, have
yet a warrant to believe and trust. But, beside, that the word here is rather a
Noun, Judgment, than a Verb, to judge; (which makes against both these
readings) and that this last reading requires a Supplement to make out the
sense; all this self-judging may be imported and pre-supposed in trusting, as
has been cleared. And therefore, according to our own Translation, I take the
words to hold out this ground of encouragement to trust in God, That Judgment
is before him, as his scope and design is in all his dealing, especially toward
his people, and that which he will be careful to have observed. Where, by
Judgment, we are not only to understand his strict justice, and that he is a
righteous Judge, and will prove so at last to Job, in deciding of his cause,
and in the mean time will do him no wrong; But his tender moderation in his
dealing with his people, and that he tenderly considers their condition, to
deal moderately with them as there is cause; as he speaks of Jobs lot in the
next Verse. Thus the phrase (though the word in the Original be different) is
used, Is. 30 18. Psalm. 99.4. See also Job 34.23. and 37.23.

Doct. As the sound knowledge of God is a sure bottom for Faith to rest upon,
Psalm. 9.10. So, particularly, it encourages Faith, to know that he is not only
righteous, but full of tenderness and moderation in all his dispensations
toward his people: So that no s^verity takes away his tender consideration of
his peoples condition; For, says he, Judgment is b^s^^^ him, therefore trust
thou in him. Hence he is said to know our mould and frame, Psalm. 103.13, 14,
15. Is. 57.16. to remember mercy in wrath, Hab. 3.2. Judge. 10.13, 16. to pity,
even our sinful disposition, if our selves be sensible of it, Genesis 8.21. to
make use of the strokes which he has inflicted in displeasure, as arguments of
his sympathy and pity, Jer. 31.20. and, to measure our burdens by our strength
and ability, Is. 28.27, 28. 1 Cor. 10.13. Hence, Gods people are to blame, when
they complain of his severity, to the weakening of their own confidence. The
causes whereof are, their inordinate love to ease, which makes them to be vexed
when they get not leave to sleep securely; their love of their lusts, which
imbittereth their Spirits when those are crushed; their want of spare strength,
which dissatisfieth them, and rendereth them still jealous, even
notwithstanding that they are supported; and, their not looking in to his
tender heart, when his hand is sad upon them, nor considering that (as a
faithful Chyrurgian) he may wound with the wound of an enemy, and the
chastisement of a cruel one, Jer. 30.14. when yet he minds nothing but love to
them.

Verse 15. But now, because it is not so, he has visited in his anger, yet he
knows it not in great extremity.
This advice and remedy of Jobs evil is here further pressed from the sad
fruits of the want of it; and that, because of his despondency and neglect of
faith, he was chastened in displeasure, though yet moderately. Whence, Learn,

1. It is nothing strange to see Saints deficient in their duty, especially, in
the matter of trusting in God; For, here it is not so, as he has advised. As
we come always short in duty, especially, in times of trouble and tentation;
So there is no duty wherein we are then more deficient, than in believing.

2. Want of humble trust in God, in trouble, is so great a sin before God, that
it is just cause of a quarrel against these that are guilty of it; For, Because
now it is not so, he has visited. This they ought to advert unto, who think
they do well, and have a call and warrant to distrust, because they are in
trouble.

3. Gods quarrel against his people, for their unbelief, may be prosecuted, and
appear in sad strokes and chastisements; For, because of this, he has visited,
or, chastened. Few do read their condition thus, and that their diffidence may
have an hand in bringing on, or continuing, of their strokes.

4. The want of trust in God does provoke God to displeasure, which should be
read and observed by Saints in their most cleanly trials, when they are guilty
of this sin; For, though Jobs trials were cleanly, yet because of this, He,
that is, God, has visited in his anger.

5. Moderation and tenderness is to be seen in Gods dealing toward his people,
even when he is angry at them, and is chastening them in displeasure; For,
though he has visited in his anger, yet he (that is, Job) knows it not, (or,
has not felt it) in great extremity. Which does not import Jobs stupidity, and
that he was not sensible of his afflictions, though they were upon him in great
abundance, as the word will also read, (for he was sensible and complained but
too much, however he made not a right use of them) but Gods moderation in his
dealing toward him, considering his deserving and miscarriage.

6. Others are, oftentimes, fitter Judges of Gods dealing toward his people,
and particularly, of his moderation in afflicting them, than themselves are;
Therefore, in this matter, he turns to the hearers, and speaks of Job in the
third person, He knows it not in great extremity.

Verse 16. Therefore does Job open his mouth in vain: He multiplieth words
without knowledge.
Follows, the Conclusion of this Speech, wherein he asserts, that Job had
spoken much in vain, and without knowledge. He propounds this also to the
Auditory, as most fit Judges, and deduceth it by way of inference and
conclusion from what he had said, Therefore does Job open his mouth, etc. Which
may relate, either to the whole Speech, from which this Conclusion may be
inferred, or, particularly, to v. 15. that because he was moderately dealt
with, therefore he dared to be so rash in complaining.

Doct. 1. It is a proof and evidence of men's faithfulness, to tell others their
faults, as they have a calling and opportunity; For, here he freely points at
Jobs miscarriages.

2. Even godly men may need to hear of their faults over and over again, and
especially, of their miscarriages under trouble, before they take with them,
and be sensible of them as they ought; Therefore, he does here tell him over
again, what he had told him before, Chap. 34.35.

3. It is required, both in justice and prudence, that we charge upon men only
their true and real faults, and do forbear, either unjust surmises and
aspersions, or, unjust aggravations of their real faults, which may tempt them
to reject all admonitions; For, he tells Job his faults as they were, and does
neither charge wickedness upon him, nor fasten blaspemy upon his complaints, as
Eliphaz did, Chap. 22.13, 14.

4. When men do charge their friends with faults and miscarriages, they should
walk upon solid grounds, and then they may be free in their censures, and those
who are reproved will be more easily convinced; For, he concludes this from the
premises, wherein he has been scanning Jobs expressions and carriage,
Therefore Job has opened h^s mouth, etc.

5. As trial will waken men's passions, so when they are any way moderately
dealt with in trial, they are ready to miscarry the more; For, so may this be
inferred from what immediately preceded. Men under trial have need to watch,
especially, that by their miscarriage they do not provoke him to tame them with
more trouble.

6. It is a great, though usual, fault under trouble, to speak in vain, or to
no purpose, and that which will not help or profit us in our distress; For, Job
is challenged, that he opened his mouth in vain.

7. Ignorance and want of knowledge has a great influence upon men's vain
expressions and carriage in trouble; Therefore is it added to the former, that
his words were without knowledge.

8. Very wise men may have their wits to seek in trouble, and so may be
exercised to little purpose; For, Job, a wise man, opened his mouth in vain,
and had words without knowledge.

9. When men are under trouble, and in their fits of passion, readily they are
most eager upon that which is to least purpose, and which proclaims their folly
most; For, in this distemper, Job multiplieth words. So that we have cause to
be jealous of that course and way to which we have strongest inclinations, at
such times.

10. When men are in their fits of passion and folly, every addition to their
words is but an addition to their sin; For, it added to Jobs fault, that he
multiplied words without knowledge.

CHAP. XXXVI.
In this and the following Chapter, we have Elihu's fourth and last Speech:
Wherein, having, in the former Speeches, reprehended some of Jobs rash
expressions, he does now proceed to speak to the whole matter and cause in
general, clearing God of what Job seemed to lay to his charge, and showing that
Job had no cause to complain of him as he did. In the Speech (beside a Preface,
v. 1 -- 4. and a Conclusion, wherein he recapitulates the whole Discourse,
Chap. 37.23, 24.) there is contained, 1. A Vindication of the Righteousness of
God in his dealing with men, wherein is showed, that albeit he be great, yet he
does wrong to none, Chap. 36.5 -- 21. 2. A Commendation of the Greatness and
Sovereignty of God, which ought not to be quarrelled, from Chap. 36.22. to
Chap. 37.23. And this is subjoyned to the former, to show, that, albeit men
should not be able to discern the righteousness of this great God, Yet, he
ought not to be quarrelled. This division of this purpose may be gathered from
Chap. 37.23. where these two are recapitulated, as the sum of what he has
spoken.

So, in this Chapter, we have, First, A Preface, wherein (after the Transition,
v. 1.) he craves attention, for several Reasons, which give an account of his
scope in the following Discourse, v. 1 -- 4. Secondly, A Vindication of the
Righteousness of God in his dealing with men, which is generally propounded, v.
5. Then, it is more generally confirmed and cleared, from the way of his
proceeding both with the wicked and righteous, v. 6, 7. And more particularly
vindicated and cleared, in his afflicting even of godly men, v. 8 -- 15. And
having spoken all this in general, he makes Application of this Doctrine, to
Jobs present case, v. 16 -- 21. Thirdly, A Commendation of the Greatness of
God, which is confirmed, from the singular monuments of his Power and Wisdom,
v. 22. from his absolute and Sovereign Dominion, v. 23. and from his admirable
Greatness, which shines, and ought to be observed, in his most obvious works.
Which Argument he propounds, v. 24, 25. and (after a repeated Proposition, v.
26.) instanceth it, v. 27 -- 33. and in the most part of the following Chapter.

Verse 1. Elihu also proceeded, and said:
IN this Verse, the Writer of the Book premits an Historical Transition to this
Speech; showing that Elihu proceeded, or, added this Speech to the former,
wherein he speaks more generally to the whole cause. Whence, Learn,

1. It is necessary that men, who would inform or convince those who are in the
wrong, do inculcate their instructions much, that so they may take them up when
they hear them, and they may be riveted upon them, notwithstanding the^r
dullness or aversion, if they understand them; Therefore does he proceed and
say, after all that he has formerly spoken. See Phil 3.1. Such as would speak
to the condition of Souls, have not only their judgments to inform, and their
prejudices and mistakes to clear, if they be in an error; But their hearts to
fix on what they hear and understand, and their affections to excite, that they
may improve and make use thereof. And as all this will require much pains and
inculcating of truths, and should quicken them to their work, who have a
calling to teach others; So, the consideration thereof should humble men in the
sense of their need of all this pains about them, and of the obstructions which
must be removed thereby; and should excite them who hear much, and have truths
frequently inculcated upon them, to see how they improve such a mercy.

2. Saints ought to be tenderly waited upon in their fits of passion and
distemper, and will be so tendered by spiritual and discerning persons, Gal.
6.1. Yea, God will tender them in the furnace, so as to lose none of their good
metal, though he will not spare their peevish humors: For, Elihu, by his thus
insisting to deal with Job, when his other Friends had given him over, Chap.
32.1. does both give evidence of his being a tender friend, and of Gods care of
him by his means, whom he had employed for that effect, as to cherish what was
good in him, so to discover his dross, that it might be purged. The
consideration of which tenderness in God, notwithstanding our follies, may
serve to commend his kindness, Act. 13.18. and humble us, Ps. 73.21, 22, 23.

3. Men will never be sufficiently convinced, by taxing their particular faults
as they fall in them; unless they be well principled in general truths
concerning Gods dealing with his people, whereby their particular escapes may
be healed at the root: Therefore here at last he comes to this more general
Doctrine, whereby Job might see the evil of all he had said amiss, or might say
hereafter of the like nature. So that in dark cases, wherein we are readily
bemisted, we should see that our principles be right, concerning God and his
dealing, the lot of his people on earth, etc. And then try how our carriage
suits with our principles, whereby we will find, that ignorance, or ill
improvement of our principles, does us much hurt.

Verse 2. Suffer me a little, and I will show thee, that I have yet to speak on
Gods behalf.
Follows, the Preface it self, to v. 5. wherein he craves attention, and
subjoynes such Arguments to persuade him to attention as gives an account of
his scope in the following Speech, that it is to plead for God. His desire is
that he may be heard in what he is to say. His first Argument pressing
attention, is, that he will be brief, and now, after a little more discourse,
will draw to a close. The second Argument (propounded in this Verse, and
amplified, v. 3.) is taken from the subject matter of his discourse, that he is
to plead for God yet more than he has done. While he entreats Job that he
would suffer him, or, wait upon him, (or, surround him, as the word signifies,
as we use to surround men from whom we expect news of worth) it is not
necessary to suppose, that either Job offered to interrupt him, or expressed
any sign of dissatisfaction; But it is rather to be conceived, that Elihu, out
of his tenderness, and being sensible how sharp he had been to Job in his
former Speech, (and particularly, Chap. 35.16. where he had charged him with
folly who was a wise man) does now labor to take off any impression which that
might have left upon his spirit, with a new Preface.

Doct. 1. As it is men's weakness which causes them be easily hurt by what is
sharply spoken to them; (as ordinarily we stand most in need of that which we
relish worst, and it is a part of the efficacy of some messages, that they hurt
and grieve us, as when Physic makes us sick in order to our cure) So it is the
duty of Speakers, in justice and prudence, to sweeten their necessary sharpness
with all lawful insinuations: For, therefore does Elihu premit this new
Preface. Though it were unfaithfulness to ^^atter men in their faults, yet
sweetness should be ^^^^ed with our faithfulness and freedom, by assuring them
of our love to whom we speak, working upon their affections (which ordinarily
bear the keys of men's hearts, so that if they be gained, there is hope or
doing them good) hearing with ill usage, and coming all things to all men, if
so be we may gain some.

2. The miscarriages, even of Saints, under trouble, are, often times, so many,
so gross, and yet so intricate and involved, that they have need of patience,
if they would hear them all laid open to them: For here Elihu needs to be
suffered, when he undertakes this task, both in respect of the time he behooved
to take to do it, and the sharpness he behooved to make use of: See Heb. 13.22.
It is the duty of all (and the property of Saints, when they are in a right
frame) to be passive and submissive in receiving instructions and reproofs, and
not prescribers of what God should say unto them. And they should love not to
be deluded, but faithfully dealt with, however it may grieve them. And they may
be quickened to suffer a word of exhortation, when they consider how apt they
are to miscarry, when yet their passions and partiality do hide it from them;
and when they raise their expectations (as the word does signify) of good by
those means. Only this should further be adverted unto, that to suffer
admonitions and instructions, does not import, that we should suffer our selves
to be hammered upon by the word, while yet we regard not what is said; but that
we should be meek in hearing (to which this careless stupidity is opposite, as
well as our mad rage) Jam. 1.21. 1 Pet. 2.2. And as not to repine at the matter
of the message; so, neither at the frequent repetition thereof, as knowing how
uneasily these things do sink into our hearts, to reach the bottom of our
wounds.

3. As it is the duty of those who stand in need, not to weary while God keeps
them under cure by his word in the mouths of his Servants; (For, this
exhortation relates also to his long continuance in speaking to him) So it is
prudence in Gods Messengers not to be tedious and wearisom to them, (...) th^n
is absolutely needful; For, says he, sup^^^me a little, as promising now to
come shortly to a l^^e. See Heb. 13.21. So weak are we, that prol^xity even of
good and necessary purposes, may (...) us: And it may humble us, that while we
(...) ^here, we (...) endure little even of what is good and necesssity for us.
Yet men ought in prudence (...) ever (...) this weakness, especially if it be
(...) with willingness.

4. As we presume, often times, to bring God to our Bar, by censuring his
dispensations, Hab. 1.13, 14. So it is very laudable service to plead for him,
whether against our selves or others; As here, it is Elihu's commendable scope
to speak on Gods behalf Thus did Jeremiah plead for God against himself, Jer.
12.1. And whosoever do otherwise, will get cause to repent of it, Ps. 73.21, 22.

5. Such is the perversity of some, and the weakness of others, of the Sons of
men, that they can very frequently tax God, but will need the help of others to
clear their mistakes; otherwise they cannot do it themselves; For, Job needs
one to speak on Gods behalf. Which may warn us, when we are in trouble; to
suspect our own judgments, and that our passion, haste, self-love, etc. may
readily bemist us.

6. Albeit, in our passions, we think we have reason for our mistakes, and that
little or nothing can be said against our apprehensions; yet, God is so holy,
and so just, that when men have said most, there is still more to say for him;
whereby we may be convinced, that it is not an act of charity, but of justice,
to have a good opinion of him and his dealing; Therefore says Elihu, after all
he has spoken formerly, I will show thee that I have yet to speak on Gods
behalf, or that there are yet words, to be spoken, for God. So that they sin
hainously who have wrong thoughts of him, and his holiness in his dispensations
may be cleared upon more accounts than one: And when the tide turns, and the
children of God cool of their fevers, they will have thoughts of Gods
dispensations far different from those they entertained in their distempers; as
the Psalmist found by experience, Ps 73.3. etc. with v. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. and
Ps. 77.7, 8, 9. with v. 10, etc. And they will see cause to admire those
infinite perfections of God, which shine in his guiding things below, and are
every way so holy and unreprovable.

7. It beseems the people of God, as to hearken to all that God says unto them
by his Messengers, so, particularly, to give good ear to what is said for
vindicating of God from their misconstructions; For, the subject matter of his
discourse, and that be is to speak on Gods behalf, is here propounded as an
Argument to press attention. Saints should delight to hear that subject of the
commendation of God; and particularly, they should not be obstinate and
wilful in maintaining of their own mistakes, as if they were unquestionably
right in them; But, being sensible of their own ignorance and weaknesses, and
loathing to live in such terms with God, they should be glad of any mean and
help which may clear them to them.

Verse 3. I will fetch my knowledge from afar, and will ascribe righteousness
to my maker.
This second Argument, taken from the subject matter of his discourse, is here
further prosecuted and amplified. And 1 He shows what way he will take in his
pleading for God; and that he will fetch his knowledge from afar. Which may
both point at this, in general, That, in managing this cause, he will not bring
forth what first comes to hand, what his humane reason suggests, and his weak
judgment fancieth; but what he searches into, and gets by inspiration from
above: And at this, in particular, That, in debating this cause, he will not
break in at first upon Jobs particular ease, but will fetch a rise to his
discourse from more remote and general principles and grounds, concerning Gods
nature and Attributes, and his ancient works and proceedings, which when they
are well studied, will easily furnish light for clearing of Jobs case. And this
we find to be his way and method throughout this Discourse.

2. He declares what his scope will be in pleading, even to ascribe, or, give
righteousness to God; that is, to plead that he is One who can do no wrong, nor
ought he to be complained of, as if he had done any.

3. He insinuates a reason why he will thus plead; even because he is his
Maker; of which see, chap. 32.22. Which does not so much point out, that Gods
being a Creator, and his making of all his creatures (among which Elihu was
one) so holily, and wisely, pleads for him against all our misconstructions and
quarrels about particular dispensations of Providence: As, that his being Gods
creature did engage him to own his Makers quarrel; Yet so, as this Argument was
not peculiar to him alone, but Job himself had the like engagement to have
joined with him in the same cause.

Doct. 1. Such as do speak in Gods name, or for him, should make conscience to
speak that which is worth the hearing, and in some measure suitable to the
purpose treated of; As here Elihu promises to fetch his knowledge from afar.
See Psalm 78.1, 2, 3.

2. If men would speak aright for God, they must not speak at random, nor
trust their corrupt reason or sense, but they should search well into matters,
and especially should seek light from God himself, and study to be near him;
For, in this respect does Elihu promise to fetch his knowledge from afar.

3. If men were but true to their common principles, they would easily refute
their mistakes of God in their particular cases; As here Elihu fetches his
knowledge from afar, or, from general and acknowledged principles, to refute
Job, who, otherwise was ready to mistake in his own particular.

4. What ever we think of Gods dealing in our particular case; Yet, his common
and general way of working pleads for him; and whosoever are not satisfied with his
common way of proceeding, but would be singularly dealt with, they are in the
wrong: For, therefore also makes he use of knowledge from afar, or, of an
account of Gods ancient way of working in the world, in this cause.

5. Whoever have due and right thoughts of God, or do plead ^ightly for him,
must exalt him as holy and righteous in all his proceedings; For, this is his
scope in pleading, to ascribe righteousness unto him

6. Were there no other engagements lying upon us, our very being, which we
have from God, obliges us to plead for him, and that against any who dare
oppose him, were they, otherwise, never so great or dear to us; For hereby he
shows himself to be engaged in this quarrel, (and indirectry taxes Job, that
he joined not with him) because God was his Maker. And if this be a strong
engagement upon men, how much more ought they to plead for God, who are engaged
to him upon the account of many special favors?

Verse 4. For truly, my words shall not be false: he that is perfect in
knowledge is with thee.
The third Argument, pressing attention, is taken from the manner of his
handling this subject, and that he will speak truly and sincerely to Job, and
not as he charged his other Friends to have done, Chap. 13.7, 8. and, 17.5.
This he confirms from his perfect knowledge of the matter, he is to treat of.
Where he speaks of himself modestly in the third person; and does not claim any
absolute perfection of knowledge, but only asserts, that he was so versed in
that subject, as he knew his Doctrine was free of error.

Doct. 1. Whosoever crave attention, or have access to speak to others, they
ought to deal truly and sincerely in Gods matters, especially with the
afflicted; For, he professes it his duty and resolution to speak truth, and
that his words shall not be false, if Job will hearken to him. It is a great
cruelty in men to be venting errors, when they are allowed and welcomed to
speak to others.

2. It is not enough that men pretend to truth, nor should their pretenses be
taken off their hands, unless they do really as they pretend; And it is a
double sin in men to deal falsely, while they pretend the contrary: Therefore
says he, truly my words shall not be false, professing his sincere resolution
to deal singly, and intimating that it were a great sin to belie so grave a
profession.

3. Men who would speak truth, especially in dark cases, ought to have (not a
superficial, but) a solid knowledge of what they speak; For, he supposes,
they should be perfect in knowledge.

4. As there is no necessity that men should be Scepticks, but they may attain
to such a measure of knowledge as they may be assured of the truth which they
own; So it is no evidence of vanity in men, modestly to avow their certain
knowledge of the truth, that thereby they may gain ground upon those with whom
they deal: Yea, it is their duty to commend themselves to their consciences, as
having knowledge, and as being sincere in seeking and holding out of truth;
Therefore does Elihu profess, He that is perfect in knowledge is with thee.

5. When truth is spoken from God, men are bound to hear it with attention,
whether it please their humors, and be fitted to their interests, or not; For,
that his words shall not be false, and that he speaks from perfect knowledge,
is an Argument persuading to attention.

Verse 5. Behold, God is mighty, and despises not any: he is mighty in
strength, and wisdom.
Follows, to v. 22. the first part of Elihu's discourse, subjoyned to this
Preface; Or, a vindication of the righteousness of God in his dealing with
men. It may be taken up in four heads; In the first whereof (in this verse) is
contained a general proposition of this truth, or, the sum of this part of
his discourse, That God is righteous in all his dispensations and proceedings
with, and about, man. Wherein (beside the note of attention, Behold.)

1. We have the Proposition it self, which he is about to clear, That God
despises not any (as this word, any, is added to the indefinite Proposition,
God despises not) or, sleights them not so far as to neglect to do them right;
for so despising is taken, Chap. 31.13. with 14. And this imports, both, That
he does not slight any, upon the account of their low condition, so as not to
do them right, but he gives right to the very poor, v. 6. and, That he does
not despise or reject any, but upon a just and relevant cause; as is after
cleared, v. 11, 12.

2. This Proposition is amplified, That God is mighty and great, and yet he
despises not any; that is, though he be great, yet he is just. And this meets
with Jobs complaints, that God was too great a party for him, and took no
notice of him. See Chap. 10.3. and, 19.7. and, 23.13, 14, 15, 16. and, 30.21.
and elsewhere.

3. This amplification is yet further enlarged, That he is mighty in strength
and wisdom, or, heart, (See, Chap. 34.10. Whereby, we are not only to
understand, That, seeing God is not only mighty in power to do what he will,
but in wisdom also, and all other perfections; therefore he will not employ his
power tyrannically, to do wrong to any; But further, That, though he have not
only strength, but wisdom also, to bear him out against all the world; Yet,
this speaks his commendation, that, notwithstanding these advantages, he will
not despise any, nor do them wrong.

Doct. 1. It is ignorance of God that is the root of men's distempers, failings,
and mistakes of his dealing; For, therefore he seeks to cure Jobs evils, by
curing his ignorance. And we find ignorance is the root of unbelief, Ps. 9.10
of slavish fears, Is. 51.12, 13. of oppression of Gods people, Exodus 5.2. of
pride and self conceit, and risings of heart before him, Is. 6.5. Job 42.5, 6.
and of all sinful courses, and men's secure presumption in them, Psalm. 50.21.

2. Who so know God aright, will take him up as mighty, great, potent, and
abounding in all perfections; For, God is mighty. The word imports a
multiplication, to wit, of all perfections in God; and so this general is
branched out both in strength and wisdom, in the end of the verse. Hence, Great
service is due to him, Mal. 1.14. and particularly, great praise, Ps. 48.1. We
may expect great, yea, and mavelous things, from him, according to the tenor
of his promise, Joel 2.21. His people serve a great Master, who will not see
them wronged. Is. 49.24, 25, 26. Jer. 50.34. And, he is not to be opposed nor
contended with, but submitted unto in every thing, Job 9.4. Is. 45.9

3. It is not ordinary thoughts of Gods greatness that ought to satisfy, but
we should think upon that subject with admiration; For, says he, Behold, God
is mighty. Ordinary thoughts of this Subject do but proclaim our contempt; and
hence it is that Saints are so much affected, when they sometime fall upon the
commendation of God; as may be seen Psalm. 145. throughout.

4. God is a just God, and it is an admirable conjunction, that he who is
great, should be also just, and will not do wrong to any; For, this is
propounded as admirable, Behold, God is mighty, and despises not any. See Job
23.6. Ps. 99.4. and, 145.9, 17. Is. 57.15, 16. The very meanest may come to
him, notwithstanding his greatness, and expect justice and equity. This should
humble us, and make us ashamed, when we think otherwise of any of his
dispensations; His greatness should make his condescendence admirable in our
eyes, and that he should be kind to us, when he needs us not, and in whose
reverence we still are; and much more should this warn great men, not to be
insolent and unjust, since the great and absolute Lord is so condescending.

5. This assertion, concerning the righteousness of God, is not easily received
and digested, even by godly men in their fits of tentation; For, it must be
asserted against Job, and he must be excited to behold it. And this may humble
us, that a little distemper will soon make us quarrel God, and will obscure his
praise.

6. Gods power is attended with infinite perfections, and particularly, with
wisdom to guide all well; For, he is mighty in strength and wisdom. See Job
9.4. Hence it is, that his infinite perfections cannot be celebrated as they
ought, Psalm. 106.2. And Saints are happy who have a portion so infinitely
perfect, and all whose perfections are attended by wisdom, which may very well
be trusted in his ordering of all things.

7. Who so study the perfections of God, they may blush at their carping and
quarrelling of his dispensations; For, this is the scope of this enlarged
commendation of God. And, particularly, his wisdom does vindicate his
righteousness, and clears, that it is but our ignorance and folly that makes
us quarrel. See Psalm. 92.5, 6, 7. Mic. 4.9. -- 13.

8. It may also heighten our admiration, when we consider Gods condescendence,
that he, who has his creatures at such advantage, does yet stoop to do them no
wrong; For, Behold, says he, he is mighty in strength and wisdom, and yet,
despises not: The more we study of him, we will see his righteousness the more
clearly, and will admire it the more. So that low thoughts (not only of
himself, but) of his righteousness will not be accepted; Nor is it enough, that
we be silent from murmuring, or give him charity, or nakedly acknowledge his
righteousness, unless it be admired and wondered at.

Verse 6. He preserves not the life of the wicked: But, gives right to the
poor.

7. He withdraws not his eyes from the righteous: But with Kings are they on
the Throne, yea, he does establish them for ever, and they are exalted.


In the second Head of this Vindication (in these Verses) this Proposition is
more generally confirmed from Gods way of dealing both with righteous and
wicked men. And,

First, He gives an account of his dealing with both conjunctly, v. 6. That he
cuts off the life of the wicked, and rights the afflicted and poor oppressed by
them.

Secondly, He gives, more particularly, an account of his dealing with
righteous men (especially them who were wronged by the wicked, v. 6.) v. 7.
Whom, 1. He attends with his care and providence. 2. Exalts them, even to great
dignity. 3. And establishes them, when they are exalted.


For clearing of this purpose, (wherein Elihu seems to speak the same things
that Jobs other Friends had said concerning the godly and the wicked; yea, the
exaltation of godly men to so great dignity is above what they asserted, of
their prosperity) Consider,

1. Elihu's Doctrine, concerning the prosperity of godly men, must necessarily
be understood with his own exception (which he subjoynes, v. 8 -- 12. and is
insinuated also in their being poor, v. 6.) of their being sometime under the
rod, and that even unto death. And so also his Doctrine, concerning Gods
plaguing of wicked men, must be understood with an exception, of their
prospering at sometimes, when God has themselves to ensnare, or, others (and
particularly, godly men, as their being poor, or, afflicted, does also import)
to try and exercise thereby.

2. Hence, Albeit the Friends general Doctrine was much of it true in a sound
sense, (Namely, in so far as it contained the Sentence of Gods Law against
wicked men, and gave an account of the godlies Charter, to whom all things
belong, 1 Cor. 3.21, 22 23.) And accordingly, Job does own their Doctrine as
true in some respects (as may be seen by what has been said on Chap. 21, and
27.) and Elihu here speaks something like it: Yet neither of them do understand
it in their sense, that all and only, either godly or wicked men, are actually
dealt with as is here expressed. For Elihu supposes the contrary, that godly
men may be poor and afflicted by wicked men. But,

3. This is to be understood according to the tenor of Scripture-promises and
threatenings, That those things are recorded, concerning the godly and wicked,
as the allowance of the one, and the desert of the other; That the wicked lie
under the lash of those threatenings, which may keep them in a continual
terror, even in the height of their prosperity; and the godly lie under the
drop of those promises, which may comfort them, even in their lowest condition;
That sometime God gives signal proof of the truth of these promises and
threatenings, for the terror and comfort, both of these to whom they are
accomplished, and of others also; And, That what is here recorded, contains an
account of Gods final design both concerning the godly and wicked, which he
will execute in due time, and delay no longer than is fit.

4. According to this rule, we may expound the words in particular, That God
(sooner or later, here or hereafter) will cut off the wicked, and redress the
wrongs done to the poor, v. 6. And, that, in like manner (in the way, and at
the time, which he thinks fittest) he will not only have an eye upon the
righteous, but exalt and establish them, v. 7. As for what is said of their
being with Kings on the Throne, it is very far from the fancy that some have
of a Kingdom of Saints upon Earth; In pursuance whereof, they not only
appropriate Saint-ship to themselves, that so they may enhaunce all advantages;
but do not stay till God exalt them by lawful ways and means, (as here is
promised) but will set themselves on high by wicked and sinful courses. Yea,
whereas the Text says, that they are with Kings upon the Throne, they are not
contented to be exalted with and under lawful Authority, but they will thrust
off Kings, that they may set themselves there. All which practices do argue,
that such men do little mind Heaven, and have forgotten what is the usual lot
of Saints within time. And it were much better for them to be Kings over their
own lusts, covetousness and ambition, than to sway the Scepter of many
Kingdoms. See Prove. 16.32. But as for the words here, they may be generally
verified in this, That righteous men are made Kings and Priests unto God, Rev.
1.6. That they are in no less esteem with him, than if they were Kings, and he
will give even Kings for them, Is. 43.3, 4. That their allowances are so rich,
that they need not envy Kings, but Kings may desire to share with them, Psalm.
72.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. And, That he will make them reign, and sit with himself
upon his Throne, for ever, Rev. 3.21. And beside all this, the words may also
be understood, more literally, That, at some times, Saints are advanced unto,
and established in, a very royal dignity, or great power with Kings; as Joseph,
Daniel and Mordecai were indeed exalted with Kings upon the Throne. Which the
Lord is pleased to do, not to warrant or excite all to aspire after, or expect
the like; But to be an evidence of what he could do for all, were it for their
good, (wherein he reserves the dispensation to himself) and a pledge that he
will hereafter exalt them to Thrones and royal dignities in Heaven.

From v, 6. Learn, 1. The commendations of God are not only recorded in his
Word, but proved by his works, which are witnesses for him; For, what is said
of God, v. 5. is here proved by what he does. Saints get not always Faith to
live by, but Performances to confirm them, Is. 25.9. And they will be made to
observe and bear witness to what is said of God, Ps. 139.14.

2. Albeit the most holy God govern the World, yet in all ages there have been
both godly and wicked, the seed of the Woman, and the seed of the Serpent, in
it; And he, who is bound to none, sees it not meet to convert all: For, here
there are the wicked, and the poor, who are afterward declared to be the
righteous. God serves himself, even of the vessels of dishonor, and brings
about his own ends and purposes by them; and they serve for trials to the
godly, not only by reason of their cruelty against them, but of their
wickedness also, and their success in it.

3. It is the very frequent lot of the godly, to suffer hard things at the hand
of the wicked; and of those who are born after the Spirit, to be persecuted by
those who are born after the Flesh, Gal. 4.29. Therefore are the godly here
designed by their being poor, or, afflicted. See Act 14.22. 2 Timothy 3.12. This
lot is very necessary for godly men, to try their faith, and purge their dross,
1 Pet. 1.6, 7. and to put them in mind that they are not at home: So that it is
their great folly to expect and dote upon another lot.

4. God is, and will continue, a party against wicked men; as here we are
assured. Their prosperity and success does not speak his approbation of them,
or that he is a friend to them; and were there none else, he will be their
party, to appear against them. See Obad. v. 3, 4. Hence it is that God so
frequently avoweth that he is against wicked men, Jer. 21.13. and 50.31. and
51.25. Ezekiel. 5.8. and elsewhere.

5. Albeit the Lord do not always evidence his opposition to the wicked by sad
dispensations, but, sometime, by raining snares of prosperity and success upon
them; Yet the opposition still continues, to be in due time visibly
manifested, and in the mean time, they lie continually under the lash, without
assurance of safety for a moment: For, his not preserving the life of the
wicked, imports, not only that he will reach it in due time, but in the mean
time, it is not continued in favor, or preserved out of any special respect to
them, (however it is of him that it is continued) not have they a moments
assurance of the continuance thereof, but their enemies may arise very suddenly
and inexpectedly, to cut them off, Hab. 2.7. Which is a sad case, were it well
seen and considered.

6. It is not only the petty concernments of the wicked that are in Gods
reverence, and obnoxious to his stroke when he pleases, but even their very
life: as here we are taught. So that, whatever else befall them, Justice has
never done with them, so long as their life, which they employ so ill, is in
them.

7. The Lord is not more opposite to the wicked, than he is favorable to the
righteous, even though they be brought low by oppression; Yea, so much the more
favorable as they are so; For, here, a good word is subjoyned to the former
threatening, concerning the righteous and poor; who should neither quarrel God,
because of their sad lot, nor apprehend that all is gone, because they get not
their will in the petty things of time; But should judge of Gods favor by
their righteous and reconciled estate, Eccl. 8.12, 13. Is. 3.10, 11.

8. Godly men, in expecting proofs of Gods favor in particular exigents,
should make sure, not only that they are truly godly, but that they have right
upon their side; otherwise, piety will not warrant men to expect that God will
own them in every cause; And that they be sensible, humble and poor under
afflictions, otherwise, God will be a party against them (as well as man is) to
humble them: So much is imported in that he gives right, and that to the poor.

9. Whoever have right on their side (especially if they be godly men) may be
sure to have it, sooner or later, vindicated by God, and to get right done
them; For, he gives right to the poor. Honesty and right will bear out in end,
and will be a planck to bring ship-wracked men to shore.

10 Albeit, ordinarily, all things come alike to all, Eccl. 9.2. yet, in due
time, God will put a difference betwixt the godly and the wicked; Yea,
sometime, he will even make it conspicuous in this life; As here is imported in
the opposite sentences concerning them. See Exodus 14.28, 29, 30. Psalm. 58.10,
11. Mal. 3.18.

From v. 7 Learn, 1. Those are truly godly men who are righteous, both by
Justification (without which, no moral changes will suffice) and by righteous
and straight walking, particularly, in the matter of their trials, and in those
causes about which they are called to contend with others; Therefore are godly
men here designed, the righteous.

2. As Gods Providence is universal, and takes notice of all things
whatsoever; So especially, his care is about, and his eye upon, the godly, to
see to all their conditions, and that he may do to them, and provide for them,
according as their case requires; For, he withdraws not his eyes from (but
they are still intent upon) the righteous. See Matthew. 6. from v. 25. to the
end. This is a great comfort to them, when they come short in their prayers,
that God has an observing eye, as well as an hearing ear, toward them, Psalm.
33.18, 19. and 34.15. Hos. 14.8. And it may ease them in their solicitudes,
seeing their help may come where they least expect it, as Hagar sound for
Abraham's sake, Genesis 16.13. And may make them answer many perplexing Questions,
with, God will provide, Genesis 22.7, 8.

3. Albeit we think little of this observing eye of God, and improve it but
little; Yet it should be more prized, seeing we would be in a sad plight if we
wanted it; Therefore is this encouragement propounded negatively, He
withdraws not his eyes from the righteous, to put us in mind, how sad it
would be, if he withdrew his eye and care from off us, and about us, as is
intimated, Deuteronomy. 32.20. Zech. 11.9. And we do enjoy many mercies whereof we do
not see the worth, but by Gods withdrawing of them.

4. It is, also, the mercy of the Lords people, that, whatever be his dealing
toward them, or their apprehensions of it; Yet, his eye is ever upon them, Is.
49.14, 15, 16 to notice who wrongs them, when his displeasure gives them an
opportunity, Is. 47, 6. Zech. 1.15. to notice their miseries, that he may pity
and moderate them, Judge. 10.16. Is 57.16, 17, 18. and, to give them a good
issue, even though they should be cut off in the trouble, Psalm. 31.23. and
94.18. and 116.15. For, it is still a certain truth, that however he deal with
the visible Church, Deuteronomy. 32.20. yet, he withdraws not his eyes from the
righteous.

5. Albeit we are little comforted, especially in the time of our trouble, that
we have Gods eye upon us; yet, there is much mercy in it, which will be
actually manifested in due time; As here, there follows no less upon it than
high exaltation. See Exodus 3.7, 8, Zech. 9.8.

6. Gods love to his people is so infinitely rich, that no mercy will be
thought too great for them, if it be for their good to have it, were it even to
be with Kings on the Throne; As here that is put in their Charter. See 1 Samuel
2.8. Psalm. 113.7, 8. Some proofs of this are given even in this life, as the
instances formerly mentioned do show (and it is not only the duty, but the
great advantage of Kings, to exalt such, who may be Instruments of good to them
and their people. See Psalm. 101.) But it will be fully cleared hereafter. And
in the mean time, righteous men are no less precious in Gods esteem, whatever
their lot be, than if they were thus exalted; Even a Lazarus on a Dunghill is
precious, as a Joseph in his Grandeur. They will also be no less honorable in
the eyes of right discerners, Eccl. 4.13. And it is no less love which
withholds these advantages from some of them, than that which conferreth them
upon others.

7. Instability is one of the great Moths which attend men's enjoyments within
time; For, it must be added, to make it a complete mercy, Yea, he establishes
them for ever, and they are exalted; that is, when he exalts them, he
establishes them in that state, and that does indeed give it the name of
exaltation, that being unworthy of the name which is not stable. See 1 Cor.
7.29, 30, 31.

8. The godly have a promise of stability, when the wicked shall reel, and be
like a rolling wheel, Psalm. 83.13. which is a judgment upon them; And albeit
the godly must not think to settle within time, yet they have the promise of
it, to be performed as shall be good for them; they will be kept stable in the
midst of shakes and reelings, Ps. 112.7, 8. and eternal stability abides them;
For, thus he does establish them for ever.

Verse 8. And if they be bound in fetters, and be holden in cords of
affliction.
Follows, to v. 16. the third Head of this Vindication, or, a more particular
Vindication of the Righteousness of God in the matter of his afflicting godly
men, which is the case in hand. This consists of four branches; In the first
whereof (in this Verse) we have the condition wherein it is supposed righteous
men may sometime be, that they may be arrested under trouble, as a man that is
bound and held in cords and fetters. Whence, Learn,

1. It is neither inconsistent with the righteousness of God, nor with the
piety of men, or their privileges being godly, that they be sometimes
afflicted; as here is supposed. Gods Sovereign power to dispose of his
creatures at his pleasure, is so absolute, that men's holiness cannot exempt
them from being subject thereunto. And, seeing he may, if he please, put even
sinless creatures to exercise, and impose upon the being he has given them,
what it is able to bear; much more may he exercise Saints, who in this life
have still some remainders of sin in them. And if Saints need rods, he will not
spare them, whomever he spare, Amos 3.2. Rev. 3.19. Yea, it is their mercy that
God makes use, even of such a remedy, to cure their diseases and distempers.
And therefore they should not quarrel God, nor cast out with him, because of
afflictions.

2. Saints may expect that their afflictions and trials will be very sharp, in
their season; For, they may be bound in fetters as captives, which is explained
to be, that they are holden in cords of affliction. Some of them may be made
captives and slaves (as the letter here bears) which is a very sharp trial; and
others may have no less trial, though they be free of that. See Heb. 12.11.
Lesser trials would neither try our Faith, and other graces, nor yet reach our
corruption to purge it out, nor rouse us up from our security, and be an
exercise unto us. And when we pretend that we do not simply dislike trial, but
only that trial which is upon us, and do like the rod that is upon any other
better than our own; we do but reflect upon Gods wisdom, who has thought our
own cross fittest for us; and would, in effect, have no trial but that which
would touch none of our corruptions, and yet no trial will ever do us good,
unless it do humble us, and vex our corruptions.

3. It is one of Gods special ends in sore afflictions, to arrest men, and hemm
them in with pressures, that they may be kept from wandering, and made to look
over their case, and amend it; So much does this binding and holding of men
(or, taking of them as a City is taken) import. Men are by nature like wild
Asses, till their Month come, Jer. 2.24. And when they turn like wild beasts,
which need a bridle, it is no wonder that many sorrows do follow, Psalm. 32.8,
9. And therefore when we are under sharp afflictions, we should remember that
our neglect of the furnace of self-examination, provokes God to set up his
furnace of affliction; and that it is no wonder that troubles do not only take,
but hold us, considering how long it is before affliction work upon us, Dan.
9.13. and how long (after it begins to work) before it produce kindly fruits,
Isa. 51.20. Jer. 31.18. In which case, an issue were no mercy.

4. Albeit God be most just and righteous, even in afflicting godly men; Yet it
is not easy to satisfy them who are under the rod, that it is so; For, in
this case, there is need that Gods righteousness be vindicated. And that we may
be helped in this case, we should learn to suspect our own judgments, and to
look upon mistaking and quarrelling of God as the scumm of our own Spirits, and
Satan's great Engine and design in our afflictions, 2. King. 6.33. Ps. 73.10,
11. Mal. 3.14, 15.

Verse 9. Then he shows them their work, and their transgressions that they
have exceeded.

10. He opens also their ear to discipline, and commands that they return
from iniquity.


In the second branch of this part of the Vindication, we have an account, of
Gods end in afflicting righteous men, and of the use they should make of it;
Namely, That God afflicts them, that he may give them a sight of sin, wherein
they have exceeded, v 9. and may excite them to repentance and conversion from
sin, v. 10. This does clearly vindicate Gods righteousness in afflicting them,
seeing he does thereby chasten them for their faults, and take pains to reclaim
them. And it is very applicable to Jobs case, in respect of his failings (not
gross hypocrisy, or wickedness) especially under trouble. Though as to what
was mainly intended in his trial, we are to remember another Argument, taken
from the Sovereign Dominion of God, which clears the case yet further.

From v. 9. Learn, 1. It is not simply our being afflicted, and made miserable
by trouble, that God does mind, Lam. 3.33, 34. nor is it that which we should
be chiefly affected with, under afflictions; but we should mind another lesson
taught by it, which if we neglect, our sense of trouble will be to little
purpose: Therefore here is subjoyned an account of Gods end in afflicting, and
of the lesson we should learn under the cross. See Josh. 7.8, 9. with v. 10,
11. It is the property of beasts to feel only the smart of a rod; but men, and
especially godly men, should make another use of it. And yet many fail in this,
and do long for deliverance, when they really obstruct it, by their negligence,
or their fair promises in trouble, which they would soon forget if they were
delivered. But (whatever God be pleased to do, according to his Sovereignty in
grace) we should still remember that sad process that may justly pursue us,
till we mind some other thing in our trouble beside our afflictions, Lev. 26.14
-- 40, 41, 42.

2. This may sufficiently justify God, in afflicting his people, that the best
of them have sins which deserve, and may procure affliction, and especially
miscarriages under trouble, which may continue them; For, they have work, which
is transgression, and Job did sl^de in the hour of his trial. Such as are
imbittered because of trouble, do prove that they have little sense of sin. And
they who look not upon their lesser sins of infirmity as sufficient to procure
any trouble that comes upon them, are justly given up, under the Cross, ^o
miscarry more grossly, as Job did. Whence it comes to pass, that afflictions,
which were but simple trials before, become real chastisements for sin, as here
he intimates it fared with Job.

3. No affliction should be accounted bitter which may help to cure and purge
out sin; For, upon that account is Gods righteousness here vindicated, that he
afflicts to discover and purge out sin. They evidence their love to sin, who
repine at rods; and they who would find trouble easy, ought to be diligent in
purging of sin, and that will make it sweet, Ps. 119.67, 71.

4. When God afflicts his people most sharply, his aim is only to cure their
sin, and it will have no worse effects, unless they turn incorrigible; For, he
binds them in the cords of affliction, v. 8. for this very end. See Is. 27.9.
He intends not their hurt, but only the destruction of sin, unless (as we say^)
they will take the ridders-stroaks, by interposing to spare their lusts.

5. The right cure of sin must begin at the discovery of it, and at convictions
for it, without which, there will be no reformation, or it will not prove
sound; For, this work begins at showing them their work; and where this root is
not, the fruits will not follow, or they prove but withered and blasted.

6. Men do not readily see sin, nor are solidly convinced of it, till they be
in trouble; For, when they are bound, v. 8. then he shows them their work.
Either the affliction, must point it out (men's sin being written upon their
rods) or when they rage and fret, or will not stay to admit of, or digest
reproofs, affliction tameth and holds them. So that it must be sad when
convictions decay under trouble.

7. Whatever men attain of convictions under the rod, yet it is not the rod of
it self, but God by it, who works and produces them; For, he shows them
their work.

8. Conviction is wrought by Gods leading men through their work, by
examination, till they find out what transgression is in it; For, he shows
them their work, and their transgressions, which he discovers to them in
their work, when they see it well.

9. True and solid convictions under trouble will discover sin in its
aggravations, both in the frequency thereof, that there are transgressions; and
in the nature thereof, that there are transgressions wherein they have
exceeded, or, prevailed and run violently ^ver all bounds and limits, as waters
overflow their banks. If the Law should discover sin to be sinful, Romans 7.13.
much more when the rod is joined with it, should sin be seen in its
aggravations, Jer. 2.19.

10. When God comes to plead against sin by the rod, it is an evidence of the
greatness of sin, were there no other thing to prove it, but that he must plead
his quarrel that way; For, when they are bound, v. 8. then he shows, that
they have exceeded. They must be no small faults which provoke God to plead
against his people in the public view of all; and therefore they should beware
of extenuating sin at such a time.

From v. 10. Learn, 1. Conviction of sin, were it never so great, is not all
the fruit that should follow upon chastisements, but there should be also
conversion and turning from sin; For, this is subjoyned to the discovery,
formerly mentioned, that they return from iniquity, without which, it will be
to little purpose to sigh and turn backward, Lam. 1.8.

2. Men will never be brought to turn from sin in earnest, till first they be
brought under discipline and order; which is opposite to that inbred
opposition, which is in their hearts, to Christ's Kingdom and Bonds, Psalm. 2.3.
and 12.4. to that excessive love of pleasures, which causes men behave
themselves as bullocks unaccustomed to the yoke, Jer. 31.18. Job 21.14. and, to
that wild fruit of security, which, meeting with affliction, drives men further
away: Therefore they must first be under discipline, before they return from
iniquity. And no particular practice or endeavor will thrive well, or be to
any purpose, till first we set our selves to come under this yoke of
discipline, and to submit to the will of God in every thing.

3. For bringing men under this york of discipline, there is need of an open
discovered car, that a passage may be opened to instructions to get in to the
heart; For, he opens also (with that discovery, v. 9.) their ear to
discipline. Of this see, v. 15. Chap. 33.16. Is. 50.4, 5. Psalm. 40.6. And it
imports,

1. That our advantage comes not simply by our being afflicted, but by some
instruction (conveyed to the heart by the ear) accompanying it, Psalm. 94.12.

2. That there are many impediments in the way, to hinder out receiving of this
instruction, such as laziness, Is. 50.4. subtle wiles, Psalm. 58.4, 5.
habitually contracted indisposition, Matthew. 13.15. rebellion, Jer. 22.21. and
44.16. and diverse others, of which see, on Chap. 33.16.

3. That, as a time of affliction is a time of teaching many lessons, Psalm.
94.12. So, the Cross should help to pierce our ear, and make us tractable, as
Act. 9.6.

4. As this is the scope of afflictions, so when God sends the rod, he will,
one way or other, cause men to hear, Is. 26.11. Jer. 1.15, 16.

5. As men's seeing of God to be their party, in teaching them by rods, should
quicken them to receive instruction; So it is himself who makes those means
effectual; For, he not only shows men their work, v. 9. but he opens also
their car to discipline.

Doct. 4. Such as come under discipline will be opposite to iniquity, because
it is iniquity, and so to all of it; and will not be opposite to some iniquity
only, because it is prejudicial, or upon other byrespects: For, here there
follows, a returning from iniquity, be what it will.

5. Persons brought under discipline, will, also, see that nothing will avail,
unless they turn from sin, and that it is not enough they hide it, Job 20.12.
or lay it by till another time; For, then they will see that they must return
from iniquity.

6. Albeit the Lord do always interpose his Authority, to command men to
abandon sin; Yet in afflictions, especially, he is said to command this,
because afflictions come, when entreaties and milder messages do not avail,
Jer. 22.21. And then he will have his Authority take place, and sends a
Messenger which is peremptory, and will not go away without his errand: For,
then he commands that they return from iniquity.

Verse 11. If they obey and serve him, they shall spend their days in
prosperity, and their years in pleasures.

12. But if they obey not, they shall perish by the sword, and they shall dye
without knowledge.


In the third branch of this part of the Vindiction, we have an account of the
Certification subjoyned to this Instruction, and what shall be the consequences
of men's improvement thereof, well or ill; Namely, That if they obey, they shall
have a sweet and comfortable life for the rest of their time, v. 11. And if
not, they shall be cut off by some judgment, v. 12. Whereas it is added, that
they dye without knowledge, which would seem to speak them utterly ignorant of
God, and so cannot agree to Elihu's scope, who is speaking of Gods afflicting
righteous men; The words may be read, They dye, because they have no knowledge,
or, are cut off because of their folly and miscarriages; which may suit well
enough with the condition of some persons, who yet have true piety. Or, this
may be understood of the lot of wicked hypocritical Professors (of whom be
has occasion also to speak in this part of his Vindication, for reasons to be
marked on v. 13, 14.) which he propounds that he may deterr righteous men from
their courses, by showing what their lot will be.

From v. 11. Learn, 1. Though afflictions be curses in themselves, yet they are
blessed to the people of God; As here is verified of some, who are supposed to
obey and serve, when they are chastened and instructed.

2. The blessed fruits of affliction begin at tenderness, and hearkening to the
Word of God, particularly, to those lessons, which are inculcated by the rod;
For, they obey, or, hear.

3. Where men's hearts are made tender, and to tremble at the Word, they will
not only amend bygone faults, but will engage themselves to serve God, by doing
or suffering, as they shall be called; For, they obey, and serve him, or,
become servants, to wit, to God to whom all service is due, as the relative,
Him, must be understood, though it be not expressed.

4. Men's changing of their way, from evil to good, brings a sweet change in
their lot, from adversity, to prosperity and pleasure; For, if they obey and
serve him, they shall spend their days in p^osperity, and their years in
pleasures. This is sometimes verified in temporal deliverances, according to
the tenor of the promises made to righteous walkers, Lev. 26.3 -- 13. and
Deuteronomy. 28.1 -- 14. and particularly to the people of God repenting of their sin
under the rod, Jer. 31.19, 20. And so Job found in experience. But however God
dispense as to those things, yet it will be fully verified in Heaven. And
whereas this promise relates especially to deliverances within time (as both
the words, and the opposite threatening, v. 12. make clear) which are not
always granted to godly men, even when they repent of their sins under the
red; It would be considered, that, though the troubles of godly and penitent
persons continue, yet, a change in their disposition will make a change in
their lot, as to them; For all will speak love to them, and is attended with
Christ's peace, Joh. 16.33. and what crusheth their Idols, promoveth their
happiness, and honors God, will not be bitter. Yea, all will be for their good
(as the word rendered, prosperity, is in the Original) Romans 8.28. and so should
be pleasant.

5. Saints should observe the sweetness, not only of the whole tenor of their
life, but of every day and moment of it; As here their mercies are observed and
measured by days, as well as by years.

From v. 12. Learn, 1. Even some of Gods dear Children may prove stubborn and
untractable under the rod; For, it is supposed, they may not obey, or, not hear.

2. It is a fruit of Saints folly and ignorance, when they are not reclaimed by
the rod, which causes them mistake Gods mind in afflicting, or, think to bear
out in their stubbornness, or, think that God will pity them, though they turn
not to him; Thus they obey not, because they have no knowledge, as the words
may be read.

3. When lesser strokes do not reform and reclaim Saints, God is provoked to
increase and augment; For, here, after bonds, v. 8. a sword, or, dart, comes.

4. Men may be truly godly, and get their Souls for a prey, who yet may be
chastened with death, and even a violent death, for their folly; For, here it
is supposed, that some righteous men, may perish by the sword and dye. See 1
Cor. 11.30, 32.

Verse 13. But the Hypocrites in heart heap up wrath: They cry not when he
binds them.

14. They dye in youth, and their life is among the unclean.

15. He delivers the poor in his affliction, and opens their ears in
oppression.


In the fourth and last branch of this part of the Vindication, we have an
account of the various events of this dispensation of affliction upon
Professors of piety, How they take with it, and what comes of it. Where he
ranks Professors of Religion and Piety into two sorts, according to their
different carriage under the rod, and the different events which befall them.

1. Close Hypocrites, who do but augment and increase wrath against themselves,
by their neglecting to cry to God in their trouble, v. 13. and do provoke God
to cut them off, even in youth, as the vilest of Sodomites, v. 14.

2. The truly godly or poor, whose car being opened under oppression, to
receive instruction (for that must be first wrought, though it be last named in
the Text) they are thereby fitted for, and get deliverance, v. 15.

For further clearing of this purpose, Consider,

1. Though Elihu in all this part of the Vindication, be speaking of Gods
afflicting righteous men; yet here he speaks also of hypocrites. Not that any
truly godly person can turn an hypocrite, and be cut off as such; but that he
may clear how of Professors of godliness (who meet with affliction) some are
sincere, and others but dissemblers, and that the trial contributes to the
discovering of both, and the seperating of the chafe from the wheat.

2. He does not here make mention of hypocrites with any design to reflect upon
Job as one of them; but partly, to vindicate Gods righteousness in afflicting
them who profess piety, considerirg (that not only he has holy ends in dealing
so with such as really are what they profess, of which he has spoken already,
and more is added, v. 15. but) that there are many unsound Professors, whom in
his holy Providence he discovers by affliction. Partly, that he may detert Job
from some pranks under trouble (particularly, his complaining more than he did
pray) he lets him see that they were the pranks of hypocrites; and therefore
not to be persisted in by him who was a godly man.

3. Albeit there was an alternative propounded, in speaking of the duty of
godly men under trouble, v. 11, 12. Yet, v. 15. he mentions only their
profiting by the rod, and nothing of their incorrigibleness, because that is
the ordinary fruit that real Saints get of the rod, and it is nor so usual for
them, when they are in trouble, to provoke God by their miscarriages to cut
them off. And therefore he asserts of them, indefinitely, or more generally,
that they are delivered, and their cars opended, in oppression.

From v. 13, 14. Learn, 1. Hypocrisy is an ordinary evil cleaving to
profession of Religion; So that Hypocrites are very ordinarily and frequently
mixed among sincere Professors; For, so is here supposed, in that when Elihu
is vindicating Gods dealing with Saints, he insinuates this as one plea for
him, that there is need of affliction upon men of their profession, were it but
to discover and purge out hypocrites from an^^^g them. So that men should not
think it enough that they are Professors, if they have no more; and even
sincerest of Professors have need to guard against hypocrisy, which so
frequently cleaves to profession.

2. The hypocrisy of some may be so closely conveyed, and hid in their
hearts, that in ordinary it does not appear; For, there are hypocrites in
heart, who do not much appear visibly to be such.

3. God is so ill pleased, even with the most refined of hypocrisy, that he
will, sooner or later, have the mark pulled off it, and cause the hypocrite
appear in his own colors; As here it is supposed, that they will appear to be
under wrath.

4. Albeit many times prosperity will discover the unsoundness of some, who
flattered God under trouble, Psalm. 78.34, 35, 36, 37. Yea, albeit close and
refined hypocrites may pass through many trials undiscovered, till their trial
(which touches upon their Idol) come; Yet, a day of adversity is the ordinary
touchstone of hypocrisy, which will at last find it our, and discover it; As
here it is in affliction, and when God binds them, that they appear in their
colors; and the scorching heat of the Sun, or the fiery furnace will make the
varnish to fall off, See Is. 33.14. So that hypocrites had need of fair
weather, for a shower will stain them, and make them cast their borrowed color.

5. Hypocrites are especially discovered by their not crying to God in trouble;
As here, they cry not when he binds them. And albeit this seem to contradict
other Scriptures, which say, they cry only when they are in trouble, Psalm.
78.34. Yet this may also hold true of them, (or, of some of them) that, when
they are in trouble, they may at first give over to cry as being madded that
they should be in trouble or confounded with it, or hoping to find relief
another way. And if they come to God in trouble, they will soon weary and give
over, if they be not speedily relieved, Is. 58.3. Mal. 3.13, 14. And to express
this character of hypocrites more distinctly, we may take it up thus.

1. If they go to God in trouble, yet there is more of murmuring than prayer
in their addresses.

2. They are ready to cry more upon the account of what they want, than because
God binds them, or because they see his hand and quarrel in their affliction,
Hos. 7.14, 16.

3. They cry more that they may get ease of their trouble, than they repent of
their sins which procured them.

4. There is little fervency, or, crying, in their addresses; or what fervor
seems to be therein, flows not from humility, love or hope, but from pride,
bitterness and diffidence.

5. Their first recourse is not to God, so long as they have any shift beside.

6. They lose all hope, and weary to cry on, if their strait grow and continue,
while they are crying, 2 King. 6.30, 33. All these should warn us to try and
examine our prayers, and to look upon it as sad, when trouble produces no
prayer, or, no right prayer.

Doct. 6. Though hypocrites ^^e always under wrath; yet their miscarriages,
and discovering of themselves under trouble, draws on a greater and more
insupportable weight and burden of it: For, by this they heap of wrath. Which
should warn all to look to their carriage under trouble.

7. Gods wrath against hypocrites will not always evidence it self only by
withholding of favors, or speaking sad words to them; but will at last break
forth in visible effects upon impenitent hypocrites, to the destruction both of
Soul and Body: And especially, if trouble be not well improved, when God has
begun to reckon with them, he will not be dallyed with, nor spare them; For,
they dye, or, their Soul, or, Life dies; that is, both their Soul and Life
dies. Or, the phrase may have relation to the thoughts that hypocrites have of
their bodily and animal life, which they so esteem, as if Soul, and Life, and
all, consisted in living here. Or, it serves to aggravate their fault, who have
a rational Soul, as well as an animal Life, and yet dare hazard to draw on
death upon themselves in wrath. It is true, this threatening against hypocrites
may admit of an exception in the visible Church, Psalm. 78.34 -- 38. as to the
grant of a national pardon to the body of a people, Numb. 14.20, 21 Psalm. 99.8.
Yet God will reckon with particular hypocrites.

8. As the Lord sees it fit, sometimes, to cut off hypocrites early, and some
of them by a violent death; So it is true of all of them, that they dye before
they be full of days, Psalm. 55.23. (they still abhorring death) and before
they cease and give over their youthful folly, and become wise in God, For,
thus, and in these respects, they dye in youth.

9. Hypocrites, especially when they do not improve trouble, are justly ranked
among the worst of men, and dealt with accordingly; For, their life is (cut
off) among the unclean, or, Sodomites, who have their name here from Holiness,
either by an Antiphrasis, because they are most unholy; or, because that
abomination was committed among some Pagans upon pretense of Religion; and so
we find their houses near the Temple in the time of the defection of the Jews,
2 King. 23.7. And this phrase, that their life is among the unclean, does not
only point at the violent manner of their death, as young men contracted
violent diseases by that vile unnatural sin; but at their being odious in the
sight of God, as the worst of sinners. See Ps. 125.5.

10. It is not unprofitable, that the godly, under fits of tentation and trial,
take a look of the hypocrites way and lot; Partly, that they may abhort their
own distempers, when they look so like the hypocrites ordinary way; And,
partly, that the fear of the hypocrites lot, may terrify them from what is
like their way; Therefore is this account concerning the hypocrite laid before
Job here.

From v. 15. Learn, 1. Whatever hypocrites do prove in trouble, yet when they
have discovered themselves, and are gone, there will be found truly godly men,
who will cleave to God in saddest times, and will get a blessed account of all
Gods dealing toward them; For, so much does this Verse, added by way of
opposition to the carriage and lot of hypocrites, teach us. See Is. 33.14, 15,
16. This imports,

1. That it is not a thing simply impossible for men to bear out in saddest
times, and so to walk, as they may sing that song, Is. 25.9. when God comes
with deliverance. It is true, it may prove very difficult so to do (as is said
in another case, Numb. 24.23.) and Saints may make foul slips, and come off
humbled, 1 Samuel 27.1. Psalm. 73.2. and 116, 11. yet experience does also
witness, that it is not impossible to get well through a sad trial, 1 Samuel
30.6, 7. Hab. 3.17, 18. Hence,

2. When men do succumb and fail in an hour of trial, their faith failing them,
and their hands being weakened; they ought not to blame the dispensations of
God, but their own weakness, for it; and therefore they should search out, and
mourn for this their weakness. See Prove. 24.10. Psalm. 73.21, 22, 23. and 77.7,
8, 9, 10. And this were a profitable way of refuting and curing tentations.

3. Whoever do decline in a day of trial, they will not want witnesses, who, by
their practice, will testify against them, that Gods ways are equal, and his
yoke easy.

Doct. 2. The property of the Children of God, who are in the right way to be
carried through troubles, and do lie near mercies, is, their poverty and
affliction; As here they are called, the poor, or, afflicted. This is their
designation, v. 6. and frequently throughout the Scripture, so that the
followers of God are called, the congregation of his poor, Psalm. 74.19. And
albeit external poverty and affliction have some hand in this (of which
afterward) yet that is not only, or chiefly, meant here. For however, when
people are otherwise humble, their external miseries have their own weight with
God, Judge. 10.16. Yet all those, of themselves, do not signify much, without
that poverty and affliction of Spirit, which is chiefly noticed by God, Matthew.
5.3. And that we may find out what this is, the Emphasis of the word
(especially as it is variously rendered, in diverse places of the Old Testament,
by the Greek Interpreters) may be taken up in those particulars.

1. A man truly poor is not puffed up with a conceit of his own worth and
fullness, but is acquainted with his own emptiness and indigence, See 1 Cor.
4.8. Rev. 3.17.

2. He has nor only a contemplative notion of his poverty, but is afflicted
and exercised with it; it is not a dreamed of, but a felt, poverty, and being
poor, he is sorrowful, Ps. 69.29.

3. The effect of this exercise is, not to lie still sinking under it, but to
cause the poor man turn a beggar, and supplicant to God. Hence the poor become
needy, Psalm. 40.17. and are fervent in their addresses, as they who may not
want long, Psalm. 70.5.

4. In all these addresses, the poor man is humble, as the word also
signifies, and is rendered. His discovered and exercising poverty does not
irritate him, or provoke his pride, but lays him in the dust. So that, as a
really poor man, in his prayers he uses entreaties, or speaks supplications,
Prove. 18.23. and he is humble when he is put to attend, and in entertaining the
returns which he gets. Where these properties are wanting, it is no wonder that
men do slide in an hour of trial.

Doct. 3. The people of God do frequently need afflictions, and even sore
oppression, to promove this their spiritual poverty; As here they are the poor
in affliction and oppression; and the Scripture speaks frequently of their
poverty in an afflicted and sorrowful condition. See Psalm. 69.29. Zeph. 3.12.
Godly men do frequently question why they are so much under affliction, and
especially sore oppression, of which they complain, Psalm. 44.24, 25. But the
question may be easily answered thus, That, as godliness does not exempt men
from necessary trouble; So, godly men may bear it best of any, seeing they have
an hope above it, and their happiness lies not at the stake. But (in pursuance
of the point in hand) this may be further added, That most ordinarily there is
but little poverty of Spirit among godly men, and therefore sharp afflictions
are necessary to purge out their pride and folly. And though it be granted,
that some are already poor; Yet,

1. Afflictions are necessary to keep them so, and to prevent pride, as Chap.
33.17. For preventing mercies are sweet, however they be little observed by us.

2. They are necessary to help their spiritual poverty to grow; and if they
love to be in that posture, nothing will be bitter that may promove it.

3. They are necessary to give them opportunities of evidencing their humility
and spiritual poverty, in eminent services whereby God is honored; and that is
no small mercy and advantage to a right discerner. Hence,

1. This commends Gods mercy, who will not spare to do us a good turn, though
we should carp at the means whereby he brings it about. He is a Father, who
will not spare for our crying, when we need the rod, Prove. 19.18. And hence it
is that our choicest mercies come, oft-times, to us in a way wherewith we are
but ill satisfied.

2. It does also commend his mercy, who gives us meat out of such an eater, and
who makes oppression (which is ready to make a wise man madd) a mean in his
hand to work poverty, and other blessed effects.

3. We should be careful to mind this use and improvement of affliction; for
when it has got its errand, and done its work, it will be removed. And for
trial of our proficiency, we may reflect on these characters of the poor man
formerly mentioned, and what may be after added. Only remember, that they who
become poor in affliction, will rely on God, on whom they are left, and will
be tender in their walk, Psalm. 40.17. Z^ph. 3.12, 13. And it will not a little
humble them, that they needed such a mean to bring them up to that disposition.

Doct. 4. Men are never right, nor will become poor under trouble, nor will
they be fitted for any good issue, till their ears be opened to hear Gods mind
in affliction, and it be not a dumb rod; For, their ears are opened, or,
revealed, in oppression. Of this see on v. 9. Only as frequently the deafness
of our ears to the admonitions of the Word draws on afflictions; so rods will
never humble us, and make us poor, till we hear from God what we are, and what
he minds by them; And till we not only hear, but learn our lesson, we are not
fit to be delivered from our Schoolmaster. So that they have a poor and
unprofitable life, who are kept toyling only under the rod, but have never a
lesson inculcated by it.

5. However God make use of the rod, as a mean in his hand, yet it is his own
hand and blessing accompanying it, that teaches us any thing thereby; For, he
opens their ears. Of this also somewhat has been spoken before. Only, our
afflictions are, oft-times, barren, that we may know who does us good, and may
eye him when they are barren, and acknowledge him when they are made fruitful.

6. When God has humbled and instructed his people under the rod, then they
are in the way to get deliverance; For, he delivers the poor in his
affliction, and opens, (or, when he opens) their ears in oppression. It is
true, the counsel of the poor may be shamed and scorned by men, Psalm. 14.6.
while they wait upon God, and are not delivered; Yet they have the promise,
Psalm. 12.5. They are left upon God, who will give a good account of his dealing
about them, Psalm. 10.14. and who devises concerning them (as the Original
phrase is, Psalm. 40.17.) to do that which is best for them. It is a part of the
commendation of God, that he is good to the poor, Psalm. 35.10. Yea, his
kindness to them may invite Kings to seek to share with them, Psalm. 72.10 --
14. And it is frequently pleaded by Gods people, that they are poor and needy,
Psalm. 69.29. and 74.19. and 86.1. and elsewhere. More particularly, as for the
way of his dealing with the poor, we are to remember, that he does actually
deliver some of them out of their troubles, and will deliver all of them at
last. And till that be brought to pass, the rod changes its nature; They are
delivered in trouble, (though they be not delivered from trouble) by his
supporting and comforting them under it, by his sanctifying and mitrigating of
it, and by faith, patience, and mortification of lusts, which make it easy.
And however it go with them; yet they may be convinced, that deliverance would
not be a blessing, without this previous opening of the ear.

7. It is the usual way of truly godly men, to get good of their crosses; and
when it is otherwise, and men's miscarriages provoke God to cut them off, though
that do not prove them graceless, yet, it should humble them, as testifying
that they have gone out of the road way, wherein Saints use to walk: For, this
issue of trouble on godly men is repeated from v. 11. as the usual way wherein
they walk, and no mention is made of that supposition, of their rebelling under
the rod, and their being cut off for it, v. 12. because real Saints do not
usually run that hazard.

Verse 16. Even so would he have removed thee out of the strait into a broad
place, where there is no straitness, and that which should be set on thy table,
should be full of fatness.

17. But thou have fulfilled the judgment of the wicked: Judgment and justice
take hold on thee.


Follows, to v. 22. the fourth Head of this first part of Elihu's Discourse,
containing a particular Application of the former general Doctrine, to Jobs
present case. Wherein, from what has been said,

1. He lays the true state of Jobs case before him, v. 16, 17.

2. He gives him his counsel, relative to his case as it stood, v. 18, 19, 20,
21.

In these Verses, Jobs case, in pursuance of the former general Doctrine, is
laid before him in these two.

First, What it might have been, v. 16. Namely, That (if he had followed that
course, which is usually observed by godly men, v. 11.15.) he might have been
in a prosperous condition; which he illustrates by two similitudes; One, of a
large bounds to dwell in, opposite to these straits, pressures, and stocks, he
had so often complained of. Another, of a plentiful table, opposite to his
poverty, and his sighing coming before his meat, which he had also regrated.
And if it be enquired,

Quest. How Elihu does so positively speak to Jobs restitution, seeing that is
not so absolutely promised to godly men, as Job has all along disputed against
his Friends?

Answ. It may be he knew, by special Revelation, that Job was to be restored
upon his repentance; and therefore he speaks so, and so earnestly presses him
to repent. But seeing that cannot make a general and common Rule for others in
the like afflicted condition, Therefore it would be considered, that, albeit
God may afflict a godly man, yea, and suffer a penient to come to outward
ruin; yet, such as improve their afflictions aright, have the promise of
restitution, and do oft-times get an out-gate, and always they get that which
is as good for them.

Secondly, He lays before him what his case indeed was for present, v. 17.
Namely, That since he had fulfilled the judgment of the wicked, justice and
judgment had taken hold on him, in the present trial. For clearing whereof,
Consider,

1. By the judgment of the wicked, here, we may understand, Either,
Metonymically, those sins for which God inflicts judgments, or, righteous
punishments, upon wicked men; Or, (as the word also will read) that sentence,
cause or principles, which wicked men maintain, and which they persist in, and
endeavor to bear out against God. And so to fulfill their judgment, is only
to follow their steps and way of it; whereby he had not only confirmed them in
their proud and insolent carriage (and so fulfilled, or ratified their sentence
and determinations) but had drawn himself under the hand of an angry God. And
so while he charge Job with fulfilling of the judgment of the wicked, he
does not assert him to be a wicked man; but only (as he had done before, Chap.
34.8.) affrights him from his way, by letting him see how like some of his
pranks were to the practices of the wicked.

2. While he asserts, that judgment and justice take hold on Job, he means not
that Job was under a dispensation of pure wrath, nor does it import that Jobs
afflictions came not upon him, at first, only for the trial of his faith, and
other graces: but only that his folly and miscarriage under the rod (for which
also God humbles him, though he employ Elihu first, to handle him more
sharply) did draw on fatherly displeasure.

From v. 16. Learn, 1. General truths will not avail, nor prove useful,
particularly, to persons in affliction, till they be applied; Therefore does he
subjoyn this particular Application to the former general Doctrine.

2. There is no general promise recorded in Gods Word, but it will be
forthcoming to every one of his people, as they have need; Therefore that
promise, v. 11. is applied to Job, as that he had right unto, if he had been in
a right frame. Yea, the promise made to Joshua, a great and eminent man, Josh.
1.5. is repeated, Heb. 13.5. as belonging to every particular distressed
Hebrew, in the general scope of it, abstracting from what was personal, and
relative to his special employment, in it.

3. The Children of God, for their exercise, or because of their folly, may be
brought under great distress; As here is supposed in the contrary promises. For
the promise to remove them out of the mouth of straitness, (as it is in the
Original) imports, That they may be under pressures which are ready to devour
and swallow them up, like a beast of prey; And the promise of a fat table,
imports, That they may be exercised with penury and want; And the conjunction
of those two promises, imports, That their penury, and other sad pressures, may
go together.

4. It may encourage men to stoop to God, and to receive instruction under the
rod, That there is no condition so sad, but repentance and turning to God will
amend it; As here these promises import. And albeit he will not take off all
our pressures within time, nor yet always deliver his penitent people; yet our
being near to God, takes away the bitterness of pressures, and affords
sweetness in every lot, and may assure us, that God will care for our table,
and will have an eye upon our pressures. And though godly men, before they
repent, may complain, that, possibly, the promise will never be performed; yet,
let rhem once repent, and be near God, and that will silence all their
complaints.

5. It may be matter of sad thoughts to godly men under trouble, when they
consider how much better their condition might have been, were it not for their
own folly; As here he lets them see, Even so would he have removed thee, etc.
if thou had not thus miscarried. See Psalm. 81.13, 14. Isa. 48.18, 19.

From v. 17. Learn, 1. It is not unusual to see godly men fail in an hour of
trial, and so to run away from their own mercy; As here he lets him see that
his case was far otherwise than it might have been.

2. As it is a kindness to tell Friends their condition freely; so they have
need to have it told them by others, they being ready sometime to take it up
too sadly, and at other times to look too easily and partially upon it;
Therefore does he so freely tell Job his condition here.

3. As godly men, in their fits of distemper, may homologate too much the
principles and ways of the wicked; so it is their great fault so to do; For,
here he charge him with fulfilling the judgment of the wicked. Of many
pranks of the godly in trouble, it may be said, What will they leave to the
wicked to do, when they do so?

4. The longer these courses be persisted in, it is the greater sin; For, it
aggravates his fault, that he fulfilled this judgment of the wicked, or
confirmed them in their way, by the length that he proceeded in it.

5. Sin would appear more formidable, if it were looked upon as inseparably
attended with judgment; As here the wickeds way is called their judgment, not
only because it is their judgment and determined sentence, and fixed
principle, to follow it; but because it is the cause of a sentence of judgment
from God.

6. Whatever others do find of judgments attending sin, the godly may lay
their account not to escape; For, this sinful course is proved to be judgment,
or sentenced by God, because judgment and justice take hold on thee.

7. As godly men may come under fatherly displeasure; and this will be sad to
them, when they discern it: So it is yet sadder, that their own folly should
change the nature of their cleanly trials, and mix anger with them; As here he
lets Job see that his cleanly trials were turned into judgment and justice,
though with moderation, as Chap. 35.15.

8. Whatever Saints may dream of, yet Gods fatherly chastisements will not only
reach them when they miscarry, but will hold them fast till they quit their
folly: For, they take hold on thee. The word also signifies (and is elsewhere
rendered) to support, or, sustain; but here (as also Prove. 5.22.) it signifies
to apprehend, or, hold fast, and includes the person of whom hold is taken, as
is supplied in the Translation.

Verse 18. Because there is wrath, beware lest he take thee away with his
stroke: Then a great ransom cannot deliver thee.

19. Will he esteem thy riches? No not gold, nor all the forces of strength.


Elihu having stated Jobs case, does now give him his counsel relative to his
case as it stands. And though the counsel be but one in substance, that he
would amend his faults; yet I shall take it up, as it lies in the words, in
three branches, which will clear wherein Elihu thought Job had fulfilled the
counsel of the wicked.

The first whereof, in these words, is, That heing now under wrath, he should
be afraid to provoke God (by his miscarriages when he was under his hand) to
cut him off without remedy; For then no ransom, or wealth, or power, could
rescue him. Whence, Learn,

1. It is no proof of true friendship, only to reprove men for their faults,
without giving them counsel how to rectify what is amiss; For, here Elihu
subjoynes advices to his former reprehensions; hereby witnessing that he was a
Friend indeed, who was not seeking nor taking advantage of him, in reprehending
his faults.

2. It is a special part of our duty, especially under trouble, to examine and
try our condition, how it stands; and it is a proof of real friendship to help
us in this trial; As here Elihu points out unto Job how it is with him, and
tells him there is wrath.

3. It is the great and concerning Question of Saints, to try how God is
pleased with them, and to try what wrath or displeasure may be in their cu^,
when they are afflicted; Therefore does he give Job an account of that
especially.

4. As Saints may be under wrath, or fatherly displeasure, (as he told Job in
the former Verse, and here again repeats it) So when they are in such a case,
they ought especially to take heed to their walk, that they do not rage and
free against God; For, because there is wrath, he would have him looking well
to his carriage.

5. It may excite men under trouble to be watchful over their own Spirits and
carriage, if they consider, that, when God is once provoked, and has begun to
contend, he will readily cut them off, who continue stubborn under corrections;
For, because there is wrath, beware lest he take thee away with a stroke.

6. Though men in passion be ready not to regard any hazard, so they may get a
vent to their humors; Yet they will soon relent when it comes to a
peremptore; For, so he supposes, that Job would seek to be delivered, if God
were about to take him away.

7. It may affright men from provoking God to cut them off, if they consider,
that, when God is once provoked to proceed to that, he will not readily turn
back; and the stroke, when it comes, is irrecoverable, Psalm. 49.7, 8, 9. For,
then a great ransom cannot deliver thee; neither can it prevent cutting off,
if once he set about it, (as there may be such irrevocable sentences concern^ng
outward strokes, even within time, 2 King. 23.26, 27. Z^ph 2.1, 2.) nor recover
thee to l^fe again, when once thou art cut off.

8. It may discover the vanity of wealth and strength, and all men's other
temporal enjoyments, that they can do them no good in their greatest
distresses, and when they have most need of help and relief; For, Will he
esteem thy riches? No not gold, nor all the forces of strength.

Verse 20. Desire not the night, when people are cut off in their place.
In the second branch of the counsel, he gives a check to Jobs passionate
desire of death, and enforces the former counsel, by obviating an Objection.
For, whereas Job might be ready to reject the former advice, as being a man who
was so far from being afraid that he should be taken away with a stroke, that
he did earnestly desire death: Elihu forbids him to desire it in that way
wherein people, or, many wicked men, meet with it, who are violently or
suddenly cut off (or, made to ascend, like the light of a candle dying out) as
men surprised by night in their very beds, or place of rest.

Doct. 1. Death in it self is a dark passage to Nature; For, it is like the
night, wherein the Sun of those delights which deceive fools, goes down. Men
had need to prepare for it, and to have much of the light of Faith (not always
expecting Sense) whereby they may see to go through it.

2. The darkness of Deaths passage is many times augmented by the way of men's
death, when they are violently surprised and cut off in a dark hour of trouble,
like men cut off by Murderers upon their beds, in a dark night; For, so is
death here described to Job. Men should not refuse or be unwilling to dye, when
death comes in an ordinary way, since God can make it much sadder.

3. Godly men have need to be very suspicious of their own inclinations and
desires in a time of trouble, considering that they are then in a fever; For,
Elihu advises Job to abandon his desires. We are, ordinarily, least sober in
our desires, when we have greatest cause of sobriety, and that is a sad
conjunction.

4. In particular, Albeit Saints, especially, ought to be ready for death at
all times; nor ought they to stumble, though God cut them off in common
calamities, or in some odd way: Yet such a way of death ought not to be prayed
for, or desired by them: For, says he, Desire not the night, etc. Yea, all
their longing after death, when they are under a cloud, ought to be suspected
and well tried.

Verse 21. Take heed, regard not iniquity: For this have thou chosen rather
than affliction.
In the last branch of his counsel, he sums up his advice in this general,
That he should not be more taken up with affliction, than with sin under it;
and that his miseries should not tempt him to impatience. Whence, Learn,

1. Whenever trouble comes on, as God lays trouble and sin before us, to try
us which of them we will choose; So it is not our misery that Satan so much
designs, as our sinning; Therefore he advises Job to have his eye chiefly
upon iniquity.

2. Present pressing trouble is so strong a tentation to sin, that even godly
men may be over-driven with the tentation; For, he regarded iniquity, and
choosed it rather than affliction. See Ps. 125.3.

3. This miscarriage of Saints flows from their inadvertency, and their not
considering how poor a choice sin is, and how unfit a mean to ease them of
trouble, but rather to augment it; Therefore he bids him take heed, that so he
may not make this choice; intimating that his inconsiderateness made him run to
impatience, to get ease by complaining, but in vain.

4. Whatever be men's thoughts in an hour of tentation, yet the greatest of
troubles should be chosen, rather than the least sin; nor does any trouble
warrant them to sin, either (as they think) to get ease, or to bring actual
deliverance to them; For, says he, Regard not iniquity, or, look not to it as
an ease, or mean of help, so as to choose it rather than affliction.

Verse 22. Behold, God exalts by his power: Who teaches like him?
Follows, the second part of Elihu's Speech (begun in this Chapter, and
continued till v. 23. of Chap. 37.) containing a commendation of the greatness
of God, which cannot be comprehended, nor ought to be quarrelled by any
Creature. This greatness of God is here to be taken in a large sense, as
comprehending his infinite Wisdom, his absolute Dominion, and infinite Power,
whereby it is confirmed and proved in the following discourse. And he does
instance and prove it from the very common works of Providence (whereof God
also makes use afterward, to prove the same conclusion) that he may reprehend
Job, who was ignorant of what was so obvious, and, withal, may, in diverse of
them, point at such things as reflect upon Jobs weaknesses.

The sum of this part of the Discourse, is, That God is a great and absolute
Lord, and therefore ought not to be quarrelled, but submitted unto, in his
dispensations. Of this Proposition there are three general Proofs in this
Chapter.

Whereof the first (in this Verse) is taken from the singular monuments of his
power and wisdom; In that he is not only exalted himself (as the words may be
read and understood) and set on high, by the demonstrations of his great power
in the government of the World; but exalts others, who are humble and low, by
this his power: And in that he is so infinitely wise, as he is a singular
Teacher. Hereby Elihu would insinuate, that it was Jobs duty to stoop more
patiently to God, in whose power it was yet to exalt him, and to adore and lean
to his wisdom, and set about to learn those lessons, which God was teaching
him, by his dispensations toward him.

In general, from this part of the Discourse, and Elihu's scope in it, Learn,

1. Though God be indeed holy and righteous in all he does, (as has been
inculcated in the former part of this discourse) yet such is the weakness, even
of good men, especially under tentation, that they do not always see and
discern his righteousness in what he does; Therefore it is needful that Elihu
add this other Argument to the former, for convincing and silencing of Job.

2. Such is the greatness and dominion of God, that, albeit men should not be
able to discern the justice and equity of every one of his proceedings, Yet
they ought to submit, and silence all their murmurings; For, so much does this
part of the discourse import, that, though he could not be satisfied with what
was formerly propounded, yet this might silence him.

3. Such as would take up aright (in that measure they are able) the greatness
of God, ought to have their hearts and thoughts elevated and excited, when they
fall upon that meditation; Therefore does he begin this Doctrine with a,
Behold, to rouse him up.

4. Such is the greatness of God, that we cannot take it up in it self, but as
it appears in visible effects; So much does this way of proving it,
especially by visible instances, teach us.

5. Albeit no man, who is not a professed Atheist, will deny the greatness of
God; yet men in a fit of distemper have need that it be much inculcated upon
them, before they can practically improve it; So much does this insisting to
give so many proofs and instances of this truth, teach us.

In particular, from this Verse, Learn,

1. Gods great power is a proof and demonstration of his greatness; For his
power is made use of, to prove this conclusion. And indeed the operations of
his power are so great, that he is thereby exalted, (as some read the words)
and declared to be great and high. See Psalm. 113.5. Where it is said, he
exalts himself, in the Original. And this caseth us of the burden of exalting
him, which he will do by his own power, Psalm. 21.13. And teaches us to look
upon him as great and high in the proofs of his power.

2. Gods power is not idle, but an operative Attribute; and as others of his
Attributes are visible in effects upon, and among, the Creatures; so also is
his power; Therefore here he declares, what God does by his power.

3. God gives proofs of his power, not only by creating and upholding of all
things, or by crushing his enemies; but by exalting them who need it, even the
humble and lowly, Psalm. 1^^.5, 6, 7. For, God exalts by his power; So that so
long as God has power, their case is not desperate.

4. As it is the duty of all to stoop, and be patient toward God; so they
should study hope, that they may be quickened to it; And, particularly, they
should study, that the humble need not run away from God, because of the most
desperate trouble, seeing his power can rid them out of it; Therefore is God
thus described to Job, as an Exalter by his power, to encourage him in his
duty, in his sad distress.

5. Not only is God great in power, but in wisdom; and both are to be studied
and observed in his working; For, he is a Teacher, which supposes that he is
wise. See Job 9.4. Ps. 94.10.

6. Such is the goodness of God, that he communicates the effects of his
wisdom, and makes it forthcoming to his people, not only to guide them, and
carve out their lot, but to instruct and teach them; For, by his wisdom he
teaches: Which is our mercy, that his infinite wisdom stoops to take notice
of us.

7. God is the Supreme Teacher of his people; So that they should submit
themselves to his wisdom, and give up themselves to his teaching, and not
presume to teach or prescribe unto him; Therefore is he pointed out to Job as
the Teacher.

8. It may encourage men to submit to Gods wisdom and teaching, if they
consider that he is a singular Teacher; For, Who teaches like him? So that
none can teach or guide so well as he. Which may further appear, if we consider,

1. The matter which he teaches, which is infallible truth, and tends still
to men's good and profit, however they, oft-times, think otherwise, Is. 48.17.

2. The manner of his teaching; And so every thing a man meets with does teach
him some lesson; He teaches strangely, discovering deep things out of
darkness; teaching by afflictions, etc. By discovering sin, he teaches us to
be lowly; by discovering his severity, he teaches us to flee to his mercy; by
discovering our bad memories, he teaches us to employ the Spirit much as a
Remembrancer: He may find it needful to take a long time to inculcate one
lesson, Deuteronomy. 8.2, 3, etc.

3. The objects, or persons whom he teaches; He teaches both wise men (whose
advantage it is to be still his Scholars) and men of rude and dull Spirits, so
that the wayfaring men, though fools, shall not err, Is. 35.8. Yea, he
teaches very Infants, Is. 65.20. as being a Teacher, who not only propounds
the lesson to be learned (which is all that men can do) but gives a capacity
also to take it up, and understand it.

4. The efficacy of his teaching; His instructions (where he takes any of his
own Children in hand) are all successful, Joh. 6.45. and he teaches them to
profit, Is. 48.17. not only by propounding what is profitable for them to know,
but by making them profit thereby.

Verse 23. Who has enjoined him his way? Or who can say, Thou have wrought
iniquity?
The second Proof of this Proposition, that God is great, is taken from his
Sovereign Dominion, That, as none may prescribe to him beforehand, What he
should do; so neither can they justly carp at any of his works, when he has
done them, as if he were faulty in doing thereof. Of this frequently before;
Only here, Learn,

1. God is not only great in power, to do whatever is possible, or implies not
a contradiction, if he please; and wise, to carve out work for his power: But
he is invested with absolute Authority to do whatever he pleases; Therefore is
this commendation of God added to what has been said of his wisdom and power.
Men may have power and wisdom to compass and usurp that unto which they have
no right, but Gods authority is no less incontroulable, than his wisdom or
power.

2. It is one part of that homage which men owe to their Sovereign Lord, to
beware of prescribing to him in his working, who gives commission to his
creatures, but takes none from any; and submissively to wait for the
declaration of his will in all things; For, Who has enjoined him his way,
wherein to walk? is a strong assertion, that none should presume to do it, and
that it will be to no purpose, if any should attempt it.

3. Whoever are not content to be guided and disposed of as God pleases, they
would, indeed, take upon them to guide God, and set him down at their feet, to
be directed by them; For, by this question he would reflect upon Jobs way, as
presuming to enjoin and prescribe unto God, by his dissatisfaction and
complaints.

4. It is a fault incident to too many, that they can pretend submission to
Gods will beforehand, hoping thereby to get their will; who yet are ready to
carp, when in the issue they are put to it, to prove their submission: For, as
some are ready to enjoin him his way, beforehand, so others may seem to
decline that, who yet are ready enough to say, Thou have wrought iniquity, if
his work do not please them when it is done.

5. Whatever be men's miscarriages of this kind, yet, as God must not be
prescribed unto before he work, so, he must not be carped at when he has
wrought; But as we ought to wait for the declaration of his will, so we ought
to stoop and adore when it is declared; considering that he can do no wrong,
and that his works may abide our most severe examination and censure: For, Who
can say, Thou have wrought iniquity?

6. Albeit men in their passions, think they have reason enough for prescribing
to God, and carping at him; Yet, they are but raving in their fevers, when
they so judge: Their own consciences and reason will condemn them in cold
blood, and discover unto them sad matter of repentance for their folly; For, so
much does these questions import, whereby the truth of these assertions is
referred to men's own consciences, as a thing they cannot deny.

7. The Sovereignty of God is a subject which will never wear bare and empty to
a right discerner, were it never so often spoken of and repeated; and which is
needful to be much inculcated and dwelt upon by men, when they are under fits
of distemper; For these causes is this subject so often repeated and insisted
upon in this Book.

Verse 24. Remember that thou magnify his work, which men behold.

25. Every man may see it, man may behold it afarr off.


The third Proof of the greatness of God is taken from the consideration of his
most obvious works, wherein it does clearly shine. In prosecution whereof,

1. He generally propounds the Proof, ver. 24, 25.

2. Being to clear it by particular instances, he premits and repeats his
Proposition, concerning the greatness of God, to keep Job in mind of his scope,
ver. 26.

3. He confirms this truth by many particular instances, v. 27 -- 33. and in
the next Chapter.

In these Verses he propounds his Proof, That even Gods obvious works (not his
work and dispensations toward Job, which the beholders do remark, as some
understand the words, but his common works, which are seen by all) are to be
magnified. And the force of the Argument is, If there be so much to be admired
and magnified, even in his common works; How much less can men comprehend his
mysterious Providence in some particular dispensations about his people? This
Argument is,

1. Propounded by way of counsel unto Job, that he should magnify Gods work.
Whereby he shows his friendliness to Job, in giving him so warm an advice;
whence also it is, that he insists to give so many instances to confirm this
Argument, in the following Discourse.

2. It is amplified, that this work, which he desires Job to magnify, is a
work which men do behold, and every man may behold it afarr off. Whereby he not
only clears what works they are he is speaking of, even works which are obvious
to all; But quickens him to magnify them, considering that all men take some
notice of them; or, do sing of them, as the Vulgar Latin reads it. And for
men's beholding these works afarr off, it may further amplify the matter, that
men see and take notice of these works, even at a distance from them (as the
Sun and Clouds, etc. are discerned and noticed by men, though they be at a
great distance above them, of which after) Or, they see his hand in them, even
afarr off, or, at first view, and though they be not very attentive. But
further, though those be truths, yet the phrase seems chiefly to import, that,
though they see somewhat of God in them, yet they do not see them perfectly,
but as men see things at a great distance, and so it points out that there is
more in them than they see.

From these Verses, Learn, 1. Much of God is to be seen, even in his ordinary
working; For, that is the work, or operation of God, which is here propounded
as a proof of his greatness. And though the word be singular, yet it relates
not to any one work only, but to many; as the following instances do clear, and
it holds true also of all of them. See Ps. 19.1, 2. Romans 1.19, 20.

2. Gods greatness, as it shines in his ordinary operations, ought to be
magnified and exalted, and not slighted, because these works manifesting it are
common and ordinary; For, says he, Magnify his work.

3. It is specially required of men, when they are distempered in their own
particular cases, that they study Gods works in general, wherein they are less
concerned; Whereby they may be instructed in good principles concerning God,
which will be of use to clear their mistakes about their own condition:
Therefore, by way of diversion, he draws Job to the study of the common works
of Providence, which might help to send him back in a better frame to judge of
his own case, and he might thereby be excited to ascribe that glory to God
which he had endeavored to obscure by his complaints.

4. Men are, ordinarily, great neglecters of Gods ordinary works; and,
particularly, Saints in a distemper are prone to study nothing which may help
to clear them, but do lie still poring upon their own condition, whereby they
do but heighten their distempers; For, here there is need to bid Job remember
this to magnify his work.

5. It is a great proof of love and kindness to wait upon distempered friends,
and to sweeten reproofs with seasonable advices; For, instead of arguing, he
lovingly advises Job, and wakens him out of his dreams, Remember that thou
magnify his work.

6. As it is the common duty of all men to study Gods works, and all men have
some sight and knowledge of them; So this, should be a spurr in the side of the
godly, to quicken them to diligence; For, this is a motive to excite Job to
this duty, that it is a work, which men behold, every man may see it. Not only
are the works in themselves obvious and visible, but somewhat is seen of them,
and in them, by every ordinary observer; and therefore Job should be careful to
magnify him.

7. It speaks the frailty of men (whose name is Enosh, here, v. 25.) and the
depths and rich treasures that are, even in Gods ordinary works, that, however
all men see somewhat of them, even afarr off; yet they cannot reach or take
them up fully: For, Man may behold them, but afarr off. The same may be said of
our spiritual knowledge in this life, 1 Cor. 13.12. And if this hold true of
the most ordinary and obvious works of God, much more are some particular acts
of his Providence incomprehensible.

Verse 26. Behold, God is great, and we know him not, neither can the number of
his years be searched out.
Elihu being about to confirm this Argument by instances, and so to help Job to
magnify these works, by pointing out some excellencies in them; He, in this
Verse, repeats and premits his general Proposition, which is his scope in all
this discourse, Asserting that God is unsearchably and incomprehensibly great,
so that man cannot take him up. This is to be understood of God, not only in
respect of his Essence and Attributes, but even in respect of his Works, of
which he is now speaking, That he is incomprehensibly great in his Sovereignty,
Power and Wisdom, which shine in them. And this Assertion he affirms from the
Eternity of God, the number of whose years (speaking of Eternity in terms
which frail man is capable of) cannot be searched out; and therefore He must be
far above our reach and capacity, who are but of yesterday.

Doct. 1. Such as would take up God aright, as he is in himself, and as he
manifests himself in his works, need to have their Spirits elevated, and
frequently excited and rouzed up, for that effect; Therefore is a new, Behold,
(after that which we have, v. 22.) premitted to this Doctrine. Not only need we
to quicken up our selves to commend God, when we do know him, as Psalm. 57.7, 8.
and, 108.1, 2. But we need excitation to take them up, that we may commend him;
as those many, Beholds, (so frequently premitted in Scripture to narrations
concerning him and his working) do point out. This Point imports,

1. That it is the duty of the people of God, to quicken up themselves, in
thinking upon God, his service, and works; Otherwise his name is taken in vain,
which is a sin to which few do advert, if their exercise be right upon the
matter. And hence comes that wasting moth of formality, and lifeless service,
which is the great snare of the visible Church.

2. That our profit, and our getting of our condition, helped, and our cases
cleared, depend much upon the raising up of our affections in that study of
God, and of what relates to him, and points him out; For, he excites Job to
behold, that his case may be cleared. Low and creeping thoughts of God, do
leave us in the dark, and may augment our trouble, as Psalm. 77.3. But quickened
and raised thoughts of him, will help us to get mistakes cleared, and are a
mount on which he will be seen, and will make men wonder that they saw not
better before.

3. Albeit it be our duty and great advantage to attain to this; yet, we are
slow of heart to take up God aright, especially under tentation; For, Job needs
to be excited to it. We are, ordinarily, confident of our own thoughts of God,
such as we have at first view, and so lean to them; But if we considered (not
only his incomprehensibleness, of which afterward, but) our ill frame of heart
under trouble, we would not judge so of them, but would rather be suspicious
that we forget God, Is. ^1.12, 13. that we do but proclaim our infirmity, by
our conceptions of him, Psalm. 77.7, 8, 9, with 10. yea, are but as beasts
before him, Psalm. 73.22. For trial puts us in a fever, and surrounds us with
many mists; and while we pore only upon our unpleasant condition, and through
that Perspective look upon God, we cannot avoid many prejudices and mistakes.
And after we have been bred with much kindness, it will not be easy for us to
acknowledge and stoop to his Sovereignty in afflicting us. All which may show,
how far they are mistaken, who think it an easy task to take up God aright,
especially under trouble.

4. Albeit at some times we get our hearts elevated, to have some right
thoughts of God; yet it is not easy to fix and hold them there; For, here a
new, Behold, must be added to the former, to recollect and excite Jobs thoughts
again. And here two things occurr as causes of our unfixedness; One is, Our
natural weakness and inconstancy; whence it flows, that we cannot keep up
long as any thing that is good, but (with Moses, Exodus 17.) our hands are ready
to fall down. Which may discover their folly, who lean to their own
dispositions, and do not look upon perseverance in good as a difficult task,
nor do cherish what good inclinations they have, by a continual dependence.
Another cause, is, The power of tentation in an hour of trial; whence it
flows, that, when our hearts are fixed, they become unfixed again, and (like
Sailors at Sea) when we have mounted up to Heaven, we are made to sink down
again unto the very depths; which we should resolve upon, and study to be armed
against it.

5. This our aversion from, and inconstancy in, right thoughts of God, makes us
need help from without, to excite and fix us; As here Elihu does to Job. And
this,

1. May point out, how great and difficult a task the work of the Ministry is,
even in this one particular, to rouse up, and keep up that frame of heart,
which both men's own inclinations, and tentations from without, are ready to
pull down.

2. It may put men to try what quickening and fixing they get by the Ministry;
otherwise they will be more deaded by it.

Doct. 2. It is an unquestionable truth, That God is great in himself, and
declares himself to be great, absolute, omnipotent, infinitely wise, etc. by
his works; For, here it is repeated, that God is great, as a truth which
stands firm against all contradiction. This is a truth so frequently
inculcated in Scripture, that God is great, (both absolutely in himself, Ps.
145.3. and in opposition to Idols, Jer. 10.10. etc. and to men who dare oppose
or quarrel him, Job 33.12.) and has so often occurred before, that I shall not
insist here to clear it. Only, in general, His inculcating of this common truth
so much upon Job, in this case, may point out, That many lessons, which we
think common and obvious, are yet but ill learned by us; And we, in our walk,
will be found not to act consonantly to our very common principles; As might be
instanced, not only in the matter of our knowing of the greatness of God, and
walking accordingly, but in many other particulars. And, in particular, for our
right improvement of this truth, That God is great; I shall not insist on this,
that we should see him great in his working, and that he is incomprehensible
therein, (both which are Elihu's scope here, and will come to be spoken of in
the next point) but shall only pitch upon these particulars.

1. That we should admire his condescendence, who, being so great, takes notice
of us, Ps. 8.3, 4, and 113.5, 6, 7.

2. That we must be humble in our converse with him, considering what He and we
are, Genesis 18.27.

3. That we must not please our selves with the performance of ordinary service
to him, Psalm. 48.1. and 145.3. Mal. 1.14. but should be abased in the sense of
our short-coming, in our best performances; as Solomon had low thoughts of his
stately Temple, 2 Chronicles. 2.6. and 6.18.

4. That we must learn to stoop more to his Sovereignty, and not suffer his
condescending love, manifested to us at any time, to hide his greatness, nor
presume to strive with our Maker.

5. That, being his servants, we should know that we serve a great Master,
Psalm. 146.3, 4, 5, 6. Jer. 50.34. So that we need not fear to expect great
things in his way, according to his promise, Joel 2.21. Of which I have spoken
before.

Doct. 3* It commends the greatness of God, that he is unsearchably and
incomprehensibly great, both in himself, and in his works; For, God is great,
and we know him not. Here, Consider,

1. Men are under a disease of ignorance of God; Not only such as the
Athenians, who worshipped an unknown God, Act. 17.23. or the Gentiles, who
liked not to retain God in their knowledge, Romans 1.28. or grossly wicked men,
who labor to fix themselves in Atheism, Psalm. 14.1. But even more generally,
men are ignorant of him. Hence ^low all disorders in men's walking; their sinful
shifts, 2 Chronicles. 25.8. their unbelief and slavish fear, Psalm. 9.10. Is. 51.12,
13. their carelessness in his service, Josh. 24.19, 20. their persecution of
his people, Jo^. 16.2, 3. and many the like miscarriages; their ignorance of
his Omnipresence making them careless to look to their hearts, and their not
considering of his Wisdom making them afraid when they are left upon his hand,
etc. All which do proclaim, that there is much practical Atheism, and
ignorance of God in the World.

2. Albeit men do endeavor to remedy this ignorance, yet God remains still
unsearchable, Psalm. 145.3. We see but his back-parts, and through a glass,
darkly; And when we think we see most in his working, and of the reasons of his
dispensations, we see only but a part of his ways, and hear but a little
portion of him, Job 26.14 Which may cause us rather mourn for our own
short-sightedness, than quarrel his dispensations.

3. Such as do indeed see most of God, and take him up aright, in his
dispensations, will be most humbled in the sense of their short-coming; As here
Elihu is, (We know him not) though he saw further than all the Disputants in
this cause. By which mark men may try their real nearness to God, and their
knowledge of him.

Doct. 4. It is a special proof of the incomprehensible greatness of God, that
he is eternal; Therefore it is subjoyned, by way of confirmation, Neither can
the number of his years be searched out. In studying his eternity, godly men,
may not only see his immutability, Mal. 3.6. and their mercy, that from
eternity they were thought upon; and that he will make them eternally happy
with himself; and wicked men may see, that they cannot outlive him, and his
enmity against them, as they may outlive their other enemies: But they may see
such deep and eternal counsels in his working, that men (who are but of
yesterday, Job 8.9.) must acknowledge their ignorance of them, and that they
are but of shallow capacities, and short-sighted for the future, to comprehend
all his counsels, who has guided many well, before complainers (who are but
new up-starts) had a being.

Doct. 5. Such is our ignorance (and this is one proof of it) that we cannot
take up the Attributes of God, unless he condescend to speak of them in t^arms
fitted to our capacity; As here, he expresses his eternity thus, that the
number of his years cannot be searched out. So also, Ps. 102.27.

Verse 27, For he makes small the drops of water: they pour down rain
according to the vapor thereof:

28. Which the clouds do drop, and distill upon man abundantly.


Follows, an ample confirmation of this truth, that God is unsearchably
great, by many instances wherein his greatness does shine. In the rest of this
Chapter he produces an instance of the rain, which he propounds in these
Verses, Showing, that the vapors being gathered into clouds, he droppeth down
the rain out of them, moderately, and yet sufficiently. Whence, Learn,

1. The most common and obvious works of God are evident proofs of his
greatness; Therefore does Elihu prove the former Proposition by this instance
of the rain; Wherein God has made his glory to shine, both in the withholding
thereof, at some times, and in overflowing Countries by the excess thereof, at
other times. And this should make us sensible of our great stupidity, who see
so little of God therein. And we should be sober in judging of the things of
God, when we find such wonders here.

2. Much of God may be seen in the rise of the rain, or the vapors drawn up by
the heat of the Sun, according to the measure whereof the rain comes down. For
hence we may gather, That things which are little promising may produce much;
As exhalations insensibly drawn up produce refreshful showers: That things
which are here below among us, being put in Gods hand, may come down in a
blessing, As vapors drawn up from among us are sent down again in refreshful
showers: And as vapors, drawn up in heat and drought, do dissolve in rain; So
we should study vicissitudes in all things, and that they will still turn in a
round, till time have an end; As rain breeds vapors, and vapors produce rain;
And that contraries put in Gods hand, will do well enough.

3. Much of God may also be seen in the manner of sending rain; Namely,

1. That he will not let the cloud pour out all at once (as in the general
Deluge; and when the hail fell of such weight that it killed men, Josh. 10.11.)
but ^ifts it down moderately, in small drops of water. And this may show, that
Gods moderation, in dispensing many of our mercies, is a remarkable mercy in
them.

2. That he distills the rain upon man abundantly, or, upon many men, as the
Original may be read; that is, though he sift the rain down in small drops, yet
it serves the turn, and that to many places at once. And this may point out,
That small things will do much in Gods hand.

Verse 29. Also can any understand the spreadings of the clouds, or the noise
of his tabernacle.

30. Behold, he spreads his light upon it, and covers the bottom of the Sea.

31. For by them judges he the people, he gives me at in abundance.

32. With clouds he covers the light: and commands it not to shine, by the
cloud that comes betwixt.

33. The noise thereof shows concerning it, the cattle also concerning the
vapor.


In these Verses, he prosecutes more fully this Instance, of the rain,
especially more tempestuous rain^, pointing out the causes, effects, and signs
thereof. Which may teach us, in general, That many things may concur in one
work of God, to demonstrate his glory shining in it. In the Verses, Consider,

First, The Causes and Antecedents of this rain, v. 29, 30. Which are,

1. The Clouds, a proper material cause of rain.

2 The noise of his Tabernacle, (or, of the Clouds, which are called, his
Tabernacle, Ps. 18.11. and his Chariot, Ps. 104.3.) whereby we are to
understand, either the high winds which sometime go before rain; or, rather
(because of that which follows, of Lightning, v. 30.) the Thunder, which is
an antecedent going before rain at sometimes, and a cause thereof, in so far
as by bursting through the watery cloud, it breaks it, and causes it
dissolve in rain.

3. Light, or Lightnings, which accompany the Thunder, and are antecedents to
the rain. Of these he says, That none can understand the spreading of the
clouds, (how they cover the Sky, sometime very speedily, and are hurried here
and there) or, the noise of thunder which is made in the clouds: Or, how the
lightnings, having broken through the clouds, do not only spread themselves
upon them, as if they were all covered therewith, but do even cover the Sea,
and that with such impetuousness, as if they would dive into the very roots and
bottom thereof.

Doct. 1. The v^ry dark clouds are bright documents of Gods incomprehensible
majesty, and his glory shines in spreading them out, and driving them here and
there, and yet keeping them from breaking; For, here, the spreading of the
clouds, is a document of his greatness, which none can understand fully, and as
it points him out. So that even a dark cloudy day may be a speaking Preaching
to those who have discerning, and a spiritual mind.

2. Thunder and lightnings, coming before rain, are another document of the
greatness of God, which none can fully comprehend; For, this is another proof
of his assertion, Can any understand the noise of his Tabernacle? Behold, he
spreads his light upon it, or, upon his Tabernacle, etc. The noise of
thunder, before rain, does not only point out the glorious majesty of God,
whose voice it is, as is at length prosecuted, Ps. 29. But does further show,
that every thing that is terrible is not hurtful to all who are ready to be
affrighted therewith; As thunder does but rarely destroy any, and but few of
those who hear its dreadful noise. The lightnings coming from the place where
rain is, and upon which the rain follows, may teach us, How little we need to
look to probabilities, in what we want; since men may expect rain, even whence
fire comes. And the lightnings being spread upon the clouds, and darting down
to the very bottom of the Sea, may let us see, How God can enlighten our
darkness, Psalm. 18.28. even by a light brought out of our dark cloud, Psalm.
112.4. How immense and omnipresent he is, who can not only spread his light
upon the cloudy Sky, but cover the Sea with it, and that very suddenly; How
infinite and effectual his knowledge is, who can make his light spread so far,
as even to lighten the World, Ps. 77.18. even the Sky and Sea, and can make it
cover the very bottom, or, roots of the Sea, and penetrate thither; And, How
much of Gods glory is manifested in the World, which man cannot overtake to
comprehend, seeing he not only fills the Earth and Sky with his glory, but does
manifest it in the Sea, where men do not so frequently converse, to see his
wonders in the deep, Ps. 107.24. and that to the bottom thereof, where man
cannot dive to see it.

3. Then are the works of God rightly studied, and God rightly seen in them,
when men do not drown themselves in nature, and in the study of the second
causes, but do see God in them, whose works they are; As here it is called, his
light; And when they look upon Gods revealing of himself by them, as but an
obscuring of himself, that he may reveal himself to their capacity; As the
clouds are called, his Tabernacle, where, in manifesting himself to men, he
involves and hides himself, that he cannot be seen as he is in himself. Thus
also the very brightness (as well as the dark clouds) is but the hiding of his
power, Hab. 3.4.

Secondly, The Effects of rain, which comes out of these clouds, after the
thunder and lightning, or the Ends for which it comes upon the Earth, v. 31.
Namely, to plague some, and give plenty to others. It is said, he does these
things by them, in the plural number, that is, not only by rain, but by thunder
and lightning, which may have influence upon the Earth, either for hurt, as
when they destroy and blast the Creatures; or for good, as when they scour and
purify the Air, that the influences thereof may be more benign. And they have
also a more mediate influence upon the effects of the rain, they way whereof
they prepare by bursting through the cloud. This teaches,

1: Means and second causes will prove unto men, even according as God employes
them, for judgment or mercy; as here we see. See Deuteronomy. 8.3.

2. Even that which is a judgment to some, may prove a mercy to others; For,
by rain and thunder, etc. he judges the people, and gives meat.

3. Tempestuous and terrible-like things may do good to whomsoever God
pleases; As by thunder, lightning and rain, he gives meat. So that men need
not be afraid of improbable-like things, if God interpose.

4. As meat is a great mercy, being so necessary daily, and a mercy wherewith
(if we have raiment also) we should be content, 1 Timothy 6.8. So God is to be
acknowledged as the giver of it, who employeth second causes to produce it, and
blesses them for that effect, and puts his blessing in it, when it is
produced, without which it would do us no more good than the Earth from which
it comes, Deuteronomy 8 3. Therefore it is marked, as his great mercy to some, that
he gives meat. See Psalm. 104.27, 28.

5. God, when he pleases, can give proof that he is not close handed in his
dispensations, b^t can give meat in abundance; as here we are taught. See Act.
14.17. So that when we are straitened in these things, we are not to quarrel,
or question his fullness, but should look to another cause.

Thirdly, The Time and Way of this preparation for the rain, v. 32. Namely,
That God, when he pleases, covers the light of the Sun and Sky with these
clouds, and hinders the bright shining thereof upon the Earth, by the
interposition of the clouds. The Original Text in the latter part of the Verse,
is very concise; but the Supplements, which make it clear, are necessarily
understood in it: For, his command upon it, (that is, upon the light) or,
against it, (which is the reading of the Original) imports an interd^ction that
it should not shine; and that which comes betwixt, or, occurreth, (which is
the last word in the Text) is the clouds, which is supplied and repeated from
the former part of the Verse. This teaches,

1. Our mercies are in Gods hand, to take them away when he pleases; As here,
he covers the light, or, Sun, and the fair day, with clouds,

2. Mercies may not only be, but be doing good, when yet we see them not; As
here the Sun is in the Firmament, and has influences, when yet we see it not,
but it is commanded not to shine, or, interdicted, by that which comes
betwixt, or, interposeth.

3. It is at no time impossible for God to do good, when we need it; or to
reach us with a stroke, when we provoke him; and when our mercies are at the
prime, he can alter our condition: As when it is light, or a bright day, he can
cover it with clouds, and make the day dark; and when rain can be little
expected in a fair day, he can suddenly over-cloud it, and send rain, either
for mercy, or for judgment.

Fourthly, The Evidences and Signs of ensuing rain, v. 33. That the noise of
winds, or, rather, of thunder, does show that it is coming, and that the very
cattle are sensible of its approach, when the vapors are but gathering to be
poured out in rain. Thus Naturallists write, and experience teaches, that not
only cattle, but other beasts and birds, are sensible of the approach of rain,
by the alteration of their bodies, or otherwise; and do evidence it by their
cries, breathings, flockings together, fleeing to shelters, and other
practices. This may teach,

1. God is so tender, as that he frequently gives men warning of approaching
dispensations; which they should improve, to prepare for them; As here, the
noise thereof shows concerning it.

2. That instinct and quality which God has given to very irrational
creatures, whereby they take notice of Gods works, may convince them of the
evil of their stupidity; For, for that end is that which is to be observed
among cattle, marked here.

CHAP. XXXVII.
This whole Chapter (beside the Conclusion of this last Speech, ver. 23.24) is
spent in prosecution of that Argument begun in the former Chapter, That God is
incomprehensibly great, even in his ordinary Operations; and therefore he ought
to be stooped and submitted unto by all. This he had begun to instance in the
former Chapter. And here, First, He prosecutes the Argument in several
Instances further; such as the Thunder, ver. 1-5. those alterations in the air,
and storms, which usually fall forth in the Winter season, ver. 6, -- 10. and
the Rain, especially in the Spring, ver. 11, 12, 13. Secondly, He makes
application to Job, rouzing him up to consider of these works, v. 14-18. and
checks his presumption, who had dared to seek to dispute with God, ver. 19-22.
Thirdly, He concludes his whole Discourse, ver. 23, 24.

Verse 1. At this also my heart trembles, and is moved out of his place.

2. Hear attentively the noise of his voice, and the sound that goes out of
his mouth.

3. He directs it under the whole heaven, and his lightning unto the ends of
the earth.

4. After it a voice roareth: he thundereth with the voice of his excellency,
and he will not stay them when his voice is heard.

5. God thundere^h marvellously with his voice, great things does he, which we
cannot comprehend.


THe Instances produced in this Chapter for confirmation of Gods
incomprehensible greatness, may be reduced to three Heads. The first whereof
(in these Verses) is the Thunder; which he had spoken of more darkly before,
and here insists to speak of it more fully. In the Verses, Consider,

First, An Introduction to this Matter, v. 1, 2. -- Wherein he shows how
himself was affected with this subject matter, v. 1. and how he would have
others ( Job, and all present, for the word is plural) to hear it, v. 2. --
This is not so to be understood, as if his simple considering of God did so
affect him, but it is relative to his seeing of God in the Thunder. Nor is he
here speaking of his own or others contemplating and meditating upon the
Thunder, which they may do in a fair day when it does not thunder. But it seems
that it began to thunder while he is speaking of it; and that helped to rouse
him up and afflict him, and made him excite the Auditory to notice how High and
Majestic that Subject was whereof he is now speaking. And this seems to have
been the beginning of that tempest wherein God appeared to decide the
controversy, Chap. 38.1.

Doct. 1. As there is sweetness in God, to allure sinners to him; so he has
dreadfulness also, which ought not to be slighted; as here we are taught by
Elihu's practice, who is affected therewith.

2. Thunder is a very speaking demonstration of the Majesty and Dreadfulness of
God; For, that is the Instance here, wherein it shines, to the affecting of
Elihu. See Psalm. 29. throughout.

3. Not only will wicked men be made ^^^eel the dreadfulness of God; but even
the Godly should be sensible of it: as here Elihu's heart trembles, and is
moved out of his place; which was not the slavish fear of wicked men, nor did
it flow chiefly, (if at all) from his natural timorous constitution, but from a
holy awe of God, which (it seems) has been heightened by the dreadfulness of
the present Thunder, which did rouse him up.

4. It is one thing to hear of Gods dreadfulness, and another thing to see it
evidenced by visible effects; as here, it moves him strangely, when he hears
the voice of the Thunder; As this also my heart trembles, etc.

5. As they need to be themselves made sensible, who would speak of God, and
his greatness, to others, (as here, he is rouzed up himself by the present
Thunder, that he may excite the Auditory;) so those who are truly sensible,
will be careful not to leave others insensible, (as they have occasion and
opportunity) of what they know of God; For, this is the fruit of his own sense,
that he excites the rest to hear.

6. It is the duty of all to attend seriously to what God declares and
reveals of himself, by his Word or Works; for, so is here required, that they
hear attentively this voice of the Thunder.

7. Men may have Gods works very obvious before them, who yet, without
excitation, will not improve them aright; For, though men must hear the noise
and sound of Thunder, yet they need to be excited to hear it attentively, or,
in hearing to hear it, that is, so to hear the sound of it, as to consider what
it says, and what God declares concerning himself, by it.

Secondly, A Description of this Thunder, v. -- 2, 3, 4. Not after the way of
Naturalists, who describe it to be, a dry vapor, or exhalation, bursting
through a watery Cloud (wherewith it is surrounded) whence comes the great
noise; and kindling, with striving against the watery cloud, in the eruption,
whence comes the Lightning, and the condensating thereof makes a Thunderbolt.
But Elihu speaks of it, as it points out somewhat of God, That it is a voice of
God, sounding under the whole Heaven, with Lightnings going before it. Hereby
teaching, That however men may lawfully search into the natural causes of
things, in studying the works of God; yet to rest there, without ascending up
to see somewhat of God in them, will tend little to edification, but is near of
kin to Atheism. Particularly, in this Description, Consider,

1. This Thunder in its nature and kind, is a sound and noise of the voice of
God, v. 2. that is, a voice whereby he speaks to men, and makes himself and his
mind known, as men declare their mind by their word. So Psalm. 29. throughout.
Hence we may learn,

1. The works of God do us good, in so far as they speak, and are Gods voice to
us; as here, the thunder gets that name, not only because of its loud noise,
but because thereby somewhat is spoken to us.

2. Thunder has a speaking voice to right discerners; it speaks what the
Majesty and Dreadfulness of the Speaker is; what the efficacy of his Word is
(when he pleases to make use of it) which can pierce like a Sword and
Thunderbolt, Heb. 4.12. What dreadful Language he has for them who will not
hear the calm (...); and, how great his Mercy is, in speaking to us (...) ^^k
men, seeing we could not endure his thundering voice, Exodus 20.18, 19.

2. As for the extent of his sound and voice, He directs it under the whole
heaven, v. 3. -- Not than it is heard in all places at once; but that he may
send it where he pleases, under the whole heaven, and wherever he sends it,
it is heard far and near. Which as it speaks his Majesty, whose voice is heard
so far off; So further,

1. It says that he will be heard by them to whom he he is pleased to speak,
and has a voice for the deafest.

2. That the most dreadful thunder is subject to his command, to be directed
whither he pleases.

3. The concomitants of this thundering voice, are Lightnings, which v. -- 3.
are declared to be of a like extent with the voice; and for the order betwixt
these two, it is declared, v. 4. -- that the thunder follows the Lightning.
Not in order of Existence (for the cloud must break with a noise, before the
Lightning appear) but in that order wherein they appear to our senses. For our
sight being a quicker sense than that of Hearing, and the Light passing through
the Air in an instant, while the sound thrusts it self through the air but by
degrees, we see the light before we hear the sound. Hence we may gather,

1. Gods Majestic Lightnings, attending his voice, may yet discover more of
the Majesty of the Speaker; and may show what pains he takes, and what splendour
and glory he displayeth, to have his voice regarded; and what need we have of
warnings to excite our attention to hear; as Lightnings in ordinary excite us
to hearken to the voice that follows.

2. This order here put betwixt the Voice and Lightnings, does point out, That
the hearing is a more dull and slow sense than seeing, And therefore we should
be careful to quicken it in hearing; yet so, as the many turns and windings in
our ear (which is the cause of this flowness) should warn us to be very
cautious and circumspect in trying what we hear.

3. Meditation should be a means to make our thoughts rise and grow, in taking
up the excellency of God; For, now after he has thought and spoken a while of
this voice of God, he calls it, the voice of his excellency.

4. The necessary connection betwixt the voice and these Concomitants, v. 4. --
Where the Relative, them, may be referred to Lightnings (many of them, in the
plural number) which are not stayed, or, kept back, when his voice, of thunder,
is heard, or, to be heard. And thus thunder is still accompanied with
Lightnings, though, sometime, we see lightnings, when we hear not thunder. Or,
it may be referred both to Lightnings and Rain (of which he has spoken, Chap.
36.27, 28, 30.) both which accompany the thunder. It may point out,

1. That Gods fixing and observing of an order and course of Nature, in
Thunders, Lightnings, Rain, as also in day and night, summer and winter, may be
of use to strengthen the Churches Faith in other cases; as use is made of it in
expecting a Day, and a Summer, after a Night and Winter of trouble, Psalm.
74.16, 17.

2. The many Glimpses and Rays of glory which he manifests together in those
concurrent works of his power, when we are surrrounded with them all at once,
may let us see how unable we are to take up all his works, or all that is in
them; we cannot have studied his glory, shining in the Lightnings, when
presently we are alarmed with the glorious voice of his Thunder, and with the
rain after that; which will sooner confound us, than we can fully comprehend
them.

Thirdly, A Conclusion of this Instance, and a transition to the rest of his
Instances, v. 5. Wherein is showed, that, as God is mavelous in his
thunderings, so, he has many other incomprehensible works; some of which are
afterward instanced as proofs of this. Hence learn,

1. When men have had never so many after-thoughts of Gods workings, they will
never see cause to abate their estimation thereof, or of his glory shining
therein, but rather to increase it; as here he shuts up the former Instance
with this, God thundereth marvellously with his voice.

2. Men see little, if they see not matter of admiration in Gods works; for he
thundreth marvellously; as there are indeed many wonders in it; How dreadful
the sound is which is made by a Vapor in the Air; how it should kindle it self
by its conflict with the watery Cloud; how the Thunderbolt should melt the
money, and yet not burn the Purse in which it is, and break the bones, and yet
make no visible breach in the skin; and many the like wonders, which are
recorded by Naturalists and Historians.

3. It is not one work only, wherein we may see the mavelous hand of God, but
any one does demonstrate what is in all, whether we see it or not; as here, he
subjoyns to this commendation of the Thunder, great things does he, etc. to
teach us to see that in Snow, Rain, etc. (which are the following Instances)
which we see in Thunder.

4. As men are ignorant of Gods works, so the cause thereof, and of our not
seeing wonders in them, flows from our own shallowness and incapacity; for,
great things does he, which we cannot comprehend.

Verse 6. For he says to the Snow, Be thou on the earth, likewise to the small
rain, and to the great rain of his strength.

7. He seals up the hand of every man; that all men may know his work.

8. Then the Beasts go into dens, and remain in their places.


The second sort of Instances, to confirm Elihu's Assertion, are those storms,
and altera^ions of the air, and seasons, which usually fall forth in Winter, to
v. 11. In these Verses,

1. He propounds the Snow, and the smaller and greater Rain, which at Gods
command, fall and stay upon the earth, v. 6.

2. He subjoins the effects thereof, especially of snow and great rains;
Namely, That they put men from their work (especially from those works which
they have to do abroad) that they may see and notice Gods work, v. 7. and drive
beasts to their dens, v. 8.

From v. 6. Learn 1. Even Winter-storms, and foul seasons are useful Documents
and Instructions to point out somewhat of God; as here the snow and the rain
are instanced for that effect. See Psalm. 147.16, 17. and 148.8.

2. It sp^aks much of God, that he can produce variety of Dispensations out of
the same mean and cause; as he can out of the Clouds, send Snow, when the
Vapors are not fully resolved, or small rain and great rain, as he pleases.

3. God is no less to be adored in lesser, than in greater works; as here his
glory shines in the small rain, as well as in the great rain of his strength,
or, that the rain which demonstrates his strength, by its own vehemence, and by
his bearing up the Cloud wherein it is. This speaks much of him, and should
preach to men, when it comes; but the small rain, or ordinary showers of rain
(as the word is) speaks his glory no less, if it were but that he moderates it.

4. It speaks out much of God, that not only he works all these works, but does
all of them by a word; For, he says to the snow, etc. as he did also at the
first Creation of all things. And in this respect, also, the Centurion gives
Christ the glory of his Omnipotency and absolute Dominion, Matthew. 8.8, 9.

5. God is also to be acknowledged and glorified in the continuance of his
Dispensations; For, he says to the snow, be thou on the earth, so long as he
pleases, and so also to the Rain.

From v. 7, 8. Learn, 1. It is God who gives men opportunity to work, or sets
them idle, as he pleases; For, by these storms, he seals up the hand of
every man, or, hinders their work abroad, as if their hand were shut up under
a Seal.

2. An idle time needs not be unprofitably and idly spent, if men were thrifty;
For, here is subjoyned, that God has an end in sealing up the hand of men, and
work for them such at a time. And, oft-times God puts men from the works of
their ordinary Callings, by sickness, storms, Piracies, etc. because they take
little leisure for this work.

3. It should be men's special exercise, when they are restrained from their
Callings, to study to know God and his works well; for, that is his end h^re,
That all men may know his (or, Gods) work. This, in general, does import, That
men, at such a time, should be exercised in piety, contemplaring God and his
works; for which they, ordinarilyt take little leisure, when they are busy
about their Calling. But more particularly, it imports, that they should study
those works of God, which retard and obstruct their work; as being not only
their present task, assigned unto them by providence, but a Document that their
work, and the success thereof, depend upon him and his Providence, (which men
do little consider, that they may acknowledge him in all their ways, till he do
thus obstruct their work) and consequently, that they should try their own
works well, that they be such, is they may go to God about them, and depend
upon him for his Blessing, and success in them, and not such as provoke him to
stop their way in following of them.

4. Though the most of men be so stupid, that they see little of God,
especially in the matter of their Callings; yet his hand is so obvious, that
they are inexcusable who see it not, and God is provoked to cause them see it;
for, all men may know his work, even by a stormy day; and when they do not see
it in ordinary, he sends such interruptions, to cause them see it. See Isa 26
11.

5. The very Beasts are under the dominion and providence of God, and must
submit and stoop to him; as here we are taught, v. 8.

6. Gods power over Beasts, and his providence about them, are speaking
Documents to men; for, for this end is this Instance brought in here. Their not
being able to stand out in a storm, is a witness against men's Rebellion, who
endeavor to stand out against God, and do not seek to a refuge in stormy
times. Their running only to Dens, and lurking places in storms, does proclaim
the beastly disposition of men, who are no better exercised, in knowing the
works of God when they are idle, v. 7. than the very beasts, who remain in
their dens during a storm. And Gods providing shelters for the very beasts
against a storm, shows how ready he is to provide a refuge for them who
employ him.

Verse 9. Out of the South comes the Whirlwind, and Cold out of the North.

10. By the breath of God Frost is given; and the breadth of the Waters is
straightened.


In these Verses, he speaks of the Whirlwinds (or, winds involved in a cloud,
which makes them reel about when they break forth) which come out of the
South, or, hidden places, where the Antarctick Pole is, which is not seen by
them who live under the Northern, or, Arctick Pole; and of Cold, which comes
out of the North, where the Sun appears least, v. 9. Where the North is
designed by those Soatt^rings, or, scattering winds (for that is the name in
the Original) which come out of it, and are the causes of the cold. And this is
further explained, v. 10. That by the breath of God, or, a cold wind, Frost
comes, which congealeth the waters, and so lesseneth them.

Doct. 1. God is to be seen and magnified in every one of his works, how
contrary soever; as, in Frost, Cold, Heat, Rain and Whirlwinds.

2. God has variety of Dispensations wherewith to exercise men, as he
pleases; as here we see.

3. God has, as it were, his Storehouses in several Quarters of the world,
whence he brings forth those varieties of Dispensations; as here; he has the
South and North, for Whirlwinds, Cold and Frost. Wherein (whatever may be seen
of the course of Nature) the infinite Wisdom of God does shine; and men may see
what he has in store for them, according as they walk before him. As Deuteronomy.
32.34.

Verse 11. Also by watering he wearieth the thick Cloud: he scatters his
bright Cloud.

12. And it is turned round about by his counsels, that they may do whatsoever
he commands them upon the face of the world in the earth.

13. He causes it to come, whether for correction, or for his land, or for
mercy.


The third so^t of Instances, are, the Rains, especially those in the Spring.
Concerning which,

First* H^ declares, that God, by watering the earth, wearieth the thick
cloud, v. 11. -- Speaking of it as a thing that could be wearied, by its being
hurled hither and t^i^her, to serve the earth in diverse places, and wearied by
i^s spending it self in that Service. This is further amplified from his
scattering of his bright cloud, or, the cloud of his Light, v. ^ -- 11. Where,
whatever light shines from, or through the clouds, it is all his, as he made
the light before he made the Sun, that he might show us that we have the light
thereof from him. And the meaning of this Amplification is, that he wastes,
and so scatters that cloud which is full of Lightning accompanying the Rain,
by pouring it out upon the earth. Or, that when he scatters bright clouds
without Rain, and they evanish; yet, he has thick clouds from whence to give
Rain; as we should indeed be helped to see the Mercy of God, by many
disappointments that we meet with. It will be seen a mercy that God has Clouds
whence to give Rain, after that many Clouds have been scattered, and produced
none. But that which seems to be the most simple interpretation, is, That he
scatters the Cloud of his Light, or, the Cloud which covers the light (as
Chap. 36.32.) by pouring it out in rain.

Secondly, He declares that the Clouds are subject unto God, so that he may
send them to pour out rain where he will, and for what end he will, v. 12.

Thirdly, He specifieth the Commission given to the Rain, or, the ends for
which he sends it, v. 13. Which are,

1. For Correction, or, a Rod; as is frequently verified in Inundations,
Deluges, Rotting of Corns, etc.

2. For his Land; whereby I do not so much understand, the Land where his
people dwell, Isa. 8.8. Hos. 9 3. For in these days, Gods people, or, the
visible Church had no such Land as yet in their possession, as Israel had
afterward the Land of Canaan. Nor yet would I understand it only of those waste
uninhabited Lands which fall (as it were) immediately in Gods own hand. See
Chap. 38.26. But it is to be understood of the whole Earth, which is the Lords,
Psalm. 24.1. and which he makes fruitful by Rain.

3. For Mercy, or, a peculiar Mercy at some times. This is not so to be
understood as if it were not a mercy to have rain in ordinary upon the earth
(as is expressed in the former word) but because that is not so well observed,
therefore at some times he discovers it to be a signal mercy that he sends
Rains after a great Drought, such as that, 2 Samuel 21. 1 Kings 17, and 18. Jer.
14. and elsewhere.

From v 11. Learn 1. God gives unto man many Proofs and Documents of his
glory, wherewith he is so surrounded, that when he begins to study them, he
will not be soon able to make an end; For also beside those already mentioned,
there are yet proofs of him to be seen.

2. Any one work of God has more in it than we can see at first view; and when
we have seen much, there is yet more to see in it: Therefore though he ^ath
spoken of the Rain, Chap. 36. and here v. 6. Yet here he speaks of it again, to
show that there is more in it than he ha^h yet pointed out. Thus in commending
of Gods works, they are halved and expressed by parcels, that the Song of Gods
Praise may be often repeated, Ps. 136. So that we should beware of Formality in
the study thereof.

3. It is a special favor and dignity conferred upon men, that the heavens are
made to serve them, and that God makes the clouds to spend themselves for their
good, as here, By watering he wearieth the thick Cloud. This high honor
conferred upon man, may lay him low, as Psalm. 8.3, 4. considering how many
props and means he needs to maintain his Being; and should make him bring in
the Rent of Praise to God, which is to be paid by all these Creatures which are
employed about him. It serves also to commend Gods indulgence, who continues
these favors with Rebel man; and may assure Believers that they are much more
noticed and owned by Heaven.

4. It may also heighten our esteem of Mercies, when we see Mercy in the bosom
of Mercy; as here, both the air is cleared, and rain comes, by scattering the
cloud of the Light, or, the Cloud which formerly did intercept the Light.

From v. 12, Learn, 1. Things here below, and above us in the air, are in a
continual motion, that so we may learn not to rest upon them, but upon God; For
so the Clouds are turning round about. This proves the vanity of the
Creatures, Eccl. 1.6. And should teach us not to seek to fix this world to our
mind, since it has been always reeling; nor so to walk as our being made like
a Wheel, or finding changes in our Lot, shall be a plague upon us, as Ps. 83.13.

2. There is not a motion of the very Clouds, but it is ordered by God, who
sends them here and there, to pour out rain upon one place, and not upon
another, Amos 4.7, 8. For, it is turned round about by his Counsels. Thus all
contingent events are ordered by him, Exodus 21.13. Which, because we observe
not, therefore he makes it appear in extraordinary dispensations.

3. As the place of Rain, so also its work, is assigned by a special Providence
of God; not a drop of rain flows from the Clouds, but it does whatsoever he
commands, upon the face of the world in the earth, that is, openly, upon the
earth, in any part of the world, whither he sends the clouds: which does point
out, both how condescending God is in his Providence, and how much we miss, and
cannot comprehend of God in his working.

4. The deep Wisdom of God shines in all that he does; for those turnings, and
commands are by his Counsels. Men may think it below them to exercise their
wits about meaner things; but God has deep Counsels in his meanest and most
ordinary works; and consequently, much more are his Counsels to be adored in
greater works.

From v. 13, Learn, 1. God will not be limited by men in his working; but
according as men sin, or are to be tried or rewarded, he will exercise them
accordingly; as here he sends rain, and causes it to come, for what ends he
pleases.

2. One and the same mean will produce different effects, according as God
gives the Commissi^n; as here the rain is sent for different ends. So that men
need not look so much to the means, as to their own frame and condition; And if
they be at peace with God, they may expect that even an Eater will afford them
Meat, and what is terrible to others, needs not affright them, Matthew. 28.4, 5.
And if God have a quarrel at men, he can curse their very blessings.

3. As Rain is a great Blessing in it self, so God can make it a sad scourge,
by the excess thereof, as moderation is the mercy of our temporal mercies,
Prove. 30.8, 9. or, by the unseasonableness thereof; as every thing is beautiful
in its season, Eccles. 3.11. For, he causes it to come for correction, or, a
rod.

4 Mercie^ unto the earth are mercies to men, seeing even Kings are served by
the field, Eccles. 5.9. For, the coming of rain for his Land, or, Earth, is a
mercy to men. So that men should not think little of these common mercies.

5. Though God has given the Earth to the Children of men, for their use and
benefit, Psalm. 115.16. Yet, he testifies his interest in it, by constant
watering of it; For by this he proves it to be his Land, or, his Earth. The
necessities of the Earth, of young Lions, Psalm. 104.21. and young Ravens, Job.
38.41. and of other Beasts, Joel. 1.20. have a mouth to God, as being the
necessities of his Creatures, when none else can help them. Which shows, That
an interest in God, were it even upon the account of Creation, is a claim
whereof we should make use (and whereof humble persons will make use) if other
interests be darkened, Job. 10.8. Psalm. 119.73. And that, if God by rain
testify his respects unto the earth, much more does he witness his respects to
men by many favors, if they would be affected with them.

6. God can easily make ordinary mercies be seen to be signal Mercies, when we
undervalue them because they are ordinary; As here, at sometimes, rain comes
eminently for mercy, in rescuing those persons, and other Creatures, which are
ready to be destroyed with drough^.

Verse 14. Hearken unto this, O Job, stand still, and consider the wondrous
works of God.
Elihu having propounded these several Instances, for proving of his Assertion,
does now make application of his Doctrine to Job, wherein,

1. He excites him to attend and remark those works of God; as proving him to
be great and unsearchable, to v. 19.

2. Hence he checks him for his presumption, in desiring to dispute with God,
to v. 23.

In this Verse he begins the Application, and propounds his Counsel, That he
would mark and seriously consider these wonderful works of God. Which does not
imply that Job was either not attending, or going about to make a reply; but
does only declare his own earnestness to have Job study that Point well, for
proving whereof, he had produced those Instances.

Doct. 1 It is not sufficient, nor will it satisfy conscientious men, that
they speak well of God, and to men's cases, unless they apply and put home their
Doctrine to those they deal with; As here, he applies his former Doctrine to
Job.

2. Even they who are silently hearing, may yet need excitation to attend, and
to ponder what is said; As here, he requires of Job, that he will hearken unto
this, though he had been hearing all the while.

3. Such as would profit by what they hear, or take up, of God, would fix their
own minds well on what they are about; As here, he bids him stand still, or
seriously compose himself.

4. It is required also, of those who would profit at this study, that they
rest not upon what they may take up of Gods working at first view, wherein
their blindness, prejudices and passions, may wrong them; but that they
seriously consider what is before them; as here he required.

5. As it is our duty to see all things that are wrought, to be Gods works; so
also to remember that they are wonderful; as here, they are called the wondrous
works of God: Which shows, that they are not easily taken up, or
comprehended; nor are we right Proficients in the study thereof, unless we be
effected with them as admirable.

6. Such as would do good to others, by what they say, ought not only to excite
them to attention, but ought themselves so to commend God and his works, as may
evidence that they are affected therewith; as here Elihu, in exciting of Job,
is careful to commend Gods works as wondrous, that thereby he may stir him up
yet more to be serious.

Verse 15. Do thou know when God disposed them, and caused the light of his
cloud to shine?

16. Do thou know the ballancings of the Clouds, the wondrous works of him
which is perfect in knowledge?

17. How thy Garments are warm, when he quieteth the earth by the South Wind?

18. Have thou with him spread out the Sky, which is strong, and as a molten
Looking-glass?


The counsel propounded v. 14. is here pressed, by overcharging Job with new
Instances, which might discover unto him his incapacity and ignorance. Where he
propounds,

1. In general, Gods disposing and ordering of all these works formerly
mentioned, and afterward to be produced, v. 15. --.

2. The matter of Light, that God caused the Light of his Cloud to shine, v.
15. -- Whereby we are not so much to understand the Rainbow, or the light of
the Sun breaking through the divided Clouds, as the lightning which appears in
the Cloud.

3. The ballancing of the clouds in the Air, sometime lifting them up, and
sometime letting them down nearer the earth, as he pleases, which is a
wondrous work of God, declaring him to be perfect in knowledge, v. 16.

4. The hea^, which is caused by the calm and warm winds, or Sunshine, which
come from the South; and was so vehement in these Countries, that is made men's
very garments a burden to them, v. 17.

5. The Sky, or air, which, though fluid and thin, and often rent with those
thunders and lightnings, yet, is strong and transparent like a Looking glass,
which (it seems) in these Countries they made of some Metal molten and
refined, v. 18.

Elihu's scope in propounding of all those Instances, in this his Advice to
Job, may be taken up in these,

First, To point out, thereby, that God is infinitely great in power and wisdom
(which is the Conclusion to be confirmed in all this ^iscourse) as appears in
his ordering and disposing of all those, wherein Job had no hand.

Secondly, That Job cannot comprehend God, who is unsearchable in his
operations; seeing,

1. He is infinitely inferior to God, and was not with him in doing of th^se
things, v. 18. But God is the Creator, and he but a Creature.

2. He was but of yesterday, and far to seek when God disposed all these
things, ( v. 15.) from eternity, or from the beginning; and so was none of his
Counselors.

3. That he cannot dive into the depths and reasons of Gods works; for if he
cannot know the reasons* and causes of these natural and ordinary things, which
are obvious and felt by him, v. 16, 17. (as indeed, though men may know
somewhat of them, yet they cannot dive into the bottom of them, or, comprehend
them fully and exactly) how can he be able to comprehend his more singular and
extraordinary works?

I shall not insist here upon what might be gathered from the particular
Instances; how much of Gods glory shines in bright lightnings coming out of
the dark cloud; whereby he shows, what light he can cause arise unto his
people even in darkness; how God has so disposed all things, and balanced
them, as he makes us dwell safely under such a weight of Clouds which hang over
our heads in the thin air, whereby he shows, that he is able to preserve his
people, when they are kept under the hazard of eminent perils; how much of God
does shine in warm seasons; whence we may gather some Documents concerning the
refreshful warmth of the light of his countenance, lifted up upon us after cold
blasts, especially in our heavenly Country: Also, concerning the emptiness of
all temporal enjoyments, and the Mercy that is in their being moderated;
evidenced in this, that however we desire hot seasons in cold weather, yet we
can no more endure the extremity of heat, than of cold, and that our Clothes,
which sometimes we find comfortable, do at other times prove a burden through
heat: And, how much of his Glory shines in the stately Canopy of the
Firmament, Psalm. 8, and 19. Whence we may gather, how much more glorious those
upper Mansions are. But passing all these, I shall only take a few
Observations, with an eye to Elihu's scope in these Instances. And,

1. All things in the world, whether more permanent, or transient, are of Gods
sole making; As here, we are taught. Which affords much ground to Faith, upon
which it may lean in greatest difficulties. See Romans 4.17. 2 Cor. 4.6. 1 Pet.
4.19.

2. Not only Gods power in making, but his Wisdom in ordering all things, ought
to be observed; For, he disposed them; So that there is not so much as an hot
day, but his Wisdom sh^nes in it.

3. As all things are ordered by God, so they are at his Command, and in his
Hand, to s^cure his People; As he causes the light of his Cloud to shine, when
he w^ll, ballanceth the Clouds, etc.

4 As Gods G^ory shines in every one of his particular works, so it shines yet
more illustriously, if we consider many of them together; For which cause they
are here represented to Job together.

5. Not only singular and extraordinary works of God, but even those which are
ordinary and obvious, are full of deep and unsearchable things; For, here he
goes no further than to the Sky, Clouds, Heat, etc. to convince Job that God
is incomprehensible in his works.

6 Gods works being all so incomprehensible, it is the duty of those who would
contemplate them aright, to raise their thoughts of them; As here, they are
called his wondrous works, v. 16. which he again repeats from v. 14.

7. In studying of the works of God, we should ascend up to high thoughts of
himself; As here he subjoyns to his sight of those wondrous works, that he is
perfect in knowledge.

8. Whatever else we see in Gods works, we should be careful to observe his
perfect and infinite Wisdom, to be adored, and trusted by us; therefore does he
point him out as perfect in knowledge, and declared to be such by the
operations of his hand.

9. Whatever may be the frame of men unconcerned, or how easy soever they
think Lessons are; yet, men under tentation are not easily brought to adore God
in his working, or to learn these Lessons which are inculcated thereby:
Therefore must this counsel, v. 14. be so much pressed upon Job, by so many new
Instances. For men are then peevish, too confident of their own opinions and
apprehensions, apt to pore too much upon their own case, etc. All which do
darken their understanding.

10. When men are disordered, and mistake in their thoughts of God, he has not
one only, but many witnesses, to convince them, and even to overwhelm their
stiffness; as here, he heaps up instances, to refute Job.

11. Whosoever study Gods ordinary works well, will find cause to stoop to him in
his singular dispensations, as here we are taught; For if no man be his
Counselor in his ordinary working, nor will he give an account of it, nor
should any murmr at it; much less will he give an account of his special
dispensations about man, but man must acquiesce and submit to his pleasure. And
we, who are but of yesterday, and ignorant of what is most obvious (as here he
confounds Job, by enquiring what he knows of these works) must not think to
pry into his deep counsels.

Verse 19. Teach us what we shall say unto him; for we cannot order our speech
by reason of darkness.

20. Shall it be told him that I speak? if a man speak, surely he shall be
swallowed up.


In the second branch of this Application, Elihu checks Job for his desire to
plead with God; the reproof whereof he coucheth in a counsel, or desire, by way
of sharp Irony, v. 19 -- That if Job desired to plead with God, or would have
them ( Elihu, or any of his Friends) to plead or interpose for him, he would
give them in^ormation how to go about it, and furnish them with some of those
Arguments wherewith he said he was well stored, Chap. 23.4. This, in effect,
imports, that however Job was so daring as to desire to plead; ye^, he could
satisfy no impartial and unconcerned man, that he had a just ground of Plea;
or valid Arguments to produce. This is further confirmed from their experience
and observation, that God could not be so pleaded with,

1. Because it is impossible; man's darkness and ignorance, and the mysteries in
Gods dispensations, being so great, that none can order their pleas or defenses
before him, v. -- 19.

2. Because of the hazard that is in such an attempt, v. 20. Where he alludes
to the customs of those times, wherein men did record their Names in a Book, or
otherwise gave public notice, that they were to plead such a Cause; as they
did also write all their disputes in the Cause, Chap. 19.23. and 31.35. Now
Elihu professes that he durst not make any intimation to God, that he was
about to speak in these terms that Job desired to plead with him; seeing he
could not plead but he was in hazard to be swallowed up.

From v. 19. Learn 1. It is men's great fault that they presume to quarrel with
God; as this check, given to Job, imports.

2. It heightens men's faults, when they are not satisfied to harbor inward
thoughts of secret murmurings and resentments against God (which yet are their
sin) but they presume to utter and speak them out; For, this check imports,
That Job was about to say somewhat unto him.

3. How high soever men's resolutions fly, in their passions; yet they will not
know how to follow them out in cold blood; for, he supposes that Job cannot
teach what to say, nor convince even the Auditory, who were but men, that he
had any valid Arguments or defenses.

4. However men will not be convinced of their irrational presumption, in
offering to plead with God as a party, while they are in their fits of
distemper; yet it may help to calm them, if they consider that no godly men
(though they love them never so well) can see through their way* or approve of
it. For, says he, Teach us what we shall say unto him; intimating, that he
could not furnish them with Arguments, though they were never so willing to
plead for him.

5. Speech to God should be well ordered in all cases, especially, when men
offer to plead with him as a Party; For, in that undertaking, he implies that
men should order Speech. See Jer. 12.1.

6. Such as are sensible of the dark mysteries that are in Gods way and
dispensations, and of their own ignorance, will find it hard to speak to him in
any case, much more to enter the Lists to plead with him; For, both those may
be imported in that darkness, by reason whereof men cannot order their speech.

From v. 20. Learn, 1. Whatever be the precipitancy of passionate men; yet,
sensible men will fear to do any thing that looks like quarrelling, even to
think it or resolve upon it, let alone to act it; For, says he, by way of
abhorrence and fear of the thing, Shall it be told him that I speak? Or, shall
I dare to let any thing flow from me which may give the least intimation of
such a purpose? Where he speaks as one affrighted with the thought of it.

2. It men will dare to run on to plead with God, they do it with no less
hazard, than of being swallowed up with a sight of that Majesty into which they
pry, or with a stroke for their presumption; For, if a man speak, surely he
shall be swallowed up. It is a wonder that God does not plague Murmurers, and
especially his own people, who, in stead of adoring, presume to quarrel that
deep wisdom which is employed about them.

Verse 21. And now men see not the bright light which is in the clouds: but the
wind passes and cleanses them.

22. Fair weather comes out of the North: with God is terrible Majesty.


Here Elihu records yet more works of God, That though now the Sun shined not
brightly (whereby it appears that, as before God had given intimation of his
coming to decide the controversy by the Thunder, v. 1, 2. So now again the air
was darkened, as a preparation to that Whirlwind wherein he appeared, Chap.
38.1.) yet the Winds would scatter the Clouds again, and clear the air, v. 21.
And that the North wind, cleansing the air (as Prove. 25.23.) would bring fair
weather; all which hold out the terrible Majesty of God, v. 22. Where, fair
weather, is called, Gold, in the Original, not only because it is precious, and
worth much Gold, as the Laborers of the ground do find, but because of that
bright shining, like Gold, which accompanies fair weather. And so bright Oil is
called Gold, in the Original, Zech. 4.12. As to Elihu's scope in this, Albeit
some Allegorize on these things, as Arguments why Job should not seek to
dispute with God; Considering, that, as the bright light is not seen till the
winds purge and clear the Sky; so, he could not discern what was in Gods
dealing toward him, till himself should clear it up; As the cold Northwind
purges the air, so Job's exercise tended to purge his dross; And as God had
formerly made him ta^^e of his goodness, so it was necessary now to make him
know the dreadfulness of his Majesty. Yet it is safer to take up the words as
proving that it was full of hazard to offer to plead with God; considering his
terrible Majesty, which shined even in those works, of clouding the Sky and
clearing it again, which did affect Elihu now when he saw them.

Doct. 1. Ignorance of God helps men's presumption, in their seeking to quarrel
him; therefore does he point out what God is, to deter him from that course.

2. Presumptuous Quarrellers of God ought to consider his Majesty, which
(though it be matter of comfort to the godly, walking in his way, yet) ought to
be reverenced by all, and will be terrible to all those who presume to make him
a party: Therefore, Job is here put in mind that with God is terrible Majesty.

3. This Majesty of God may be seen in very obvious things; As here it is
proved by his over-clouding or clearing of the sky. And this is often hinted in
th^s Discourse, to reprove our formality, who forget it so often.

4. However these works of God may ^ff^ct others, yet they will affect those
who are sensible, especially in the present time wherein those works are in
doing; as Elihu is affected, and sees terrible Majesty in it, when now he saw
not the bright light, etc. Hence it is that our forgetfulness of works, when
they are past, is the cause why they are re-acted.

5. The sudden alterations of the air, from light to darkness, and from
darkness to light again, do point out the dreadful Majesty of God, who can soon
over-cloud men's comforts, and restore them again, when he pleases; For, this
sudden change, now, and the expectation of the air's being cleansed again,
proves his Majesty.

6. It does also manifest the Majesty of God, that as he can bring trials out
of that which promises otherwise; so he can bring Mercies out of that which,
otherwise, seems to be disadvantageous: even as fair weather comes out of the
cold North.

Verse 23. Touching the Almighty, we cannot find him out: he is excellent in
power, and in judgment, and in plenty of justice: he will not afflict.

24. Men do therefore fear him: he respects not any that are wise of heart.


In these Verses, we have the Conclusion of Elihu's fourth and last Discourse;
wherein briefly he sums up all that has been said of God, and points out the
use to be made thereof. The Doctrinal part of this Conclusion, v. 23. is, That
God is unsearchably great, infinite in power, judgment and justice (which are
the Heads upon which he has insisted in this Discourse) and will not do wrong
to any in his afflicting them. The practical Inference, v. 24. is, That
considering all this, men should fear him, and not quarrel him; Otherwise, if
any will be so presumptuous, in trusting to their own wit, as to attempt to
quarrel him, he will deal with them as persons, that are contemptible, and not
worthy to be noticed. I may be the more brief in speaking to these Verses, that
they contain only a sum of what he has already said. Only the repeating and
inculcating thereof may show us, in general, That we should frequently meditate
and fix our selves in the certain assurance of what we know of God, and so make
sure that we believe it indeed; and, that we will never need to eat in any
thing we have spoken to the commendation of God; For, here, in the close of
all, he repeats, and avows what he had formerly said.

From v. 23. Learn, 1. It is our duty to dwell upon the study and contemplation
of God, with humble Sobriety; to see God and his hand in every thing, as
Atheists do not; and to see what he says and points out to us, as our Duty and
Lesson, by every thing: F^r, here, it is supposed, that he was seeking out God,
or, how he might know him.

2. Whosoever know God best, will find that he is unsearchable, and that they must
give over that study before they come to an end; For, he closes all his
discourse and instances with this, We (I, or any other who shall essay it)
cannot find him out. Which may let us see, that we ought not to lean (in all
cases, especially in our distempers) to our own verdict concerning God, seeing
he is unsearchable and incomprehensible, and should humble us, and make us keep
a due distance with him.

3. High thoughts of God do become all, and will be entertained by them who are
much conversant with him; therefore, in the close of all this discourse
concerning God, he calls him, the Almighty. So that they who have high thoughts
of him, do prove that they are near him, and do find him to be unsearchable.

4. This is a certain truth, to be fixed in our hearts, that God is infinitely
powerful, to effectuate what he will, to support his people, Isa. 40.28, 29,
etc. and create what they need, Romans 4.17, and to crush whom he will, 1 Cor.
10.22. For, it is a concluded truth, He is excellent in power. Where he does
not content himself to say, that he has power, judgment and justice; but that
he is excellent, great, or, multiplieth, in them. Which not only points out
that those are infinitely and singularly in God, but that Elihu esteemed of
them as excellent. So that it is not enough to acknowledge the Attributes of
God, unless our hearts be aff^cted with the excellency thereof, and they do
look upon them as infinite, when they need proofs of them.

5. Gods power is attended with singular moderation; For, he is excellent in
judgment. See Chap. 23.6. Ps. 99.4. Isa. 57.16. So that we should adore his
greatness, which is sweetened with such condescendence, Ps. 113.5, 6, 7 and
138.6. and should exalt him, in those proofs of his condescendence, as singular
and excellent.

6. As God will not exercise moderation toward any, to their hurt, by favoring
of their lusts; So when he seems to deal in rigor with any, he is excellently
and plentifully just in so doing, whatever we apprehend to the contrary:
Therefore it is added; he is excellent in plenty of justice. See Neh. 9 32, 33.
Dan. 9.7, 8, Here it is that men are very sparing to glorify God, as appears
in their murmurings and complaints. Whence it comes to pass, that men who are
impatient under more cleanly trials, yet soul Rods, dipped (as it were) in
their sin and pollution, wherewith to be exercised, and their rods are
continued till they acknowledge their Iniquity, or, be guilty (in their own
eyes) as the Original has it, Hos. 5.15. And therefore men are to try how they
acknowledge his Justice in sharp dispensations, by their not murmuring, by
being more affected with their sin than their trouble, and seeing the one to
surmount the other, Ezra 9.13. and, by being more solici^ous about deliverance
from sin, than from trouble, Psalm. 80.3, 7, 19.

7. Gods excellent moderation and plentiful Justice do appear in this, that, he
will not afflict; As here is subjoyned. Some do read it, he will not answer,
or, give an account to any; which is a truth; But our Translation renders the
word better in this place. And the meaning is not, that he will never afflict
any; for experience witnesses the contrary; and it were no mercy to us
(considering our sinful frame, and the dross that is in us) to be simply and
altogether free of affliction, far less to be afflicted and he not to do it, if
it were possible such an evil could be without him. But the meaning is, That,
notwithstanding his greatness, he does not willingly afflict, Lam. 3.33. Nor
will he exercise his power to crush, or his Justice to deal rigorously with
them who stoop to him. And when he gives proofs of his power in executing
vengeance, he makes it evident that it is not without cause, Ezekiel. 14.22, 23.

From v. 24. Learn, 1. Whatever men know of God, it should appear in their
practice; As this practical Inference from the former Doctrine does teach. See,
Tit. 1.16.

2. Men's practical improvement of the knowledge of God should appear in their
piety, and turning servants to God; particularly, in seasoning Religion with an
holy fear, and awe of God, and in not quarrelling him or his dispensations;
For, that is the use of all, to fear him, which may import both Piety and
Reverential awe of God in general, and a fear to quarrel him, in particular.

3. Not only Gods greatness, but his condescendence, does contribute to beget
this fear of God; For, men do (or should) therefore fear him, not only because
he is great and powerful, and just, but also because he is excellent in
Judgment, and will not afflict. If he did not thus condescend, Creatures could
never subsist to serve him, but would be cut off by his Justice and Power,
Psalm. 130, 3, 4. And his gracious condescendence cannot but affect honest
hearts with fear and reverence, and make them tremble to think of quarrelling
him, Hos. 3.5.

4. Though many do not make this right use of what they know of God; yet others
will not be wanting to do it, whose practice will be a Witness against them;
therefore he propounds the duty of all, in the practice of some, Men do
therefore fear him.

5. Whatever God manifests of himself, in his Greatness, Justice, or
Condescendence; yet there is so much pride in many, that they will not stoop to
him, nor fear him: For, so is here supposed, that there are who think
themselves wise in heart, in following another course than here is prescribed.

6. This bitter root may be in men's hearts under a crushed condition, or
humble-like carriage; as here it is in their witty heart.

7. Men's conceit of their own wit, and that they are able to censure Gods
dispensations, is the great Fosterer of their pride, and fountain of their
miscarriages, under trouble; therefore, that men are wise in heart, or think
themselves so, is here put for all the miscarriages whereof quarrellers are
guilty.

8. No Condescendence in God affords any ground of encouragement to proud
self-conceited quarrellers; but he will deal with them as contemptible objects,
not worthy to be regarded: For, notwithstanding what has been said of his
Condescendence, yet, he respects not any that are wise in heart, and that is
sad enough, that they are not respected by him, nor enjoy his Favor. See Psalm.
138.6.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Elihu having proceeded thus far in convincing of Job, God begins here to take
the matter off his hand; and as supreme Judge (to whom both Job's friends and
himself had appealed, Chap. 11.5. and 23.3. and elsewhere) does give a final
decision in this Controversy which had been so long in dependence. Wherein,

1. He deals with Job, to convince him of his miscarriages, to Chap. 42.7.
Insisting upon Elihu 's last Argument, taken from his Greatness, which might
let Job see how far he had miscarried in quarrelling him; as shall be more
fully cleared when I come to give a general account of his Scope in his debate
with Job, on v. 4, etc.

2. He decides the principal Controversy betwixt Job and his Friends, in a few
words, Chap. 42.7, 8, 9.

His dealing with Job is divided into two Speeches; By the first whereof,
(contained in Chapter 38, and 39. and 40.1, 2.) he brings him to some sense and
confession of his weakness Chapter 40, 3, 4, 5. And by the second (from Chap. 40.6.
till the end of Chap. 41.) he brings him to a more ample confession of his
Folly, Chap. 42.1, -- 6.

This Chap. may be taken up in these three, First, An Historical transition of
the Writer of the Book; Showing that God did appear and speak in this Cause,
and began first to deal with Job, v. 1.

Secondly, An introduction, premitted by God himself to the dispute with Job;
wherein he checks him for his presumption, v. 2. And provokes him to the
dispute, v. 3.

Thirdly, The Dispute it self, begun in this Chapter; wherein he non-plusseth
him with a number of Questions, Concerning the Earth, v. 4. -- 7. the Sea, v.
8-11. Light and Darkness v. 12-21. Various Meteors, with the Causes thereof, v.
22 -- 38. And concerning his Providence about Beasts and Birds; which is
instanced in the Lion, v. 39, 40. And the Ravens, v. 41. to which many more are
added, throughout the next Chapter.

Verse 1. Then the Lord answered Job out of the Whirlwind, and said.
IN this Verse we have the Historical Transition, wherein is declared that God,
manifesting his glorious presence in a Whirlwind, did by an audible voice speak
to Job. In it, consider,

First, That the Lord answered Job. As for the time when he began to speak, it
is indefinitely expressed, Then the Lord answered; Where in the Original we
have only the Copulative And, which has various significations, to be gathered
from the Circumstances of the place where it is used. And here it imports, that
after Elihu had spoken, God also answered Job. And particularly, it is not
probable, that God brake in and interrupted Elihu; for he does formally
conclude his Discourse, Chap. 37.23, 24. Nor yet that he hindered Job to answer
Elihu; for I find not that Job had any such inclination. Yet it seems God began
to speak immediately after Elihu had closed; and, it may be the Tempest and
Whirlwind (wherein God appeared) being somewhat singular, had made Elihu draw
to a close. It is said, He answered Job; which is an usual phrase in Scripture,
where there has been no precedent question moved, but men's case and condition
is only spoken to. But here this Answer is relative to many Propositions,
formerly made by Job, in his appeals to God, and in his desires that he would
give him an hearing; beside that his complaints and murmurings made God a
party; who therefore appears to plead for himself, and returns a suitable
answer, to his Proposals and Desires.

Doct. 1. Albeit the world be troubled with many controversies and debates, and
that even amongst Gods people; yet it is matter of comfort, that they will once
be all decided: as here, a notable and hot dispute begins to be decided. And
albeit there will still be some differences till the end of the world; yet
(beside what particular decisions, within time, there may be of some
controversies, such as this) the right and wrong that is in all debates will be
one day finally decided.

2. It is proper to God, and his Prerogative, to be the decider of
Controversies; as here he proved in this cause. So that men's decrees in their
own favors, or against others, will not carry it; but all causes, however they
have been once decided amongst men, will be over again decided by God. Which
may warn all to take heed how they judge; and may encourage them who are
wronged by men, Eccl. 3.16, 17. and 5.8.

3. As God is the competent decider of Controversies; so, even in debates among
godly men, he must appear, before they come to a close: As here he appears in
this Cause. For though Elihu's authority was sufficient to convince the parties
quarrelling, in respect tha^ he was employed by God; and spoke clear and
convincing truths; yet he had not Majesty enough, fully to compesce all their
boiling humors, and to overawe these great men against whom he argued. And
though such an extraordinary manifestation may not always be expected to clear
every controversy; his mind being now fully manifested in his written Word,
dispensed by his ordinary Messengers: Yet Gods Spirit must interpose, to
accompany the light which we get from the Word, and to make it effectual, and
calm men's spirits and passions, which are raised by debates.

4. Albeit there be a right and wrong in every controversy debated among men:
Yet, ordinarily, when God comes to decide controversies, he finds cause to
humble both parties: Some for false opinions, and their way in promoting
thereof, and others, for their failings in their way of maintaining truth; for,
here, when God appears, he deals with Job, who had maintained truth, as well
as with the Friends, who had erred. And this had need to be adverted unto by
those who, because they are on truths side in a debate, are not sensible of
their failings in maintaining it.

5. Albeit Godly men discover much dross in the furnace; yet God (according to
his rich mercy and free grace) accounts them worthy to be wa^ted upon, that he
may purge their dross, and recover them out of the snare; Therefore, after that
Jobs Friends had given him over as incorrigible, God will not deal so with him,
but takes pains upon him, though he had indeed miscarried.

6. It is no small proof of Gods Favor to his people, that he pursues them
hotly for their failings, and lets not their folly thrive in their hand;
Therefore, he begins with this sharp Answer to Job, first, because he respected
him; and leaves the censure of the three Friends last.

7. Whatever mercy or favor God intend to any of his people, yet he may
suspend it, till first they be humbled for their folly; nor were it a mercy to
deal otherwise with them: Therefore, also, does he begin with this sharp answer
to Job, to humble him, before he decide the main controversy in his favors.
And godly men will find, that their not being humbled stands in the way of many
mercies, which otherwise they might enjoy. See, Ezekiel. 43.11.

8. This answer had been long desired by Job, and he often complained, that his
desire was not granted; yet it came at last. And albeit it was sharp, yet in
the issue it proved refreshful and comfortable. This teaches, That Gods
delaying long to satisfy the pressing desires of his people, does not say,
that he will never answer; but at last he may appear.

9. Albeit Elihu had spoken so well to the purpose, that he silenced Job, and
put him from answering; yet God will appear also, and answer him himself, that
he may thoroughly convince and humble him. This teaches, That men's prejudices
and distempers are not soon rooted out, and that they may be put to silence,
when yet they are not thoroughly satisfied and humbled.

Secondly, The way and pasture wherein God answered him; It was out of the
Whirlwind, which is a wind involved in a Cloud, and sometimes is so violent,
that it lifts up and drowns very Ships. This was the special sign of his
presence at this time (as before he gave signs of his appearing by the Thunder
and darkness) out of which he formed this audible voice. Thus also the
Whirlwind is a sign of his presence, Ezekiel 1.4. Nah. 1.3. And albeit it be said,
1 Kings 19.11, 12. that God was not in the strong wind, nor Earthquake, nor
Fire; because that, in that appearance to Elijah, he was pleased to make his
mind known in a still small voice, that thereby also he might intimate how the
things foretold would come to pass, not by violent, but by more calm insensible
ways; yet here it was a sign of his presence And this way of his appearing may
be looked upon,

First, In reference to God himself who did appear, and is by this represented
as dreadful: And so it teaches,

1. When men receive any thing as the mind of God, they had need make sure that
it is so indeed; delusions being dangerous, and full of dreadful consequences:
For, this Whirlwind was a sign to assure Job, and the rest, that it was God who
spoke. And though we want these extraordinary evidences now, yet we have a more
sure word of Prophecy, 2 Pet. 1.19.

2. The Declaration of Gods mind and will has not its due weight with men,
unless they take up himself in his great and dreadful Majesty; therefore does
he thus appear, when he is to speak his mind to Job, and his Friends.

3. Such is the stupidity, even of Gods people, that, oftentimes, they do not
ponder Gods Majesty and Authority, unless he make it conspicuous in some signal
way: As here, he does represent himself in this terrible Whirlwind, to them.
Because men do not study Gods authority in his naked word, therefore they are
made to notice it by other means, which they should be careful to improve.

Secondly, This way of Gods appearing may be looked upon with a relation to the
subject matter of the Debate which is to be decided; and as this Whirlwind,
(wherein God appeared) was an involved wind, so thereby may be pointed out,
that this dispensation of Providence toward Job was involved and intricate; as
is also insinuated, v. 2. and in the following Dispute. And it teaches; That
as Gods dealing with his people may be very dark and intricate, for their
humiliation and the exercise of their Faith; So this does not seclude Gods
presence from it, or from them under it: for, his way is in the Whirlwind, Nah.
1 3. He dwells in the thick darkness, 1 Kings 8.12. and has his way in the Sea
and deep waters, Psalm. 77.19.

Thirdly, It may be looked upon with a relation to the issue of the debate;
that God appears very terrible, and begins very sharply, and yet the issue is
sweet. Teaching, that many things may have a good and comfortable issue, which
seem to promise no such thing. A still calm voice may follow the wind,
Earthquake, and Fire, 1 Kings 19. God may do his people good in the latter
end, after he has long humbled and proved them, Deuteronomy. 8.16. And he may give
them meat out of the Bater, and sweetness out of the strong.

Verse 2. Who is this that darkneth Counsel by words without knowledge?
In this and the following Verse, we have Gods Introduction to the following
Dispute, consisting of two Branches. In the first whereof (in this v.) he
checks Job for his presumption; which also intimates that his scope, in the
subsequent debate, i^, not to accuse him of hypocrisy or wickedness, but only
to reprehend him for his rash and presumptuous speaking of God, and of his
Administration of the Affairs of the world. For clearing whereof, Consider,

1. The person here challenged, in this general expression, Who is this, etc.
is Job, and not Elihu. It is true, indeed, that even they who speak most
soundly of God and his Counsels (as Elihu did upon the matter; and therefore
God prosecutes that same Argument which he had propounded) do but obscure and
mar them in the telling, yet this check is directed to Job, whom he answered,
v. 1. and in all the following discourse, and who lays the same fault to his
own charge, Chap. 42.3.

2. F^r the fault reproved, darkning counsel by words without knowledge, we are
not to understand this counsel of Job's own Cause, as if he had obscured it;
but of Gods counsels in his Administrations, of which Job did but babble. And
here it is to be ma^ked, that he does not charge Job with Blasphemy, or
Maliciousness, in this his Miscarriage, but with Ignorance. Nor yet is this
challenge so to be understood, as if God had judged him wholly ignoran^ of
these things; for he had spoken well in general of them: But that he was
inadvertent, and spoke rashly, in his Fits of passion, of that which he could
not comprehend.

3. As for the Reproof it self, Who is this that darkneth, etc. It imp^rts,
that Job did not know himself well when he durst presume so to do; that God did
think meanly and contemptibly of any, in so far as they were thus presumptuous;
and that, in reason it would not have been expected, that holy Job would have
been so rash.

In general, Learn 1. Sincerity and true honesty will not want Gods testimony,
whenever he appears; for, here Job'^ Integrity is approved, in that God does
not question it, now when he appears to give an account of his thoughts
concerning Job. See 1 John 3 21.

2. As even sincere Saints have their own failings; so their being sincere
should not hide the sight of their faults from them, nor will it hide them from
God: For, here God checks Job for that which was his fault indeed. It is a
blessed and right sight of our sincerity, when it hinders not our exercise
about our infirmities.

3. The weakness of the people of God does very frequently appear in their
thoughts and speeches concerning God and his Dispensations, when they are under
affliction; for, herein Job was found faulty. To speak of God and his
Providence, especially in his afflicting of his people, is a Subject too high
and wonderful for us; as Job acknowledges, Chap. 42.3. And hardly, when we are
under Afflictions, can we be guarded by any Cautions, from thinking or speaking
amiss thereof.

4. Albeit God will not indulge his people in their infirmities; yet he is a
most tender and equitable Judge of them: No such Charity is to be expected in
any, as he will have for them; for, he calls not this fault of Job, Blasphemy,
etc (as his Friends had done) when he reproves it, but only a fruit of his
Weakness and Ignorance. So that they who are sensible of their own infirmities,
may very confidently go to him who knows their frame.

In particular, Learn, 1. Gods dispensations in the world are not ordered at
random, but are full of deep wisdom; for, there is Counsel in them. See Psalm.
104.24. And this is our mercy, that such wisdom is employed about us; and that
we may trust it, when we cannot comprehend it.

2. The counsels of God are so deep, in ordering the Affairs of the world, and,
particularly, the Lots of his people, that men are ignorant thereof, and cannot
take them up; for, here men are without knowledge; not only enemies, Psalm.
92.5, 6, 7. Mich. 4.11, 12, 13. but even the godly, Psalm. 73.21, 22. And yet
men are more ready to tax God of Imprudence, than themselves of Ignorance; and
hence flow their manifold mistakes and quarrellings; Psalm. 77.7, 8, 9, 10.

3. Hence it comes to pass, that when men take upon them at any time to speak
of Gods counsels, they may be humbled because they do but obscure them;
especially, when, in their passions under trouble, they do presume to pass a
censure upon them: For, then they darken Counsel, by words without knowledge.
Men may tremble, at any time, when they begin to study Gods dark dispensations,
especially, when themselves are in a Fever: and whatever thoughts may be
boiling in their hearts, yet it is dangerous to vent and speak them.

4. No Honesty in men, nor good intentions, do warrant them to think or speak
amiss of God, nor free them of a fault when they do so; for, Job is checked for
his fault, albeit he was a godly man, and meant well in what he said, yea, and
sometime did speak very highly to the commendation of God. And therefore godly
men should not justify themselves in such failings, as Jon. 4.9. but should
rather mourn for them.

5. Whenever a man does miscarry in his thoughts or expressions of God, or
about his dispensations, he bew^ales ignorance of himself, and that he does not
consider what he is, or what he is doing; for, Who is this? etc. imports, that
Job had forgot himself, and was lifted up in pride. See Romans 9.20.

6. Whoever mistake God, it beseems Saints (who are formed for his praise, Isa.
43.2.) to be tender of his glory; for, Who is this? may reflect also upon Job,
that it was not to be expected that he would have been so foolish and
presumptuous.

7. Whatever men think of themselves, when they dare carp at God, and censure
him; yet God thinks meanly of them in so doing, and will make them know so
much; for, Who is this? does also import, that God thought but meanly of a
person in such a frame, and following such a course. His esteem of th^se who
humbly stoop to him, is great, but he knows the proud afar off, Psalm. 138.6.
And the contentio^s will gain nothing at his hand.

Verse 3. Gird up now thy loins like a man; for I will demand of thee, and
answer thou me.
In the second branch of the Introduction, God provokes Job to the Dispute,
upon this subject; and shows him, that since he was so bold, as to pass his
censure upon his deep Counsels, and to desire to debate with him, he was now
content to speak for himself. Here, Consider,

1. The provocation to the Dispute, Gird up thy loins like a man. Where he
alludes to the Custom of those Countries, where people had long Garments, which
they girded up, with a Girdle fastened about their Loins, when they went about
any work, or on a Journey. And the meaning of this provocation here, is only
this; That God would have him fit himself for the Dispute, and if he had any
thing to say, let him take courage and produce it. Yet herein also an Irony is
couched, and God indirectly intimates, that he little considered what he did,
when he sought to enter the Lists with him.

2. The terms of the Dispute, I will demand of thee, and answer thou me, or,
make me know, and inform me. Where he alludes to Job's own Offer, that, if God
would debate the Cause with him, he should have Liberty to choose the Weapons,
and to be either Plaintiff or Defendant, as he pleased, Chap. ^3.22. Here God
accepts the Offer, and chooses to be Plaintiff, or Pursuer and Questioner; and
leaves it to Job, to give a proof of his abilities, in answering, and
discovering whether he had knowledge in all those things he shall propound to
him, which, in effect (as the sequel clears) contains an Assertion, that,
in stead of his being able to inform God, God could easily puzzle and nonplus
him.

From this v. Learn, 1. General Convictions and Challenges will not do men
good, unless they be particularly instructed, and born in upon them; therefore
does God subjoin this Dispute, to that general Reproof, v. 2.

2. God will not suffer Presumption, especially in his people, to pass without
a reproof and check; as here, he gives a check to Job's presumption, by this
indirect reflection, upon his attempt to dispute with him.

3. God is not bound to give any account of his matters; far less is he bound
to stand at our Bar, and defend himself; till man once prove that he is a
competent Judge of his Actions, and that he has ability and knowledge to
comprehend them: Therefore, he declines to turn an Answer (as Job had also
offered) for his di^pensations, or to vindicate them from Job's exceptions,
till Job first answer him, and prove that he has ability to pronounce
righteous Judgment.

4. Albeit God be great, and man be not his equal; yet he condescends to give
him fair play, and will not overthrow any right he has, by his might and
power: For, by this invitation, Gird up now thy loins like a man, he offers him
free liberty to take courage, and to say all he can.

5. How wise or experienced soever a man be, or seem to be; yet God is able to
puzzle and confound him; for, if he demand, man cannot answer. And so Job
himself thought in cold blood, Chap. 9.3.

6. When all things are well considered, man will be found to be ridiculous, in
his attempts to grapple with God; for, so much does the scope of this
Proposition and provocation import, that God, by accepting Job's offer, would
discover his folly in it.

Verse 4. Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth? declare, if
thou have understanding.

5. Who has laid the measures thereof, if thou know? or who has stretched
the line upon it?

6. Whereupon are the foundations thereof fastened? or who laid the Cornerstone
thereof?

7. When the morning-stars sang together, and all the Sons of God shouted for
joy.


Follows the Dispute it self, which is begun in this Chapter. And for taking
up of Gods scope in deciding of this quarrel betwixt himself and Job, it will
be necessary (as formerly I have done upon the Dispute betwixt Job and his
Friends, and upon Elihu's Discourses) to premit a few things, which may serve
as a Key to open up the following Discourses. And,

1. If we speak of hi^ scope Negatively, He does not at all touch upon that
which Job's Friends had alleged, of his Wickedness or Hypocrisy. But, though
he find faults in his way, yet he does no^ condemn him, as a grace less man*
Albeit none know us so well as God does; yet our dearest godly friends will not
be so tender and charitable as he is, who will not quench a smoking fl^x, when
it is surrounded with tentations and infirmities.

2. If we speak of his scope positively, he does insist (at least) upon a part
of what Elihu, assisted by his Spirit, had spoken, and so confirms it; though
he speak of those Subjects in a more lofty style. And this intimates, how much
we may be encouraged to lean to what his Servants speak according to the Word,
and how confidently his Servants may publish it; seeing God, whenever he
appears, will speak and judge accordingly, and it is according to the Gospel
that God will judge the secrets of men, Romans 2.16. See also, John 12.48.

3. Albeit he thus insist on Elihu's Discourse; yet, whereas Elihu had urged
diverse Arguments, taken from Gods Justice, man's sinfulness, and the failings of
the most Godly, etc. and had spoken sharply to Job in handling of them: God
insists only upon that one Argument which Elihu had last spoken to, taken from
his Dominion, Power, and Wisdom, and his unsearchable Greatness which shines in
his common and obvious Works. This he pitcheth upon, not because the rest of
Elihu's Arguments were unsound; but, partly, he had sent Elihu before to use
that needful sharpness, that when himself appears, he might give proof of what
he is indeed, even not only a tender regarder of true Grace, though it be
surrounded with faults and infirmities, but more tender and meek, in reproving
the faults of his own Children, than the tenderest of Saints, such as Elihu
was. Partly, to show, that when men once stoop to Gods greatness, it will both
cure other distempers and evils, and God will not hotly pursue them for them;
for a stooping mind gains much at Gods hand.

4. His scope in demonstrating his greatness by his works, is, not so much to
prove any particular Conclusion (as some do gather) or to evince that men need
not be anxious, seeing all things are well ordered by God, and he cared for m^n
before ever Job had a being; But (as may be gathered from Chap. 40.2, 8. and
41.10, 11.) to prove his Sovereignty, and that it ought not to be quarrelled,
and his eternal Power and Wisdom, which ought to be adored. And, in sum, it
points at this, That however Job carped at Gods dispensations; yet his works
demonstrate that there is nothing in Job like his Eternity, as being but of
yesterday; nothing like his Knowledge, as being but an Ignorant; nothing like
his Power, as being but a weak man; and nothing like his Wisdom and Providence,
as being witless and without skill. And therefore it was folly for a Worm of
yesterday, who is also so weak, witless, and ignorant, to challenge any thing
in Gods Dispensations, and not to submit to his Sovereignty. And this God makes
use of as his only Argument, to show, That this study of God is the best way to
solve all doubts about his Dispensations, and an effectual mean to cause men
keep that due distance which should be betwixt God and the Creature, and which
is often encroached upon by their complaints. And till we submit to his
Sovereignty and infinite Wisdom in all that he does, there is no reason that we
should get another more comfortable account of our Lot.

5. This his Argument he confirms by several Instances taken from his common
works of Creation and Providence, and poseth Job with Questions about them,
every one of which argues Majesty and Wisdom in God, who works and
understands all these things, and Ignorance and Weakness in Job. This points
out, partly, how unquestionable the evidences of the wisdom and greatness of
God are, seeing they shine in what is most obvious and ordinary. Partly, A
right use of Physiology, or the study of the works of Nature; which is, to know
God by them, and to adore him therein Partly, how well this speaks to Job's
case, by an Argument from the less to the more: for if Wisdom ^hine in common
things, made for man's use, much more in guiding ^f man himself, as, 1 Cor. 9.9,
10. And if Job could not comprehend his counsel in common things, but would be
non-pluffed at every step; and was neither Counselor nor Assi^tant to God, in
making and ordering of them: How much less could he be able to comprehend what
he was doing about himself, and his deep counsels in that singular
dispensation, that he should thus presume to carp and quarrel? If he could not
see through all that is in the vicissitude of day and night, in an Hawk, Eagle,
Horse, etc. How could he know what God intended by his trial, and that he was
about to make him a Mirror to all ages, and a comfortable Precedent to all
afflicted Saints?

6. Albeit this truth was conspicuous in any one Instance; yet he helps them
upon Job, as Elihu had done before, and all his Discourse runs upon these
Instances: To show, not only how many Instances and Witnesses God has for him;
but how incapable we are to understand and take up what God reveals of himself,
and how unwilling to be convinced of our Mistakes concerning him. For all Job's
silence, while Elihu spoke, is not yet enough. And after God has brought him
to confess his weakness, Chap. 40.4, 5. He yet insists further, till he come a
further length, Chap. 42.1, 2, etc.

This being the general scope of all the ensuing Dispute (beside what may be
gathered from any of the particular Instances, suitable to Job's case) I proceed
to speak to the Instances in particular, wherein those Attributes of God do
shine. And in these Verses, we have the first Instance, of the Earth, and the
founding and forming thereof. Which may be understood of the whole Globe of
Earth and Water, which was formed on the first day, Genesis 1.1, 2. Or rather
(seeing he speaks afterward of the Sea, by it self, v. 8.) of the dry land,
which he founded and established upon, (or, beside) the Seas and Floods, Psalm.
24.2. to make up one Globe with it; which was the work of the third day, Genesis
1.9. In this Instance, three things are remarkable.

First, That Job was not when God wrought this. That Question, v. 4. imports,
that he who is but of yesterday, and a bit of Clay, and a parcel of the dust of
the earth, was far to seek when God made the whole of it; nor can he give any
account where he was then, or what parcel of that dust he was made of. So that
here, the eternity of God, and his being before the Earth, as the Maker
thereof, is compared with Job's short life, to silence his carping.

Doct. 1. The Eternity of God proves the wisdom of his Counsels, and man's being
but of yesterday, speaks much against his presumptuous censuring of God; for,
he lets Job see that he was not old enough to have prescribed unto him, and
that he should rather be humbled for his Ignorance, being but a new Upstart.

2. Albeit those things which might check men's presumption be obvious and
common; yet the people of God, in their fits, do but little mind them, and
improve them less; for, these Questions serve to rouse him up to consider these
things, which he little pondered.

3. Gods forming of the Earth before we were, may also teach, That the world
was well guided before we came into it; and therefore, there is no reason that
our complaints, in our generation, should be heard, or that God should be
guided by our advice in ordering of it; for as he had no Counselor nor
Companion in creating of the world, so he will have none in governing of it.

4. This Instance (with the other particulars) does also demonstrate, That God,
who had a care to create and provide a world for man, before he came into it,
is not to be suspected, that he will guide him ill, after he has brought him
into it.

Secondly, That the work it self, which was wrought before Job was, sp^eks for
it self to the commendation of God. Where, v. 4, 5, 6. He speaks of the Earth,
as of a stately Fabric, or, Building; desiring Job to give an account, how and
whereupon the Foundations thereof are laid? or, how it is made to rest upon its
Center, and the whole Globe of Earth and Water made to hang in the Air, as if
it leaned upon a foundation, Psalm. 104.5. Prove. 30.4. Who laid the measures
thereof? in bounding its Circumference and Diameter; or stretched a Line upon
it? (as Workmen do upon their building) giving it such a form and dimensions,
and shaping it out in Hills, Valleys, etc. that so it might be furnished with
receptacles and channells for the Waters, and might keep an exact proportion
with the rest of the Elements; And who laid the Cornerstone thereof? in
compacting it, and making it stick together. By all which Questions, God would
first, point out, that Job ought co consider that it was He, and only He, that
did all this. Next, that he was bound to see so much of him in this, as might
silence all his Complaints about his own Condition. And so this whole purpose
may be taken up in this one Observation, That as God is the Founder and Framer
of the Earth; so, this work demonstrates much of his Glory, and much which may
contribute to clear other cases; Hence, it is not only spoken of here, as a
stately Fabric, commending the Architector, but elsewhere it is spoken of as
matter of Gods Praise, Psa. 104.5. and frequently. In Scripture we find use
made of this Instance, to prove that the Earth, and all things therein, are at
Gods disposal, that so his people may trust his Providence, Psalm. 24.1, 2. To
prove Gods Sovereign dominion, to dispose of all things, and to crush all that
shall oppose him, Psalm. 23.1. And to be matter of fear and trembling to all, 1 Chronicles. 16.30. And matter of encouragement to the godly, Isa. 45.17, 18, 19.
More particularly, as to the present scope, this Instance may point out,

1. If there be more of God shining in what he has already wrought, than men
can take up; how much less are they able to dive into what is to come, which
was Job's case?

2. As the power of God has compacted this Mass of Earth and Water into one
Globe, as by a Cornerstone, and makes it hang in the Air, as if it had
foundations (or, Sockets, as the Word is) to support it; So he is able to
uphold Saints in as deep distresses as Job was under, Psalm. 119.89, 90, 91, 92.
And as support is enough, 1 Cor. 10.13. So, though, sometimes, no small power
can promise and assure us of support; yet, this power of God can assure it,
Isa. 40.28. See, 2 Cor. 4.8, 9.

3. If God have framed the earth in so fit a proportion and symmetry; who dare
call any of his other works crooked? seeing every thing is beautiful in its
season, Gal. 3.11.

4. As the beauty and symmetry of the earth does not consist in its being
uniform in shape and figure, but in variety of hill and valleys, waters and dry
places, etc. So the beauty of Gods Dispensations toward his people consists
also in a variety.

Thirdly, This work is further commended from the praise given to God at the
working thereof, v. 7. When the Morning-stars, and Sons of God sang and shouted
for joy. Where, albeit it be true, that the Stars and all the Celestial bodies
do, in their own kind, glorify God their Maker, Psalm. 19.1. and 148. Yet here
the Morning stars cannot be taken literally. For the stars were created on the
fourth day, Genesis 1.16. and therefore were not in being at the founding of the
earth, whether on the first or third day. And therefore I conceive that the
latter Phrase, here, expounds the former; and that these Sons of God, or,
Angels (as Chap. 1.6.) are those Morning-stars, or, pure and bright Spirits,
who in the Morning of the Creation (as Birds at the Break of day) resounded the
praise of the Creator, and applauded that testimony of God, so often repeated,
that all his works were good.

Here we may consider, First, Some hint of the time of the Creation of Angels,
which is not mentioned in the Book of Genesis; Namely, that they were created
on the first day with Heaven, the place of their habitation (and not long
before; for to be before the creating of the World, and to be eternal, is all
one in Scripture Language) for here when the Earth is founded, either on the
first day (God having proceeded from creating of the Heavens, to make the
Earth; and from what was pure and simple, such as Angels, to what is material,
or compounded) or on the third day, they have a being, and are singing.
However, the silence of the Scriptures in this, and many the like things, may
give a check to men's curiosity in divine matters.

Secondly, We have an hint of the nature of Angels; not only that they are Sons
of God (of which, see, on Chap. 1.6.) but Stars, and bright Morning-stars; so
many Lucifers and Phosphorus's (as is also said of the glorious King of
Babylon, Isa. 14.12.) for bright purity and resplendent glory. Which is an
intimation what Saints shall one day be, when they shall be like Angels, Mat.
22.30. See Dan. 12.3. Mat. 13.43.

Thirdly, We have some account of their work, Singing together, and shouting
for joy, rejoicing in, and commending the Creator. Whence we may gather,

1. What is the end for which all things were created; even that God might get
praise, and his Creatures might pay that Rent to him which is called for,
especially, from the Church, Psalm. 65.1. Isa. 43.21.

2. What their work is who are presently blessed with God; even singing and
shouting for joy. They obtain joy and gladness, and sighing and sorrow will
flee away.

3. We may also hence gather a commendation of the work of Praise, in that they
who are perfect, delight in it; and it is a work not to be wearied of, for they
began the Song at that morning, and do continue it still, Psalm. 148.3. And will
never give it over throughout all eternity.

4. Hence, we may also gather a special encouragement to praise, seeing we have
so noble Assistants and Companions as Angels, yea and all the Creation, Psa.
148.

But further, if we look to the scope here, this may speak several things in
reference to Job's case, and such as may be in a like case with him. As,

1. If Angels, who had a bring at the founding of the Earth, were not assisting
to God, by Counsel or Action, but were only praising and commending Spectators;
how much less should Job (who had not a being then) think to have any hand in
ordering Gods Affairs? To aspire to this, is to seek to be higher than is
competent to any Creature; seeing very Angels did not presume to seek after it.

2. If Angels, who had a being then, did praise Gods work, and if they and all
other Creatures do still sound forth his praise; what is Job, a new upstart,
that he should presume to murmr? and, if he had been present then, durst he
have contradicted the Verdict of those sweet Singers? Murmurers are great
Monsters among the other Creatures, and a String out of tune in that sweet
melodious Concent. It were no wonder if all the Creatures be enemies to such
repiners, as the Earth proved to Corah, Dathan and Abiram; And man should be
ashamed to lie behind in this work, seeing he should be Mouth to all the
inferior Creatures, to utter their Praises to God.

3. If Angels could only praise God, but not give any recompense to him; then
Job could not be any way so profitable to God, as might give him ground to
complain that he was not guided to his own mind.

4. If Angels do thus praise; we should seek to do his will on earth, as it is
in heaven.

Verse 8. Or who shut up the Sea with doors, when it brake forth, as if it had
issued out of the womb?

9. When I made the Cloud the garment thereof, and thick darkness a swaddling
band for it,

10. And brake up for it my decreed place, and set bars and doors,

11. And said, Hitherto shall thou come, but no further: and here shall thy
proud waves be stayed.


The second Instance (in these Verses) is the Sea, which God not only made, but
divided it from the Earth on the third day, Genesis 1.9, etc. And the Question
concerning this work of God is repeated from the former Instance, that he might
remember, not only that God wrought it, but that much of him may be seen in it;
and therefore it is propounded as matter of his praise, Psalm. 104.6, 7, 8, 9.
In this Instance, Consider,

First, A general Proposition concerning this work of God, v. 8. That God
hemmed it in, when at its first Creation, it violently brake forth (as a Child
breaks forth at the birth) and overflowed the earth, Psalm. 104.6.

Doct. 1. God has many Witnesses for him, and demonstrations of his power and
glory in the world; so that wherever we turn us, they are not wanting: For,
here is another Instance added to the former.

2. Much of God is to be seen in the Sea; as here we are taught So that
Travelers may see his wonders there, Psalm. 107.23, 24.

3. The bounding of the Sea is a mighty work of God, and a clear demonstration
of his Power and Providence in overruling of trouble, and bounding it; for,
here this Instance is pointed out to Job, that God shut up the sea with doors,
to silence his quarrelling that he was exposed to overwhelming trouble without
remedy. See Psalm. 65.7.

4. Mercies are so much the sweeter, that sometime we are made to taste of a
contrary Lot; for, here it is marked that the Sea brake forth, and overflowed
all, before it was shut up with doors, that the remembrance thereof may
heighten the mercy of his bounding of it.

5. Neither the violent extremity of our condition, nor want of power in us,
will be able to obstruct Gods power in restraining of trouble, when he
pleases; so much is intimated in this Instance, where the Sea violently brake
forth, as a Child at the birth, as if it had issued out of the womb; there was
no more power in Nature to hinder it, than a Woman is able to hinder her pangs,
or retain the fruit of her womb when it is ripe; and yet it was shut up with
doors. Thus we find Saints believing and glorying in God, even though the
course of Nature should be overturned, Psalm. 46.1, 2, etc. Hab. 3.17, 18.

6. As there is no exercise of the people of God, but there is some moderation
in it; so that Gods hand is about their trouble, and that he does somewhat
restrain it, is sufficient to silence their quarrellings: As Job is here taught
by this Instance, of the raging, and yet bounded, Sea.

Secondly, An Amplification of this Proposition; wherein is contained,

1. An account of his Providence about the Sea, before he bounded it, v. 9.
Where he insists in that Metaphor, v. 8. of a newborn Infant, and shows how
he covered, and environed it with a Cloud and thick darkness, as with clothes
and swaddling bands. Which is not to be understood of these thick and dark
vapors which are daily drawn out of the Sea by the Sun, and whereby it is (not
only sometime covered, but) lessened, and kept from immoderate swelling; but of
that darkness, Gen: 1.2. which at first was the only bounds set to it.

Doct. 1. Every step of the work of Creation is much worthy to be marked,
however we pass it lightly; as here this passage, concerning the cloud and
thick darkness, is marked for special use, and the Apostle gathers yet more
from it, 2 Cor. 4.6.

2. Even that which is dark and confused in it self, is a bright demonstration
of the Glory of God; as here; this cloud and thick darkness, covering the Sea,
is propounded as a Document to Job.

3. It speaks much to the commendation of God, that he brings much out of that
which is confused and little promising; as here, out of this dark and huddled
up Mass, he brings out a Sea and Dry Land, and of an unruly Sea, bounded only
by darkness, he makes a bounded gathering of waters.

4. It speaks much also to the commendation of God, that the greatest of
difficulties are nothing to him; for, the very Sea is to him as an Infant in
its swaddling clothes.

5. It does also commend God, and encourage us, that his Creatures fall under
his care; as here the Sea is cherished, like a little Infant, by the thick
Darkness.

2. An account of his bounding of the Sea, after that, in the first moment of
Creation, it had been swadled up in thick darkness, and that he provided a
place fit for it, bounding it by the Hills and Shore, and confining it there by
his Decree, v. 10, 11.

Doct. 1. The mercy of Gods bounding and limiting of the Sea (as a Document
that he can set bounds to trouble) is worthy of our serious and second
thoughts; therefore is it here spoken of again, after what he had said, v 8.
The overflowing of the Sea at some times, and in some places, tells what a
mercy this is. And so the overflowing of trouble upon some, and at some times,
may tell themselves and others, what a mercy it is that it is not so always,
and with every one.

2. We must not measure what God will make of our condition, by what it may be
at some time; for, here, after the Sea overflowed all, and was only bounded
with darkness, this further bounding comes.

3. Every thing has its place and bounds assigned by God; as here the Sea has
its decreed place, with Bars and Doors; and every one of us must be content
with our Lot.

4. The Decree and Determination of God is sufficient to limit and set bounds
to what is most impetuous; for the place of the Sea has therefore Bars and
Doors, because it is its decreed place, or, decree, which he brake up, or,
established, by his word of command, upon the third day of the Creation.

5. When God has pronounced the word, a little mean will serve the turn; for,
when he said, Hitherto shall thou come, but no further, the Sea stoops, and is
hemmed in by a low sandy shore.

6. The loftiness and terribleness of Difficulties will not make void Gods
purposes; for, even proud waves, when they rage most, will be stayed there
where God appoints.

Verse 12. Have thou commanded the morning since thy days? and caused the
dayspring to know his place,

13. That it might take hold of the ends of the earth, that the wicked might be
shaken out of it?

14. It is turned as clay to the Seal, and they stand as a garment.

15. And from the wicked their light is withholden, and the high arm shall be
broken.


The third Instance is, Light and Darkness; to which all may be referred that
is recorded to v. 22. in this order.

1. He speaks of light, to v. 16.

2. Of Darkness, or the places thereof, to v. 19.

3. Of Light and Darkness, and their places, conjunctly, to v. 22. For the
first, in these Verses, we may take it up in these Particulars,

First, A Proposition, v. 12. That God, and not Job, has the command of the
light; not only to command it every morning to succeed after darkness, but to
order it every day to arise in its proper place; which does alter every day,
according as the day shortneth or lengthneth; so that the Sun arises still in
diverse places successively: And this Instance does speak very fitly to the
matter of Consolation and Deliverance, which Job missed so much, and which in
Scripture are so frequently compared to the morning light. See, Hos. 6.3. Luke
1.48.

Doct. 1. It is not one piece of Gods works only, but every piece, and every
days work, that speaks much of him; for, here, after the former Instances, he
proceeds to another work, which proves the same Conclusion. The Field of
Creation and Providence is so rich, that even Angels feed on it, Isa. 6.3. And
Saints are refreshed by it, Psalm. 104.24, 33, 34. and find sweet matter of
praise there, Psalm. 148. And much more when they ascend up from those, to
consider of spiritual things, Psalm. 19 1-7. and 147.15-19 And if the sight of
those works leave not very Pagans without a witness, Acts 14.17. Much more are
we inexcusable, if we improve them not.

2. Not only Gods making of all things, but his guiding of what he has made,
does demonstrate and show forth his Glory; as here, that he commands the
morning every day, does preach much of him. We should see that same beauty in
every providential dispensation which we see in the Creation; and that the same
God, who made all things good, Genesis 1. does guide all well, as is said of
Christ, Mark 7.37. See Psalm. 23.6, and 25.10. Romans 8.28 Neh. 9.33. And we may
as well accuse him for his works of Creation, as quarrel his Providence.

3. In particular, As Gods creating of the Light, so his guiding thereof, is a
glorious work, Psalm. 19 4, 5. and 136.7, 8, 9. And does demonstrate, not only
that we should see much of him in it, in causing the light dispel Darkness; but
that we should remember, that the light of Consolation and Deliverance is in
his hand, and at his disposal, and not ours: For, hereby does he silence Job's
quarrellings; Have thou commanded the morning, etc. Or, whether should it be at
thy disposal or mine? or which of us can dispense it best, and most wisely?
From which we may gather, partly, That he, who commands light to shine out of
darkness, has the light of needful Consolation and Deliverance in his hand;
and that is much that it is not impossible for him to afford it when he
pleases, Dan. 3.17. Partly, that it is a mercy it is in his hand, and not in
ours; for we could not dispense it well, but would surfeit upon it.

4. It may humble man in his quarrellings, that not only much has been well
done and guided before he was; but that he dare not presume to arrogate to
himself the guiding of many things that come to pass even in his own time;
whereby he may know how base he is; and that since he must be guided by God,
and not be a guider in his ordinary enjoyments, there is no reason why he
should not stoop in other things: Therefore, lest Job might object, that he
could not have an hand in ordering these things formerly instanced, v. ^, 8. as
being done before he was; God urges him further with this Instance, Have thou
commanded the Morning since thy days? To show that if, even in his own time, he
had not so much as the power of lengthening or shortning of one day, much less
should he presume or desire to guide other things. And if we press this
Instance more particularly, with an eye to the scope, it imports,

1. Let man be never so anxious and solicitous, yet he cannot guide and order
all that concerns him. As here he could not alter the light of the day, nor
will his anxiety avail him, Mat. 6.27.

2. God will not share his Dominion with man, he will either guide all, or
nothing; he will either have all our care cast upon him, 1 Pet. 5.7. or none of
it. And if there be any thing wherein we presume to prescribe to him, he may
justly put us to care for all that concerns us; were it even to order the Light
which we need, when it should come and shine.

3. That Job could let God order and guide common things, such as the light of
the day, etc. without him, and will not quarrel God for longer or shorter,
colder or hotter days; but he will not pay him that submission in his own
particular concernments. Which shows, That our Self-love is the cause of all
our quarrellings; God, by our own confession, does still well enough, till it
come to our particular, and we can construe well of he lot of any other, but
not of our own, which is an evil for which we ought to be humbled.

Doct. 5. It is an useful study to ponder how the Lord has ordered a variety
and vicissitude in time, and that Light should succeed Darkness; for, the
morning light, and dayspring import so much here: And by this, the Lord would
teach us, to expect changes, and not to settle upon fl^eting time, for we will
find it but vanity, he would have us seeing a beauty in every thing, in its
time, Eccl. 3.11. (as the darkness of the night has i^s own usefulness, as
well as the light of the day;) and would teach his people not to cast away
their confidence in a dark hour, as if a morning would never succeed to a dark
night. See, Psalm. 71.16, 8.

6. It is also to be observed, that this vicissitude, and the coming of light
after darkness, is at Gods command, not at our disposal nor any others, nor to
be impeded when he will have it come; for, he commands the morning, and
causes the dayspring to know its place. All things are a^ his disposal, so
that till he command, nothing will be effectual, but we may look for peace, and
behold trouble, Jer. 14 19. And when he commands, nothing will hinder; neither
h^s peoples fears, nor their enemies, will be able to obstruct their mercies,
Isa. 49, 13, 14, 15, 24, 25.

7. We should also observe, that God will keep no fixed course in things below,
save in exercising a constant variety; for, as the dayspring has its various
places, and every day is shorter or longer than another, and the Sun rises not
still at the same place in our Horizon; so are his other dispensations various.
And he is pleased to alter them, that we may be preserved from formality, that
we may get variety of Experiences, and that our dependence may be entirely upon
him. Only as long nights are recompensed with long days at another time, and
cold with heat, so will it prove with the people of God, Psalm. 90.15.

Secondly, This work of God, in sending of the morning-light, is further
commended, v. 13. from the effects.

1. That it quickly spreads to the ends (or, wings and extremities) of the
earth; not absolutely of all the earth (for then it should be no night any
where, whenever this light shines, and seeing it still shines in some place,
there should be no night at all) but only of that part of the earth, which is
within the compass of that Horizon where this light arises; where in a moment
it spreads far and near, enlightening the most remote parts.

2. That hereby the wicked are shaken out of it; that is, out of the earth, by
being discovered and punished (where the phrase may allude to that ancient
practice of executing judgment in the morning, Jer. 21.12.) Or, out of that
part of the earth where the light appears (and so they are shaken out of the
light, as some understand it) by being made to flee, and seek to darkness, Job.
24.13.17. John 3.20. For the first effect; beside the general observation, That
the Glory of God shines in this work, in that he gives the morning these
wings, whereby it spreads so quickly; Psalm. 139.9. We may further gather, in
reference to the scope,

1. If God communicate so rich a common benefit to the earth, and wicked men in
it, Mat. 5.45. How little cause have Saints to quarrel his special
dispensations toward them?

2. God can very quickly and unexpectedly transmit comfort to his Children, as
they need it; as the morning light does quickly take hold of the ends of the
earth. From the second effect, Learn,

1. Whatever wicked men seem to gain by their impiety, yet they have but a poor
trade of it; as here is supposed.

2. Whatever Consolations God dispenses, yet they are not allowed on the
wicked; for, this mercy, of the light, is not allowed to be comfortable to them.

3. Albeit some wicked men may be so impudent, as to avow their sin in the open
light; yet, generally, sinners want not their own fears and horrors to torment
them; and, however, they are obnoxious to hazards; for, the light is a terror
to them, and they are shaken out of it, or out of the earth, by a violent
stroke of Justice, or by the violent agitations of their own disquieted minds.

4. In reference to the scope, this may teach, That, as the light dissipates
darkness, contributes to the shaking out of wicked men, and drives wild beasts
to their dens, Psalm. 104.22. So whenever God is pleased to lift up the light of
his countenance, that will dispel all the tentations and fears of Saints, that
they will not appear. Which if Job had hoped for, he might have seen cause to
forbear his quarrelling.

Thirdly, These effects of the morning-light are further enlarged and amplified
in the two following verses; And,

1. The lights spreading of it self, is further amplified, v. 14. from this,
That the earth, which by darkness loses its luster, as to our sense (for then
we cannot discern it) does by the morning-light recover (as to our sense) a new
luster, as if Clay were new stamped, and received a new impression by a Seal;
and as if the earth were decked with a new garment, and variety of Ornaments.
See, Mat. 6.28, 29. Psalm. 104. -- 30.

Doct. 1. Our Mercies are, oft-times, taken out of our sight, that we may learn
to prize them; as darkness turns the earth ^o be as it were without form and
shape.

2. Mercies are not always lost when they disappear, and are taken out of our
sight; as the earth loses not that real luster which it has in the day,
though want of light hide it from our sight.

3. After Mercies seem to be lost and gone, they may yet be recovered and
restored; as the earth recovers its beauty, and is seen in its luster, by the
morning light.

4. God exercises men with variety of changes in their condition, that their
mercies may have a new luster, when they are restored to them; as here, the
earth appears every morning, as if it had got a new stamp, and new ornaments;
and so should we look upon the earth, and all our other mercies, every day,
Lam. 3.22, 23.

5. It may encourage Saints to wait on God in dark times, seeing those will but
contribute to make their mercies more sweet unto them, when they are restored;
for, so much is intimated unto Job by this Instance.

2. That which befalls the wicked is amplified v. 15. That their light shall be
withholden, not only by their being put to flee into corners, but by their
being deprived of all light of comfort in their evil way; and of the light of
Life, when Magistrates shall punish them, and break their lofty and insolent
power, as is added in the end of the v. Whence Learn,

1. It is much and seriously to be studied, how little allowance the wicked
have to share in these comforts which are allowed on others; therefore is this
again repeated, how prejudicial the common mercy of light proves to the wicked.

2. All the light, of comfort or life, that wicked men have, is in hazard; for,
they lie under the lash, of having their light withholden.

3. The mercies of wicked men are nothing the surer, that they have
probabilities that they shall continue; for, their light shall be withholden,
and intercepted.

4. Men that are proud and insolent in the exercise of their power, may expect
to be crushed; for, the high arm shall be broken.

5. It is useful to the godly to study the Lot of the wicked, that they may be
humbled, and excited to walk tenderly; therefore is this inculcated so much
upon Job, that he may beware of the wickeds pranks, which make the light sad
and dreadful to them, and might humble him, now when God appeared.

Verse 16. Have thou entered into the Springs of the Sea? or have thou walked in
the search of the depth?

17. Have the gates of death been opened unto thee? or have thou seen the doors
of the shadow of death?

18. Have thou perceived the breadth of the Earth? Declare if thou know it
all.


As in the former Verses, God had informed Job how little command or skill he
had of the light; so here, he proceeds to speak of the opposite darkness,
(which may allude somewhat to Gods dark dispensation toward him;) and shows
that he was as little acquainted with the places of darkness; such as, the
springs (or weeping sources, which drop continually) of the Sea, into which he
had never entered, and the depth, in the search whereof he had never traveled,
v. 16. Also, the gates of death, or, the inferior parts of the earth, where
the dead are kept, and where none can come living; and the approach whereunto
casts the shadow of death upon men, or would affright them with deadly horror.
Hither Job had never come, v. 17. Yea, there are things which are lightsom and
visible in themselves, and yet are dark to him, as never seen by him; such as,
the breadth of the earth (or, the circumference thereof, which is spoken of
according as it is represented to our sense, not round but broad) which,
however Geometers guess at it, yet, they cannot tell it exactly, nor give a
reason why it is not broader or narrower; far less could Job, or any man else,
travel over it all himself, that he might know it all, or, all its dimensions,
by ocular inspection, or know what is in doing through the wide world; but he
would find many a Remora in that journey, v. 18.

By this Instance is pointed out,

1. That as light, so darkness also is ordered by God, and known to him; for,
these Questions, propounded to Job, do intimate, that God knew all those
things, and if Job were ignorant of them, it did not beseem him to compete with
God as he did. See, Psalm. 139.11, 12.

2. Man is ignorant and soon put to a nonplus in many things; many things are
shut up in darkness from him, as the springs and depth of the Sea, and the
Gates of death, and of the shadow of death; and many things are visible, which
yet he cannot reach; as the breadth of the earth, all of it: For, so much do
these Questions import. So that man should be sensible of his Ignorance, and
not presume to measure all by his skill, nor mistake, albeit many things be in
the dark to him.

3. Not only does God order and know the places of darkness; but even in
darkness, and what is unaccessible, his Glory does shine, no less than in what
is visible: For, so much does this Instance import, the scope whereof (as of
all the rest) is to convince Job of the Glory and Majesty of God. From which,
in reference to the scope, and to Job's present case, we may further gather,

1. Gods glory shines in his works, no less in what is hid, than in what is
visible to us.

2. Hence, in dark cases, we must not think all is wrong, because we cannot
comprehend them, and what is in them; for, he brings deep things out of
darkness.

3. We should, in stead of quarrelling, rather see cause to adore him who
employs deep and unsearchable wisdom about us; so that it is as easy to dive
into the depth of the Sea, etc. as to comprehend it.

4. As we rest satisfied, albeit there be many things in Gods works which we
cannot reach; so ought we also to submit in our own case, when it is dark.

5. Yea, as the more unsearchable the depth, the gates of death, etc. be, the
more they speak of him; so, the further our condition be taken out of our own
fight, we ought to expect the more of him in it.

Verse 19. Where is the way where light dwells? and as for darkness, where is
the place thereof?

20. That thou should take it to the bound thereof, and that thou should
know the paths to the house thereof.

21. Know thou it, because thou wast then born? or because the number of thy
days is great?


In these Verses, the places of light and darkness are spoken to conjunctly;
whereof, whatever conjectural knowledge men may have, yet, they have not so
perfect knowledge, as either to direct them to their places, and prescribe them
their home and bounds if they should wander abroad, or to be able by travel to
go to that place, v. 19, 20. This he amplifieth, v 21. That those things were
ordered before Job was born; so that he might as well fancy that he was born
before he had a being, as think to have the command of them. And as he could
not have skill of those things, by being at the first ordering thereof; so
neither, by long experience since, for the experience of never so many years
could not supply that defect of knowledge.

Hereby is pointed out, 1. That we have abundance of the works of God at our
door, wherein we may see much of him; even every day and night, and every
vicissitude of light and darkness.

2. If men have not the command, nor can direct the least of Gods ordinary
works, How much less should they dare to prescribe to God, who orders them
all?

3. The works of God, though never so obvious, do require our serious and
second thoughts, to take them up aright; therefore are those things here spoken
of again.

4. It is seriously to be observed, that God has ordered vicissitudes in
things below; as there is in the matter of light and darkness. Hereby God
exercises man, Eccl. 7.14. and teaches him to see the beauty, and find the
usefulness, of every thing in its time, Eccl. 3.11. And hereby man may be
helped to see, that his folly and presumption in prescribing to God, is no
less, than if he would foolishly desire to have it noonday at midnight.

5. Whatever knowledge men have of Gods works, and of his ordering of the light
and darkness; yet they ought to be sensible that it is but unperfect; for, man
knows not the places, either of light or darkness, so as to know the paths to
the house thereof.

6 Far less has man any knowledge to prescribe a law to other creatures, but
he and they must submit to the will of God only: For, as he cannot take it at
the bound thereof, (as some read) by going thither, as it is in the close of
the v. So he cannot take it to the bound thereof, or, prescribe to the Sun to
set or rise any where, but as God has appointed.

7. No experience, which men can acquire by living long, does warrant them to
murmr against, or prescribe unto, God; for, the number of his days was not so
great, as to afford him this knowledge, and it had been too much for him to
pretend to that wit, though he had lived since the Creation, and been then
born; and therefore he ought not to prescribe to God in other things.

Verse 22. Have thou entered into the treasures of the Snow? or have thou seen
the treasures of the hail?

23. Which I have reserved against the time of trouble, against the day of
battle and war?


The fourth Instance, to v. 39. comprehends various Meteors and alterations in
the air (some of which Elihu had spoken of) to v. 31. and their causes, to v.
39. In these Verses, he instanceth the Snow and Hail, which he joins together,
and produces them as a pair of Witnesses for him (as he does also mention
these that follow, not one by one, but more of them together) Showing that the
treasures of Snow and Hail are unsearchable by Job; so that he could neither
ascend up to the place from whence they come, nor could he comprehend that
Omnipotency of God, which does produce them in such abundance, in so short a
time, when there was no visible appearance of them before, v. 22. And this is
amplified from one use of these Meteors, for which they are reserved in the
Storehouse of Omnipotency; even against a time of trouble and war, v. 23.
Which is not so to be understood, as if common calamities and war were always a
tended with foul weather (though many sorrows and terrors do usually gather
together, as in a solemn Assembly, Lam. 2.22.) But that Snow and Hall (as Rain,
also Thunders, etc.) are ready scourges wherewith to plague men, when God has
a quarrel. See, Exodus 9.18. Josh. 10.11. Judges 5.20, 21. 1 Samuel 7.10. And this
is not only true of the Hail, which sometime has destroyed men and beasts,
trees and fruits of the ground; but of the Snow also, which (whatever good it
does to the ground) has destroyed men and beasts, both in its falling, and in
it^s melting.

Doct. 1. Man is surrounded with proofs and evidences of the glory of God, both
about him, under him, and above him; for, here, after the former Instances, he
ascends again to point out more Instances in the air.

2. Man is ignorant, as well of what is obvious, as of what is hid; for, he
cannot comprehend the snow and hail, more than he can enter into the depths of
the Sea, and of the Earth.

3. God has not only made his Creatures, and Snow and Hail among the rest; but
there is an use for every one of them; as there is an end for which he has
reserved those in his Treasures. Which shows, that he does nothing but to
good purpose, and for wise ends, though we see them not.

4. Among other uses for which God has made his Creatures, this is one, that
by them he may scourge rebellious man; which is the end wherefore he has
reserved the snow and hail. And the Scripture is full of Instances, how men
have been plagued by Angels, Winds, Rains, the Earth; etc.

5. Albeit there be no probability that rebellious man shall be reached, yet
Omnipotency has Treasures of Scourges laid up in store for him; as here we are
taught. See, Deuteronomy. 32.34, 35.

6. It is useful for Murmurers, though godly men, to study Gods Furniture and
store of Scourges for the rebellious; therefore is this instanced, to be
considered by murmuring Job.

7. As man's wit cannot comprehend how much snow and hail are treasured up in
Omnipotency, and in a Vapor drawn from the earth, which sometime is very
little; so he can as little take up improbable things which God can produce, in
mercy or judgment; so much may be gathered from this Instance, in reference to
the scope.

Verse 24. By what way is the light parted, which scatters the East Wind upon
the Earth?
In this v. he produces the Light, and East Wind. This may be understood of
the Rising Sun, whereby the light parts, or separateth from the darkness, and
which sometime (and, it may be, oftener in these Countries) was accompanied with
an Easterly wind, or, air. Or, of the Lightnings which break through the clouds
that are full of Wind, and so do scatter the East Wind, (which is put here for
all winds) through the earth, In both these Job was an ignorant, as to any
exact knowledge of them; either how the lightnings are parted, and break out
here and there, as God directs them, with their various causes and effects; or
how the winds are scattered on the earth; sometime blowing from one Quarter,
and sometime from another, and do blow so far out of one Quarter, and no
further. See, John 3.8. This also is a part of Gods treasures, Jer. 10.13. And
teaches,

1. Man has a great task, of much of God to study in all his works; as these
many Instances do teach.

2. The whole Creation and course of Nature is full of Wonders; for, there is
more in the Lightning and Wind than we can take up.

3. Till men be able to comprehend the ordinary works of God (which will never
be) they may be ashamed of their presumption, in offering to pry into the
Counsels of God; for, all these Questions are propounded to Job, to check his
presumption, in seeking to comprehend Gods counsels about him.

Verse 25. Who has divided a Watercourse for the overflowing of waters? or a
way for the lightning of thunder?

26. To cause it to rain on the earth, where no man is: on the wilderness,
wherein there is no man?

27. To satisfy the desolate and waste ground, and to cause the bud of the
tender herb to spring forth.

28. Has the Rain a Father? or who has begotten the drops of dew?


In these Verses, he instanceth the Rain, Lightning and Dew; Showing,

1. How God orders the Deluges of Rain, which accompany Lightning and
Thunder, v. 25. That as he finds a way through the Clouds for the Lightning,
which is accompanied with Thunder; So (as men make Canals, wherein the water
may run) he dispenses that Rain, as it were by Pipes and Conduits, and has
lower parts of the earth, wherein it may run; that it overflow not the whole
earth.

2. The place to which he directs the Rain, not only to the inhabited parts of
the world, but even to places where there is no man, v. 26. that there (as well
as in other places) he may refresh the ground, and make grass to grow, v. 27.
Whereby he shows his Riches, and provides for the wild Beasts.

3. That he is the Author of this Rain, and of every drop of dew, v. 28. From
all which we may gather,

1. We have need to be much and often put to it, to stand still and consider
the works of God; for, therefore does he produce those Instances, some of which
have been mentioned before, Namely, Rain, Thunder, and Lightning.

2. Gods mercy is very conspicuous in moderating and overruling of those
things which, otherwise, would overflow and overwhelm us; for, there is not a
flash of Lightning, or Thunderbolt, or drop of Rain, but it is in his hand, to
direct and order its way; and he makes the Rain sometimes impetuous, that we
may observe his Goodness in moderating it in ordinary, and in providing a Water
course for it.

3. That God is kind to all the Earth, Mat. 5.45. To other Creatures beside
man, Psalm. 36.6. And to the very Earth when it needs, does evidence that man
has no just cause of complaint against him; for, this pleads for God against
murmuring Job, that he causes it to rain upon the Earth, even where no man is,
etc.

4. Gods sending of more rain upon the earth, than is for man's use (as in the
overflowing of waters, and causing it rain on the Wilderness.) may teach, That
he has more to do in his work, than men's satisfaction only; and that he may
have more to do with some men's lot and exercise, than what may concern
themselves in particular; as he consulted not with Job's ease and satisfaction,
when he made him a mirror and pattern to all ages.

5. God is not only the orderer of Lots, when they come, but the Author of
them; and we should study the Author in his works, and believe that he can
produce what he pleases: For, these Questions, v. 28. do point him out to be
the Father and Begetter of these.

6. We should observe and acknowledge the hand of God in the meane^, as well as
the greatest, of his works; for, the drops of dew, whereby we are insensibly
wet, are ascribed to him, as well as the greater rain.

Verse 29. Out of whose womb came the Ice? and the houry frost of heaven, who
has gendred it?

30. The waters are hid at with a stone, and the face of the deep is frozen.


In the last place, he produces the hoary frost, and Ice, whose generation is
of God, v. ^9. And the effect of Ice is, that it hides and freezeth (or,
takes, as a captive) the waters, as if they were covered with a stone; and
that not only the lesser, but the deepest waters, v 30. See. Psalm. 147.16, 17.
Those, considered with an eye to the s^^p:, may teach,

1. ^old Meteors (such as these are) are full of warm beams and rays of the
glory of God; so that even a cold day may preach somewhat of him unto us.

2. The womb of Omnipotency can produce whatsoever it pleases; not only rain,
and drops of dew, v. 28. but Ice and hoary frost of heaven.

3. God in not to be limited by our unbelief; who can make the Dew, or Vapors,
in falling, turn in hoary frost, and turn the liquid waters into strong and
firm Ice, and can cause men, in some places, travel upon depths and seas, as
upon firm stones.

4. As men do not mistake the hiding of the waters by Ice, nor fret at these
winter storms, but do with patience attend the warm Spring; so men should not
stumble at their present sad Lots, but expect the end of the Lord.

Verse 31. Can thou bind the sweet Instuences of Pleiades? or loose the bands
of Orion?

32. Can thou bring forth Mazaroth in his season? or can thou guide
Arcturus with his Sons?

33. Know thou the Ordinances of heaven? Can thou set the Dominion thereof
in the earth?

34. Can thou lift up thy voice to the clouds, that abundance of waters may
cover thee?

35. Can thou send Lightnings, that they may go, and say unto thee, Here we
are.


Now he ascends from these Meteors, to speak of their Causes, the Stars and
their Influences, and the Clouds; Showing that Job had neither Authority (like
him) to command them, v. 31-35. Nor wisdom to order them, v. 36, 37, 38. In
these Verses, he asserts that Job had no authority to command, or rule, these
Constellations. And,

1. He instanceth in these four Constellations which appear in the four seasons
of the year, v. 31, 32. Of which, see Chap. 9.9. Pleiades, or, the
Constellation called, the Seven Stars, does arise in the Spring, and (not to
dip upon the Hebrew name) has its name in Greek from Sailing, because the
Grecians used to set to sea, when it arose. Orion, rises in the beginning of
Winter; and has its name in Hebrew from Folly, because of the various and
inconstant weather which accompanies it. Mazzoroth, (which seems to be the
same with those Chambers of the South, Chap. 9.9.) is that Constellation, which
arises in Summer; and Arcturus, (or, Boots, or, the Charlewain) and his Sons,
(or the lesser Stars about it) in Harvest. Now Job could rule none of those,
either to restrain or further them; and so could have no power of these
alterations of the season which they influence.

2. He asserts more generally, v. 33. That he knows not the Ordinances of
heaven, so as to settle and order that dominion which they have over inferior
Creatures on the earth.

3. He instanceth in the effects of these Constellations, v. 34, 35. That he
can neither cause Clouds, Rain, nor Lightnings. From all which, Learn,

1. God has so ordered this world, as superior bodies have influence upon
those that are inferior; and so makes them reach men (for whose use they were
created) though they be at a distance; for, those Constellations have, some of
them, sweet influences, others of them, bonds, to draw up, and gather together
Vapors, and all of them have their seasons, and guided motions, which produce
effects upon the earth.

2. It is commendable and useful to study and be acquainted with these
Celestial bodies, and their motions; for, God speaks in such terms, as does
evidence they were Astronomers in those days, though not Judiciary Astrologers;
or, at least, his mentioning of these things does not evidence his approbation
of any such thing that was among men; Particularly, among the Chaldeans, who
lived near those Parts. For albeit the study of Astronomy did help them in
distinguishing of the course of the Year, and gave them some general hint of
the season and temper of the Weather, (which they gathered by long observation
and experience, and looked upon the rising Constellations rather as Signs, than
as Causes thereof; for their Observations did not always hold) yet, to subject
to the Influences of the Stars (which, at most, are but a general and universal
cause, determined in their operations by the second and more immediate causes;
and by the subject matter upon which they work) to subject, I say, to their
Influences those things which depend upon contingent causes, and the will of
man, so as to make predictions from them, concerning such Events and Effects,
is a mere folly, founded upon so many fond suppositions which have no being in
nature, but are only the Chimaera's of the Astrologers own brain. For if they
cannot foretell what will be the temper of the air in every particular day (as
experience does witness) wherein yet these Constellations have special
influence, who will credit them in other things? See, Isa. 47.13. Jer. 10.2, 3.
--

3. It speaks forth the glory of God, that he commands all the Stars in their
motions and influences; and not Fate, or they themselves; for, so much do those
Questions import, that God can do that which Job, or no creature else, can do.
And this calls upon us to fear him, Amos 5.8 And proves that he has skill to
guide all his Saints, Psalm. 147.3, 4, 5.

4. It may humble contentious and quarrelling man before God, when he
considers that God is more powerful than he; and that all authority belongs
to God, and submission to God is his work and duty: For, here is intimated,
that God only, and not man, can rule, guide and command.

5. Man may see reason to submit to God, if he consider,

1. That God guides the Sun, Moon, and Stars; as here, and what is man that he
should plead exemption?

2. That he orders the Seasons wisely, throughout the Year, whereof these
Constellations are signs; and why should man carp, or offer to prescribe to the
infinitely wise God?

3. If Clouds, Rain, and Lightnings, etc. obey God (as here is supposed) why
should man rather carp and dispute, than submit?

4. If man cannot command one Shower, or Flash of Lightning, or Star, why
should he offer to prescribe to God in greater matters? All those checks of
Job's murmuring may be intimated in these Questions.

Verse 36. Who has put wisdom in the inward parts? or who has given
understanding to the heart?

37. Who can number the clouds in wisdom? or who can stay the bottles of heaven?

38. When the dust grows into hardness, and the clods cleave fast together?


In these Verses is showed, that as God is more powerful, and has more
Authority, than Job (as has been intimated in the former Verses) so he is
nothing like God in wisdom, to order those things. For all man's wit is of him,
v. 36. Nor could man's wit be able to order the clouds, that they should be so
many, and have so much rain in them; or to order those bottles of heaven (the
clouds) to be so high or low, and no more, to consist of so many Vapors, and
no more, to rain so much, and then to stay them, that they rain no more, v. 37.
Which rain is seasonably restrained, when the Earth (which the drought turns
into dust) is consolidated and brought to a consistence again by rain (as
Metal, when it is melted, runs together, to which the word alludes here) and
when the clods, which the drought does cleave asunder, are made to cleave
together again, v. 38. Hence learn,

1. God does not only employ Authority and Power (of which in the former
Verses) but Wisdom also, in ordering of the Affairs of the world, and about
man; as here is added.

2. Man's wit is but borrowed, and he holds it of God; for, Who (but God) has
put Wisdom in the inward parts? See, Chap. 32.8. Eccl. 2.26. And we should
acknowledge his mercy in conferring such a gift.

3. True wisdom does not fleet in the brain, but is solid, and settled in the
inward parts, and heart; as here is intimated.

4. Since men's wit is but borrowed, they neither should be proud of their
borrowed Loan, as if they could guide all, nor make a God of their wit; far
less should they compete with him who gave it, as if they could guide better
than he: For, God gives a check to Job's conceit of his own skill, by putting
him in mind whence he had it. See, Psalm. 94.9, 10.

5. Man's wit would sooner break than guide all well, if he had his will; for,
he could not guide the clouds, nor moderate rain. And though we, oft-times,
think we could guide, even the seasons, better than they are guided; yet we
should consider that he has more to do than to satisfy us; and has even our
selves to exercise with dependence.

6. It commends Gods wisdom in guiding, that it shines in every thing; we do
ordinary things by guess, but he even numbers the clouds in wisdom.

7. It commends his wisdom also, that he has means provided and in readiness,
against the time they be needed; as he has the rain in bottles.

8. Also his wisdom shines in that, though the means of our help be far off,
yet, he can make them reach us; as he makes Bottles of heaven to furnish us.

9. It is no small proof of his wisdom; that he dispenses mercies when they
are needed, and only as they are needed; for, he lends rain when there is
drought, and then stays the bottles of heaven, when the dust grows into
hardness, or, firmness and consistency, etc.

Verse 39. Will thou hunt the prey for the Lion? or fill the appetite of the
young Lions,

40. When they couch in their dens, and abide in the Covert to lie in wait?

41. Who provideth for the Raven his food? when his young ones cry unto God,
they wander for lack of meat.


Follows to the end of Chap. 39; (and therefore some begin that Chapter here)
the fifth head of Instances whereby he convinces Job; taken from Beasts and
Birds, in whom much of Gods glory does shine, considering his provision for
them, their strength, and other qualities. After the Lord had led him up to the
Stars and Clouds, and Meteors in the air, lest he might object that these were
above him, as other Instances were of things before him; Therefore he leads him
now to his Parks, and his Aviaries, or, Volaries, to see if he could pretend to
any thing like his Providence about them, and his dominion over them. And here
we may mark in general,

1. Though those be inferior Instances, yet they come nearer Job, to conclude
that he should be abased before God; for, seeing he could not reach nor order
these things, which are so near him, how much less other things?

2. Here Gods Providence is commended in the most ordinary and common things,
to assure us that he will guide well in the special Affairs and Concernments of
his people, Mat. 6.26-30.

3. These Instances teach us, that somewhat of God may be seen in things of
least worth: As Prove. 6 6, etc.

All those Instances, to the end of Chap. 39. may be reduced to six; whereof
the first (in these verses) is, his feeding of ravenous beasts and birds;
instanced in the Lions, v. 39, 40. And the young Ravens, v. 41. As for the
first, Albeit some do understand the first word here of the old decrepit Lion,
who cannot range for his prey, but must lie in wait if any pr^y come by him;
and the other word of young Lions Whelps, who lie in their Dens till meat be
brought to them by the stronger Lions, who go abroad, Nah. 2.12. Yet the first
word does not signify a decrepit Lion, but rather one who is very terrible,
Genesis 49.9 And seeing all Lions do catch their prey as is here described, Psalm.
10.9. I take up the meaning rather thus; That albeit Lions do need prey to fill
their appetite, or for their life; and albeit they use industry for catching of
it, and (seeing they would be outrun by some other beasts) they do crouch, that
they may steal upon them as they come by: Yet this prey must be brought unto
them (not by Job, who for all the wealth he had, could not feed them long, but)
by God, who hears their cry, Psalm. 104.21. For the second, v. 41. The words may
be understood thus, that God, and not Job, provides food for the Ravens, when
the young ones cry for want, and their Dams wander seeking food for them and
themselves. Though others understand this of the young Ravens only, who (as
some write) are forsaken of their Dams till they grow black like themselves,
and so are made to cry and wander about the Nest for ^ack of food; in which
case, though none regard them, yet God hea^s their cry as directed to him, and
feeds them, and that (as they also write) with Dew, and with Flies, or Worms,
which are bred of the Ravens dung in and about the Nest. Or rather, it is to be
understood of these young Ravens, which, being thrust our of the Nest by their
Dams so soon as they are able to fly, are put to hard shifts in seeking food.
See, Psalm. 147.9.

From the words, considered abstractly and in themselves, Learn,

1. God has his own use for the most ravenous creatures; His glory shines in
making of them, and in his Providence about them: As here we are taught.

2. Even excellent Creatures, such as the courageous and sturdy Lions, as well
as the Ravens and other baser Creatures, have their abasements, and evidences
that they are but Creatures; in that their Life must be continually preserved
by meat. And so is it with man also, Eccl. 6 7.

3. Creatures have no cause to lean to their own endeavors for supply of their
necessities; for, God must bring a prey to the ramping Lion, and to the
wandering Raven. See, Psalm. 145.15, 16.

4. Needy cries, which are neglected by all, lie at Gods door, to be noticed by
him; as here, the young Ravens are said to cry unto God. So Lions, Psalm. 104.21.

From the scope of this Instance, in reference to Jobs condition (Beside that
this, and the rest of the Instances, do point out somewhat of that infinite
distance that is betwixt God and Job, and all men) we may further, Learn,

1. If God have use for, and do preserve ravenous beasts and birds; he has
also use for Oppressors and Oppression, and work to be done by them in the
world, which the people of God, especially when under them, should observe and
submit unto. See, Isa. 54.16.

2. If he feed all those, then is he all-sufficient, and not to be complained
of; See, Psalm. 104.27.

3. Men are bound to observe Gods mercy toward them, were it but in his
providing meat for these ravenous beasts; who otherwise would be ready to come
among men and devour them.

4 He who is so careful of the beasts and birds, cannot, without extreme
injustice, be complained of as being cruel to men.

5. If he care for th^se Creatures, much more will he care for Saints, Psalm.
34.10. Mat 6.26, 30.

6. If a man, though very wealthy, could not be able to feed these Creatures
for which God provides; how can he presume to guide the world, and affairs in
it?

7. The glory of God shines, not only in this, that he feeds those beasts, but
that he can make them afford food to others; as Elijah was fed by ravens, and
Samson got honey out of the Lion. Thus out of the Eater he gives meat, and can
make very cruel and ravenous enemies do his people service, Ps. 106.46. Jer.
15.11.

CHAP. XXXIX.
In this whole Chapter, the Lord prosecutes that Head of Instances begun in the
former Chapter, taken from his Providence about Beasts and Birds. And unto the
Instance propounded in the former Chapter, five more are here added. Namely,
his care in preserving and continuing the kinds of several Creatures, v. 1. --
4. His ordering the liberty and untameableness of some wild beasts, v. 5-12.
His care in adorning some Birds, and his care of the careless among them, v. 13
-- 18. His endowing of the Horse with Strength and Courage, v. 19 -- 25. And,
his Providence about the Birds of prey, the Hawk and the Eagle, v. 26-30.

Verse 1. Know thou the time when the wild goats of the rock bring forth, or
can thou mark when the Hinds do calve?

2. Can thou number the moulths that they fulfill? or know thou the time
when they bring forth?

3. They bow themselves, they bring forth their young ones; they cast out their
sorrows.

4. Their young ones are in good liking, they grow up with Corn: they go forth,
and return not unto them.


THe second Instance (though the first in this Chapter) is, Gods care to
preserve the Species and Kinds of Creatures, in helping them when they bring
forth, and caring for their young ones. This is instanced,

First, In the wild Goats which live among the Rocks, (of whom, see, 1 Samuel:
24.2.) the time of whose bringing forth Job is ignorant of, v. 1 --.

Secondly, In the Hinds; Concerning whom,

1. He declares that Job is ignorant how long time they are with young, and at
what time they calve: v. 1, 2. The meaning whereof is not that Job is simply
ignorant of this; for a man may learn somewhat of that by experience. But he
does not so know it as to prescribe it, nor does he know when they gender and
conceive, that he might come and be assistant at their bringing forth.

2. He declares that Job has no skill in their natural Midwifry, v 3. When,
they, who have great pain in bringing forth (and therefore it is marked as a
singular effect, among others, of the Thunder, that it makes the Hinds to calve
for sear, Psalm. 29.9.) do not only make use of a certain herb to help them, as
Naturalists write; but do bow their own bodies, that they may ease themselves
of their pain: And so they cast out their sorrows, that is, they cast out their
young ones which caused their sorrows, or, presently after they have brought
forth, their pain cease, and as (Naturalists also write) they make use of
some other Herb for this end, and for recovery of their strength.

3. He declares that Job had no hand in caring for their young ones, v. 4.
Who, though they be brought forth with pain, yet do soon become lusty, and do
grow up, being fed with Corn (or, as though they got corn) and go forth and
shift for themselves. The meaning whereof is not, that their Dams cast them off
(for the Hind is a loving Beast, Prove. 5 19. And it is an evidence of a great
straight when they forsake their young ones, Jer. 14.5.) but that their young
ones need no help, but are able to do for themselves.

From the Words and Scopt, we may gather,

1. God does guide much well enough, without man; As he guides the wild Goats,
and Hinds, without Job, or the assistance of any man. And therefore he may well
have our consent to guide all things; as he will guide them, whether we consent
or not.

2. Poor affrighted Creatures do fall into Gods hand, to see to them; as here
he cares for the timorous Hinds, who are afraid of men, and especially of other
beasts. See, Psalm. 56.3.

3. God, who has a care of continuing the kinds of beasts, will not weary to
continue his goodness with his own people, even to the end. Thus other
Ordinances of Nature, Genesis 8.22. Psalm. 119.89, 90, 91. are pledges of the
stability of his Covenant, Jer. 31.35, 36. and 33.20, 21. And therefore he is
not to be supected of casting off his People, as Job did complain. See, Psalm.
23.6. and 77.7, 8, 9, 10.

4. They are not ill guided who are left upon God; for, he gives a good account
of his care of Hinds in their Calving, and of their young ones. Which may not
only encourage us to commit women in Childbirth unto God; but to rely upon
him in every case, when we are poor and needy, Psalm. 40.17.

5. God orders the exercise of his Creatures to be more or less, according as
they have means and opportunities of help under it; for, the sorrows of Hinds
are soon over, and the young ones of Beasts are soon able to care for
themselves, otherwise they would perish; whereas it is otherwise with Children
who have some to tender them. Thus according as God has manifested more or
less of himself to men, and according to the means they enjoy, and experiences
they have had, they may expect that their exercises will be proportionable.

6. If Beasts, who do not well know their own burden what it is, yet do by
natural Instinct labor to ease themselves, and do make use of means for that
end; why do men, under pressures, resolve to lie down and die; neglecting all
those means whereby lawfully they might make their own burdens more supportable.

7. If God care for the young ones of Beasts, what sinful folly is it in men to
be anxious, and even to sell their souls, that they may provide for their
Children?

Verse 5. Who has sent out the wild Ass free? or who has loosed the bands of
the wild Ass?

6. Whose house I have made the Wilderness, and the barren land his dwellings.

7. He scorneth the multitude of the City, neither regards he the crying of
the driver.

8. The range of the mountains is his pasture, and he searches after every
green thing.

9. Will the Unicorn be willing to serve thee? or abide by thy crib?

10. Can thou bind the Unicorn with his band in the furrow? or will he harrow
the Valleys after thee?

11 Will thou trust him because his strength is great? or will thou leave thy
labor to him?

12. Will thou believe him that he will bring home thy seed? and gather it into
thy bird?


The third Instance, is, the Liberty and untam^albleness of some wild Beasts,
which yet are commanded by, and subject unto, God. This is instanced,

1. In the Wild Ass, of which, see, Jer. 2.24. Isa. 32.14. Hos. 8.9. A Beast
much contrary in properties to the dull tame Ass; which is set free by God and
loosed (not from any bonds that ever were actually put upon it by men, but)
from those bonds which bind those inferior Creatures to serve man, and which
are actually put and kept upon some of them, v. 5. Which has its habitation
chosen and assigned by God in the Wilderness, and in barren and brackish
grounds; where it chooses to dwell, rather than to serve man, v. 6. Which
scorneth the City and all places of Commerce, or where men repair; Or, being
very swift, it disdains to be taken by never so many men (were even the
multitude of a City gathered for that effect) and to be made obey the driver,
as other Beasts do, v. 7. And, which; in stead of Parks, wherein tame beasts
are k^pt and fed, has the large Mountains whereupon to feed, and to search
after green grass and herbs, v. 8. And yet however this Beast cannot be reached
by man, God can reach it when he will.

2. It is Instanced in the Unicorn, of which, see, Numb. 23.22. Deuteronomy. 33.17.
Psalm. 22 21. and 92.10. Whatever Plintus write, yet some deny that there is any
such B^ast in nature as an Unicorn, having (as the name signifies) one horn in
its forehead. And therefore they take the wild Bull to be here meant (such wild
Bulls probably abounding in those places, and being very strong and fierce)
which is opposed to the laboring Ox, as the wild Ass is to the tame, v. 5,
etc. But whatever Beast be here meant, yet this is true of it, That though it
be a strong beast, and stronger than these whereof men make use, yet, it is so
undaunted, that it will not yield to serve man for its meat, nor will it be
b^und to a Crib, as a Child may do with an Ox, v 9. Nor will any man, who has
his wits about him, trust his labor, of plowing, harrowing, and gathering in
of his harvest, to it, v. 10, 11, 12. And yet God commands it at his pleasure.

From this purpose we may gather,

1. The liberty and bondage of Creatures is of God, and at his disposal; for,
he has ordered some beasts to be easily tamed, and others not at all. Much
more does the spiritual liberty of men come from him John 8.36.

2. Though many do desire a licentious liberty, and to be free of all yokes and
bonds; yet that is but a poor advantage, as being no more than what many Beasts
have; as here is to be seen in the wild Ass and Unicorn. Men should be far from
placing their happiness in that which is common to them with Beasts.

3. Whatever liberty Creatures have, yet none of them are exempted from
subjection to Gods Dominion; for, he does retch the wild Ass, Jer. 2.^4. And
Behemoth, Job. 40.19. And this most insolent men, who neither fear God, nor
reverence men, will be made to find, Isa. 37.28, 29.

4. That God has abundance of wild and untamed Creatures at his command, does
evidence that he need not be in man's reverence for service, or sacrifices, as
Psalm. 50.8. -- 12. Which may humble them who presume to quarrel God, because he
seems not to notice them and their integrity and service, which was Job's
practice.

5. Man's indigence is continuall^ proclaimed, not only in his daily need of
food, and that himself must be kept at a continual labor for his food; but in
that he needs the help of other Creatures to labor for his meat; as here is
intimated, that he needs beasts to drive with his burdens, v. 7. and to labor
the ground, and bring in the fruits thereof for him, v. 10, 11, 12.

6. The untameableness of some Creatures serves to commend the love of God, who
tames others of them for man's use; as here is intimated; That though the wild
Ass and Unicorn will not, yet others will be driven, and will serve and abide
by our Crib. It speaks somewhat of God when we see a little Boy lead and
command an Horse or Ox, which are much stronger than himself.

7. Albeit every thing be not for that use which we desire, yet they are not
therefore useless; for, those beasts s^rve to set forth the Glory of God,
albeit they will not serve man.

8. Creatures and Lots will prove, not according as they seem to promise in
themselves, but according as God makes them to be; for, when one sort of Asses
is dull and unserviceable, another sort is wild, and though the Ox be tame for
labor, yet the Unicorn (which is stronger and might work more) is not.

9. As there are many Creatures fed without man's care (such as the wild Ass and
Unicorn, beside these formerly mentioned) So even those of them who are not
ravenous (like the Lion and Raven, Chap. 38.39, 40, 41.) yet get their food; as
the wild Ass has a large pasture. Their case is not desperate who can promi^^
little for themselves; nor will all those go to wrack, who do not help
themselves by violent means.

10. God can command even the wildest of Creatures; for, the wild Ass is at his
command, and the Unicorn will serve him, though he will not s^rve man. Which
may warn the stout-hearted and undaunted, to fear, and may encourage the Godly
to trust in him when difficulties a^e impetuous and violent.

Verse 13. Gave thou the goodly wings unto the Peacocks, or wings and
feathers unto the Ostrich?

14. Which leaves her Eggs in the earth, and warmeth them in dust.

15. And forgets that the foot may crush them, or that the wild Beast may
break them.

16. She is hardened against her young ones, as though they were not here; her
labor is in vain without fear.

17. Because God has deprived her of wisdom, neither has he imparted unto her
understanding.

18. What time she lifts up her self on high, she scorneth the Horse and his
Rider.


The fourth Instance contains an account of Gods care in adorning some ^^rds,
and his care of the careless amongst them* This is cleared in the Peacock and
the Ostrich; where we have to consider,

1. The beauty of the wings of Peacocks (or of the Feathers in their Tails,
spread out like the wings of a Bird) and of the Wings and Feathers of
Ostriches, v. 13.

2. The unnatural stupidity of the Ostrich; which leaves her Eggs, covered with
a little Sand, to be hatched by the heat of the Sun, v. 14. Little considering
that they may be crushed by the seet of men and beasts which pass by, v. 15.
And which neglects her young ones, and runs the hazard (were it not for Gods
care) of losing all her labor, in laying of her Eggs, without any fear at all,
v. 16. And that because God has deprived her of that natural Instinct which
other Creatures have, v. 17. See, Lam. 4.3.

3. That though she be thus stupid and unnatural, yet she is fitted to flee
danger; and by lifting up her self on high, scorneth the Horse and his Rider
who pursue her, v. 18. Which is not so to be understood, as if she were able to
soar and flee high; for by reason of her large and unwieldy body, she scarce
lifts her self from off the ground, but runs fleeing, and flees running,
making use both of her feet, and of her wings, as sails, to help her forward.
But the meaning is, that when she thus lifts up her self to escape a danger,
she is not only bigger than Horse and Rider both (being very tall) but moves so
swiftly, and withal (as some write) casts Gravel and Stones behind her, with
her Feet, as she runs, that Riders on swif^ Horses cannot overtake her, nor
dare come near her. Hence it was that the Arabians tried the swiftness of their
Horse^, by their running after the Ostrich.

From the Instances, gather,

1. God is to be seen and acknowledged in the beauty he has put upon some
Creatures; such as the Wings and Feathers of the Ostrich, who have goodly
Plumes, and the goodly Wings, or Tail, which God, and not man, has given to
the Peacock, and which has so many changing colors, that no Art can imitate
it. Thus he has adorned the Lillies with beauty above what Solomon had in his
Glory, Mat. 6.28, ^9. A look of those things should not be passed without a
spiritual use; seeing therein we may read how beautiful God is, in himself, and
in his dispensations, and what beauty he can put upon any of his Creatures he
pleases; as will be verified upon the vile bodies of his people, Phil. 3 21.

2. There is no excellency in the Creatures but it is attended with some
imperfection, which may show that they are but Creatures; as here, the beauty
of the Ostrich is attended with stupidity.

3. God has deprived some Creatures of a natural Instinct to care for their
young ones (which is here called Wisdom and Understanding, v. 17.) That so we
may observe it as a mercy in others of them; as Children should be sensible of
the mercy they received, in their Parents care of them, when they could not
care for themselves, and should labor to require it, 1 Timothy 5.4. And that we
may beware of provoking God to cast us into those difficulties which will
deprive us of that natural Affection, Lam. 4.3.10.

4. God has a care even of these Creatures which are cast off by Parents; as
here, the Eggs and Young ones of the Ostrich are tendered by him. Much more
will he care for Saints in such a case, Psalm. 27.10.

5. As the unnatural Ostrich is yet secured by her swiftness, v. 18. So evil
doers may prosper; nor should Saints stumble at it, as Job by his complaints
did evidence he was offended thereat.

Verse 19. Have thou given the Horse strength? have thou clothed his neck with
thunder?

20. Can thou make him afraid as a grasshopper? the glory of his nostrils is
terrible.

21. He paweth in the valley, and rejoices in his strength: he goes on to
meet the armed men.

22. He mocketh at fear, and is not affrighted, neither turns he back from
the Sword.

23. The Quiver raileth against him, the glittering spear and the shield.

24. He swalloweth the ground with fierceness and rage: neither believes he
that it is the sound of the Trumpet.

25. He says among the Trumpets, Ha, Ha; and he smells the battle afar off,
the thunder of the Captains, and the shouting.


The fifth Instance, is, the Strength and Courage of the Horse which serves
man, especially the Horse bred for War. It is God, and not man, who has given
him great strength, so that with his Neck and Breast he runs down what he
rusheth upon, as if a clap of Thunder had fallen upon it, v. 19. And his
Courage is no less than his Strength; so that he will not be affrighted, as a
Grasshopper, but his Snortings and Neighings are terrible, v. 20. This his
courage appears, especially in War; for it makes him paw on the ground with
his feet, and glory to run without fear among armed men and weapons, v. 21, 22,
23. And he digs the earth with his feet, or runs so quickly over it to come to
the Battle, as if he would swallow it up; and finds nothing terrible, in the
Trumpet, sounding the deadly Alarm to the Battle, more than if it were a
Whistle, and not a Trumpet, v. 24. But resounds to it by his Neighings, when he
perceives, by the dreadful noise of Officers and Soldiers, that the Battle is
approaching, v. 25.

From this Instance, gather,

1. The creatures want of one kind of advantage is, ordinarily, made up with
some other; as the Ostrich outstrips the Horse in swiftness, v. 18. and yet,
here, the Horse excels in courage.

2. Albeit God has appointed some creatures to serve men; yet that should not
hide the Glory of God which shines in them; As here, the Lord points out his
Glory by this Instance of the Horse, to convince and humble Job.

3. God, who gives strength and courage to very Beasts (as here he does to the
Horse) can very easily furnish his Saints therewith, and keep them from
fainting as they have need: as Job had found by experience, being made to
triumph by faith in the midst of danger, however he complained.

4. If the Horse, being so strong and courageous a Beast, does yet serve man,
and is subject to him, Jam. 3.3. why should Saints be diffident but they may
manage and overcome great difficulties, in Gods strength?

5. As the Horses courage appears eminently in War, and in the midst of
hazards; so should Saints study to acquit themselves in a day of trial, Job
4.3, 4, 5, 6. Prove. 24.10. And God can furnish them against such a time, above
any thing that they could promise to themselves (consulting their own
dispositions and courage) before it came.

6. This strength and courage of the Horse is a great Excellency, yet God has
no pleasure in it, nor in the like excellencies which are in men, Psalm. 147.10.
Which should teach us, not to conceit of our common excellencies and
endowments; but to delight more to be Saints, than to have all that courage,
strength, wisdom, etc. which are in men or beasts, Psalm. 147.10, 11. Jer. 9.23,
24.

7. This fierce courage of the Horse must be managed and guided by men, Jam.
3.3. To show, that fierceness is but a beastly disposition, if it be not well
managed, Psalm. 32.9, 10. And if men with a small Bridle do command the fierce
Horse, how much more should men be pliant to God? And if they will not, he has
Hooks and Bridles also for them, Isa. 37.29.

Verse 26. Does the Hawk fly by thy wisdom, and stretch her wings toward the
South?

27. Does the Eagle mount up at thy command, and make her Nest on high?

28. She dwells and abides on the Rock, upon the Crag of the Rock, and the
strong place.

29. From thence she seeks the prey, and her eyes behold afar off.

30. Her young ones also suck up blood: and where the slain are, there is she.


The sixth Instance is, those noble Birds of Prey, the Hawk and the Eagle. For
the first, Albeit men have learned an art of training Hawks, so that they flee
after their prey when they let them loose, and they return to them again
because of their food; yet it is not by any wisdom from men that they do flee,
but they know how to follow their prey before ever men take them, who do but
put them to the exercise of what they have by nature, for their own recreation.
And particularly, It is from God that the Hawk has an Instinct to flee toward
the South, v, 26. as wild Hawks, in cold seasons, and when they cast their old
Feathers, do flee into warmer Climates, till their new Feathers grow up. As for
the Eagle, it is from God that she has that instinct and strength to mount
straight upward an higher pitch than any other Bird can do; and that for this
end (among others) that she may build her Nest upon the high and unaccessible
Rocks, for the security of her young ones, v. 27, 28. And it is from God that
she is able to discern her prey at so great a distance (as some report, that
she not only sees sar, but will smell dead Corpses very far off) and comes to
it for blood and flesh to her self, and to her young ones, to whom she brings
food, till she can get them brought to it, v. 29, 30.

In these Instances we may observe,

1. So much of God may be seen in every thing, that even the recreation of
hawking, and the flight of Birds, may afford profitable and edifying
Instructions; as here, the Hawk and Eagle are Instances of that glory of God
which shines in his Creatures.

2. Since God ^i^ects all things, even the flight of Birds (as here is showed,
that it is Gods wisdom, and not Job's, that directs these Birds in their
several motions) who should presume to direct him, or exempt themselves from
his directions, or orders concerning them and their Lo^s.

3. Since he directs very birds well (sending hawks to the South, when they
need warmth, and Eagles to ^he Rock, for security of their young ones, and that
they may the more easily discern their prey) who can justly suspect him in his
guiding of men?

4. The sagacity of the Eagle being an Emblem of what godly persons and
Christians should be, Mat. 24. 28. Luke 17.37. We should learn at them, to flee
above things below, and contemplate things above, as they look upon the Sun; To
build sure upon the rock, where hazard cannot teach us, Isa. 33.16. Mat. 7.24,
25. To discern and smell our mercies, though they be very far off; as Job did,
Chap. 19.26. And, to flock continually about Christ crucified; and cleave to
him; as the Eagle does to the slain, or, Carcass.

Having ended all those particular Instances, save we remarkable Ones which are
added in the next Speech; we may Ones them all up in these three general
Remarks.

1. God cannot fully be seen in any one of his Creatures; all of them together
are little enough (and too little) to point him out.

2. Yet somewhat of him may be seen in every one of the Creatures, even the
least of them.

3. Then do we observe God well, in one or all of them, not when we think we
may boast of our skill in knowing them, their causes, properties; etc. But when
we see God in them, and are not such Naturalists as turn mere Atheists; and
when we so study them, as we see cause to be abased and humbled before God,
whose Glory shines in them: For, that is the scope of all those Instances
propounded unto Job.

CHAP. XL.
This Chapter contains, 1. The Conclusion of Gods former Discourse, and his
Application thereof to Job, v. 1, 2.

2. Job's taking with his Fault before God, v. 3, 4, 5.

3. A part of Gods second Speech to Job, to humble him yet more; wherein, after
an Introduction, v. 6, 7. He reprehends him for reflecting upon his
righteousness, in defending his own Integrity, v. 8. And subjoyns a proof of
the Justice of this Reprehension, taken from the inequality and infinite
distance that is betwixt himself and Job, v. 9 -- 14. Which Proof he further
confirms by an Instance of Behemoth, v, 15-24. To which another is added in the
following Chapter.

Verse 1. Moreover, the Lord answered Job, and said,

2. Shall he that contendeth with the Almighty, instruct him? he that reproves
God let him answer it.


WE may gather from what is said by the Writer of this Book, v. 1. That the
Lord had stayed a little after the former Discourse, waiting if Job would make
any further Reply; but finding him silent and astonished, He quickens him up,
by this superadded Conclusion. Wherein,

1. He propounds a general Question concerning his Complaints and Quarrellings,
shall he that contendeth with the Almighty, instruct him? or, instruct? which
is only in the Original. Some read it thus; Is contending with the Almighty
Instruction? or, Erudition? that is, however Contenders pretend to have Wit and
Reasons on their side, yet is it any evidence of Wisdom and Skill, and of a man
well instructed, to offer to contend with God? The words may also be read thus;
Shall contending with the Almighty instruct? or, shall it be any edification so
to do? But according to our Translation, the words point out the sinfulness of
his complaints, as being, in effect, a contending with him who is Almighty, and
that such a contending, as if he would presume to instruct, guide, and direct
God, and not be directed by him. And so, in sum, He would have him forbear his
complaints, unless he would presume to be wiser than God.

2. He lays before him the hazard and difficulty of such an undertaking, That
he who offers to reprove, or, argue with God, must answer; that is, either he
must answer these former Questions, to prove himself able to debate with God,
which would be too hard for him; Or he must answer and give an account for his
presumption, which he durst not do.

In general, Learn, 1. When much is said to men's condition, it will be to no
purpose unless it be applied; that so they may be convinced, or otherwise
affected, as their case requires: For, God must lay the former Doctrine home,
and answer (not to any thing Job spoke, but) as his need required. It is our
great fault, that we see and hear much, which we neither perceive nor observe;
and if we could observe the penetrating power of the Word, and the particular
eye that God has upon hearers, when he sends out his Word, Heb. 4.12, 13. we
would be more tender in applying: Whereas, ordinarily we pass what we hear, as
if we were not at all concerned, but it were spoken at random by men.

2. No hearing of seasonable Doctrine (and that even by godly men in
affliction, who need that a word should be spoken to them) will make them take
it home, unless God himself apply it; as here, he rowzed up Job. See, Acts
16.14. We should employ God much in hearing, were even himself speaking
immediately (as he did to Job) much more when men speak, that he may put forth
his hand to apply the word which he sends. Nor should we lean to our own
dispositions under affliction, which may either prove stupid, or tempt us to
misapply the Word.

3. God is very faithful in dealing with his wayward people; for, he will not
let Job pass without applying what he had heard, but ro^zeth him up out of his
dumpish and confounded frame, to lay his case to hear. It is one of our
covenanted mercies, not to get away with our faults, Psalm. 89.30, 31, 32, etc.
and that blunt and stupifying convictions are not taken off our hand, till they
work better. Of which more afterward.

4. As God is faithful, so he is tender in waiting upon his distempered people;
for, he waits upon Job, and takes leisure to produce all the former Instances,
and now to lay home his faults very mildly. Thus did he wait upon Jonah, in his
peevish Fits. Which may assure us, that God does not handle his people roughly,
beyond what they need, however they may complain that it is otherwise, and they
may be cruel to then selves by their own distempers: And it may warn us to deal
patiently and mildly with others, with whom we have to do, so long as there is
hope of doing them good.

5. That he propounds this Challenge in Theft, or, in general, without naming
Job in particular, may teach,

1. Men should be upon their guard, that their own self-love do not sway them,
in looking upon their way; but they should judge of themselves, as they will be
ready enough to judge of others: For, whatever Job might think of his own
practice, yet he could not but condemn this fault in general.

2 Whatever difference God put betwixt his people and others, yet this allows
them no particular privilege to sin; and, particularly, to mistake and quarrel
God: Therefore he propounds this Challenge in Theft, to show, that he would not
so respect any good thing in Job, as to assoyl him from a fault in this.

Doct. 6. His laying this charge home to Job's Conscience (as his Conscience
has been often posed before in the dispute) by way of Question, as being
assured that the Cause will be decided there in his Favors, does teach,

1. Even the dear Children of God, and when they are in their most tender
exercises, do not always act according to the Principles and Dictates of
Conscience; but, as wicked men do detain the truth in unrighteousness, Romans
1.18. So, their Tentations, Passions, and Lusts may over-drive their light,
which is a sad Spectacle; for, it is here supposed, that in the throng of Job's
exercises, his Conscience was not acting its part, but needs to be rowzed up.

2. Men's Consciences will not still lie by, but when God puts them to it, they
will judge righteous judgment; and then men who have miscarried, will have a
sad game of it with their own Consciences: For, this Question ^mports that
Job's Conscience will at last speak.

In particular, From the first Branch of this Conclusion; v. 2 -- Learn,

1. Whatever hazard there be in a sinful course; yet it will never be laid to
heart as it ought, unless the sinfulness of it be first noticed; therefore he
begins with letting him see the evil of his complaints, and then informs him of
the hazard and difficulty in his way.

2. Man, especially being under trouble, is a quarrelsom and fretful Creature;
as here is supposed, that man is ready to contend. That which breeds all this
is, man's missing of happiness within time, or his taking it ill, that all
things should not go according to his mind (which is a fruit of his aspiring to
be like God, Genesis 3.) and his ignorance and self-love, while he knows not
what is good for him. And there is no cure for this evil, but by Humility,
Mortification, much Trust in God, and submission to him, and much of the Spirit
of the Gospel.

3. It may deter men from their quarrelsom unpatient humors, when they consider
that passion does not spare to reflect even upon God; for, it contends with the
Almighty. And this is done, either directly, when complaints are ven^ed against
Gods dispensations, which was Job's way; or indirectly, when, Gods
dispensations having imbittered us, we do wreck our selves upon, and are
imbittered at, what is nearest us.

4. The sin and folly of this quarrelling (and that there is no Instruction or
edification in it, according to the other Readings) may appear, if we consider,

1. It is a contending with him who is Almighty, and so does argue great
presumption, and that we do neither know him nor our selves.

2 It is a presuming to instruct him, who is infinitely wise, whereas we are
but foolish; as if it become us to guide, and not to follow and submit.

3. It is a presuming to reprove God (as it is in the end of the v.) or, to
argue him out of all his defenses; as if we did well in complaining, and he had
nothing to say for justifying his dealing. See Jon. 4.9. All which, were they
well considered, might make us abhor our selves for this evil.

Doct. 5. Though this evil be thus heinous, yet men are not easily convinced of
the evil of it, when they are in their fits of Passion; for, it must be thus
born in upon Job. Men will be afraid to commit other sins, who make no scruple
to mistake God, and to read all his dealing wrong. Pride sets them on work to
complain hat all is not to their mind, and their passion blinds them, that they
see not the evil of it. And beside, they are ready to put a fair face upon
their miscarriages, pretending that they are only sensible of their own ill
condition, etc. when in effect they are murmuring against God. And therefore we
are not to trust our first thoughts about our accession to this fault.

From the second Branch of the Conclusion, v. -- 2. Learn,

1. If the Conscience of sin will not, the sense of difficulty and hazard may
deter men from sin, particularly, from quarrelling of God; therefore is that
consideration subjoyned, because the former, oft-times, does not prevail.

2. Though men got their will to debate with God, yet they would not thereby
gain their cause; for they could not answer all the Questions wherewith God
could pose them.

3. Quarrellers of God will not escape, but in due time they will be called to
an account for their presumption; for, he that reproves God must answer for it.

4. Whenever God calls Quarrellers to an account, they will not be able to
abide it, but must succumb, since they make their best friend their party; for,
let him answer, imports, that God will not own him in it, but let him take his
own hazard, which will be too heavy for him. So that it is a folly for men to
meddle with that which they are not able to maintain, when God deals
seriously with them.

Verse 3. Then Job answered the Lord, and said,

4. Behold, I am vile, what shall I answer thee? I will lay mine hand upon my
mouth.

5. Once have I spoken, but I will not answer: yea, twice, but I will proceed
no further.


In these Verses, we have Job's Answer to this Proposal, or, his taking with,
and confessing of, his fault. Wherein, Consider,

1. The Rise of this Confession, is, That he, who was resolute enough to fill
his mouth with Arguments, chap. 23.4. if once he could meet with God, is now so
damped with Gods immediate Parley, and his unexpected and terrible appearing in
the Whirlwind; so confounded with the former non-plussing Questions, and so
affrighted with his discerning God to be angry; that he, is at first stricken
silent, and now when the Lord rowzeth him up, and lays the matter home to his
Conscience, he utters this Confession; and then brings out this Answer.

2. The Confession it self; wherein he confesses his vileness, and that he
has nothing to answer; and therefore will be silent from complaining and
disputing, v. 4. and will not persist in that which he had already, once, and
twice, (that is, too much, and too often) dwelt upon, v. 5.

3. As for the quality of this Confession; as (no doubt) it was; for substance,
sound and sincere; so the Lords not taking of it off his hand, till, by a
second speech, he draw out a fu^ler confession, Chap. 42.1, 2, etc. does evince
that it was defective in somewhat. Somewhat of this defect will come to be
marked, on v. 6. And we will find what his confession should have been, when we
come to consider what afterward it was, Chap. 42. Only this, in general,
appears, That though he was confounded, and his Reason silenced, yet his
passions were not calmed; and therefore he promises only to stop his mouth, v.
4. And though he acknowledge his former folly, v. 5. yet not so humbly or fully
as afterward he does.

From these Verses, Learn, 1. Whatever be the high bended thoughts of men in
their, passion, yet Gods appearing and interposing will soon cause them stoop:
As here Job passes from his Compeerance, and renounceth his former bold
resolutions.

2. Whoever be stubborn, yet it is the duty and property of Godly men, that
they are soon convinced by God: whereof here we have some begun evidences in
Job.

3. When a Child of God gets a right sight of his own distempers, it will breed
an admirable change, and will make him wonder at the thoughts he is made to
have of himself and his way, different from what he formerly had, and how
incredible that seemed to be, which now he finds to be really true; for,
behold, says he, by way of admiration, when he comes to reflect upon his
former way, and to discern it as indeed it was.

4. Men do never get a right sight of their particular faults, till they be led
up thereby to see their pollution, and their vile disposition from which they
flow; for, now, when he is convinced, he begins at that, I am vile, or, light,
vain and empty.

5. As all men by nature are vile and empty things, so godly men do best
discern that they are so, especially when they get a sight of God; for, then
with he to God, I am vile, being compared with thee. See Isa. 6.5.

6. Such as study their own vileness, will find, that there is no cause for
quarrelling of God for any thing he does, but they must be silent before him;
nor can they sustain, if he be the pursuer: For, what shall I answer thee?
either by way of defense, or to any of those puzling Questions which thou have
propounded? His Question imports a puzling perplexity, and the utter
impossibility of the thing.

7. It is not sufficient that men have clear light to know what reverence is
due to God, unless they put their light in practice, by silent submission to
God under his hand; therefore it is subjoyned to the former Question. I will
lay my hand upon my mouth, or give over the Plea.

8. Even convinced Saints may be so far under the power of distemper, that it
is much if they get their Reason satisfied, and their evil humors buried in
silence, albeit for a time they continue boiling within; for, laying the hand
on the mouth, is not only a sign of simple silence, but sometime of compelled
silence, when there is much distemper within; such as Aarons was, Lev. 10.3.
and Jobs, Chap. 2.10. And Saints are bound to glorify God with their tongues,
(which are their Glory) when they cannot get their hearts commanded.

9. Such as do in sincerity reform their evils, will be sensible of their
former debordings; for, so was Job here, Once have I spoken, in my foolish
passion, complaining of thee, and desiring to dispute with thee.

10. Such as have a true sense of former debordings, will look upon them in all
the aggravations thereof; and particularly, how frequent they have been
therein; for, Once, yea twice, have I spoken, not definitely so many times
only, but frequently.

11. However men's corrupt hearts do look upon their being, engaged in an evil
way, as a reason why they cannot come off, Jer. 2.25. Yet it is rather a strong
argument persuading them to put an end to their frequent wanderings; For, so
does Job argue, Once have I spoken, but I will not answer; yea twice, but will
proceed no further. See, 1 Pet. 4.3.

Verse 6. Then answered the Lord unto Job out of the Whirlwind, and said,

7. Gird up thy loins now like a man: I will demand of thee, and declare thou
unto me.


In the rest of this Chapter we have a part of Gods second Speech to Job, to
press him to be yet more humbled. And in these Verses, we have the Introduction
to the Speech. Wherein it is declared,

1. That God (not acquiescing in what Job had said, as satisfying) proceeds to
convince him yet more by a new speech, uttered with wonted Terror and Majesty
out of the Whirlwind, which was commoved of new, that the Speech might have the
deeper impression upon him, v. 6. Where it is not needful to conceive (as some
do) that, because the Emphatick Article which was prefixed to the Word
rendered, Whirlwind, Chap. 38.1. is here wanting, therefore it was less
terrible now than before; for that Article is not always prefixed where the
thing spoken of is remarkable enough.

2. That God renewed that former provocation to the Dispute, v. 7. Of this, see
Chap. 38.3. It is in sum, a provocation to Job, to prepare himself to defend
against his pursuit. And it is here again repeated by way of Irony, in answer
to Job's declining to answer, or speak any more as he had done, to this sense;
What I will thou, who wast so keen and eager to dispute with me, now resile and
start back, when thou have the opportunity? It cannot be, but thou will make
good thy word and undertaking; therefore set to it again.

From these Verses, Learn, 1. Even many convictions of real Saints are not so
sound, or, at least, not so solid; through, and serious, as they ought to be;
for, God does not acquiesce in what Job had said, nor takes it off his hand as
a sufficient confession of his former miscarriages, and declaration of his
sense thereof. His speech evidenceth that he was indeed silenced, but not that
he was satisfied. He had quit the Plea, as being sensible that he was no fit
party to grapple with God; yet he had not confessed his fault fully enough, nor
repented sufficiently, and sought pardon for it, as he does afterward. Though
he was silent, yet had he not commended and justified God, as afterward. And
what good things were begun in him, were not yet solidly enough rooted. All
which may be of use to us to consider them, that we be not deceived in the
matter of our Convictions and Repentance; remembering, That Corruptions may
remain after we are convinced of them; That passions and corruptions may be
silent and quiet for a time, when yet they are not subdued: that evil courses
may be abandoned, when yet they are not mourned for; that fits of good motions,
wanting a root and solidity, are little worth; and, that, when we are humbled,
It is good to be holden going at that exercise; and, therefore we should not
mistake, though, after we have been taken with our faults, God yet heap
challenges upon us, that we may be yet more humbled and convinced.

2. God is a Judge of men's Convictions and Repentance, who will not be
deceived, however we please our selves; for, whatever Job thought of his former
Confession, God will not take it off his hand.

3. It is of Gods mercy that he follows his people, not only when they are
stubborn, to convince them, but when they are not thoroughly convinced, to bring
them up to be more serious; as here, he casts not off Job, first nor last, for
his stubbornness before, or his defects now; but deigns him with his second
speech; to perfect his cure, and to break the neck of his pride, and root out
all his scruples.

4. As a sight of Gods dreadful Majesty is needful to abase man; so even a
Child of God may expect to be kept (as we say) at the staffes end, and not to
be admitted to a comfortable sight of God, till he repent: for, he speaks to
Job with wonted Majesty, out of the Whirlwind, and keeps his won^ed distance,
bidding him gird up his loins like a man, etc. and either stand to his plea, or
else be more humble.

5. When God appears terrible to his people, it is not against their persons,
but their faults; whereof they shall have proof so soon as they abandon their
faults; for this distance is kept up, only to testify how God was dissatisfied
with Job's miscarriages, and to bring him to repent for them; after which he
speaks kindly to him.

6. Proud daring to contend with God is a fault wherewith he is highly
offended, and which he will not easily let pass; for, this, in particular, is
the fault which here again he reflects upon in that Ironical Challenge, Gird up
thy Loins like a man; I will demand of thee, and declare thou unto me.

Verse 8. Will thou also disanul my judgment? will thou condemn me that thou
may be righteous?
This Verse contains the Sum and Scope of this second Speech of God; which is
to convince Job that he had done ill in disannulling (or making void, and of
none effect) Gods judgment, or, his procedure in the world and toward himself;
which is made void and disannulled, when Gods purpose and determination is
reflected upon as an unjust Sentence, and such as ought to have no effect; or
when men so complain, as if they would have the guiding of Affairs taken out of
Gods hand, and put into their own. This the Lord not only charge home upon
Job as a great fault, even himself being Judge (as the Question imports) but
propounds it very emphatically, Will thou also disanul, etc. Where the Emphasis
may lie in the Person, Thou: Will thou, a godly man, do so as the wicked are
ready to do? Or, in the Particle also (which is most emphatick in the Original)
will thou not be content to plead in defense of thine own Righteousness, but
thou must also disanul my judgment? And this is prosecuted in the latter part
of the Verse, That Job was not content to plead that he was righteous (which
God did not quarrel) but he would needs also condemn Gods way of proceeding
with him, that thereby, as by an Argument, he might prove his own
righteousness. In sum, this Challenge imports, as if God had said; O Job, as
the case now stands betwixt Me and Thee, thou being a righteous man, and yet
afflicted by me, and thou complaining that I should deal so with thee, a
righteous man; There is no Medium here, but either I in my proceeding with
thee, or thou in thy Complaints of me, must be wrong. Now I refer the
determination of this Case to thy own Conscience in cold blood; whether it be
seemly to raise thy Righteousness upon the Ruins of the Glory of my
Righteousness in governing the Affairs of the World; or whether it were not
sitter that thou maintained thy righteousness some other way, and so as thou
forbear to quarrel my righteousness, who have afflicted he?

I we consider this purpose generally and abstractly, it imports,

1. God has a Judgment in the World; not only a Sentence, or Verdict,
concerning the ways of men, to which they ought to submit; but a determination
and purpose, daily manifested in his Providence and Procedure in and about all
things. And this, as it is comfortable to the Godly, Psalm. 11.3, 4 So it is
terrible to the Wicked. And therefore they shift the thoughts of i^, not only
when Providence does not act according to their mind, Mal. ^.17. But in their
evil courses, Psalm 10.11 13. and 14.1, 2. and 59.7. and 94.5, 6, 7. Ezekiel. 8.12.
and 9.9. which is but a poor shift.

2. As a Providence is to be acknowledged; so it is to be looked upon as a
Judgment, or, a righteous procedure, not to be disanulled, nor God, who is the
Author of it, to be condemned. See, Psalm. 145.17. Genesis 18 25. Here it is that
men fail and stumble, before they turn gross Atheists; And none are more ready
to carp at Providence, than Hypocrites, Isa. 58.3. Mal. 2.17. and 3.14, 15.
Therefore it should be their care, who believe a Providence, to commend God in
all he does, Psalm. 22.3. with v. 1, 2. And that we may cure our Mistakes, we
should study,

1. That God is Sovereign and absolute in all that he does, and not to be
contended with.

2. That seeing godly men have corruptions, which need purging, they must not
expect that their lot, within time, will ever be fully to their mind.

3. That when providential dispensations are most dark to us, ordinarily God
has most special purposes of Love to manifest thereby.

4. That he makes every thing beautiful and useful in its season, Eccles. 3.11.
And when he seems not to be a God of judgment, or compassion (as he is called,
Isa. 30.18.) yet he is a God of knowledge, weighing actions, and what our
condition requires, 1 Samuel 2.3. and will prove a God of Judgment to them who
wait for him, Isa. 30.18. Rev. 13.10.

In particular, If we consider the Plea as it stands here betwixt Job a
righteous man, and the righteous God afflicting him; it teaches,

1. When men are indeed righteous, whatever be their lo^, or failings, yet God
allows it, as acceptable service, that they stand to the maintenance thereof;
for, here he concedes that Job is righteous, and does not find fault simply
that he maintained it, had he done it fairly. It is true, righteous men should
not desperately, and Roman-like, bear out the testimony of their integrity
under trouble, without humbling of themselves under it; nor yet should they who
are truly righteous, fancy themselves sinless, or that they can be wrong in no
cause, or that they should not be afflicted in Fatherly displeasure, seeing
they are truly Godly. Yet they should not so eye Providence in their
afflictions, as to let cross dispensations disturb the peace of their
Consciences concerning their Integrity.

2. However God allow righteous persons to maintain their integrity; yet when
they do not cast away their Confidence, they do hardly manage this claim well;
and beside their Pride and Vanity in ordinary, they do especially miscarry in
defending their integrity under affliction: As here Job did. A good Conscience,
and a Cup of bitter Affliction, are seldom well carried, when they meet
together. This miscarriage of Saints under cleanly trials, causes them meet
with many foul Crosses, Psalm. 51.4. And where Trials are most cleanly, men will
never carry right under them, unless the Conscience of sin and daily failings
be their daily exercise; for, herein Job failed.

3. Saints do then manage the testimony of a good Conscience under trouble ill,
when they make too many complaints under Afflictions, and cannot stoop that God
should exercise them so much as he pleases; blessing him, that they have a
good Conscience to support them; for, here God reflects upon Jobs complaints as
disanulling his Judgment, etc. The root of which, is, men's conceit, which makes
them think they should be dealt with according to their own mind, because they
are righteous: and their love to ease, which makes them dislike afflictions
upon any terms.

4. Albeit in in our passions we think little of complaining; yet such
complaints are terrible reflections upon God, a pleading of our own
righteousness to the prejudice of Gods Righteousness, and a condemning of his
proceedings, as if he were not fit to sit upon the Throne; for, thus does God
expound his Complaints, as disanulling his Judgment, and a condemning of him
that he may be righteous. So also does unbelief reflect upon him, 1 John 5.10.

5. Those Complaints, when well pondered, will be found to be most unjust,
seeing God is to be justified, whoever be condemned, Psalm. 51.4. Romans 3.4.
Therefore does the Lord challenge them here as a great fault.

6. Though we think lightly of those escapes under trouble, yet they are
heinous provocations, highly displeasing to God; for, here they are the matter
of a sad quarrel, and God rejects all his confessions, till he be more sensible
of this fault.

7. As the Consciences of all men cannot but condemn those presumptuous
reflections upon God; so a Child of God, especially, will take it ill, in cold
blood, that he should entertain wrong thoughts of God; for, he refers this case
to be decided by Job himself, when he is sober. So that such a tender
disposition may be an evidence of a godly man in a good frame; and they who do
miscarry in this, will find sad company of their Consciences, when they are put
to it to speak impartially.

Verse 9. Have thou an arm like God? or can thou thunder with a voice like
him?

10. Deck thy self now with Majesty and Excellency, and array thy self with
Glory and Beauty.

11. Cast abroad the rage of thy wrath: and behold every one that is proud, and
abase him.

12. Look on every one that is proud, and bring him low: and tread down the
wicked in their place.

13. Hide them in the dust together, and bind their faces in secret.

14. Then will I also confess unto thee, that thine own right hand can save
thee.


In these Verses, the Lord proves the Justice of the former Reprehension, That
since there is no comparison or equality betwixt him and Job, therefore Job
should not debase or impeach His Righteousness to cry up his own, nor offer to
contend with him as his Equal. This inequality betwixt God and Job is held out,
partly, by way of Question, if he could claim to any Majesty like Gods, v. 9.
Partly, by way of Proposition, that if he would compare with God, he behoved to
do what God does, v. 10-14. And particularly, this inequality is instanced,

1. In the matter of Power, v. 9. -- That there is nothing in Job like Gods
Power and Arm.

2. In the external signs of Power and Greatness v. 9, 10. Jobs Voice (which
would scarce affright a petty Creature) is nothing like Gods thundering voice;
and he, who was lying now full of Boils, could put on no Majesty and Glory,
like unto that wherewith God is seen to be attended and surrounded in his
special apparitions unto men, and that which shines daily in the Creatures,
proclaiming his Excellency, Psalm. 104.1.

3. In the effects of Power and Greatness, v. 11, 12, 13. Jobs wrath is very
impotent, v. 11 -- He cannot (as God does) know the proud every where and reach
them and abase them, v. -- 11, 12. -- and all wicked men, to tread them down
every where, and where they are most insolent, v. -- 12. Nor can he bury them
in death, and hide their faces in secret oblivion (as the faces of Malefactors,
Esth. 7.8, and the Dead in their Graves, John 11 44. use to be covered) v. 13.
From all which God draws this Inference, v. 14. That when Job does all those
things, as he does, and not till then, he will acknowledge that his own right
hand can save him; that is, that he is self-sufficient, and so may enter the
Lists with God as his Equal. Hereby also intimating that, since he needed often
to be saved and delivered, and could not help himself, but behoved to depend
upon God for it, it became him not to be so proud.

In this purpose, Observe, 1. In general, That those who contend with God,
about his Righteousness in his Dispensations, do little know God or themselves,
and do little consider, his Greatness, and the Inequality that is betwixt Him
and them; for, so much does this Argument, in the scope thereof, teach, that
Job, when he quarrelled God, little minded what He was, and how unlike himself
was to God. For this greatness of God does not only prove that he can do no
wrong, but does intimate, that opposition to him will be full of hazard to the
opposer.

Obs. 2. In these Questions and Proposals of what Job should be, or do, if he
would prove an equality with God, we have several Instructions concerning God,
which are to be well studied. Such as,

1. God is of great and incomparable power and force, to support some, and
crush others, as he pleases; for, there is no Arm like Gods. See, Psalm. 89.13.
Deuteronomy. 33.27. Isa. 51.9.

2. Gods strength is attended with incomparable, Majesty, Glory and Beauty, to
conciliate reverence and to affright all from opposing of him; for, no man can
thunder with a voice like him, nor deck himself with Majesty and Excellency,
and array himself with Glory and Beauty, as God does,

3. Though Gods tender mercies be over all his works; yet he is not all mercy,
but has wrath and displeasure, when he is provoked; for it is a part of his
praise, that he has rage of wrath.

4. Gods power and anger are not idle, but are let forth in effects, every
where, all the world over, as there is cause; for, he casts abroad the rage of
his wrath, and compenseth all delays with the severity thereof, when it comes,
Isa. 42.14.

5. As the humble need not be afraid of Gods Power, Majesty, or Wrath; So the
proud shall not escape the effects thereof; for, here the proud are singled
out, as his especial party. See, Psalm. 138.6.

6. As no man can know all that are proud, as God does (for they are but few
men that any one man can know, in respect of the multitudes that swarm upon the
earth, and among these they know many may mask their proud and lofty hearts
from them, under a show of humility) So neither can any man overtake all the
proud men he knows, to punish them, seeing they may flee from him; nor dare
he grapple with every proud person who stays beside him, seeing many of them
may have more power than himself: But God has perfect knowledge of every proud
person, can overtake them wherever they flee, and can crush all of them, were
they never so strong; for, he beholds every one that is proud, and abases him;
and locks on every one that is proud and brings him low, or makes him crouch.
Where the expressions are doubled, not only to confirm the truth of the
Assertion against all the presumptuous Dreams of proud men, Obad. v. 3. But to
show that, as he beholds and sees every proud man, so, with a look he can
confound the proudest of them, and bring them low, Exodus 14.24. See, Dan. 4.37.

7. Though God have a special quarrel against proud persons, yet he will not
spare any wicked person, though pride be not their predominant evil; for, after
the proud, the wicked are propounded to be punished.

8. God can reach the wicked, wherever they are; and even where they think
themselves most secure, and are most insolent (as a Cock on his own Dunghill)
there he can crush them; for, he can tread down the wicked in their place. See,
Exodus 18.19.

9. God can, and, when he pleases, does pursue the wicked even unto death, and
till he lay them in the dust, and bury them in obscurity, and make them calm
with their Swords under their heads, Ezekiel. 32.27. For, he hides them in the
dust, and binds their faces in secret, and that together, not all of them at
one time, or in one place, but all of them are thus reached, and put in a like
condition, the great and mighty ones, as well as the weaker, Isa. 14.9, 10.

10. God is self-sufficient, and his own right hand can bring salvation, and
effectuate all his purposes for his people, and against his enemies; for, this
is not to be yielded unto Job, but upon the former impossible terms; and if it
should be yielded, it were to make him equal wi^h God, whose own right hand can
save. See, Isa. 59 16.

Obs. 3. These Questions and Proposals made to Job, if he would aspire to an
equality with God, do also afford several Instructions concerning men.

1. Men by nature aspire no less than to be Gods, and equal to the true God,
seeking to do whatsoever themselves will, and to have all things done to their
minds; for, so much does this parallel betwixt God and Job import, that he
aspired to no less, though he was nothing like God.

2. N^ne do more proclaim this presumption than Murmurers at Gods providence,
especially in afflicting righteous men; such, do, in effect, declare that they
would gladly usurp Gods Throne, to guide better than they think he does; for
murmuring Job, v. 8. would be like God, though indeed he have nothing like him.

3. Men will soon see the evil and folly of this bold presumptuous attempt, if
they consider the dreadful Majesty of God, and the distance which is betwixt
him and his Creatures; for, God here propounds his Arm, Thunder, Majesty, and
Excellency, Glory and Beauty, and his proceedings with the proud and all wicked
men, not only to convince Job of his folly, in seeking to be equal with him who
was so infinitely above him, but to let him see the hazard of such an attempt,
seeing his strong arm, dreadful thunder, and glorious Majesty, and his
proceedings against proud and wicked men, might let him see that as God can
reach, so he will not endure such presumption.

4. Howbeit men do thus presumptuously aspire, yet their own Consciences, when
put to it, will soon discover it to be a foolish attempt; therefore does he
begin with Questions, v. 9. as knowing that his Conscience (if he were serious)
would so resolve them, as might contribute to his own abasement for what he had
done.

5. Albeit men's Consciences may be blindfolded, in their fits of passion; yet
they are able to do no acts that may prove they have a right to aspire to any
equality with God: Therefore, after the Questions, v. 9. he propounds, in the
following Verses, what is to be done by Job, before he aspire to that which his
Complaints insinuated he thought of himself.

6. Men are not soon brought to be serious and solid, in studying and
practically improving that distance which is betwixt God and them; therefore
God does not content himself with a naked proposition of this distance, but
insists so long to give Evidences and Instances of his Power and Majesty, that
Job may lay it better to heart.

7. It is an evidence of men's afficting a D^^^y, when they would help and
relieve themselves in all conditions, without depending upon, or employing of,
God; so that they are vexed when they are left upon God, and put to that
exercise of Dependence; for, it is a divine property (communicable to no
Creature, nor to be affected by them) that his own right hand can save.

8. When men consider how often they need help and deliverance, and are put to
depend upon God for it, it may keep them from proud competing with him; for, if
Jobs own right hand cannot save him, there was no reason why he should carry so
proudly as he did, but his being so absolutely in Gods Reverence should have
kept him humble.

Verse 15. Behold now Behemoth which I made with thee, he eats Grass as an
Ox.
Follows, to the end of Chap. 41. the confirmation of the former Proof, or of
this inequality that is betwixt God and man, by two remarkable Instances of
Gods works, Behemoth on the Land, to the end of t^ is Chapter; and Leviathan in
the Sea, Chap. 41. His Scope in both which may be taken up thus;

1. It points out Gods greatness, and the infinite distance that is betwixt him
and man, that he is the Creator and Governor of those vast Creatures, as well
as of others; to the like whereof man cannot pretend.

2. Though those Creatures be great and terrible, yet the first (at least, some
sorts of them, for some are more untameable than others) is made tame, and more
peaceable than others, by God, as the description will clear; and God can reach
him, v* 19. And so can he reach great ones, v. 11, 12.

3. If this Creature were not tamed by God, none durst meddle with him, as none
dare grapple with the Leviathan, Chap. 41.9, 10. For less dare any grapple with
God, as is there inferred.

This being the general Doctrine pointed at in both these Instances, I shall
unfold the Description of the Beast in this Chapter, and draw out some
particular Remarks from it. And in the entry, waving the idle Allegories of
men, who understand this of Satan; I do, by this Behemoth, understand the
Elephant, and not a Complex of all Beasts together (as the name, Behemoth,
signifies, Beasts, in the plural number) for God speaks of it as of one Beast.
And (as the Latins oft-times call it Bellua, so) it gets this name in the
Hebrew, because it is as great as many Beasts put together; or because it wants
a name in the Hebrew, therefore it gets the common name by way of excellency,
to show that it is the most excellent of Beasts. And so some understand it, as
if it were called, the Beast of Beasts. Thus Wisdoms (as it is in the
Original, Prove. 1.20.) is put for most excellent Wisdom.

Unto this Beast, the following Description, in all the parts of it does agree.
And in this Verse we have a general Proposition, of the greatness, and yet the
peaceableness, of this Beast. He desires Job to consider and behold this Beast,
which is as great as many Beasts put together, yet,

1. It is made with him, that is, his Fellow creature, made by God as well as
he. And not only so, but a Beast that comes very near man in teachableness,
and other properties, and created on the same day with man, and living on the
Earth with him, and not in the Waters, as the Leviathan does; yea, a Beast
excelling other four-footed Beasts, as man does excel other Creatures.

2. It is a peaceable Beast, though great, so that it lives not upon prey, as
Lions and other ravenous Beasts do (which if he did, he would devour much) but
feeds upon Grass as an Ox.

Doct 1. It is one of man's great weaknesses, that he is slow in taking up of
God and himself; therefore must his truth be inculcated over again.

2. It does also evidence man's great inadvertency, that he must be sent out to
the Creatures to learn this Lesson, concerning God and himself; (as Job is
here) whereas, by studying himself, he might both see what himself is, and what
God, who made him, is.

3. This defect of man, in studying himself for that end, is supplied by much
of God, and of man's frailty in comparison of God, shining in his works about
man; as here, by these instances we are taught. And this is one right use of
the Creatures, when by studying of them, we are helped to know God and our
selves, Psalm 8.3, 4.

4. When many proofs of God have been seen in his works, there is still more to
be studied, both in the same, and in o^h^r of his works; for, after all the
former Instances, God yet adds these two remarkable ones, as teaching yet more
of him. And by adding these Instances, God does teach us how to study him in
many more of his works, though they be not here named; from every one of which
we may either get a new Lessen, or have former Lessons inculcated, and may know
that when we have studied most, we are still ignorant of God, and of what may
be known of him.

5. Because little of God is, ordinarily, seen in ordinary and lesser
operations, God lets forth some great and signal operations; as Behemoth is
here subjoined to the former Instances. And this is also his method in the
dispensations of his Providence.

6. It demonstrates and commends the greatness of God, that the most excellent
of Creatures are but his handy work; as here Behemoth is. So that if they be
remarkable and singular, much more is He so.

7. Gods very work of Creation, and his making of his Creatures, is an
excellent study, as well as his providential dispensations; as here, he bids
him behold, I have made Behemoth. Our not studying and improving of these may
provoke God to hide from us a comfortable sight of his providence.

8. No length of time, wherein we are conversant with the Creatures of God,
should diminish the luster of his glory shining in them; for, though Behemoth
was made long before this time, yet Job should still behold him, as but
beginning to study that work, or not having studied it enough.

9. It may humble man, if he consider that, notwithstanding his excellencies,
yet, he is but a fellow creature with all the rest. All the Creatures are made
of the same nothing, and whatever difference is, betwixt one creature and
another, It is of God: for, says he, he is made with thee, thy
fellow creature. And God might have made man another thing than he is, if it
had pleased him.

10. The more opportunities men have to take up God in his works, their guilt
is the greater if they neglect them; for, says he, since he is made with thee,
and lives upon the Land with thee, thou should study him well. Though yet men
should not neglect to study those works, also which are further from them and
in the Sea, as the Leviathan i^.

11. It speaks the emptiness of the greatest of Creatures, that they need daily
provision and supply from God; as here, the Elephant must have food.

12. God, who is the maker of all the Creatures, is also their preserver, and
gives them food to eat; for, he provides food for the Elephant. See, Psalm. 104
27. and 145.15, And in this God is to be adored, that he preserves man and
beast, Psalm. 36.6

13. As the Elephant, notwithstanding his vast bulk, is not ravenous, as some
lesser beasts are, but feeding on Grass, like an Ox; so this may teach, That
things will not prove as they seem to promise or threaten in themselves, but as
God makes them to be; for, the huge Elephant does live harmlessely upon grass.

Verse 16. Lo now, his strength is in his Loins, and his force is in the navel
of his belly.

17. He moves his tail like a Cedar, the sinews of his stones are wrapped
together.

18. His bones are as strong pieces of brass, his bones are like bars of iron.

19. He is the chief of the ways of God: he that made him, can make his sword
to approach unto him.


In these Verses we have a particular Description of the great strength of this
Beast, to set forth the glory of God, who rules him, and ha^h power over him.
This his strength is instanced in his Loins, and in the navel of his belly
(though some read it, that he has Pains, and may be easily hurt there) where
the Channels of the Veins and Arteries do meet, v. 16. It is also instanced in
his moving of his Tail, v. 17. Which, because it is not great in Elephants,
some understand of his Instrument of generation, because of that which
follows, of his Stones, which are not visible, but wrapped up at his R^ins. But
because that is not proportionable to the rest of his bulk, therefore I would
rather understand it of his Proboscis, or, his Snout, which is very long, and
when he pleases, he can stretch it out, or erect it, like a tall Cedar. And it
may be called his Tail, because it hangs at his body, as tails do on other
beasts, though not at the same place of the body, and because he moves it, as
other beasts do their tails. As for what is added in the end of the Verse, the
word, Stones, is not in the Original, but Terror, or, Fear; and so I read it,
His terrible sinews, (or, the sinews of his fear, or, terror) are wrapped
together, like twisted Branches; to wit, in his Snout, which is the cause why
he moves it so nimbly, though it be long, and why it is terrible to those whom
he smites, or lifts up, and throws where he will, with it. His strength is
further instanced in his bones, v. 18. Where some do understand both the
expressions, of his Teeth, or, Tusks; but that seems to be too narrow an
interpretation. And because the Expression is doubled, and there are two words
in the Original to express his Bones; we may thus conceive it, that not only
his great bones are like Biass, but his smaller bones, and very gristles, are
like Iron; or (because the words in the Original import no such difference of
bones indefinitely, all his bones, greater and lesser, are like brass or Iron.
All this Description of his strength is briefly summed up in this v. 19 that he
is the Chief, or first of the ways, or, works of God; to wit, among Beasts, not
that he was created first of all the beasts, but that he is chief inexcellency
of strength among them. Now though this Beast be thus great, and strong; yet
Gods dominion and power over him, does not only appear in this, That (however
his ^nout be terrible to others, yet) his strength, for most part, is not in
his offensive parts, not has he any horns on his head, etc. but in his bones
and loins, whereby he is able to bear those great Towers which men build upon
him in time of War, that out of these they may fight against their enemies; and
in the Navel of his Belly, about which this Tower is girded on him; but
further, in this, That God, who made him, can reach him with his sword, or
stroke, v. -- 19. And that either immediately, or mediately, by Dragons, and
some lesser Creatures, which (as Naturalists write) do kill or annoy him.

From these Verses, Learn, 1. It is not sufficient that men, in taking up of
God, do take up a general view of his works, wherein his glory does shine, that
they must be distinct and particular in that study; therefore after that
general Proposition, v. 15. he descends to this particular Description.

2. Men should follow their study of God in his works, with renewed and
repeated admiration, and exeltation of their own spirits for that effect;
therefore, after that Behold, v. 15. the Note of Admiration, Lo, is here
prefixed to this particular Description.

3. It has pleased God to endow some of his Creatures (as the Elephant here)
with very great strength; That so we may consider how strong a God we have to
deal with; may commend his kindness, who makes such vast and strong Creatures
so useful to men; and may learn not to glory in excellencies which are common
to us with Beasts, such as bodily strength and force are.

4. God has so ordered, that, as no Creature is perfect in any excellency, so,
none have all excellencies; but some are eminent in one kind, some in another:
As here, the Elephant is chief of the ways of God in his kind, as other
Creatures (and even other Beasts) are excellent in their kind.

5. No excellency in the Creatures does hinder God to dispose of them at his
pleasure, were it even to cut them off; as here, he has a sword for this
Beast. Which may help to silence Murmurers at herd dispensations, as if their
excellencies and privileges did exempt them from Gods Dominion, who, when he
pleases can reach the greatest and most excellent Creature; as he can make his
Sword approach to this Beast.

6. That God is the Creator and Maker of his Creatures, does prove his power
and right to dispose of them as he will; for, since he made him, he can make
his Sword approach unto him.

Verse 20. Surely the mountains bring him forth food: where all the beasts of
the field play.

21. He lies under the shady trees, in the covert of the Reed, and Fens.

22. The shady trees cover him with their shadow: the willows of the Brook
compass him about.

23. Behold, he drinks up a River, and hastes not: he trusts that he can
draw up Jordan into his mouth.

24. He takes it with his eyes, his nose pierces through snares.


In these Verses, the Lord proceeds yet in the Description of this B^^st.

1. In his peaceableness (though he live wild from among men, till he be tamed)
as to his food and converse with other Beasts, v 20. and that he feeds upon
grass among other Beasts, who play without fear about him. The Original may be
more emphatically rendered thus; Because the mountains bring him forth food,
therefore all the beasts of the field play there; that is, because he feeds on
grass, other Beasts do feed about and beside him, not fearing to be devoured by
him.

2. In the place of his Repose, v. 21, 22. Though he feed upon the mountains,
v. 20. yet the hot Climate, and his own natural heat, make him come to repose
himself under the shade of Trees, Reeds, and Willows. As for what is asserted
by many (that he does not lie, but lean to a tree, when he rests, otherwise,
wanting Joints in his Legs, he could not rise again) it is refuted by later
Writers, both from Reason and Experience. And as those two branches of the
Description speak something of Gods taming of so vast a Creature, in that he is
peaceable in his repast and repose; so,

3. The next speaks his terrible vastness in himself, evidenced by his great
drinking, v. 23. That (not only does he press a River with his bulk, as some
understand i^, when he goes to drink, but) drinks so much (even many hundred
pound weight of water at one time, as Naturalists write) as it he would drink
up a River, and oppress it, by swallowing it up, and swallow up Jordan (a River
known to Job, who lived in Arabia) as it is swallowed up by the Dead Sea. This
he does, and hastes not, as being afraid of no interruption, as Dogs and other
Beasts, when they drink of the River Nilu^, are afraid lest the Crocodile
should surprise and take them. Or, he hastes not to drink the clear water,
till he foul it first with his feet, as Naturalists do write. As for that
which is added, v. 24. Some read it by way of Interrogation, Will any take him
in his fight, or bore his Nose with a Snare, or Gin? that is, he cannot be
taken by open force, but only by Wiles and Stratagems. But our Translation
rendereth it better, as an amplification of his Drinking, that he takes it (or
the River, v. 23.) with his eyes, that is, by reason of the greatness of his
thirst, he looks greedily on a River, as if he would drink it all; and his nose
pierces through Snares, that is, though, in thrusting his Snout, or Nose, into
the water to get drink, he pierce through Weeds and other Blocks in the bottom
of the River, yet he cares not for that, so he get Drink.

From these Verses, Learn, 1. Very common passages of Gods works do need to be
looked upon again and again; for, after what has been s^id, v. 15. his food is
here again spoken of. Spiritual minds will never find such Subjects barren.

2. Whatever our delicate appetites lust after, yet Nature is content with what
is very common; for, as this vast Beast is nourished by Grass brought forth on
the mountains, so might men be satisfied with less than they lust after.

3. God provides for the necessities of his Creatures, and can help them, when
he pleases, without the assistance of man; for, the mountains bring forth food
for him, and for many other Beasts. See Psalm 50.10. Which may help to cure the
anxieties of Saints, Mat. 6.26.

4. That all the Beasts of the field do play about the Elephant, does not only
tell us, That vast and dreadful things will not prove terrible, if God please;
which may be of good general use: But this their playing, may also point out,
partly, that sweet life which freedom from sin brings, however they be also
made subject to vanity, Romans 8.20, 21. Partly, that Play and Recreation is not
man's happiness (however many spend their time that way) it being common to
Beasts also.

5. Creatures are concluded under many necessities, that much of God may be
seen in their supply; as this Beast needs rest and shelter, as well as food.

6. God has accommodated and provided the world with what is necessary for all
his Creatures; as here he has provided this Beast a fit place for food, and a
place of repose, and to be a covert from the heat, whereby he lets us see that
he is all-sufficient for all cases and necessities.

7. Whatever God make of our Lots, we should still remember what they would be
in themselves, if he interposed not; therefore, after an account of the
peaceableness of this Beast, it is subjoined how vast he is in himself, as is
evidenced by his great Drinking.

8. Our Affections should be often rowzed up, in our meditating upon the works
of God, that we fall not asleep in the midst of our study; therefore is Job
again excited with a new behold, v. 23.

9. The excellencies of Creature, are still attended with eminent wants and
necessities, that they may be known to be but Creatures; as here this beast
needs a great Drink, though he drink not often, and can endure thirst, and live
without Drink, for diverse, (some write, eight) days together.

10. We may here see a reason w^y God has made great Rivers, and many other
things whereof man has no special need; even (beside other ends) for the
supply of wild Beasts; as here for the Elephant. Thus the Beasts in the
Wilderness had benefit by the Water which God gave to his people out of the
Rock, Isa. 43.20. And we should hence learn, not to enquire after a reason of
every thing that God does, and not to measure, or judge of all things according
as we reap particular satisfaction and benefit thereby.

11. The appetite and lust of Creatures is far greater than their real
necessities; for, that hyperbolical Expression, v 23. of his drinking up a
River, is expounded, v. 24. of his greedy look, and that he would be at more
than he can drink.

12. That God gives this Beast a natural instinct to see his own preservation
and health, evidenced by his drinking at leisure, and after the Water is
troubled, (which is judged to be healthful for him) may teach us, That a lawful
care of bodily health is needful and allowed; the health of the body being a
great mercy, and helpful to the exercises of the Soul.

13. His not standing upon Snares and Impediments, so he may get Drink, may
warn us, that all our Advantages and Mercies are surrounded with Thorns and
Difficulties, which are not to be regardded in our necessary and lawful pursuit
after them. Much less should we be deterred, by difficulties in our way, from
pursuing after more choice and needful refreshments.

CHAP. XLI.
This Chapter contains the second Instance confirming the inequality that is
betwixt God and Job, and all men; Namely, the Leviathan. Which, though some do
idly turn it into an Allegory, understanding it of Satan (as sometime great
Oppressers are compared to this Creature, Psalm. 74.14. Isa. 27.1.) yet it is
clear from the following Description (and from Psalm. 104.26.) that it is a
Sea Monster. The difficulty is to know what particular Creature, living in the
Sea and Waters, is meant by this name. The Crocodile in the River Nilus has
indeed such Scales as are here mentioned, v. 15. But that is neither so big,
nor so fierce, as here this Monster is described to be. As for Whales that are
known to us, it is certain this Description agrees not to them; for they have
not these Scales, v. 15. and are taken by men, as this is not, v. 1. -- 9. and
in other parts of the Description. And to say, that God describes it thus,
because then men knew not the way of taking them, as they do now, is not only a
false supposition (as the following Description will clear, where the ways now
in use for taking of Whales, are mentioned) but says in effect, that God could
then refute Job, but could not have refuted him, had he lived in our days.
Therefore it is clearest to understand it of some scaled Whale, Dragon,
Crocodile, or Sea Monster, well known on these Coasts where they lived, though
not seen in our Seas. And so we find Naturalists making mention of Sea Monsters
in the Arabian and Indian Seas, of a vast, and almost incredible, proportion;
whose very Sneezings send forth such abundance of waters as will drown any Ship
they fall into. This Creature has the Name Leviathan, from Addition, either
(as was said of Behemoth) because it is so big, as if many Fishes were added
and joined together in one; or, because of the close Conjuction of his Scales,
of which afterward

In this Description, 1. The Lord points out, more generally, the strength,
untameableness, and terribleness of this Creature, v. 1. ^9. to check Job, who
durst offer to grapple with him, v. 10, 11.

2. He points forth his Glory shining in this Creature, by a more particular
Description thereof; containing a Preface, v. 12. The Description it self, v.
13. -- 32. And a summary comprehension thereof, in the Conclusion of all, v.
33, 34.

Verse 1. Can thou draw out Leviathan with an Hook? or his tongue with a Cord
which thou let down?

2. Can thou put an hook into his Nose? or bore his Jaw through with a Thorn?

3. Will he make many supplications unto thee? will he speak soft words unto
thee?

4. Will he make a Covenant with thee? will thou take him for a servant for
ever?

5. Will thou play with him as with a bird? will thou bind him for thy Maidens?

6. Shall the Companions make a banquet of him? shall they part him among the
Merchants?

7. Can thou fill his Skin with barbed Irons? or his head with fish spears?

8. Lay thine hand upon him, remember the (...) battle, do no more.

9. Behold, the hope of him is in vain: shall not one be cast down, even at the
sight of him?


In these Verses, we have an Account of the vastness, untameableness, and
terribleness of this Creature; which may be taken up in these particulars.

1. That there is no taking of him, as of other lesser fishes, which are angled
out of the Waters with a Hook and a Cord, v. 1. And which, when they are taken,
are strung together upon Hooks, Cleeks, or Thorns, that so men may keep them,
and carry them home, v 2.

2. That (upon an impossible supposition of his coming into men's hands, or
being taken) there is no taming of him; neither will he supplicate, as one that
is vanquished, for his Liberty, but will fight it to the last, v. 3. Nor, if he
cannot escape, will he covenant to work or serve for his Life, as Elephants,
and other Wild Beasts do, v. 4. And as he would decline to work, so, neither
would he be taught to play to Boys and Maids, as himself plays in the Sea,
Psalm. 104.26. and as Birds and some Beasts make sport to men, when they are
tamed, v. 5.

3. That since he cannot be taken, men's expectation of advantage by him does
fail. When Fishers take a great prey at Sea, the Society make a Feast, and sell
the super-plus to Merchants for gain; as is usual in Whale-fishing: But no such
advantage is to be got here, v 6.

4. That, as he is not to be taken as men do take small fishes, v. 1. So
neither can men take him as they take Whales, or other Sea Monsters, by
shooting Darts to wound them, v. 7. For if any would offer to lay their hand
upon him, to take him, the remembrance of that battle they would have with him,
might make them give over their attempt, v. 8. yea all hope of taking him is in
vain, seeing the v^ry sigh^ of him is enough to confound the stoutest, v. 9.
If, against all this, it be objected, that all sorts of Creatures, even in the
Sea, may be tamed, and consequently taken, by men; Jam. 3.7. It is sufficient,
for verifying of that Assertion, and the scope thereof in that place, that so
many of all kinds of Creatures have been tamed, albeit some be still excepted.

From all this, Observe, 1. If we look upon this Instance in the Sea, as it is
added to all that are before, it may point out.

1. God has still more and more Evidences and Instances, to demonstrate what
he is, as men are able to take him up; for, here is another Instance more.

2. Such is man's Stupidity, and his Distemper when he is under Tentation, that
he needs that much pains should be taken upon him, to inculcate what God is;
and he has reason to suspect that he is not serious and solid enough in that
study, even when he observes most; therefore does God insist so much to take
pains upon Job.

3. As the Earth, so also the Sea, is a Storehouse full of Gods Riches;
wherein Travelers may see much of God, both for the variety and vast greatness
of Creatures in it; so that Seafaring men (who, oft-times want Ordinances among
them) are without excuse, if they reap not much edification by their Journey.
Therefore is Leviathan instanced in the Sea, that we may be led to study God in
all his Works th^re. See, Psalm. 104.25, 26. and 107.23, 24.

Obs. 2. This Description serves to point out the the fruit of man's sin, in
his loss of that primitive Dominion over the Creatures, Genesis 1.26, 28. So that
albeit, in the indulgence of God, some of them are tamed by their continual
converse with men, yet many of them are wild, and not usually, if at all,
tamed. This should excite men to lament their own slavery under sin, which has
caused this change, and should make them endeavor to recover a right to all
things in Christ, 1 Cor. 3.21, 21, 23. Heb. 2.6, 7, 8.9.

Obs. 3. When we consider this fierce and untameable Creature; we may be helped
to remark many advantages we reap by other Creatures, which cannot be expected
by this. As,

1. It is a mercy that other Creatures, though wild, are yet taken by men for
their use; as is insinuated, v. 1, 2. though the Leviathan will not be taken.
Thus many men have their Dinner to ^etch out of the Sea in the morning, and
others live by hunting of wild Beasts, and yet are provided for.

2. It is a mercy, that so many of the Creatures as we need, serve us, yea, and
fawn upon us, and do their service so willingly, as if they had covenanted to
do it; all which Leviathan declines to do, v. 3, 4.

3. It is a mercy that we have, and may lawfully use Recreations, and
Refreshments by some of them, as we have not by the Leviathan, v. 5, 6.

4. It is a mercy that men's labor about the Creatures does not only furnish
them with plentiful Allowances of food, but gain also, by their Traffic;
neither of which Leviathan will afford them, v, 6.

5. It is a mercy that even some fierce Creatures, may be taken for the use of
man, without any inevitable hazard, which they run, who grapple with Leviathan,
v. 7, 8.

6. It is a mercy that God has not made the sight of every Creature a terror
to us; as Leviathan would be, v. 9. All which may be useful meditations to us,
when we read this Scripture.

Verse 10. None is so fierce that dare stir him up: who then is able to stand
before me?

11. Who has prevented me that I should repay him? whatsoever is under the
whole heaven is mine.


In these Verses, we have an Inference from, and an Application of, this
Instance, to convince Job of his Folly in thinking to enter the Lists to
grapple with God, and so to stand before him, or, set himself before him, in
judgment, as a Party able to contend with him. This is propounded in Thesi, or,
in a general Interrogation, leaving to Job to see how it concerned him; And it
is confirmed,

First, From this Instance, v. 10. That if no man, were he never so fierce,
dare stir up, or provoke, this Creature, how much less dare any offer to deal
with God?

Secondly, From other Arguments, v. 11. Such as,

1. That God owes no man any thing, whereby he might be obliged to guide him
as he likes, and not as himself pleases.

2. On the contrary, all things are his by Right of Creation; so that he may
dispose of them as he pleases, and they have no cause to quarrel.

From these Verses, Obs. 1. This Application, considered in general, points out,

1. There is nothing which God speaks, nor any parcel of Scripture, that is
barren, but has profitable and special Instructions in it, if we could discern
them; for when God insists on this Subject, concerning this Sea Monster, to an
afflicted sick man, it shows, that there is somewhat in it, as here he clears.

2. It is not enough that we hear what is spoken in Scripture, unless we make
some application and use of it; as here God teaches Job.

3. God must be employed, not only to point out what is seasonable to our
condition, but to apply it also; as here he does to Job.

Obs. 2. The Challenge or Proposition v. 10. imports,

1. We are forgetful of the Greatness of God; for this is the point here
inculcated.

2. This our forgetfulness appears much in our thinking to stand before God,
or, to enter the Lists with him, as a party, in our complaints.

3. When men's Consciences are well informed, they will decline this
undertaking; as this Question imports.

4. Men are far more clear and ^ound in acknowledging general Principles, than
when it comes to their own particular; for this cause does he propound the
Challenge in general.

5. No personal Advantages, of one man above another, will bear them out in
their Quarrelling with God, therefore, also, is it propounded in general, Who
is able, etc? to show that none can undertake this, but the mighty man, and the
godly man, must give it over as well as others.

Obs. 3. The first Argument, v. 10. Imports,

1. Men are naturally fierce and violent, and that appears eminently in some;
for, here, there are some fierce and daring. And though many do not evidence
that they are of daring disposition, by running upon hazards; yet there is no
man but by nature he is a Bullock unaccustomed to the yoke, be the hazard what
it will.

2. Even some of the very Creatures are sufficient to give a check to the pride
of fierce men; for, none is so fierce that dare stir him up.

3. The dreadfulness of some Creatures may convince men of their Folly, in
their fierce and stubborn way with God; for, since none is so fierce that dare
stir him up, or grapple with a Creature made by God, Who then is able to stand
before him? Hence,

4. Such as would walk before God as becomes, whenever they see any Glory,
Beauty, Strength, Terror, etc. among the Creatures, they ought to be spiritual
minded, and ascend up to the Fountain whence those Excellencies flow; as here
God leads Job from the study of this Creature, to the study of himself.

Obs. 4. These Arguments, v. 11. do teach,

1. What men see of God, they should dwell upon it, till it be rooted and fixed
in their hearts; for, therefore is that truth, which is cleared by this
Instance, v. 10. here confirmed by new Arguments.

2. Men have, ordinarily, a great conceit of themselves, as if God were some
way or other obliged to them, and bound to repay and requite them; as here is
supposed.

3. Such as complain that they are afflicted, being righteous, are not free of
this proud and vain opinion; this is reflected upon as Jobs fault, though it be
generally propounded for the Reasons formerly marked.

4. Such proud complainers should know, that God was never prevented by a good
turn done him by any man, which might put him in his debt; and that this may
silence all their complaints, that God owes them nothing, for the want whereof
they may complain; for, who has prevented me that I should repay him? See,
Romans 11, 35, 36.

5. All things under heaven being Gods, by right of Creation, Psalm. 24.1. He
not only needs not man nor his services, to be obliged thereby; Psalm, 50.8, --
13. But he may dispose of men as he will, without doing them any wrong, or
giving them any cause of complaint; for, this both proves that he cannot be
prevented by man, or obliged to him, and that Job has no just cause of
complaint, that whatsoever is under the whole heaven is his.

6. Whatever be Gods condescendence to his humble people, yet he will plead his
Sovereignty, even against them, when they are stubborn: As here he pleads
against it Job, because of his stubbornness, though otherwise, he was a broken
and afflicted man, and so seemed to need more tender usage.

Verse 12. I will not conceal his parts, nor his power, nor his comely
proportion.
Follows a more particular Description of this Leviathan; to which this is a
Preface, wherein God shows, that he will not conceal what he is, nor forbear
to set him out in his particular members, or parts, in his great strength, and
comely proportion, or, proportionable greatness and sutableness of every part
to so vast a bulk of his body. Whence Learn,

1. God is a faithful revealer of what concerns his people, and may be for
their good; for, he will not conceal from Job what is necessary to be told him
concerning this Creature. See, also, John 14.2. Thus also may he be trusted in
his dispensations toward his people, wherein he is faithful and tender.

2. When God speaks to us, it engages us to look upon what he speaks, as worth
the marking, whatever it be in it self; for, his not concealing of this
Description is an Argument why Job should hearken to the Discourse, how barren
soever it seem to be, since God insists to speak it. Thus also his
dispensations should be observed and improved, because they are his, of how
little soever moment they seem to be in themselves.

3. We ought frequently to remember how much need we have that our Lessons be
inculcated upon us; for, so here, what is already said of this Creature is not
enough, without this further addition.

4, Even the vastest, and most monstrous-like of Creatures, have their own
beauty and comely proportion, which should be observed; as here is said of
Leviathan.

Verse 13. Who can discover the face of his Garment? or who can come to him
with his double bridle?

14: Who can open the doors of his face? his teeth are terrible round about.


Follows the Description it self, which may be taken up in six Branches. The
first whereof (in these Verses) is, That he is terrible, inaccessible, and
untameable. This is expressed in terms alluding to men's taking off the sheets
or coverings of Horses, when they bridle them or take them forth; and he
shows, that none dare deal so with Leviathan. None can draw him out of the
Sea, wherewith he is surrounded as with a garment, or offer to bridle him,
though with a double Bridle, v. 13. for though he were otherwise accessible,
none durst open his mouth (which is big like a door, or gate) to bridle him,
his teeth being terrible, v. 14. This Branch of the Description does
demonstrate and point out,

1. That it is a mercy those Creatures whereof we have need, are accessible.

2. That it is a mercy they suffer themselves to be approached unto, and
bridled, and otherwise commanded, by us, Jam. 3.3.

3. That it is a mercy, that God has given man skill to tame and manage those
other Creatures, for his necessary use and affairs.

4. That if Leviathan be so terrible and inaccessible, much more is God
inaccessible and incomprehensible; whose counsels are deeper than the Sea
wherein Leviathan haunts, and who has more terror, than what appears in the
teeth of Leviathan, which may affright these who dare hazard to contend with
him.

Verse 15. His scales are his pride, shut up together as with a close seal.

16. One is so near to another, that no air can come between them.

17. They are joined one to another, they stick together that they cannot be
sundred.


In the second Branch of this Description, it is declared, that he is strongly
armed for defense, with thick Scales (like Shields, as the word signifies)
wherein he glories; which are so joined, as if they were sealed together, v.
15. So that no air can get in betwixt them, v. 16. Nor can they be sundred by
force, v. 17. This points out,

1. The Providence of God, who has guarded his Creatures with natural
defenses, against cold, and other injuries; as here he has guarded Leviathan
with Scales, formerly united together. Hereby he shows that he is the
Preserver of man and Beast, Psalm. 36.6. And so delights not in their
destruction, however men be often apt to quarrel; and, that we ought to admire
and commend him, who makes up that to other Creatures, in strength, beauty,
etc. which man can hardly reach with all his Art and Industry. See, Mat. 6.26,
28, 29.

2. Pride is an evil very incident to the Creature; as here is said, by way of
Analogy, of Leviathan, that his Scales are his pride, or, he glories in them;
as we may observe also in other Creatures. And though irrational Creatures do
not sin, yet in that their way they are a Document to man.

3. Excellencies, though never so poor or mean (as the Scales of Leviathan) are
apt to beget or occasion pride; so that it is hard to have any excellencies,
and not to be proud of them.

Verse 18. By his neesings a light does shine, and his eyes are like the
eyelids of the morning.

19. Out of his mouth go burning lamps, and sparks of fire leap out.

20. Out of his nostrils goes smoke, as out of a seething Pot or Caldron.

21. His breath kindles Coals, and a flame goes out of his mouth.


In the third, Branch of the Description is pointed out, How his appearing any
way above the Water is full of Majesty, his neesings, or casting up of water
into the air, appear bright as light to observers, and his eyes appear bright
and sparkling, like the morning-light, or Day Star, v. 18. His mouth casts out
Vapors, or Waters, so commoved and broken, that they are like Lamps and Sparks
of fi^^, especially by the irradiation of the Sun (as broken waters in Tempests
appear as if they were all on fire) v. 19. Sometime his Nostrils cast out
waters, or Air and Vapors, so gross and plentiful, that they appear like the
smoke of a boiling Pot or Caldron, v. 20. Yea, his very Breath is so hot as
fire, and as a wind that is able to kindle coals, v. 21. By all which may be
pointed out,

1. Gods glory in his working is sometime hid from our ^ight, that it may be
the Object and Exercise of our Faith; as Leviathan is oft-times under water,
and then those Sneezings, etc. appear not.

2. However God do thus sometime cast a vail upon his working, and upon his
Glory shining therein; yet at other times, it is made convincingly to appear,
to silence the Atheism, and confound the pride of men; as sometime Leviathan
appears above water, with all those actings and qualities, which do demonstrate
the glory of God who made him.

3. When God, at any time, manifests the glory of his working, it should be
improved, to make his glory be remembered and believed at another time; as the
use of those appearings of Leviathan should last longer than the sight of him,
or of his Sneezings, etc. do continue.

4. If Leviathan, even when he appears but a little above the water, be so
terrible; how much more terrible is God, when he appears but a little
displeased? Psalm. 2.12. And if his Neesings, and what appears at his eyes and
mouth be so dreadful; how much more dreadful is it, when God threatens and
testifies that he is angry? Psalm. 18.8, etc.

Verse 22. In his neck remains strength, and sorrow is turned into joy before
him.

23. The flakes of his flesh are joined together: they are firm in themselves,
they cannot be moved.

24. His heart is as firm as a stone, yea as hard as a piece of the nether
Millstone.

25. When he raises up himself, the mighty are afraid: by reason of breakings
they purify themselves.


In the fourth Branch of the Description, is pointed out his firmness and
strength in all his parts. His Neck being strong, v. 22. His Flesh firm, and
solidly joined, v. 23. And his heart full of courage, and firm as the nether
Millstone, v. 24. This his strength is amplified from an effect, v. 22. (which
though it be subjoined to the strength of his Neck, yet flows from all the rest
also) that sorrow is turned into joy before him, or (as it will read better)
sorrow skippeth out before him; that is, at the sight of him men do skip (as
they do in dances) and are made to start for sorrow and fear. This is further
explained, v. 25. That when he is seen in the Sea (by such as sail there) the
stoutest are afraid; and when by the Breakings and commotions of the waters,
they know he is near, they purify themselves; that is (not that Nature caleth
it self, and they purge and empty their Belly, through fear; for the word here
will not signify that; but) they run to be cleansed from their Offenses and
Sins, and to have them expiated, as fearing to be overwhelmed. This may point
out,

1. God can furnish Creatures with multitudes of advantages, which yet are but
his Creatures, and can be reached by him; as here, strength and courage are
added to the rest of the Properties of this Creature; whereby we may be helped
to consider how infinite these Excellencies are, which are in God.

2. If men will not fear God, as he reveals himself in his Word, he has
wherewith to affright them; as here, he does affright some with the sight of
Leviathan.

3. God can make the most stout-hearted of men afraid, by a Creature; as the
Leviathan makes the mighty afraid. Yea he can make Lice and Worms terrible to
them, if he please; as Pharaoh and Herod found.

4. Fears and sorrows are so much the sadder, when they come by a surprise upon
men; as sorrow skips out, or, suddenly starts out, and makes them to start,
upon the unexpected sight of Leviathan. So that it is good for men to be upon
their guard, and to know what they may expect.

5. It is good, especially when men are in hazard, that they make their Peace
with God; as here they purify themselves.

6. Men who are graceless and have no Religion, may yet set about it in
straits: as here, these Mariners do, when they apprehend hazard. And this
unquestionably proves the worth of Piety, that its greatest Enemies, and
Neglecters of it in ordinary, are forced, if they be not mad, to see the worth
of it in a strait.

Verse 26. The sword of him that lays at him cannot hold: the spear, the
dart, nor the habergeon.

27. He esteems iron as straw, and brass as rotten wood.

28. The arrow cannot make him flee: sling-stones are turned with him into
stubble.

29. Darts are counted as stubble: he laugheth at the shaking of a spear.

30. Sharp stones are under him: he spreads sharp pointed things upon the
mire.


In the fifth Branch of this Description we have an effect of the strength of
his Scales, and of the firmness of his body, and an aggravation of the cause of
men's fear because of him: In that no Habergeon for defense can secure against
him; nor any Weapon offend him. But Swords, Darts, Arrows, and Sling-stones,
are all as Straw, Wood, and Stubble to him, and he scorns them all, v. 26, 27,
28, 29. Yea so firm is his body, that he lies on sharp pointed Rocks in the
Sea, as on Mire, and by his bulk and weight tumbleth them down into the mire
which is in the bottom of the Sea, v. 30. This points out,

1. Men's defenses against hazards, and the means whereby they think to help
themselves, may soon be made vain, and of none effect; as no Armor or Weapon
will avail against Leviathan. Whereby man is taught, that his strong refuge and
rich supply are without him, and to be sought in God.

2. As there is no prevailing against Leviathan, by fighting with him, who
crusheth the sharpest rocks; so many of our vexing Lots are not overcome by
wrestling and resisting, but by submission.

Verse 31. He makes the deep to boil like a Pot: he makes the Sea like a pot
of Ointment.

32. He makes a path to shine after him; one would think the Deep to be hoary.


In the last Branch of this Description it is declared that his bulk is so
great, that by moving his body, he makes the Deep to tumble and boil, like a
pot of Ointment, or, of the composition of the Apothecaries, which cast up a
great Scum when they boil, v. 31. Which is further explained v. 32. That he
leaves a path of Foam behind him, wherever he moves, as if an hoar-frost were
upon the Sea. This points out,

1. That the very motions and tumblings of Creatures, especially those vast and
great ones, are remarkable, and somewhat of God may be seen in them; for, the
motions of Leviathan are here produced to prove this.

2. If this Creature do thus tumble and toss that part of the deep Sea where he
comes, how much more should the Majesty of God move and affect us, who are but
weak things in comparison of the Sea, which yet is moved by a Creature?

Verse 33. Upon earth there is not his like, who is made without fear.

34. He beholds all high things: he is a King over all the Children of pride.


These Verses contain a summary Conclusion of this Description, That he is
singular above all the Beasts on Earth, and fearless, v. 33. And that he looks
on every high thing with contempt, in comparison of himself, being indeed King,
or Chief, of all fierce irrational Creatures, v. 34. This points out,

1. When we have studied Gods works, we should fix somewhat of the excellency
of them in our hearts; as here, this Conclusion sums up the Description for
that end.

2. God has replenished the Sea with Creatures of a vaster bulk than those on
the dry Land; whereby is intimated, that there is much more of Gods glory
unseen by us, than any thing we do see: for, upon the earth there is none like
Leviathan in the Sea, considering his vast bulk, fierceness, and other things.

3. To be without any fear, is but the property of an irrational Creature, and
so no excellency proper to man; for, Leviathan is made without fear, being
created so by God.

4. To contemn others who are in any eminency, as nothing in respect of our
selves, is also but a brutish quality; for he beholds all high things, or,
looks upon them with contempt.

5. Beasts do outstrip some men in this, that their loftiness flows from some
real ground, or excellency in them; whereas many men are proud, while they are
really nothing, Gal. 6.3. For, Leviathan is indeed King, or, Chief over all the
Children of pride, or over all these irrational Creatures which are high
things, (as the word signifies) and carry themselves loftily because of some
excellency in them. Not that he exercises any dominion over them, at least all
of them, particularly, those on the Land, but that he is indeed chief and
excellent above them, as a great King is above inferior Princes, or common
Subjects.

CHAP. XLII.
This last Chapter contains a comfortable and sweet Close of all these hard
Occurrents which have passed in this Book. And,

1. That previous debate betwixt God and Job, for humbling of Job for his
miscarriages, is closed with Job's Confession of his faults; wherein God
acquiesceth, without pressing him any further, v. 1-6.

2. The Controversy, so long debated betwixt Job and his Friends, is finally
decided by God in Job's Favors, v. 7, 8, 9.

3. (Which is the fourth and last part of this Book) a Close is put to Job's
sharp trials, by Gods returning of his Captivity, and continuing of him in a
prosperous state, for many years after this, till his death, v. 10-17.

Verse 1. Then Job answered the Lord, and said,
IT is to be remembered, that when God appeared to decide the Controversy
betwixt Job and his Friends, Chap. 38. before he enter upon the principal
Cause, He (as Elihu had endeavored before) deals first with Job, to humble him
for his failings. And albeit Gods first Speech brought Job to some sense, Chap.
40.3, 4, 5. yet the Lord not being satisfied therewith, he deals with him of
new; which now produces a fuller answer, witnessing his through conviction and
humiliation; wherewith God is satisfied, as appears by his insisting no longer
on the Debate with him.

In this Verse it is recorded by the Writer of the Book, that Job did answer,
or return a satisfactory acknowledgment of his folly and miscarriage. Whence
Learn,

1. When God takes man to task, to humble him, by Word or Rod, or both; man
must down to the dust so low as is meet. God will carry his point one way or
other, with all men whom he thus takes to task, and will cause them either bow
or break; as here, the Lord never gives over dealing with Job, till he mould
him to his mind: So that he who formerly raged at his Afflictions, is now
calmed; he who looked only to his integrity to kindle his passion, looks now on
his folly and weakness, to lay him low in the dust. It is sad when Gods Cures
are not operative, and it does speak his Patients to be reprobate silver. And
it is a folly to be long in stooping to God, seeing Jobs experience tells we
must do it at last, one way or other. And it may humble men, though they stoop
at last, as Job did, that these need so much pains to be taken upon them,
before they be brought to it.

2. Whatever become of the wicked, who may be broken before they stoop; yet the
Lords pains to humble his Children will not be in vain, but they will be
thoroughly convinced at last: As here Job was. As it is a true evidence of
pity, to be easily convinced by God; so they who find that an hard work,
should not be diffident of what God can do, who brought Job so low after all
his stiffness; and they should look upon his continuing to take pains, as a
pledge of what he is about to do, and that he purposes to prevail at last.

3. Gods convincing of Job by his former Doctrine concerning Beasts, Birds, and
Sea Monsters, (which, however it was most pertinent and suitable, to refute a
proud man, who would comprehend Gods counsels, by these obvious things; yet he
could have spoken infinitely more sublimely, and of more sublime things, to
this purpose) may not only put us to try, if we reap so much by reading, or
hearing of it, as Job did; But further, it may teach,

1. It is not Doctrine (how sound soever; as it ought to be sound) of it self,
but Gods presence with it, that makes it effectual. God appearing with such
Doctrine, concerning plain and obvious truths, as the former Discourses were,
will convince men, and without that presence no Doctrine will avail.

2. Men of weak parts and abilities may be bold to go forth in Gods hand,
having his Gall; seeing he can bless their weak endeavors, as he blessed his
own discourse, about obvious things, to Job.

3. It may humble men to whom the Lord has spoken of more sublime Subjects
concerning Christ, his Fullness and Righteousness, etc. and yet they have not
profited so much as Job did by this Doctrine.

Doct. 4. When men are convinced and humbled for their folly, it is their duty
to bring it forth by confession, when God calls for it, and the nature of
their miscarriage requires it; as here Job does by this solemn Answer, wherein
he made that Return, which God designed in all his Questions to him. See, Jer.
3.12, 13. Hereby,

1. Men do evidence their taking with; and repenting for, their miscarriages,
as is their duty.

2. They evidence the soundness of their Convictions, when they do, not only
check them within, but make them willing to take shame to themselves, by their
free Confession.

3. Confession is a mean to fix men's Convictions yet more in their hearts, and
to prevent a relapse, when they have openly taken with their folly.

4. Hereby, also, they glorify God, justifying him in all that he has done to
humble them, and in all his proceedings, which they carped at before they were
humbled. See, Neh 9.32, 33. All which may give a check to them who are often
convinced of their folly, and would pass from it, but never do make conscience
to repent, or give Glory to God by Confession; which occasioneth many Relapses.

Verse 2. I know that thou can do every thing, and that no thought can be
withholden from thee.
Follows, to v. 7. the Answer it self, or, Jobs Confession; which may be
reduced to these two Heads.

I. He gives an Account of three Principles and Lessons which he had learned by
this Speech and appearance of God, contrary to these Principles which had led
him upon his Miscarriages,, or, had appeared in them, v. 2, 3, 4.

2. He professes his Repentance for his Miscarriages, which has followed upon
this new discovery made unto him, v. 5, 6

The first Principle, or, Lesson, which he professes to have learned (in this
v.) is, The Sovereign power of God to do all things, whatsoever he pleases;
and that this is so absolute, that none of Gods purposes are controulable, nor
can be hindered by men. Whence Learn,

1. True Convictions, Repentance, and Humiliation, do not consist only in some
pricking of the heart and affections, but must flow from sound principles,
first fixed in the Judgment and Understanding; for, Job begins at these hire,
in professing his Repentance. Thus the Prodigal is said to come to himself,
when he repented, Luke 15. And where Ignorance, or false Principles possess the
Understanding, they will either hinder Repentance, or m^^^ it prove like the
morning cloud, or early dew.

2. Gods Power and Dominion is absolute, to do whatsoever he wills and
purposes; as here Job professes, Thou can do every thing; of which we have
heard frequently in this Book. Hence, we ought not to doubt of his power,
seeing nothing is too hard for him, Jer. 32.27. See also, Ezekiel. 37.11, 12.
Neither is he to be called to an account for any of his matters, whose Will is
a Law. Our voluntary submission to his Sovereignty would bring us much peace,
and prevent many sorrows; seeing we must come to that at last when we have
striven never so long; as here befalls Job. And when we come to that, we may
expect a more comfortable account of what is sad in our Lot; as Job also found.

3. Gods absolute Dominion and Power is not exercised in the world without some
endeavors of m^n to control it; while they either resist, and stand (so much
as they are able) in the way of his power, or do fret and repine at what he
does according to the pleasure of his Will: For, it is supposed here, that
there may be endeavors to withhold, or hinder his Thoughts and Purposes. Men
ought to mourn for their frequent opposition unto God, their standing in the
way of his powerful operations, by crossing what is good, so far as they can,
and (when they can do no more) their fretting at every thing he does, and being
pleased with nothing.

4. Men's opposition unto, and endeavors to control, Gods purposes, will not
avail; for, no thought of his can be withholden, or, hindered. Opposition to
his power, will but crush the Opposer, and opposition to the exercise of his
Sovereign Dominion does but evidence our ill frame, which needs to be crossed,
that it may be cured.

5. As men who would walk aright, or repent of former miscarriages, ought to be
well rooted in sound principles; so, in particular, it is necessary that they
know God with whom they have to do, in his Power, Dominion, and Sovereignty, as
well as in his other Attributes: Therefore says he, I know that thou can do
every thing, etc. Ignorance of those those things breeds us much trouble and
needless pains. See, Psalm 9.10. Jer. 5.22.

6. If it be alleged that Job knew all this before, and does largely commend
the power and sovereignty of God in several of his Speeches; and therefore it
may be enquired, how he comes now only, after God has spoken to him, to say, I
know this? The answer to this doubt may afford us diverse Instructions
concerning this knowledge of God; And,

1. He knew this before, but now he knew it in a greater degree and measure.
Which paints out, That so much is still to be known of God, that they who know
most of him, ought to be sensible of their ignorance, and have need to be daily
making proficiency in that Study. See, v. 5. And, that when afflictions are
sanctified, and God teaches us under them, Psalm. 94.12. we will be making
progress in knowing of God; as here Job did. And this may put men to try
whether their growing knowledge of God does evidence that their trials are
blessed, and that they (...) with God in them.

2. If we (...) to the manner of his knowledge, he know thi^ (...) ^^w
experimentally, at least more ex^^^^^ (...) h^^^h^ knew it before. And whatever
(...) ^^w, or do really know by common illumin^^^^^ (...) God, or the things of
God; yet they do not (...) as they ought, till they know them; (...), so as may
leave some impression upon the (...). See Psalm. 139.14.

3. As for the Nature and Effects of this knowledge, he knew and did
acknowledge this truth before; yet in his practice he walked not according to
his knowledge; but his passion did over-drive him, and made him to speak as if
he thought otherwise, and as if he had judged that God is not absolute in his
power and dominion. And this teaches, That practical Knowledge, or, Knowledge
which appears, and is improved, in practice, is not easily attained, even by
godly men, who are sound in their Light and Principles. And, That, whatever men
know, yet, nothing is rightly and fully known but what is improved in practice;
not at sometimes only, but in their greatest exigencies, and when Tentations
are strongest to the contrary; as Job ought, when his passions were strongest,
to have acknowledged and improved this Truth, which he did not.

Verse 3. Who is he that hides counsel without knowledge? therefore have I
uttered that I understood not, things too wonderful for me, which I knew not.
The second Principle and Lesson which he learns, is, Man's inability to dive
into, or comprehend the counsels of God. Of this he makes profession.

1. In Theft, or, in general, that man does but obscure the counsel of God, by
his ignorant and shallow Conceptions and Expressions of it. Which he
propounds by way if repetition of what God had said, Chap. 38.2. As if he had
said, Lord I well may thou say, Who is this etc? Or, ask, who is this that is
so presumptuous, as to obscure thy deep Counsels, by their Babbling? For I am
now of the same opinion, that they do but hide Counsel without Knowledge, and I
have the same low esteem of any who shall attempt it, that thou have. As for
the difference betwixt Gods Question and Jobs, in that what God calls
Darkning, Job calls it Hiding; and whereas God said, that man darkens counsel
by words without knowledge, Job says only, that he hides it without knowledge;
all comes to one purpose. For darkning and hiding are both one, and this hiding
without knowledge must be understood to be done by words, though it be not here
expressed. Or it may be conceived that Job aggravates the fault, now when he is
sensible (as is the way of godly men, when they come to see their folly) so, to
be simply hid, is more than to be only darkened; and whereas God had mentioned
only his foolish expressions, he reflects upon the ignorance from whence they
flowed, and upon the folly which was in them, in that he ran so great a hazard
by his presumption.

2. He makes profession in hypothesi, or, in particular, That himself was the
man who had vented his Ignorance, and had uttered his raw conceptions, of these
mavelous and wonderful things which were above his reach.

This purpose having been before spoken to, on Chap. 38.2. we may here briefly
Learn,

1. Whatever men think in their passion, yet when they come to themselves, they
will subscribe to the Verdict of God in his Word; as here Job repeats and
subscribes to the truth of what God had said.

2. It is a truth which cannot be contradicted, That there is deep counsel and
wonderful wisdom, in the providence of God about men, and especially about the
godly; as here is supposed. Which is both matter of encouragement to them, and
of caution, that they seek not to pry into these things.

3. It is also a certain truth, That no man can reach the depth of Gods
Counsels in his Providence; Particularly, in his singular dispensations toward
the Godly; as here Job confesses, that men do but hide counsel without
knowledge, and that himself had uttered that he understood not, etc. when he
spoke of these things.

4. It is not enough that men do acknowledge, in general, that there is
ignorance, and short coming, in taking up the Counsels of God, unless they be
sensible thereof in themselves, and be affected with their own particular
miscarriages in that matter; as Job here subjoins his particular Confession of
his own miscarriage, to the general Challenge; Therefore (because I was one of
these without knowledge) have I uttered that I understood not, things too
wonderful for me, which I know not: Men may be clear enough in general Truths,
who yet will miscarry when they are under a particular Tentation; and it is in
that case and time, especially, that men ought to be upon their guard.

5. Though men, ordinarily, think but light of their mistaking of God, and of
their babbling when they speak of his Counsels; and particularly, do think
lightly of what they have done of that kind, if they give it over for the
future; yet when Saints are tender, such miscarriages will leave an humbling
conviction behind them, even after they are abandoned; as here we may see in
Jobs Confession of the evil of that course, which now he has given over.

Verse. 4. Hear, I beseech thee, and I will speak: I will demand of thee, and
declare thou unto me.
The third Principle and Lesson he has learned, is, to decline to be a
Quarreller of God, and (in stead thereof) to betake himself to be a Disciple
and Scholar unto God. Those words (however they sound) are not a Preface ^o any
new purpose he is now to speak or propound; But they are relative, (as v. 3.
also was) to somewhat that had passed before. And for finding out his meaning,
we are to reflect on Chapter 13.21, 22. Where Job had desired to debate with God,
and was content that God should either be Pursuer, or Defendant as he pleased.
In answer to which proud Proposal, God had taken him at his word, Chapter 38.3. and
40.7. And, in the two preceding Speeches, had acted the part of a Pursuer, or,
Demander. This Job now finds so hard for him, that he declines to defend any
longer, and betakes himself to the propounding of Questions, that he may get
Answers from God.

Quest. But is not his offering to demand no less proud, than when he offered
to answer; as being (as well as the other) one of these two Offers which he had
proudly made to God? Chap. 13.22.

Answ. That is not the demanding, or, questioning, formerly undertaken by Job
in his passion, which here he means to insist upon; for, when he gives over
answering, he does also give over to demand in these terms. But that which he
intends here is only thi^, That hereafter he will give over all such proud
quarrelling and debates, and will now learn humbly to propose his difficulties
unto God, that he may receive information, concerning his case, and his duty,
from him.

Doct. 1. Such as know God aright, will decline to pursue and challenge him, or
to call him to an account for his dealing; nor will they offer to teach him, as
Carpers and Murmurers would do; for, this Job now declines.

2. Albeit men may no more pursue God, to seek satisfaction concerning every
thing he does, or the Reasons thereof, than they can defend themselves, if he
pursue them; yet man is so great a Stranger to himself, and his case is
oft-times so intricate, that he still needs information from God, to help and
remedy his ignorance, to make him know himself and his case, what it is, what
to make of it, and how to improve it: For, when Job gives over all thoughts of
debating with God, yet he has need to demand of God, that he may declare unto
him.

3 Sound and right Information must be had from God only, not from our own
hearts, nor from suggestions, tentations, or outward probabilities and
appearances; for, it is to him, that Job has his recourse, I will demand of
thee, and declare thou unto me.

4. Such as employ God for Information and Instruction, ought to seek it
earnestly, knowing that many distempers, mistakes, and fears, will be cured by
his opening of his eyes; and humbly, learning to adore and trust him when they
are kept in the dark, and being sensible of their own ill deserving, and
unworthiness to receive any good thing from him; for, says he, Hear, I beseech
thee, and I will speak; whereby he evidenceth his estimation of, and desire
after the thing he seeks, and his humility and submission to God.

5. It is an evidence that men are truly humbled under their sad and humbling
pressures, when they renounce their own wit and skill, and to give up
themselves to be Scholars to God, in all things: as here Job does, resolving to
be a Demander, and to take his answers from God.

Verse 5. I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear: but now mine eye
sees thee.

6. Wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes.


Follows Jobs practice of Repentance upon this new discovery; wherein we have,

1. The ground and Rise of his Repentance; which is, a more clear sight of God
than formerly he had, ver. 5.

2. His practice of Repentance, resulting upon this ver. 6.

For the first of these, v. 5. He speaks of his present sight and knowledge of
God, by way of comparison instituted betwixt what formerly he had, and now has
attained; and shows, that this does so exceed the other, as a sight of God
does transcend men's hearing of him only by report. Where it is to be well
observed, that he does not institute the comparison betwixt Gods manifesting of
himself, and that sight of him which is had, in and by the external means only;
and that manifestation and sight of Him, which is attained by the internal
illumination of the Spirit, accompanying these means; which does indeed surpass
the other no less than ocular inspection excels a flying report. For, if
that were Jobs meaning, then he should deny that ever he had known God before
this, by the inward manifestation of the Spirit; which is not to be admitted,
seeing he would never admit that to be called in question, that he was
regenerate (and so had known God savingly) in the midst of his tentations, nor
does God allow him to make any such Confession, Nor yet does he institute the
comparison betwixt the ordinary means whereby God makes himself known to man,
and this extraordinary appearance of God to convince him; to intimate that he
had never the like before. For, however it may be true, that he had never any
manifestation of God so solemn as this was; yet extraordinary Revelations were
not unusual, in those times, to godly men (as Eliphaz shows, Chap. 4.12, 13,
14, etc. and is intimated by Elihu, Chap. 33.14, 15.) and probably also to Job
himself, before this time. And however, this sight of God, here spoken of, may
be attained by Gods blessing upon ordinary means. But Jobs scope in this
comparison is, not so much to speak of different means, whereby men come to
know God, as, of the different effects of means, according as men are diligent
improvers thereof, and God blesses them unto them. And particularly, his scope
is to show, That by Gods appearing in so great Glory and Majesty, and by his
Speeches to him, he had received a measure and degree of Illumination and
Knowledge of God, as far beyond what he had before, as the seeing of a thing
(which affords us more clear and certain conceptions of it) is beyond the
hearing tell of it only.

From this v. Learn, 1. As it is a duty to know God; so Saints are not
altogether ignorant, but do know somewhat of him; for, it is supposed here,
that Job had heard of him.

2. It is not inconsistent with the real humility of Saints, or with the sense
of their many miscarriages, that they do discern, and profess, what they know
of God, though it be but little; for, Job, when he is professing his humility
and repentance, does yet profess that he has heard somewhat of God.

3. Albeit we are not to expect any new means of knowing God, while we are
within time; yet there is so much to be known of God, and so rich and full will
experimental discoveries, and sensible manifestations of God, be found to be,
that the most knowing of Saints, when they attain to these, will be sensible of
their ignorance and short coming before; for, now, all that Job had before, was
but as an hearsay, or, hearing of the ear, in comparison of this, which was as
if his Eye did see him. By this is discovered the fullness of God, and we are
invited to press for these discoveries of him; and we may also try our nearness
to God, by our growing in the sense of our ignorance of him.

4. The more that God is known, he will be the more esteemed; for, this is the
rise of his Repentance, and of all his right behavior before God, that he
sees him at a nearer distance. It is otherwise with the Creatures, whose
emptiness is discovered by familiarity, and so the more they are known, the
less are they esteemed. But our estimation of God is a touchstone of our
nearness to him, and of what we know of him.

5. Here we may also, further, remark somewhat concerning our knowing of God.

1. That we should not content our selves with Hear-says and Reports, unless we
see and feel somewhat of what we hear. We ought, indeed, to take the Verdict of
his Word concerning him, and rest upon it, without seeking any Revelations,
beside, or above it; yet we should study to have what is revealed in the Word
brought into our hearts, and made lively upon them.

2 If Job do institute this comparison betwixt these two measures of Knowledge
within time, that the one is but an Hearing, and the other a Seeing; much more
may it be instituted betwixt the highest pitch of our Knowledge here, and that
fight which we will get hereafter, 1 Cor. 13.12.

As for his practice of Repentance, following upon this sight of God, v. 6.
Wherein he abhors himself, and repents in a very humble pasture, usual in these
times, Chap. 2.8. It teaches,

1. Manifestations of God, when they are in mercy, will be practically
improved, and not gazed upon, or played with only; as here appears in Jobs
practice.

2. When God is indeed seen, the most holy of Saints become loathsome and vile
in their own eyes; so that they will not get leisure to be puffed up because of
the manifestation: For, when Jobs eye sees God, it follows, wherefore I
abhor, to wit, my self, as is added in the Translation. So was i^ with Isaiah,
Isa. 6.5. And so did God prevent Paul, 2 Cor. 12.7

3. Abhorrency of our selves, upon a sight of God, ought to be more eminent,
when we have miscarried through our ignorance and mistakes before; for, that
was Jobs fault, for which he now abhors himself, when his eye sees God.
Whatever we think of these faults in the heat of tentation, yet they will lay
us low in our own eyes when God appears; and they ought then to be looked upon
as very sinful, and not as ordinary failings.

4. I^ is not enough that men be convinced of their follies and mistakes of
God, unless they also repent of them; for, Job adds that here, I abhor, and
repent.

5. Repentance, particularly for such faults, ought to be very deep and
serious, and lay the penitent very low, for, he repents in dust and ashes,
wallowing himself there in his sorrow, and covering himself therewith,
according to the custom of those times, Mat. 11.21. And it is no wonder that
convinced men do thus repent of these sins, when they reflect upon the injuries
thereby offered to God, and what persons they are who commit them.

6. Whoever see God aright, and most clearly, they will not run away from him
with their guilt, but will humbly and penitently run to him, which is an act of
Faith; for, so does Job here, when he gets the clearest sight of God, and of
his own vileness; See, 1 Samuel 12.20. No sight of God, in his Holiness, Justice,
Dreadfulness, etc. nor of our own sin, in his injuriousness to God, warrants us
to run away; for that were (in stead of seeking a remedy) to add that sin to
all the rest, whereby the remedy is neglected, and they become incurable.

Verse 7. And it was so, that after the Lord had spoken these words unto Job,
the Lord said to Eliphaz the Temanite, my wrath is kindled against thee, and
against thy two Friends: for ye have not spoken of me the thing that is right,
as my Servant Job has.
Follows to v. 10. the second part of the Chapter, wherein (God having now
ended what he had to say to Job about his particular miscarriages) the great
controversy betwixt Job and his Friends is decided in Jobs favors, and upon
these terms which were premitted in the Introduction to Chap. 4. and so the
Dispute ends. And this decision of the Controversy may, in the entry teach us,
That albeit God suffer Controversies and Debates to arise, and continue, even
among his people; yet, in due time, they will be cleared in Truths favors,
Psalm. 94.15. And so the truth will, at last, set its asserters free, John 8.32.

This part of the Chapter may be taken up in three Branches; the first whereof
(in this v.) is the decision of the Controversy, held out in a Charge against
Eliphaz and his Companions; wherein God testifies his displeasure against
them, for their unsound Doctrine concerning Him. Here (for more distinct
handling of the words) we are to consider,

First, The time when this Sentence comes forth; After the Lord had spoken
these words unto Job. Where no mention is made of Jobs speaking to God,
recorded in the former Verses; not because God did not accept it, or because
that, while Job is preparing to repent, and to make that Confession mentioned
in the preceding Verses, God had, in his audience, sent this Message to
Eliphaz, to encourage him yet more to repent. But this does also take in his
Repentance, as a fruit of Gods speaking to him; wherein the power and efficacy
of his Word did much appear. And this Circumstance does teach,

1. It is a sweet property of godly men, that they are not ill to convince, but
are soon brought to ^^e and be sensible of their faults; for, this immediate
connection betwixt Gods former Speech to Job, and this decision of the main
cause, does intimate that Job was not long from setting about the duty of
Repentance, and from bringing forth the former confession, after God spoke to
him.

2. When God does most sharply reprove his people, he is not seeking their
ruin, nor yet that they should make an amends for the wrongs they have done,
but only to humble them; for, after his former words unto Job, which he
improves by humbling himself before him, he speaks no more against him.

3. When the Godly have cleared what is betwixt God and them, they will soon
get a comfortable account of their trials from others; for, It was so, that
after (and not before) the Lord had spoken these words to Job, and he is
humbled thereby, the Lord said to Eliphaz. etc. and began to clear his cause
with his Friends. Whence the people of God may observe how far they sit in
their own light, by their neglecting of this Method.

4. Whatever change be wrought in Gods people, antecedent to his appearing for
them in their trials; yet the glory of all that is done to them, or for them,
is to be ascribed to God only; so much may be imported in this, that no mention
is made of Jobs confession, but only of Gods speaking to him, antecedent to
Gods passing sentence in his favors. Whence we may gather, that his Confession
and Repentance were no cause of Gods appearing for him; but the glory of all is
to be ascribed to God, whose free love prevented him, by speaking to him, when
he was in his passionate and stiff humor; whose efficacious grace and power
made these words work upon him; and whose graciousness, in a Redeemer, appeared
in taking that Confession off his hands.

Secondly, Consider the persons who are challenged; Eliphaz, and his two
Friends, who are also expressly named with him, v. 9. Where it is to be
observed, that Elihu is not comprehended in this Charge, as having spoken amiss
of God. So that his Doctrine may be admitted without any scruple, as has been
cleared in the Introduction to his Discourses. It is also to be observed that,
though all the three Friends were guilty, yet the Lord directs his speech to
Eliphaz concerning them all; and that because he was (as appears) the oldest
and most eminent among them, and had first breached those Errors in the
Dispute, wherein the rest did follow and concur with him. This teaches, That,
however all be guilty who engage in an ill course; yet, the more eminent
persons be in themselves, and the more eminently they appear in that evil
course, their fault is the greater; for which causes Eliphaz is here chiefly
spoken unto.

Thirdly, Consider the sentence past in the Cause; Ye have not spoken of me the
thing that is right, as my Servant Job has. Where the Sentence is pronounced.

1. Absolutely; Ye have not spoken of me the thing that is right. Not that they
had not spoken any thing right of God, but that their Principles, which they
managed in the dispute, were injurious to God, as Job also had told them, Chap.
13.7.8. For they set limits to his Sovereignty, prescribed rules to his Justice
in his proceedings with men, judged amiss of his dispensations, represented him
as terrible, and dealing in wrath with an afflicted godly man, asserted that
God did always in this life visibly reward men according to their ways, etc. In
all which they spoke not of God the thing that was right, as has been cleared
in the progress of the Dispute.

Doct. 1. Right Thoughts and Interpretations of Gods ways and proceedings are
good in trying times; so, here they are missed.

2. Those right thoughts of God should be spoken out, as we have a calling and
opportunity, for glorifying of God, and edifying of others; for, they should
have spoken of him the things that are right.

3. They may seem to be much for God, and for his Holiness and Justice, whom
yet God will find to be otherwise employed; for, these Friends made it their
chief Plea, to plead for God against Job, and yet, says he, Ye have not spoken
of me the thing that is right. So that fair pretenses, if there be no more,
will not avail before God.

4. In particular, we may from this censure conclude, That such Principles as
are maintained by these Friends (wherein Job opposed them, and which have been
marked in the progress) will never be approved of God, let men set them off as
they will; for, of these God says, Ye have not spoken of me the thing that is
right.

2. The Sentence is pronounced comparatively, Ye have not spoken -- as my
Servant Job has. Whereby an Objection is obviated; for, they might be ready to
say, If we be wrong, so also may Job be. In answer to which, he asserts that
they had not spoken right as he did. The Comparison is not instituted betwixt
Job and them, with an eye to what Job had lately spoken in his Confession, to
convince them that they had not repented of their Errors and Mistakes, as he
had lately done. But it is instituted betwixt Jobs Principles and theirs in the
dispute; wherein, albeit Job be not simply assoiled, for he had spoken rashsy
of God in his passion; yet, in the main cause he is declared Superior, and
that his Principles concerning God were sound, in what he had maintained
against them.

Doct. 1. Godly men are right at all times, when they cleave to God, and his
love and an interest in him, whatever befall them; for in this Job is assoiled
and approved.

2. Men's being in the right ought not to be called in question, notwithstanding
any stream of Providence, or opposition from godly men, against them; for,
here, Job is approved in speaking out his interest in God, against all these.

3. Men may be right in their main cause, who yet have their own failings; as
Job also had, who, though he be commended above them, and declared to have
spoken right of God in the main cause, yet he is not simply assoiled, as may be
seen in Gods challenging of him, in the preceding Discourses. God would have us
to look not only to faults, but to degrees of our accession to them; that we
may neither please our selves in gross evils, because others are, some way,
involved in them; nor yet satisfy our selves that we are more right than
others, when yet we are not right as we ought to be.

4. When we do rightly consider and compare faults, we will find that unsound
Principles (such as the Friends had) are worse than sinful and rash expressions
in a Fit of Passion; which were Jobs fault, wherein he is assoiled in
comparison of his Friends. For unsound Principles are like a corrupted
Fountain, which does send forth corrupt waters; whereas rash Expressions do
only evidence weakness, and not a corrupt disposition, and men's sound
Principles will help them to retract them.

5. Whatever be the failings of Gods poor people, and whatever God do or say to
them for their faults, yet the reconciled estate of their persons is not
altered thereby, as they will find when they take with their faults; for, Job
here is his Servant still, as at the beginning, Chap. 1.8. and 2.3. and this is
again thrice repeated here, v. 8.

Fourthly, Consider how God pronounces in the merits of the Cause; or, how he
relisheth this their miscarriage. My wrath is kindled against thee, and against
thy two Friends, for ye have not spoken, etc. Whence Learn,

1. It is not enough that men know their way, what it is, and whether it be
right or wrong, unless they ponder also the hazard of it; which here is
intimated to them.

2. It is sad enough, and imports hazard enough in a way, if God be angry at
it, whatever he do further upon it; for, however, ordinarily, men regard this
little, yet God propounds it as a certification sad enough, that his wrath is
kindled against them for their fault. See 2 Samuel 11.27.

3. Even Gods Children may fall in miscarriages whereby they will incur his
displeasure, though their persons be justified; for, his wrath is here kindled
against those godly men.

4. It is a mercy when God, by his Word, does evidence that he is displeased,
and does not keep it up, till some Judgment intimate it; as here he tells them
that his wrath is kindled against them; and so does he by his Word daily, to
them who hear it, if they would be attentive.

5. It is also a mercy, when God distinctly points out, and makes his people
know, the sin he is angry at, and does not leave them under displeasure and
confusion at once; as here, he tells them the quarrel. Such distinct
Convictions are a singular mercy.

6. Maintaining of Errors, and, particularly, Errors concerning God, and the
crushing and discouraging godly men under their troubles, are evils which
provoke God to anger; for, here his wrath is kindled because of these faults in
Jobs Friends.

Verse 8. Therefore take unto you now seven Bullocks, and seven Rams, and go to
my servant Job, and offer up for your selves a burnt-offering, and my servant
Job shall pray for you, for him will I accept: lest I deal with you after your
folly, in that ye have not spoken of me the thing which is right, like my
servant Job.
In the second Branch of this Part of the Chapter, we have God prescribing a
way to these Friends of Job, for preventing the hazard which they incurred by
their sin; namely, That they should bring Sacrifices to Job, as a Priest, whom
he would accept, in his sacrificing and praying for them, as a godly man, and
especially as a Type of Christ. Here we have to consider,

First, The general Connection betwixt the former Challenge and this Direction.
Which teaches,

1. It is supposed, as the duty of all, and the property of godly men, that
when God passes sentence against them, and tells them he is angry, they will
take with their faults, for, this Direction, subjoined immediately to the
Challenge, does intimate that they would not, nor did stand out, excepting and
disputing against Gods Challenge. It is not easy to make some guilty (as the
Original has it, Hos. 5.15.) or to make them give over to say that they are
innocent, Jer. 2.35. But it is an evidence of a good disposition, to give over
all such pleas and reasonings.

2. When men do rightly take with their faults, and are sensible of Gods
displeasure, it will be their serious study and endeavor to get out from under
the pressure of guilt; for, so much also does this Direction, subjoined to the
former Challenge, import. It is dangerous for men to lie sleeping under
convictions, without renewing of Repentance and Faith in the Messiah, or to
habituate themselves with a custom of neglecting and treading upon their light.

3. The true remedy, for purging and pacifying of guilty Consciences, must be
described and taught by God; for, he prescribes it to them here. No device of
our own (wanting the stamp of divine institution) will satisfy, or serve the
turn; nor will the penitent decline whatsoever the Lord shall be pleased to
prescribe.

4. It may encourage us to set about those means which may free us of guilt, if
we consider that God, when he reproves and threatens, intends not to drive us
away, but is willing to be reconciled, and to pluck us out of the snare; as
this Direction, after the former Challenge, does intimate.

Secondly, Consider the remedy and duty here prescribed to them, for taking
away of their guilt, and putting an end to the quarrel. Where we are to observe,

1. What the remedy is; namely, a Sacrifice, or, seven Bullocks, and seven
Rams, offered up for them in a burnt-offering. Whether these were to be offered
for them all jointly, or so many for every one of them, is not so clearly
expressed, though the first seem most probable. And for clearing hereof,
consider,

1. Albeit by the Law of Moses, a Sin-offering, or a Trepass Offering, was to
be offered for particular faults, according as they were committed in
ignorance, or against light through infirmity, Lev. 4, and 5, and 6. and a
whole Burnt-offering was added to them, to expiate men's sinful dispositions,
evidenced by those particular escapes: Yet here only a Burnt-offering is
commanded, because, it seems, the rest were not yet instituted.

2. Albeit by that Law, Lev. 4. a lesser Offering than what is here, is
required for the Errors and Ignorances of one or more persons; yet here a
number of perfection, seven Bullocks and seven Rams, is appointed, to point out
the hainousness of their sin, as being an injury offered to God, and to his
afflicted Servant, and that it was so much the greater, that it was committed
by them, who were great, wise, and holy men.

Doct. 1. Since the fall of Adam, there is no expiating of sin but by
Sacrifices, or by Christ's blood typified thereby; as here, this Injunction,
even before the Law, does intimate, no forgetting of sin, or Gods forbearance
toward sinners; yea, no sorrow for sin, or abandoning of it, can secure the
sinner, or make him happy, unless the sin be pardoned through the blood of
Christ, Psalm. 32.1, 2.

2. Christ is to be made use of with an eye to all the aggravations of our sin;
as here, the Sacrifice, pointing at the hainousness of their sin, does intimate.

3. Sins, which seem to be very small, may, yet, be very great in Gods eyes;
for, their Error, whereby (as they thought) they pleaded for God, does need
this great Sacrifice. Gods Verdict concerning our sin may be very far different
from our thoughts of it. And, particularly, Errors in Judgment, and unsound
Principles, are more abominable in the sight of God, than erroneous persons,
ordinarily, judge them to be; especially if they be eminent, wise, and holy men.

2. By whom this Sacrifice is to be offered; even by Job, who is also to pray
for them all, as the man whom God will accept. If we consider Job as a Priest,
He was a Type of Christ, who has offered up himself a Sacrifice for the sins
of his people, and makes continual intercession for them; into whose hand all
our Offerings and Services must be put, seeing without him we can have no
access unto, nor acceptance with God, Heb. 4.15, 16. If we consider Job in this
as a godly man, drawing near to God for himself or others, it points out, That
Acceptance must be looked unto in our services, without resting on the work
wrought; for, this is the motive to persuade them to employ Job, seeing,
otherwise, they would not be accepted, and without that, their service would
afford them no comfort: And, That, in order to the acceptance of our service,
our fa^e (as it is in the Original) or person, must first be accepted; (for, he
says, Him will I accept. See, Heb. 11.4.) And Prayer must be joined with any
other service we go about; as Job is to join it here, when he offers up the
Sacrifice. But further, the scope here points out,

1. They who would have Gods peace, and their service accepted, must first be
reconciled with their Neighbors, whom they have injured; for, so must they go
to Job, and be reconciled with him. See Mat. 23.24.

2. Godly men are ready to forgive Injuries, when those who have injured them
are sensible of their miscarriage: For, it is supposed here, that Job will
offer the Sacrifice, and pray for them. See, Mat. 18.21, 22. Col. 3.12, 13.

3. God will, in due time, put honor upon his reproached people, who cleave to
their integrity; for, not only does God, here, thrice call Job, my servant, but
(according to the custom of those times; wherein the chief person of a Family,
or Society, was the Priest to the rest) he is made Priest to them; and declared
to be the man whom God will accept. See, Zeph. 3.19.

Thirdly, Consider the Certification subjoined, to press this Direction;
wherein he intimates that, consideering their Error in the Debate (which he
again repeats) he will deal with them after their folly (or, attribute folly to
them, in sad effects) if they flee not to this remedy. It teaches,

1. True Penitents should be serious, in looking again and again upon their
sin, and the hainousness thereof; for therefore is their sin laid here again
before them, ye have not spoken of me the thing which is right, etc.

2. The folly that is in sin should be seriously laid to heart; what vain
comforts it promises; what folly men evidence by following it, and expecting
to prosper in it; and, what ignorance and folly men bewray in their unsound
opinions: Therefore does he put them in mind of their Folly in this their way.

3. It should, particularly; he looked upon as an act of man's folly, to think
to measure Gods deep counsels by their shallow conceptions; for, that was their
folly in particular.

4. When men have their sin discovered to them, and they do not flee to Christ,
they lie under great hazard of reaping the fruit of their folly; for, so is
here intimated, that if they will not do as he directs, he will deal with them
after their folly, in that they have not spoken of him the thing that is right,
etc.

Verse 9. So Eliphaz the Temanite, and Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the
Naamathite went, and did according as the Lord commanded them: the Lord also
accepted Job.
The 3. and last Branch of this part of the Chap. contains an account of their
obedience to the former Direction, with the issue of all. Both they and Job do
obey what was commanded, and God accepts Job offering and praying for them,
and, consequently, accepts them also. It is not needful to enquire how this
acceptance was evidenced, whether by Fire from heaven consuming the Sacrifice
(as was usual at other times, Lev. 9.24. Jud. 6.21. 1 King. 18.38. 1 Chronicles.
21.26. 2 Chronicles. 7.1.) or otherwise, seeing the Scripture is silent.

Doct. 1. It is a Character of godly men, that they are easily convinced, and
do tremble when God threatens; as here, they lay aside all their height of
Spirit, and do stoop, and go to Job, according as God had commanded. And albeit
it be hard to draw off men, when they are engaged in a course; yet if God
interpose, the stiffest will be made to stoop.

2. God is still as good as his word to his people; for, he promised to accept
Job, v. 8. and here he performs accordingly.

3. It suffices to assure poor sinners of acceptance with God, if their
Intercessor, Christ, be accepted in their stead and name; as here Job is
accepted for them.

Verse 10. And the Lord turned the captivity of Job, when he prayed for his
Friends: also the Lord gave Job twice as much as he had before.
Follows, the third part of the Chapter, and the last part of the Book;
wherein a Close is put to Jobs sharp trials, and an account is given of his
prosperous estate afterward, till his peaceable death. This restitution of Job
is spoken of in general, in this Verse, and then it is branched out in some
particulars, v. 11-17,

In this general sum and account of his Restitution, we have to consider,

First, The substance and sum of the mercy; The Lord turned the Captivity of
Job. Where the term, Captivity, does not import (as some of the R^bbins dream)
that all Jobs losses, of Children, Servants, and Goods, were only an Illusion
of Satan, blinding the eyes of the Messengers who brought him word of these
Losses, which they thought they saw really lost according as they represented
to him. And that those Persons and Goods were only carried away by Satan and
his Instruments, and kept in safety, till now they are restored again. But the
plain meaning is, That, whereas Job had been delivered up to Satan's power to
afflict him, Chap 1, and 2. who held him under the pressure of troubles, as in
a prison (as himself complains, Chap. 13.27. And David in the like case, Psalm
69.33.) Now the Lord did liberate him, and set him at freedom. And albeit this
General be afterward instanced only in his Restitution, as to his external
state; yet it include^ more, That his bodily sickness was healed, that he was
restored to serenity of mind after his perplexities, that the aspersions of his
Friends were wiped off, and he was delivered from their bitter encounters.
These are all supposed here, if not principally intended in this General.

Doct. 1. Whatever affection the Lord bear to the persons of his own Children,
and whatever be his ultimate design in afflicting them, yet their afflictions
will be sharp in their season, and will hem in their spirits and humors, and
shut them up on every hand; for, Jobs Trouble was a Captivity. See, Job 36.8.
Heb. 12.11. This is the way to make afflictions operative; so that the
sharpness thereof is no evidence that God does not own his Children under it,
or that he will not deliver them from it.

2. There is no sharpness in the affliction of Saints but God (how long soever
he continue it) does notice and ponder it; for here, after all this long tract
of trouble (wherein Job was ready to think he was forgotten) the Lord noticeth
that it was a Captivity. His Sympathy does not weary, though we weary to look
to it; nor is his sympathy so fond as we desire, but he can let them lie long
under trouble, with whom he does sympathize all the while.

3. As the Lord will give all his people proofs of his sympathy, by putting an
end to all their troubles, sooner or later, Psalm. 34.19. So, sometime, he sees
it meet visibly to deliver them in this life: As here Job, who had been a
pattern of sharp trials, is now made a public and visible monument of Gods
kindness, and Gods dealing to him is a pledge to all, that a good Cause and a
good Conscience will still have a good issue. See, Jam. 5.11. And the Lord is
pleased thus to deal with some of his people, not that all of them should
always expect the like; But,

1. To give some public Documents to the world of the advantage of Piety,
Psalm. 58.10, 11.

2. To humble them who obstruct the manifesting of such kindness to themselves,
by their not walking fruitfully under trouble.

3. To excite us to guard against miscarriages, and diffidence under trouble,
seeing God may humble us, by refuting all those by his gracious dealing, such
as he showed to Job.

4. To assure tender walkers that, whatever the Lord do for them in their
particular trial, yet he wants not power nor good will to do for them as he did
for Job.

Doct. 4. Men are not warranted to cast away their confidence, because there is
no probable mean of their deliverance, to which they may look; for, the Lord
turned the Captivity of Job, when nothing else could promise it. See Esth.
4.14. Dan. 3.16, 17, 18.

5. Albeit unbelief be the great fault of Saints; yet God is so gracious, as to
send deliverance when they little expect it; for, Job looked for no such thing
as this, Chap. 17.13, 14. It is of the Lords great mercy that he passes over
the unbelief of his people, Psalm. 77.7, 8, 9, 10. Isa. 40.27, 28, etc. and
64.3. Yet we should not presume, because of this, to cherish unbelief, nor
suffer our selves (through want of hope of deliverance) to be driven on such
courses as may make us ashamed when deliverance comes.

6. The more sober men are in their expectations, the more near are they to
deliverance; and the less weight they lay upon prosperity as a reward of piety,
they are the more like to get it: For, not only did Job, in his si^s, lay his
account never to be restored but cut off; but he reasons solidly against h^s
Friends, when they spoke of temporal prosperity as the reward of piety, and
maintains that God may cut off a man, who yet is truly godly and approved of
him, Chap. 9.22 and 13.15, 16. And here we see a man of such a temper restored.
When men have too high an esteem of worldly enjoyments, they do thereby declare
that they are their Idols; and therefore it were no kindness to bestow them
upon them.

Secondly, Consider the time of his Restitution. As for the time of the
continuance of his Trouble and Trial, some of the Jews have limited it to a
year. Others have made it three, others, seven years: But without any grounds
for their Assertions. This is certain that at the very beginning of the Dispute
there had months of Vanity already passed over him, Chap. 7.3. But how long
time was spent in the subsequent Debates, betwixt all parties, is not
determined in Scripture. Here it is certain that his restitution trysted with
his praying for his Friends. And it teaches,

1. A time of blessed and sanctified deliverance is a praying time; as here it
was with Job. See, Zech. 12.9, 10. Ezech. 36 37. And when God prevents our
prayers with his Mercies, we should be he more busy afterward, that they may
be blessed unto us.

2. As even godly Friends may be ready to act unfriendly toward a godly man in
his trouble, that his trial may be complete; (as they did to Job.) So it is an
evidence of Grace, especially marked by God, to pass over these Injuries; as
here, God marks that Job did so to his Friends; who are called his Friends,
notwithstanding their miscarriages toward him. (See also, Chap. 6.15. and
19.21.) Not only because they were of his Kindred, but because he, in love,
thought them Friends, and because they minded to express friendship in all they
did, however they mistook the way.

3. It is not enough that men seem to pass over injuries, that so they may more
closely pursue a revenge; but they should pray for them who have injured them;
as here Job prayed for his Friends. See, Mat. 5.44. Romans 12.14. If Conscience
were made of this duty, it might be a mean to reclaim those who wrong us, from
their evil courses; and however, it would bring much peace to our selves, Psalm.
35.13.

4. As our forgiving of others is an evidence that our selves are pardoned by
God (which malicious vindictive spirits do little mind) Mat. 6.14, 15. So when
men are in a tender frame, and ready to pardon Injuries, it is a pledge that
their deliverance is near, and that it is blessed to them, when it comes: For,
the Lord turned the Captivity of Job, when he prayed for his Friends. So that,
as those who have done wrong to others should imitate Jobs Friends, in taking
with their faults; so, they who are wronged, and would evidence that they are
approved of God, and that their deliverance is blessed to them, should imitate
Job, in their tender passing over of injuries; which also was not only the
practice of David, 2 Samuel 19.21, 22, 23. but even of Saul before the Lord
departed from him, 1 Samuel 11.12, 13.

Thirdly, Consider the measure of Jobs prosperity, now when he is restored; it
was twice as much as he had before. And albeit this be instanced only in his
goods, v. 12. where a remark like to this is premitted to the particular
account of his substance, and there we may speak to it; yet the Original has
it, God added to all that Job had, to the double. Where the Universal All, may
be restricted to all of that kind, or, to all the particulars of his wealth,
mentioned, v. 12. Or it may, also, be further extended, and taken more
absolutely. What was verified of this in the matter of his Children, will come
to be considered, on v. 13. Only here it may safely be extended both to his
body and mind, That the Gifts and Graces of his mind were notably improved by
this trial; and such Gifts of body and mind as he had before, and he was now
repossessed of, were double mercies in his esteem. And so it teaches,

1. Saints restitution after trouble will be with advantage; as here Job ^ound.
So that they shall have no cause to repent, or to quarrel, that they were in
trouble. See, Psalm. 1 19.71. Isa. 61.7,

2. Whatever other advantages men reap by trouble, yet they are great gainers,
if they learn to prize mercies, as double mercies when they are restored; and
if the Gifts and Graces of their minds be thereby improved: In which respects
Jobs mercies were now double to him.

Verse 11. Then came there unto him all his Brethren, and all his Sisters, and
all they that had been of his acquaintance before, and did eat bread with him
in his house, and they bemoaned him, and comforted him over all the evil that
the Lord had brought upon him: every man also gave him a piece of money, and
every one an ear-ring of Gold.
Follows, to the end of the Chapter, a more particular account of his
prosperous condition after his restitution. By which is intimated, That the
Providence of God toward his people ought not to be superficially viewed, but
distinctly marked. Here, this account of his prosperity is branched out in five
particulars; the first whereof (in this v.) is, his restitution to his Honor
and Reputation among his Friends and Kinsmen. Where it is declared that all his
Kinsfolks (called Brethren and Sisters) and his Acquaintance (who had formerly
forsaken him, either because of his poverty, or their suspicions of his
Hypocrisy) do now flock unto him; and do eat and drink, and sympathize with
him, and comfort him over all his sorrows. They do also give him some money
(which has its name from a Lamb, which, it seems, was stamped upon the Coin,
as we call some pieces of Gold, Angels, for the like reason) and Jewels; which
they did, both in testimony of their Love and Kindness, and (it is likely also)
toward the reparation of his ruined estate. For albeit we read not that in lost
what Gold or Wealth he had in the House; yet that could not so soon have
purchased so much wealth as he had again, v. 12. And if he had many Friends,
every ones Mite might contribute somewhat to set him up again. It is further
here to be considered,

1. This eating of Bread with him, does not only import that they were familiar
with him, but has some hint also of those Feasts of Consolation, which of old
Friends were wont to give to the afflicted, Jer. 16.7, 8.

2. If it be enquired, what need there was of their sympathy and comfort, now
when the Lord himself had appeared for him?

Answ. However it was now with Job, yet they testified their good will; and
what they did, might help to confirm him, and heal any scars that were left,
especially when they confessed their fault, in abandoning him in his trouble.

Doct. 1. Godly men may expect to be stripped of all comfort from their
friends, in the day of their trial; as here is supposed, that Jobs Brethren and
Sisters, and all they who had been of his acquaintance before, had forsaken him
in his trial, of which he complained, Chap. 19.13-18. Of this also Heman
complains, Psalm. 88.18. And David frequently. This is great inhumanity, and
contrary to the Law of Friendship and Kindred, Prove. 17.17. Especially when
godly men are deserted in a trial, when they maintain a righteous cause, or are
quitting a bad cause. For otherwise, even godly men cannot expect to be owned
in a wrong cause; though yet love to their persons should make us careful to
take them off their ill cause. However, in this that usually befalls godly men,
in their most cleanly trials, they may read, partly, how little friends are to
be trusted in, who may fawn upon them in their prosperity (as here they do) and
yet fail them in their adversity. Partly, That God will strip them of all means
of comfort, that they may depend upon himself, and that he alone may have the
glory of supporting them.

2. Whatever God take away from his people, for their trial; yet those things
are not lost, but when God returns, they will be restored also; as here, when
God turned Jobs Captivity, all these came unto him. Yea, very enemies will
prove friendly, if it be for our good, when God shines upon us, Psalm. 106.44,
45. Jer. 42.12.

3. Sober godly men will not reject their Friends, when they amend their
faults; albeit themselves be now in prosperity, and need them less than when
they abandoned them. For, Job meekly admits of them to eat bread with him, and
does not reject them now when God restored him, as they abandoned him in his
distress.

4. It is men's duty to comfort godly men in trouble, as they are able; and for
that end, they should sympathize with them, that they may comfort them thereby,
when they can do no more, and they may administer any other comfort, they are
able to afford, with more tenderness; for, they bemoaned him, and comforted
him. See, Chap. 2.11.

5. Gods being a party in trouble needs not obstruct comfort, nor hinder others
to administer it; for, they comfort him, even over all the evil God had brought
upon him.

6. Even after long and sore trouble is gone, some scars and prints of trouble
may remain, which need comfort still; for, Job needs to be comforted, even now
when he is delivered. The dregs of sharp trouble may continue long after a
deliverance, and we will find, after eminent deliverances, that time is but
time still.

7. Godly sober men are not above any lawful mean of comfort; for, though God
had comforted him, yet he rejects not their comfort.

8. True Love and Compassion cannot be proved by words only, without deeds, as
there is ability, and others have need; for, every man gave him a piece of
Money, and every one an Ear-ring of Gold. See, Jam. 2.15, 16. And if words
without deeds will not avail, much less will Complements suffice, where there
is not so much as reality in these.

Verse 12. So the Lord blessed the latter end of Job more than his beginning;
for he had fourteen thousand sheep, and six thousand Camels, and a thousand
yoke of Oxen, and a thousand she-Asses.
The second particular in this account, is, his outward wealth, or Cattle
(wherein their wealth consisted most in these times) which is, both in general,
and by particular reckoning, found to be double to what he had before. Compare
Chap. 1.3. Not that he had all those at first (as it was but after a time also,
that he had all these Children, v. 13.) but in process of time he acquired all
this wealth.

Doct. 1. God may sometime restore his afflicted people with advantage, even in
the matter of wealth, as well as in other things; as here, his latter end, is
blessed more than his beginning, as the induction of particulars does witness.
And albeit Bildad pressed that promise too peremptorily, Chap. 8.7. Yet now it
is verified to Job; not as a constant Rule, but to make him a visible monument
of mercies, who had been so remarkable for his miseries: Not that Job needed
this, to make him happy; but to point out,

1. That temporal mercies are, in themselves, good things, and not incompatible
with piety; so that they sin who are unthankful for them, or abuse them; and
the more signal such mercies are, the abuse is the more h^inous.

2. When these outward mercies are bestowed on godly men, they are rewards of
piety, and proofs of love, as well as other mercies; and ought to be
acknowledged and improved as such, to further, and not to hinder, piety.

3. In those days, when Gospel-promises were not so fully revealed, these
temporal favors were liberally dispensed, as shadows of better things;
whereas, in the want of these, we should labor to make up all those wants with
spiritual things, now clearly revealed, and more plentifully dispensed.

4. God has abundance of temporal mercies to bestow upon his people, were it
for their good; as sometime he instanceth in his dealing with some of his
people, to silence the quarrellings of all.

5. Though God do not still follow this way; yet it is sure that God will
always restore his people out of trouble with advantage, Romans 8.28.

Doct. 2. Whatever means God make use of in furnishing his people; yet that
should not obscure his own hand and blessing; for, though Jobs Friends gave him
gifts, v. 11. and himself was industrious; yet it was God who blessed his
latter end.

Verse 13. He had also seven Sons and three Daughters.

14. And he called the name of the first Jemima, and the name of the second,
Kezia, and the name of the third, Kere^happuch.

15. And in all the Land were no women found so fair as the daughters of Job;
and their Father gave them inheritance among their brethren.


The third particular in this account, is, his Children, whom probably he had
by his former Wife, returning to her wonted dutifulness (wherein she had
failed, Chap. 2.9. and 19.17) now when his trial is ended. Here we have
recorded,

First, The Number and Sexes of his Children, v. 13. He had seven Sons and
three Daughters, just as many as he had before, Chap. 1.2. And therefore that
General, v. -- 10. of his getting double of what he had before, must either not
be extended to his Children, but understood only of his Wealth; or the former
Children must be reckoned as not lost to Job, seeing they were with God, and so
those he had now, and those that were removed, was a double number; or those
Children he had now were a double mercy in his esteem.

Secondly, Something is particularly marked concerning his Daughters, as,

1. Their Names, v. 14. which were given them upon the account of their
singular beauty, above any Women in the Country about them, v. 15. -- For the
Name of the first signifies one fair and bright as the Day; the Name of the
second imports one so sweet as Aromatic Cass^a; and the Name of the third
implies, that she was one so fair, as if an Horn (or, large measure) of
Paintry, or, Varnish, had been powered upon her, to make her appear beautiful.

2. Their Estate and Portions; and that they were made joint heirs with their
brethren, of their Fathers Lands and Estate, v. -- 15. Which does not import
that they were never married; but that their Father was careful to settle them
near himself and his Sons, that so they might have a Society among themselves
for Gods Service, because of the many Idolaters that were about them, who might
be ready to infect and corrupt them.

Doct. 1. Children, in themselves, are a ^lessing, as continuing us in them, to
serve God, even when we are gone; for, here they are ranked among Jobs
Blessings. See, Psalm. 127.3. and 128.3. So that it is a sin to murmr at this
mercy, or not to improve Children a^ a Blessing.

2. It is, in special, a Blessing to them who have Wealth, to have Children,
who may succeed to them in their Estates; for, this mercy of Children is
subjoined to Jobs wealth, v. 12. to intimate that his wealth would not have
been so sweet, if he had wanted Children to enjoy it after him. So that it is
the fault of men of great Estates and Power, if they breed not their Children
well who are to succeed to their Estates and Dignities; whereby they not only
wrong their own Families, but their Country also, wherein their posterity may
have power. And they are also culpable who, having great Estates, do not marry,
that so themselves may have a care of educating their Heirs, if God give them
any; but do suffer those who shall succeed them to be bred by they cannot tell
whom.

3. Even the multitude of Children is a blessing; as here it heightens Jobs
mercy that he had so many. And albeit Job was a rich man, and had enough to
give them; yet they are indefinitely a blessing to poor or rich; Psalm. 127.5.
not to be murmured at, though not to be doated upon either.

4. Every sex of Children, sons or daughters, is a mercy; as here is distinctly
marked, though we ordinarily dote upon those we want, whether sons or daughters.

5. Though Favor be deceitful, and Beauty vain, Prove. 31.30. and God may
compense want of Beauty with excellent qualities; nor must men cast off their
Children because of deformities; yet, beauty is, in it self, a mercy, not to be
abused with a polluted life, or wi^h pride because of it; for, therefore is the
singular beauty of Jobs Daughters marked.

6. It is a great blessing, both to Parents and Children, when Children are
dutiful and obedient; for so were Jobs Daughters, as appears from his care to
provide for them, and his delight to have them near himself; and this is marked
as one of his mercies.

7. It is a great blessing, and an evidence that Children are dutiful, when
they live in love one with another; as here, the sons and daughters delight to
live near together. See, Chap. 1.4.

8. It should be a special part of Parents care, and an evidence of their love
to their Children, to study to prevent their infection in the matter of
Religion, and so to settle them, that they be not cast upon tentations; so much
did Job evidence, by settling his Daughters among their Brethren.

Verse 16. After this lived Job an hundred and forty years, and saw his sons,
and his sons sons, even four generations.
The fourth Particular in this account, is, his long life, after his
restitution, even for the space of 140 years; so that he saw four generations
come of him before he died. If we apply that General, v. -- 10. to this also,
and make this sum double to what he lived before his trial, we may conclude
that he was 70 years old (which is the half of 140) when his trial began; and
lived in all, 210 years, beside the time of his trial. Which (if there were not
somewhat singular in it) might help to prove to the antiquity of this History,
and that Job lived before these days wherein men's lives began to be shortened,
as Moses shows, Psalm. 90.10. But this supposition, of the doubling of his
years, not being so certain, we may only here, Learn,

1. Albeit our life on earth be but a warfare, yet long life is a mercy in it
self, and to godly men a reward of piety, and a benefit to the Church with whom
they are continued; for therefore is Jobs long life marked as one of his
mercies. See, Psalm. 34.12, 13. It is true, godly men have some loss by their
long life, being so much the longer kept from heaven; yet death being, in it
self, a fruit of sin, the deferring thereof is, in it self, a mercy. And a long
life may be full of rich advantages to godly men; while they see Gods goodness
in the land of the living before they go hence, Psalm. 27.13. while they have
opportunity to honor God, and do him much service, Phil. 1.23, 24, 25. while
they get many proofs of Gods love; Genesis 48.15. 1 Kings 1.29. while they have
opportunity to sow largely for a rich harvest, 2 Cor. 9.6. and get leisure to
ripen for death, which is their difficult step and great trial. All which does
not import that we should dote upon long life; but it serves to condemn the
Godly, who are weary of their life, and all those who make little good use of a
long life, but do thereby render themselves obnoxious to a sudden stroke, Psalm.
68.21.

2. It is yet a further proof of kindness, when God sweetens our long life with
mercies, particularly, of posterity; as here, Job saw his sons, and his sons
sons, even four generations.

3. Our long life is then especially sweet, when we see the Church well, and
are doing good therein, in our stations; as Job here had opportunity to train
up, and see a Church of his posterity. See, Psalm. 128.5, 6.

Verse 17. So Job died being old and full of days.
The last particular in this account, is, his happy death, when he is full of
days. Whence learn,

1. Did men live never so long, and in great prosperity, yet they must at last
die; as here Job did. See, Psalm. 49.6, 7, 8, 9. Heb. 9.27.

2. It is a mercy in it self, when men are ripe, to be taken away; for, it is
ranked among Jobs mercies, that he died, being old, It is true, young persons
do dote upon time, expecting an happiness in it; but when men come to what Job
attained of years, or any thing proportionable to it, they will count it their
mercy to get their Pass to be gone, if they be godly.

3. Were men never so old when they die, yet to be full of days, and satisfied
with the time they have lived, is a mercy and gift of it self; for, it is here
marked, as a distinct mercy, that he was not only old, but full of days, when
he died. And this is a mercy bestowed upon the godly, Psalm. 91.16. even though
they die young, Isa. 65.20. And this satisfaction is begotten by a sight of
Christ, Luke 2.29, 30. But the wicked have it not, Psalm. 55.23.

Having now ended this whole Book, so full of rich matter, I can subjoin no
Conclusion so pertinent; as to sum up the whole of it in that use which James
makes of this whole History, Jam. 5.11. Behold we count them happy which
endure. Ye have heard of the patience of Job, etc. Wherein we may observe,

1. Albeit Job was so singularly afflicted as never any one mere man was (for
Christ is to be excepted) yet his trials are not to be forgotten by the Church
in any age: For, therefore does James put afflicted Saints, in his time, in
mind thereof. Hereby we are taught, That none should seek exemption from the
Cross, seeing such a one was exercised; That we should not quarrel lesser
trials, when we reflect upon his eminent sufferings, but should rather be
preparing for, and ready to submit to more; and, That we should expect that our
lesser trials will exercise and try us, considering our strength, no less than
his greater sufferings tried him; and that God does consider this; for,
therefore is Jobs case propounded to all afflicted Saints.

2. Saints under their afflictions may reap great advantage by the study of the
Scriptures, and the experience of others recorded therein; therefore does James
remit his afflicted Brethren to what they have heard of Job. Whereby he not
only intimates that they were acquainted with the Scriptures; but that there
they might find, That afflictions are not inconsistent with true piety, nor
with the favor of God; and, that the Fords of trouble should have been tried
before them by others; which is the great advantage of those who live in the
latter times of the world.

3. It is not enough that men contemplate what they observe in the Scriptures,
unless they find it sweet in their own practice; for, he insinuates, That when
they heard of the patience of Job, and saw the end of the Lord, they were ready
to count them happy who endure, and to look upon Job as a blessed man; and yet
they might be ready to count themselves miserable, when the same Lot fell to
their share.

4. Patience is a most excellent Grace under trial, and will make Saints famous
after their trials are over; for, says he, ye have heard of the patience of
Job, as his singular commendation in all ages. Of which frequently in this Book.

5. Saints, who desire to walk meekly under the hand of God, and do not approve
themselves in, but do mourn for, their passions, and scum which appear in the
Furnace, may believe that God will not judge of them by their Fits of
impatience; for, therefore is Job commended for his Patience, notwithstanding
his many fits of passion.

6. Patient Saints may expect a satisfactory and comfortable issue of all their
troubles; the experience and observation whereof should encourage others in the
like case: For, Job got an end, or, issue, of all his troubles; and that they
had seen this, or known that it was so, might quicken them also to patience.
See, Psalm. 9.18. Prove. 23.17, 18.

7. This issue is called the end of the Lord.

1. Because it was the issue which God prescribed and allowed. And his
salvation (which he carves out, and thinks good for his people) may be near,
Psalm. 85.9. when our salvation we would be at, may be so far off, as, in mercy
to us, we shall never see it. And withal, if he allow great salvation ( Psalm.
18.50.) upon any of his people, as he did to Job; why should they scruple to
receive his bountiful allowance, though they be unworthy to receive it.

2. Because no worth in Job procured this issue, but all flowed from Gods
mercy, who thereby proved himself to be very pitiful, and of tender mercy. And
as the most tender Walkers under trouble ought to ascribe all their
deliverances only to Gods mercy, so this may invite the most wretched and
miserable, and the most unworthy (if they be sensible that they are so) to look
to him in their distresses.

3. Because his Almighty power brought about this deliverance, when Job did not
expect it, and there was no probability that it should be; as he can command
deliverances, Psalm. 44.4. when nothing in us, or in second causes can promise
them. Now unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we
ask or think, according to the power that works in us, unto him be Glory in
the Church by Christ Jesus, throughout all ages, world without end, Amen.
Ephesians. 3.20, 21.

FINIS.

