THE Faithful and Diligent SERVANT OF THE LORD, Blessed at the COMING OF HIS
LORD. As it was lately unfolded in a Funeral Discourse On the Death of Mr.
THOMAS CAWTON. AND Now on the earnest desire of the Hearers Published by H.
Hurst.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside
near Mercers-Chappel, 1677.

To the Christian Reader, and to those who desired the publishing of the
ensuing Discourse.
Christian Reader,
IT would be an indecorum, as custom now obtains, to send abroad a discourse,
without direction where it may seek its entertainment: whether this be to be
imputed to the great unkindness of Readers, or to the unreasonable multitude of
Writers, it concerns me very little to enquire, and thee as little to know. To
them I send it, who I hope intended honestly, when they desired this plain
discourse might be published; and though perhaps it might be weakness in me to
let your desires have this effect on me, yet it is no fault to wish it may, and
to hope it will do thee good. It was a plain discourse in my mouth, and it was
needful it should be so; and it is plain now in paper and Ink, because I was
desired to publish what I preached: if it be somewhat more concise, it is not
without reason (somewhat being proper enough to the Hearers, which might be
less proper to Readers, who knew not those circumstances the Hearers were
acquainted with). And you need quarrel the brevity of it no sooner than you
find you were at the end of it before you were willing. I am sure I had an
excellent pattern of fidelity and diligence in Gods Family, when I had his life
in my eye, whose death was occasion of this discourse; I will not praeoccupate
your Judgment, whether I have well commended the Duty to you, or encouraged you
to the performance of it. I pray of you a serious and heedful Reading: and I
pray to God that he would give you such a heart as he requires, such a life of
holy care to save your selves and others, that God may give you the blessedness
of faithful Servants in life, at death, to eternity. That this may contribute
to all these, prays,

Your Souls Friend, H. HVRST.
April 20. 1677.
Luke XII. Ver. 43. Blessed is that Servant whom his Lord when he comes shall
find so doing.


I Think I need not give a Reason of my choice of this Text, when I have told
you the occasion of the words: If you will look into the Context, you will soon
see how great agreement there is in it, to this mournful occasion; and that
there was sufficient reason why I should fix here, where the best encouragement
of faithful Servants is laid before us, and an example of such an one is to be
treated by us. Nor shall I need other reason to persuade you to attend to what
shall be spoken.

Our blessed Lord, having exhorted his hearers to a readiness and watchfulness,
which becomes Servants whose Lord will certainly come, though they know not
when, ver. 35, 36. And having encouraged them with the proposal of blessedness,
ver. 37, 38, in case they do attend diligently to this Duty, and persevere in
it unto his coming; and withal, proposing it in so comprehensive a manner,
that it did not appear whether it were spoken to all equally, or to some more
than unto others: Saint Peter, either out of desire to know his Duty, or out of
curiosity to know his Lords mind, does (as in some other cases he did) make the
enquiry, ver. 42, whether the Parable were spoken unto all, or only to the
Disciples and Apostles, Lord, speak thou this unto us, or even unto all?
unto which query, Christ gives such an answer as does more closely bind our
Duty on us, and awakeneth all concerned in it, to see to it that they do their
duty, be ready for their account, and wait for their blessedness; And the Lord
said, Who then is that faithful and wise Steward, etc? Christ seems to have
answered with a check to his curiosity, but with a direction to his and our
willingness to our Duty; as if Christ had plainly told him, I speak to as many
as hope to be blessed by their Lord when he comes, excluding none who pretend
to the relation of Servants to the Lord, or to the hoped reward; who so would
be found faithful in his work, and blessed for it; who so is either Servant or
Steward, to him I speak; and according to the proportion of the Talents and
Trust, I do advise to diligence and fidelity in their employs, and assure of
blessedness to their fidelity. Be then your condition what it will, whether
higher or lower in your Lords Family, if you are in that condition faithful,
and wise, and helpful to your Fellow Servants, and so continue to be till your
Lord shall come, you are and shall be blessed.

For, Blessed is that Servant, whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing.

The words I shall, with your leave, briefly Paraphrase: [Blessed], we so
express a good, comfortable, and desirable state: It is well with him that is
blessed; and he is thus well, who is thus well doing, and found in it. [ Is
that Servant, whom, etc.] This notes the universality of it, extending to all,
and yet points out the persons, who are here put under the Character of
blessedness; That Servant, though no more; That Steward or Ruler, if so much,
is the person Christ speaks of, who shall be blessed, when his Lord, who has
authority and right to require and direct our obedience, who has right of
calling us to account, and of distributing rewards; when Christ shall come,
then they who served him faithfully, shall be blessed, and in a good condition.

[When he cometh] which refers both to the time when, and to the manner how
he comes; at what time soever, or in what manner soever our Lord shall come,
all his faithful servants shall be blessed, for they are found [so doing];
which you must refer, partly to what was spoken more remotely in the Parable,
and concerns all according to the capacity in which they are, Servants in the
Family; and partly to what was spoken in the foregoing verse, where Stewards
and Rulers in the Family, giving to the Family its portion of meat in season,
are described, and supposed to be found faithful and wise in this charge; and
these are they who are so expressly pronounced happy in their so doing. Briefly,
this so doing, is doing the office of our places, and doing it according to the
Rule thereof, wisely, faithfully and diligently. The words thus opened, do lay
in open view before us, 1. A Lord who will sometime or other certainly come to
see what his Servants are in their several places doing. 2. A blessedness or
happy condition of some of those Servants. 3. The Character of those who shall
be happy, which Character is made up of the particulars mentioned distinctly in
ver. 42, and summed up in the Text in so doing. Hence then passing by other
particulars, I commend to your attention this Doctrine.

Doct. That whenever, and however our Lord shall come, all his Servants,
especially his Stewards, who have been wise, faithful, and diligent in his
family, giving to all their portion in season, shall be found in a good and
happy state.

It is not certain when or how our Lord will come; but whenever it is, or
however it may be, they are Servants and Stewards in happy state who are found
fit for, and faithful in the Lords Service.

His condition is and shall be good, who is a good servant to the Great and
good God. The meanest, and most ordinary Servants in the family being faithful,
are blessed according to their capacities; the Stewards who are above ordinary
Servants in their charge, abilities, and account, are also above them in their
blessedness, when they are found faithful to their Lord. It is a good, and a
great employment to be a Servant: It is a better and greater thing to be a
Steward in Gods Family, the Church of Christ. It is the best temper to be wise
and faithful in discharge of either, as our Lord shall appoint to us and
require of us.

Now in handling this Doctrine, that I may speak fully to it, I shall desire
you with me to consider,

1. The time when our Lord comes.

2. The manner in which he comes.

3. The Scriptures do assure us his faithful Servants are happy.

4. Wherein their happiness does consist.

5. Why appropriated to so doing, i. e. to giving the Portion to each, etc.

6. Why deferred until the coming of our Lord.

When these are dispatched, the Doctrinal part will afford us profitable
Application.

Now to the first thing proposed, I answer:

1. General. ^^e of our ^ds coming.
That our Lord in his coming does not observe the same time toward all; he
comes sooner to some, he stays longer to others; our experience and
observation herein is an undeniable witness. Some Parents God has taken away
sooner, and left in younger days both Wi^ows and fatherless Children: Some
Preachers have h^d the opportunities of Forty or Fifty years, when others have
been called to their rest at half that period. You know not how long God may
continue you to yours, or them with you; P. Martyr aged 63. H. Bulling^ 50
years d^ aged 71. Guil. Fare lived 76 ye^ Bishop Lat^mer lived years, and
Gataker. Nicol. Hemmingius, ag^ 87. Theod. Beza^ aged 87. Dr. Chader^ 89. Pet.
Nanniu^ insigni litera^tura, viz. 10^ A^.
you had not been now mourning under this loss, if God had given to all his
faithful Ministers the same length of time for their work, to which some
attended longer than others have lived. The years of labor to some exceeding
by much the years of Life given to others. Thus 35 or 36 end the life, and of
these, some 16 or 17 years end the Labors of this Servant of God; yet he dyed
not the youngest Minister that ever yet dyed. But the unaccountable variety
here bids me forbear to enquire farther into it.

2. That our Lords coming is according to his own determined purpose: Our times
for life and service are in Gods hand; they are reserved with him, and he will
come in his own time. Were our times in other hands, we might be unseasonably
hurried too soon out of Life and Labor, by unkind hands of ill-willers; or
detained too long by the unwillingness of our Friends to part with us. But our
Lord has appointed, and will keep his own set-time to come to us.

3. There can no measures be given beforehand, what time our Lord will take to
come to us in. Nor may we expect any such Rules from any by which to guess how
long it will be ere our Lord will come to you, or me; Thousands have within our
time and observation (if we had heeded it) been summoned, when all about them
have thought they might have continued much longer. Parents have lost their
Children, Wives have lost their Husbands, and People have been deprived of
their Pastors on a sudden, when no such cala^i^y was feared. Our Lord has not
made an hour to come sure to any of us, or invested us with a Right to another
succeeding moment. Our rule is, Work now, attend on the present business God
lays before us, for our Lord comes at an hour we know not of, as Matthew. 24.42,
sooner or later; expected, or unexpected; seasonably to our comfort, or
unseasonably to our Friends, Relations, and Churches grief; we cannot foretell.
Sure we are, he comes not to all at one age, nor to any in any time but his
own; nor with certain fore-warnings of weeks, or days, or hours; he has no
where told us he will stay a day longer for the youngest of us: It is enough
that he does assure us, if we are faithful in our places, and serve him, we
shall be blessed in so doing. And as the time is thus various, so in the second
place, His manner of coming is various; of which next.

2. Genesis Genesis The ner of our is coming.
There are five several ways wherein the Lord is pleased to come toward us.

1. He comes in public afflictions, and general calamities upon Kingdoms, or
Nations, or People, among which many of his faithful servants dwell, and are
with others oftentimes involved in their troubles and sorrows: When the Lord
did call ( Psalm. 50) his Saints together, verse. 3, he tells us a fire shall
devour before him; and this is the effect when God shall come, and not keep
silence. Of such a coming Isaiah speaks in these words, The Lord shall come
out of his place to punish the inhabitants of the earth, Isa. 26.21. The
faithful Servants of God inhabiting the earth with others, may thus feel the
castigatory indignation of their Father. And in his Prophetic lofty strains,
the same Prophet does lively describe this coming of the Lord, Chap. 13.5, 6,
7, 8, 9, 10, 11 verses, Who is represented coming with the weapons of his
indignation, verse. 5, And the day of destruction comes, verse. 6, To lay the
land desolate, verse. 9, which was indeed accomplished in its time on Jerusalem
and the Jews after they had rejected Christ, and crucified him; yet then at
this coming, those that were faithful, were found in a good Condition; they
were blessed who served the Lord, and prepared for his coming; though this be
not the coming chiefly meant in the Text, yet the Doctrine is sound in this
regard.

2. Sometime the Lord comes in that manner, that particular families or
persons are found out by the rod and corrections. Lev. 20.5, God speaks of
cutting off a house or person. Dent. 29, 18, 19. God warns persons in a
Family, and the Family too; now if such do not take warning, but provoke him,
he will in his own time come to correct or punish such a person or family: of
this manner of proceeding are we to understand that of 1 Samuel 2.30, 31, and
cap. 3.13. When God does thus visit persons, or families, he is properly enough
said to come against them, and in such cases still it holds true, Those
servants of God who are faithful in their service to God, are blessed, or in a
good condition. So Eli was, though he smarted under the Rod; and David
comforted himself in the prospect hereof, 2 Samuel 23.5, though his house should
not grow; though severe corrections and rebukes should cause the Beauty of his
house to wither; yet God would give him the Covenant-salvation, it should be
well with him, in case of such coming: though the Text less intend it, the
Doctrine is both true and useful.

3. Sometime the Lord comes to search and try men's state, and conscience is
awakened to make enquiry, and to discover them to themselves. While God stands
as at a distance, men are secure; but when he comes by his Word and Spirit,
and commands an admission, he sets up that light within the man's soul that
discovers what he has done, what he may expect, and what he farther must do.
The word is sharp as a two-edged sword, and searches the reins, Heb. 4.12. And
thus the secrets of men's hearts are discovered, when God comes with his word,
1 Cor. 14.25, among men. When God heweth men by his prophets, and makes his
judgments as the light, Hos. 6.5, then he comes into the heart and conscience.
Now certainly the Faithful and Diligent are in a good condition, when their
hearts do not condemn them, when they know God will not condemn them. But oh
the sad condition of those that dare not look themselves in themselves! that
are self-condemned, and afraid to know what God discovers at such coming! The
Kings of Judah, who did not obey the Command of the Lord, could not endure the
Prophets, or their word. But Josiah who was faithful to God, can bear such a
searching word, 2 Chronicles. 34.19. and 27. ver. Who desire to be faithful to God,
they dare abide this coming; it does discover their sincerity, and declare them
happy. In this case (though not directly intended by the Text) it holds true,
All Gods faithful Servants and Stewards are found in a good and happy state.
But next, which is that coming intended chiefly in the words and Doctrine:

4. When Death is the Messenger God sends to let us know he is coming to us,
when he fetches us from amidst men, and comes to take account of each of us;
each man by man, thus visited, is either more or less happy, as he is found
more or less faithful and diligent at this coming of the Lord; this is that
coming, of which by concurrent vote of our Interpreters the Text does speak, as
also does its Parallels, Matt. 24. ver. 42, 43. and Mark 13. ver. 34, 35, 36.
of which I say the less, because it passing with so general consent, needs not
much proof. But,

Fifthly and lastly, The Lord comes in his Glory and Majesty to raise the
dead, and to Judge all men. They who now do, shall not eternally sleep in the
dust; God will come and call them out of their beds: The Lord Jesus will
descend with the voice of the Trump, and the dead shall hear and rise, to the
great, general and last judgment. Thus he comes to judge the world (Psalm.
96.13, and 98.9,) with righteousness, and the people with equity. Places that,
speaking of the Kingdom of the Messiah, do include this Royal procedure which
shall consummate his ministerial Government. When he comes (as Rev. 1.7,) in
view of every eye, for every eye shall see him when he thus comes; or as it is
described, 1 Cor. 15.23, 24, 25, At this coming the Faithful diligent Servant
is in good state. Briefly then, Whether our Lord come sooner or later to try
the heart by his word, or families by his Rod, or Nations, as he did try the
Jews by more public calamities; In these cases the most faithful of his
Servants and Stewards are in the most safe and blessed state; but when he
comes as the judge of all men to particular judgment, calling each man by
death; and to the general judgment, calling all men before him; He, and he only
is in a good and blessed state, who is found to have been faithful and diligent
in his Stewardship and Service within the House and Family of God, giving to
each what portion of meat is due to them. Which is

In the third place now to be proved by the more general Testimony of the
Scriptures. 3. Genesis Proofs of the Doctrine.
Where we find all faithful and diligent Servants, and Stewards especially,
pronounced blessed and happy in their attendance to the work of doing good to
all as they are able, and therein serving their Lord, and waiting for his
coming. So Rev. 14.1^, Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord: Death is the
greatest, as well as last Enemy to our life; yet if that natural life be spent
for the Lord, and we dye in him, we are blessed; for such men's Works do follow
them, and they rest from their Labors. Now certainly lesser troubles, and
lighter afflictions cannot render him or her unhappy, whom Death found and left
in a blessed state; so that to work those works which we would have to follow
us, and to dye in the Lord, as they prove our Fidelity, so they do prove our
Felicity, and at once prove us good Christians, and in good state. Again,
Matthew. 25.34, 35, Come ye blessed of my father, etc. These are such who fed,
clothed, harbored, visited, and refreshed those in the Lords Family, though
the least of his Family, verse. 40, which was as much a Duty to them who could
do it, as it was useful to others for whom it was done: Now they are declared
happy ones, who had thus, according to their opportunity Ministered unto others.
And much more will they appear blessed, who have faithfully directed thirsty
Souls to the Fountain of living Waters, hungry Souls to the Bread of Life,
naked Souls to the white Robes, wandering Souls to the rest of Souls. Again,
Matthew. 7.21, Not he that says, Lord, Lord, but he that does the Will of my
heavenly Father, etc. not a fruitless profession, but a faithful obedience; not
an unactive complement, but a diligent fulfilling the Will of our Lord, is at
last a blessing to us; he is in a good state indeed, whose Lord does reward his
Service with an entrance into, and enjoyment of eternal life in Heaven. And
nothing can alter it to him, who alters not his course of Faithfulness and
Diligence. Such an one is ( Jam. 1.22,) Blessed in his deed: now who is blessed
in doing his work, can never be in ill-state whilst he is doing it; and he is
in better state when the work done is rewarded: whose work is his happiness,
cannot but be happy, whilst he attends his work; and this is the case of all
diligent and sincere observers of Gods Commandments, Psalm. 19.11.
The keeping them is a great reward. Christians consider it, if glory, honor,
immortality, and eternal life, can be a blessedness to us, we are assured of
this, For every soul that does good (as God requires) whether Jew or Gentile,
Romans 2.13. There is a crown of righteousness (2 Timothy 4.8. for St. Paul who had
fought a good fight, etc. Yea, but if it were limited to his person, none could
rejoice herein with assurance for themselves; or were it limited to his
excellent qualifications, and unparalled diligence, few or none of us could
argue our own right hereby; therefore it is added, not for me only, but for all
that love his appearing. It is then unquestionable, that when the Lord shall
come by Death and particular Judgment to any of us; and when he shall come in
the general Judgment to us all, every faithful and diligent Servant shall be
blessed. And the blessedness of that future state, will as much make and keep
every state here in our way to it, good and happy, as gains of thousands yearly
will make and keep him rich who loses some farthings or pence now and then.
Thus in general, the common and ordinary Servants find their diligence and
fidelity to be their happiness; Stewards and Ministers of the grace of God find
it much more their happiness to have been faithful and diligent. So the Holy
Ghost seems to speak for encouragement to the Angel of the Church of Smyrna,
Rev. 2.10. And 2 Cor. 4.1, Ministers of the Gospel are mentioned, who did
handle the word of God faithfully, and commended themselves to the consciences
of men, verse. 2. Who did preach not themselves, but Christ, verse. 5. Who were
troubled on every side, verse. 8. Of these it is said, that light and momentary
afflictions work for them a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory,
verse. 17, 18. The share Ministers shall have in answer to the diligence and
faithfulness of their Labors, shall be greater than the share of common or
ordinary Christians at the coming of him who is Lord to them all. When each
Believer has his Crown, and all their joys are full, then are those Believers
an accession to the glory and joy of their faithful diligent Ministers, who
labored for their Conversion, and helped forward their final and eternal
salvation, 1 These. 2.19, 20. And once for all, that of Dan. 12.3, Who turn many
to righteousness, shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, etc. Each
faithful Minister shall have his Aureola, golden Ornament added to his Crown:
though all the faithful Servants of the Lord shall be as the stars, yet one
star differs from another; the most bright and glorious will be those who
were on earth the stars that Christ held in his right hand, Rev. 2.1.

These Scriptures, with others, which might be added, do confirm the blessed
future state of faithful and diligent Servants, and Stewards, who in the Lords
family attend to their work, and serve the Lord by their affording what help
they can to all; and in proportion to their trust and fidelity, shall be their
happiness at Death and Judgment. And in the mean time, in what ever way of
corrections or judgments the Lord may come to others, and to them while they
are among others, and are liable to troubles; yet they shall be found blessed
in public troubles, blessed in private troubles, blessed under personal
trials, at death more, in the resurrection most blessed, happy, and in good
state in all these cases.

Now wherein this blessedness consists, is the fourth proposed head of our
discourse, to which your attention is now desired, that you may be thoroughly
affected with this undoubted truth, and be brought to a greater resolution for
fidelity and diligence according to your Talents, and may at last have a larger
measure of this present, and that future blessedness, which I thus range before
you. 4. Genesis What the blessedness of faithful Servants.


1. The faithful and wise Servant of the Lord is blessed in the pardon of his
sins, and culpable blemishes, which intermix with his services. He that will be
so wise for, and faithful to his fellow Servants, as to persuade, direct,
encourage and help them to serve the Lord, cannot be supposed will not be wise
for himself, or unfaithful to himself, or neglect to sue out a Pardon for his
known and unknown infirmities: The good man Nehemiah, cap. 13.22, sought this
pardoning Grace from the greatness of Gods mercy, when he reflected upon the
great services he had done for God and his Church. David, the man after Gods
own heart, joins this suit for Pardon, to his requests for guiding in the ways
of God, to which he was fully addicted, Psalm. 25.4, 5, 6. and in midst of
troubles he sueth for the same mercy, Psalm. 25. ver. 15.16, 17, 18. When his
feet were in the net, v. 15. when desolate, v. 16. when troubles were enlarged
into distresses, v. 17. Then he prayed that God would forgive all his sin. So
the returning Church, Hos. 14. ver. 2, prays, and God promises he will do it,
ver. 4. And so Micah 7. ver. 18.19. Now this makes any condition good and
safe: The man whose transgression is forgiven, Psalm. 32. ver. 1, is in every
place and in every condition a safe and happy man. God who pitieth infirmities,
pardons them where he finds sincerity in his Servants. He that faithfully
warns another, and calls on him to repent, and seek his Pardon; he that
faithfully endeavors to engage others to do their Duty, and seek for mercy, is
a man whom God has affected, so as to ensure the blessedness for himself which
he persuades others to look after. Parents, Husbands, Wives, Friends and
Ministers, who heartily desire and labor to get others into the service of
God, on terms and encouragements sufficient to prevail with them, are indeed
the persons whom we must in charity believe are pardoned. I should think he
were pardoned who commended the Grace of his Prince, who persuaded to all due
Allegiance for future, and urged his fellow Subject to sue for Pardon of what
had been ill and undutifully done already. It is certain the faithful are
forgiven and blessed therein, though perhaps they have not sense of it, or we
evidences to prove it of them. Now no condition can come on such a man, to
render him miserable or in evil state.

2. The blessedness of such faithful and diligent ones does lie in that
gracious acceptance which God does afford to them for all their sincere and
willing obedience, though imperfect in it self, unsuccessful to others, and
altogether unprofitable to God. It is a blessed thing to be accepted with God;
this is Heaven upon Earth; this is Heaven after we leave Earth. The Lord
rejects none that he has fitted for, and who are faithful in his charge:
This was a blessing that David entreated of the Lord, Psalm. 19.14, Let the
meditations of my heart, and the words of my mouth be acceptable in thy sight,
etc. This gracious acceptance did in David's troubles counter-balance the
grieviousness of his troubles, Psalm. 69. ver. 7, 8, with ver. 13. He could bear
the reproach of enemies, when he knew his prayer should be acceptable unto his
God. No Courtier despised by Rebels is so happy in his Prince's Favor, and
free access to his Prince's Person, as such diligent and faithful Servants are
in their access to, and acceptance with their God. You may guess at what I say
by the resentment Cain (of men one of the worst) had of Gods refusing to accept
him, Genesis 4. ver. 5. It cast him down, and filled him with trouble. No
condition is uneasy to a soul that enjoys Gods Favor; for it is better than
life, Psalm. 63. ver. 3. and every condition is dark and doleful without his
favor. What is Hell, but a place where hopeless Souls are under the
inconceivable Tortures of an eternal rejection and separation from God? What is
Heaven but a glorious, free, full and eternal state of nearness to God, and of
favor with him? This acceptance is the great blessing God has promised to
such as serve and love him, Isa. 56.7. It is the sum of all we obtain through
Christ, in whom we are accepted with God, Ephesians. 1. ver. 6. Matt. 25. ver. 21,
Well done good and faithful Servant, is enough to make us blessed now; enter
thou into the joy of thy Master is fullness of the future blessedness. In every
state, and at the coming of the Lord, thus blessed is the good Servant.

3. This Blessedness of the faithful and good Servant, does lie partly in the
peace and tranquillity of his mind, persuaded that now sin is pardoned and his
duties are accepted: every condition shall at last give place to what is best,
and all shall work together for good to him; though various troubles do tols
him, yet they (like rolling waves) carry the Ship toward the Harbor. It is
well with him, because he knows the knife which lanceth him, does not make
him a Sacrifice under avenging Justice. And though he is corrected, yet it is
under the hand of a Father, he is not destroyed by the hand of an Executioner.
He is satisfied that it is good for him that he has been afflicted, Psalm. 119.
ver. 67, 71, 75. When he suffers with others, he sees he needed it; so all
appears seasonable, necessary and profitable to him, 1 Pet. 1.6, We are in
heaviness for a season if need be, and for our profit, Heb. 12. ver. 10. It is
blessed to be refined, and God does by his coming intend this, Isa. 48. ver.
10, That he may choose them before others. Now this considered, the faithful
Servants of God do account their condition good, for that it is always tending
to, and shall at last end in what is best for them: It is on the increase
toward full happiness.

4. The faithful and good Servants happiness does partly consist in that
support which his Lord gives to him under his burdens; while he submits to
the will of his Lord waits for him, and does his Duty, he is supported by the
presence of his Lord: He sinketh not, because the Lord upholdeth him, Psalm. 94.
ver. 17, 18. When David's feet did well nigh slip, the Lords mercy held him up.
It is an unutterable variety of helps that God affords to his faithful ones,
they are very secret, unexpected, strong and satisfactory, many times beyond
the belief of strangers, and the hope of those who receive them, Isa. 43.2, In
midst of Rivers and waters, in midst of fire and flames; if God promise to be
with us, we may account our condition good and safe; for his presence shall
save us from Rivers, that they do not overflow us, and from Fire, that it
kindle not on us. Now thus safe and good is the condition of every faithful
Servant of God, he is pardoned, accepted, bettered, and supported still, The
Angel of Gods presence is with him, and saves him, Isa. 63. ver. 9. He is
blessed whom God will save, whom God will support. It is sad to be left sinking
under our burdens; but to be supported under them, is next to a blessed
freedom from them, or next to a life above them.

5. However, it may be death shall be the sad consequence of a faithful and
diligent Servants sufferings with others; yet he is in this case blessed too:
For he might die in peace and joy; he does at least die in safety, and free
from danger of suture evils. It is possible a good Servant may die under fears,
but he does not die under danger of condemnation; Who walk in their integrity,
enter into their Rest, Isa. 57. ver. 2. Though Death be an enemy, it is last to
a child of God: Stewards and Servants though faithful and diligent, yet they
must die; but after death there is no other enemy, all is then safe to them:
they pass by Death to the enjoyment of the love of their Lord, to be filled
with that love which is inconceivable, and possess that love which is eternal;
from which, Nothing can ever separate them, Romans 8. ver. 37, 38. thus death is
theirs, 1 Cor. 3. ver. 22. Now that is a blessed state indeed which is so full
of safety: How do dying men acknowledge this! when Death brings no danger with
it, we are happy indeed: This Balaam wished for, though he never attained it.
The untrusty and slothful Servant is unhappy in his death, because he dies
under greatest danger, he dies an evil and wicked Servant; the good Servant
dies as safe as he can wish, and as happy as he can be made. Which will appear
in the

Sixth thing, wherein the blessed state of such does consist: They pass after
death immediately into an inconceivable glory, where their souls purified from
all sin, and made perfectly holy, enjoy a blessed, though not a full
consummated glory: they are in the joys of their master; they live in the sight
of their glorified redeemer, triumph over sin and temptation; assured of the
future resurrection of their bodies, without tediousness of a delay wait for
it; they possess their building of God, their house not made with hands, which
is eternal in the heavens, 2 Cor. 5.1. They are before the throne, etc. Rev.
7.14. Thus blessed in life, in death, after death, are the faithful Servants of
the Lord. And yet, this is not all, there is

A seventh thing, part of their blessedness, which, when their Lord comes,
they shall enjoy, that is, the resurrection of their bodies in a glorious
conformity to the glorified body of their redeemer. When the Lord of these
Servants and Stewards we speak of, shall come and awaken all out of their beds
of dust; His good Servants, whose bodies were sown in dishonor, shall receive
their bodies raised in honor: those bodies which were sown mortal and weak,
shall be raised immortal, and in strength, fit to be the eternal habitation of
immortal souls; and both soul and body united, shall ever live in a most
delightful, regular and sinless harmony and friendship. You that admire the
unparalled beauties of mortal creatures, and judge That their happiness, which
is your envy or wish; withdraw your eye, and look to the Grave, whence the
rarest beauties are at last to rise, whence the firmest strength, the most
desirable activity, and the spiritfullest vigor. And then say whether you can
think them less than blessed, who have their part in this Resurrection, to
allude to that of Saint John.

Nothing shall ever be able to hinder them from this, which though exceeding
great, is yet followed with another part necessary to their happiness; which is,

8thly, A public, solemn and full declaration of their absolution from the
charge which men or Devils, in their accusation of them, would load them with;
nay, the charge wherewith the Law would burden them, shall be fully and
solemnly taken off: when they shall be justified before men and Angels, from
all that from which they could not be justified by the Law of Moses, Act.
13.38, which shall be when our Lord shall proceed in Judgment toward all, when
according to the order of the Resurrection, those that are Christ's, shall be
first called, judged and absolved; when according to the order of the Parable,
Matt. 25.34, Those shall be adjuged to glory first, who fed the hungry,
clothed the naked, took into their houses those that were strangers, etc.

This I doubt not, you will confess is a great happiness indeed: well, when our
Lord comes, thus happy shall all his faithful and diligent Servants be, who in
life laid out themselves in labor for the Lord, who in death rest from their
labors, and whose labors follow them into Judgment, to be examined, pardoned
and rewarded according to the riches of Grace.

9thly, Our Lord, when he comes, will add another thing to their happiness:
They shall then with him, as assessors and approvers of his righteous
proceeding with the rest of the world, sit Judges of the world; of this we are
assured, Jude 14, The Lord comes with (or in midst of) ten thousand of his
Saints to Judge, etc. Of this the Apostle speaks more clearly, 1 Cor. 6.2, The
Saints shall judge the world: Nay, more, we shall judge Angels, says the
Apostle. This honor have all his Saints; and in this they are blessed: and
this is enough to make every condition good to them, until the glorious coming
of their Lord, until they are thus advanced: In a word, Christ seems to promise
to his, who are more than the ordinary Servants in his Family, a more than
ordinary degree of this Honor, Luke 22. ver. 28, 29, 30. with Matt. 19.28. I
will not enquire how far faithful Stewards and Ministers are herein, next to
the Apostles, concerned: It is well for them, their faithfulness to souls shall
then be manifested and honored.

10thly and lastly, Christ our Lord, when he comes in the Glory of his Father
Judge of all, will, when the solemnity of Judgment is finished, and the wicked
world is cast into Hell, thrown into the place of Torment, where their worm
dies not, where the fire is not quenched; Then Christ will take all his
faithful ones, and pass with them into the inconceivable and eternal Glory of
his Kingdom, brought to the fullest degree of greatness and Majesty that is
foretold to us. When they shall ever be with the Lord, and behold his Glory;
when they shall be like to him whom they see, and be filled with that Glory
that shines on them; when all the Saints of God, and none others, shall be
amassed into one great and general assembly, and all orderly ranged before the
throne of God, and the Lamb ministering in sinless praises, love and adoration
for ever.

Now certainly, could you and I lift up our eyes toward this illustrious
assembly; could we view them there, we should ever be satisfied, That diligence
in, and faithfulness to the service of our Lord, according to our capacity, now
is, and will, at the coming of our Lord, appear to be as much our comfort and
happiness, as it is our Duty, and ought to be our care. Oh then, let us
consider, What it is to be acquitted from guilt: What to be approved and
rewarded: What it is to be bettered by all providence: What to die in safety at
last: Is not this to be blessed? Is not this to die the death of the righteous?
Why Christians, your faithfulness and diligence shall so be found, and so end,
if you continue it.

Do we believe a glory succeeds our death, a resurrection our burial, a public
absolution our being judged? shall we sit assessors, approvers, and witnesses
to the Great Judge, and pass with him into glory everlasting? And shall not our
unwearied diligence and faithfulness exercised in his Service, prove we believe
the truth, and expect this benefit hereof? I hope now you will be less moved
with present difficulties, and more fixed for future diligence in serving the
Lord, and doing good to his Family, expressed here by giving the Portion of
meat in season; in which appears the wisdom and fidelity of Servants and
Stewards, and to which blessedness is annexed and appropriated in the Text. The
Reason whereof, is the fifth general head of discourse, and which we shall now
briefly touch upon.

1. Wisdom and faithfulness in Servants and Stewards, (...) Genesis Why (...) Ted,
who ^e the Por^ of, etc.
are the best qualifications, and comprise all that a Lord and Master
requires, or need require in them: for wisdom makes them meet for such a
trust, and faithfulness encourages their Lord to trust them. And both these
appear in their observing what is fit for each person and season, and applying
to both accordingly. So when Fathers know what is fit for Children, and Masters
know what is fit for Servants, and Ministers for their people, and accordingly
instruct, reprove, warn, encourage, or comfort them: Here is both the widom and
fidelity requisite to a good Servant; and the Lord, who intends in the Text to
oblige us to all that good Servants and Stewards should do, has thus closely
couched all our Duty in this comprehensive phrase. So the blessedness is
appropriated, not to a single Duty, but to the universal diligent discharge of
all our Duty; which is summed up in this giving to each other our Portion of
meat in season.

2. Thus we are seasonably minded of that great and necessary duty, which the
last and worst age of the world does neglect; we are minded of giving mutual
help and furtherance to each other in the way of Holiness and Obedience. Our
disputing, quarrelling, censuring, and condemning age, is ready to turn one
another out of the way, to dispute each other out of the truth, and to quarrel
each other for doing their duty, instead of helping each other to do it: But
this little becomes Servants and Stewards in the same Family; this is no part
of their wisdom or fidelity; Christ knew we should (unto his coming) need each
others help, and has therefore so commended it as our wisdom and fidelity, and
so encouraged the discharge of it by this large reward. Let us then have so
much reason to see the excellency of the duty and temper, and so much Religion
before God, and love to our selves, as to get this temper that we may do the
duty, and receive the reward, and be at last blessed with those we helped
toward Heaven.

3. This giving the portion of meat in season: This charitable benificence,
puts a great honor upon Religion, and commends it to others: And Christ does
therefore expect we should thus adorn our Profession; and he encourages us to
it, by such a declaration of the blessedness of those who attend this duty. A
wise, faithful, and diligent Physician credits his Profession, and convinces
men, that it is very useful and profitable to mankind. A Christian of such a
temper in Christianity, and so exercising himself to do this comprehensive good
in his place, does as much convince the world, that Christianity is of all
Professions most useful to mankind, who are by it helped forward in the arduous
and important affairs of eternity.

4. Thus we are awakened to greater watchfulness over our selves and others,
and minded of observing, laying hold on, and improving opportunities; which,
though we are so engaged not to let slip, yet we too too often let fall quite
out of our own hands: and that becomes for ever impossible to us, which once
might have been easily effected by us. Time is not easily redeemed, but
opportunities are more difficultly recovered, and for most part once slipped, and
for ever lost: Well then, might such Emphasis be laid on this Duty of giving a
portion in season, that all might be awakened to heed what opportunities are in
their hand. Oh consider it, I beseech you, Parents for your Children, Husbands
for your Wives, Masters for your Servants, elder ones for the younger, and
Ministers for their People; you cannot always live, they must dye, and neither
can give or receive helps when death swallows up your opportunities. You Will
never hear him catechizing, preaching, praying, and exhorting, who now rests in
his grave; and you are not sure you shall ever have such another. How heedful
should we be then to receive our portion when offered, and to offer it to
others while we may; and be so found prepared for the reward which is promised
to these good Servants, but is reserved until the coming of our Lord: The
reason of which delay or adjourning of our happiness is the sixth General
branch of our discourse, and now comes to be considered. And so,

1. (...) Genesis This ^^^ssedness ^y reserved (...) last coming, etc.
The seasons and manner of our Lords coming before Death and Judgment, are
notable discoveries of the unhappiness of sinners, and therefore do by a
necessary consequence manifest the happiness of the servants of God; Though
light is always pleasant, yet it was most pleasant in Goshen, when Egypt lay in
darkness. Heaven is always desirable, but when the misery threatened involves
the contemners of it, they will appear blessed indeed, who sought it, and
obtained it. The various coming of our Lord does show the world the evil state
in which the unbelieving and rebellious sinners are found, and so cannot but
show the good state in which the faithful are found to be at his coming.

2. There is somewhat of Royal prerogative in it: God will have his last coming
to be the season, because it seems good to him that it should be so. And this
were reason enough, though there were no other; he has reserved times and
seasons in his own hand: and he who gives the reward freely, may (surely)
choose the time wherein he will give it. That ever he will give, it is grace;
that he will give it at last, is his pleasure; of which none ever complained,
when they received the blessing.

3. There is much of Decorum, and due order herein: it would not be so
seasonable at any other time; their Service is for the Lord their Master, and
he is the fittest to view their Service, and to assign their recompense; they
did not expect their happiness before his coming, and yet they professed they
should receive it at his coming; and now when times and seasons suit their
expectations and declared hopes, there appears a just order and harmony between
times and things: Now the promise, and their hopes are consonant to each other.

4. There is somewhat of that we call necessary in the case, their happiness is
reserved to that time, because it could not be sooner. For,

1. All the greatest good Gods Servants can receive before this coming of their
Lord, is too little and mean to be their blessedness; besides that, most of
external advantages are the rewards of such as shall never have better, and are
given to hypocrites, Now it is necessary that faithful Servants should stay till
they may receive a better reward than hypocrites have.

2. It is necessary all their work be done, before they receive their full
blessedness; now their work ends not till they dye, then their works follow
them, and they are blessed. It is not more necessary a Labourer do his work,
ere he receive his wages; or a Soldier conquer, ere he triumph; than that the
faithful Servants of the Lord do all their work ere they are blessed and fully
recompensed for it.

3. Full blessedness of Gods Servants must be in a place and state where all
(not one excepted) may meet, and be joynt-heirs of the same inheritance. Now
this cannot be in any place or state, but that to which (at the Lords coming)
they shall be carried. Now we come into the world, live a few days, and in
small numbers together, and cannot live all together, nor long together; your
tears witness it: but we must be all gathered together ere all tears shall be
wiped from all faces, and this cannot be but where our Lord will be with us for
ever, which will not, cannot be till his coming.

4. Until death be conquered, and we raised immortal, which cannot be till the
last coming of our Lord, we are not able to bear that glory which must be our
final and full blessedness: none can see God while they live, mortal flesh is
too weak for immortal Glory, this is too weighty a Crown for heads that must
lie down in dust: We must dye, that we may be raised immortal, and so be made
capable of our final happiness.

Vlt. lastly, in a word, The eternal Presence of God with us in the immediate
fruits of it, is our objective happiness, and necessary to our reward; and this
cannot be hoped or enjoyed whilst we are on this side eternity, and are
measured by time: But when the last coming of our Lord shall determine the
periods of time, and fix our eternity, which shall commence at the expiration
of time: Then he will never more be absent from us, or hide his presence, or
abate it to us. This being necessary to our happiness, it is necessary we stay
until his last coming; wherein you will, I hope, and wherein I pray that you
may meet the faithful and diligent Servants of God, his Stewards; wherein I
persuade my self you will meet this faithful servant of Christ, whom you now
lament, but shall then ever rejoice with him. Sirs, I believe you will scarce
doubt the truth I have preached; I am sure you cannot with reason contradict
it: I hope you will not through slothful hearts lose the proposed blessedness
which is last, that it may be best to you. I have now done with all the
Doctrinal part, and think I have spoken to as much as needed to be handled in
it: I proceed to the Uses of the Point; which I shall confine to these two
following:

1. Information: Hence we may learn, 1. Use. Information.
1. That the care and business of Christians is as their privilege, very great:
Happiness in every condition and state is an exceeding great privilege; and to
be faithful and diligent in the Lords Family, according to our Talents and
Relations, is no light and easy care, or work; it requires much wisdom, and
much heedfulness. I wish we were more apprehensive of both, that our endeavor
to be faithful might somewhat answer our hopes to be happy; if you separate
them now, God will separate you from them hereafter, when death shall cut you
off from your opportunities, and Judgment shall cut you off from your hopes. Be
holy, and serve your Lord, as ever you hope to be happy with your Lord.

2. Hence learn, The first part of a faithful Servants and Stewards work is the
more troublesome, the last part is most sweet, and satisfactory; Sincerity and
Diligence are sweetest at last. The idle revelling Servant is most at ease when
his Master is at farthest distance; but the diligent and faithful Servant does
most rejoice when his work is nearest an end, his Master nearest coming, and
his reward nearest to his hand. All that is difficult, is at first somewhat
harsh to our weakness; but when difficulties are well nigh conquered, it is
greatest quiet and satisfaction to the diligent hand, and willing mind.
Religion grows sweetest to us at last, if we are sincere in it.

3. Hence learn, That best men, though they shall be fully blessed at last, yet
that last shall not be but when the Lord pleases. None have our times in their
hands, to prolong them, or shorten them to their humors or passions: Good
Christians should live too little, and serve God and the Church too little, if
bad men might measure out the time of their service: such men would send them
to their happiness sooner than would be convenient for those that neeed them.
And were our arrival in glory at the disposal of our friends, and such as love
us, we should be kept longer from it than we would. It is fit it should, and
it is best that it be in God our gracious Sovereign and Lords hand, to measure
out the time of our Service, and to fix the time of our reward, which shall be
when he comes; and he will come when he pleases, and never to the loss of his
faithful Servants.

4. Hence learn, To check the inordinate and excessive grief or impatience of
Spirit under our losses, in the death of our Relations. A thousand disputing
thoughts will start up in your breast, which must not be allowed any debate: It
is the Lord who might have come sooner, though we should possibly think he came
too soon; crush such like surmizes, look rather to the known piety, diligence,
faithfulness and labors of your deceased Christian Relations, and consider to
whom they lived Servants, to whom they are passed, with whom they now do, and
ever shall live. Be followers of them, as they were of Christ; that in Gods
time, i. e. the best and sit time, you pass to them, and be with your Lord
and theirs, in fullness of rewards and joys.

But Secondly, By way of Exhortation. 2. Use. Exhortation.
Since the faithful and diligent Servant shall be blessed at his Lords coming;
be persuaded, all, whether Hearers or Readers, especially you who have such
examples, and who have a more peculiar concern in the occasion of these lines;
Be persuaded to get such a temper of soul, and lead such a course of life, as
may best become the Servants of such a Lord who will come, and as may most
comfort you when he comes. I will not prolixly direct how you may thus do, nor
farther move with argument; I will suppose you willing already, and desirous to
hear how you may be blessed in your temper, life and death.

1. Wisdom is necessary; the verse before my Text tells us as much, therefore
you must get wisdom from the Scriptures. Read, consider and remember them, they
are the rule our Lord has left for direction of his whole Family: The entrance
into these, gives wisdom, and this wisdom will attemper both heart and life,
that both may be holy, and the end happy.

2. Settle your resolutions to do all the known will of your Lord: Let it be
your motive why you do, and your warrant when you have done the things that are
proper to your places and callings. An unresolved man will never be thoroughly
faithful or diligent: the full purpose of your heart must be to do all the good
to all as you can; which is the will of him who is good to all, and whose
tender mercies are over all his works.

3. Whatever advantage you have on men, whether it be advantage of Interest or
Authority, use it all for God, and the good of their souls, who in likelihood
will hearken to you, and be advised by you: Perhaps you may thus save some.
Where you may forbid, let not sin be committed, unforbidden: Where you may
command let not good be omitted through want of your Command: use the Power God
gives you to engage others to serve God. Abraham would command his House to
keep the Covenant of the Lord, so do you.

4. Watch over your selves, that you may watch over others; and ere you pretend
faithfulness to others, and diligence and care to make them good, be sure to be
good your selves; none can believe you are in earnest bent on the good of
souls, if you neglect your own.

First, Do the good which your places require, and then persuade others to mind
their Duty in their places. Masters, Fathers, and Teachers will do more hurt by
bad examples, than they can do good by best Counsels.

5. Look frequently to the future blessedness, under the conditions with which
it is proposed to you and others, in the Text, Context, and other places: a
frequent view of that blessedness, will heighten your desires and hopes: A
frequent view of the conditions, will awaken your care, and provoke to
diligence, lest you should come short of your hopes, and be disappointed of
your best desires. We are apt to forget our hopes, therefore look often to that
blessedness; we are apt to indulge our ease and sloth, therefore look well and
often to the terms on which it must be expected. Though many weaknesses are
passed by and covered, yet wilful negligence and insincerity will not be passed
by; you must be faithful and sincere, if you will be happy and blessed: This
light is sown for the upright; and the spirit in which is no guile, is, and
shall be blessed, Psalm. 32.2.

6. Remember and imitate the best examples that fall under your observation.
Beside what are recorded in sacred Scripture, (to which you must look) it will
be helpful to you, if you will remember and imitate those whose life and
carriage was much in your eye. And let me tell you, in the Copy our late
faithful Brother set you, there are remarkable for your imitation. A prudent
care to manage soul-concerns; a constant unwearied diligence in Labors for
their good; an undannted resolution for known duty to God and Man; a tender and
meek spirit, gently dealing with the weak, yet willing enquirers after God; A
ready and full-willing mind to minister on every occasion to the edifying of
those he conversed with: An even and steady practice of what he commended as
excellent or urged, as necessary duty, an acquaintedness with the importance of
duty and reward. A serious mindfulness of Death and Judgment, on which he
discoursed frequently, and lively; dying to the World, but living to God, and
still valuing most what was so good, God would not, and men could not take from
him: which appeared in his deportment and frame of spirit, when loss of dying
Children, and uncertain riches, raised his esteem and value of the Gospel, and
his and your hopes set before us in the Gospel; a heart full of love, and
thoughtfulness for your good; whence those last desires and requests in order
to the promoting of your good, which I am informed he left you to consider:
Prize a Guide that will be faithful to your souls; keep the unity of the spirit
into which you are called by the Gospel; and seek God earnestly for both. Now
could we prevail with you who heard, and with others who read this discourse,
to endeavor for such a frame of spirit, and to act according to it, I know
there would be more faithfulness, diligence, and mutual hope among the Servants
of the Lord, and his Family would be more beautiful in sight of others, and
more comforted and edified in their own souls. Read then, and read again, and
be in your houses (which should be little Families, or Churches of God) in
directing, and helping them to Heaven, what he desired and labored to be
amongst you all; I do think he gave you the Copy of Faithfulness and Diligence,
or I would not have thus set it before you; and I commend it to you as becomes
both me and it, viz. It is the Copy of one who whilst he was good, was still a
man; but though I could wish you would excel him, I will not flatter you with a
hope you will do it; Oh that you would equal him, of whom allow me to say, He
could do as much as most of best Men, Scholars, Christians, Husbands, Fathers,
Brethren, Ministers; and his will was ever equal to his ability; the Service of
his Lord was his life: though he lived not on it, he would not, he could not
live without it; by a gracious Master fitted for, succeeded in, carried through
much work in a little time; and I believe now rewarded with a Crown of Life and
Righteousness, which he knew he did not merit, though he knew it should be his
wages.

In brief, he was such an one as friends who knew him, desire they may be; and
now is such as they hope they shall be; such an one as some enemies already (as
I am informed) have wished they might be, and others will once at last wish they
had been. He had a worth known to himself, and others, but it did not puff him
up. Should I say all I could, strangers would think I exceed, Friends would
know a better Orator might justifiably have spoken more. Yet once for all; If
either Readers or Hearers carp at the Character I have given him, I have two
things to say: First it will be easier to quarrel at the praises, than to
deserve them: Next, I would defraud none of the Commendation due to them; nor
do I prefer him above all; there are some (but too few) superior in gifts and
graces, I hope there are many his equals; I am sure the most are lower by head
and shoulders, who likeliest to misinterpret me, shall have a good wish for
them, or rather a serious Prayer, testimony of a hearty love to their persons,
and unfeigned desire of their own good, comfort and welfare; and of all these,
to theirs, and the Church of God, in this, and after ages; for them I say, I
will pray more days, fewer troubles, and that they may be in other things
altogether such as he was.

FINIS.

