THE WAR IN NEW ENGLAND VISIBLY ENDED.

King PHILIP that barbarous Indian now Beheaded, and most of his Bloody
Adherents submitted to Mercy, the Rest fled far up into the Country, which
has given the Inhabitants Encouragement to prepare for their Settlement.

Being a True and Perfect Account brought in by Caleb More Master of a Vessel
newly Arrived from Rhode Island. And Published for general Satisfaction.

Licensed

November 4. Roger L'Estrange.



C R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms

LONDON, Printed by J. B. for Dorman Newman at the Kings-arms in the Poultry,
1677.

NEW-ENGLANDS WAR Visibly Ended.
SIR,
IN my last, which I hope you received, I must acknowledge what I writ (though
truth) yet I had not that comfortable satisfaction in my spirit, to give me
hopes, that our public Calamities were so near an end as now I have, which
God in Mercy sanctify to us, that we may see the Rod, and wherefore it is come.

We have been, and still are ready to put different Reflections upon the
Murders and Spoils that have been made upon us by this Destructive War: Various
are men's thoughts why God has suffered it, all acknowledge it was for sin;
many wish there has not been some leaven of that spirit in the provocation for
which we left Old England: I am in great pain while I write, to remember how
severe some of us have been to Dessenters, making Spoil without pity, but God
is teaching us Moderation.

That black cloud (God be thanked) begins to waste almost to nothing, which may
not only give us an hopeful opportunity of repairing the Spoils made by our
Barbarous Neighbors, but also deliberating upon the true causes of these great
distractions: for now we have no visible appearance of an Enemy: Terror is
fallen upon very many, who come in daily with submission, and the rest withdraw
into places remote, hiding their weapons of War, and flying from Justice in
small Numbers.

King Philip, who has been a pestilent Ringleader, that had once three hundred
men (Barbarously inclined) as I told you in my last, was reduced to ten, but
now is killed, in this manner. He being hid in a Swamp on Mount Hope-neck, with
his little Party, one of his Indians being discontented with him, made an
escape from him, and came to Rhode Island, and informed Captain Church a
Plimouth-Captain of a Company that was in search after this said King Philip,
(the Captain being at this time on the said Island, refreshing his men with
Necessary Provisions) but understanding where King Philip was, and that he
intended very speedily to remove far off, to provide his Winter Quarters,
retaining still the same Barbarous spirit and purposes, without the least
appearance of reluctance offers of Mediation, toward his surrender to Mercy;
whereupon the said Captain and his company with some Rhode Island men went in
pu(...) (...) after him, taking an Indian Guide with them, and (...) where,
they heard he was, which was very miry, and the ground so loose, that our men
sunk to the middle in their attempts, to come at this sculking Company, but all
in vain, the passage was to difficult.

While we were thus beset with difficulties in this attempt; the Providence of
God won^erfully appeared for by chance the Indian Guide and the Plymouth man,
being together* the Guide espied an Indian, and bids the Plimouth-man shoot,
whose gun went not off, only flashed in the pan; with that the Indian looked
about, and was going to shoot but the Plimouth-man prevented him, and shot the
Enemy through the body, dead, with a brace of Bullets; and approaching; the
place where he lay, upon search, it appeared to be King, Philip, to their no
small amazement and great joy: This seasonable Prey was soon divided, they cut
off his head, and hands, and conveyed them to Rhode Island, and quartered his
body, and hung it upon four Trees: One Indian more of King Philips Company they
then killed, and some of the rest they wounded, but the Swamp being so thick
and miry, they made their Escape.

This is the substance of this Enterprise and the small remnant we left as
inconsiderable, who must either fly up into the Country or perish in the place.

There is one Potuck, a mischeivous Engine, and a Counselor; taken formerly,
said to be in Goal at Rhode Island, is now sent to Boston, and there shot to
death. One Quonepin a young lusty Sachem, and a very Rogue is now in Goal at
Rhode Island, who was there some years ago for his Misdemeanors, but broke
Goal, and run away, and could never till now be l^id hold on.

God be thanked, many Indians come in daily, and submit themselves with much
dejection, crying put against King Phillip, and other ill Counselors, as the
causes of their Misfortunes.

The English go many of them now to their Old Habitations, and Mow down their
Ground, and make hay, and do other occasions necessary for their, re-setling?
All which gives his comfortable hope, that God with graciously repair our
breaches, and cause this Bloody War to End in a lasting Peace, So prays,

Your faithful friend, R. H.

FINIS.

