A Christian Vindication OF TRUTH Against ERROR, Concerning these Seven
Controversies: 1. Of Sinners Prayers. 2. Of Priests Marriage. 3. Of Purgatory.
4. Of the second Commandment; and Images. 5. Of praying to Saints and Angels.
6. Of Justification by Faith. 7. Of Christ's New Testament or Covenant.


By Edw. Hide D. D. sometimes Fellow of T. C. in Cambridge, and late Rector
(Resident) of Brightwell in Berks.

Holding forth the faithful word as he has been taught, that he may be able by
sound Doctrine, both to exhort and to convince the gainsayers, Tit. 1. 9.

Idcirco doctrinam Catholicam contradicentium obsidet impugnatio, ut fides
nostra non torpescat otio, sed multis exercitationibus elimetur: Aug. Sermon. 98.
de Tempore.

London, Printed by R. White, for Richard Davis Bookseller in Oxford. 1659.

The General Contents of each Chapter.
CAp. 1. Of Sinners prayers. p. 1. 2. Of Priests Marriage. p. 13. 3. Of
Purgatory. p. 69. 4. Of the Second Commandment, and against Images. p. 129. 5.
Of Praying to Saints and Angels. p. 245. 6. Of Justification. p. 359. 7. Of
Christ's New Testament or Covenant. p. 471.
Courteous Reader,

The pages abovementioned, will show the^ the full Contents of all particulars
handled in each Chapter.

TO THE Christian Reader.
HE that writes Devotion, is like to please all good Christians, and is sure to
please himself, because he walks with God, in whose presence is joy, and at
whose right hand are pleasures for evermore; But he that writes Controversy,
is sure to displease many (even all that are either Unchristian as coming short
of Religion, or Antichristian as going beyond or against it) and cannot easily
please himself, because he walks among briers and thorns, which may entangle,
but must annoy and offend his footing.

I did little think, when I took some few steps in Golgotha (to teach my self
and prepare others how to dye) That I should have met with thorns instead of
dead men's skuls, though I made a public impression of those steps (in my
Christian Legacy) for others the more plainly to see, and the more easily to
follow them; But such is the contentiousness of this carping and quarreling
age, That it turns even Devotion it self into controversy; and no wonder
then, if it turn controversy into contention, and contention into bloodshed:
Let the Apostle cry never so loud, Foolish and unlearned questions avoid,
knowing that they do gender strifes; And the servant of Christ must not strive,
(2 Timothy 2.) yet this captious world will afford more questions concerning
strife then Godliness; not considering that the Spirit of God calls them
foolish and unlearned questions, though they be invented with never so much
wit, and maintained with never so great learning; And such I think are most of
these ensuing questions, (raised by so many exceptions lately brought against
the doctrine and practice of the Church of England, by one G. B. nearly devoted
to the Church of Rome;)

1. Of Gods hearing the Prayers of Heathens; for what is that to Christians?

2. Of Purgatory; for what is that to the Christian Faith?

3. Of Priests marriage; for what is that to the Christian Religion?

4. Of worshipping Images; for they are both directly against Religion. 5. Of
Praying to Saints;

6. Of Justification by works; for that is against Faith in Christ.

7. Of Quarrelling about the words of Testament and Covenant; for that is at
least vain, if not profane or sinful babbling; As it is merely upon words, so it is
vain; as it is quarrelling upon those words, so it may easily be sinful; For he
that says, Hold fast the form of sound words (2 Timothy 1. 13.) bids us stand
upon Propositions which signify true or false, not upon single Terms, which
are unsignificant as to the Truth, whether speculative or practick; for there
can be neither Faith nor Love in them: yet I have endeavored to make the
Answers to these Questions (though grounded on such unnecessary exceptions) to
contain some very necessary and sound Divinity, for which purpose I have put
them into large Chapters, and have assigned to each Chapter large Contents,
being resolved to answer the Cause for the satisfaction of others, rather then
the Objection, for the vindication ofmy self. And I think I had a good occasion
and a better reason so to do; for though our Brethren most oppress us, yet our
Adversaries most revile us; and therefore every true Son, much more Servant of
this distressed Church, ought to believe and observe his Church now speaking to
him in the language of St. Paul, Be not thou therefore ashamed of the Testimony
of the Lord, nor of me his Prisoner, but be thou partaker of the afflictions of
the Gospel, according to the Power of God, 2 Timothy 1. 8. He that is ashamed of
his Religion, is ashamed of the Testimony of the Lord; He that forsakes his
Church when she is the Lords Prisoner, did hypocritically follow her when she
was the Lords free Servant; and refusing to partake in the afflictions of the
Gospel, shows he embraced the Gospel according to the custom of men, not
according to the Power of God: But the Word of God is not bound, (2 Timothy 2. 9.)
These Truths which we profess according to Gods word, will always be professed
to the worlds end, though with less visibility, yet not with less constancy;
and if Protestants shall go from them, Papists shall return to them; For God
that can raise Children out of Stones, will never be without witness among his
own children, and I look upon all Christians at large as his children, though
only upon good Christians as his dutiful children; And if they should hold
their peace, the very stones would speak, crying Hosanna to the Son of David,
our blessed Savior, ascribing unto him the Truth of our Religion, and the
honor of our Salvation; And we desire no more, may obtain no less; Let our
adversaries show any one Tenent or Practice wherein we of this Church leave
them, to be more for the honor of Christ, then that which we embrace, and we
will acknowledge our selves the worser Christians, nor be any longer in that
particular Protestant against them, but detestant of our selves; But till they
can show that, we beseech them to show themselves good Christians, in not
railing and raging against us for being so; because we cannot think God has
given any Church Dominion over Religion, or his Servant power above his Son;
yet men of their persuasion then most call to be answered, when they least
resolve to be satisfied; disiring only to hinder Orthodox Ministers from
confirming Protestants, because they have power (by prohibiting their own
Proselites the use of their Books) to hinder them from converting Papists: yet
for my part, I should not have laid open the corrupt doctrines and practices of
Popery, had I not been constrained to vindicate Protestancy; for I had rather
spend my time and zeal about doctrines of Conscience, the of Contestation or of
Corruption; and these for the most part are both, Doctrines of corruption in
themselves, of contestation in their Champions; who contest more about these
weeds (for they are not so good as Mint or Comin, that they might be called
Herbs) then about the best and choicest Flowers of Paradise: As the zeal of
Truth has enlarged my answer to these Exceptions, so the Power of Truth (I
hope) will defend it; How ever, I have certainly done my best, concerning these
particular controversies between our Church and that of Rome, to let the world
know, That those men are swayed by little Truth and less Conscience, who seek
to turn the unworthy suppression of the true, to the more unworthy advancement
of the false Religion; And I have been the more Zealous and the more copious
for their sakes, who may be tottering to the Popish Religion, because they have
lately been discountenanced and discouraged, (if not persecuted and opposed) in
their own: And in all these my poor endeavors I have had an eye to my last
account, That (setting aside my infirmities and imperfections) I might be able
to say with the man which had the Inkhorn by his side, Ezech. 9. 11. I have
done as thou have commanded me: For I have not wittingly nor willingly deviated
either from Gods Word, or from Gods Church; But have (as near as I could)
followed in my doctrine that rule of the Holy Spirit, Prove. 9. 10. Principium
sapientiae timor Domini; and scientia sanctorum, Prudentia; The fear of the
Lord is the beginning of wisdom; And the knowledge of the Saints, is
understanding; which I look on as a short but a full sum of all the
instructions that belong to a Christian Divine, requiring him to Teach nothing
else but true Religion toward God, and true Communion with his Saints, or with
his Church; And what I have labored to follow in my doctrine, I cannot but
follow in my Devotion, Beseeching Almighty God to keep me and all good
Christians, (especially his Ministers) in the Religion of his Word, and in the
Communion of his Church: And with this prayer I conclude my self

Your Brother and Servant in our common Savior, E. H.

Errata.
PAge 5. line 20. r. viventes. p. 10. l. 25. r. Her. p. 14. l. 6. r. seasons.
p. 23. l. 20. r. Exemplo. p. 25. r. (...). p. 26. l. 2. r. distinction. p. 28.
l. penult. r. 858. p. 52. l. 1. r. Asserit. p. 52. l. 25. r. Punishments. p.
60. l. 25. r. Philetus. p. 62. l. 14. r. (...). p. 66. l. 25. r. censu. p. 72.
l 8. r. man. p. 73. l. antepenult. r. Animam. p 85. l. 18. r. Assert Purgatory.
p. 96. l. 6. r. benefit. p. 100. l. 20, 21. r. what we have not heard. p. 102.
l. 24. r. To prove either. p. 104. l. ult. r. inference. p. 111. l. 14. r.
Contradictions. p. 116. l. 14. r. Bachon. p. 117. l. 10. r. usually do. p. 132.
in 4. Exc. l. 6. r. Possibly. p. 142. l. 18. r. Souls. p. 149. l. ult. add
perfect. p. 178. l. 2^ r. (...). ibid. r. (...). p. 183. l. 26. r. But I
answer. p. 202. l. 5. r. Commoretur. p. 218. l. 2. r. Anablatha. p. 219 l. 1.
r. Knot. p. 223 l. 17. r. Tharasius. p. 234. l. 17. r. greatest. p. 239. l. 19.
r. Three. p. 242. l. 26 r. Fable. p. 250 l. 3. r. Offices. p. 234. l. 19. r.
praise. p. 265. l. 26. r. Subjects. p 280. l 24. r. severe p. 283. l. 16. r.
himself. p. 289. l. 5. and 6. dele to him. p. 289. l. 18. r. commanded. p. 300.
l. ult. r. that. p. 311. l. 3. r. then. p. 316. l. 19. r. Being. p. 319. l. 25.
r. may. p. 328. l. ult. r. commanded. p. 331. l. 23. r. done. p. 338. l.
antepenult. r. Baronii. p. 340. l. 10. r. true. p. 344. l. 24. and 25. r. self.
p. 351. l. 14. r. At. p. 360. l. antep. after shall be justified, add [concerns
rather our condemnation, then justification,] p. 369. l. 6. r. man. p. 372. l.
6 r. this. p. 372. l. ult. r. (...). p. 373. l. 13. r. greater. p. 375. l. 23.
r. that. p. 386. l. 20. r. sc. by. p. 399. l. 3. dele or else. p. 404. l. 2. r.
or a faith wor^ing, p. 413. l. 12. r. infinitely. p 414. l. 19. r. man. p. 421.
l. antepen. r. men. p 437. l. 16. r. Abrahae. p. 445. l. 17. r. men. p. 454. l.
8. r. or. p 467. l. 18. r. Arm. p. 470. l. 11. r. absolve from. p. 471. l. 1
r. work. p 522. l. antepen. r. mistrust. p. 525. l ult. r. commands.

CAP. I. Of Sinners Prayers.
SInning and Praying, are not consistent together; God hears not Sinners,
rejected by Saint Augustine as no true Proposition, yet admitted by Aquinas.
The one taking Sinners for those under the Infection, the other for those under
the Dominion of sin. But it is known to be true, by the Principles of Reason,
much more of Religion, and is more fully explained in the Old, then in the New
Testament. 2. God hears not sinners as sinners, (but as Penitents) is rather
an Exception, then an Exposition of this General Rule: for sinners as sinners
do not Pray, and God hears the Sin, not the Prayer, when he hears in Anger.
3. God hears not the Prayers of natural men as such, for so they are
sinners; and though they may have good Desires, yet not good Prayers. 4. That
Christians only can Pray, and that their prayers are heard only through Christ's
intercession, are Two Doctrines taught by Christ, and by his Catholic Church.

The first Exception.
PArt. 1. chap. 2. sect. 1. p. 35. You allege the saying of the born blind
man, God hears not sinners, John 9. 31. To which you say Saint Augustine
makes rather an Exception then an Exposition. He indeed takes exception to the
man for the reason you there allege; yet me thinks he gives a full
satisfactory exposition of his words. I have not his works, but I find in
Maldonat upon this place, these words cited out of his Tract. 44. Si Deus
peccatores ^on audiret, frustraille Publicanus oculos in terram dimittens, and
pectus suum percutiens diceret, Deus propitius esto mihi peccatori. I find also
in Valentia commenting upon that 16. Article of S. Tho. Aquinas, which you
approve of, Tom. 3. disp. 6. qu. 6. punct. 6. these words cited out of his
Tract. 73. Metuendum est ne multa Deus, quae poss^t non dare propitius,
detiratus. Out of these very words of Saint Augustine, Saint Thomas in that
Art. 16. resolves this question, Utrum p^ccatores orando impetrant aliquid a
Deo? In two conc^usions (I have only his Compendium by Ludovicus Carbo) Concl.
1. Orationem peccatoris ex bono naturae desiderio procedentem, Deus audit ex
misericordia: Ita Aug. docet, Publicanus alias frustra orasset. Concl. 2.
Quando Peccator orando petit aliquid ut peccator, id est secundum desiderium
peccati, in hoc non exauditur a Deo ex miserico dia: Sed quandoque ad
vindictam, quia Deus quaedam negat propitius, quae concedit iratus. Now Sir, if
Saint Thomas in that 16. Article approved of by you, has made a sufficient
exposition of the blind man's words, I do not see but Saint Augustine has done
the same.

The Answer.
HE that teaches men to live righteously, teaches them to pray continually,
even to lift up holy hands and holy hearts to him that dwells in the heavens:
But sin must be poured ont of the soul, before the soul can truly be poured out
in prayer: For in vain is Holiness in the mouth, whiles wickedness is in the
heart; in vain are we Saints in our expressions, whiles we are Sinners in our
affections and in our actions; in vain do we think of multiplying our prayers,
whiles we resolve to multiply our sins; for that is not to ask God forgiveness
of sins past, but to ask him leave of future sinning: So little reason is there
for our eyes to be dazzled at seeing that Truth, which the born blind man could
not but see, God hears not sinners, John 9. 31. For there needs no other
light to see the Sun withal, but its own; And this being a Proposition so
clear as to be known by its own light, may very well stand for its own
exposition.

But concerning Saint Augustines gloss, it is thus at large in his own Tract.
(for both Aquinas whom I alleged, and Maldonat whom you allege, cite it
imperfectly. Adhuc inunctus loquitur; nam and Peccatores exaudit Deus; si enim
Peccatores Deus non exaudiret, frustra ille Publicanus oculos in terram
dimittens and pectus suum percutiens diceret, Deus propitius esto mihi
peccatori. He is yet blind, whiles he speaks this; for God does hear sinners;
for if God did not hear sinners, in vain did the Publican fix his eye upon the
ground, and strike his hand upon his breast, saying, God he merciful to me a
sinner. And surely this is not an Exposition, but an Exception upon that
general rule given in the Text, God hears not sinners: For it is resolved
into this sense, God hears not a sinner as a sinner, but only as a Penitent,
such as was the Publican when God heard him. Which though it be an admirable
doctrine, yet is it delivered there by Saint Augustine as an Exception against,
not as an Exposition upon the blind man's words, and was clearly so intended by
him. For it is certain that Saint Augustine was of the contrary persuasion, and
did believe that God does hear sinners, since himself professes this belief;
Lib 1. Retr. c. 3. Nec illud mihi placet, quod quum dixissem Summa opera danda
est optimis moribus, mox addidi, Deus enim noster aliter nos exaudire non
poterit, been autem inventis facillime exaudiet; Sic enim dictum est tanquam
Deus non exaudiat peccatores, quod quidam dixit in Evangelio, sed ille qui
nondum cognoverat Christum. Nor does that please me, that when I had said, we
must labor above all things to live virtuously, I presently added, for else
our God cannot hear us; but he will easily hear us if we live well; For that
was so spoken as if God did not hear sinners, which a certain man said in the
Gospel, but he which yet knew not Christ. Now Sir, look upon my words again,
and do not think I have mistaken Saint Augustine, but rather that you have
mistaken me, and heaped up a company of heterogeneous quotations against me, as
if I had mistaken my self; whereas all my guilt is, that I did not follow Saint
Augustines opinion, because I took Peccatores in a stricter sense then he did;
not for those who unwillingly were under the infection, but for those who
willingly were under the dominion of sin. Wherein however I did no more then
Aquinas had done before me; for whereas Saint Augustine thought it was not a
true Proposition, God hears not sinners,, Saint Thomas said it was, if the
word Sinners were taken properly (as it ought in every exposition) for so is
his ingenuous profession; Quamvis possit verificari si intelligitur de
peccatore in quantum est peccator, per quem etiam modum oration ejus dicitur
execrabilis: Though it may be made true, if we understand it of a sinner as a
sinner, for so his prayer is called abominable. He relates to Prove. 28. 9. He
that turns away his ear from Hearing the Law, even his prayer shall be an
abomination; Oration ejus erit execrabilis, (says the Latin;) so that this is
a most undoubted Truth, not only made known to us by the light of nature, as I
formerly asserted, but also by the light of Grace, and the two conveyances of
that light, the Old and the New Testament, that God hears not sinners; And it
is more fully explained in the Old then in the New, (as are generally those
Truths which the Law preaches, whose office it was to terrify and frighten
men into obedience) for it is much more to say, God will abominate or hate his
prayer, then to say, God will not hear it. 2. Now, Sir, if this be the general
rule, God hears not sinners, as sinners; it is clearly an exception of this
rule, to say, He hears sinners as Penitents, since that gloss is not properly
an Exposition, but an Exception, which changes the original sense and meaning
of the Text, as a sinner into no sinner, that God may hear him: And yet here
will be found, or must be made a greater change of the Text then this, to make
your ensuing allegations so many several expositions, and not rather so many
several exceptions, or at least so many several descants or variations upon
this Rule; For then we must put audit for non audit, and say, not hearing does
signify hearing, and so turn a negative proposition into an affirmative, that
we may expound it. Truly Sir, in my poor judgment, it is safer and better to
say, God hears the Sin, not the Prayer, when he hears the sinner only in
Anger: That this is rather Gods not hearing, then his hearing, whiles he
continues in his anger; and man's not praying, then his praying, whiles he
continues in his sin: For I fear if I say otherwise, I shall be forced to
grant, That God did once hear the Devils prayers, since I find they besought
him that He would not send them away out of the Country. There Is such a kind
of sinners praying, and he suffered them to enter into the ^rd of swine.
There Is such a kind of Gods hearing; (Mark 5. 10.) They besought our blessed
Savior for a liberty to do mischief; will you call that praying? Then say,
Prayer may be without, nay against Religion; for how full may factious men's
mouths be of such prayers, whiles their hearts are empty of faith, and of the
fear of God? And he gave them that liberty; will you call that a hearing of
Prayer? Then say, That hearing of Prayer is not an Act of Grace, but of
Vengeance; for a liberty of doing mischief, does of it self tend to nothing but
to the increase of damnation: He that seriously considers Prayer to be an
elevation of the soul to God, will not easily allow it to be an engagement of
the soul to the Devil. 3. As for Gods hearing the good desires of natural men,
that is also in my weak apprehension, another exception against this general
Rule, God hears not sinners; rather then an exposition of it: So far am I
from thinking that Aquinas intended to expound this rule, by turning it into a
question; and much further was I from saying, That he made a sufficient
exposition of it: For I must look upon all natural men, as God looks upon
them, that is as sinners; so says the Text most expressly, God looked down from
heaven upon the children of men, to see if there were any that did understand,
that did seek God: Every one of them is gone back, they are altogether become
filthy, there is none that does good, no not one, Psalm 53. 2, 3. which is
alleged by Saint Paul as a proof that both Jews and Gentiles are all under
sin, Romans 3. 9, 10, 11, 12. That is, They are all under sin as they are in
themselves, or as natural men: And therefore as such, that is, As natural
men, or as sinners, God hears them not. Hitherto I think the general Rule is
not expounded but excepted; and though natural men may in some respects have
good desires, yet as such, I do not see how they can have good prayers; Good
desires may be from nature, but good prayers are only from grace. 4. You may
take to your self what liberty you please in some other opinions, but scarce in
this, because it may easily be made destructive of true Christianity: For every
Christian Divine is bound not only to believe, but also to profess, That none
can properly be said to Pray, but only a Christian. And that no Christians
prayers, whatsoever he be, are heard by virtue of his own, but only by virtue
of Christ's intercession: The Catholic Church having taught us the belief of
both these doctrines by her constant obsecration in all her prayers, Through
Jesus Christ our Lord; And the Holy Ghost having taught it his, For no man can
say that Jesus is the Lord, (much less, our Lord) but by the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor.
12. 3. And he must not only say, Our Lord, but also Our Father, that will truly
pray; that is, he must draw near to God in the acknowledgement of Christ's
Communion, and through the Faith of Christ's intercession; Our Father which art
in heaven, teaches us both these Truths: In that we call God Father, we
profess that we pray through his eternal Sons intercession; for till he
reconciled us, we were enemies, not children: In that we call him Our Father we
profess that we pray in his eternal Sons Communion, who did graciously teach
us to call him Ours, because he had made him so; Nor can any man say to God,
Our Father, who knows not Christ; nor any man that knows Christ, truly say it,
but in that Communion whereof Christ is the Head: If nature does teach men to
pray in faith of Christ's intercession, and in the acknowledgement of Christ's
Communion, saying, Through Jesus Christ our Lord, then without doubt God may
hear the Prayers which proceed from natural men: But if nature does so indeed,
then am not I so much bound as I think and willingly acknowledge, to Christ and
his Church, for teaching me to pray so. And I had rather disown, (that is not
embrace) any man's opinion, then disown the least part of my obligation to
Christ's Catholic Church, which does by me as Saint Paul did by the Galathians,
travaileth in birth of me, till Christ be formed in me, that I may offer to God
such Prayers as proceed not from my nature, but from his Grace; and that, not
through my self, but through Jesus Christ our Lord. And much more am I bound
not to disown my obligation to my blessed Savior, by whose Grace I am enabled
to pray, and for whose sake God does hear my Prayers; In the merit of whose
unspotted righteousness I offer and present my impure person; in the
righteousness of whose all-sufficient intercession, I offer and present my
imperfect prayers before the throne of the heavenly Grace, as often as with my
heart, and not only with my lips, I say unto my God, Our Father which art in
heaven.

For though men may number their prayers by their repetitions and by their
beads, yet surely God numbereth them by their sighs, and by their gr^ans: And
it were to be wished that all men did likewise so number them, having such an
heavenly attention in their prayers as to be with Christ, and such an heavenly
affection, as to be in Christ; since it is requisite they should have their
hearts in and with him in praying, whose mediation they desire to have with
their Prayers.

CAP. II. Of Priests Marriage.
1. POpe Siricius blamed for speaking dishonourably of marriage; and some
Papists after him. 2. To say that Priests marriage has been forbidden by the
Apostles or the Catholic Church, is to accuse both of approving the doctrine
of Devils. 3. Christ allows of Priests marriage. 4. The Popes of Rome did not
attempt to forbid it, till Siricius his days. 5. The Apostles neither taught
nor decreed against it. 6 For Priests to marry, is not contrary to the Churches
precept. 7. Nine Popes of Rome, the sons of married Bishops, Priests and
Deacons, some in Europe, some in Africa, some in Asia, show that marriage was
lawful for all those orders of Clergy men, in the Catholic Church, till near
nine hundred years after Christ. That the Prohibition thereof in the Church of
Rome, was not till the year, 1074. by Pope Gregory the seventh. 8. The second
Canon of the second Council of Carthage, rightly interpreted, forbids Priests
only the use of their marriage at some special feasts; (...), being rendered
secundum priora, and propria statuta, speaks for the truth of the Greek Copies,
before the Latin: The Pope in need of a Provincial Council to support his
Decree. 9. Abraham's being married, a good instance for Priests marriage, who
need look for no better then his righteousness. 10. God saying of all, It is
better to marry then to burn, the Church may not gainsay it of Priests. 11. The
Trullane Fathers blame the Romanists aboout Priests Marriage, yet their Canons
confirmed by Pope Adrian, who in this thwarts Siricius. 12. Saint Paul allowed
marriage to prevent the danger, and not only the guilt of fornication: The
Church bound to follow his doctrine. 13. Saint Paul's thorn in the flesh, his
poenall afflictions, not his sinful motions; or his tribulations, not his
temptations in the flesh. 14. Marriage better allowed then prohibited the Roman
Clergy, in the judgment of their own Authors.

The second Exception.
PArt. 2. chap. 1. sect. 2. page 128. You reprehend Pope Siricius as saying in
effect, that to marry is to be in the flesh: I could not meet with his own
words; only I find in Bellarmine lib. 1. de clericis cap. 19. Siricius prohibet
cum uxore commercium iis qui sunt in sacris: Hitherto he is not to be blamed:
For the whole Africane Church in the second Council of Carthage Can. 2. thus
decrees, Omnibus placet ut Episcopi, Presbyteri, Diaconi, vel qui Sacrame^ta
contrectant, pudicitiae custodes etiam ab uxoribus se abstineant, ut quod
Apostoli docuerunt, and ipsa servavit antiquitas, nos quoque custodiamus: So
that the Apostles themselves were the first that taught and decreed, that
Priests ought to abstain from wives: Neither does your instance of Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob urge Siricius. There was no precept in the Law of nature, nor
in the Mosaicall Law, forbidding Priests to marry, as there has ever been from
the very Apostles in the Evangelicall Law, in which for Priests to marry
contrary to the Churches precept, Siricius might well say is to be in the
flesh, because it is to be in a continual state of sin and damnation: Neither
does your other instance 1 Cor. 7. 9. urge him, viz. It is better to marry then
to burn; For Burn there does not signify to be tempted, but to fornicate,
according to the precedent words, if they cannot contain let them marry, which
yet is more express by the words in the second verse, To avoid fornication, let
every man have his wife. Saint Paul himself had great temptations of the flesh,
2 Cor. 12. 7, 8, 9. for which he prayed thrice that they might be taken from
him; but did neither marry nor fornicate to avoid them, but contented himself
with this Divine Answer, My grace is sufficient for thee: And this has and
will be still sufficient to the worlds end for millions of good men to
undertake the office of Priesthood, without needing either to marry or burn,
especially if they will do as he did, not only assiduously pray, but also,
Castigocerpus meum and in servitutem redigo, 1 Cor. 9. 27.

The Answer.
POpe Siricius his doctrine concerning marriage is plain enough in his Epistle
ad Himarium Tarrac recorded by Binius Tom. 1 council. and cited by me as his
first degmaticall Epistle, because so I find it the^e, in which speaking of
married Priests, he expressly applies to them Saint (...) words, They that are
in the flesh cannot please God: which being applied to them in regard of their
marriage, and not of their Priesthood, concerns them as married men, and not as
married Priests; even as he that says, A blaspheming Priest ought to be
disdained, shows that disdain belongs to the man, not to the Priest: For in
a blaspheming Priest, it is the man, not the Priest, is the blasphemer, though
as a Priest he is the greater sinner by blaspheming: So in a married Priest, it
is the man, not the Priest who is married; and therefore if a married Priest be
said to be in the flesh, his being in the flesh must be ascribed to him from
his marriage, not from his Priesthood; for it may be ascribed to all other
married men as well as to him: This is the doctrine concerning marriage, which
I blamed in Siricius, as I found it had flowed from his own pen; And it is to
small purpose (it seems) that Bellarmine has endeavored so long after, to
furnish him with a little better Ink; For even from his new proposition which
he puts upon Siricius, [That Priests may not have commerce with their wives]
you infer this conclusion,

That for Priests to marry is to be in the flesh; only you annex some new
propositions to make your conclusion sound the better, though it is impossible
to make it good; and they are these, That for Priests to marry, is contrary to
the Churches order, and to the doctrine and decree of the Apostles, and to be
in a continual state of sin and damnation.

2. I am very sorry that your zeal to excuse Siricius, has in effect made you
accuse both the Church and the Apostles of Christ; For it is an high accusation
against both, to say that they have forbid Priests to marry, since Saint Paul
expressly reckons this among the doctrines of Devils, Forbidding to marry, 1 Timothy 4. speaking in general of the prohibition, in whomsoever it forbid
marriage, whether in Priests or in any other men; And now by the help of this
Text, I have found out a fit subject for your abominable praedicate, [To be in
a continual state of sin and damnation] For none is truly in a continual
state of damnation, but only the Devil, or they that are led captive by him at
his will, which cannot justly, much less charitably, be said of any sort of men
merely for using that liberty which neither Christ nor his Church has denied
them, especially if they use it, (as doubtless they should, and I hope they do)
not for an occasion to the flesh, but as the servants of God, that they may
with the lesser distraction, if not with the greater devotion, attend his
service.

Wherefore though this doctrine of forbidding Priests marriage, may not be
disliked by you as you are a Papist, because it came from a Pope; yet pray let
it not be approved by you as you are a Christian, because it first came from
the Devil; And it were to be wished that those of your party who desire to be
thought of a purer mould then all mankind besides, would so labor from
henceforth to make us poor sinners more then Angels, (for it is more to put
off, then not to put on the flesh) as not to make themselves little less then
Devils, by calumniating Gods own holy institution, and shooting such
thunderbolts as may well be thought to come from the Prince of the air, but
sure cannot come from the God of Heaven.

3. For he has spoken in a still small voice, He that is able to receive it,
let him receive it, Mat. 19. 12. And again by his Apostle, Nevertheless to
avoid fornication, let every man have his own wife, 1 Cor. 7. 2. If God say
every man, for you to say, the Church has said not a Clergyman, is to accufe
the Church of that which she has taught you daily to pray against, even of the
contempt of Gods Word and Commandment; For Christ who spoke the one by
himself, the other by his Spirit, is Head of the Church, and therefore it is
monstrous and prodigious to affirm, that the Church, which is his body, has
spoken otherwise; For sure the body cannot have a voice without the Head; and
Christ's Church is such a Body, as will not have a voice without, and much less
against her Head.

4. Therefore you should not have said The Churches precept, but your Churches,
or rather your Popes precept, when you spoke of forbidding Priests to marry;
for your own Canonist calls the statute which inhibits Priests marriage,
Statutum Ecclesiae non ita generale, Glos. in Decr. par. 2. Causa 25. c. 3.
Papa non potest contra generale Ecclesiae statutum dispensare, sed contra
statutum Ecclesiae quod non est ita generale, sicut de continentia sacerdotum,
been potest dispensare: The Pope cannot dispense against a general statute of
the Church, but he may against one that is not general, such as is that of
Priests continency. Pray learn hereafter to speak with your own Doctors; or do
not require all the world to follow their Doctrine; And yet in truth, even your
own Church the Church of Rome, or rather your own Popes, the Popes of Rome, did
not make any such precept till Siricius his days, if you will again believe
your own Gloss upon Gratian, Par. 1. Did. 84. cap. 3. descanting upon this
very Canon of Carthage, which you have urged; for there says the Gloss, Dicunt
quod olim sacerdotes potera^t contrahere ante Siricium; They say that Priests
might lawfully marry before Siricius his days. And again, A tempore Siricii
vocat Antiquitatem, The Canon calls that Antiquity, which was from the time
of Siricius: 5. And whereas the Canon (as it is alleged by him) affirms that
the Apostles taught this doctrine, the same Gloss brings fresh fasting spittle
to allay this quicksilver, and the allay is good enough for the metal,
saying, Apostoli docuerunt exemplo and opere, and admonitione, non institutione
vel constitutione, The Apostles taught it by their example, deed, or
admonition, but not by their doctrine, or any constitution; So far is it from
truth, (in the judgment of your own Canonists) which you averr so confidently,
That the Apostles themselves were the first that taught and decreed that
Priests ought to abstain from wives. And besides it is clear from the Apostles
own writings, that they neither taught it nor decreed it: Else why did Saint
Paul say to Timothy, (1 Timothy 3.) A Bishop must be blameless, the husband of one
wife, if he were indeed to be blamed for having one? And that he ^ught to have
his children in subjection, if it were unlawful for him to have any children;
Therefore the Apostles taught it not: Again, why did the same Saint Paul say to
the Corinthians concerning this argument pro and con, I speak this by
permission and not of commandment, 1 Cor. 7. 6. if the Apostles had given any
command concerning it? And v. 7. I would that all men were even as I my self,
but every man has his proper gift of God; if there had been any Apostolical
decree to force those who succeeded him in his calling, to succeed him also in
his continency; for then sure he would not have wished, but have commanded them
to be as himself, whereas on the contrary he only wishes them to be as
himself, who have the Gift enabling them so to be; therefore the Apostles
decreed it not: And the truth of both these was anciently attested by your own
Gratians ordinary copies of this very Canon; for so says your new Glossator
upon those words, [Apostoli docuerunt] In vulgatis codicibus sequebatur
Exempla, quod est sublatum, In the ordinary copies it was written, The Apostles
taught it by their Example, but I have taken that away. The addition of which
word Example, (whether by Gratian himself or by any other) being commonly
received, is a sufficient evidence that even the Church of Rome in those days
did not think that the Apostles had forbid Priests to marry, by the^r Doctrine,
and much less by their Decree.

6. From the Apostles, let us pass to the Church, for you say, for Priests to
marry is contrary to the Churches precept: But you do only say it, and will
never be able to prove it: For the Greek Church in its most pure and flourshing
age, had a married Clergy, insomuch that Gregory Nazianzene was born after his
Father had officiated at the holy Altar; let his own mouth witness it, who
brings in his Father thus speaking unto him,

(...)
(...)
(Greg. Naz. in carm. de vita sua.) Which is in plain English, Thou have not
yet had thy life so long, as I have had my Priesthood. I hope you will not
affirm that the Father, because a Priest, was the worse for having such a son,
when you cannot deny but the whole Christian Church has ever since been the
better for that he had him.

Again, How came the first Council of Nice to be kept from determining for the
forced continency of Priests by one single Paphnutius, if so be the Apostles
had so determined before, or the Church had thought fit so to determine it
after them? Nay it is evident, The Catholic Church determined there should be
no such determination, as appears from the forecited consent of the Nicene
Fathers to Paphnutius his advice, which is generally attested and approved by
the Authors both of the Greek and Latin Church; As by Socrates, lib. 1. c. 11.
(Lat.) By Gelasius Cycicenus, lib. 2. de actis Council. Nic. c. 33. By
Nicephorus, lib. 8. cap. 19. By Cassiodorus, hist. Trip. lib. 2. c. 14. By
Gratian, Par. 1. Did. 31. cap. 12. And by Peter Crabbe, in actis Concilii
Niceni: So that if you may have recourse but to one of these, you shall little
need to go either to Neteoricks or to Epitomists for the story, as you did in
your first Exception for Saint Augustines answer, and in this for Siricius his
words. And yet I will add to these one more proof, and that from the Council of
Gangra, whose Canons were put into the Code of the Catholic Church, so often
appealed to by the Fathers at Calcedon, and placed together with the Holy
Bible, in the mid^t of their Council; Council. Gangr. can. (...) (...) (...): If
any man make a dissension between married and unmarried Priests, as if he ought
not to take the Communion from the married Priest, let him be accursed: Now if
the Church had made that distinction, why should not the people make it? But in
truth the Church was so far from making it, that she showed it to be against
her judgment to make it, speaking no less reverently of the offerings of the
married, then of the unmarried Priests: Or you may thus interpret the Canon, If
any man withdraw himself from a married Priest, as if he ought not to
communicate, whiles such a Priest does officiate, let him be accursed. It is
plain here in the judgment of the Church (for these Gangrensian Canons were
admitted into the Code of the Catholic Church, which yours of Carthage were
not) That the married Priests were as fit to serve at the Altar as the
unmarried; and if they were as fit to serve God, why not as fit to serve the
People, and to content you? And to show you I have not strained this Canon in
my interpretations I assure you they are not mine, but your own Authors: The
first is Gratians Par. 1. Did. 28. c. 15. Si quis discernit Presbyterum
conjugatum, tanquam occasion ^ptiarum, quod offerre non debeat, and ab ejus
oblatione ideo se abstinet, Anathema sit: The latter is the new Glossators upon
Gratian, in the edition authorized by Greg. 13. Si quis secernat se a
Presbytero qui uxorem duxit, tanquam non oporteat illo liturgiam peragente, de
oblatione percipere, Anathema sit: And he tells us, That Dionysius exiguus had
in effect so interpreted it before him.

7. And this one single Canon might I allege, not only as the Jugement and
Decree of the Catholic Church, from the Code of her Canons; but also as the
Judgment of your own particular Roman Church from Dionysius, and as the Decree
of the same Church, from Gratian; But that both the ancient Judgment and
Decree of your Church are more clearly proved by the practice of it: For in
your very Church of Rome, have heretofore been no less then nine Popes, which
were the sons of married Priests and Deacons; whereas if Priests and Deacons
marriage had been forbid by the Apostles, or by the Catholic Church, I might
say, They were the sins of Priests, not sons; and you might say, They were very
unfit Popes, because very unfit successors for Saint Peter, but more unfit
Vicars for his master: But so says Gratian (Par. 1. Did. 56. cap. 2.) Osius
Papa fuit filius Stephani subdiaconi; Bonifacius Papa fuit filius Jucundi
Presbyteri; Felix Papa filius Felicis Presbyteri; de titulo Fasciolae; Agapetus
Papa filius Gordiani Presbyteri; Theodorus Papa, filius Theodori Episcopi de
civitate Hierosolyma; Silverius Papa filius Silverii Episcopi Romae; Deus dedit
Papa filius Stephani subdiaconi: Felix etiam tertius natione Romanus ex Patre
Felice Presbytero fuit; Item Gelasius natione Afer, ex Episcopo Valerio natus
est; Item Agapetus natione Romanus, ex Patre Gordiano Presbytero originem
duxit; complures etiam alii inveniuntur, qui de sacerdotibus nati, Apostolicae
sedi praefuerunt. See here are nine Popes named which were all the sons of
married Clergymen, and yet Gratian concludes this Chapter, saying, These were
not All; diverse more might be found if he had a mind to look after them: yet
these are enough to prove the practice of the Church of Rome for having married
Priests till the year of our Lord 158, when Anastasius flourished, who writ the
lives of the Popes, says Bellarm. de script. Eccles. with this emphatical
asseveration, Ut notum est, denying Damasus, cited by Gratian, to have been the
author of of that Book, as well he might; For Damasus lived in the year, 367.
So that very few of these men (not above three at most) had been Popes before
his time; for it is evident That Agapetus (who is reckoned fourth in this
Catalogue) lived in the time of Justinian, that is above 500. years after
Christ: For by his courageous answer he kept Justinian from embracing
Eutychianism, saying, He thought he (...) come to a Christian Emperor, but he
had found a Pagan persecutor; the reason was, The Emperor had labored to
persuade him to be an Eutychian; And that Silverius who was this Agapetus his
next successor, may (by the way) be added to Gratians list, for he was the son
of Hormisdae (not of Silverius) Bishop of Rome. I have no mind nor leisure to
make any special enquiry after the rest, and I need not: For if you will
consider this testimony seriously, you will find in this one Catalogue not only
Priests and Bishops of Rome to have been Fathers of Popes, which is enough to
prove the marriage of Priests allowed in that particular Church, but also
Theodorus Bishop of Jerusalem in Asia, and Valerius Bishop of Hippo in Africa,
to have been Fathers of two of your ancient Popes, which is enough to prove the
marriage of Priests then allowed in the Catholic Church; that is to say, not
only in Europe, but also in Asia and in Africa. But I do entreat you to take
special notice of Valerius Bishop of Hippo; for he alone may very well make you
misdoubt, if not the truth, yet the authority of your own alleged Canon; since
it is incredible that such a married Bishop should live at Hippo at the very
same time in which such a Canon was made at Carthage against Priests marriages
and neither confute the Canon, having such a Learned Priest under him as Saint
Augustine, nor be confuted by it, having so many enemies about him as the
Donatists; but however, in that so many Fathers of your own Church have been
the sons of married Priests, it will be discretion in some of your Zealots
hereafter to bestow better language upon the children of married Priests, for
fear they be constrained to reproach not only many of their own Popes, but even
the whole Church of Christ: For so far does your own Gratian justify this
Truth, as to assure us That the marriage of Priests was lawful at that time in
every Country over all the Christian world: Did. 56. c. 13. Quum ergo ex
sacerdotibus natiin summos Pontifices supra leguntur esse promoti, non sunt
intelligendi de fornicatione, sed de legitimis conjugiis nati, quae
sacerdotibus ante Prohibitionem Ubique licita erant, and in orientali Ecclesia
usque hodie eis licere probatur: When as therefore the sons of Priests, as we
we read before (viz. cap. 2. which I alleged) have been promoted to be Popes,
we may not think they were born to those Priests in fornication, but in lawful
marriage; for it was lawful everywhere, (that is in all the Christian world)
for Priests to marry before the Prohibition, and in the Eastern Church it is at
this day proved to be lawful. So we see that the Clergy both of Eastern and
Western Church did plainly show by their Practice, That the marriage of Priests
was not prohibited by the Apostles or the Catholic Church, and therefore
generally used their liberty, till some after-prohibition denied the same to
the Clergy of the Western Church: And the new Glossator himself, who
confidently says that Gratian was mistaken as to the Latin Church, shows
little reason for his own confidence, because no pretense or proof for the
others mistake, till this Decree of Siricius, which was not made till almost
400. and not generally ratified or received in his own Diocese, till above a
1000. years after Christ: For so Baronius himself has recorded, that in the
year 1074. this Decree of prohibiting Priests marriage was forced upon the
Bishops of Italy, Germany and France, by Pope Gregory the seventh, after they
had unanimously gainsayed, and most earnestly deprecated and opposed it, (v.
Bar. An. 1074. nu. 37, 38, 39.) Now if this Decree were not generally received
in the Latin Church till then, though it were made before, yet was it not
ratified and confirmed till then; for that is an undeniable rule of her own
Canonist, Leges instituuntur quum promulgantur, firmantur quum moribus utentium
approbantur. (Great. Par. 1. Did. 4. cap. 3.) Whence it follows, That neither
this Decree of Siricius, nor any other of the like nature, could properly be
called a Prohibition, till that time when it was first generally received imto
Practice, and that was not til the year 1074. a longtime sure after the
Apostles: And this same Truth is attested by Gratian in the first words of his
31. distinction, Tempus quoque, Quia nondum erat institutum ut sacerdotes
continentiam servarent; where your new Glossator is very much troubled to prove
that Sacerdot^s is put for Subdiaconi Priests for Subdeacons, that so he may
rather elude then expound the Text: It does therefore nearly concern you as a
Trustee of Gods Truth, (not of any man's mistakes or insolences) and as a
member and Minister of Christ's Catholic Church, to mitigate, if not recall
those words, [That the Apostles themselves were the first that taught and
decreed, that Priests ought to abstain from wives;] And those other [For
Priests to marry contrary to the Churches precept, Siricius might well say is
to be in the flesh, because it is to be in a continual state of sin and
damnation] unless you will say, That the Apostles taught and decreed that in
word, which they have contradicted in writing: and that the whole Church
wittingly and willingly sinned against their Decree for above a thousand years
together, by which means you may chance teach others to say (and we now find
many Scholars most ready to learn such a wicked lesson) That for so long
together Christ was without a Catholic and Apostolic Church: For my part, I
dare not be so far an Accuser of my Brethren, but sure I will never be brought
to be so far an Accuser of my Mother.

8. But least it may be thought that Sampsen-like you have smitten us poor
Philistines hip and thigh, and have carried away our Gates by the virtue and
strength of the Council of Carthage, I will now look after a Razor that shall
very much endanger that lock, wherein your great strength lies, for I have yet
only clipped it a little by Valerius his hand, and must now labor to cut it
off, which I shall endeavor to do by cutting the Africane Church from the
Catholic; and that Council you have alleged, from the Africane Church, and
that Canon you have alleged from the Africane Council; I say therefore,

1. That the Africane Church was but a particular Church, and could not pass
the sentence, may not have either the repute or the authority of the Catholic
Church; And for this answer I have your own Cardinals precedent, Bellar. lib.
2. de council. cap. 8. and 9. Where that objection against the Popes being
called Summus Pontifex, which is brought from the 26. Canon of the Council of
Carthage, Ut primae sedis Episcopus non appelletur Princeps sacerdotum aut
summus sacerdos, aut aliquid hujusmodi, sed tantum primae sedis Episcopus, is
by him thus answered; Quum hoc Concilium nationale fuerit, non universae sed
tantum Africanae Ecclesiae leges tulisse potuit: Itaque hoc Canone non
prohibuit neque potuit prohibere ne Romans Pontifex diceretur sacerdotum
princeps, vel summus sacerdos, sed tantu^ ne ita appellaretur ullus
Metropolitanus Africae; This Council being but national, could not make Canons
for the Catholic Church; and therefore by this Canon, could not prohibit the
Bishop of Rome to be called an high Priest, but only the Bishops of Africa to
be so called. Pray show me a reason why this answer is not as good for the
Priests of Europe, as for the Bishop of Rome; for all the world cannot make one
National Church the whole Catholic Church, no more then it can make a
particular an universal, or one corner of the South or West, all the world.

2. That second Council of Carthage scarce deserves to have the credit, and
cannot have the authority of the particular Africane Church: First because for
ought that can be collected out of the acts thereof, there were not above seven
Bishops present at it, (no more then were at a Collation with the Donatists) v.
Bin. Conc. Tom. 1. Col. p. 624. whereas Africa afforded above two hundred
Bishops, and they were all by their Canons strictly bound to be present at
National Synods.

Secondly because there is a plain and a gross untruth set down in the first
words of that Council, as it is in the Latin Copy, (which only befriends your
assertion) for there it is said, [Gloriosissimo Imperatore Valentiniano Augusto
4. and Theodosio viris clarissimis consulibus. i. Whiles Valentinian the
Emperor was Consul the fourth time, and Theodosius with him, these Bishops met
at Carthage] whereas it is evident by the Archives of Chronology, That
Valentinian the Emperor never at all was Consul with Theodosius; and it is as
clear by the same Archives that when Valentinian the Emperor was Consul the
fourth time, Neotorius (not Theodosius) was his partner; (See Helvicus An.
Christ. vul. 390.) So I show you plainly we have a false Consul put upon the
Council; and I have some reason to suspect we have also a false Council put
upon the Church: For it is clear that this Council was not held in the year
390. when Valentinian was Consul the fourth time, because Genedius, (who speaks
first in it, and was President of it) was not taken by Aurelius to be his
Coadjutor at Carthage, till after Saint Augustine had been taken by Valerius to
be his Coadjutor at Hippo, (as says Binius, Aurelius factum Valerii
Hipponensis imitatus, onus Episcopale in Genedium stranstulit) And it is
asserted by Helvicus, That Saint Augustine was made Priest of the Church of
Hippo but in the year 391. that is, the year after this Consulage: And sure he
lived some years a Priest of that Church, before he was made Bishop thereof,
perchance so many as to satisfy the custom of the Church; but sure so many as
to write full thirteen Books (as appears by his Retractations, lib. 1. cap.
14.) notwithstanding his continual Preaching all that time: For he was required
and authorized by his Bishop to be a Preacher whiles he was yet a Priest, which
till his days had not been known in the Africane Church; and he preached both
privately and publicly against the Donatists, Manichaeans and Pelagians, says
Possidius; and sure the more time he spent in Preaching, the less time he had
for writing; But to let pass collections and conjectures, we see Genedius the
President of this Council, was not a Bishop till after Saint Augustine; And
Saint Augustine was not so much as a Priest till one year after the date of
this Council; so it is certain the Council has a false date, and it is
possible we may have a false Council; Accordingly Binius is forced to confess,
That the second Council of Carthage, though it was so in Title, yet was not so
in Truth; but was such a second as had at least five before it; Post quinque
saltem anteriora, hoc quod secundum appellatur, habitum fuisse oportet: Which
he proves, first from the Bishops names recited in the Acts of this Council,
Genedius, Alypius, Faustinus, who were not Bishops till long after the year
that Valentinian was the fourth time Consul. Secondly from the very words of
this very second Canon which you have alleged: For that begins thus, Quum in
praeterito consilio de continentiae and castitatis moderamine tractaretur;
relating to a fore-past Council, which fore-past Council (says Binius) was
that Africane Council celebrated the first year of Pope Coelestine, which was
the year 424. after Christ, according to Helvicus; (A great distance sure from
390.) And the 37. Canon of that Africane Council, says Binius, is that which
is here related to: The like he affirms concerning Fortunatus his words in the
third Canon, Memini praeterito consilio fuisse statutum, I remember in a
fore-past Council it was ordained; where says the same Binius, That fore-past
Council, was the forenamed Africane, and Fortunatus reflected back to the tenth
Canon of that Council; But if this Council in which were so few Bishops, and
concerning which are so many uncertainties, may deserve the credit and
authority of the particular Africane Church, yet sure it will be hard to prove,
That the words alleged by you deserve to have the credit or Authority of a
Canon of this Council, to that purpose for which, and according to that sense
in which you have alleged them.

3. Wherefore thirdly, I make bold to assert, That this your Canon, as you have
applied and urged it, was no Canon of the Africane Council, called the second
of Carthage; for the Fathers in Trullo (Can. 13.) do upon this very occasion of
Priests continency, cite that yery numerical Canon of Carthage, with an
addition of other words, and in another sense, saying, (...), etc. We know that
those who met at Carthage, and took care of the grave and sober behavior of
Priests, did say, That at some proper and set times, they should abstain from
their wives: (...), Propriis terminis a consortibus abstineant: So that this,
and no other but this, is the doctrine which the second Council of Carthage did
say, The Apostles had taught, and antiquity had practiced: And this is no more
then what we find in Saint Paul's writings, [Except it be with consent for a
time, that you may give your selves unto fasting and prayer, 1 Cor. 7. 5.]
which though spoken generally of all married men, yet may without any violence
to the Text, and with great zeal of, and advantage to godliness be appropriated
a fortiori to the married Clergy: But for Priests total abstaining from wives,
you must find it in some other Canon, or say the Trullane Fathers did either
want Honesty in mis-citing this Canon, or Learning in misunderstanding it, or
Judgment in mis-applying it: Whereas on the contrary they were so far from
wanting any of these, that they had moreover power and authority to have
reversed it, and would have used that power, had they indeed found it a Canon
of the Africane Church; For they are so bold as plainly to reverse a Canon near
of kin to it, delivered in the Roman Church, requiring married men if they were
made Priests, to promise they would after that time not co-habite with their
wives: And to assure us (and all the world) That these words (...): (concerning
which in truth is all the controversy) came not either by surreption or by
mistake into their Canon. The reason of this restriction is thus given in the
ensuing words, (...): Oportet enim eos qui altari afsident, quum sacra manibus
tractant, in omnibus continentes esse; not bidding Priests contain from
marriage at all times, but only at such times as they were to administer the
holy Sacrament.

This was certainly the sense of your second Canon of the second Council of
Carthage; or not only Greece did not understand carthage, but also Carthage did
not understand it self: Whence Balsamon is so bold as to assert in plain terms,
That they of Rome and their accomplices, were much mistaken, who inferred from
this, or any other Canon of the Councils of carthage, That Priests and Deacons
might not have their own wives, (...) But were bound to keep themselves single
and unmarried: (vid. Bals. in Can. 3. and 4. Council. 3. Carth.) And he proves
his assertion from the 70. Canon of the third Council of Carthage, (meaning the
73. as we commonly say the 70. when we mean the 72. interpreters) where the
injunction is plain, That they ought to abstain, (...): Secundum proprios
terminos, At their proper or peculiar times, viz. At the times of their
Administration. Nay yet more, Aurelius who is said to have propounded this your
Canon, does himself thus allege, or at least thus interpret it in the Greek
Canons of the third Council of Carthage, as they are entered and received in the
Code of the Africane. Church, your own Binius being my witness; For there Can.
25. he requires Priests to abstain from wives only at some proper times, (...),
Propriis terminis ab uxoribus abstineant: (v. Bin. Council. Tom. 1. edit. Colon.
p. 580. in altera editione quorundam Canonum Concilii tertii Carth. ex codice
Africano:) But the Latin interpreter in Binius rendering these words, (...),
Secundum priora statuta, (priora instead of propria) and Binius fo^lowing that
reading in the 37. Canon, council. Africani sub Coelestino and Benifacio; and
preferring it as the better of the two, in his notes upon Council. Carth. 5. sub
Anastasio cap. 3. even contrary to the reading of that same Canon, as it is in
its own edition, makes me suspect that the Africane Canons have not been
derived to us so entire and incorrupt in the Latin copies, as in the Greek;
wherein if I am mistaken, you may well pardon my mistake, because your own new
Glossator upon Gratian has presumed to correct the Latin Copy of this very
Canon, (as he had found it in the Books then commonly received) by the Greek
Copy, leaving out exemplo after Apostoli docuerunt (as I showed before) for
this one reason amongst others, That he found it not in the Greek Copies: I
know Binius is of another mind, (so impossible is it there should be Unity,
where there is not Verity) and says concerning the carthage Canons, That the
Latin Edition is of a greater authority then the Greek translation; But
confessing two various editions of the Latin Canons (Secundum propria statuta,
and priora statuta) and not being able to show any more then one translation of
the Greek, he has unawares granted that the Latin Canons are not of so great
certainty, and should not be of so great authority as the Greek; For one of Two
cannot be so certain, as One by it self. Again, prof^ssing that secundum priora
statuta in the Latin, is the better edition of the two [Quaedam alia lectio
melior habet secundum priora statuta] he has unawares granted it is the worse;
for that could not have been quaedam alia lectio, if the other of propria
statuta had not been before it; and surely of two various readings, the first
must needs be the best, because that was the Original, according to the rules,
Id verum quod primum, Id bonum quod verum. Thirdly, confessing secundum priora
statuta to be the Original, in that it was the better, (for else the Original
was falfe, and the variation from it was the true reading) he has as
unadvisedly taxed the Greeks for mistaken Interpreters: [Graeci haec verba male
intelligentes verterunt, (...)] For if he mean these for the words ill
translated, secundum propria statuta, the Greeks did not ill translate them;
for (...), does fairly and fully express those words: But if he mean for the
words ill translated, secundum priora statuta, then it is not credible the
Greeks intended to translate them; for they must have said, (...), not (...),
if they had read secundum priora statuta in the Latin copies, and meaned to
translate what they had read: It Is much more probable that the Greeks found
secundum propria statuta in the Original Africane Canon, which sure was penned
in Latin; for the Africane Fathers writ in Latin; and Valerius Bishop of
Hippo in Africa did therefore take Saint Augustine while he was yet but a
Priest, to officiate for him in the Pulpit, contrary to the custom of that
Church, because himself being a Greek, and not expert in the use of the Latin
tongue, could not Preach so well to the edifying of the Africane people (as
says Possidius in the life of Saint Augustine;) And it is as probable, That
the Latins did at first read that same Canon secundum propria statuta, as did
the Greeks, till some of later years, (sc. after the Prohibition of Priests
marriage in that Church) thinking priora statuta would better serve their turn
then propria statuta, (not only because it took off the specification of time,
but also because it put on the face of antiquity) ventured to shuffle that in
for the other: For it is evident that Gratian did read that very Canon secundum
propria statuta, concerning which Binius avoweth secundum priora statuta to be
the better reading: (v. Great. Did. 84. cap. 3.) But indeed Binius in this
assertion is confuted not only by his own Latin interpreter in his own
Councils in this very particular Canon, upon which he has passed this
unwarrantable sentence, but also in Balsamons Councils by Gentianus Hervetus,
if that marginal note be his upon the 13. Canon of Trullo, Legerat interpres
Graecus in Canone Carthaginensi, secundum propria statuta; And if that note be
not his, we have gotten a new author to confute Binius, but we have not lost
our old confutation; For in the Latin translation, which without doubt belongs
to Hervetus, we see not only that he so read, but also that he so understood
those words; for he there thus interprets them, Propriis terminis a consortibus
abstineant: Let them abstain from wives at proper and peculiar seasons or
times, that is, At the times of their administration, as says Balsamon: So
that Binius shows more his animositie then his ingenuitie in his ensuing
words, Hac translatione nostri temporis haeretici caelibatum Clericorum
impugnant, quasi hujus Canonis authoritate Clerici ab uxoribus in ordine tantum
Vicis suae abstinere deberent, reliquis vero temporibus iisdem maritali
consortio cohabitare liceret. For, we say no more in this, then Balsamon had
said four hundred years before us, your own Hervetus being his interpreter,
(...), Vicis suae tempore; (...), Eo sc. tempore quo sacrificant. Bals. Council.
Trul. cap. 13. Nay we say no more in this, then the whole Council in Trullo had
said 600. years before Balsamon, as has been proved already in most express
words; yet in truth we have no reason to be angry with Binius; for though he
has given us bad language, he has given us a good advantage; for having said
that secundum priora statuta, was the better, and therefore the antienter and
truer reading of this Canon, he has not only justified our appeal to former
Canons concerning this matter, but has also confuted his own new exposition of
the Greek words, (...), which is this, secundum proprias regulas. (...) enim
non tantum significat terminum, sed etiam regulam ac praeceptum; For though we
may admit that (...) does signify Regula, yet (...), would have been an
improper translation in Greek for secundum proprias regulas in Latin (in which
language the Canon was first penned) because it would have been equivocal, and
therefore unexpr^ssive and uncertain; But it must have been an impossible
translation of these Latin words, secundum priores regulas, for all the world
cannot make priores signify (...), no more then priority signify property:
And yet he confidently avoweth that secundum priora statuta, was the better
reading of the two: The upshot of all is this, whether we look to the Greek
(...), or to the Latin, secundum propria statuta, (for priora was a mere
device, I will not say a forgerie) If we will look upon certainties, not upon
conjectures, the Greek word (...), does import terminum temporis, not terminum
orationis, a determination of time, not of law; and so likewise the Latin word
statutum; or the whole Greek Church did not rightly understand their own
tongue; and the Africane Church did not intend their Canon should be rightly
understood: wherefore I hope you will pardon this my Descant upon Binius,
because you see I have done it, not to show my self a Grammarian, but a Divine;
not a bold Critic, but an honest Churchman: For I have followed that sense of
the Africane Canon, which I find given it not only by the Greek, but also by
the Latin Church: And therefore this your Canon may not bear that sense which
you have given it, because it may not contradict all other Canons of the same
Africane Church, according to the judgment of all Greek and Latin
Interpreters: And yet this seems to me the best defense you have made for
Siricius, whereby you have taught us Protestants (very ingenuously, though very
Covertly) to believe, That a Pope may need the authority of a particular Church
to defend his Decrees; notwithstanding that some others of your profession
would fain persuade the world, That the Popes Decrees ought to be received and
embraced as the infallible rules of the whole Catholic Church.

9. Having done my weak endeavor to vindicate the Church, I now come to
vindicate my self, and to make good my decarded instances: As for that of
Abraham, if it reach not Siricius, it must content me; For if my salvation
shall go no further then to be in Abraham's bosom, my Religion may seek no
further then for Abraham's righteousness: And he must be to me a bold Dogmatist,
who would make me more righteous then my Father, who am not righteous but for
being his Son: And if Saint Paul has thought fit to argue from Abraham's faith
to our faith, sure I am not mistaken in my Topics for arguing from Abraham's
righteousness to our righteousness: And yet I will give you a better precedent
then Saint Paul; for I find our blessed Savior himself so arguing, This did
not Abraham, John 8. 40.

10. As for my instance out of Saint Paul, [It is better to marry then to burn]
I think it does prove Siricius a false Dogmatist; for he says, It is not
better to marry then to burn; and I am sure that both parts of the
contradiction cannot be true, and dare not imagine That Siricius has taken the
true, Saint Paul the false part: For if for Priests to marry, is to be in the
flesh, Then clearly it is better for Priests to burn then to marry,
notwithstanding Saint Paul has said generally concerning all men, It is better
to marry then to burn; And neither good Reason, nor good Religion, nor good
Manners, will allow any man to give an exception upon Gods general Rule, or to
distinguish where his Law does not distinguish, or to set up an Hypothesis
against his Thesis; by saying, That is unlawful for some particular men, which
he has declared to be lawful for All men; or to say, That puts a man in the
state of sin, which God has said is consistent with the state of
righteousness; For this is to give earth a Dominion over heaven, to allow men a
legislative power over God; for he that in this manner judges the Law, does
indeed condemn the Lawgiver; according to that assertion of the irrefragable
Doctor, Si enim aliquis effecit aliquid quod non sit determinatum in sacra
Scriptura, mortaliter peccat, quia se constituit supra Deum; (Halensis Par. 1.
qu. 68. number. 1. art. 2.) Therefore I dare not say The Church has determined
that to be unlawful in Any, which God has determined to be lawful in All; For
I am in love with that Rule in the Angelical Doctor, which he has improved out
of Aristotle, (as he has indeed all other Ethics) In his quae arbitrio
Judicis relinquuntur, viri boni est ut sit Diminitivus Poenarum, (22. qu. 67.
art. 4. ad 1.) In those things which the Law has left to the Judges
arbitrament, it is the part of a good man to Diminish Punishments; and if so,
Then much more to diminish, not to increase sins; What an Heathen has allowed
to be the part of a good man, pray let a Christian allow, to be the part of his
best Mother; and not suppose the Church 10 cruel as to be willing to increase
sins, when he may not suppose a good man so cruel as to be willing to increase
Punishment.

11. This makes me follow the Trullane Fathers, who thought it fitter (Can.
13.) to tax the Roman Church for making a Canon to keep married Priests from
cohabiting with their wives, then by consenting to such a Canon to bring
themselves under the suspicion of disparaging or disgracing marriage, which God
had instituted by his Law, and both honored and blessed by his presence: For
the whole Gospel (say they) cries aloud, What God has joined, let not man put
asunder; but if Priests that are married be in the state of damnation, let us
say, not God but the Devil has joined them and their wives together, and
therefore man ought to put them asunder: and so call marriage in them not Gods
but the Devils institution: The same Fathers urge further that of Saint Paul,
Heb. 13. 3. Marriage is; honorable in all; to prove it honorable in Priests,
for that was the whole matter then in debate: And I desire you to show me, How
in this enuntiation, marriage is honorable in All; the universal particle All,
does signify All but Priests; And yet in another enuntiation, Drink ye All of
this, the same particle All does signify none but Priests; me thinks by this
extraordinary kind of subtilty, All is come to signify None; For All is none
of the Clergy in one place, and none of the Laity in another; and in my dull
sense the whole company of Christians are either Clergy or Laity. I will yet
further add the testimony of Adrian, that I may oppose a Pope against a Pope,
both for the credit of this Council, and for the truth of this cause: For I
find him in Gratian speaking these words, Sextam Sanctam Synodum recipio cum
omnibus Canonibus suis, I receive the sixth holy Synod with all her Canons, (Gr.
de consec. did. 3. c. 29.) He says, I receive the sixth holy Synod; so the
Council is good, (as to you who are so zealous for the Pope, whatever it be to
others.) He says, with all her Canons; so the cause is good against you; for
this Canon is received among the rest; And he that said all this, lived above
800. years after Christ; so your assertion is not good, [That the Apostles
themselves were the first that taught and decreed that Priests ought to abstain
from wives] For if Pope Adrian could have alleged the least particle of an
Apostolical decree against Priests marriage, no doubt he would not have said,
He received all the Canons, merely for this one Canons sake, which had been
made of purpose to confute his own Church and Chair (of both which he was not a
little zealous) merely for following Siricius, in being addicted to the
contrary opinion; choose you which of the two Popes to follow, Siricius or
Adrian, for both you cannot.

12. But you say, To burn, does not here signify to be tempted, but to
fornicate; I cannot think Saint Paul was so zealous to determine that which no
man was yet so impudent as to doubt, viz. It is better to marry then to
fornicate; for that is no more in effect then this, It is better to be a man,
then to be a beast; which surely was not the doubt concerning which the
Corinthians had desired to be resolved: Therefore I think this cannot be Saint
Paul's meaning, It is better to marry then to fornicate; and I suppose you will
think so too, when you shall consider that from this interpretation I can
justly make this inference, That if Priests do fornicate first, they may marry
afterward, and not be in the state of sin by marrying; For then by your own
allowance the Rule will hold; and truly if the rule will not hold till then, I
believe the inference will hold ever after: For if a man's being tempted to
fornication will not, yet sure his actual fornicating will put him under this
indulgence of marrying, because if he once fornicate, he then may lawfully
marry, since the Apostle in saying, It is better to marry then to fornicate,
has allowed if not command him to chose the better, and to leave the worse:
And whereas you appeal to the precedent words, If they cannot contain, let them
marry; the same absurdity still follows your new gloss, which is this, That the
Privilege of marriage depends upon the bestiality of fornication; for If they
cannot contain, is no more then if they burn; and if they burn, in your gloss,
is no less then if they fornicate; whence it follows that according to your new
gloss, Saint Paul has said, If they fornicate let them marry: And this is yet
more palpable as the same Rule is set down in the second verse, not by way of
supposition, but by way of Position, in these words, To avoid fornication let
every man have his wife; for if to avoid fornication do there signify not to
avoid the danger, but only the guilt of fornication, this concession, To avoid
fornication, let every man have his wife, will in effect be turned into this
Prohibition, Let no man have his wife till he has actually fornicated, and so
the Laity must plunge themselves in vitiousness as well as the Clergy, if they
will have wives: For Saint Paul's (...) every man; comprizeth Clergy and Laity
both alike, neither of them more nor less then the other: Wherefore since there
is no man in Christendom but is either a Clergyman, or a Layman, it will
follow that no man in Christendom has a License, much less a Command to take a
wife, until he has actually fornicated; and so the ready way to avoid
fornication, by this remedy of marriage, according to your gloss, is to commit
fornication: To join all three together, you in effect say, That to burn is to
fornicate; and if they cannot contain, is, If they be actually guilty of
Incontinency; and to avoid fornication, is to avoid the sin of fornication, not
the temptation to that sin; And I say that this being supposed (though it be
not granted) you will scarce be able to prove, That any man has the Apostles
concession, and much less his approbation to marry; but only such a man as has
first actually fornicated; which is a strange kind of Doctrine, and may well
make any sober man exclaim with the Canonist, Nota mirabile, quod plus habet
hic luxuria quam castitas: (Gloss. in Decretal. Greg. lib. 1. Tit. 21. cap. 6.)
See here a wonderful case, That Luxury has a greater privilege then
chastity; Therefore I conceive it fitter for a Divine to say, That Saint Paul
intended the remedy before the disease, not after it; and consequently did
allow men to marry, that they might avoid not only the guilt; but also the
danger of fornication, for else he had not allowed marriage to avoid
fornication, till it was impossible to be avoided: And consequently, it is a
greater sin in any Christian Church to allow one Priest to fornicate, then to
allow all her Priests to marry; for by the one she thwarts Gods command, by the
other she follows his example; by the one she approves and encourages a
damnable sin, by the other she approves and encourages a most glorious Virtue;
For allowing Priests to marry, does not make their marrying the more necessary,
but only their abstaining from marriage the more voluntary, that is to say, It
does only make Vi^ginity in Priests a Free will offering, which cannot be
acceptable unless it be free; and the more it is free, the more it is
acceptable.

13. You say further, That Saint Paul himself had great temptations of the
flesh, but did neither marry nor fornicate to avoid them. I answer, If I had
fully transcribed my Instance concerning Abraham, as it is in Ignatius his
Epistle to the Philadelphians, I might have added not only Saint Peter but also
Saint Paul to the number of married men, and so perchance have prevented this
part of your Objection: But to let go conjectures, Saint Paul himself tells us
what were his Temptations, Acts 20. 19. even temptations which befell him by
the laying in wait of the Jews; Temptations from other men's flesh, not his own;
from other men's fleshly minds, not from his own fleshly body: And I wonder upon
what probability of Truth you say Saint Paul was under the sinful motions of
the body, when himself says, he could not tell whether he were in the body or
out of the body, at the time he had that revelation, after which was given him
a Thorn in the flesh, lest he should be exalted above measure, v. 3. and 7. The
Text says, Saint Paul had a Thorn in the flesh, not Temptations of the flesh;
that is, he had penal afflictions, not sinful motions; These if they went up
with him into Paradise, yet surely came not with him down from thence: For
going to Paradise does (by your favor) much more purge sin, then going to
Purgatory. Besides, datus est mihi stimulus, was not so properly said of these
motions, as natus est in me stimulus carnis meae; nor can you say That was
given him at that time, which you know was born in him so long before, and was
properly to be called, a Relick, not a Gift; Or that God gave that
concupiscence to his chiefest Apostle, which by his Spirit he does subdue in
his meanest servants: Nor is it probable Saint Paul did call that a Messenger
of Satan, which was inbred in him from his own natural corruption; or ascribe
that to the Devil, which was rather to be ascribed to the flesh; Sum all
these inconveniences together, and I believe you will hereafter join with
Saint Chrysostom (Saint Paul's most faithful interpreter, in the judgment of
your own Divines) who gives us this interpretation, (...), etc By the Angel of
Satan, he means Alexander the Coppersmith, those about Hymaeneus and
Philetas, all that opposed the word, and contended or contested against him,
those who did cast him into prison, scourge and drive him away, because those
did the works of Satan: Therefore even as he calls the Jews the sons of the
Devil for following his example, so he calls the Messenger of Satan, every
man that fell foully upon him: (...): And this (says he) was the thorn in the
flesh given to buffet me; And truly the world is still very full of such
Messengers of Satan; for no Orthodox Divine now adays can teach men either how
to live or how to die according to his duty, trust and conscience, but legions
of factious spirits will be pecking at him, by making either frivolous
objections, or fond cavils, or false calumnies against his Doctrine; which in
truth is to be the Messengers of Satan; And for ought we can see, Saint Paul's
truest Disciples are most like to have such Messengers to buffet them to the
worlds end: For this is one of those requests which according to Saint
Chrysostom is most like to come under that Text, For we know not what we should
pray for as we ought, Romans 8. 26. When men who are persecuted and troubled for
Religion, pray for deliverance from their persecutions, or for rest and
relaxation from their labors and troubles: But yet the Scholars (says he)
need not be so much ashamed or dismayed; for even the great Master of Israel
was himself in the same condition; Saint Paul saying of himself as well as of
others, For we know not what we should pray for as we ought; and that not out
of modesty or humility, as appears in that he uncessantly made request to see
Rome, which was not then granted him, when he requested it; and that he prayed
earnestly and frequently for deliverance from his thorn in the flesh, that is,
from his manifold dangers and afflictions, which was never granted him at all.
(...), Chrysostom. in Romans cap. 8. v. 26. (...) 14.

You have here a second place out of Saint Chrysostom to confute your new
interpretation; take yet a third; for upon those words of Saint Paul to the
Galathians, [which are next of kin with these to the Corinthians) My temptation
which was in the flesh ye despised not, Gal. 4. 14. the same Saint Chrysostom
thus glosseth, (...): I was tumbled and tossed, I was beaten with rods, I was
under a thousand deaths whiles I preached to you, and yet though I was in that
contemptible condition, you contemned me not; (Me thinks I hear my despised and
distressed mother the Church of England at this time saying the same to all
that still embrace her doctrine and continue in her Communion) For this he
means, when he says, My Temptation which was in the flesh ye despised not;
Whereas if Saint Paul had been under such Temptations of the flesh as you
imagine, these supercilious pretenders who sought to be justified by their own
righteousness, must needs have condemned him for more then an ordinary sinner:
They who boasted of their own circumcision in the flesh, would certainly have
despised him as uncircumcised who had such temptations in the flesh; For what
is it in the world that to this day makes any man more despicable? nor could
Saint Paul well have given such proud Justiciaries a greater advantage against
him or his doctrine, then such an open profession as this, which you have made
for him, That he had great Temptations of the flesh; But indeed the whole
context speaks with Saint Chrysostom, and against you, That the Thorn in Saint
Paul's flesh, was not his great Temptations, but his great Tribulations in the
flesh; For they are particularly mentioned in the ensuing discourse, wherein is
not one word concerning any impure motions; Therefore (says he) I take
pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in
distresses for Christ's sake: And he particularly asserteth the Grace or
strength he had obtained by prayer, as given him to encounter with these
Tribulations; and I ask you seriously, would not these words, Most gladly
therefore will I glory in my infirmities, be very ill paraphrased after this
manner, Most gladly therefore will I glory in my concupiscence? and I would
fain know how it is possible for that which is naught in the Paraphrase, to be
good in the Exposition; since a Paraphrase is no other but a verbal Exposition?

14. Lastly you say, This has and will be still sufficient to the worlds end,
for millions of good men to undertake the office of Priesthood, without needing
either to marry or burn, especially if they will do as he did, not only
assiduously pray, but also Castigo corpus meum, 1 Cor. 9. 27. Good Sir, how do
you know that the married Clergy with us do not so, or that the unmatried
Clergy with you do so? Did not Saint Peter do this as well as Saint Paul; and
yet he was doubtless a married man. But I answer, I do find that men are bid
abstain from marriage to fast and pray, not that they are bid fast and pray to
abstain from marriage; nor have Priests any particular promise more then other
men, that they shall be enabled to live perpetual Virgins by fasting and
praying, that so they may fast and pray in faith of that promise; nor have they
any particular command more then other men to fast and pray to enable them to
live perpetual Virgins, that so they may fast and pray in obedience to that
command: And why should any man place Religion in that which neither is in
faith, as to Gods promise; nor from obedience, as to Gods command? And whereas
you speak of your millions of good men, I heartily wish it may be more then
speech; but I have a fear, a suspicion, nay a proof, that hitherto it has been
no more: For first your own Panormitane, as I find him quoted by my late
Reverend and Learned Diocesan Bishop Davenant, makes me fear otherwise; for he
says expreslly, Credo pro bono and salute esset animarum ut volentes possent
contrahere; I believe it would be for the good and salvation of souls, if they
that will might marry: He means sure the Priests souls, and therefore thought
many of them deeply plunged in sin for want of marriage.

Secondly the Testimony of your own Agrippa, makes me think otherwise; for he
says plainly of your Priests and Monks; Clanculum confluunt ad lupanaria,
stuprant sacras virgins, vitiant viduas, And puts his Quod ego scio and vidi,
to their clancular yet prodigious abominations, and at last thus concludes, Et
quarum animas lucrari debent Deo, Illarum corpora sacrificant Diabolo; Agrip.
de van. scientiarum, cap. 64.

Thirdly, the authority of your own Espencaeus makes me say otherwise; for
these are his words in his exposition, upon Titus 1. Turpissimum est quod and
Clericos cum concubinis, pellicibus, and meretricibus cohabitare, liberosque
procreare sinunt, accepto ab eis, atque adeo alicubi a continentibus certo
quotannis cansu: Habeat concubinam sive non habeat, aureum solvat and habeat si
velit: I should have been ashamed of quoting these three Testimonies, had not
your great boast constrained it, but I am ashamed to English these quotations,
though by so doing I should go near to overthrow your boasting. Indeed your own
Cassander has overthrown it; for this is his ingenuous profession and
confession in this kind, That the want of able Ministers (idoneorum Ministrorum
inopia) is one cause amongst others, why the constitution which forbids the
marriage of Priests in your Church, should be recalled; for that had kept many
learned and picus men from the Ministry: So that for the most part no other
young men entered into holy orders, but such as looked after a fat living, and a
licentious life, unless it were some few who through unadvisedness and
inconsideration were brought into the snare: Praeter nonnulios qui imprudenter
and nondum sibi satis noti in laqueum inducuntur: And therefore says plainly
and positively, unless marriage be tolerated, they should scarce be able to
find out fitting Ministers to supply the Church: Nisi conjugium toleretur, vix
idonei Ecclesiae ministri in posterum quidem inveniri poterunt: Cassander in
Consult. Art. 23.

And now considering that Truth is good in it self, and Virginity is good only
in order to another thing, sc. to righteousness: let any conscientious man
judge, which of the two Priests is more in the state of sin and damnation;
whether he that is lawfully and righteously wedded to a wife, or he that is
unlawfully and unrighteously wedded to such a false opinion; although as
self-interest now steers Saint Peter's ship, there is little hope that the one
will part or be divorced from his opinion, as there is little honesty that the
other should part or be divorced from his wife.

CAP. III. Of Purgatory.
1. PUrgatory a stumbling block, not to be cast in the way of men that are
departing hence. 2. Saint Paul desired to be dissolved, that he might be with
Christ. 3. All that die in the faith of Christ at their death go immediately to
Christ, as did Saint Paul and the good thief; and to assert otherwise, is to be
injurious to Religious souls, and to Christ their Savior. 4. Bellarmine
professes it is uncertain that Christ's humane soul was in Purgatory, and by
his proofs makes it impossible; for they all speak of the Hell of the damned.
5. To say Christ went into Purgatory as into a part of his Kingdom, to take
possession thereof, savours of blasphemy and of infidelity. 6. Bellarmines
uncertainties are so many and great concerning the Place, the Time, the
Torment, the Tormentors, and the causes for which souls are said to be
tormented in Purgatory, as to enfeeble any unprejudicate man's belief, though he
is so confident as to say, That all shall be damned who do not believe
Purgatory. 7. This doctrine is neither in word nor sense taught in the holy
Scriptures: The Texts alleged for it in Bachonus his days, answered by him:
The Books of the Macchabees no more Canonical to the Christians then to the
Jews: The fire mentioned 1 Cor. 3. no proof of Purgatory. It shall not be
forgiven him in the world to come, spoken by way of aggravation, Mat. 12. Hell
taught in the Creed, not so Purgatory. 8. Peter Martyr vindicated; Bellarmines
rules of prudence against the rules of Logic, mere nullities; Doctrines
inferred from prudential consequences are humane imaginations; but from Logical
consequences, are Divine Truths: The one by being believed, the other by not
being believed, make a man an Heretic. 9. No remission of sins in the next
world, proved by Aquinas, out of Saint Chrysostom and Saint Augustine. 10. Gods
Remitting of sin, is, not Punishing it for Christ's sake. 11. Saint Augustine
defines against Purgatory. 12. No ground for it in the Text, nor in any true
general Council. 13. Beilarmines reasons for it are not from but against Gods
Word, though seemingly deduced out of the holy Scriptures. 14. His arguments
for Venial sins, untheological. 15. His wresling of Scripture against the
analogy of faith, to maintain this new doctrine of his Church, which agrees
not with the belief of the remission of sins, or the Communion of Saints. 16.
The Prayers of the Church may be abused by this doctrine, as well as the Word
of God. 17. Christ not praying for souls in Purgatory, they can (if any there)
have no benefit of others Prayers.

The third Exception.
Part. 2. Chap. 2. page 174. Against Purgatory you object first, Desiderium
habens dissolvi and esse cum Christo, Phil. 1. 23. But all the strength of this
argument stands upon a Desiderium habens, having a desire: And what good
Catholic man does not desire to die so holily as he may escape Purgatory, and
go immediately to Christ? Secondly, Hodie me^um eris in paradiso, Luc. 23. 43.
Where you say it is evident, The Convert thief upon the Cross cannot be looked
upon as a privileged person: Were this evident, it is evident to me that most
eminently learned men would have perceived this evidence; yet our Rhemes
Doctors confidently call it A rare example of mercy and prerogative. Maldonate
handling this place, Mat. 27. 44. calls it a stupidity, Ex uno exemplo
generalem legem colligere; Bellarm. lib. 1. de Purg. cap. 8. concludes his
answer to this very objection, Privilegia pauco rum legem non faciunt: Becanus
compend. men. contr. lib. 1. c. 11. n. 7. calls it expressly, Singular
privilegium; so that this your evidence, is to me inevident. Thirdly Bellarmine
himself confesses, De Purgatorio incertum est; you quote neither Chapter nor
Book, which is very uncouth amongst learned Antagonists: These words may be
understood in a double sense; absolutely as to Purgatoty it self; or relatively
as to the good thief: If the first, then Bellarmine confesses it is uncertain
whether there be any such thing as Purgatory or no; if the second, whether the
good thief went to Purgatory or no: As to the first, there can be nothing more
certain amongst Christians then what is de fide, of divine faith; But Bellarm.
lib. 1. de Purg. cap. 2. and 3. affirms it is de fide; And again, cap. 11.
Constanter asserimus dogma esse fidei Purgatorium; adeo ut qui non credit
Purgatorium esse, ad illud nunquam sit perventurus, sed in gehenna sempiterno
incendio cruciandus: What can a man speak more resolutely then this! As to the
second, He has not any such word, but all the contrary, as I have showed to
your second objection: Where then Bellarmine should make this Confession, is
beyond my skill to find. Fourthly none ever durst say, That the humane soul of
Christ was at all in Purgatory: If you mean To suffer there, it were an
horrible blasphemy to say so. But if to go down thither in majesty as a most
victorious Conqueror and triumphant King to take possession of his whole
Kingdom, which according to Saint Paul is tripartite, Philip. 2. 10.
Coelestium, terrestrium, and infernorum: So Bellarmine (besides what he says
thereof, lib. 4. de Christo, cap. 12. in fine) durst c. 16. with a probabile
say, that Christ's humane soul went down thither, not only quoad effectum, but
secundum substantiam and realem praesentiam; For having made this querie, Ad
quae loca inferni descenderit? He answers, Probabile est profecto Christi
animum ad omnia loca inferni descendisse; But whether so or no, it neither
makes nor marrs, but the good thief enjoyed Christ's promise to be with him that
day in Paradise, that is, in the state of glory, as all Catholic divines
profess and teach; So that I do not well understand what was your aim to make
this Objection.

The Answer.
1. MY intent was to comfort the dying, not to contest with the living: To show
to penitent and believing Christians, That for them to depart out of this life,
is to be with Christ, because it was so to Saint Paul and to the good thief
before them: You are willing to lay Purgatory in their way, which I look upon
as a very stumbling block, fit only to make their passage hence much more
formidable, and much less comfortable; Nor can I find your Commission, as you
are a Christian Divine, to break a bruised reed, and quench the smoking flax;
much less to throw it into the flames, to burn and to consume it: For sure it
comes nearer the office of Christ, (which is the foundation, should be the
platform of yours) to preach good tidings to the meek, to bind up the
brokenhearted, to comfort them that ^ourn in Zion, to give beauty for ashes
(not burning instead of beauty) the oil of joy for m^urning, the garment of
praise, (even the immaculate robe of our Saviors righteousness) for the Spirit
of heaviness, (Isa. 61.) For our Savior Christ requiring the Ministers of his
Gospel, sparingly to use even true frights in bringing obstinate sinners to
rely on his merits and mediation, will never approve those who invent false
fears to scare true Penitents that are actually with him, from their comfort
and hold in him. 2. But this is rather to acquit my self. I come now to answer
you, and say, That Saint Paul looked upon his life as that which gave him a
being with the Philippians, and therefore was more advantageous to them: But he
looked upon his death as that which would give him a being with Christ, and
therefore would be more advantageous to himself: This makes him desire rather
to die then to live, because by his death he should so depart from the one, as
to approach to the other: His dissolution was to be his admission into heaven,
not his introduction toward it, to let him first into Purgatory, and from
thence to transmit him unto Christ: This is Saint Chrysostoms exposition; He
says It is good to be dissolved and to be with Christ; for death or
dissolution in it self is an indifferent thing, neither good nor bad; but it is
bad when a man dies to be punished, (and sure Purgatory in your belief is a
very great punishment) good when he so goes from men as to go to Christ: So
that if you suppose his being dissolved and being with Christ were not both
together in one and the same instant; Saint Chrysostom will tell you his
dissolution was not good; and if not good, sure not desirable; And if good
only for being with Christ, then desirable only for that being. 3. Yet you
say, All the strength of my first argument stands upon the desire: If so, it
cannot stand upon the dissolution; and then it will follow, Saint Paul might be
dissolved and not be with Christ; say then Saint Paul might go to Purgatory, to
make your good Catholics the more willing to go thither after him; But first
so make them good Catholics, as not to let them be bad Christians: For their
desire to die so holily as to escape Purgatory, is too servile to make them
good Christians, even in the Heathen Poets divinity, Oderunt peccare mali
formidine poenae, They are wicked men who hate to sin for fear of Punishment;
Therefore if they desire to avoid sin merely for fear of Purgatory, they are
not good Catholics: If for love of Christ, as their life is to be in him, so
their death is to be with him, and that immediately; for else not to be with
him, but with some other before him; which made Saint Hierom to say concerning
Nepotian, when he was but newly dead, Scimus Nepotianum nostrum esse cum
Christo; corpus terra suscepit, Anima Christo reddita est: (Hier. in Epitaph.
Nepot.) We know that our Nepotian is with Christ, (you now say quite contrary,
we know that he is not with Christ, for he is in Purgatory) the earth has his
body, but his Savior bath his soul: See how he disposes of a man that dies in
the faith of Christ, His body goes to the dust, but his soul goes to Christ
that redeemed it; Oh Sir, be not you so willing to allow, much less to make a
separation betwixt Christ and good Christians, in that very instant which God
has appointed to consummate their Union, since you find it so expressly said,
That neither death nor depth (and sure Purgatory is a depth in your account)
shall be able to separate us from the Love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our
Lord, Romans 8. 38. and much less shall it be able to separate us from Christ
Jesus our Lord, of whom it is said, Jesus having loved his own which were in
the world, he loved them unto the end, John 13. 1. Nay who has said of
himself, Father, I will that they also whom thou have given me, be where I am,
that they may behold my glory which thou have given me, Joh. 17. 24. This will
of his was fulfilled not only in Saint Paul, who was given him by a miraculous
conversion in his life, but also in the good thief, who was given him as a more
miraculous Convert just a little before his death; yet even he was told that he
should be with Christ, not with tormented souls, immediately upon his
dissolution, and that in Paradise, not in Purgatory: And I cannot see, may not
say, That Christ is less willing to receive those who are now given him, (or
shall be given him to the worlds end) then he was to receive that thief: And
therefore I still say he was no privileged person after his conversion to go
to bliss sooner then other Penitents, though he were indeed a privileged
person in regard of his conversion to be made a penitent, when his fellow
thief, and many others, were still left in their impenitency, And that
satisfies all the evidence you have produced against me either out of your
Rhemish or out of your Romish Doctors, so that you may reserve your Jo. Poean,
Jo. Triumph till another occasion; For that evidence makes not my assertion,
(of his being no privileged person) any whit more inevident; For he was not
privileged as to his death; but only as to his conversion: Wherefore since our
blessed Savior is still as ready to receive other true Penitents as he was the
good thief, I hope you will not say he is ready to receive them in Purgatory,
not in Paradise: For sure you are, if it were to be proved (as you assert) that
Christ once showed his glory in Purgatory, yet he does not now show it there,
and therefore that cannot be the place for Christian souls to go to, when they
depart from hence, because Christ himself has said concerning them, I will
that they be where I am, that they may be^old my glory: I will that they be
where I am, not where I have been, for then they might still remain on the
earth, or when they go hence, sooner go to Hell then to Purgatory, since it is
without doubt (say your authors) Christ was once in Hell, but much doubted,
whether he were once in Purgatory, because that is looked on as a fictitious
Place, and so could not receive him: But in truth the words will have those who
are given unto Christ, to go immediately unto Heaven; for that is our Saviors
meaning, I will they be where I am, viz. in heaven, for there he then was in
his Divinity (in which respect we are taught to say to him, Our Father which
art in heaven) and I think you must have recourse to the Divinity of Christ to
prove that the good thief enjoyed his promise to be with him that day in
Paradise, for his body was in the grave, and his humane soul in Hell, say you,
and for ought we can prove, only his Divinity was in heaven: Wherefore whiles
Christ was in the state of Humiliation, all those who were given him, were at
their deaths with him as God; But now he is in the state of his Exaltation, all
that are given him, are at their deaths with him not only as God, but also as
man, that they may behold his glory, whether given him of the Father by eternal
generation as God, or by temporal dispensation as man; And surely if they be
with him that they may behold his glory, they cannot be in Purgatory; for
neither he nor his glory is there: And how their faith can be so long suspended
from Vision, their hope from comprehension, their charity from fruition by the
interposition of some continuance in Purgatory, not to be measured by time, for
they are past that, nor by eternity, for they are not yet come to that, I
cannot see without a great injury to their soul^, which may not part with these
Theological virtues till they be fully perfected, and yet a greater injury to
their Savior, whose merit and satisfaction is not thought enough to perfect
them. 4. As for those words, Bellarmine himself confesses de Purgatorio
incertum est; It Is clear by the context, they are to be understood only of the
humane soul of Christ, that it is uncertain whether that were ever in Purgatory
or no; for I said, The good Thief was without doubt to be with his Savior, and
therefore was to be in Paradise, not in Purgatory, since it was not without
doubt that Christ was in Purgatory, but it was without doubt that he was in
Paradise: And Bellarmine himself has said thus much in sense, though not in
words, and I intending to meddle only with his sense, thought it needless to
quote either Chapter or Book, since I thought his sense so known to all
Papists, as not to be doubted, and so received by them as not to be denied; For
my business was a consolation of Protestants, (at such a time when they wanted
it very much, and yet against such a time, when they might want it more) not a
contestation with Papists, and therefore I quoted only the substance of his
doctrine, not the words of it, and not the place, because not the words; which
is not uncouth amongst serious Divines, though, as you say, it is amongst
learned Antagonists: But since you have followed this quarrelsom age, which
will not let Catholic Divines and honest men, either live securely, or die
peaceably, that you might be my Antagonist, and have turned that into
Controversy, which I intended only for peaceable Divinity, (for I was not then
in case to answer a challenge, much less to send one) you have made it
necessary for me to quote the very place, that I may not be thought to have
misquoted the thing. The place I pointed at in Bellarmine was lib. 4. de
Christo, cap. 16. (the very same which after your long excursion you have
alleged, as you think, against me, but in truth for me) Probabile est profecto
Christi animam ad omnia loca inferni descendisse, It is probable that Christ's
humane soul, descended to all the places of Hell; I knowing that he reckoned
Purgatory for one of those places, took this for his sense, It is probable that
Christ's humane soul went down into Purgatory. But Logic having taught me that
what was asserted only as probable, was acknowledged as uncertain, I put his
sense in such words as I thought most suitable to my purpose, saying,
Bellarmine himself confesses De Purgatorio incertum est, that is in plain
English, (since my Latin had so ill luck) Bellarmine himself confesses it is
uncertain concerning Purgatory whether Christ's humane soul went thither or no;
which is clearly his own doctrine by undeniable consequence: For he only says,
It is probable Christ's humane soul went down into Purgatory; which is all one
as if he had said, It is uncertain that Christ's humane soul went down into
Purgatory: For if it be but probable it was so, it is also probable it was not
so, and therefore uncertain it was so; This is all Bellarmine does say, and
this is more then he does prove: Nay his proofs make his assertion altogether
improbable, if not impossible: For all the proofs he brings concerning Christ's
descent, do speak only of Hell properly so called, not of Purgatory; As that of
Fulgentius, Ubi solebant peccatorum animae torqueri, He went thither where the
souls of sinners had used to be tormented: Whereas Purgatory, though a place of
torment according to his doctrine, yet is it not so for the souls of sinners,
but for the souls of the righteous: And that other proof he brings from all the
Fathers at once, is like to this: Et ipsi patres dum describunt terrorem
gehennae and daemonnm in descensu Christi, aperte indicant Christum praesentiam
suam illis manifestasse. And the Fathers describing the frights and fears of
Hell and the Devils in Christ's descent, do plainly show that Christ did
manifest his presence to them: I think you will not allow this to be spoken of
Purgatory; for then you must make it all one with Hell, and take it for a place
of Devils, not of righteous Spirits, which after they have been purged in
flames from the relics of their sins not expiated by their own former
penance, nor their friends after payments, are sure to see the face of God.

5. This is all the certainty I find in Bellarmine, of Christ's descending into
Purgatory, and this I look upon as a very great uncertainty: But you look upon
this as a great certainty, in that you give a reason for it, saying, it was to
take possession of his whole Kingdom; say then, Purgatory is a part of Christ's
Kingdom, and if Christ did not take possession of this part amongst the rest,
you do not believe He did take possession of the whole: But take heed whiles
you say so, that they who are against you and deny Purgatory, tax you not of
blasphemy, for saying that which is not in being, is a part of Christ's Kingdom,
(for to make Christ a King in Utopia, in a place which is not, is to make him
no King:) And that they who are with you, and affect purgatory, tax you not of
infidelity, for believing that Christ has taken possession of his whole
Kingdom upon no better grounds, then upon a mere uncertainty.

6. For even your own Bellarmine, though in his first Book de Purgatorio, he
writ so confidently, as if all men were bound to believe Purgatory that will be
saved, yet in his second Book de circumstantiis Purgatorii, He writes so
ambiguously, as to enfeeble any unprejudicate man's belief; I will give you some
few instances, and then leave you to judge what small reason he had for his so
great confidence.

Cap. 6. de loco Purgatorii, He says, The Church has not defined in what
place Purgatory is, for that the purgation of souls may be in many places, and
some are purged where they sinned: but after several other opinions he seems to
like that best which places Purgatory in the bowels of the earth, because of
several eruptions of fire out of the earth, in several parts of the world: Be
it so, if we must needs have a Purgatory, that they may have the greatest share
in it, and terror from it, who were once the first inventers, and now are the
chiefest maintainers of it, even the Italian Monks and Friars; for the most
notorious eruptions of fire, in these parts of the world, are either in Italy,
as at Mount Vesuvius, or not far from it, as at Mount Aetna in Sicily.

Cap. 9. De tempore quo durat Purgatorium; Of the time that Purgatory lasts,
which is as uncertain as the place; Quando ab hoc loco in coelum avolant res
est incertissima, How long the souls must stay in Purgatory before they can get
to heaven, is a matter of the greatest uncertainty.

Cap. 10. and 11. Qualis sit purgatorii poena; The quality of the Torment in
Purgatory is as uncertain as either the time or place: De poena Purgatorii
quaedam sunt certa, quaedam dubia; As concerning the punishment of Purgatory,
some things are certain, some are doubtful: Certa sunt Carentia visionis, and
poena sensus, and poena ignis: It Is certain (says he) the souls in Purgatory
are under the punishment of loss for want of the beatifical vision, and are
under the punishment of sense by torment of fire: Do they want the beatificall
vision? say then God has thus sentenced them at their particular Judgment,
Depart from me ye cursed, and let them hereafter be accounted not blessed but
cursed souls, not in a Communion with God, but in a separation from him; yet in
saying so, remember you bid your best Champion recall even the very subject of
this whole Controversy (which indeed is the best, if not the only way to end
it) De Ecclesia quae est in Purgatorio, of the Church which is in Purgatory;
for that cannot be a part of Gods Church, which is in a separation from God:
And sure I am your Cardinal is beholding to the latter part of this same
sentence, to prove that souls in Purgatory, are under the punishment of sense
by fire; for he proves it by these words, Ite in ignem aeternum, Go into
everlasting fire, (Mat. 25.) And why not also prove their punishment of loss in
the want of the beatifical vision, from the first part of the same sentence,
Depart from me ye cursed? For the same sentence denounces the judgment of
loss and of sense; of loss in Depart from me ye cursed; and of sense, in Go
into everlasting fire: And we may fancy the one to be Temporary as well as the
other, and to belong to righteous souls as much as the other; but surely the
Text says both are eternal, and belong only to the cursed: And indeed it is a
strange proof, which brings Hell to prove Purgatory; yet this is the best he
can find in all the Scripture: For here he proves that material fire can punish
immaterial souls, because it was provided to punish the Devil and his Angels,
which are immaterial spirits: But still the proof concerns only Hell fire; so
that in plain truth, He alleges hell to prove Purgatory: All the doubt is,
how he can make it so: This proof is yet further enlarged in the next Chapter,
where he answers some chief doubts concerning Purgatory, as, whether it be a
true real fire, and how it can act upon separated souls? and both are answered
from these words, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire: Ignem Purgatorii esse
corporeum, quia in Scripturis passim poena impiorum vocatur Ignis; Et regula
Theologorum est, ut verba Scripturarum accipiantur proprie, quando nihil
absurdi sequitur: The fire of Purgatory is corporeal; for commonly in the
Scripture, the punishment of the wicked is called fire, (what is the punishment
of the wicked to the righteous? or must men turn wicked, that they may go to
Purgatory?) and it is a rule of Divines, That the words of Scripture are to be
taken properly, if there follow no absurdity; and a little after, Corpora
damnatorum puniuntur igne, Mat. 25. Ite in ignem aeternum: est autem idem ignis
corporum damnatorum and spirituum corpore vacantium; nam ibidem dicitur, qui
paratus est diabolo and Angelis ejus: The bodies of the damned are punished
with fire, (Go into everlasting fire, Mat. 25.) but it is the same fire which
punishes their bodies, and other souls or spirits without bodies, as it is
said, Which is prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

Pray Sir, why should any Christian be taught to desire to go to that fire
which was prepared for the Devil and his Angels? and if he do once go thither,
how shall he ever return from thence? And yet your Cardinal would have us
believe Purgatory, that we may have the happiness to go thither; and says, if
we do not, we shall burn for ever in Hellfire: A new Apostle sure, he speaks
not only so resolutely, but likewise so authentically, yet not dropped down (as
the rest) from Mount Sion, but from Mount Sina, as we may guess by his Thunder
and Lightning, Seriously, it is a sad thought for all good Christians, that any
Divine should (after Nadab and Abihu) dare offer strange fire, for God is not
well pleased with such an offering: But it is a joyful thought for us poor
Protestants, that this fire of Purgatory is not only a strange, but also a
false fire; for so we are sure it cannot burn us: Else, it seems, after it has
been your Purgatory, it should be our Hell; However it is palpable, That your
Cardinals talk only is of Purgatory, but his proof is of Hell; Thus himself
has brought his certainties concerning Purgatory into doubts, and his doubts
into nothing: Nay in truth his last doubt in this 11. Chapter is a mere nothing
of it self, An per se agant istae poenae, Whether those pnnishments do act upon
the souls by and of themselves? For to think accidents can act of themselves,
is to think them substances; and to think they can act upon immaterial souls,
is to think them above the best substances; And to think they can act upon
blessed souls, is to think them above the substance of substances, above God
himself; For the souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, neither does
any grief hurt them, Wisdom 3. 1. or rather, and there shall no torment touch
them; The Latin translation Et non tanget illos tormentum mortis; And the
torment of death shall not touch them, is too short by being too long; has
taken from the Text by add ng to it; for putting in mortis, and saying the
Torment of death shall not touch them, seems to allow that Torment after death
may touch them; But the Greek Original is plain, (...), Et non tanget illos
tormentum, And no torment at all shall touch them; sc. after once they may be
truly said to be in the hands of God, as resigned unto him, according to that
most comfortable Resignation sanctified unto us by the Spirit of God which made
it, and by the Son of God which used it; In manus tuas commendo spiritum meum;
Into thy hands Lord I commend my spirit; It was always in thy hands, by thy
dominion and Tuition; But now it is more peculiarly in thy hands, by my own
resignation; The souls of the Righteous are always in Gods hands as their
Governor, but more peculiarly at the hour of death as their Receiver and
Possessor: For they no sooner go from their own bodies, but they go into his
hands; and being there, no grief can hurt them, no more then it can hurt him,
or take them out of his hands: And sure we are, he will not hurt them, for he
does not receive them with one hand, that he may torment them with the other;
so says the voice from heaven, (and it is both shame and sin for any voice
from earth to say otherwise) Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord; for
they rest from their labors, and their works do follow them, Apoc. 14. 13.
That is, their good works, to procure their reward, not their evil works to
procure their punishment (such as you teach to be in Purgatory) for that's not
agreeable with their rest, nor consistent with their blessedness: And I desire
to know how he can say to God at his death, Into thy hands I commend my spirit,
who believes the Torments of Purgatory, by which, (for ought you dare avow to
the contrary) he may be in the hands of the Devil.

Again, Cap. 12. Sciri non posse in hac vita, quomodo ignis corporeus Animas
urat: It cannot be known in this life how material fire can burn immaterial
souls; let me add, much less how it can purge them, or expiate the relics of
their sins; for though we read that fire is an instrument of Gods Justice, and
so may punish immaterial spirits; yet we do not read that it is an instrument
of Gods Grace; that it should purge or expiate them.

Cap. 13. An in purgatorio torquentur Animae a daemonibus: Whether or no in
Purgatory the souls are tormented by the Devils? Concerning which he answers,
Res est omnino incerta: It is a a thing altogether uncertain; This is the
second time he has answered us with that very word; so we see he could be
confident, where he could not be certain; But in this case we have reason to
believe him; For there are diverse several opinions concerning it; so the
doctrine is uncertain as to the Believers; and not one of those opinions but
has an objection stronger then its proof; so the doctrine is uncertain as to
the belief; For some say the souls in Purgatory are tormented by the good
Angels; but how come they from being their friends and Guardians, to be their
enemies and tormentors? Others say, That they are tormented by the Devils (and
to this Bellarmine inclines, because forsooth the pretended Revelations have
avowed it) But how comes the Devil from being conquered by them whiles they
were in the infirmities of the flesh, to be a Conqueror over them when they
are nothing but pure spirits? Does God say, Resist the Devil and he will fly
from you, (James 4. 7.) and shall men say, The Devil comes as a Conqueror upon
them who have most resisted him? Does the Church pray That God would beat down
Satan under our feet; and have we no better benefit of that prayer, Then that
God should permit Satan to get up even over our Head? Others say, they are
tormented by the fire, meaning I suppose, as it is directed and assisted by the
hand of God; But how comes God so low in their esteem as to do that, which they
do not think fit to be done by his meanest good Angel? Why must that office of
an Executioner become him, which is unbecoming his most inferior Minister?
Besides, how can his Justice which has been satisfied by Christ, require a
second satisfaction? Or where has God declared that he will allow his Justice
to be thus satisfied? We dare not deny, That Gods Justice is fully satisfied in
Christ for penitent Sinners, because himself has said, This is my beloved Son
in whom I am well pleased, Mat. 3. which were nothing to us, if he were not
well pleased with all that fly to Christ, or rather that are in Christ, for
Christ's sake; yet sure not well pleased, if his Justice be not fully satisfied,
since Justice first and then Charity, is a rule not to be violated or broken on
earth, much less in heaven: Again, our blessed Saviors forerunner thus
proclaimed concerning him, Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of
the world, John 1. 29. If he has taken them away, they cannot be left behind,
either for our guilt or for our punishment; since guilt is nothing else but an
obligation to punishment; for that were to say, He has taken them away, so as
to leave them behind, for us to take them away; which is in effect to deny him
to be the Propitiation for our sins, against the express word of God, John 2.
2. and consequently not only against the benefits, but also against the belief
of our own souls: wherefore we dare not deny, That Gods justice is fully
satisfied in Christ; and if we dare, we shall not know where to find him any
other satisfaction; for he has not allowed or appointed any other; and sure no
satisfaction can give him content, but such as himself has allowed and
appointed: And indeed that is the only satisfaction which is adequate to his
offended Justice, the satisfaction made by his Son, not by the sinner, either
in doing or in suffering, because there is no proportion betwixt an infinite
Justice, and a finite satisfaction: This considered, may I not be as gross an
Ebionite or Cherinthian, by saying there is a necessity of penal satisfaction,
as if I say, there is a necessity of legal observations for the expiation of
sin? do not both alike diminish and disparage the efficacy of Christ's death? Or
may I think that the Church of Christ by using the power of the Keys in
retaining sins, intends to retain where Christ remits, to wi^, in the true
Penitent, to the undervaluing of Christ's merit in purchasing remission of sins,
and Gods free grace and mercy in granting it, and Gods holy Spirit in
testifying it: Therefore I must let the satisfaction enjoined by the Church,
die with the Penitent, and not be required of him after death, unless I will
suppose the Church both able and willing to bind where Christ has loosed; For
if Christ loose not the sinner here, I do not find upon what grounds to believe
That he will loose him hereafter: So that we see if satisfaction is to be made
by the sinner, All must go to Purgatory, and for ought we can prove, tarry
there eternally. And so Purgatory will in truth be Hell. If satisfaction has
been made by Christ, then none at all can justly go thither: And so Purgatory
will in truth be Nothing; certain it is, no other satisfaction was given for
all the offenses of the good Thief, though he were not a Penitent till the hour
of his death; and with what color of Truth can any Divine teach that God will
not take this satisfaction (and this alone) for all other Penitents? And yet
this (in Bellarmines acount) is one of the two supporters of Purgatory; the
other is Venial sins, which may also be shaken in good time.

In a word, The Place, the Time, the Quality of Torment, the manner of
tormenting, the Tormentor, and the cause or end for which souls are said to be
tormented in Purgatory are all uncertain; and how can the torment it self be
taken for a certainty? For it is not any man's confidence can make that certain,
which is invested with so many intrinsecal doubts and ambiguities, nor any man's
arguments can make that credible, which is not certain: But besides the
uncertainty w^ meet with in this temporary Torment^ which will not suffer us to
believe it, w^ find it casts an uncertainty upon that eternal Torment which we
confess our selve^ bound to believe: For as you rightly say^ Nothing is more
certain amongst Christian then what is de fide, of Divine Faith: So crave leave
to infer from that sayin^ Nothing is to be affirmed de fide, of divi^ faith
among Christians, which is not ce^tain, unless we will labor to overthro^ the
Certainty of the Christian faith; F^ to require men to believe an uncertai^
equally with a certainty, is to invite the^ to disbelieve a certainty, since it
is not possible they should have one and the same Divine Faith for
uncertainties and for certainties: And therefore to teach men to believe
Purgatory which is uncertain, is the ready way to make them not believe Hell,
which is most certain.

Nor is it to be wondered, That Bellarmines certainties concerning this
doctrine should be so much enfeebled by his own uncertainties concerning the
same, no more then it is to be wondered that the certainty of our Christian
says should depend, not upon the wit of man, but upon the word of God.

7. For this doctrine of Purgatory is so far from being taught in the Word of
God, that if you should ask those Disciples who have been most and best
instructed in the Word, Have ye received the doctrine of Purgatory since ye
believed? They must answer you, We have not so much as heard whether there be
any Purgatory; and yet the same men will plainly tell you, They have heard
there is an holy Ghost and have received him; though your over-bold Peltanus
would persuade the world, That Purgatory is as expressly taught in the holy
Scriptures, as the Unity of God, and yet that is a little more expressly taught
then the Deity of the Holy Ghost, though (blessed be God) the Scripture is very
express in both these Doctrines: But in the whole Book of God there is neither
in words nor in sense, neither explicitly nor implicitly any such thing as your
Purgatory, which we cannot say concerning any Article of the Christian Faith,
That the thing we are bound to believe is not so much as really or virtually
named in all the Holy Bible: For an sit is as truly a precognition in the
object of faith, as in the subject of any question, by that Rule of the
Apostle, (if reason will not serve) How shall they believe in him of whom they
have not heard, and how shall they hear without a Preacher? Romans 10. 14. We
cannot believe what we have heard, we cannot hear any supernatural truth,
unless God preach it; and if he has been the Preacher, we may find the
doctrine in his written Word; which the most zealous defenders of this your
doctrine, durst not assert in former times: For a very eminent Schoolman of our
own Cou^rey, (Iohannis Bach^nus, lib. 4. did. 45. qu^unica) answers all the
Texts that were in his days commonly alleged out of the Bible to prove
Purgatory, which were then but three, though since they have swelled into a far
greater number.

The first Text was that of 2 Mac. 12. To which his answer is, Libri
Macchabaeorum non sunt de Canone Bibliae, ut dicit Hieronymus; The Books of the
Macchabees are not of the Canon of the Bible, as says Saint Hierom: Nor does
your Cardinals new subtilty invalidate this answer, Dico librum Maccha. non
esse Canonicum apud Judaeos, sed apud Christianos esse, I say the Books of the
Macchabees were not Canonical among the Jews, but they are among the
Christians; For the Christian Church had the Canon of the Old Testament from
the Church of the Jews, who not daring to make themselves a Canon, took that
which God gave them, and therefore left out the Macchabees, because they were
not in the Ark, that is to say, not in that Canon which God had given them: Nor
has God given the Christian Church power and authority to make that or any
other Book Canonical, which himself has not made so; for the Text is plain
which says, To them were committed the Oracles of God, Romans 3. 2. Which words
only show a Trust of keeping, not a power of making the Oracles of God, either
in Jew or Christian.

The second Text then alleged to prove Purgatory, was that of 1 Cor. 3. To
which his answer is, That the Apostle there speaks of that fire which shall
burn the world at the day of Judgment; therefore that place will not prove
such a a purging by fire as the Doctors suppose, before the day of Judgment;
Been probatur Purgatio ista conflagrationis in die judicii, non ista purgatio
quam Doctores ponunt ante diem judicii: Mark his words, He says the Doctors,
not the Apostles, had been the Teachers of Purgatory. Yet this is the Text your
Cardinal most magnifies, (lib. 1. cap. 5.) as fittest to prove both this fire
and its fuel, both Purgatory and Venial sins, though a very learned
interpreter of his own Church Erasmus had avowed before, that it was not
sufficient to prove it either; and in truth in that himself has confessed it
to be one of the hardest Texts of all the Scripture, (unum ex difficillimis) he
has in effect discredited his own proof; For no Divine may laudably take that
Text to prove an Article of Faith, whose obscurity is fitter to show men their
ignorance, then to remedy it: For God does not oblige any man to an
impossibility to believe that which he cannot know, or to know that which he
cannot understand; and therefore to say the place is very obscure, and yet to
ground an Article of Faith upon it, is in effect to say, There ought to be a
belief where there is not an understanding; or there ought to be an
understanding where the thing is not to be understood: For sure God is not
defective in necessaries; and therefore if this doctrine had been necessary to
salvation, he would not have delivered it so obscurely, as to leave the
unlearned under a most irremediable ignorance, which is inconsistent with the
knowledge of Faith; nor the learned under most inextricable doubts and
perplexities, which are incompetible with the assent of Faith: So that this
text makes no more for the belief of Purgatory, then the former.

The third and last Text then alleged to prove Purgatory, was that of Mat. 12.
to which the forenamed Author answers, Non sequitur, non remittitur hic neque
in futuro, ergo utrobique est remissio, Quia ex negativis nihil sequitur, sed
tantum dicitur ad majorem gravitatem peccati blasphemiae: It follow^ not,
because it is said, It shall not be forgiven him neither in this world, nor in
the world to come, that forgiveness may be had both here and there; for nothing
can follow from mere negatives; But this is only spoken by way of aggravation
against the sin of blasphemy. Thus that judicious man answers this Text, and I
think you can scarce show any of your writers that have exceqted against his
answers: But the very same answers in Peter Martyrs mouth much displease your
Cardinal, (lib. 1. cap. 4.) For first he excepts against that part of it, That
the words were spoken by way of aggravation, and tells us, That by the same
reason we may deny Hell it self; and say those other words, [Go ye cursed into
everlasting fire] were spoken only by way of aggravation: Pray let another add
after him, that we may as well deny heaven too, and say that those words in the
Creed, I believe the life everlasting, were spoken only by way of aggravation,
that so if we will not have a Purgatory, we may not have an Heaven, as well as
not have an Hell in our Creed: But if you think this in form too irreligious,
pray think the other so too, which caused it, and you will not approve your
Cardinal as the only Master of Gods Israel, who is so ready to teach men to
turn Atheists, if they will not turn Papists. For all the Christian Churches
many years before us, and most Christian Churches at this day with us, have no
belief of your Purgatory, and yet firmly believe both Heaven and Hell; For both
are alike contained in the same Article, to wit, the life everlasting, which
teaches us to believe this Truth, [They that have done good shall go into life
everlasting, and they that have done evil shall go into everlasting fire] But
we have no third state of those who have neither done good nor evil, but partly
good, and partly evil; Good by avoiding mortal sins, or repenting of them; but
evil by committing venial sins, and not repenting of them: Or good by
repenting, but evil by not satisfying: And we have no third place for this
third state of men to go into, a place in which is neither everlasting life by
it self, nor everlasting fire by it self; but a strange kind of medly, which is
made up partly of life, and partly of fire, only the life of it is everlasting,
but the fire of it is temporary, not everlasting; so yon see we may very well
deny Purgatory, and yet not so much as doubt of Hell, because that very Article
which teaches us to believe everlasting fire, teaches us not to believe
temporary fire.

But your Cardinal has another exception against this exposition; Exaggeratio
non debet esse inepta, qualis est quum fit partitio, and uni membro nihil
respondet. An exaggeration ought not to be improper and unfit, as that is which
makes a Partition, and leaves nothing to answer one member of it. Pray Sir who
can imagine, That Negatives are capable of a Partition, any more then mere non
entities, and therefore an exaggeration grounded upon negatives, may not be
supposed to make a partition, because a non entity cannot be supposed to have
any parts or members: As if I should say of a confirmed Christian, He is not to
be made a Papist or a Turk, what partition is here of Christians into Papists
and Turks?

8. Secondly he excepts against that answer, Nothing can follow from mere
Negatives; As Philip King of Spain is not King of Venice, therefore some other
man is King of Venice; it follows not, says Peter Martyr, by good Logic,
because it is grounded upon a negative: So here, It shall not be forgiven him
neither in this world, nor in the world to come; it follows not, There shall be
forgiveness in the world to come: The Cardinal excepts, saying, It follows not
according to the rules of Logic, but it follows according to the Rules of
Prudence, because otherwise we should suppose our Savior had spoken most
unfitly or improperly; nay (in plain terms) most foelishly: Respondeo non sequi
secundum regulas Dialecticorum, id quod inferimus ex verbis Domini, sed tamen
sequi secundum regulam Prudentiae, quia alioqui faceremus Dominum ineptissime
loquutum. An horrid blasphemy to say the eternal Word spoke impertinently, or
Wisdom it self spoke foolishly, unless we may set up a false consequence to
make his words good.

Is not this contrary to the wise man's advice, Ne dixeris quia ipse me
implanavit; Say not thou He has caused me err, for he has no need of the
sinful man, Eccl. 15. 12. Let an insolent Dogmatist say what he pleases; but
a conscientious Divine must say, God needs not my Lie to maintain his Truth, no
more then he needs m^ sin to maintain his righteousness: For a consequence
without the Rules of Logic is a Lie, since it is a conclusion without
premises, an effect without a cause, or a Consequent without an Antecedent,
that is a mere nothing, but pretending to be something it is no longer a mere
nothing; for it is a Lie, which is worse then nothing. I say, A Consequence
without the rules of Logic, is a Lie, and I am forced to say it as a Christian
Divine, That I may not betray the Truth of Christ, nor belly the Church of
Christ: For how many Truths does the Church of Christ teach me to believe,
which are Divine Truths only as they are Logical Consequences, whereas it is
palpable, A Logical Consequence cannot be a Truth, but an Unlogical Consequence
must be a Lie. I will instance but in one; The Monothelite who said Christ had
but one will, is condemned for an Heretic by the sixth general Council; and yet
it is only a Logical Consequence, That Christ had two wills, from this
Antecedent, That two complete rational Natures must have two wills; Whence
comes this Syllogism, Two complete rational Natures must have two wills:
Christ had two complete rational Natures, (sc. the nature of God, and the
nature of man) Therefore Christ had two wills: Here is a Truth inferred by
Logical Consequence, which has a Being in it self, and charge them for
Heretics who deny it, because it is a Divine Truth; whereas such inferences as
are only from Prudential not Logical Consequences, have no being save in the
fancy of him that makes them, and therefore Charges all with Heresy that
believe them, because they are not Divine Truths, but only humane imaginations:
For it is an heresy to believe that for a divine Truth, which God has not
taught in his Word, neither explicitly nor implicitly, neither as a doctrine,
nor as a deduction; neither as a Theological Principle, nor as a Logical
Conclusion; For such a belief does not only set up Fancy, or rather Falsity
instead of Truth, or man instead of God for the author of our Faith, but it
also disbelieveth that Truth, whereof God is the undoubted Author: For he which
believes that which God has not taught concerning any Truth must needs in
some respect not believe that which God has taught concerning the same Truth;
as in this particular case concerning the remission of sins, He that believes
remissionn of sins in the next world which God has not taught, must needs not
fully believe remission of sins in this world, which God has taught: For what
sins are left to be remitted there, cannot be remitted here; so I must not
believe remission of all sins here (though upon never so earnest a repentance,
never so true a faith) that I may believe the remission of some sins hereafter:
So dangerous a thing is it for any Divine to set up rules of prudence, (rather
of imprudence) instead of rules of Logic, that is to say, Fantastical
additions, instead of rational deductions; even as dangerous as to teach men to
believe a Lie, instead of believing Truth; For what is inferred from any Text
of Scripture by Logical consequence, is a Theological conclusion, and may not
be disbelieved without an affront to God the Author of Logic, that is, of
Reason; But what is inferred without Logic, is not a Theological conclusion,
but a Fantastical Addition, and may not be received by us either as
Christians, because it comes not from God; nor as men, because it comes not by
Reason: And I think such a conclusion is that of the same Cardinals, (lib. 3.
de euch. c. 7.) Per divinam Potentiam posse ab homine tolli facultatem
intelligendi, interim ut maneat Homo; That by Gods Almighty power may be taken
from a man the faculty of understanding, and he may still remain a man: A
Consequence doubtless from the first Article of our belief (I believe in God
the Father Almighty) but inferred only by the Rules of this new prudence, not
by the Rules of old sound Logic, and therefore to be looked upon as a mere
fiction; for it supposes an Impotency in Omnipotency, as if God could deny
himself, working contradiction, and making a man not a man, a reasonable
creature not a reasonable creature at the same time and in the same respect:
But however this Consequence has found us out a man fit to believe other such
like Consequences; For such Consequences are clearly without Reason, and
therefore the man that can believe them, had need be a man without Reason.

9. But it is high time to leave your Cardinal (whom yet I had not traced so
far, had it not been to follow your footsteps) and since our Countryman could
not, his own Countryman shall stop his mouth: For Saint Thomas of Aquine as
good an Italian as himself, and a far better Divine, sees here no remission of
sins in the next world, but proves the contrary both out of Saint Augustine,
and out of Saint Chrysostom, in his Commentary upon this Text, that is, out of
the two chiefest Doctors both of the Greek and of the Latin Church: And he
sets down Saint Chrysostoms exposition with the approbation not only of its
Truth, but also of its perspicuity: Chrysostomus valde plane exponit, and
dicit, etc. Saint Chrysostom expounds this place very plainly, and says, That
we are here told of a twofold blasphemy, one against the Son of God, calling
him a wine-bibber, and for this they had some excuse because of their
ignorance; The other against the Spirit of God, calling him Beelzebub, and for
this they had no excuse, because they were sufficiently instructed in the
Scriptures, (that evil spirits could not be cast out by an evil spirit, but by
the good Spirit, that is the Spirit of God) and therefore this blasphemy should
not be forgiven neither in this world, nor in the world to come, which (says
he) is spoken upon this ground: Because some sins are punished in this world,
some in the next, some both in this and that; The sins punished only in this
world, are those of Penitents, (yet your Purgatory will needs punish them, and
only them in the next world) The sins punished only in the next world, are
those of miscreants, of whom it is said, Job 21. 13. In a moment they go down
into Hell; But the sin which is punished in this world and in the next, is the
sin against the Holy Ghost: Therefore it is said concerning that sin, ^t shall
not be forgiven neither in this world, nor in the world to come, Non quia sit
remissio in futuro, sed quia poena erit in futuro, unde sensus est, quod non
remittitur quin poenam patiatur in hoc seculo and in futuro, Not because there
is any forgiveness in the next world, but because there shall be punishment in
the next world; wherefore the meaning is, It shall not be forgiven, but he
shall suffer punishment for it, both in this and in the next world: Thus the
Angelical Doctor expounds this Text, and his Exposition stood good a long
time, and was generally received in the Latin Church; for your own Ferus has
followed it, saying, Minus dicit, plus significat; vult enim quod non solum in
futuro, sed etiam hic punitur tale peccatum: He speaks little, but he signifies
much; for his meaning is, That such a sin is punished not only in the next
world, but also in this.

10. Your late Jesuits tell us of a remission of the sin, with a reservation
of the punishment; but your old Divines take remitting for not punishing,
without which in truth it cannot be remission; For God does not afford us a
less forgiveness, then he does require us to afford one another, and that is so
to forgive the sin, as not once to think of punishing or of revenging it: For
indeed to forgive sin, is nothing else in its own nature, but not to reserve it
to be punished; and because God punished our Savior for our sins, it is said,
He made him sin for us, 2 Cor. 5. 21. For so Christ took our sin upon him, that
is to say, not our Guilt but our Punishment; and he took it upon himself, that
he might not leave it upon us; For he was wounded for our transgressions, Isa.
53. 5. He was bruised for our iniquities; (that is, He was punished, that we
might be acquitted) The chastisement of our peace was upon him, that is, His
chastisement was our Peace) and with his stripes we are healed. And blessed be
God we are so; for sure it is, we could never be healed with our own stripes;
it is his wounds work our cure, and not our own; yet I will not follow Scotus,
who to confute them that denied contingency, did say, It is pity but such men
should be under torments, till they should confess it were possible for them
not to be tormented; I will not say in like manner, It is pity but they who
deny our souls to be healed with our Saviors stripes, should themselves be
beaten with many stripes, till they should confess that their own stripes could
not heal them; for then I know they would be under the lash for ever; But I
must say, That it were just with God to put them under such a confutation; For
they are under a gross denial, not of a Metaphysical, but of a Theological
Truth, and that of such a Truth as has joined Gods Mercy and Justice both
together in man's salvation, and therefore such a Truth as may not be denied
without great uncharitableness to man, and greater unthankfulness to God.

I think few of those men who now most stand upon this new Divinity of
remission in the next world to be obtained by our own stripes and others
suffrages, because it brings them so good a market, would be willing at their
deaths to venture their souls upon it, for fear it should bring them as bad a
remedy; And I cannot but wonder at your Cardinal, who has said concerning this
Text, Hinc colligunt Sancti Patres, quaedam peccata remitti in futuro seculo,
per orationes and suffragia Ecclesiae, (Bellar. lib. 1. de Purg. cap. 4.) Hence
the holy Fathers do gather that some sins are forgiven in the next world, by
the prayers and the suff ages of the Church; for he could not say this, if
Saint Thomas said true, without putting Saint Augustine and Saint Chrysostom
out of the Catalogue of the Fathers.

11. I know our Countryman Backet was swayed by Saint Augustine to conclude
for Purgatory; but I fear either he mis-applyed or mis-understood Saint
Augustine, or Saint Augustine mis-understood himself; For Saint Augustine has
most dogmatically determined against it, lib. 13. de Civit. Dei cap. 8. In
requie sunt animae piorum a corpore separatae, Impiorum autem poenas luunt,
donec istarum ad aeternam vitam, illarum vero ad aeternam mortem corpora
reviviscant: The souls of the righteous are in rest, of the unrighteous in
torment, after they are separated from the flesh, till the bodies of the one
shall be raised again to eternal life, the bodies of the other to eternal death.

12. But he that will not teach Fancy instead of Faith, must take God for the
Author, and Gods Church for the Pillar and ground of that Truth which he
teaches; else he may chance rove in uncertainties to the worlds end,
especially if he shall take Metaphorical allusions for dogmatical conclusions,
and florid decl^mations for solid determinations, as Divines now usually are on
all sides in their citations out of ^he Fathers upon any argument, making some
of them speak against their own doctrine, to speak for new devices, and in
effect to write contradictions, rather then not write for the great Diana of
these clamorous Ephesians: Therefore I will not here examine the citations of
the Fathers; for surely A Christian Divine is bound to teach no other Faith for
Christian, then such as has been manifestly declared in the Word of Christ,
and generally and constantly professed by the Catholic Church of Christ: And
your Cardinal finds not so muth as the word Purgatory in all the Scriptures,
nor in any one general Council, till the fourth of Laterane under nnocent the
third, above twelve hundred years after Christ, which was as far from being
Ecumenical, as Rome is from being all the Christian world; and if it had been
so, yet has only furnished us with Consultations, not with Canons or
Constitutions, your own Platina being my witness, who says thus in the life of
Innocent the third, Venere multa in consultationem, nec decerni tamen quicquam
aperte potuit; Many things were debated, but nothing was openly decreed in this
Council; and I hope you will not say that they passed their decrees in private,
or by any underhand dealing; An observation that may weaken some of your other
Tenants no less then Purgatory, which you obtrude upon the consciences of men
as established by the Canons of this Council, which in truth made no Canons at
all, if your own Platina be worth belief.

13. Next I meet with your Cardinals Reasons, whereof some do rather put, then
prove this new Article of Faith, (contrary to Aquinas, who allows not of Ratio
ponens, but only of Ratio probans radicem fidei, par. 1. qu. 32. art. 1. ad 2.)
arguing not so much from the authority of Gods Word, as against it: As
particularly that reason (lib. 1. cap. 11.) Intelligibile non est quomodo
verbum ociosum ex natura sua dignum sit perpetuo odio Dei; maneat igitur
quaedam esse peccata venialia and sola tempora^i poena digna; No man can
understand how an idle word is in its own nature worthy of Gods eternal hatred;
therefore let it stand for a Truth, that some sins are venial, and only worthy
of temporal punishment: A strange way of arguing for a Divine, who should not
exercise his Readers curiosity, but establish his conscience: Christ says,
That for every idle word men shall give account in the day of Judgment, to
make men repent before hand, even of their least sins, that judging themselves,
they may not be judged of him; Bellarmine says, It is not intelligible how a
man should be judged for an idle word, and therefore it must be taken for such
a picro, such a little sin as cannot come into Judgment: An excellent Doctor
sure to correct his master as if he had wanted Truth, and to corrupt his
Scholars as if they did not want Repentance.

14. For this Text if rightly urged, will rather ptove no sin venial in its own
nature, but only by Gods mercy: For if not an idle word is venial, then much
less a greater sin; but not an idle word is venial for that shall be accounted
for at the last day, if not repented of before, at least virtually in the
contrition, if not actually in the confession: Thus he first makes bold with
Gods Justice, proving some sins to be venial, that he may find or make matter
for Purgatory, and afterward he teaches others to make as bold with Gods
Mercy, that he may the better follow his proof; for he tells us that a man
may die a true penitent (for no other has hopes of Purgatory) and yet die with
a resolution of abiding in sin: Potest quis dum moritur habere voluntatem per
gendi in peccato veniali, igitur tale peccatum deleri in morte non potest; A
man when he dies may have the purpose of continuing in a venial sin, therefore
such a sin is not to be abolished by death, He means a man in the state of
grace, for no other is capable of the benefit of his purging flames: So he
cares not to pull down repentance, that he may set up Purgatory; whereas sure
it more suits with conscientious and sound Divinity, to pull down venial sins,
to set up repentance: For it is not possible that man should die in the state
of true repentance, who dies with a purpose of retaining any sin in his soul
that displeases God; for by that very purpose he prefers his own will and
pleasure above Gods, and therefore loves not God with all his heart, and
consequently is not a true believer, because not a true lover; and not a true
penitent, because not a true believer: Surely this cannot be a doctrine of
Piety which teaches Impenitency, since no man now has hopes of being
righteous by his innocence, but only by his repentance: Nor had Saint Augustine
such a light esteem of venial sins, if we may believe Gratian, Par. 1. did.
25. cap. 3. For this was his doctrine, Nullum peccatum est adeo veniale, quod
non fiat criminale dum placet; No sin is so venial but it may be made mortal if
it please the sinner; and this it must do if he has a will and purpose to
continue in it: And Consequently, if he die having such a will and purpose, his
venial sin is become mortal, and by that means is made fuel for Hell, not for
Purgatory; And so venial sin is also in danger of falling, which is the other
supporter of this your new building: Isto enim fundamento posito, quod tollitur
satisfactio, and descrimen peccati mortalis a veniali, necessario sequitur
nullum esse Purgatorium: Bell. lib. 1. c. 2. This foundation being laid, that
there is not satisfaction for sin (sc. of our own) and that there is no venial
sin, (sc. in it self) it must follow, there can be no Purgatory: And this
foundation may very safely be laid by us, because it is without if not against
the Text, that you have laid the other foundation.

15. I know your Cardinal alleges many more places of the Bible (besides
those three formerly mentioned) to prove this new Article of Faith: But there
is so much straining of the Scripture in his allegations (I will not say
wresting, because I hope it was not to his destruction) that he comes under
that condemnation of the wise man, There is an exquisite subtilt^, and the same
is unjust, Eccles. 19. 25. Men may by their wit and exquisite subtilty make
Gods Word seem to say any thing, but it is unjust for them so to do, and they
must be unrighteous in so doing, and had need be very penitent for that
unrighteousness: For if we shall give an accoun^ for every idle word of our
own, much more for endeavoring to make Gods Word partake of our idleness. And
indeed Gods Word being to be interpreted according to the analogy of Faith,
Romans 12. 6. it is fitter for Infidels then for Christians, to seek after such
interpretations thereof, as are not agreeable with that analogy: But herein
your writers are partly excusable; for being overruled by the determination of
your Church to set up a new Article of Faith, which is not reducible to any of
those in the Apostles Creed, they have been after a sort constrained to
interpret the Scriptures according to that new Article lately made by your
Church, and not according to the Analogy of that Faith which was at first left
by the Apostles; For sure it will pose an ordinary understanding, to show how
your Purgatory is consistent with the Communion of Saints, and with the
forgiveness of sins, which are both in that Creed, since they cannot be of the
Communion of Saints, who are in a separation from God, (and perchance under the
power of the Devil) nor have they obtained remission of sins, who are still
under torments for them: Nor can I see how this doctrine does agree with that
which is the very marrow and substance of the whole Gospel, to wit, That we are
reconciled to God by the death of his Son, Romans 5. 10. and That God was in
Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto
them, 2 Cor. 5. 19. For if there be a punishment reserved, the trespass is
imputed; But (...) there be an actual reconciliation, (a^ doubtless there is
for true Penitents an^ true Believers) then surely no punishment is reserved,
and no future satisfaction is necessary, and so we may fully believe the
remission of sins, according to ou^ Creed: And no present separation is
possible; and so we may as fully believe the Communion of Saints: The woman
tha^ came behind our blessed Savior an^ touched but the border of his garment
was healed immediately, Luke 8. 43. D^ not you say, A soul shall come, not
behi^ but before him, look him in the face, na^ go into his bosom to dwell in
him, and he again dwell in that soul, and yet it sha^ not be healed, unless you
will recall the of the Psalmist, Bless the Lord O my soul who forgiveth all
thine iniquities, who hea^eth all thy diseases? Psalm 103. 3. For wh^ is the
disease of the soul but sin, or ho^ is that healed but by forgiveness? Ho^ is
sin forgiven if it must be satisfied, o^ how is the soul healed if it must be
tormented? for sure not healing but wounding comes from torment. He that took
upon him our flesh that he might save us, did thereby show, He more willed our
salvation then our flesh; and how shall we say, He more wills our punishment
then our salvation?

16. But if any will hereafter thus abuse the Word of God, let him know he must
likewise abuse the Prayers of his Church, that so the sight of the one may
bring him to the greater detestation of the other; Wherefore let him say,
Domine, non secundum peccata nostra facias nobis, 1. non secundum mortalia, sed
facias nobis secundum venialia peccata; O Lord deal not with us after our sins,
that is, deal not with us after our mortal sins, but deal with us after our
venial sins: Neque secundum iniquitates nostras retribuas nobis, 1. non in
inferno, sed in Purgatorio; Neither reward us after our iniquites, That is,
reward us not after our iniquities in Hell, by eternal torments; but reward as
after our iniquities in Purgatory, by temporal punishment: And if he think
these too direful deprecations for his Hope, let him think those other too
direful interpretations for his Faith, which would make repentance so take away
his mortal, as to leave behind his venial sins or would so take out Hell, as to
le^ in Purgatory for his bounden satisfaction.

For our parts, we will do Gods Wo^ and Gods Church more right, then to fi^
such Doctrines upon his Word, or such Prayers upon his Church: And since the
thoughts of our hearts are repute^ among our venial sins, we will say, Tha^
both God and his Church have taught u^ how to get those thoughts purged from
our souls whiles we live, and not expect^ their purgation after our death, even
by heartily praying in this manner, Cleans^ the thoughts of our hearts by the
inspiratio^ of thy holy Spirit, (not by the operation of an imaginary or unholy
fire, which if it come not from Hell, is but imaginary; if it come from Hell,
is but unholy) that w^ may perfectly love thee, and worthily magn^fie thy holy
name: This we can pray in faith; for our heavenly Father will give his holy
Spirit to them that ask him, Luke 11. 13. And that holy Spirit will purify our
heart by faith, Acts 15. 8, 9. (...), Fide purgans corda eorum Purging their
hearts by Faith; This is a^ the Purging of sin mentioned in the Scriptures,
even a Purgatory by Faith, not by Fire: And this is all the soul needs; for if
we may by virtue of this Purging Spirit, or Purifying Faith, either in our life
or at our death, perfectly love God, we may doubtless after our death presently
enjoy him; since then as our faith is to be turned into Vision, and our hope
into Comprehension, so our Charity is to be turned into Fruition; our love of
Christ into the enjoyment of him, and we cannot enjoy him where he is not, but
where he is, that is, not in a place far from Heaven, (if at least it be a
place at all) but in Heaven, sitting at the right hand of God, making
intercession for us.

17. And we had rather trust to his intercession to keep us from Purgatory,
then to others intercessions to deliver us from it: For we are sure their
intercessions are nothing worth but by virtue of his intercession; and we are
not sure that he does intercede for souls in Purgatory, for we cannot believe
that he does pray to God, that a fire (we know not whence) should purge those
souls, which himself that came down from heaven could not purge; For whatsoever
fond Christians may fancy, yet sure Christ himself will not so undervalue his
own most precious blood, and his own most holy Spirit, as to pray that fire may
cleanse those souls which his Spirit and blood have not cleansed: And were it
possible that such prayers could be made for souls in Purgatory, as Christ
would please to intercede withal, yet since it cannot be known how long it is
fit for souls to be in Purgatory, no living man can use such prayers in faith
of Christ's intercession to go along with him to the throne of Grace; But as he
may pray for them without Christ's intercession, if they be there, so he must
pray for them without it, when they shall be gone from thence: For God has not
let us men on earth know the time of their deliverance, no more then he has
taught us the belief of their captivity: And now by this time I hope you
understand what is my aim in making this answer, though you say you did not in
making that objection; and will not persuade men hereafter to go to Purgatory,
that you may pray for them, when it is so undeniable a Truth, that if they be
there, they can have no benefit by your Prayers.

CAP. IV. Of the second Commandment, and against Images.
1. PApists not to be called Catholics, but false Catholics, says their own
Cassander. 2. Confession and Absolution in the Church of Rome, both faulty. 3.
The Church of England not defective in the practice of Penance, neither for
Confession, nor for Contrition. 4. The Church of Rome defective in her
Confessional Interrogatories, and consequently in her Penance, for the sins
against the second Commandment. 5. No Catholic Divinity either in making the
second no Commandment, or in making no sin of Ignorance against it; for All the
Decalogue is as necessary to salvation, as all the Creed. 6. An error in fact
against a Commandment in the Decalogue, infers an error in faith against its
corresponding Article in the Creed. 7. Saint Augustine made bold with the place
and order, but not with the power or substance of the second Commandment; He
writ much against Images, especially those of the blessed Trinity, which you
now maintain and worship to the great danger of making the scoffers of this age
Antitrinitarians, as by denying or concealing the second Commandment, you have
made them Antinomians. 8. All Catholic Divines after Saint Augustine have not
reckoned the first and second Commandments but as One, (indeed very few or
none at all, till Peter Lombard) and might not so reckon them, because it is
against essential and accidential Catholicism. 9. Good Churchmen did neither
join the first and second Commandments together, as did the School, nor divide
the Tenth into two Commandments; the absurdities of that division. 10. It Is
easy for Christians well instructed in the first, to sin out of ignorance
against the second Commandment. 11. Christ is not to be worshipped by A
Picture, because he is the true God. 12. The Religious worshipping of Saints
and Angels, gross Idolatry: For all the elicite Acts of Religion belong only to
God, who alone is the object of the first, as Neighbor is the object of the
second Table: And it is against the order of Justice to confound the offices of
God and Neighbor, and consequentl^ the greatest breach of Christian Communion,
which is founded upon Justice. 13. The Honor of Religion due by the first
Table, is unproportionable to any creature, and cannot be given to any but
against true Faith, Hope and Charity, and must be the cause of eternal
Dissension and Division in Christ's Church. 14. Religion orders a man only to
God; and that superstition which takes in Saints and Angels is for Babel not
for Jerusalem, because it confounds both the work and the Rule of Religion,
and is accordingly threatened and punished with confusion. 15. Religious
worshipping the Pictures of Saints and Angels is so gross Idolatry, that you
dare not let the people know the Commandment which forbids it. 16. Images long
kept out of the Churches of Christians. Epiphanius his pulling down a veil with
an Image at Anablatha, unjustly (if not unadvisedly) rejected by Bellarmine as
a false story. 17. Images kept out of the Religion of Christians, after they
were admitted into their Churches: The second Council of Nice opposed and
confuted by the Latins, not acknowledged for a General Council by the Greeks,
but most of all opposed and confuted by its own egregious falsities, and
falsifications discovered from its own Acts, and affirmed by the testimony of
Baronius. 18. Interrogatories concerning Image Worship to be put into the
Confessionals of the Romish Priests, rather then of the people, for that of the
two, they are the greater idolators.

The fourth Exception.
PAr. 2. chap. 3. sect. 2. page 193. speaking of us Catholics, you say, The
second Commandment is not of so great repute with them as to have any
Interrogatory concerning it. By the second Commandment nothing possible can be
forbidden, but only external Idolatry, as internal is forbidden in the first:
Which moved Saint Augustine quest. 71. in Exodum, and all Catholic Divines
after, to reckon these two but as one. Now in those negative words of the
first, Thou shall not have strange gods before me, is necessarily and
positively included this affirmative, Thou shall have me only for thy true God;
Hence it follows, that it is impossible for Christians, (whatever the Jews did)
well instructed in the first, to offend through ignorance against the second:
What Interrogatories then are needful concerning it? But I know you hint at our
Pictures and Images of our blessed Savior, and his holy Saints. But it must
first be proved that Jesus Christ is a false God, before the application of our
Divine Worship, through his Pictures, unto him, can be convinced of Idolatry:
And the same I say proportionably, though in an infinitely inferior degree, of
our Religious worship, through the Pictures of his glorious Servants, Saints
and Angels.

The Answer.
1. I Spoke not of you Catholics, but if I spoke of you, it was of you
Papists, who by your own Cassander are not to be called Catholics, but false
Catholics: Sunt quidam qui Pontificem Romanum, tantum non Deum faciunt,
ejusque autoritatem non modo supra totam Ecclesiam, sed supra ipsam Scripturam
divinam efferunt: Hos non video quo minus Pseudocatholicos and Papistas
appellare possis: (Cassander de officio pii viri:) There are some who make the
Pope almost a God, and extol his authority not only above the whole Church,
but also above the holy Scripture: These are to be called Papists and
Pseudocatholicks, that is to say, false Catholics: Wherefore in the judgment
of your own Cassander, if you will needs be Papists, you cannot be Catholics.

2. But in truth my intent was not so much to speak in condemnation of you
Papists, as in justification of us Protestants; not so much in condemnation of
your Church, as in justification of our own: But since you have taken it for a
condemnation of your Church, pray consider whether you may not take these
particulars for the parts of that condemnation.

First that in your General confession, Confitior Deo omnipotenti, and B.
Mariae semper Virgini, etc. You suppose the blessed Virgin, and the holy
Apostles Saint Peter and Saint Paul, and all the Saints departed, equally
present at your Confession with God to hear you, if not equally powerful or
merciful with him to forgive you; whereas we who are taught only to say,
Omnipotens and clementissime Pater, Almighty and most merciful Father, in our
general Confession, cannot be under the suspicion, much less under the danger
of communicating to the creature either the presence, or power, or mercy of the
Creator.

Secondly, That in your particular and private confession, you clog men's
consciences with an absolute necessity of confessing every mortal sin, though
it be but only in thought: For so says your Laterane Council under Innocent
the third, (cap. 21.) Omnia sua peccata fideliter confiteatur, Let him
faithfully confess all his sins: And though that of Trent afterward seem to
mitigate the matter (sess. 14. c. 5.) saying, Nihil aliud exigit Ecclesia a
Poenitentibus quam ut confiteantur omnia peccata mortalia, quae post diligentem
sui excussionem memoriae occurrent; Yet Cardinal Bellarmine, whom his fellow
Jesuits will certainly follow (and they are now your chiefest confessors)
says plainly, after a full debate of the cause, Colligimus hinc necessarium
esse confiteri omnia peccata mortalia, etiamsi sola cogitatione commissa sint
(lib. 3. de Poenit. cap. 7. ex his) so that it is to little purpose for your
Council to say that it is necessary for the Penitent to confess all the mortal
sins he can remember, whiles your Champion, and after him your Confessors, say,
it is necessary for him to confess all the mortal sins he has committed, and
spare him not so much as a thought, which may easily be a mortal sin, and yet
is as easily forgotten as committed; whence it was that your own Cassander
called your auricular confession Carnifieinam conscientiarum (in consult. Art.
11.) the wrack of consciences, to torment not to ease them; For who can tell
how often he offends! O cleanse thou me from my secret faults, said the man
after Gods own heart, Psalm 19. If none can tell how often he offends in word
or deed, much less in thought, who is able to confess all his offenses? yet you
say, He must confess all, or he can receive pardon of none: And therefore as
you leave the horror of that question upon the conscience, Who can tell how
often he offends? So you take away the comfort of that prayer from it, O
cleanse thou me from my secret faults.

Thirdly, That in your absolutions you remit the punishments of Purgatory, for
all the sins committed against God and man: Remitto tibi omnes poenas
Purgatorii propter culpas and offensiones quas contra Deum and proximum tuum
commisisti: This was the form of that Absolution which Dr. Harding brought over
from Rome to bestow amongst those of his party in this Nation, who would join
with him in his dis-allegiance against Queen Elizabeth; I meddle not with its
vanity, in absolving from Punishments which are not in being, or if they were,
cannot come under the Churches absolution. I meddle only with its Impiety, that
it turns the gift of God into the instrument of Ungodliness: For no credulous
Papist that believes the torments of Purgatory, can stick to do any Villainy, if
he may be thus absolved for doing it: And it is to be seared that some of your
party still heighten their absolutions according to their designs, which is
little less then to make the power of God subservient to the malice of the
Devil; and to fill the hearts of men with impiety that they may commit sin, and
with impenitency when they have committed it.

3. This and much more might have been said by way of condemning your Church;
but I desired only to acquit our own, and to show that if we would our selves,
we might all be sincere and true Penitents, because our Church was not really
but only seemingly defective in the practice of Penance; For though she
wracked no man's conscience, yet she so far instructed all, that not the meanest
of her Communicants who were not Hypocrites, could be under the danger, and
much less under the guilt of Impenitency. And I had reason to satisfy my self
and others in this point; for it is evident by Saint John Baptists first
Sermon, Mat. 3. 8, 9. [Bring forth therefore fruits meet for repentance, and
think not to say within your selves, we have Abraham to our Father:] That it is
in vain for any man to boast he has Abraham for his Father, or as we
Christians use to speak, He has the Church of Christ for his Mother, who is
not a true Penitent: Nay it is in vain for any Church to boast of her being the
daughter of Abraham, or the Spouse of Christ, if she follow not his example who
first Preached Christ, calling upon all that are of her Baptism, and are
associated in her Communion, To bring forth fruits meet for Repentance.

And upon this ground did Lactantius determine so positively, That the true
Church of Christ was to be known only by the practice of Penance; Lib. 4. de
vera sap. cap. 30. Sed tamen quia singuli quique caetus Haereticorum, se
potissimum Christianos, and suam esse Catholicam Ecclesiam putant, sciendum est
illam esse veram, in qua est Confessio and Poenitentia, quae peccata and
vulnera quibus subjecta est imbecillitas carnis, salubriter curat; But because
the several Congregations of Heretics think themselves the best Christians,
and each his own Church to be the Catholic Church, we must know That is the
true Catholic Church, in which there is Confession and Penance, to take care
for the healing of those sins and wounds which the infirmities of the flesh
bring upon us: He says the Catholic Church is to be known by an Healing
Confession and an Healing Penance; the same in effect which Saint John Baptist
had said before him; I knowing that those words, Confession and Penance, made
more noise in your Church then in ours, was willing to examine, whether we had
not the same virtue of them amongst us, to heal us, as was amongst you, to heal
you, because we had not the same noise of them; And I found we had; For besides
the greater censure of Excommunication in the power of the Bishops, and the
lesser censure of abstention in the power of all Parochial Priests, enabling
and requiring them to deny the Communion to scandalous sinners, till they had
testified their repentance for their sins, I found that every one of us was put
under a necessity of censuring and condemning himself, which was the readiest
way to bring us all to an ingenuous confession of our sins, and to a serious
contrition for them: For being bound in our daily public prayers to hear the
Ten Commandments from the mouth of the Priest as from the mouth of God,
kneeling upon our knees, and to say at the end of every Commandment, Lord have
mercy upon us; We could not justly be charged for want of an Healing
Confession, (to let pass that at the beginning of our prayers) because no sin
but was against some one of Gods Commandments; and we asking mercy for our
transgression of every one, did in effect confess our transgressing it: And
being also bound to say, Incline our hearts to keep this Law, we could not
justly be charged for want of an healing Penance, because that wholly consisted
in the contrition and conversion of the Heart: That Penance most healing the
soul, which had most broken the heart; A broken and a contrite heart, O God
shall thou not despise; For this Contrition as it is true Penance, so it is
sufficient for wiping away of all sin from the soul; your own Cardinal not only
asserting but also assuring this for true doctrine, (Bellar. li. 2. de de
Poenit. cap. 15.) Utrum omnia peccata per veram contritionem sive Poenitentiam
deleantur? Resp. Illud autem affirmamus, non ut probabile sed plane ut certum
and apud Catholicos exploratum, nullam esse peccatorum multitudinem vel
gravitatem, quae per veram poenitentiam non expietur; nam Ezech. 18. and 33.
Deus saepius clamat Nolo mortem Peccatoris, and sine ulla exceptione veniam
pollicetur omnium iniquitatum, si impium serio paenituerit vitae praeteritae
cum emendationis proposito; Whether all sins are blotted out by true Contrition
or Penance? I answer, we affirm this not only as probable, but also as certain
and unquestionable amongst Catholics, That there is no multitude or magnitud:
of sins which is not expiated by true Penance; For God himself, Ezech. 18. and
33. often says (nay swears) I will not the ^eath of a sinner, and promises
forgiveness without exception, of all iniquities whatsoever, if the wicked
earnestly repent of his sinful life past, and truly purpose amendment for the
time to come; Here you see he takes true Contrition and Penance for one and the
same, and says, That is true Contrition, when the wicked earnestly repents of
what is past, and really purposes amendment for what is to come; We have this
earnest Repentance professed and practiced in our Church; for we say, Lord have
mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this Law; And we have also this
real purpose of amendment; for after our repenting we say, And write all these
thy Laws in our hearts we beseech thee; So that having this true Contrition, it
cannot be denied but we have also true Penance amongst us, that is, such a
Penance as does expiate our sins, though never so many and great, heal our
wounds, and save our soul: If such an Healing Penance as this, may not be had
without an Healing Confession, it is plain we have also an Healing Confession
amongst us, because we have this Healing Penance; If it may, it is as plain we
need no other Confession, then that we have: I desire not to implead your
Church concerning the exercise of Penance, for I see our own wishes it might be
restored: But I crave leave to say, That our Church which requires us to lay
open our consciences daily before the searcher of hearts, does not permit us to
conceal any one sin in our confession, nor retain and keep back any one sin
from our Penance, but bids us follow the example of David, saying, Try me O
God, and seek the ground of my heart, prove me and examine my thoughts, look
well if there be any way of wickedness in me, and lead me in the way
everlasting, Psalm 139. You cannot say, He concealed any one sin in his
Confession, though he had not the Priests Interrogatories; for he desires God
to examine and to interrogate him; Interoga me, says your Latin; Nor can you
say he retained or kept back any one sin from his Penance, though he had not
the Priest for his Penitentiary; for he had God instead of him; Mark well if
there be any way of wickedness in me, and lead me (from that perishing way)
into the way everlasting.

4. I heartily wish I could say the same of your Church, which requires the
people to say open their consciences before the Priest, That she did not permit
the people to conceal any one sin in their Confession, nor retain and keep back
any one sin from their Penance: For I am so far from envying for your sakes who
alone would be thought to sit in Moses his Chair, that as he wished all the
Lords people were Prophets, so I heartily wish all the Lords people among you
were Penitents; for then we should have less perplexity and more piety and
peace on both sides then now we have, either within us or without us. But as
there is great reason to fear that a late faction among us by putting down the
Ten Commandments as they were repeated with our Confession and Penance, has
not only suppressed the practice, but also banished the very thought of
Repentance from some men, no less then the desire of Innocence from themselves:
so there is great reason to believe, that a late faction among you, by putting
no interrogatory upon the second Commandment, and putting all other sins into
interrogatories, has not only suppressed the practice, but also banished the
very thought of repentance both in themselves and others, as to all the sins
that are generally committed amongst you, against the rule of that
Commandment: And surely there may be sins not only of Ignorance, but also of
Infirmity and of Presumption committed against the second Commandment, as well
as against any of the other, of which sins there should be a Confession, and
for which sins there should be a Penance, as well as of and for the sins
against any of the other Commandments: For the second Commandment being as
moral as the rest, is as capable of being transgressed as the rest; and why
then should your Interrogatories upon the seventh Commandment (in true
account, though the sixth in yours,) be so many and gross, as almost to lead
even your very Priests into Temptation, and yet so few or none at all, upon the
second, as not to lead your people out of it? Si cognovit faeminam in vase
naturali vel extra vas, is such a question as may justly come under an
interdict; for God plainly forbids all such ribauldry which leads men into sin,
Ephesians. 5. 3. Let it not once be naemed among you as becomes Saints; And Colos.
3. 8. (...) filthy communication is to be put out of the mouth, not taken into
it, for fear it should pass from the mouth into the heart; But si adoravit
imaginem, if he has falen down and worshipped an image, is such a question as
ought not to be omitted in your Penitential Interrogatories, because God has
forbidden such a worship, and has commanded such a worshipper to repent, and
the goodness of God leading him to repentance, (Romans 2. 4.) it is the
wickedness of man to keep him from it: And truly the practice of your Church
does not lead such a sinner to repentance, but rather does confirm him in his
impenitency: For seeing so many interrogatories upon all the other
Commandments, not only for Commissions in thought, word, and deed, but also
for Omissions, and seeing none at all upon the second Commandment, he is
thereby confirmed that there can be no sin against that Commandment, and so no
repentance needful concerning it: By which means he is in danger not to repent
truly of any sin; This general Axiom, He that offends in one point is guilty
of all, being as undenyably true concerning each point of repentance, as
concerning each point of obedience; for by the witting and willing neglect of
repentance no less then of obedience in any one particular, Gods authority is
equally contemned, and Christian Charity is equally violated; And though I
doubt not but God graciously accepts of your Peoples unfeigned repentance,
because being cordial for the sins they know, it is effectual for the sins they
know not; yet sure your Priests do not discharge their duties so conscionably
as they ought, who keep the people from knowing their sins against the second
Commandment; for by that means they do keep some from being true Penitents,
and do not take a right course to make any one a true Penitent. Do you think
God will forget this his own Commandment in his last sentence, because you are
now willing to forget it in your examinations? If not, why should you thus
betray the souls committed to your charge, not teaching them to judge
themselves, that they may not be condemneded of the Lord? For even your method
of Confession Printed at Paris, 1556. which pretends fully to show all sins and
their remedies, (in qua peccata and eorum remedia plenissime continentur) yet
quite leaves out the second Commandment; for thus it sums up the Precepts of
the Decalogue, Unum creed Deum, Believe in one God, for the first; Ne jures
vana per ipsum, Take not his name in vain, for the second Commandment, and
more at large so sets them down in the Titles of the two ensuing Chapters, that
we cannot think the omission of the second Commandment the fault of your
Poetry, but of your Divinity; So you see it was not out of any humor of
quarrelsomness, but merely out of zeal to godliness, that I hinted the defect
of your Confessional Interrogatories.

5. But it seems by you, It is not only the practice, but also the Doctrine of
your Church, That there needs no repentance for any sin against the second
Commandment, and you think to justify this doctrine, first by making no
second Commandment, and then by making no sin against it: First by making no
second Commandment; For you say, Saint Augustine and all Catholic Divines
after, reckon these two but as one. Secondly by making no sin against the
second Commandment, for you say, It is impossible for Christians well
instructed in the first, to offend through ignorance against the second. I
answer first in general, That there is no Catholic Divinity, either in the
one, or in the other; either in making the second no Commandment, or in making
no sin through ignorance against it: For the Ten Commandments of the Decalogue
are no^ess fundamentals in regard of our Charity, then the twelve Articles of
the Apostles Creed are fundamentals in regard of our Faith; and it is as
Catholic to abolish or confound an Article, as to abolish or confound a
Commandment; and you may as well say, there may be no error of ignorance
against one of the Articles, as that there may be no sin of ignorance against
one of the Commandments: For the Decalogue is Symbolum agendorum, as the Creed
is Symbolum credendorum; the one is a short summarie of Duties to be practiced,
as the other of Truths to be believed; and all the Decalogue is as necessary to
salvation as all the Creed; for as he that dis-believes any one Article is in
the state of damnation, so he that disobeyes any one Command; And as God
requires us to know and believe every particular Article, at least in the
purpose and preparation of our souls, that we may be saved; so also to know and
obey every particular Command, dispencing no more with our dis-obedience, then
with our dis-belief; and exacting as much our knowledge of, and obedience to
his Commands, as our knowledge and our belief of his Promises; both Faith and
Obedience must be alike, as to the perfection of parts, though neither is or
can be as to the perfection of degrees: As our faith is not a true faith able
to save, us unless in our desire we perfectly believe all that God has
revealed to us; so our charity is not a true charity able to save us, unless in
our desires we perfectly fulfill all that God has commanded us: For God
accepting through Christ the will for the deed both in our believing, and in
our obeying, does so accept us in his Son, ^s not to deny himself. He takes
that for a true faith which says, Lord, I believe, help thou my unbelief;
because it desires to believe whatever he has proposed for the object of
faith; He takes that for a true Charity which says, We are not able of
our-selves, as of our-selves, to think a good thought, because it desires to
perform whatever he has proposed as the object of our obedience; There is his
gracious accepting us in his Son: But he takes not that for a true faith which
says concerning the least title of his revealed Truth, I will not believe; for
that is to question his being the first Truth; nor that for a true Charity
which says concerning the least title of his imposed Commands, I will not
obey; for that is to question his being the last or chiefest good; There is his
not denying himself: God accepts us in his Son by taking the will for the deed,
both in our Faith and in our Obedience; but he denies not himself by allowing
us to believe or obey according to our own wills; for what we want of actual
conformity to his will in our righteousness, we are bound to make up by a
potential conformity to his will in our repentance; which is a plain
demonstration that God accepts not of half-Christians, either in believing or
in obeying, but will have us put on All Christ, before he will accept us in
Christ, according to the Apostles exhortation, Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ,
Romans 13. 14. that is, Put him on no less as your Lord to be ruled and governed
by his commands, then as your Jesus to be revived by the purchase and promise,
or to be anointed with the joy and gladness of his salvation; For a mere
speculative knowledge of the divine promises can bring no man to Christ,
without a practical knowledge and love of the Divine Commands; and therefore
the doctrine of the moral Law is as necessary to us Christians, both to be
known and to be practiced, as it was to the Jews; and consequently whatsoever
is propounded in the Decalogue, is so really fundamental in joining us to
Christ the foundation, that as it must be obeyed to keep us from
refractoriness, which separates the will, so it must be taught to keep us from
ignorance and from error, which separates the understanding from the blessed
Redeemer and lover of our souls. For as the Creed does teach us to know God in
Christ, as he will be known; so the Decalogue does teach us to worship God in
Christ, as he will be worshipped; The same Messiah who came to teach us all
things, has not only said, This is life eternal, that they might know thee the
only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, John 17. 3. but also, I
know that his commandment is life everlasting, John 12. 50. As his Creed is
life eternal which teaches us to know God in Christ, so his commandment is
life eternal which teaches us to love and obey God in Christ; I know that his
commandment is life everlasting. If Christ know it, the Christian may not
doubt it, much less deny it: And therefore he that denies or eludes any
Commandment in the Decalogue, is in as great danger of damnation, as he that
denies or eludes any Article of the Creed; For a false tenent in matters of
obedience against any one Commandment, is an heresy in practicks and
destroys salvation, if it be unrepented, even as a false tenent in matters of
Faith against any one Article of the Creed, is an heresy in speculatives: So
says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not deceived; neither fornicators, nor
idolators, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with
mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor
extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God: As if the Apostle had said, It
is no less damnable to err in the principles of practice, then in those of
speculation; therefore he supposes these also may be Heretics, saying unto
them, Be not deceived; For corruption of judgment in duties of life may make
an Heretic, as much as in Articles of Faith, especially if it be in any
principle or ground of the Law; as he which thinks he may be a Rebel or an
Idolator, and yet inherit the Kingdom of God, is as much deceived, as he which
denies the Communion of Saints, and yet thinks to be saved: For he does impinge
in as fundamental a point, and consequently incurrs a most pernicious and
damnable heresy: For a Practical truth declared in any Commandment, is a
fundamental Truth, and challenges our knowledge and belief no less then a
speculative truth declared in an Article of faith.

6. And therefore Suarez does justily and judiciously except against those who
laboring to maintain the Infallibility of your Church, do notwithstanding
confess that she may err in doctrina morum, but not in doctrina fidei, in
doctrine of life, but not in doctrine of belief; in matter of fact, but not in
matter of faith (Disp. de fide, sec. 7. and 8.) because (says he) by and from
any impious and ungodly decision or determination in duties of life, must needs
follow an error in Faith: And so Bellarmine himself professes (lib. 4. de
Pont. c. 5.) Si Papa erraret praecipiendo vitia and prohibendo virtutes,
teneretur Ecclesia credere vitia esse bona, and virtutes esse malas, and
proinde teneretur errare; If the Pope should err so grossly as to command us to
do evil, and to eschew that which is good, the Church would be bound to believe
that Vices were lawful, and Virtues unlawful, and so consequently would be
bound to be in error. We may yet further improve this tenent, and say, That no
man can maintain what is false in matter of fact, but he must also maintain
what is false in matter of faith, according to the very same particular in the
Creed, which corresponds to that of the Decalogue, wherein he is erroneous;
whether the falsity concern his God, or his neighbor, or himself; For as all
practicks, so all speculatives are reducible to these three heads, Our God, our
neighbor and our selves: As for example, He that explicitly in fact maintains
that fornication is lawful, or any sin that is against his own body, does
implicitly in faith deny his own resurrection; and as in fact, so also in faith
does sin against himself: He that maintains any point of faction and
disobedience against the fifth Commandment, or any thing of injustice against
the rest, does not only in fact explicitly sin against the Decalogue, but also
in faith implicitly sin against the Creed, in that part of it which concerns
his neighbor, that is, The Catholic Church and the Communion of Saints.
Lastly, He that maintains any false external worship, being rather willing to
expunge or confound the second Commandment, then to obey it, sins not only in
fact but also in faith against his God, and does in effect expunge that Article
out of his Creed, which immediately concerns the Deity, I believe in God: So
you see there is no Catholic Divinity in this doctrine, which either makes the
second no Commandment, or makes no sin against it: as it is no Catholic
Divinity which supposes our belief in God to be no Article of Faith, or that
there may be in Christians no error or heresy against that Article: For your
seeming qualification in these words, [through ignorance] alters not the case,
because the second Commandment has as great an obligation, and as distinct a
morality as the first, and therefore may be transgressed as many ways as the
first, that is to say, as well by ignorance as by negligence, infirmity, or
presumption; and I suppose you cannot think it for the credit of your
Confessional Interrogatories, so to keep men from ignorances, as to let them
continue in presumptions: Therefore either say, there may be no sin at all
against the second Commandment, or do not say, What Interr^gatories are
needful concerning it? For if your Interrogatories do not discover the greater
sins, they must discover their own weakness, if not your deceitfulness: and
that's my answer in general.

7. Secondly, I answer in particular, That Saint Augustine did in the division
of the Commandments, reckon the first and second but as One; not that he
thought the second comprised in the first (as you seem to intimate) but that
from a Trinity of precepts concerning our duty toward God, we might readily
acknowledge a Trinity of persons in the Unity of the Godhead; For he neither
expunged the second Commandment out of the practical principles of his
Religion, nor confounded it with the first, but allowed it to prohibit an
external Idolatry in worshipping the Godhead by any Image or representation:
For so says he, (lib. de fide and Symb. cap. 7.) Simulachrum Dei nefas est
Christiano in templo collocare; It is a great sin for a Christian to set up any
Image of God in the Church; which is the very second Commandment changed from
a legal prohibition, into a doctrinal conclusion: Again, (Epist. 119.) In primo
praecepto prohibetur coli aliqua in figmentis hominum Dei similitudo, non quia
non habet imaginem Deus, sed quia nulla imago ejus coli debet, nisi illa quae
ho^ est quod ipse; nec ipsa pro illo, sed cum illo; In the first Commandment,
(sc. the second being joined with it, according to his new method) we are
forbidden to worship any Image of God, according to the false inventions of
men, not that God has not an Image, but because no Image of his ought to be
worshipped, but only that one substantial Image of him, his begotten Son, who
is the same with himself, and to be worshipped as himself: And in his 222.
Epistle, Si Trinitas sic est invisibilis, ut nec mente videatur, multo minus de
illa hujusmodi opinionem habere debemus, ut eam rebus corporalibus, vel
corporalium rerum imaginibus similem esse credamus: If the Trinity be so
invisible, as that it is also incomprehensible, we ought not to have so slight
an opinion concerning it, as if it were like any corporeal thing, or to think
it may be represented by any corporeal images. What could Saint Augustine say
more for the second Commandment, and against you, who are now come to
represent and worship God the Father under the image of an Old man, God the Son
under the image of a Lamb, and God the holy Ghost under the image of a Dove? If
I wrong you in this, you may thank your own Cajetane, who says expressly,
Ecclesiae Romanae usus admittit hasce Trinitatis imagines, eaque pinguntur non
solum ut ostendantur, sed ut adorentur: (Cajet. in 3. Aqu. qu. 25. art. 3.) The
custom of the Roman Church admits these images of the Trinity, and they are
painted not only that they may be showed, but also that they may be worshipped:
See the vast difference between Saint Augustines and your doctrine concerning
the second Commandment; He allows it to prohibit both the making and the
worshipping any Image of God, either in Trinity or in Unity; you
notwithstanding that prohibition, say it is lawful not only to make, but also
to worship the images of the Trinity: Doubtless were Saint Augustine now alive,
he would again part the second Commandment and divide it from the first,
merely out of hatred to this your most abominable idolatry: For rather then
suffer the holy and undivided Trinity to be thus sinfully either represented or
worshipped expressly against this second Commandment, He would certainly
restore it to its own place, that it might no longer lie hid under the first,
but recover its own power, as being much more zealous of Gods glory then of his
own, and therefore such a Divine; as had much rather lose his argument of
proving the Trinity from the number of three Commandments in the first Table,
then let you lose your Religion by an idolatrous representation and worship of
that Trinity expressly against the letter and the end of the second
Commandment: Or if you think Saint Augustine a greater lover of his own
imagination, then of your reformation, which were to make him a bad Divine; yet
you must believe him a greater lover of Gods glory, then of his own
imagination; for else you cannot allow him to be a good Christian: Therefore
that you may not un-Saint him, pray unsinner your selves, and allow the second
Commandment to have its own force and virtue, wherever you find it, or plead
not Saint Augustine for your precedent; because he did only make bold with the
place and order, but not with the prohibition, or power, or substance of that
Commandment: And consider seriously, whether your being Antinomians in this
one Commandment, has not taught others to be Antinomians in all the rest; and
whether your allowing such a gross representation and worship of the most holy,
most blessed and most glorious Trinity, has not much rebated the awful
reverence and serious belief of the holiness, and blessedness, and glory that
is in those three persons of the Godhead, and consequently be not a ready way
to make the scoffers that are come in these last days, to turn
Antitrinitarians.

8. But you say, [All Catholic Divines after Saint Augustine have reckoned
these two Commandments but as one.] I take the boldness to say, They have not
done so; Nay more, I take the courage to say, They may not do so. First I say,
They have not done so; For, 1. Sedulius a Scottish Priest who lived in 430. (ten
years after Saint Augustine) and writ a Comment upon all Saint Paul's Epistles
out of Origene, Saint Ambrose, Saint Hierom and Saint Augustine (as says your
Bellarmine) in his explanation of these words, Ephesians. 6. 2. Honor thy Father and
Mother, which is the first Commandment with promise, says positively out of
Saint Hierom, There was a promise before in the second Commandment; In secundo
mandato repromissionem esse sociatam; Ait enim non facies tibi Idola: He would
not forsake the old division of the Decalogue, received by the Fathers, to
follow Saint Augustines new division. 2. Eucherius Bishop of Lions in France,
in the year 440. in his questions upon the Epistle to the Ephesians, says
concerning the fifth Commandment, Alii vero hoc mandatum, non quarto sed
quinto loco, quod and nos probamus, esse confirmant; Others reckon that not as
the fourth, but as the fifth Commandment, of whom we approve; Tacitly
reproving Saint Augustines new division of the Decalogue, but openly approving
those who followed the other division before it. 3. Primasius Bishop of Utica
in Africa in the year 545. writ a Comment upon all Saint Paul's Epistles, (says
Bellarm.) and upon these words, Ephesians. 6. 2. which is the first Commandment with
promise, gives us this exposition, sc. in secunda tabula quae ad humanitatem
pertinentia praecepta sex numero continebat; Prima enim tabula proprie Divina
officia exigebat; The fifth Commandment was the first with promise, sc. in the
second t^ble, which contains the six precepts, expressing man's duty toward his
neighbor; as for the first table, that only declares man's duty toward his
God: See here is an Africane Bishops testimony to prove that Saint Augustines
new division of the Decalogue, was not yet received in his own Church; for the
Africanes above an hundred years after he had made that division, did still
reckon but six Commandments in the second Table; whereas if they had made but
one of the two first, they must have made two of the last, or else have come
short in the number of Ten Commandments. 4. Procopius Gazaeus a Catholic
Author of the Greek Church, and commended by Photius, who writ about the year
560. says Bellarmine, in his Comment upon Exodus says thus, [Non erunt tibi
Dii praeter me, etc.] Hoc primum est praeceptum, secundo sermocinante de idolis
and imaginibus: ni enim in hunc modum quis leges distinguat, non poterit in
ordinem certum redigere Decalogum; The second Commandment is that which
forbids Idols and Images; for unless we follow this division, we cannot have a
right order of the Commandments. 5. Hesychius Bishop of Jerusalem, who lived
in the time of Saint Gregory, (says Bellarmine) and expounded Saint Hieroms
Latin Text, then generally received in the Church, in his expositions upon
Leviticus, sets down a new division of the Commandments, making Two of the
first, and putting the second in the place of the third, (which Saint Augustine
had made a part of the first) and the third in the place of the fourth, that so
he might leave out the fourth, (which he thought merely ceremonial) and yet
retain the right number of four Commandments in the first Table. Distinguit
tamen quatuor praecepta pertinentia ad Deum, (12ae. qu. 100. art. 4. in c.)
Though he left out the fourth Commandment, yet he would not have less then
four in the first table, and consequently, could not allow seven in the second;
so it is clear that in neither Table he thought himself bound to follow Saint
Augustines division of the Ten Commandments. 6. Jonas Bishop of Orleans in
France, (about eight hundred years after Christ, and full four hundred years
after Saint Augustine) says of Claudius Bishop of Turine, That he took the
second Commandment to forbid the making of all Images, (Quum de omni
similitudine facienda secundum Decalogi praeceptum assumpseris) Which he could
not have said, if the second Commandment had been then joined with the first,
according to Saint Augustines example; though since it has had the ill fortune
to be suppressed by it, or to be forgotten in it. This Centurie produced one
more famous Writer or Commentator upon the whole Bible, in the Latin Church,
namely Rabanus Maurus Bishop of Mentz, an. 835. and he in his Comment upon
Exodus, (lib. 2. cap. 12.) has this Title, Sermo Dei ad populum, Decalogum
Legis proferens, The Sermon of God to the people concerning the Ten words of
the Law; and in the Chapter it self has these words, Primum ergo mandatum est
Non erunt tibi Dii alii praeter me; and post haec sequitur, Non facies tibi
sculptile, neque omnem similitudinem, etc. The first Commandment is this, Thou
shall have no other Gods but me; and after that follows, Thou shall not make to
thy self any graven image, nor the likeness of any thing, etc. which he could
not have said did follow after the first, if he had found it joined with the
first, and reputed, in the judgment of all Catholic Divines, as a part of
that Commandment: But I will now pass to the twelfth Centurie, where I meet
with Rupertus Tuitiensis, who lived about the year 1124. (that is, full seven
hundred years after Saint Augustine) yet shows plainly, That Saint Augustines
division of the Decalogue, was not then received in the Latin Church; For in
his Comment upon Exodus (lib. 3. cap. 31.) he says, that the first
Commandment was, Thou shall have no other Gods but me; the last, Thou shall
not covet; [Primum est, Non habebis Deos alienos coram me; Ultimum, Non
concupisces] whereas if his Church had then followed Saint Augustines division
or account, he must have said, not ultimum, but duo ultima Non concupises, not
the last, but the two last are, Thou shall not covet; For Saint Augustine takes
Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house for one, and Thou shall not covet thy
neighbors wife for another Commandment: But in the first words of the
following Chapter he speaks yet more plainly, whereby he that runs may read, he
that reads must understand, That in the age wherein he lived, neither was the
second Commandment confounded with the first, nor the second Table augmented
in the number of its Commandments: His words at large are these; speaking of
the Commandments in the very beginning of his 32. Chapter, Quorum primum, Non
habebis Deos alienos coram me; Non facies tibi sculptile, sequens; sed ultimum
est, Non concupisces; Quatuor ex his dilectioni Dei, sex dilectioni subserviunt
proximi: Non habebis Deos alienos coram me; Non facies tibi sculptile neque
omnem similitudinem; Non assumes nomen Domini Dei tui in vanum; Memento ut diem
sabbatorum sanctifices; Quatuor ista Dei dilectioni repugnantia prohibendo,
locum eidem dilectioni Dei, sermo Dei parare intendit; The first of the
Commandments is this, Thou shall have no other Gods but me; The next to that
is, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image; and the last of all is,
Thou shall not covet: Four of these set forth our love toward our God, and six
our love toward our neighbor; Thou shall have no other Gods, Thou shall not
make an image, Thou shall not take the name of God in vain, and Remember thou
keep holy the Sabbath day, by forbidding those four things which are repugnant
to the love of God, do intend to prepare amongst us a place for his love: See
here he allows four Commandments to treat of the love of God, and the second
to be one of those four; So he admits not of Saint Augustines conjunction of
the first and second into one; and he allows six Commandments to treat of the
love of our neighbor; so he admits not of Saint Augustines division of the
Tenth Commandment into two: And he was of so great a repute for a true
Catholic Divine, that Tritenhemius says of him in his life, Vir in divinis
Scripturis spiritu sancto per visionem illustrante, doctissimus: He was a man
instructed in the knowledge of the holy Scriptures, by immediate Visions and
Revelations from the Holy Ghost.

Thus I have surveyed the chiefest Catholic Divines till full seven hundred
years together after Saint Augustine, not only of the Greek and Latin Church,
but also of Great Britane, France, Germany, Africa and Hierusa^em, and not one
of them follows Saint Augustines division of the Decalogue; and though the
master of the Sentences about the year, 1145. brought the same in request, and
the Schoolmen after him; yet Aquinas himself (who is most zealous for it) durst
not say it was the division of the Decalogue generally received in the Church
from Saint Augustines days, for it is his positive determination, Quod
praecepta Decalogi diversimode a diversis distinguuntur, (124 qu. 100. art. 4.
in c.) The Commandments of the Decalogue have been severally distinguished by
several men; and he instanceth in Hesychius, whom I named before. Now Sir, if
you consider That the whole Catholic Church did speak by the mouths of these
forenamed Divines for so many Centuries, after Saint Augustine, I hope you
will say This was an Assertion much sooner to be vented then to be verified,
(for indeed never to be verified) That All Catholic Divines after Saint
Augustine, did reckon the first and second but as one Commandment.

Having done my poor endeavor to prove de facto, That all Catholic Divines
after Saint Augustine have not reckoned the first and second Commandments but
as one; I now come to prove it de jure, That they may not; because indeed it is
very Uncatholick so to do, as being against essential Catholicism, that is to
say, The substance of a Divine Truth taught by God himself: and against
Accidental Catholicism, that is to say, the Profession of A Divine Truth
always taught in the Church of God: And if I prove both these, I hope you will
hereafter allow the Commandment an Interrogatory in your Confessions, if not a
distinct place in your Catechisms: First I say, it is against essential
Catholicism, that is, against the substance of a divine truth taught by God
himself; For the Commandments are called by Gods holy Spirit, Ten words, Exodus
34. 28. Scripsit december verba, (...), say the 70. He writ the ten words, whence
has been derived the name (...), which has ever been the usual appellation in
all Christian Churches, to say, The Decalogue or Ten words, for the Ten
Commandments: And Deuteronomy. 4. 13. it is expressly said that God writ these Ten
Commandments upon two Tables of stone; As many words as he writ with his
finger, we must read with our eyes, hear with our ears, and obey with our
hearts; and as many words as he writ in each Table, so many must we read, hear,
and obey in it, neither more nor less, if we will have our Divinity come from
God; or in vain shall we talk of being Catholics with his Church, whiles we
are Schismatics from himself; for the reason why we may not separate from his
Church, is because his Church does not separate from him; Considering then That
God writ these Ten distinct words in Two distinct Tables, it must needs be
uncatholick either to make no distinct word of Gods second word in the first
Table, or to make two distinct words of Gods last word in the second Table: For
most Catholic is that saying of our blessed Savior, Mat. 19. 6. What God has
joined together, let not man put asunder; From whence by the Rule of Conversion
emergeth this other, What God has put asunder, let not man join together; The
first Proposition will not allow us to divide the Tenth Commandment into two,
because God has made it but one; so we must have but six Commandments in the
second Table: The second Proposition will not allow us to make the first and
second Commandments into one, because God has made them two; and so we must
have full four Commandments in the first Table; For neither fewer words then
four were written by Gods own hand in the first, nor more then six in the
second Table; And the Church of God may not be said to have power, may not be
thought to have will, to correct Gods own Handwriting: For the same God who
has given us Ten words in both Tables, has also given us four in the one, and
six in the other: And doubtless he that tells the number of the stars, will
not learn of man how to number his own Commandments: Wherefore if our number
disagree from his, we shall not only have a false piece of Arithmetic in the
numerus numerans, in the number numbering; but we shall also have a false piece
of Divinity in the numerus numeratus, in the number numbered: For we shall call
that First which God calls Second, there is the false Arithmitick; and we shall
make that nothing, which God has made a Commandment; or make that two, which
God has made but one, there is the false Divinity: Therefore as we may not
leave Gods own handwriting to consult with the Church about the number of the
Commandments, whether there be Ten or no; so neither may we leave it to
consult about the number of the Commandments in each Table, whether three or
four in the first; for God has said four; whether six or seven in the second
Table; for God has said six; And what God has made his Determination, the
Church of God may not make her Consultation; It is the doctrine of your own
Casuist, (Reginald in praxi fori Poenit. lib. 13. c. 15.) Ut omnia rerum genera
ad december summa reducuntur, sic omnia praecepta moralia ad december praecipua, quae
Decalogum constituunt, ex quorum etiam distinctione, sicut res ex distinctione
summorum generum inter se distinguuntur: As all things which have a natural
being are reduced to the Ten Predicaments: So all things that have a moral
being are reduced to the Ten Commandments: And as natural entities are
distinguished by the Ten Predicaments, so moral entities are distinguished by
the Ten Commandments. So that the Ten Commandments, are as it were the Ten
Predicaments or general heads in Divinity, to which all moral Duties are to be
reduced, by which they are to be examined, and from which they are to be
Practiced: And therefore as he would show himself no good Logician, who should
expunge or confound any one of the ten Predicaments because that were to
disturb the order of nature; so he would show himself no good Divine, who
should either expunge or confound any one of the Ten Commandments, because
that were to disturb the order of Grace; The one would bring Babel upon our
natural, the other upon our spiritual inheritance; The one would confound us in
regard of earth, the other in regard of heaven; The one would confound us as
men, the other would confound us as Christians, which is infinitely the more
dreadful and the more damnable confusion: Therefore we must needs say and
believe, That there is a much greater necessity of distinct entities in morals,
then in naturals, because there is a much greater necessity that we should
exactly know our Duties, then that we should exactly know our estates or
habilements; That we should know our God, then that we should know the world;
And consequently, any true Christian Church which teaches us in morals, must
much more abhor to confound a ^ommandement, for fear she should perplex us in
our Religion; then the most careful Tutor, that teaches us in naturals,
canabhor to confound a Predicament, for fear he should perplex us in our
learning: For there is no such desperate perplexity as that of Conscience, and
no such damnable confusion as that of Religion; and God has ordained and
commanded his Church to prevent and to redress, not to create or to continue
either such perplexities or such confusions: And a late faction in your Church,
by either expunging or abridging the second Commandment, (for in some
Catechisms it is expunged, in others it is abridged, for fear if it were read
out all at length, it should either stagger the people by the plainness of its
Prohibition, or else awake and frighten them by the terribleness of its
commination) have brought two great absurdities upon the outward Profession of
your Religion, which I may not be ashamed to name, whiles you are not afraid to
practice; First that in this point it is less certain, then was the Religion of
the Jews; for they had no confusion in their principles concerning the outward
worship of God, as you have; and where is confusion, there must be uncertainty.
Secondly that in this respect it is more scandalous and offensive, then was
sometime the Religion of the Heathen; For Numa would not allow any image to be
made of God (says Plutarch in his life) because he was a mind invisible, and
therefore neither to be represented nor worshipped by any image; But you will
needs both represent and worship him by images: Why should any Christians do
that against the Law of God, which some Heathen would not do against the Law of
nature? For if the Gentiles which had not the Law, doing by nature the things
contained in the Law, were a Law unto themselves, and showed the work of the
Law written in their hearts, by abstaining from so gross Idolatry: what can be
said in excuse of those Christians who have the same Law of nature as fully
written in their hearts, and more fully written in the Holy Scriptures, yet
will not do by Grace the things contained in the Law, nor show the work of the
Law written in their hearts and in their Bibles, but will needs be a Law unto
themselves against the Law of God and nature, that they may be and continue
most gross Idolaters? I could wish with all my soul that the question were
impertinently asked, because I fear it cannot be substantially answered; and if
it may stand good without an answer, it will not only be a most harsh question,
but also a most heavy accusation.

Secondly, this reckoning the First and Second but as one Commandment, is also
against accidental Catholicism, that is to say, against the Profession of a
Divine Truth, universally taught in the Church of God by the Jews and by the
Christians, both before and after Saint Augustines days; For the Jews Church,
we have the testimony of Josephus, who lib. 3. Antiq. cap. 4. has these words,
(...): The first Commandment teaches us There is but one God, and that we
must worship him alone; The second commands us not to worship him by any
image.

For the Christian Church, we have generally the Testimony of all the Fathers
before Saint Augustine, and of all the writers after him, till the Schoolmen;
and we have his too, as to the force and virtue of the second Commandment,
though not as to the place and order of it. I will cite but some few.

1. Origene in his 8. homily upon Exodus, speaking of the first and second
Commandments, says, That some would have them both go but for one, but he
altogether dislikes their opinion, and thus confutes it; Quod si ita putetur,
non complebitur december numerus mandatorum, and ubi jam erit Decalogi veritas? If
we reckon so, we shall not have the full number of Ten Commandments, and where
then will be the truth of the Decalogue?

2. Athanasius in bis Synopsis, cap. (...): This Book of Exodus contains the
S^atutes or Judgments, and before them all the Ten Commandments in two
Tables, whereof this was the first, I am the Lord thy God, etc. This the
second, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image.

3. Greg. Naz. in his verses, which have this title, (...), The Ten
Commandments of Moses, sets this for the first Commandment, (...): Thou shall
not know any other God: and this for the second, (...), Thou shall not make any
vain or breathless image; I could moreover add Saint Chrysostom, and
Epiphanius, and others; but this was never at all a doubt, much less a
Controversy in the Greek Church: Therefore I make haste to the Latins, where
I will not insist upon Saint Hierom, because we had his testimony already in
Sedulius, but only Saint Ambrose, who in his Comment upon the sixth of the
Ephesians, says expresty, This is the first Commandem^nt, Thou shall have no
other Gods but me; and this the second, Thou shall not make to thy self any
image or likeness; This is enough to show the doctrine of the Latin Church,
whereof Saint Hierom and Saint Ambrose were accounted the two first and
chiefest Doctors; yet to these I will add Severus Sulpitius, who in the first
Book of his holy History has these words, Nos eam (sc. legem Dei) breviter
perstringemus; Non erunt (inquit) tibi alii Dii praeter me; Non facies tibi
Idolum; Non sumes nomen Dei tui in vanum; Sabbathis nullum opus facies, etc. I
will briefly set down the Law of God, Thou shall have no other Gods but me,
Thou shall not make to thy self an image or idol, Thou shall not take the name
of the Lord thy God in vain, Thou shall do no work on the Sabbath days, etc.
This man undertaking to set down the Decalogue, sets down those four
Commandments distinctly as belonging to the first Table: And though the
Schoolmen in process of time had generally followed Saint Augustine, joining
the first and second Commandments in one, yet the other Divines had not
generally followed the Schoolmen, till of very late years, if we may believe
Polydore Virgil, (an Author that writ in the days of our King Henery the
eight) For in his fifth Book de Invent. rerum, and ninth Chapter, he has these
remarkable words, Si vis ad vitam ingredi, serva mandata, quorum capita haec
sunt, Unum Deum colito; Nullius animalis effigiem colito; Per Dei nomen haud
frustra dejerabis; Festos dies pie and ri^e celebrato; Parents venerare;
Hominem ne occideris; Adulterium fuge; Furtum non feceris: Nihil alienum
concupiveris, nec falsum dix eris testimonium: If thou will enter into life,
keep the Commandments, the Heads whereof are these, Worship one God; Worship
not the image of any creature, (mark he puts these for two several heads of the
Decalogue, and not the one as it were the tail of the other) Swear not vainly
by the name of God; Observe the Festivals piously and righteously; Honor your
parents; Kill no man; Fly adultery; Steal not; Covet nothing that belongs to
another; Bear no false witness; He is so far from dividing the Tenth
Commandment, that he puts the ninth after it, whereby to keep others from
dividing it; for it is palpble himself took Nihil alienum concupiveris, but for
one Commandment: And he says so plainly, That these were the heads of the
Commandments; that nothing could be said more plainly, to show That though the
School did use a liberty in Disputing, yet the Church did not use a liberty in
Dogmatizing against the Ten Commandments, as they had been taught and
delivered by God himself.

9. But that generally all good Churchmen did even at that time in their method
of Preaching (of which he there speaks) part the first and second
Commandments, and did not part the tenth; for he that says, Covet nothing
that belongs to another, sets down but one universal negative concerning all
coveting; And an universal negative may no more be divided into particulars,
then it may be limited; for its division, will at last prove its limitation;
and so an universal will be turned into a particular, and Gods Negative will be
made man's Affirmative; as for example, Thou shall covet nothing of thy
neighbors, may be made, Thou shall covet something of thy neighbors; for the
enumeration of all the prohibited particulars in an universal negative being
impossible, to particularize in some few only as prohibited, is in effect to
leave those which are not particularized or enumerated out of the Prohibition;
and therefore we may not think those particulars which are set down in the
Tenth Commandment, to be set there by way of enumeration, as if they were All,
but only by way of instance or exposition, as being the most notorious; And
consequently one and the same Prohibition, Thou shall not covet, must be
extended to them All alike, and then pass from those particulars till it come
to this universal, Nor any thing that is his; So that this is in truth the
Tenth Commandment, Thou shall not covet any thing that is thy neighbors; for
we cannot make it an universal Negative, unless we suppose it but one universal
Prohibition, concerning all manner of concupiscence, forbidding internally the
first motions and affections thereof, and the consent to either; externally,
the lewd significations or expressions, and much more the completion and custom
of concupiscence; All these are alike forbidden in the Tenth Commandment, by
one and the same universal Prohibition; And if it be but one Prohibition, it
cannot be two Precepts; and if it be two Precepts, it cannot be one
Prohibition, and so it must come from an universal negative, forbidding all
concupiscence to be a particular negative, forbidding some concupiscence, and
consequently licencing that which it has not forbidden.

10. I have hitherto examined your assertion, That all Catholic Divines after
Saint Augustine did reckon the first and second Commandment but as one; I now
come to examine your Divinity built upon it, and first that Position, It is
impossible for Christians (whatever the Jews did) well instructed in the First,
to offend through ignorance against the second Commandment; You might as well
have said, It is impossible for Christians well instructed, to sin through
ignorance; for you allow the instruction of the first to reach to the second,
or you allow no second Commandment; so the instruction and the ignorance both
concern the same thing. I answer, 1. God thought it not impossible; for he has
given the second Commandment no less to Christians then to Jews, since we find
it not only reinforced, but also even repeated in the New Testament, 1 John 5.
21. Little children, keep your selves from Idols; 9. d. If you will keep your
selves Gods children, and in his Communion, you must keep your selves from
idols or images in his external worship: For to use idols or images ((...) in
Greek being translated by your own Vulgar Interpreter, simulacra in Latin) as
a part of the worship of the true God, is to communicate with those who did
worship false Gods, that is, with the Heathen, who worshipped their false Gods,
(or rather Devils) by Idols and Images: The same is Saint Paul's doctrine, 1
Cor. 10. That the Israelites who did eat of the sacrifices, were partakers of
the Altar, v. 18. that is, by eating of the sacrifices, did show their
Communion in the Mosaical rites and ceremonies; from whence he inferrs this
conclusion, That for any man to eat things offered unto Idols, is to
communicate with Idolators in their idolatry, and that is no less then to
forsake the Communion of God, and to have Communion with Devils, v. 20, 21. And
I hope you will say there is little reason and less Religion, for any Divine to
averr, That Christians may not indeed communicate in things offered unto Idols,
but yet they may communicate in the Idols themselves, without being Idolaters;
that is, without breaking Communion with God, or beginning Communion with
Devils: For if they be Idolaters, they must do both; and they may be Idolaters
not only by committing Idolatry, but also by communicating in it: Therefore as
God had before said to the Jews, [You shall make you no Idols nor image to bow
down to it, for I am the Lord, Levit. 26. 1.] So after that he said also to the
Christians, Wherefore my Beloved, flee from Idolatry, 1 Cor. 10. 14. and used
the same reason as before, but much more fully explained, for as he said to the
Jew, I am the Lord; so he said to the Christian, Ye cannot drink the cup of the
Lord and the cup of Devils; ye cannot be partakers of the Lord Table, and of
the table of Devils; as if he had said, Unless you will forsake my Communion
who am your Lord, and unless you will needs communicate with Devils who are
mine enemies, you must abstain from this and all other idolatrous rites and
ceremonies in my worship, which have been used by the Heathen in their worship,
and particularly from Idols, for I will not be worshipped by you as the Devil
was worshipped by them, with Idols or Images; This is the general reason which
God himself gives of the Prohibition, For I the Lord thy God am a jealous God;
and this reason without doubt did not then more concern the Jew, then it does
now concern the Christian; for God is now as jealous of his Honor and Worship,
as he was then, and has as great cause for his jealousy. 2. We ought to
follow God, and think it both possible and easy for Christians well instructed
in the first, to offend through ignorance against the second Commandment: For
the second Commandment has its own peculiar and distinct morality from the
first, not only that it prohibiteth external, when the first prohibiteth
internal Idolatry, (as you acknowledge) but also because the first treats of
the Object, the second of the Manner of our religious worship, and therefore is
as liable to be transgressed through ignorance, as the first; according to
Saint John's rule, (...), Sin is the transgression of the Law; 1 John 3. 4.
Therefore you must deny the (...), or not deny the (...), you must deny the
second Commandment to be a Law, or not deny but you may transgress it as far
as you may transgress any other Law: And consequently unless you will pass your
index expurgatorius upon Gods handwriting as you have upon man's, and come with
your deleatur upon his Commandments, as you have upon their Books, you may not
think to persuade Christians, That it is impossible for them to sin through
ignorance against the second Commandment; For the Text is plain which says to
Christians well instructed in the first Commandment, Neither be ye Idolators
as were some of them, 1 Cor. 10. 7. speaking not at all of internal, but only
of external idolatry; and speaking to no purpose, if the Knowledge of the one
were incons^stent with the Ignorance of the other: But the contrary is here
proved. For the Jews believed in one God, calling him Jehovah according to the
first Commandment, (To morrow is a feast to Jehovah, Exodus 30. 5.) yet are
called Idolators, because they worshipped that God by a molten image, against
the second Commandment; Now if those Jews were ignorant Idolators who said to
an Image, These be thy Gods O Israel, which brought thee up out of the Land of
Egypt; How are not those Christians ignorant Idolators, who say to a piece of
wood, Thou have redeemed us, Thou have reconciled us unto God? Neither
perchance to be called Idolators through ignorance against the first
Commandment, in the undue object of worship, for that was God; yet both alike
gross Idolators against the second Commandment, (either through ignorance or
through presumption; and my charity bids me say through ignorance) in the undue
manner of worshipping; for God will not be worshipped by any Image or
Representation.

11. But that brings me upon your second position, which concerns the
worshipping of our blessed Savior by his picture; and I think that also very
false and dangerous Divinity, both in the speculation and in the practice, both
to be taught and to be followed; For surely we Christians may not worship our
Savior Christ by any Image, because as Christians, we believe him to be God of
God, light of light, very God of very God, begotten not made, being of one
substance with the Father by whom all things were made; and we cannot deny but
as God he forbids himself to be worshipped by pictures or images: So that here
I may justly retort your own argument against you; For you in effect say, That
because Jesus Christ is the true God, therefore he may be worshipped by an
image: But it is quite contrary; for therefore he may not be worshipped by an
Image, because he is the true God: Or to set it down in your own words, [It
must first be proved that Jesus Christ is a false God, before the application
of our divine worship through his pictures unto him can be convinced of
Idolatry] For because Jesus Christ is without controversy the true, not a
false God; therefore the application of divine worship through a picture unto
him, is idolatry; for it is the true God which forbids himself to be worshipped
by an image; for it is the true God which being an infinite, eternal,
incorruptible Spirit, ought not, cannot either be represented or worshipped by
a finite, a momentary, a corruptible Image; and this himself has taught us
saying, For I the Lord, there is his Omnipotency; Thy God, there is his
All Sufficiency; do not you then think he may be described by a picture the
workmanship of your hands; for that is to think him neither omnipotent nor
all-sufficient; Do not you think he may be worshipped through a picture which
himself has so expressly forbidden; for that is in effect to deny him to be
your Sovereign Lord. For if he be the Lord, ascribe unto him that worship and
honor which himself has commanded, not that which himself has forbidden,
because you cannot ascribe unto the Lord the honor due unto his Name, whiles
you do not ascribe unto him the honor due unto his Nature; that is, the honor
of being the Lord: For this is to say unto him, Lord, Lord, according to the
letter of the first Commandment, whiles by your breaches of the second, you
force him to say unto you, I know you not, depart from me ye workers of
iniquity; so far is it from Truth, That Christians well instructed in the
first, cannot through ignotance offend against the second Commandment; yet I
will strive to make it true for truths sake, by annexing to it this
supposition, if they exactly follow the instructions given them in the first
Commandment; for then clearly they will know God too well either to worship
him by an image, or to worship any image instead of him; But now this your own
assertion, like a rebellious subject, will take up arms against you; for by the
Rule of Logic, which proceeds from the eversion of the Consequent, to the
eversion of the Antecedent, it may be proved that notwithstanding all your
great boasts of being so well instructed in the first Commandment, you have
not well received, or not well followed those instructions, because you have
not rightly received and followed the prohibition of the second; For if the
first Commandment were in truth rightly understood and obeyed amongst you,
according to your own negative, Thou shall not have strange Gods before me; and
according to your own affirmative, Thou shall have me only for thy true God,
you would not be so zealous as you are, to bestow religious worship upon your
petty Deities, for that is to have strange Gods, not him only for your God; nor
would you be so ready to represent or worship the eternal Deity through a
picture; for that is not to have him for the true God; since undeniable is that
of the Apostle, God that made the world and all things therein, seeing that he
is Lord of heaven and earth, dwells not in Temples made with hands, Acts 17.
24. And if not in Temples, then sure not in Images made with hands, yet take
away this crude and carnal thought, that the Creator is like the creature, to
be confined or comprehended in his dwelling, which is against the very light of
nature, and much more against the light of grace, and you will not easily be
Idolators either in worshipping him by an Image, or in worshipping an image
instead of him: So that from your not honoring God rightly according to the
Prohibition of the second, we have reason to fear you do not honor him rightly
according to the instruction of the first Commandment: For even Damascene
himself though a great admirer of other Images, yet allows not any to make the
Image of God; but says, (lib. 4. de Orthod. fide, c. 16.) (...); Who can make
a representation of the invisible, incorporeal God, which can neither be
described nor defined? it is then the height of madness and of wickedness, to
make any form or picture of the Deity: Therefore Christ as God, is not to be
represented, much less worshipped by a picture, and consequently your
application of divine worship through his pictures, unto him, may easily be
convinced of Idolatry.

12. I next come to your third position, which concerns the worshipping of
Saints and Angels, for they are to be Religiously worshipped before their
pictures; and if not they, then not their pictures; since therefore all moral
duties (that are performed without us) are reduced by our blessed Savior to
these two Heads, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart; and Thou
shall love thy neighbor as thy self, (Saint Mat. 22.) I ask, To which of these
two you will reduce your Religious worshipping of Saints and Angels? If to the
first, say there is more then one God, and you can love more then one God with
all your heart: If to the second, do not talk of a Religious worship; for no
man yet ever worshipped himself with a Religious worship, and you are to love
your neighbor but as your self, not as your God; For since God has called All
but himself your neighbor, how can you call Any but himself your God, whiles
you worship him as your God by a Religious worship? Can you think that Job did
not intend that of every other creature whatsoever, which he spoke of the Sun
and Moon, (because the Heathen bestowed their Religious worship on them, as not
knowing any creature more glorious then them, for they knew nothing of the
Angels, or glorified Saints) If mine heart has been secretly enticed, or my
mouth has kissed my hand, This also were an iniquity to be punished by the
Judge; Hebr. (...) Iniquitas judicans vel judicialis, and digna quae a Judice
puniatur, an iniquity to be punished by the Judge of quick and dead, since it
is a Judged Case in his own Court, (since he himself has judged it to be an
iniquity) For I should have denied the God that is above; Here is the Religious
worship, which calls the creature the Creator, for so says Jarchi (...) If I
have worshipped the Sun or Moon, saying they are Gods; And here is the iniquity
that cannot escape Judgment; for this calling the creature the Creator, is to
deny the God that is above; so says (...) I should have denied the (...) ^at
is above; The meaning is, (...) The God that is above these two great lights;
The Hebrew words will yet bear another interpretation, (...) For I should have
lied against the God above; Hence Idolatry is called mendacium perniciosum, a
pernicious lie, by your own Reginaldus; Scandalous to men, injurious to God,
directly against the honor due unto him, which is not communicable to any but
to himself, (Regin. lib. 16. cap. 14. sec. 3.) Idolatry is therefore called a
Lie in Job, a pernicious lie in Reginaldus; because it communicates that honor
to the creature, which is due only to the Creator: And according to this
Principle, The Religious worship of Saints and Angels must be called Idolatry:
For to worship them Religiously, is to Communicate to them the honor of God,
it is to say they are Gods: And to say they are Gods, is to lie both to God and
man; for it is to deny the God that is above them, and to deceive the men that
are amongst us: For it is vam here to talk of inferior degrees of worship,
since Magis and minus non variat speci^; if it be Religious worship properly so
called, the least degree of it is Religious worship, and the g^eatest degree of
it is no more; Therefore we say, That Religious worship in what degree soever,
is to be given only to God, because he alone is the object of Religion: For
Religion, though it command and govern such acts as pass from man to man, or
from man to God, yet it does not of it self produce or excite any act but only
such as has God for its immediate object: And therefore all the elicite and
proper acts of Religion, such as flow from its own nature, are reducible to
some of the four Commandments in the first Table, which concern God only, as
appears in that his name alone is used in every one of them: And therefore to
bestow any act of Religion upon any other then upon God alone, is to set up
both a God and a Religion neither revealed nor commanded in the first Table,
and consequently not of Goa's, but of our own making; Nay it is to fetch a God
out of the second Table, to bestow upon him the Duties enjoined in the first;
It is to borrow an Object from the second Table, to exercise the Acts of the
first: For the whole Decalogue knows no other object but only God or neighbor;
and these are so distinct, That what is neighbor, cannot be God; what is God,
cannot be neighbor; And the Acts concerning these are as distinct as the
Objects; for all the Acts commanded or forbidden in the first Table concern our
God; All the Acts commanded or forbidden in the second Table, concern our
neighbor; and it is equally absurd, to apply to neighbor the Duties belonging
to God, as Glory or Worship; and to apply to God the Duties belonging to
neighbor, as relief or maintenance: This is the Divinity God himself has
taught; for it is the plain undoubted sense of his Commandments; and this is
the Divinity Gods Church has learned and professed; for thus she understood
his sense, as says Lactantius, (lib. 6. cap. 10.) Primum Justitiae officium
est conjungi cum Deo, secundum cum homine; sed illud primum Religio dicitur,
Hoc secundum misericordia vel humanitas nominatur; The first office of Justice
is to unite man to God; The second to unite man to man, or to his neighbor:
The first office is called Religion, the second is called Humanity: And
therefore it is against the very order of Justice to confound these offices;
For as Humanity cannot extend to God, so Religion cannot extend to neighbor:
Wherefore since all Communion is founded in Justice, those who most confound
the offices of Justice, are the greatest enemies and opposers of true Christian
Communion; and consequently, They who worship Saints and Angels, are the
greatest Schismatics, because they most confound the Offices of Justice, doing
to neighbor those offices which belong to God, and not doing to God those
offices which belong to him; For he that renders to Caesar Gods due, does for
that cause not render to God his own due: And accordingly these two are
disjoined and divided as two distinct offices of Justice by Gods own eternal
Wisdom and Truth; and therefore may not be confounded without man's unsufferable
folly and mistake; for so says our blessed Savior, Mat. 22. 21. Render unto
Caesar the things which are Caesar's; there is the Debt of Justice belonging to
Humanity: And unto God the things that are Gods; there is the Debt of Justice
belonging to Religion. Caesar must have his own, but he may not have Gods
Tribute: The noblest creature that is either in Heaven or in Earth, may not
have the Creators due: Since therefore Religion is the Creators due, as
Humanity is the creatures, (according to Lactantius) Gods most glorious
Servants, Saints and Angels, may not be sharers with their Master in his due,
that is to say in the offices of Religion, though in never so inferior a
degree, because they cannot be Gods, though in never so inferior a degree: But
they may only be sharers with their fellow servants or creatures, in the
offices of Humanity, whether double or treble, or (if you will) centuple
sharers, it matters not, according to their several degrees of glory and of
excellency: And this was so clear a Truth in our Saviors days, that it is
said concerning the disciples of the Pharisees and the Herodians, when they
heard these words they marvelled, and left him, and went their way, (v. 22.)
And it is still so clear (notwithstanding the many sophistical distinctions
whereby some of late have clouded it) that if any man now will needs reply
against it, he must be more refractory then those Pharisees or Herodians, and
fall under Saint Paul's reproof, Nay but O man, who art thou that replyest
against God? Romans 9. 20. For God the Father in his Law, God the Son in his
Gospel, and God the Holy Ghost the Pen man both of Law and Gospel, has so
determined, That the offices of Justice may not be confounded; but those which
belong to Religion must be reserved by themselves for God alone; none of them
all bestowed upon our neighbor; he is capable only of those offices which
belong to Humanity; but of none of those which belong to Religion: Therefore
your words, [And the same I say proportionably, though in an infinitely
inferior degree of our Religious worship of his glorious Servants, Saints and
Angels] are not to be justified, though you should say them to the worlds end;
For there is no proportion betwixt the creature and the Creator, and
consequently you may not say the same thing, or talk of the same worship
proportionably concerning them.

13. The Honor of Humanity or of the second Table, due from the fifth
Commandment, though in the highest degree of proportion, being infinitely
below the Creator; and the honor of Religion or of the first Table, due from
the four first Commandments, though in the lowest degree, being infinitely
above the creature; For that honor is internally in the understanding an
apprehension or belief of an infinite excellency; in the will, a subjection or
submission to it; there is the duty of the first Commandment: The same honor
is externally in the gesture an adoration, in the speech a profession, in the
deed a public and solemn Homage made to the same infinite excellency; there is
the duty of the three other Commandments in the first Table: Wherefore you
must place your degrees of proportion, not in religious worship, to make an
inferior degree of that, but in civil worship to make a superior degree of
that for Gods glorious servants, unless you will serve them instead of God to
the dishonor of their Lord, and to the despite of his Commandments. I would
not speak so positively, were this Divinity of yesterday; but you see
Lactantius shows it was of old in the Catholic Church: And the Angelical
Doctor shows the same; for notwithstanding the Practice of the Church was
corrupted in his days, yet this Doctrine, this Divinity was not corrupted: For
this we find was his determination, 12o qu. 100. art. 5. in c. Sicut praecepta
Legis humanae ordinant hominem ad quandam communitatem humanam: Ita praecepta
legis divinae ordinant hominem ad quandam communitatem seu rempublicam hominum
sub Deo; Ad hoc autem quod aliquis in aliqua communitate be^e commoratur, duo
requiruntur: Quorum primum est ut been se habeat ad eum qui praeest
communitati; aliud autem est ut been se habeat ad alios communitatis consocios
and comparticipes; oportet igitur quod in lege divina primo ferantur quaedam
praecepta ordinantia hominem ad Deum, and inde alia quaedam praecepta
ordinantia hominem ad alios proximos simul convenientes sub Deo. As the
praecepts of humane Laws do order men to a Communion or Common wealth amongst
themselves; so the Precepts of divine laws do order men to a Communion or
Commonwealth under God; Now that a man may be fit to live in any Communion,
two things are required; The first is that he behave himself well toward the
Head of that Communion; the next that he behave himself well toward his
fellow members and copartners in it: Accordingly in the Divine Law, first we
meet with precepts teaching a man his duty toward his God; after these we meet
with other precepts teaching him his duty toward his neighbors, who together
with himself do live under the government of that same God: Nothing can be
spoken either more plainly or more punctually, to show that the Decalogue, as
the Rule of Justice, is the g^ound of Christian Communion; That whosoever
desires to be of that Communion, must first learn his Duty toward his God the
Head of it; then his duty toward his neighbors, his fellow members in it:
That these Duties are as distinct as their objects, taught in two several
distinct orders of precepts, some concerning God, others concerning his
neighbors: And that all save God alone are to be accounted as his neighbors
in this Communion, as all living with himself under one and the same Head,
which is God: From which premises we may well infer this conclusion, That what
Duty belongs to the Head only, may not be practiced toward any of the members,
without a confusion of Gods Order, a violation of Gods Law, and an invasion of
Gods Right, which must needs be highly displeasing to all the true members of
this Communion, whether in heaven or in earth, who all agree in nothing more
then in honoring their Head; and therefore cannot but detest whatsoever shall
tend to his dishonor; for since himself has said, I am the Lord, that is my
name, and my glory will I not give to another, Isa. 42. 8. we may be ashamed,
must be afraid of giving that Glory to Saints and Angels, which God will not
part withal; for if he deny the gift, how dare we give? that is to give in sin;
there is reason for our fear: If he will not give it, they will not take it;
that is to give in vain; there is reason for our shame: For as in men's natural,
so in Christ's mystical Body, all the members alike are made to serve the Head;
and in order to the Head it is that they serve one another; So that there is
not one member, which will not neglect to serve it self, and much more its
fellow-member, when it should serve its Head: Let God but have the same
privilege among Christians (as without doubt he has the same right; for they
are that body whereof he is the Head) and no man will hereafter so misplace his
devotion, so mispend his time, so mistake himself, as to be worshipping of an
Angel or a Saint, whiles he should be worshipping of God: I will not ask, With
what faith I can say, I believe in an Angel, instead of I believe in God; or to
which Article of the Creed this Religious worship (as you call it) is
reducible, that it may be done in faith, (though what is not of faith is sin;
more then exceeding sinful in our Prayers) for in that I have proved this
worship cannot be without f^lly, I have sufficiently proved it cannot b^ with
faith; Nor will I ask how it is agreeable with our Lords most holy Prayer (the
pattern of all sound prayers) for me to say Our Brother, instead of Our Father
which art in heaven; (though if I pray out of Christ's Communion, who will not,
cannot join with me in saying Our Brother, but will and does join with me in
saying, Our Father, I cannot pray in hope, because I must also pray without
Christ's Intercession, through which alone God hears my prayers) for having
proved that this worship cannot be with faith, I need not prove it must be
without hope: I only ask, How this worship can be with Charity; I mean that
Charity which has God only for its immediate object, since Faith, Hope and
Charity are three Theological virtues no less inseparable from themselves, then
they ought to be inseparable from our souls: And if this worship may not be
with Gods Charity, why should my Charity be with this worship? If it love not
God, why should I love it? and if it love another instead of God, how does it
love God? Sure I am, God himself has determined in a case very like this, That
They who embrace a false worship, do hate the true God; Exodus 20. 5. Visiting
the iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children, unto the third and fourth
generation of them that hate me; And how can good Christians with any
conscience do that which may come under the least temptation or suspicion of
hateing God? Wherefore this false worship must needs so trouble and startle
true Believers, as to be the cause of division and disunion for ever in the
Church of Christ, dividing man from man to the worlds end, because it divides
man from God; for whose sake and in whose name and love we ought to follow and
embrace the Christian Communion: For the same Voice which calls us to Communion
in worshipping, first calls us to Religion in the worship; nor is it possible
for any man to show a Text which says, O come let us worship, (there is the
Communion) which does not likewise say, worship God, there is the Religion) Thus
says the man after Gods own heart, and therefore nearest his mind, O come let
us worship and fall down and kneel before the Lord our maker, Psalm. 95. 6. So
establishing public, as also establishing true, and forbidding false worship;
For Rectum index sui and obliqui; he which says, O come let us worship and
fall aown and kneel before the Lord our maker, does by the rule of contraries
likewise say, Let us not worship nor fall down nor kneel before any that is not
our maker; Wherefore since you have most shamefully violated this command, you
were best to let your repentance follow yout shame, that your shame may not
fore-run your confusion: Put then your own translation into your practice; come
with your Venite adoremus and procidamus, and ploremus ante Dominum qui fecit
nos; O come let us worship and fall down, and weep before the Lord our maker,
because we have worshipped and falen down and kneeled before those who have not
made us, do not convert or call us, cannot save us.

14. For it is the part of Religion to order a man rightly in regard of his
God, as of Temperance and of Justice to order him rightly in regard of himself
and of his neighbor; so says Saint Augustine, Tract. 23. in Johan. Haec est
religio Christiana ut colatur unus Deus, quia non facit animam beatam nisi unus
Deus; This is the true Christian Religion, that we worship one God, because
none can make the soul blessed but one God; None can make the soul, says holy
David; None can make the soul blessed, says holy Augustine, but one God;
therefore we may worship none but him; Idem principium creationis and
beatificationis; The same God is the author of our Being and of our well-being,
and claims our worship as his homage for both; The same is our maker and our
Savior; The same Lord which gives nature, gives also Grace and Glory; and
therefore to ascribe unto others the honor which is due only to him, is to put
others in his place, as if they were Lords with him, and were the givers of
Nature, of Grace, of Glory. Yet this is the Divinity you teach your people;
this is the Duty you bind them to do by the first Commandment: Sacrosanctam
Eucharistiam adoratione latriae venerari jubemur; Virginem autem Mariam honor
hyperdu^iae; Cru^em etiam adorare and venerari; Angelos vero and maxim Angelum
nostrae custodiae designatum, sanctos, sanctas, eorum reliquias and Templa,
honor duliae honorare jubemur: (methodus Confessionis in expositione primi
praecepti) We are here commanded to worship the holy Eucharist, the blessed
Virgin, the holy Cross, the Angel^, (especially him that is our Guardian) The
Saints, their relics and Temples: And it is to small purpose that you would
be thought to give a lesser kind of worship to these then to God; for all kinds
of Religious worship are alike forbidden to any creature by this Commandment;
as all kinds of uncleanness by the seventh, of slander by the ninth: So that in
truth you have taught your people to worship many Gods, instead of worshipping
one God; for you cannot multiply acts specifically distinct, without
multiplying the objects; therefore you must make many Gods, by making many
several distinct acts of Religious worship: This is such a Babel as reaches up
to heaven, a very great and horrid confusion which confounds the Creator with
the creature; and stays not there, but comes down again and also confounds
the Communion of Saints, and the Commandments of God, and consequently not
only the work, but also the whole rule of Religion; For seeing our blessed
Savior has said, On the^e two hang all the Law and the Prophets, Mat. 22. 40.
by confounding the two Tables of the Commandments, you must also confound the
whole Book of God: So then this false worship may only belong to Babel, not to
Jerusalem: For in confounding the Creator with the creature, it strikes at God
the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth; In confounding the Communion of
Saints, it strikes at God the Son, who is the Head of that Communion; In
confounding the Commandments, and the whole Book of God, it strikes at God the
Holy Ghost, the Penman of those Commandments, and of that Book: And we ought
not to think that Jerusalem the City of God, will either teach or practice a
worship against God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost: For such a worship is not a
Religion, but a Confusion, and is accordingly punished with confusion, Psalm
97. 7. Confounded be all they that worship carved Images, and that delight in
vain Gods; worship him all ye Gods: A Text that exactly follows the method of
the second Commandment proceeding by Command and by Commination; only here the
commination is put in the first place, because the command had hitherto been so
much transgressed, and so little regarded; God thereby intimating, That if his
Command does not restrain us, his commination shall ruin us; which in this sin
is more terrible then in any other; for here he threatens to visit the sins of
the Fathers upon their Children, which in the language of this Text, is To
confound both them and theirs: Confundantur omnes qui adorant sculptilia, says
your own Latin; for that is to delight in vain gods, who are all commanded to
worship the true God, as well as we; for so it follows, Worship him all ye
Gods; (...), says the Seventy, worship him all ye his Angels; Here Is yet
another confusion, This Idolatry makes them Idols whom God made Angels; it
makes them vain Gods, whom he made Gods; It unmakes Angels; and what is that
but to make Devils? I mean in regard of those that worship them; For though the
holy Angels in themselves are blessed Spirits, yet by those that Religiously
worship them, they are after some sort made wicked Spirits, because to them
they are the occasion of sin and wickedness; So far is man from righting
Angels, by wronging God, from honoring the servants, by dishonouring their
Lord; and yet the best pretense that is usually made in this kind, is, least
the Angels for sooth should lose their right, whereas by doing them this right,
we do them the greatest wrong, See thou do it not, for I am thy fellow servants;
Thou wrongest no less then three by doing it; Thy self, and me, and our common
Master; A prohibition twice urged, (Rev. 19. 10. and 22. 9.) and with the same
reason, showing that God made Angels our fellow servants and Brethren, and that
we may not by our Religious worship make them God: Therefore Confounded be they
that make them Idols, says David, since God made them Angels; and yet your
Position makes them twice idols; once in themselves, whiles it bestows
Religious worship on them; a second time in their images, whiles it bestows
that worship on them through their Pictures: And that is your fourth and last
Position, which concerns the Religious worship of Gods glorious Servants,
Saints and Angels, through their pictures.

15. In which case if you are not to be convinced of idolatry, sure it is for
want of will, not of means of conviction; for the Commandment expressly
forbids to make the likeness of any thing in heaven or in earth with intent
to worship it; and I believe you will not deny the Saints and Angels to be in
heaven; or if so (because for ought you know, who believe the Purging of souls
after death, some Saints may be in Purgatory to be tormented, some good Angels
there to torment them) yet you cannot deny God to be in heaven, unless you will
discard your Pater Noster, which teaches you to say, Our Father which art in
heaven: But it is a sufficient proof that your Priests are convinced of their
Idolatry in worshipping of Images, because they are so willing to shuffle off
the second Commandment which forbids it, least that should also convince the
common people; wherein a late German Bishop and Clergy of yours showed too much
fraud to be accounted men of conscience, and too little Art to be accounted men
of cunning; for commanding that the Lords Prayer, the Angelical salutation, the
Creed and Ten Commandments should be distinctly and leisurably repeated in the
German tongue every Lords day by the Parish Priests, that the people might be
able to repeat, understand, and learn them (Distinct ac tractatim, ut populus
legentem repetitione subsequi, ea discere, and memoriae mandare possit. Synod.
Augustensis cap. 25.) yet left not so much as any blind footsteps of the second
Commandment in their German translation, which they appointed the Priests to
read: There was little conscience in leaving out one of Gods Commandments, and
as little cunning in commanding the Parish Priests to read them All, when they
themselves had left out One; for they could not think by their false copy which
quite left out the second Commandment, and called the third the second, to
blind their Priests, though they did think by it to blind the people: They
would be thought very zealous in teaching those committed to their charge, all
the Fundamentals of salvation, yet purposely concealed one main practical
fundamental, because they had formerly mis-taught, or at least mispractised the
same; finding it more agreeable with their honor, though less with their
honesty, to let the people continue still in ignorance, then to recall their
own error: The like was the tender care and conscience of your Trent Fathers
to instruct the people in their prayers, (Sess. 22. cap. 8.) Etsi Missa magnam
contineat populi fidelis eruditionem, non tamen expedire visum est Patribus ut
vulgari lingua passim celebraretur; Ne tamen oves Christi esuriant, Pastores
frequenter aliquid in Missa exponant; Though the Mass contain in it very great
and necessary instructions for faithful people, yet we do not think fit to put
it in a language they can understand; notwithstanding least Christ's sheep
should be bunger-starved, the Pastors are required often to expound some parts
of it. A great seeming Fatherly care of souls, to fear they might perish for
want of food; but no Fatherly kindness nor resolution, rather to let them
perish then make them able to feed themselves; But the cause was the same in
both; The peoples ignorance was to keep them in their sinful obedience; For the
less they knew, the more they would obey in things so plainly against the Law
of God; Therefore these two Synods had rather the common people should worship
God without their Reason, then with their Conscience; though they could not
worship as men, without their Reason, nor as Christians, but with their
Conscience: But so it is, Reason and Conscience must both be laid aside or
lulled asleep, when men are to act upon false Principles, as in this
particular, The Commandment was to be thrown down, that the Images might be
k^pt up; For that is so plain in its Prohibition, and so powerful in its
Commination, that if the people had understood it, they would not have
committed so gross Idolatry, or would full soon have become very penitent
Idolators: And good reason; for Images are but a relick of Paganism; Ex Gentili
consuetudine, as says Eusibius, Hist. Eccles. lib. 7. cap. 18. (...), out of a
Paganish custom; and therefore long kept out of the Churches of Christians, and
longer kept out of their Religion, though now they so abound in your Churches
and Religion, as if you meant that even in your most populous Cities, these
your new Gods should exceed and outvie the number of their worshippers: so
that I might justly hint at your pictures and Images; all my fault was, I did
only hint at them; I will now make some part of amends, and downright strike
at them, though by other men's hands, not mine own: For in this case I have the
primest Champions of Christendom to prove that Images were long kept out of the
Churches of Christians, and longer kept out of their Religion; and either of
these is enough to break them in pieces.

16. First that Images were long kept out of the Churches of Christians; and
for this we have the testimony of Epiphanius for the Greek, and of Saint Hierom
for the Latin Church, both in one Epistle to John of Jerusalem, which was
indicted or composed by Epiphanius, translated and approved by Saint Hierom.
The testimony is in these words, Cum ergo hoc vidissem in Ecclesia Christi
contra authoritatem Scripturarum, hominis pendere Imaginem, scidi illud, and
magis dedi consilum custodibus ejusdem loci ut pauperem mortuum eo obvolverent
and efferent: Precor ut jubeas Presbyteros ejusdem loci deinceps praecipere in
Ecclesia Christi ejusmodi vela, quae contra Religionem nostram veniunt, non
appendi: The story is this, Epiphanius going to say his prayers in a Church at
Anabaltha, there spied a vail or curtain which had in it the picture of Christ
or of some Saint, at which he was so offended, That he cut down the said veil
or curtain, and wished the Keepers of the Church to bury a dead man therewith,
alleging it was against the authority of the holy Scriptures, and the purity
of Christian Religion, that such Images should be set up in Churches; and
desiring the Bishop of Jerusalem (in whose Diocese it was) to require the
Clergy there to admit no more such pictures or images into that Church: Contra
authoritatem Scripturarum, contra Religionem nostram; No Christian Bishop can
have stronger arguments or rather adjurations, either for the casting out or
the keeping out of Images from his Church, then that the retaining or the
receiving of them, is against the authority of the Scriptures, the custom of
the Church, and the conscience of Religion; All which are here alleged by
Epiphanius; For he that says, Contra Religionem nostram, against our Religion,
does appeal to the custom of Christians, as well as to the conscience of
Christianity: And this quotation is such a Gordian not to your Cardinal, that
after all his pains to loosen and untie it, at last Alexander like, he cuts it
off, saying, Verior solutio, haec verba esse supposititia, (Bell. lib. 2. de
sanct. cap. 9.) The truest answer is, The words are supposititious; But words
entailed upon the Church for so many hundred years together, are not so easily
cut off; The same Authority had before troubled Waldensis; yet he denies not
the truth of the story, only says, That Epiphanius did this thing in hatred of
the Anthropomorphites, and out of zeal not according to knowledge; (Wald. de
Sacramental. Tit. 19. c. 157.) So likewise Alphonsus a Castro (lib. de Haer.
voce Imago) denies not the story, only dislikes it, excusing Epiphanius from
the Imputation of Heresy, because the thing at that time had not been defined
by the Church: And indeed this story is to be found in all the editions of
Saint Hieroms works, not only in that of Basil by Erasmus, who says in the
argument thereof, Hanc Epistolam Hieronymus in odium Johannis and Rufini
Latinam fecit; But also in that of Antwerp, 1579. where this is the argument,
Epiphanius intimus D. Hieronymi, a quo epistola versa est, amicus, excusat se
Johanniquod Presbyterum ordinarat in ipsius diocaesi ipso inconsulto; postremo
cur velum ad Ecclesiae fores pendens, in quo hominis imago depicta erat,
sciderit, rationem reddit. This Edition no more doubts that Epiphanius excused
the cutting of the vail, then the ordination of the Priest to John Bishop of
Jerusalem; Nay yet moreover, The edition of Marianus Victorius at Rome, which
Bellarm. confesses to be purged from Erasmus his errors, (ab erroribus Erasmi
purgata est;) has not this part of the Epistle purged out of it; but Victorius
in his Annotation confesses it to be as undoubted as the rest, in that he
seeks to elude it by this gloss, That the story was to be understod of the
image of some profane man, de Imagine hominis profani; He is very bold in
calling that the Image of a profane man, which Epiphanius said was the Image of
Christ or some Saint, (for so Saint Hierom from him, Habens imaginem quasi
Christi vel Sancti cujusdam) yet not so bold as to deny that Epiphanius had
thus dealt with that image.

Nay this story is also in Epiphanius his works Printed at Paris, 1622. with
Petavius his notes; yet he makes not the least objection against it, but by his
silence rather seems to allow it as unquestionable, because he was so well
able, yet not willing to question it: But it is no wonder if Petavius in this
dissent from Bellarmine, (one Jesuit from another) for in it Bellarmine
dissenteth from himself: For whereas (lib. de Script. Ecclesiasticis) in his
Chapter of Saint Epiphanius he said; Ad finem epistolae ad Johannem
Hierosolymitanum videtur aliquid additum ab Iconoclastis; At the end of his
Epistle to John Bishop of Jerusalem, something seems to have been added by the
haters of Images; In his Chapter of Saint Hierom, he in effect denies any such
addition; for he says concerning the second Tome of Saint Hieroms works, In
hoc etiam tomo nihil est dubium vel supposititium; Also in this tome nothing is
doubtful or supposititious; and this Epistle of Epiphanius concerning the Image
at Anablatha, is in that very second tome of Saint Hieroms works: By all which
it appears that this passage concerning the Image at Anablatha may not be
excluded out of Epiphanius his Epistle, nor out of Saint Hieroms translation,
and that alone is enough to prove that in their days Images were excluded out
of all Christian Churches.

17. But some very good men are not troubled that Pictures have got into
Churches; for the Lutherans still keep them there; the main trouble is, That
they have got into Religion, and therefore in the last place, I am to prove,
That though they had (with much ado) got into the Churches of Christians, yet
they were a long time after kept out of their Religion; For Image Worship was
not dogmatized till the second Council of Nice, (which was not till the year
787. after Christ) nor was it practiced as soon as it was dogmatized, but
rejected presently after in the Councils of Frankefort, under Charles the
great, and at Paris under his son Lodowick; the one saying, The determinations
of those at Nice smelt of dreams and dotage; (Pene nihil est ibi quod non
somnii vanitatem aut deliramenti hebetudinem redoleat, Act. Conc. Franc. in
lib. Carol. 3. c. 26.) The other saying, That Pope Adrian the first had done
very indiscretly, by whose importunity they at Nice had passed those
determinations: (Hadrianus indiscrete noscitur fecisse, in eo quod
superstitiose imagines adorari jussit, Council. Paris. tempore Ludovici, in
princip.) And Engilbertus an Abbot, Chaplain to Charles the great, was so bold
as to send a full confutation of the Nicene Council concerning this
Imageworship, unto Pope Hadrian, which he endeavored to answer, but had
clearly the worst of the cause, as well as of the Religion: And it is worth our
notice, That though that part of the Greek Church assembled at Nice, had
yielded to the Pope in this particular, (being overmastered by the
impetuousness of Irene their Empress, and overborn by the Authority of Theranus
their Patriarch) yet the Latin Church did long after stoutly oppose him, (for
the Pope at that time was not Omnipotent in his own Diocese, though now he
would be so in all the world;) For besides the forenamed oppositions, Jon is
Bishop of Orleans in the year 820, though he writ of purpose in defense of
Images, yet he writ against their Religious worship, following exactly the
doctrine of the Council of Frankefort, which chose the middle betwixt two
extremes, defining against the Iconoclasts, that Images should be retained, and
against the Idolators, That they should not be worshipped: So Baronius has
registered his opinion, (An. 825. nu. 62.) Jonas ita non confringendas esse
praedicavit Imagines, ut tamen eas non esse venerandas asseruerit; Wherein he
agreed with his adversary, Claudius Bishop of Turine, whom he would be thought
to write against; for though the Title of his Book was de cultu imaginum,
concerning the worship of Images, yer the doctrine of his Book was against it;
for which cause (says Bellarm.) He is to be warily read, because he was in the
same error with Agobardus and the rest of the French divines of that age, who
denied any religious worship to be due to Images; So that not only Jonas, but
also all the other French divines in his time, though they allowed Images to be
in their Churches, yet they would not allow them to be in their Religion; Hic
auctor caute legendus est, quoniam laborateode^ errore quo Agobardus, and
reliqui ejus aetatis Galli, qui negabant Sacris Imaginibus ullum deferri cultum
religiosum; (Bellar. de. Scr. Eccl. in cap. de Jona Aur.) which I have declared
the more at large, because the same Bellarm. lib. de Imag. cap. 12.) reckons
this very Jonas amongst those holy men who worshipped images; Sanctorum virorum
qui imagines coluerunt; showing to all the world that he was not so candid a
Divine as he was an Historian, and that he penned men's Lives more faithfully
then Gods Truths; For this Jonas was so great an opposer of Image Worship, that
Baronius says plainly of him and of Walafridus Sirab^, That they both receded
from the common opinion of the Catholic Church, and did shoot their bolts both
against her practice and her doctrine; Eos a Communi Catholicae Ecclesiae
sententia resiliisse, atque adversus ejus usum atque doctrinam scripsisse, and
spicula intorsisse: (Bar. An. 794. nu. 62.) So little could the second Council
of Nice prevail at that time with the Latin Church, for admitting images into
their Religion: And though of late years that Council has been accounted the
seventh Ecumenical by a faction amongst the Latins, yet the Greeks themselves
did not anciently so account it, your own Baronius being my witness, An. 863.
nu. 6. In reliquis omnibus Ecclesiis Patriarchalibus excepta
Constantinopolitana, sex tantum Oecumenicae Synodi in publicis confessionibus
and professionibus nominari consuerunt, In all the other Patriarchal Churches
that of Constantinople only excepted, The Grecians did usually make mention of
no more then six General Councils, in all their Confessions and Professions: So
it is plain they accounted not the second of Nice as the seventh General
Council; and if not they, why should we? who know that though the Bishop of
Rome consented to it, yet all the other Bishops of the Latin Church generally
opposed it: And truly it deserved to be generally opposed not only for setting
up a false worship, this of images, but also for setting it up by egregious
falsities, and yet more egregious falsifications. First I will give you a short
view of their falsities; our blessed Savior had said, Mat. 4. 10. (...). Thou
shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve, They thus
qualify the Greek Text, (...), (Act. 4.) He does put this Only to the word
Serve, not to the word Worship; by false Logic distinguishing between two
Synonomaes which signified one and the same Religious worship, unless we will
blasphemously say That our Savior did not fully confute the Devil, who had
used the word (...) not (...), in his temptation, saying, All these things will
I give thee, (...), if thou will fall down and worship me; or unless we will
add to this blasphemy yet another much more execrable saying, That so as we do
reserve our (...), our Divine worship for God, we may allow our (...), our
Religious worship to the Devil; be not startled at the inference; for if any
may have Religious worship but God alone, the Devil will quickly have his share
of it; for he can transform himself into an Angel of light, 2 Cor. 11. 14. and
therefore if we will give Religious worship to Angels, we may soon be so
deluded, as to give it unto Devils, and whiles we pretend to worship God, may
in truth be brought to worship the Devil; Therefore this was so very false a
device (though it were intended for a distinction) That no Divine: can be in
love with it, but he that is contented to venture Gods glory and man's salvation,
and much more his own soul upon a piece of Sophistry: Again^ (...), (Act. 4.)
Those that call pictures or images Idols, let them be accursed; A false
authority assumed, to countenance a false divice, taking to themselves power of
cursing those whom God had blessed; even the Apostles and Prophets, and many
holy men who have promiscuously used these two words Images and Idols: However
no Christian Divine can justly be condemned for disowning those who could find
in their hearts to deliver men over to the Devil, merely for a Grammatical
notion, and that a false one too in the case for which it was alleged; For
though there may be a Grammatical difference betwixt an Image and an Idol, yet
a Theological difference there is not, since he that worships an Image, does
without all peradventures make that Image an Idol to himself.

Thirdly, whereas the Council of Constantinople had made men take an Oath
against images, These infatuated Zealots determine, it is better for a man to
break then to keep that Oath, (...), Act. 4. It Is better you should be perjured
then keep your Oath for throwing down of images; strange besotted Divines to
make so much of an image, so little of an Oath; yet more strange besotted
Casuists, to advise a man rather to break his Oath, then to break an Image; for
an Oath is sacred by Gods institution, but an image is sacred only by man's
imagination; The one does not only reach the conscience but also bind it; the
other though it does reach the eye, yet cannot reach the conscience.

Fourthly, They define that Angels and separated souls are corporeal, (which is
another falsity) (...), (Act. 5.) They are not quite without bodies, though
they have but thin bodies, for only God is wholly without a body; They were so
afraid of losing their pictures, that they had rather lose the Truth, and not
allow Angels and blessed Spirits to be incorporeal, then not allow them to be
pictured; But Binius, though not over modest, yet is ashamed of this gross
assertion, saying, Angelos and Animas esse corporeas falsum est, sed pingi
posse judicio Ecclesiae receptum est; It Is false That Angels and souls are
corporeal, yet the judgment of the Church is, That they may be pictured; He
has mended the matter well, by taking a falsity from a Council to put it upon
the Church; for the Church cannot judge that may be pictured which is not
corporeal, since lineaments must first be in the substance represented, before
they can truly be in the representation; Therefore the picturing of Angels and
immaterial Spirits is more fitly assigned to the practice of some men in the
Church, then to the Judgment of the Church; and yet these men intended not an
essential but an historical representation of those Spirits; not to describe
them in their substances, but in their actions or performances, or appearances.

Fifthly and lastly, (not but that more might be alleged, but that I have
already alleged too much of such absurdities) when as a Jew had objected in
his Disputation, (...), I am scandalized orgrievously offended at you
Christians, because you w^rship Images; Their answer is, The Scriptures do not
forbid us to worship Images, but to worship (...) as God, (...), (Act. 5.) As
if they intended to be so false, as to put a lie into the mouth of Truth it
self, making the same Commandment to speak contradictions, whereof it is
impossible both parts should be true: For to limit an universal negative, it to
make it a particular affirmative, and consequently so to deny or forbid in one
thing, as to affirm and command in another, that is in truth to make it speak
contradictions: As for example, Thou shall do no murder, limit you this
universal negative, by saying, Murder not a Roman Catholic, and it will follow
that you may murder a Protestant, whom you call an Heretic; and so the same
Precept shall forbid and allow murder, that is, shall speak contradictions: So,
Thou shall not steal, add this limitation, not from a Brother, not from one of
the family of Love, and you will make it lawful to steal, so it be from a
stranger or from an enemy: The reason is, because an Universal is not capable
of Addition, (for who can add to All?) and where nothing can be added, nothing
can be distinguished (for who can distinguish upon nothing?) Therefore to
distinguish upon an universal, is to suppose it a particular, to which
something may be added, and that is in truth to deny it to be an universal:
(For every distinction is a kind of limitation, and every limitation is a kind
of negation:) Thus, Drink ye All of this, is an universal; and therefore as we
cannot add to All, so we may not distinguish upon All, and say, Omnes
conficientes, All that consecrate; for that is to suppose the Universal a
particular, nay to make it so by adding to it; and consequently to include its
contradictory in the same Precept, making that to say not All, instead of All;
and so, Drink ye All of this, and Drink not All of this, will be the sense of
one and the same Precept; which being impossible, we must look upon that Trent
Declaration as more peremptory then true, Ecclesia declarat nullo divino
praecepto Laicos vel clericos non conficientes ad bibendum obligari, (Council.
Trid. sess. 21.) The Church declares that no divine Precept obliges the Laity
and not consecrating Clergy to drink of the cup: For Drink ye all of this, is a
divine Precept, and cannot but oblige all that receive the holy Sacrament,
because it is a Precept concerning the receiving it: So in the particular case
of Image Worship, The Text says, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven
image or likeness to worship it; if you will limit this universal negative by
confining the graven image to this or that kind of image, then the
contradictory will be true Divinity; as, Thou shall not make nor worship the
graven image of Venus, or Bacchus, or Jupiter; that is, any image of the
Heathen Gods, which are mere fictions: But thou may make and worship the
Image of Christ, and of the Saints and Angels, which have a real being; So
then, Thou shall not worship an Image, and Thon shall worship an Image, being
contradictories, will be both true divinity, and both commanded in the same
Precept, and God must be said to Command, and men must be made to Obey
contradictions: And yet this is the slight by which your two great Champions
Baronius and Bellarmine have endeavored to elude this very Commandment:
Surely I think your Catechist Laurence Vaux much more ingenuous, who goes to
prove by this very Commandment, that it is not only lawful, but also
necessary, to worship the Images of the Saints: For so in his Catechism Printed
at Antwerp, 1574. in the sixth Chapter of his first seven Queries upon the first
Commandment, he asks this question, Who breaks the first Commandment of
God, by irreverence of God? (you may be sure he means the first with the second
joined to it, because he speaks of outward irreverence) to which himself thus
answers, They that do not give due reverence to God and his Saints, or to their
relics and images: An excellent Catechist, who makes the second
Commandemement say, Thou shall make, thou shall worship graven Images; yet this
man said no more then your two great Cardinals have in effect, though more
covertly, said after him; only he tells us, He writes for the use of children
and ignorant men, but your Cardinals write for the use of the greater and most
learned Scholars: But as unsuccessfully as they of Nice before them; The
Scripture does not forbid us to worship Images, but to worship them as God, say
the one; The Scripture does not forbid us to worship true but false Images, say
the other: Both distinguish upon Gods universal Precept, the one upon the act
of worship, the other upon the object or the image worshipped; so both deny the
precept to be universal, and make it particular though God made it universal,
and by so doing, give us the contradiction of the Precept, for the exposition
of it; For Thou shall not worship an Image, is, Thou shall worship an Image,
according to both their expositions: But which is very remarkable, As they both
contradict God, so they also contradict one another; That it is not easy for a
sensible man to discern, how far this Image Worship has been dogmatized; For,
Thou shall not worship Images as God, say they of Nice, Thou shall worship
Images as God, (if they be his images) say your men now, whereby they have in
truth forsaken the Council, though they still cleave to the Images; and we have
done no more, who have forsaken the Images; And indeed we have been constrained
thereto out of our bounden duty to God, and his truth, not only for the many
falsities, which show it to have been a factious Council, but also for the many
falsifications therein, which in effect show it to have been no Council; For
they bring not Scripture but Revelation and Miracle (the two principles of
Enthusiasts not of Divines) for the establishment of their new doctrine; They
talk of an Image of our blessed Savior at Berytus, which being pierced by the
Jews, there immediately gushed out of it, Blood and Water; which when the Synod
heard, They showed their fond belief by their sad lamentations, (...), They
were much troubled and wept; yet upon this and such like fabulous stories which
supposed a stranger kind of Transubstantiation then you have since invented,
not changing the substance of bread into Christ's Body, but changing the
substance of Christ's body into Wood or Stone, they were pleased to vote (...),
The Relative worshipping of Images, and so call those Jews and Atheists, and
enemies to the Truth, ((...)) who were opposers of that worship.

But these and the like particular falsifications do chiefly cast a dis-repute
upon their doctrine. I now come to a general falsification which will cast a
disrepute upon the Council it self: For that frequently speaks of letters from
the three Patriarcks of Antiech, Alexandria and Jerusalem to Tharasius; And of
Thomas and John two Presbyters, as the Legates of those Patriarcks to subscribe
in their names, when your own Baronius confesses, That they could not then
have any intercourse either by message or letter, with those three Patriarcks,
because they were wholly under the power of the Sarazens; and that one of them,
namely the Patriarck of Jerusalem, was at that time dead in exile: So that if
you cannot take off this forgerie and falsification from these grand voters of
Images, you may not allow them the repute of a Council; and you cannot take it
off from them, but you must cast it upon your own Baronius: For these are his
words, An. 785. nu. 40. Non fuit facultas tribus Patriarchis Orientis ad
Tharasium rescribendi; neque etiam legatis missis a Tharasio facultas data fuit
eosdem conveniendi, cum regnaret Aaron princeps Saracenicus in Christianos
infensissimus: Cum autem duo qui Constantinopoli missi fuerant ad eos Legati,
in Palaestinam pervenissent, audientes Theodorum Patriarcham Hierosolymorum
exulem jam desunctum, diverterunt ad Monachos quosdam, a quibus acerbissimam
quam paterentur Christiani orientales servitutem intellexerunt, quodque
periculosissimum esset adire sive Antiochenum sive Alexandrinum Patriarcham;
nimirum si detecti essent, fore ut non ipsi tantum Legati extremum subirent
periculum, sed in illud ipsum omnes Orientis fideles conjicerent; quamobrem eos
a proposito revocarunt illuc proficiscendi: There was at that time no
convenience for those three Patriarchs of the East to write back again to
Tharasius, nor indeed for his Legates to deliver Letters to those Patriarcks,
because Aaron a Prince of the Saracens, and a great persecutor of the
Christians, had the sole power of those Contries; Therefore the two Legates who
had been sent from Constantinople with Tharasius his Letters, as soon as they
came to Palaestine, and there heard that Theodorus Patriarck of Jerusalem was
dead in exile, they turned aside to some Monks there, who informed them of the
great bondage of the Oriental Christians, and that it was very dangerous for
them to go to either of the two Patriarcks of Antioch or Alexandria; for if
they were discovered, they would not only endanger themselves, but also all
those Eastern Christians; By which means they dehorted them from their purpose
of going further; thus says Ba^onius. Therefore pray expunge that Synodical
Epistle out of the third action of this Council, which has this title, (...),
We the high Priests and Priests of the East, framed in answer to that from
Tharasius, with this inscription, (...): To the high Priests and Priests of
Antioch, Alexandria, and of the holy City; For it is evident by your own
Baronius, that neither was Tharasius his Epistle delivered to any of these
Patriarcks, not was this answer sent from any of them; Nay indeed it is evident
from the answer it self, That it was sent from some Hermites of Palestine,
(...), We your humble servants, and the meanest of those who desire to live in
the desert; which cannot be made good of any that lived in Antioch, Alexandria,
and Jerusalem, their great and populous Cities: Nay in the sequel of the
Epistle, the Monks or Hermits themselves discover this forgerie, saying, They
would not let the Legates or Messengers sent from the Council go any further,
(...): We therefore knowing the deadly hatred of those cursed Nations against
us, resolved with one consent to detain your Messengers, and not let them go to
those to whom you had sent them; that is, To the forenamed Patriarcks; And
again a little after, We knowing two of our own Brethren, John and Thomas,
adorned with the zeal of the Orthodox Faith, said unto them, Go ye along with
these men, and make their Apology, and signify by word of mouth, what we dare
not signify by letter; and when they excused themselves as private and
ignorant men, ((...)) we replied, That he who opened the mouth of his Apostles
enabling them to instruct all the world, is able to open your mouths and make
you speak the sense of those (Patriarchs) who neither can now receive the
Councils Letters, nor dare answer them; (...). Potens est dare vobis sermonem
in apertione oris vestri ad supplendum intentionem and sensus eorum, qui neque
literas quiverunt suscipere, neque ausi sunt scribere, vel super talibus
quolibet modo mutire: See here what Patriarchs they were who sent these two
Presbyters, John and Thomas for their Legates to the second Council of Nice,
even a few Monks of Palestine, and seeing this, you cannot but abominate that
damnable ^orgerie and falsification of that Council, which reckons these two
Presbyters as the Legates of the three Patriarcks of the East, and so takes
their Subscriptions; Thus it is said in the beginning of the fourth, fifth,
sixth and seventh actions; That this John and Thomas supplied the places of the
Apostolical Thrones of the Eastern Churches, (...), (a title often afterward
given to that John, with this variation, (...), That he supplied the place of
the Eastern high Priests) and at last at the end of the fourth Action, they
both subscribe after this manner, I John supplying the place of the three
Apostolical Thrones of Alexandria, Antioch and Jerusalem, do agree to all
things contained in this Action. The like is also the Subscription of Thomas;
and yet one of those Patriarchs was dead, and neither of the other two had sent
or could send to this Council; The words of the subscription are these, (...)
(...). Joannes misericordia Dei Presbyter, and Patriarchicus Syncellus locum
retinens trium Apostolicarum sedium Alexandriae, Antiochiae and Hierosolymorum,
omnibus quae praeferuntur in hoc textu consentio, and conveniens subscripsi
manu mea: This subscription doubtless was intended for the greater confirmation
of this Council, (that it might be thought to have the consent of all the five
Patriarchs,) but it is the greatest conf^tation of i^; for it appears by the
very letter which they brought with them, that they came not from any one of
those Patriarchs as his Substitutes, but only from some private Monks of
Palestine^ Thus the wisdom of this world is foolis^ness with God, (and much
more against God) for it is written, He takes the wise in their own
craftiness, 1 Cor. 3. 19. And I think you can scarce show me in all your Legend
any one Table which so grossly contradicts it self, and so openly bespeaks the
Readers dis-belief.

18. What should I say more to disprove a false worship, then (which were
enough to discountenance a true) even that it was at first set up by falsities
and ^alsifications, and is still upheld by them? Look to your Council that
first set it up, look to your Champions that still uphold it, and tell me if
they do not proceed in such a course as is fitter for Juglers then ^or Divines;
as if God had given them the Key of knowledge not to open but to lock up his
Commandments, and the power of jurisdiction, not to guide his people in the
right way of salvation, but to drive and force them out of it; yet thus far
notwithstanding so great sins, and so little Repentance, I will gratify you in
leaving the second Commandment out of your Confessional Interrogatories as to
say, you may the more securely leave it out at the Peoples, if you put it in at
your Priests Confession; For to the one this Image Worship is a sin of
Ignorance, to the other a sin of Presumption; In the one it is a personal, in
the other it is a doctrinal sin; and therefore is rather to be confessed by
your Clergy then by your Laity; rather by your Ministers, then by your People;
^or whereas your People are but single, your Priests are double Idolaters, that
is to say, not only in their practice, but also in their doctrine, in that they
have set up the Inventions of men, instead of the Commandment of God, and
magnified the authority of men not only against, but also above the authority
of God, in Gods own worship: So that your Priests had need doubly ask God
forgiveness concerning this second Commandment; first for the Idoloatry of
their Images, and next for the Idolatry of their Imaginations.

CAP. V. Of Praying to Saints and Angels.
1. CHrist our only Sanctuary in the day of Judgment, should be so now. 2.
Praying to Saints is asking both in vain and in sin. 3. Angels not trusted with
themselves, or with others, but in part: God found no stedfastness, or Put no
trust in the Angels, are both one. 4. That literal sense most proper in
doubtful Texts, which is most agreeable with the comparative and illative sense
of the same, is a rule which keeps the unlearned from being interpreters of the
holy Scripture, and the learned from quarrelling with sound or judicious
interpretations. 5. Gods putting no trust in his best servants whether Saints
or Angels, a sufficient reason that men should not pray to them. 6. His finding
no steadfastness in them, proves the same concerning those confirmed in Grace
and Glory. 7. Papists swallow the mis-allegations of their own writers, but
quarrel at the true and proper allegations of the text, by Protestants. 8.
Bellarmines allegation for the Invocation of Angels, from sacobs practice, Genesis
48. 16. refuted by the context, because it is interpreted in such a
Grammatical, as is against the Theological and Logical sense of the words, that
is, in such a sense as is against the analogy of Religion in the Decalogue,
(which is as necessarily observed in the interpretation of doubtful
propositions in the Old, as the analogy of faith is in the New Testament) and
against the anaolgie of Reason, both in the proposition, and in the connection,
and in the deduction: And generally all the texts alleged for this false
invocation are so mis-interpreted, particularly this, in the judgment both of
Greek and Latin Church. 9. The Latin translation of Job 5. 1. intemperately
defended by Bellarmine against Chemnitius; Spirituael drunkenness worse then
Carnal, and makes the more scandalous Minister in Gods account. 10. The words
of Job not to be interpreted of the Invocation of Saint, by Bellarmines own
professi^n, both as a Critic and as a Divine, though not as a Disputant, and
much more by Text. 11. Invocation of Saints is against the analogy of says in
the C^ed, and of righteousness in the Decalogue, and against all the devotions
taught us in the holy Bible, and consequently does leave Christ's Communion, and
must lose Christ's inter^ssion, as being a piece of Religion, not of Gods, but
of man's making. 12. The Invocation of the blessed Virgin used by the Romanists,
faulty in the object of worship, and the manner of worshipping, and
consequently falsely imputed to the Catholic Church, which is a Communion of
Saints, not of sinners. 13. Protestantism in Popery against this false worship.
14. The Catholic Church falsely alleged for this false worship, which yet
could not make it true worship, since it is against Gods Commandments; The
Church not having an absolute power in the exercise of Religion to act against
Gods Law, but only an orderly power to act according to it: The Churches
threefold foundation, 1o In her Religion, 2o In her Communion, 3o In her
authority admits not her authority before, much less against her Religion, and
her Communion. 15. Prayers to Saints, as to the authors of the blessings prayed
for, unlawful by Bellarmines own Confession, who labors to excuse his Church
for using such prayers, but unsuccessfully: The ^esuites maintain such prayers
both by their doctrine and by their Practice. 16. Gods trusting the holy Angels
with his Elect, is no sufficient ground for their praying to Angels. 17.
Baronius unjustly quarreling with Theodoret about the worshipping of Angels,
and falsely interpreting the Canon of Laodicea. 18. No ungratefulness in our not
praying to Angels, because ung^dliness in praying to them. 19. The Pap^sts
invocation of their Guardian Angel, not to be justified,

The fifth Exception.
IBidem sect. 5. p. 219. Against Praying to Saints you allege, Behold he put
no trust in his Servants, and his Angels he charged with folly, Job 4. 18. Our
Latin Vulgar reads thus, Ecce qui serviunt ei non sunt stabiles, and in
Angelis suis reperit pravitatem: Conformably whereto your old translation
reads, Behold be found not stedfastness in his Servants, and laid folly upon
his Angels; And Job 15. 15. your old repeats, He found no stedfastness in his
Saints, though your new, He puts no trust in his Saints: Now according to
our Latin and your old English translation, this place must needs be
understood of the bad Angels that fell, as is evident by those words, 2 Pet. 2.
4. If God spared not the Angels that sinned, where both your old, and Mr. Beza
also quotes in the margent this very place, Job 4. 18. Here is nothing then
against praying to Angels and Saints confirmed in grace and glory: If your new
then be to be understood of them (as you understand it and urge it too) That
(...) pa^teth no trust in his servants nor Saints, it is contrary to it self,
and to all Divine Scripture: For to omit a thousand ^stances, thus says Saint
Paul, though yet alive upon earth, 1 These. 2. 4. we were allowed of God to be
put in trust with the Gospel, and 1 Timothy 1. 11. the glorious Gospel of the
blessed God was committed to my Trust; And does God put no trust in him now
being a glorified Saint in heaven think you? you cannot deny but in blessed
Angels at least: Otherwise, why do you so earnestly beg of God to put them in
trust with your self both body and soul, praying in your ejaculation 34, O God
let them compass me about wh^st I am living, and carry my soul into Abraham's
bosom when I shall die; Let them in in my sickness succor and defend me, and
in my death convey my soul to the everla^ing mansions, Now since God puts this
great trust in them with us, ough^ (...) we to put them in trust, by reverently
^mmending our selves unto them? and by humbly praying them to do those good
offers for us, which you very piously here mention, least we should
ungratefully slight them, contrary to Gods command, Ex. 23. 21. Observa eum and
audi vocem ejus, nec contemnendum putes.

The Answer.
1. I Will not spend words with you like a Sophister, but sense like a Divine;
nor will I wonder with what face you made this Exception, but see with what
Head, Heart and Hand I can answer it; for all will be little enough to
vindicate Gods glory, which you have taken from him to give unto his servants;
so little cause have you to be troubled that we will not join with you in the
same theft, and agree altogether to rob God: For you say, Against praying to
Saints, I allege Job 4. 18. It seems I might have alleged twenty texts more
impertinently for praying to Saints, and no exception would have been taken at
my allegations; For so your late Dogmatist has done, most unconscionably,
because to the abuse of Christian Religion, most uncharitably, because to the
breach of Christian Communion; and yet neither you, nor any of your party have
sought to reclaim his error, or to repair Gods truth; But you have laid a task
upon me, That I must ^rit vindicate mine own, before I may oppose his
Allegations; Mine own allegation was this, Behold he put no trust in his
servants, and his Angels he charged with ^olly; This (...) used as an argument
to confute that strange, I might have said that blasphemous Invocation, which
you are pleased to teach poor mis-believing souls, (though its rythm being
above its reason, shows in what unhappy age it stole into your prayers;) O
Thoma Didyme, succurre nobis miseris, ne damnemur cum impi^s, in adventu
Judicis, Help us O good Saint Thomas that we be not condemned with the wi^ked
in the last Judgment; For, said I, those mighty helpers the blessed Saints,
will not in that day be able to help themselves, much less will they be able to
help others: Therefore all of us had reed rely upon that helper, which alone is
able to stand himself, and to support us in the Judgment; and he is no other
but only the eternal Son of God. For saying this, two great sins are laid to my
ch^ge (by the cons^quence of your exception which concerns Divines, though not
by the words of it which concern Grammarians.)

The first is, That I look upon the day of Judgment with too fearful an eye,
and seek to get my self an helper or a supporter against that day.

The second is, That I look upon my Savior with too faithful an eye, and seek
to get him for my helper and supporter.

Come Sir, let us not triste away our souls, though we do our words, but
acknowledge the terror and the scrutinie of that day will be both alike
unsupportable; That the Justice of God will show it self indispensable: That
our conviction will be made indisputable, and why not our condemnation
undeniable? That all flesh must then keep silence, and no flesh will be able to
keep station before him, but such as have the eternal Justice to satisfy for
their sins, and the eternal Word to plead on their behalf that satisfaction.
Therefore in this unimaginable, unexpre^, inextricable exigency and di^tress of
^ouls, there can be but one common Sanctuary for all mankind to she un^o, and
consequently in vain do any of us ^lie to other Sanctuaries before it; For if
we must chang our other Sanctuaries then, why should we choose them now? If the
Saints then cannot be our Helpers, why should we now pray unto them for help,
since all our Prayers tend to this, That we may be acquitted in the last
Judgment, and not so gain the world as to lose our own souls? My help comes
from the Lord, (says holy David) which made heaven and earth, Psalm 121. 2.
not saying what help, because he meant all help; not saying ae what time,
because he meant at all times: not saying in what exigencies because he meant
in all exigencies; so then this is his meaning, All my help, at all times and
in all exgencies, comes from the Lord which made heaven and earth; As no Saint
helped him to make them, so no Saint can help me when he will destroy them;
Therefore if I would not be helpless in that day when I shall most want help,
even in the day of Destruction, I must beseech him to be my Helper which made
heaven and earth; For only he that made them out of nothing, is able to keep me
from being wor^e then nothing: ^or though the Heavens shall then pass away with
a great noise, and the earth shall be burned up, (2 Pet. 3. 10.) yet his help
shall not pass away, but shall preserve me, and all those that heartily Pray
unto him, from the everlasting Burnings; which is more then he has promised to
do for those who pray to Saints, and it is to be feared that such prayers will
make him do less: Therefore give me such an Helper as will not leave me nor
forsake me till he has saved me, and sure that can be no other but the God of
my salvation; so says the same holy Supplicant, Thou have been my help, leave
me not neither forsake me O God of my salvation, Psalm. 27. 9. May I say to any
Saint in the Day of thanks giving, (when I shall be in heaven) Thou have been
my help. 2. And how then shall I say to any Saint in the day of supplication,
(whiles I am on earth) Make speed to save me, make haste to help me; since what
is Prayer on earth, will be Prayer in Heaven; for we shall not there learn
unthankfulness: How can I leave out O Lord, and say, O Mother of God save me
and help me? For in this case your learned Cardinal supplies me with a reason
to the contrary, Nam ea quibus indigen^us superant vires creaturae, ac proinde
etiam Sanctorum, (Bell de ^anct. Beat. lib. 1. c. 17.) Those things which we
(...), are above the power of the Saints to give us; And if our wants be above
their Power, how are our Prayers for the supply of those wants not above their
Glory? for we are taught to say at the end of our Prayers, For thine is the
Kingdom, the power and the glory; nor can we pray in faith to any, to whom we
cannot say so at the end of our Prayers; therefore not to any but to God the
Father, Son and holy Ghost; And it is the great scandal and greater sin of your
Prayers to the blessed Virgin and other Saints, That you ask those blessings
and that protection from them, which he alone can give, whose is the Kingdom,
the Power and the Glory; But to return to your Cardinals Reason, (which alone
is enough to keep me from turning to his Religion) If those things which we
want be not in the power of the Saints to give us, why should they be in our
Prayers to the Saints, as if they could give them? ^or be that has said, Ask
and it shall be given you, Mat. 7. 7. has in effect said, Ask not of those who
cannot give; For that is either to ask in vain, or to ask in sin; it is to ask
vain if without the Gift; it is to ask in sin if against the Precept: So then I
asking not that help of the Saints which they cannot give, am acquitted by your
own Doctor from asking in vain; But you asking from them that help which God
alone does give, are not so easily acquitted by our blessed Savior from asking
in sin.

3. If then there be no stedfastness in the Saints to stand before God, how can
they make me so steadfast as to stand before him? Or, If God put no trust in his
servants to save themselves, why should I put my trust in them, to save me?
Both interpretations agree in sense, though they differ in words; He found no
stedfastness in his servants, or He put no trust in his servants; The Hebrew
word will bear both, as Saint Hierom has rendered it, Ecce qui serviunt e^ non
sunt stabiles; so Pagnin has rendered it, Servis suis non credet; The one
says, He found no stedfastness in his servants; The other says, He put no
trust in his servants; Nay more, He will put no trust in his servants; He has,
he does, he will put no trust in his servants; The Proposition is of eternal
Truth, not to be made (...) in any Tence, because not subject to Time; Take it
then of the Angels, his first and best servants, you must take this for the
meaning of it, He did put no tru^t in them when he first made them; he does put
no trust in them since he has confirmed them; he will put no trust in them
when he shall glorify them, that of themselves or through their own
stedfastness, they should be able to stand either in nature, or in grace, or in
glory; For these words, He put no trust in his servants, are not to be
understood, in regard of other things (as you strangely imagine) but in regard
of themselves: God does trust one creature with another, (the inferior
creature with the superior) Non propter defectum virtutis, sed propter
abundantiam bonitatis (as Aquinas speaks) not for the defect of his virtue, but
for the abundance of his goodness, Ut dignitatem causalitatis creaturae
communicet; that he may communicate to the creature the honor of causality,
making one creature the instrumental or subordinate cause of good unto another,
whiles himself alone is the efficient and supreme cause of good to All; But
this partial or respective Trust is not here meant, which is only in regard of
some particular effects, or operations, but that absolute and universal Trust
which no less concerns the very Being of the creature, then its working: In
this sense God puts no trust in his servants, that is, he trusts them not with
themselves, he leaves them not to themselves; for it he did, they would soon
lose themselves; according to that of Saint Augustine, Solus Deus immutabilis
est; quae autem fecit, quia ex nihilo sunt, mutabilia sunt; God only is
unchangeable, but all things that he has made are changeable, because he has
made them out of nothing; q. d. There was a change in their very making (a
change from nothing to what they are) and therefore they must needs still be
subject to change now they are made; For whatsoever is made out of nothing,
would soon return to its first nothing, did not the same hand which first made
it, still preserve and uphold it: But because you have lately made your selves
new Fathers, from whom you had rather take your Divinity then from the Old, I
will allege unto you one of those new Fathers, and that is your Father Pineda,
who gives us this Paraphrase upon the Place, [Ecce qui serviunt ei non sunt
stabiles] Certe supremi ipsi spiritus and Dei ministri, quorum praestans atque
praeclara natura and constitutio est, nihil ex se boni habent, nullam vivendi,
nullam consistendi stabilitatem, neque firmitatem nisi a Deo creatore and
bonorum omnium authore fulciantur, and confirmentur; Surely those very supreme
spirits and Ministers of God, who have a most excellent nature and
constitution, have no good of themselves, no stedfastness of living or of
subsisting from themselves, but as they are upheld and confi^med from God their
maker, the fountain of all goodness; So in that other parallel place to this,
Job 15. 15. Iterum videtur repetere illam propositionem capitis quarti, ecce
qui serviunt ei non sunt stabiles; and argumento a majori probat hominem
carneum and luteum non posse merito Sanctitatis constantiam and firmitatem sibi
arrogare; He again repeats the Proposition, says Pineda, ^rged in the fourth
Chapter, v. 18. and by an argument from the greater to the less, proves that
man cannot arrogate to himself any stedf^stness or constancy in righteousness;
You here divert me from Divinity, and make me turn Grammarian, for you say here
our old repea^s, He found no stedfastness in his Saints, though our new, He
puts no trust in his Saints: If you are angry with our old translation for
being constant to it self, you are angry with it for a virtue, for constancy is
so: If with our new, for dissenting from our old, you are angry with your own
Pagnine, for our new follows him, as our old followed your old, in its sense,
though not in its inconstancy; For that says, Ecce qui serviunt ei non sunt
stabiles, cap. 4. v. 18. But Ecce inter Sanctos ejus nemo immutabilis, cap. 15.
v. 15. And yet the Hebrew Text is exactly the same in every point and Tittle,
in both places, save that in the fourth Chapter it is said (...) in his servants,
in the 15. (...) in his Saints, but (...) is the same in both places, Though
your old or Vulgar say, Non sunt stabiles, He found not stedfastness, in the
fourth Chapter, and Nemo immutabilis, none is unchangeable, in the fifteenth:
But your new, (that is Pagnines translation) says in both places alike, Non
credet, He put no trust, whom our new had reason to follow, not only because he
more agreed with the Hebrew, but also because he disagreed not from himself: So
that for your own translations sake, you should have spared this fond cavil,
more then for ours.

4. But I return to your Pineda, who like a judicious Divine looks upon words
as they are in their sense, not in their sound, and takes that for their sense
which is not only positively true by Grammatical construction, but also
comparatively true by real connection, and illatively true by rational
deduction, which is the only way not to be mistaken in a Text that, like this,
is liable to so many diverse and different interpretations, as himself
asserteth, Admodum vary hoc ab aliis vertitur; Pagninus, In Angelis suis ponet
lumen; Tygurina, Angelis suis in did it vesaniam; Vatablus, nec in Angelis suis
posuit lucem exactissimam; Regia, In Angelis suis ponet gloriationem;
Symmachus, In Angelis suis reperit Vanitatem; Sept. cum nostra, Adversus
Angelos suos pravum quid advertit; quae tanta varietas orta est ex faecunditate
radicis Halal, etc. He finding the positive or proper sense so diverse and
repugnant, according to Grammatical construction, took that for the most
proper, which was most agreeable with the comparative and with the illative
sense; and that was this, He put no trust in his servants, and his Angels he
charged with folly; For this is his exposition, Melius in communi accipitur pro
Sanctis, sive Angelis sive hominibus; nam nemo fit tam inconcussae
constantisque naturae, qui mutari non possit: This place is best taken of the
Saints in general, whether they be Angels or men; for none of them all is of so
unshaken a temper but he may be changed; Comparing both places together, and
sinding in the fourth Chapter first servants, then Angels; in the fifteenth
first Saints, then heavens (which Targum expounds Angels) and weighing the
intent and purpose of both places, was to beat Job from an opinion of his own
rightousness, and to make him humble himself before his Maker, He gives this
for the most proper Grammatical or positive sense o^ the words, [He put no
trust in his servants, and his Angels he charged with folly] because this
interpretation was most agreeable to the comparative sense of the words as they
were compared with themselves, or with their parallel place, according to the
connection of the thing spoken; And also because it was most agreeable to the
illative sense of the words, according to rational deduction from the intent of
the Speaker: So that the comparative and the illative senses did here show
which among so many was to be taken for the true positive sense.

A thing much to be observed to keep illiterate men from turning Interpreters
of the Text, (who have not Grammar enough to understand the literal or positive
sense of any one place of Scripture in the language it was written, much less
Logic enough to find out the comparative or the illative sense from other
places) yet more to be observed to keep learned men from quarreling with such
interpretations, which though seemingly different in words, yet do really agree
in all these three senses, as does our new English Translation, though you are
pleased to say, It is contrary to it self, and to all divine Scripture; For
Pineda had observed a greater difference in your old Latin translation both
from it self, (saying in one place Non sunt stabiles; in another, Nemo
immutabilis) and from the new, which said in both places, Non credet, yet
finding the Difference to be verbal, not real; in words only, not in ^rse,
joins all together in his Exposition, because all this varitie did unanimously
tend to one and the same Truth, even to show the instability and unstead^ness
of Gods best Saints and Servants, whether Angels or men, whether in heaven or
in earth.

5. For, says he, Job. 15. 15. Pagninus ex Hebraeo, and Septuaginta, Sanctis
suis non credet, i. Nemo est qui fidelis servus ex naturae suae merito and
ratione haberi usquequaque possit. A verbo Aman, quod est credere tanquam rei
fideli and constant^, aut fidele esse and constans, cui credi debeat; Pagnine
from the Heb^ew, and the Septuagint renders the place thus, He puts no trust
in his Saints, that is, He has none that of himself, or by the merit of his
nature, ought to be accounted in all respects his true and faithful servant,
from the word Aman, which is to put trust as to a thing faithful and constant,
or to be faithful and constant, such as ought to be trusted; And again, Yea the
heavens are not clean in his sight; In re igitur clarissima and perfectissima,
videt Deus maculas, quae nos praetereunt: Sic igitur de nostri ani^i maculis
existimare oportet: Therefore God see^ some (...) and blemishes which we cannot
see, in the most clear and perfect substances: And so ought we to think of the
spots and b^emishes of our souls. Surely the Saints cannot be more
quick-sighted to see further into our souls then we our selves, and as sure
that we shall be judged for those blemishes of our souls, which neither they
nor we our selves do see (For God sees them and will condemn them, and us for
them, unless his Son exempt us from the condemnation) How then can we
reasonably, (much less Religiously) pray to Saints, to prepare us for
Judgment, by discovering to us our sins which they cannot see, and much less
to support us in Judgment, by taking from us those sins which they cannot
expiate? So fully convincing is this Text, against praying to Saints, as it is
expounded by a great Author of your own.

6. And now Sir, I hope, our new translation, He put no trust in his servants,
(though in outward appearance it recede from our old and from your vulgar
Latin) may pass for current, since it is avowed and attested not only by the
Hebrew and the Greek, but also by your own Pineda; But your exposition of the
old, may not pass for current, He found no steafastness in his servants, that
is, in the bad Angels; For how were they his servants after they had disclaimed
and renounced his service, and were become his enemies? How were they his
Saints, when they were in actual Rebellion against their King? How were they
his Saints, (as the parallel place calls them) after they were become obstinate
sinners? But I suppose you will little regard my arguments, (for you generally
have a deaf ear for us Protestants, though you will not have a dumb mouth)
Therefore again I produce your own Pineda against you, who will either find
acceptance with you as a Divine, or force it from you as a Jesuit; And he
telling us that some understand this Text in particular of good, others of bad
Angels, concludes in effect it is best understood in general of All Angels; for
so are his words, Sensus uterque ad rem facit; nam quicquid lucis, laudis,
gloriationis in Angelis reperiri potest, a Deo datum, constitutum and inditum
est; ex se nihil habent nisi insaniam negative, i. nullam ex se sapientiam,
nullam virtutem, bonitatem nullam; Both interpretations make to one and the
same purpose; for whatsoever light, or praise, or exultation is in the good
Angels, it is all from God; (there is (...) in its primary signification,
Laudare, gloriari, vocem attollere;) From themselves they have nothing but
madness negatively, that is, no wisdom, no virtue, no goodness; (there is (...)
in its secundarie signification, by way of Antiphrasis, Nequam and pravum esse,
gloria and nominis splendore indignum:) Here is then very much, (though you say
here is nothing) against praying to Angels and Saints confirmed in grace and
glory; For what is their confirmation to my Religion? or how comes my Religion,
which is the homage I owe to my Creator, made communicable to a creature? Be he
never so glorious, yet he is as far from God as my self; for betwixt finite and
infinite the distance is infinite, whether the finite be glorious or
inglorious; for be he never so glorious, yet he and his glory both are nothing
in comparison of him to whom Cherubins and Seraphins continually do cry, Heaven
and earth are full of the majesty of thy Glory.

7. Having vindicated mine own allegation against praying to Saints, I come to
oppose your Cardinals allegations for it, which though they savor much more of
learning and authority, yet not one jot less of impertinency: And yet you and
all yours swallow them as glib, as once you swallowed the holy league and
Covenant; or as still you are desirous to swallow up all other Churches into
your own pretended mother Church that is, as that Behemoth swalloweth waters,
of whom it is said, Behold he drinks up a river, and hastes not; he trusts
that he can draw up Jordan into his mouth, Job 4. 23. A large swallow you have,
to let down your own Camels, whiles you strain at our gnats; not considering
the advice of the first Bishop of Jerusalem to his Clergy, My Brethren, have
not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of glory, with respect of
persons, Jam. 2. 1. If you had not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ with
respect of persons more then of causes, you would rather be exceptious against
your own writers, for most shamefully misapplying the holy Scriptures to set up
your false worship, then with ours for rightly applying them, to pull it down;
since it is so much to the dishonor of Christ our Redeemer, and to the danger
of those Christian souls which he has redeemed: And yet your late writers
seeing the unwritten word so unequal a match to grapple with the written word
(for the Protestants have opened their eyes, though God alone can open their
hearts, and we pray him to open them) do labor to prove all your false
adorations, and false invocations, out of the holy Scriptures, notwithstanding
they are so plainly and so directly against the express letter of the Law of
Moses, and therefore cannot be according to the letter of the Prophets, which
are no other then (...) ^aw: But I will confine my self to your mo^ ^ed
Dogmatist, and desire you with me to consider the strange impertinency, and (if
wilful) the stranger imprety of his allegations out of the Text, to maintain
your invocation of Saints: And amongst them all, two only shall serve my turn.

8. The first is that of Genesis 48. 16. The Angel which redeemed me from all evil
bless the lads; Hic aperte sanctus Jacob A^gelum invocavit, (says Bellarm.)
Here holy Jacob did manifestly invocate an Angel. If he did, it is manifest he
took that Angel for the God of his Fathers Abraham and Isaac; for the God which
fed him all his life long, and redeemed him from all evil; for he invocateth
none other to bless the lads but only that God; so says the Text, God before
whom my Fathers. Abraham and Isaac did walk, the God which ^ed me all my life
long to this day; The Angel which redeemed me from all evil, bless the ^ads:
It Is palpable all these particulars do concern but one, and him Jacob desires
to bless the children: If that one were an Angel, he did not pray for Gods
blessing upon them, so the lads were little beholding to him: If that one were
God, he did not pray to an Angel to bles^ them: so (...) ^olding to your Car^.
Nay indeed all that are concerned in this Text (for the Angel though named, yet
is not concerned in it) are little beholding to him; for all are losers by this
interpretation. 1o God loses his honor of accepting, feeding, redeeming and
blessing his servants. 2o Abraham and Isaac lose their God; For it was the
Almighty God (not an Angel) that said to Abraham, Walk before me and be thou
perfect, Genesis 17. 1. and God. before whom my Fathers Abraham and Isaac did
walk, says this Text. 3o The poor infants lose their blessing; for it is clear,
an Angel could not bless them, but only ministerially from God. 4o Jacob loses
his Religion, for he calls upon a false God, if upon an Angel instead of God.
All these cannot lose by this interpretation, and the Interpreter himself be no
loser; therefore though I will not say he lost his honesty by seeking to wrest
a text, yet I must say he has lost his authority by seeking to oppose it; For
it is not an exposition but an opposition of the Text, when words are taken
Grammatically in their own sense, that should be taken Theologically in Gods
sense: The Grammatical sense of a word is according to its own signification:
But the Theological sense of a word is according to Gods use of it, or Gods
application; As Genesis 18. 2. The Lord appeared unto Abraham, but v, 2. Lo
three men stood by him; And again v. 16. The men rose up from thence, yet v.
17. And the Lord said; and it is evident by all Abraham's prayer, that it was the
Lord appeared unto him, for he calls him the Judge of all the earth, v. 25.
and v. 33. it is said, The Lord went his way, as soon as he had left communing
with Abraham. If you take this word men Grammatically, as it is in its own
signification, you must say Abraham prayed to a man; But if you take it
Theologically, as it is in Gods use or application, it is no less then the Lord
appearing in the likeness of a Man; and you must say That Abraham prayed only
to the Lord; So in this Text (mis-interpreted by your great Doctor) if you take
the word Angel Grammatically as it signifies in it self, it is plain Jacob
invocated an Angel, but if you take it Theologically as God uses it, it is no
less then the Lord in the likeness of an Angel, and so it is plain Jacob
invocated none but God; And truly the one Text might as well have been urged to
prove that Abraham invocated a man, as the other to prove that Jacob invocated
an Angel; Both good proofs Grammatically, but neither a good proof
Theologically; For Grammarians look upon words as they signify in themselves,
but Divines look upon words as they signify in their use; the reason is,
because the work of the one is to understand the Thing, but the work of the
other is to understand the Truth; therefore as doubtful Propositions in the New
Testament are to be expounded according to the Analogy of Faith in the
Apostles Creed, that we may have Truth in our Belief: So doubtful Propositions
in the Old Testament are to be expounded according to the analogy of
righteousness in Moses his Decalogue, that we may have Truth in our Obedience:
And as that Proposition, This is my body, must be taken Theologically, that is,
in the sense of the speaker, because taken Grammatically, that is, in the bare
sense of the words, it overthrows the analogy of Faith in the Apostles Creed
concerning Christ's natural body; for that was conceived by the holy Ghost, born
of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead and
buried, ascended into heaven, and now sits on the right hand of God, which
cannot be truly said of Christ's Sacramental Body in the blessed Eucharist; So
this Proposition, The Angel which redeemed me from all evil, bless the lads,
must be taken Theologically, that is, in the sense of the speaker; because
taken Grammatically, that is, in the bare sense of the words, it overthrows the
analogy of righteousness in M^ses his Decalogue, ascribing that to an Angel,
which is proper and peculiar to God alone, by virtue of the first Commandment,
as to be the God before whom Abraham and Isaac did walk, the God which had fed
Jacob all his life, and had redeemed him from all evil, and could bless the
lads by his own authority, both with temporal and with spiritual blessings: ^or
he that says Thou shall have no other Gods but me, says, Thou shall not have
an Angel instead of me, as if thy Fathers had walked before him, thou were to
be fed from him, to be redeemed by him, to (...) blessed through him; The
analogy o Righteousness or of Religion in the first Commandment admits not
this interpretation; therefore though it be Grammatically true in the sense of
the words, yet it is Theologically false in the sense of the speaker; for Gods
Spirit speaks not contradictorily to himself. And being proved to be
Theologically false, because it is against the analogy of righteousness or of
Religion, it is easy to prove it Logically false, because it is against the
analogy of reason: And truly so it is in three respects.

1. In respect of the Proposition, The Predicate not agreeing with the Subject;
and therefore though an Angel be named, yet he is not intended, because he is
named with such a property or attribute as belongs only to God, viz Redeeeming
from all evil, and Blessing with all good.

2. This interpretation is Logically false in respect of the connection, the
Proposition not agreeing with the Antecedents and Consequents; For an Angel
cannot be the God before whom Jacobs Fathers walked, by whom Jacob himself was
fed and redeemed, from whom Jacobs children could be blessed.

3. This interpretation is Logically false in respect of the deduction, because
if an Angel be here meant as he is named, it will follow that an Angel has the
Kingdom and Power, may have the Glory and worship of God.

And now pray Sir consider how distant are your proceedings from that love of
truth, that candor of Ingenuity, that care of conscience which should be among
Christian Divines, both in rejecting those interpretations of the holy
Scriptures against praying to Saints (whether Angels or Men) which are
undoubtedly true, not only Grammatically, but also Theologically and Logically,
and in embracing those interpretations for praying to Saints, which are
undoubtily false, if not Grammatically, yet at least both Thelogically and
Logically in all these respects: And such will be found all the interpretations
of the Text alleged by your late Divines in this argument, if they be
diligently examined either according to the analogy of Religion, or according
to the analogy of Reason: But I return to this, which cannot be made true in
the judgment of the most eminent Divines both of Greek and Latin Church; I
will name you two, St. Chrysostom for the Greek, and St. Thomas of Aquine for
the Latin Church. 1. St. Christ. for the Greek Church, who upon these words,
The Angel which redeemed me from all evils bless the lads, gives us this gloss,
((...) 66. in Genesin) (...): O thankful resolution, O Soul loving of God, how
does the remembrance of his benefit dwell and lodge in his heart! That God
(says he) whom my Fathers pleased, who sed me from my youth until now, who
from the beginning delivered me from all evil, He who has showed such signal
providence toward me, He bless these Children; See here in St. Chrysostomes
gloss, Jacob prayed to God, not to the Angel to bless his grand Children; And
He was the mouth of the Greek Church. 2. St. Thomas of Aquine says the same,
but much more perspicuously as to the Confutation of Bellarmines error, though
not as to the confirmation of Gods truth; For whereas Bellarmine says, Jacob
invocated an Angel; The Angelical Dr. says, he did not, but that he called the
God of his Fathers His Angel; for these are his words upon the place, Videtur
quod Deum Patrum suorum suum vocat Angelum, and sui protectorem and salvatorem,
unde and postea in singulari dicit, Benedicat pueris istis: It seems that he
calls the God of his Fathers his Angel, and his Protector and savior, whence
it is that afterward he says in the singular number, (though he had named two,
sc. God and the Angel) He bless the lads: nisi forte Angelicam benedictionem
divinae benedictioni tanquam comministram sive subministra^ adjungat, sed modus
loquendi quem tenet si been advertatur, magis sapit primum modum; Unless you
will say that He annexeth the Angelical benediction as ministerial to the
Divine; But the manner of his speech if it be well observed, rather calls for
the first interpretation; This was Aquinas his judgment, after his most
serious deliberation upon the words, and we may well look upon it as the
judgment of the Latin Church, the rather because He was the chief Captain of
the Schoolmen, and though he labored to prove the same conclusion with
Bellarmine, yet not by the same praemisses, but he leaves out this, as not
thinking it a fit proof, and is contented only with that of Job 5. 1. Voca si
est qui tibi respondeat, and ad aliquem sanctorum convertere, which is another
of your Cardinals allegations out of the Text, to prove the Invocation of
Saints.

9. And He is so over zealous for this proof, (lib. 2. de Verbo Dei, cap. 12.)
That when Chemnitius had said the Text was corruptly interpreted in the Vulgar
translation; His answer is, Forte fuisse ebrium, quum hoc scripsit, Chemnitium;
Perchance Chemnitius was drunk when he writ this: Bad words are seldom signs of
a good cause; but often more then signs, they are proofs of a bad temper; And
we know that there is a sort of men which are drunken, but not with wine; that
stagger, but not with strong drink, Isa. 29. 9. Those upon whom the Lord has
poured out the spirit of deep sleep and has closed their eyes, v. 10. and that
this judgment is chiefly denounced against them who teach the fear of God by
the precept of men, v. 13. (or who teach for Doctrines the Commandments of
men, as our blessed Savior has explained those words, Mat. 15. 9.) for
concerning those it is said, The wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and
the understanding of their prudent shall be hid, v. 14. There is a spiritual,
as well as a carnal drunkenness; and God keep all Christians, (especially the
Ministers of Christ) from them both, for either is enough to make them
scandalous Ministers in Gods, if not in man's account: But of the two the
spiritual drunkenness is the more sinful, though the carnal drunkenness be the
more shameful; The carnal drunkard is a beast, but the spiritual drunkard is a
Devil; Noah repented and recovered of his carnal; but Ham (that mocked his
Father) never repented nor recovered of his spiritual drunkenness: I would to
God our proud malicious self-justitiaries, but others Censors, would seriously
consider this undeniable, though perhaps unwelcome Truth, who in this
particular follow the example, as in other, the doctrine of the Jesuits, and
deal with sober, grave, learned, Religious Divines their Brethren at least, if
not their Fathers, as Bellarmine did with Chemnitius, reproaching their
persons, instead of answering their Arguments or reverencing their Functions;
That by persuading the common rout they are scandalons Ministers, they may
deprive Gods Church of the office, Gods people of the benefit, and God himself
of the glory of their ministry: This is such a kind of spiritual intoxication
as besotteth not only the Head, but also the Heart; destroying all true
temperance and sobriety, which is therefore called (...), because it guards and
preserves and keeps entire the very mind, the Heart and the Soul:

For I pray, was that Synagogue of the Libertins to be reputed a company of
sober Ecclesiastics, who not being able to resist the wisdom and the Spirit
by which St. Stephen spoke, suborned men, stirred up the people, and set up
false witnessess, which said, This man cease not to speak blasphemous words,
Act. 7. as if they had said in our new style, (for it is sharp, and cuts deep,)
He is a common swearer: Or were not those Jews worse then drunk, who because
St. John Baptist observed a secure course of life, said He had a Divil; and
because our blessed Savior came eating and drinking said, He was a man
gluttonous and a wine-bibber, a friend of publicans and sinners l. Matt. 11.
That is, say our new Merchants, (for they man sale of Gods glory, men's
innocence and their own consciences) He is a Papist, or He is a common
drunkard. They who thus unjustly and unconscionably, asperse Orthodox
Ministers, that by taking away their Innocence, they may also take away not
only their Patrimony, but also their Authority and their Ministry, are
spiritual drunkards besotted either with pride or with malice, or with
coveteousness; And the Holy Ghost speaks against them as drunkards, saying of
them, Behold they Belch out with their mouth, Swords are in their lips; for
who, say they, does hear? Psalm. 59. 7. Behold they Belch out with their mouth;
what can drunkards do more? and they say, Who does hear? what do such arrant
sots say less? But thou O Lord shall laugh at them, (though they laugh at all
the World besides) Thou shall have all the Heathen in derision; thou accountest
them no better them Heathen, though they account themselves the only good
Christians; or if you please, the only true Jesuits, as if no other but
themselves did truly know, or love, or Preach Jesus Christ; he that is of this
proud persuasion, or rather of this perverse and poysonsome disposition, may be
called a Jesuit, whether he pretend to be a Papist or a Protestant: But it is
not bad language can make any man a bad Divine, save him that speaks it; Been
facere and male audire Regium est, To do well and to hear ill is the part of a
good King; And by the same reason, To say well, (that is boldly to rebuke vice,
and constantly to preach the truth) and to hear ill, is the part of a good
Divine; Black-mouthed calumnies stick a very little while upon their names that
patiently bear them, but a long time (nay for ever, unless they be washed away
by the tears of repentance) upon their souls that maliciously use them; such
arguments suddenly confute themselves, but eternally condemn their Authors.

10. Therefore Bellarmine relyes not upon this argument, but finds out
another, saying, Nam apertissime Hebraea sic se habent, Voca nunc si est
respondens tibi, and ad aliquem de sanctis respice; and sane si quaeritur
verbum expressum, hic expressissimum est; (Bell. lib. 2. de Verbo Dei, cap.
12.) The sense of the Hebrew is plainly this, Call now if any will answer thee,
and look to some one among the Saints: If we would have an express Text (to
prove the Invocation of Saints) this is most express: There Is no calumny in
this assertion concerning the Person, but sure there is concerning the cause;
For if this Text in the Hebrew be so express for the Invocation of Saints, how
comes it to pass that (...) of the Hebrew Doctors did so understand it? (for
Ezra and Jarchi explain it of Holy men here on earth) and none of the Hebrew
nation did so practice it? For all the world cannot prove that the Jews did
Invocate Saints, or Angels; so that either the Jews were inexcusable for not
performing this express duty of the Text, or Bellarmine is inexcusable for
calling it so. And indeed himselves gives us two strong presumptions to say,
that though he did call, yet he did not believe it to be an express duty of the
Text; The one is taken from him as a Critic, for in his Hebrew Grammar (Par.
2. cap. 4.) He reckons the pronoune (...) (used in this place) among the
Interrogatives, and consequently, (...) cannot here be rightly interpreted, ad
aliquem, by way of command or concession, but ad quem? by way of question or of
Interrogation; not to one of the Saints, but to which of the Saints? The other
is taken from him as a Divine; For in his first book de Beat. Sanct. c. 19. v.
2. he says plainly there was no invocation of Saints before Christ's ascension
into Heaven; Quia ante id tempus sancti non videbant Deum, non fuit consuetum
in veteri Testamento ut diceretu^, (...) Abraham ora pro me. Because before
that time the Saints did not see God, it was not usual under the Old Testament
for any to say, O Saint Abraham pray for me: As a Critic he tells us the
Hebrew words were properly to be interpreted by way of Interrogation; As a
Divine he tells us the Jews did not take them for a command or injunction; for
then whether the Saints did see God or not, they must have been invocated;
Therefore it is only as a Disputant that he tells, This was a most express Text
for the Invocation of Saints; sure Pineda his fellow-Jesuit thought it not so;
for he says these words had as many several interpretations, as thy had
several interpreters, Tot interpretationes quot interpretum capita; and by
cleaving to Aquinas his exposition of them, which was for praying to Saints, He
falls into this absurdity to say that at that time this Invocation was both in
the custom and in the faith of the Church, Tum in consuetudine, tum in fide
fuisse receptam; which though Bellarmine be zealous to affirm concerning the
Invocation of Angels, yet he is not so hardy as to affirm concerning the
Invocation of Saints: A Tenent that creates their contradictions, cannot invite
our assent, may not have our belief: And the rather because Hieronymus Osorius
a Bishop (but not a Jesuit) of their own Religion, (if at least the Religion of
Jesuits may be called the same with the Religion of the Bishops in the Church
of Rome) in his Paraphrase upon Job gives us a quite contrary exposition of
these words, saying, Denuntia quaeso alicui praestanti viro testimonium, and
animadverte an sit aliquis qui tecum sentiat: Ad quem enim ex Sanctis hominibus
adibis, qui tuae sententiae suffragari audeat? Declare now to some excellent
men your testimony, and observe if there be any that has the same thoughts
with you; For unto whom amongst all the Holy men can you go that will dare to
be of your opinion? This man was trained up in the Invocation of Saints as well
as Bellarmine, yet could not see how to ground it upon this Text; For he
expounds it not of Saints in Heaven, but of Saints on Earth, as Abenezra had
expounded it before him, Ex cujus ore sanctorum qui in terra sunt talia unquam
audisti? (...) of the Saints which are on earth out of whose mouth among all
the Saints which are on the Earth did you ever hear such things! But we may
very well grant the words are rather to be understood of Holy Angels, then of
Holy men, because he had spoken of the Angels a little before; yet even so
Bellarmines inference will not be made good, that it was then the custom to
call upon the Holy Angels for their Patronage, (tunc fuisse consuetudinem
invocandi patrocinium Sanctorum Angelorum) For the context will then require
this sense as it is delivered by the most judicious and learned Mercerus, Voca
Angelorum aliquem and eum inclama, an vero eorum vel minimus tibi respondebit,
te suo sermon and alloquio dignabitur? Nullum sane reperies: Vides quantum a
Deo distes, quum ne Angeli quidem long Deo inferiores, te sint allocuturi, si
ad eos clames, ob distantiam quae inter te est and illos: Call any one of the
Angels and cry unto him, and see if the meanest of them will answer thee, or
vouchsafe thee one word of discourse; Thou will find none; Thou see then how
far thou art distant from God, when not so much as his Angels who are so far
below him, will answer thee if thou call to them, because of the distance which
is betwixt them and thee. This is most probably the meaning of the words from
the context; for Eliphaz had a little before debased the excellencies of the
Angels in regard of God, and now comes to debase the excellencies of men in
regard of the Angels, all the scope and intent of his discourse tending to show
the emptiness and vanity of the Creature, that so he might make Job humble
himself before his Creator, as has been showed a little before, sc. Paragraph
3. 4, 5, 6. out of your own Pineda.

11. But we must take to us the whole Armor of God, that we may be able to
withstand the assaults of men so furiously assaulting us, and so watchfully
besetting us; To the Law and to the Testimony, if others speak not according to
that word, it is because there is no light, no truth in them; I ask then, Does
this Invocation of Saints agree with the analogy of Faith in the Apostles
Creed? or with the analogy of righteousness in Moses his Decalogue? I trow
not: For the one teaches me to believe in one God; the other not to call upon
him in whom I have not believed, and cannot believe; And it is clear that
Invocation of Saints is against the whole current of devotions derived to us by
the Spirit of God through the channel either of the Old or of the New
Testament, For there is scarce any prayer in either, which our Savior Christ,
who has taught it us, does not pray with us; for if he do not, it is in vain
for us to pray, since God hears not our prayers, but for his Intercession;
And therefore the Invocations that are used in the Psalms (a peculiar Book of
Prayers, and Praises made by Gods own Holy Spirit for the use of his Church,
and constantly used by it in all ages,) are generally first spoken in the
Person of Christ, (as appears in that he applied to himself very many of them;
as, my God, my God, why have thou for saken me! Psalm. 22. 1. and, Into thy
hands I commit my spirit, Psalm. 31. 6.) and being first spoken in the Person of
Christ, are the more strongly recommended to all good Christians, as composed
by his Spirit, sanctified by his lips, and empowered and strengthened by his
Intercession; For Christus realis, and Christus mysticus, Christ personally and
Christ mystically considered, do constitute but one Communion of Saints; He is
the Head, they are his Body; and therefore they must pray in sin (for in
Schism) if they pray not to him as their Head, for that is not to pray in
Christ's Communion; as also in vain, (because in sin) if they pray without their
Head, for that is not to pray in Christ's Intercession: Wherefore it being an
undoubted truth that Christ was made obedient to the whole Law for man, it
necessarily follows that praying to Saints cannot be a duty of the Law, but we
must say That Christ the eternal Son of God prayed to Saints, that is, the
Creator to the Creature. And if it be not a duty of the Law, how can it be
command in the Prophets, since they are but expounders, not enlargers of the
Law? How in this Prophet Job? whose book was penned in Hebrew by the Lawgiver
himself (and only in Arabic by Job as says your own Bellarmine, (de Script.
Eccl. cap. de Job) because it is the judgment of the Catholic Church that
Moses was the first Ecclesiastical Writer, or the first Amanuensis and penneman
of the Holy Ghost: which by the way is another argument to prove that
Bellarmine did not, could not believe this Text of Holy Job was to be
interpreted as a command, Ad aliquem Sanctoru^ respice, Look to one of the
Saints, but as a question or expostulation, Ad quem sanctorum respicies, To
which of the Saints will thou look? for without doubt so great a Scholar could
not believe, That Moses did bid us to do that in Job, which he did forbid us to
do in Exodus: For the Commandment which says Thou shall have no other Gods
but me, does likewise say, Thou shall invocate no other but me, because
invocation is the most proper and the most public acknowledgement and worship
of God: For Invocation is required by the first, though it is regulated by the
third commandment; That enjoins the object and internal affection, this only
enjoins the manner and the external expression; Therefore Call upon me in the
day of trouble, Psalm. 50. 15.) belonging to the affirmative; Call not upon any
besides me, does belong to the negative precept in the first Commandment,
since these two are contraries, and contraria sunt sub eodem genere posita,
contraries must be ranked or reckoned under one and the same Head; For in vain
does your Cardinal seek to excuse bad words in prayers, from the good sense or
meaning of him that prays (non agitur de verbis, sed de sensu verborum, Bell.
l. 1. de sanct. Beat. c. 17.) because as a right intention in our prayers, is
required by the first; so also a right expression in our prayers, is required
by the third Commandment; God requirlng us no less to honor his Name by right
words and professions in the One, then to honor his Nature by right intentions
and affections in the other:

For as we may not honor God with our lips whiles our hearts are far from him;
So neither may we dishonor him with our lips whiles our hearts are near him;
For as the one makes us Hypocritical, so the other makes us blasphemous
worshippers; As the one is directly against the internal, so the other is
directly against the external Act of Religion; as the one is against the
morality of the first, so the other is against the morality of the third
Commandment: But of this I have spoken elsewhere, of purpose to justify the
Religion established and professed amongst us (for which so many Orthodox
Divines have lately lost their livelyhoods by Protestants, and pray they may
not come to lose their lives by Papists) because I was there bound to show the
irreligion that I found not only in Faction, which has no Liturgy, but also
in superstition, which has corrupt Liturgy, (Justif. of the Church of
England, cap. 3. sec. 3.) there you might have seen more work made for you upon
the grounds of conscience, then you have here made for me only upon the grounds
of contention: Thither if you please you may go for more of this argument; but
before you go, take this Question along with you, not Where was this your
Religion of praying to Saints before Luther, but where is it now? For it is not
in any of Gods Commandments concerning Religion, nay it is plainly against them
all; It Is against the first in having a false Object, and false internal acts
of Religion; against the second, in having a false external act or manner of
Religion, by way of adoration; against the third, in having a false external
act or manner of Religion, by way of invocation, or of Praise and Profession:
As it is not according to Gods Commandments, so it cannot be Piety or
Religion: as it is against Gods Commandments, so it is moreover impiety and
irreligion: Therefore boast not any longer of the general profession and
practice of this or any other corrupt part of your Religion, which you cannot
justify in its substance; For it is a miserable Religion which is to be found
only in its exercise according to the purport of the fourth, and not also in
its substance according to the purport of the three first Commandments: A
Religion in its Name, not in its Nature; in its solemnity, not in its purity;
in its followers, not in it self: That is, in one word, A Religion not of Gods,
but of man's making.

12. To such a Religion belongs that Prayer, Maria matter gratiae, matter
misericordiae, Tu nos ab host protege, and hora mortis suscipe; which yet your
Cardinal boldly imputes to the universal Church, (sic loquitur ecclesia
universa, lib. 1. de Sanct. Beat. cap. 19.) though its language speak only the
Church of Rome, and its rythme speaks only the late and corrupt ages of that
Church, and its irreligion does in truth speak no Church; For that is no Church
whereof Christ is not the Head: And he is not the Head of that Church which
prays to such as he did not pray; And he did never pray to his Mother, but
only to his Father; teaching us o say, Our Father, not Our Mother, which art in
Heaven: We cannot say the words of this Prayer in his Communion, we cannot
obtain the blessing o^ it by his intercession, therefore if we w^l ^e his
Church, we must put this prayer o^ of our meut^es, because we dare not put it
into His: We have no pattern (...) such prayers in all the Book of God; and
(...) we can find better Patterns then God has given, we are bound to ^ollow
those of his giving, or we shall leave his (...) ^oly Communion, and lose his
So^s blessed ^ntercession in our prayers: ^or as we are sure the eternal Son of
God has ^ot taught us thus to pray, so we may be assured he will not, he
cannot (...) us in this Prayer: Esto mihi in Deum Protectorem, (Psalm. 31. 4.)
will not agree with this, Tu nos ab host protege^, In ma^us tuas co^mendo
spiritu^ meu^, will not agree with this, Et hora mortis suscipe: why should I
leave the Communion of Gods eternal Son, either in not saying the one, or in
saying the other? For I may no more now venture to have Religion, then I may
hereafter hope to have a salvation out of his Communion? And though it be more
like a Heathen then a Christian to say, If it be a question of words and of
names, and of your Law, (Acts 18. 15.) for words are to be regulated in the
exercise of Religion, according to Gods Law, by virtue of the third
Commandment, no less then thoughts by virtue of the first: Gestures by virtue
of the second, and Deeds by virtue of the fourth; yet is that saying very
unfitly applied in the defense of this Prayer: For this is as formal an
Invocation of the Blessed Virgin, as if she were God; Calling her the Mother of
Grace and Mercy, and praying her to protect us in our life, and to rece^ve us
at our death; And who can say more then this to God, (putting but Father
instead of Mother) who can ask more then this of God? This is in effect to say,
Matter de coels Dea, instead of, Pater de coelis Deus, miserere nobis miseris
peccatoribus; O blessed Mother of God, instead of O God the Father of Heaven,
have mercy upon us miserable sinners; And we ought to say, Libera nos Domine,
Good Lord deliver us, not so much in regard of any other evil and mischief, as
in regard of such Letanies: Therefore this Invocation of the Mother of God, is
faulty in Objecto cultus, and in modo colendi; both in the object of worship,
and in the manner of worshipping; I^ the object of worship, for the Mother of
God is not God; (there is the breach of the first Commandment) In the manner of
worshipping, for she is called upon with such titles, and for such blessings,
as if she were God; there is the breach of the third Commandment; Add to these
the manner of Adoration, which also generally accompanies this Invocation, and
you will see in it likewise the breach of the second Commandment; and so
cannot but show your selves strangely Religious in breaking at once all the
three Commandments that concern the substance of Religion: Here is a false
worship materially or extrinsecally in gesture and words, and a false worship
formally or intrinsecally in a Religious affection to the creature which is due
only to the Creator; So that you see I did not aggravate b^t diminish the
defects of your penance, when I said, your Confessional Interrogatories were
defective as to one; for I might have said they were defective as to three
Commandments: And will you still boast of your uncontroled and uninterrupted
exercise of this corrupt Religion: Do you think that Gods Church can outweigh
Gods Word in the balance of the Sanctuary? or will you avow that for the
practice of Gods Church, which is disavowed by the Precept of Gods Word? Say
then, you believe the Communion of sinners, instead of the Communion of Saints;
For that is sin which is directly against Gods Law; and to communicate in sin,
belongs to the Communion of sinners, not to the Communion of Saints; Therefore
pray let the Lords Psalter, which was composed by the Spirit of God, and not
the Ladies Psalter, which was impiously devised by the phansies of men, be
accounted the general rule and square of Devotions for Gods Church; And when
the Spirit of God has said, Rejoice in the Lord O ye righteous, and give
thanks for a rememberance of his holiness, Psalm. 97. 12. setting forth, 1o the
Communion of Saints, O ye Righteous; 2o the Religion of Saints, wherein they
Communicate, Rejoice in the Lord, and give thanks for a remembrance of his
holiness; (where we have the object of their Religion, the Lord; and the
internal act thereof, Rejoice; and the external act thereof, Give thanks; and
the end or intention of both, for a remembrance of his h^liness;) Do not you
persw^de the world, that his Church (truly so called) has taught the people to
say, Rejoice in the Lady O ye Righteous, and give thanks for a remembrance of
her holiness, for that were to say, that the Church has both corrupted the
Religion, and forsaken the Communion of Saints, which is little better then to
set up the Devils Chapel, instead of Gods Church; For these abominable kind of
prayers are most unconscio^able, because to the abuse of Christian Religion;
and most uncharitable, because to the breach of Christian Communion; and it is
for the Devils Chapel, not for Gods Church to be guilty of unconscionableness
and of uncharitableness.

13. Therefore let the men, not the Church bear the blame of such corrupt
invocations; For the Church of Israel did continue and fulfill Joshua's
Protestation, A^ for me and my house, we will serve the Lord, (Josh. 24. 15.)
when the men of Israel did for sake it, and served Baal; and God owns those for
his Church which had served him alone, saying, I have reserved to my self seven
thousand men who have not bo^ed the knee to Baal, (Romans 11. 4.) They who had
bowed the knee to Baal, were not G^ds reserve; they were of the men, they were
not of the Church of Israel; God himself accounting those only for his Church,
who in that general defection and apostasy, had reserved themselves for him,
and consequently who had in their hearts a secret detestation of the false
worship then generally followed, if not in their mouths an open Protestation
against it; They were all of them either private or public Protestants,
privately or publicly protesting against that Religion which served not the
Lord; and they had no worse a Precedent then I^shua, (the very type of Christ,
the author and finisher of our faith) for that their Protestation: If the true
Religion did constitute Gods Church then, why not now? (though the false made a
(...) greater noise and show then the tru^, the Prophets of God being driven
into caves, whiles the Prophets of the groves did eat at Iezabels table) For an
agreement in falsity and irreligion, though never so great, both shows and
makes rather a conspiracy o^ sinners, then a Communion of Saints. Therefore
since this Invocation is indeed (...) Religion, it must ^ds be (...) a^ributed
to the true Church of God, for that is constituted and established by the true
Religion; and is no more a true Church from its falsities, then the Moon is a
true Moon from its spots, or a man is a true man from his Diseases: And the
Church of Rome is not a true Church from the false Invocation of Saints, or any
other acts of false worship, but from the true Invocation of God, and other
such acts of true worship, which are still maintained, professed and practiced
in that Church; And we Protestants justly say, That your Religion is the same
with our Religion, but our Religion is not the same with your susperstition: As
far as as you pray to God, we pray with you, (at least in vote and desire) As
far as you pray to Saints, we can only pray for you, we dare not pray with you:
And though we may all justly be destroyed for our manifold and grievous
offenses (particularly for serving our selves of God, more then serving him, in
the prosecution of our reformation) yet in this respect we may be sure God will
never want a Protestant Church, because he will never want a true Church: If
all the world should turn Papists, Papists themselves should in this turn
Protestants, if not openly yet secretly, Protesting against the worship which
is against the Law of God, and forsaking it either explicitly by a new
obedience, or at least implicitly by an earnest Repentance: This kind of
Protestantism has hitherto preserved a true Church in the midst of Popery,
and will preserve it to the worlds end, if that should continue so long: For he
that is able out of stones to raise up children unto Abraham, is both able and
willing out of Papists to raise up children unto himself: Dutiful children,
such as will obey their Fathers commands, and therefore will not embrace such a
practice of Religion, as breaks no less then three of the chiefest of his
Commandments; or will repent that they have embraced it.

14. Therefore we dare not say with your Trent Catechist, That the Catholic
Church always invocated Saints, and worshipped their Relics; Invocationem
Sanctorum sanctorumque cinerum cultum, quem semper Catholica Ecclesia adhibuit,
huic legi non repugnare, cap. 3.) because we cannot but say that such
Invocation is repugnant not only to the first and second (which are there
joined in one) but also to the third Commandment; and we think it very unjust,
that a few Italian Bishops and Priests should endeavor to lay those sins upon
the Catholic Church, which they ought to lay to and upon their own
consciences, because they have not only suffered, but also maintained them in
their own Churches: For it is not crying out, Templum Domini, Templum Domini;
the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, that can acquit us from any act
of sin against the Lord; It Is not the noise of Gods Church in our ears, can
expel the knowledge or fear of Gods Commandments out of our hearts: God has
entrusted his Church with the Keeping, not with the Making of Religion; she is
the Guide to it, and in it, not the Author of it; That Power and Trust he
communicated only to his Son and to his Holy Spirit, because indeed it was
incommunicable to any other: For who can know the mind of God but God, who can
declare the council of his heart, ^ut only he that came out of his b^m? Shall
not God have that privile^e over his servants, which men have ov^r theirs, to
prescribe the way and (...) of his own service? or ^all we al^ow that disorder
in Gods Family, which we will not admit into our own? There was no King in
Israel when every man did that which was right in his own eyes, (Jud. 17. 6.)
If the Church may do what she pleases in matters of Religion, it is either
because there is no King in Gods Israel; or because Truth and Righteousness are
not the establishment of his Kingdom: For Truth and Righteousness come not from
man but from God; and therefore none can be the author of Religion, but only
God, since that is nothing else but Truth and Righteousness; Truth in Articles
of Faith, Righteousness in duties of life. Truth in what we are bound to
believe, Righteousness in what we are bound to practice: Therefore it is vain to
set up the Church which is only the Judge, against the Law which is the Rule of
Righteousness: For we can go to the Church only for the Practice, but we (...)
go to the Law for the Purity of Religion.

The question is here concerning the Purity of Religion, (...) of Saints be not
(...) Law of God? but the (...) is made only concerning the Practice (...)
Religion; for they tell us it was always used in the Catholic Church! We look
upon this answer as faulty for its impertinency, because the question is matter
of Right, but the answer is matter of Fact; and much more faulty for its
Calumny, because the Romanists thereby so labor to excuse their own, as to
accuse the Catholic Church: For it is plain that Christ and his Apostles never
used it; and we must look upon him as the Head, upon them as the chief members
of the Catholic Church; since we can have no Catholic Church without them,
that is, which does not persist in their doctrine, nor continue in their
Communion: And it is as plain that no particular Church since them can justify
the using it; and consequently it is unjust as well as untrue, to ascribe the use
of it to the Catholic Church, although it has of late years been used in some
particular Churches: For even Nicephorus himself says expressly (Hest. Eccl.
lib. 15. cap. 28. ad finem) That Petrus Crapheus (who lived near 500 years
after Christ) was the first that brought the Invocation of the blessed Virgin
into the prayers of the Church; and doubtless she was invocated before the
other Saints, who is now (and has been for some ages) so much invocated above
them: [(...): Ut in precatione omni Dei genitrix nominaretur, and divinum ejus
nomen invocaretur:] That this Invocation was not till then in any Church, is a
clear proof it was not of the Apostolic, and therefore though it has been
since in some Churches, cannot be a proof that it is of the Catholic Church.
For the Apostolic and the Catholic are not two Churches: But let us suppose
(which we may not grant) that the Catholic Church, as far as it is visible,
has of late years used it, yet that is not a sufficient ground for us still to
continue the use of it; For we are to serve God, not out of Custom, but out of
Conscience; and therefore in vain do any pretend Custom in Gods service
against Conscience; in vain do any allege the Churches usage, which calls for
Custom, against Gods Law which calls for Conscience: If an Angel from Heaven
preach any other Gospel then what ye have received, let him be accursed, says
St. Paul, Gal. 1. 8. The same reason is for the Law received in the Old, as for
the Gospel received in the New Testament; Gods truth and righteousness are
above the Church Triumphant in heaven, much more above the Church militant on
Earth; not that either Church has opposed, or will oppose them, (for the
Church of the living God is the pillar and ground of the Truth. 1 Timothy 3. 15.)
but that they are above the Churches opposition; For no creature can be to it
^eli the rule of working, no more then the cause of being; and therefore its
work of righteousness cannot depend upon its own, but upon its makers will; And
Religion being the principal work of Righteousness, cannot depend upon the will
of the Church, but upon the will of God; This sublime truth is admirably
delivered by the master of subtilties, and sublimites (Scotus in 1. lib. sent.
did. 44.) in these words, In omni libere agente, quod potest agere secundum,
praeter, vel contra dictamen legis rectae, est distinguere potentiam ordinatam
and absolutam; Ordinata quidem, conformiter agendo legi rectae; absoluta vero,
agendo praeter illam legem, vel contra eam; sic dicunt Juristae, aliquis potest
facere de facto, hoc est de poten tia suatabsoluta; vel de jure, hoc est de
potenia ordinata secundum jura: Quando autem lex ista secundum quam recte
agendum est, non est in potestate agentis, tunc agendo secundum potentiam
absolutam, inordina^e agit and non recte; Q^um enim subsit tali legi, tenetur
agere (...) legem: sed quando in pote^ate age^s est lex and rectitudo legis,
po^est tale agens ordinate and recte agere aliter quam lex illa dictat, quia
non subest illi legi, and sic ejus po^entia absoluta non est inordinata: In
every free agent which can act according, besides, or against the dictate of
law and righteousness we must distinguish betwixt his orderly and his absolute
power; his orderly power is showed in acting conformably to the Law; his
absolute power inacting either besides it or against it: so the Civilians tell
us, a man may do a thing as a matter of fact, that is by his absolute power,
(according to his will) or as a matter of right, that is by his orderly power,
(according to the Laws:) when the Law, according to which a man is to act
righteously, is not in the power of the Agent, then by acting according to his
absolute power he acts disorderly and not righteously; for being subject to a
Law, he is bound to act according to that Law: But when the Law and the
Righteousness of the Law is in the power of the Agent, such an Agent may act
orderly and righteously, and yet act otherwise then according to the dictate of
that Law, because he is not subject to that Law, and so his absolute power is
not disorderly. To apply this to our present case; The Church is this free
Agent in the exercise of Religion, and having a Law given her to act by, she
may not act therein by an absolute power, either besides or against that Law
given her; but by an orderly power, according to it; For being subject to the
Law of Religion, she is bound in the exercise of Religion, to act according to
that Law: For there only the Agent may act orderly and righteously, not
according to the dictate of Law, where the Law and the righteousness of the Law
is in his own power. So that either we must say, That the Law and the
righteousness of Religion is under the Power and Authority of the Church, or we
must confine the Church in the exercise of Religion, to act according to the
Law of God: And therefore though your wit, learning and numbers may invite you
to that unsufferable insolency of seeking to domineer over other men's reasons,
yet pray let your own hearts and consciences deter you from that unpardonable
impiety of seeking to domineer over Gods Commandments: For what his Law has
made sin, your practice cannot make righteousness; what he has made
irreligion, you cannot make Religion, though you were, as you say you are, (but
show you are not) his Catholic Church; For the Church is to depend upon God,
much more then the People are to depend upon the Church, not only for the
substance, but also for the exercise of Religion; Gods commands must be obyed
for the substance of Religion according to the three first Commandments, for
the order and exercise of Religion according to the fourth; Invocations,
Adorations, Confessions, Consecrations, all must be for the honor of God (for
he only is named in the Commandments that require them) that the Church may
not make a Schism from God in the substance and in the exercise of Religion:
And then we must all with one heart and mouth unanimously and magnanimously
join together in the defense and obedience of such Invocations, Adorations,
Confessions and Consecrations; That the people may not make a Schism from the
Church in the outward Profession and Practice of Religion: The Laws of the
first Table are not only in the order of place or situation, but also in the
very order of nature and of Justice, before the Laws of the second Table.

God must first have his right, before the Church can lay claim to hers; As in
the Creed, we are first taught to believe in God, and after that to believe the
holy Catholic Church; so in the Decalogue it is first said, Thou shall fear
the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve; and after that, Honor thy
Father and thy Mother; This Protestation was under Moses his hand, before it
was in the Apostles mouths, We ought to obey God rather then man, Acts 5. 29.
And this Protestation alone will justify all Protestants to the worlds end
that shall depart from your Church in those points of Religion wherein you have
plainly and palpably departed from the Law of God; For God first requires
Verity i^ the Religion, before he requires Unity in the Communion of his
Church; and after these, and for these, he requires obedience to her
Authority: She is first holy by her Verity, then Catholic by her Unity; That
Church that is (...) (sub (...)) our mother in the Lord, by her Authority: This
we believe, in believing the holy Catholic Church: And according to the method
of our faith, must be the method of our obedience; First obeying the Churches
Verity, then her Unity, then her Authority.

For God founded the Religion, before he founded the Communion, as he founded
the Communion, before he founded the Authority of his Church; at least
according to the Priority of nature, though not of time; For he founded the
Religion of his Church in the three first Commandments, The Communion of his
Church in the fourth, and the Authority of his Church in the fifth
Commandment: So that Gods Church has in truth a threefold foundation; one in
respect of her Religion, another in respect of her Communion, a third in
respect of her Authority: The first concerns the Being, the second the
well-Being, the third the splendid Being of the Church. In regard of the first,
The Church is the pillar and ground of True worship, in regard of the second,
she is the Pillar and ground of solemn or of public worship; in regard of the
third she is the Pillar and ground of orderly or uniform worship; First we have
Truth in the service of God from her Religion; Then solemnity from her
Communion; Then Uniformity from her Command. These are the inestimable
blessings God has conveyed unto this wicked world by his Catholic Church, and
by every particular member thereof, if we consider the goodness of God in
offering these blessings, rather then the wickedness of men in rejecting his
offers, or in abusing his goodness; For by Gods holy appointment and
institution, his Church in every Nation is intrinsically Catholic from her
Religion, extrinsecally Catholic from her Communion, and potentially Catholic
from her Authority; and it is only by men's perverseness and undutifulness That
she loses her Potential, whiles she retains her intrinsecal and extrins^cal
Catholicism: For having her Religion according to the three first, and having
her Communion according to the fourth, she ought also to have her Authority
according to the fifth Commandment; But if she forsake her Religion, or corrupt
her Communion, she cannot justly claim her authority, if it be denied; and does
unjustly use it, if it be granted, for she uses it against the honor and
glory of Gods and for the distraction and the destruction of men; whereas St.
Paul says expressly concerning his own, and the Authority of all the other
Apostles, (for he says our authority, which the Lord has given us) that it
was only for edification, not for destruction, 2 Cor. 10. 8. and having said
this for the Apostles themselves, He has much more said it for their
successors: Let it be granted, which cannot reasonably be denied, That every
Christian Priesthood or Ministry is the grand Apostle of that Nation wherein
is an Apostolical Church. I hope you will say the Apostle ought to be true to
his God, no less then the People ought to be true to their Apostle: I will
instance in St. Paul, (who was not a whit behind the chiefest Apostles, 2 Cor.
11. 5. though you now attribute all to Saint Peter) we read that certain of the
Jews banded together and bound themselves under a curse, saying, That they
would neither eat nor drink, till they had killed Paul, Act. 23. 12. This
banding against an Apostle was fighting against God, in the judgment of a Jew,
(Act. 15. 39.) how much more should it be in the judgment of Christians? For
we cannot but look upon St. Paul in this case, as upon God^ Trustee both for
the Christian Religion, and for the Christian Communion, an^ accordingly
invested with authority from God for the discharge of that Trust: an doubt not
but He looked upon himself a^ one that ought to be more zealous for Christ's
Religion, and for Christ's Communion, than for his own Authority And so
doubtless ought the Priest-hood^ all Churches after him; and why not all in
your Church? For the Churches foundation or being is much more excelle^ and
glorious in regard of her Religion and of her Communion, then in regard^ her
Authority.

15. This I fear comes nearer your (...) then I am willing to urge it; sure I
am comes very near my position, That formali^ vocation of Saints, such as is
now commonly used in your Devotions, being p^vately used, is against the three
first Commandments which concern the Religion and being publicly used, is
against (...) fourth Commandment, which conce^ the Communion of Gods Church;
a^ therefore in vain do you pretend, in sin do you employ the Authority of your
Church to uphold either the private or the public use of it; And this
difference I cannot but observe betwixt your Trent Catechist, and your Rome
dogmatist. The one goes to prove that Invocation of Saints is not against the
Commandment, because it is according to the use of the Church. The other goes
to prove that it is not according to the use of the Church, because it is against
the Commandment; For so Bellarmine proves that the Saints are not to be
invocated as the Authors of any blessing appertaining either to grace or glory,
but only as the impetrators or procurers of it; and his two proofs are, one
from the Command of the Holy Scriptures; probatur primo ex Scriptura; The other
from the Custom of the Church; Secundo probatur ex usu Ecclesiae; Bell. l. 1.
de Sanct. beat. cap. 17. though to make good his second proof. He maintains
this Unlogical and Untheological position, That it is no matter for the words, so
as it be the sense of our Prayers: which is Unlogical, because it is against
the very nature and institution of speech; and Untheological because it is
against that very Commandment which orders our Speech in our Prayers, and
therefore orders our Prayers only as they are Vocal, and may be spoken, not
as they are Mental, and may be thought; and that is the third Commandment;
whereby God has set a watch only before the doors of our Lips, and not of our
Hearts. He had ordered our Hearts in the first Commandment, and orders our
mouths only in the third, when he says, Thou shall not take the Name of thy
Lord thy God in vain: And in this respect the Psalmist prays. Accept I
beseech thee the free will offering (...) my mouth O Lord, Psalm. 119. 10. Here
is then very much (in the Judgment of your own Cardinal) though you say Here
is nothing against Praying to Saint^ and Angels confirmed in grace and glory.
For (to let pass that their bless in Heaven does not make them God for
Neighbor) we may not pray to them for any blessing that tends either to Grace
or Glory; and all good Prayers are for blessings that do tend to one of these:
And it is a poor shift to talk of sense, not o^ words, when the question is only
o^ words; and to say you mean the Saint^ but as Procurers, when you speak to
then as Authors of the blessings you pray for: For He that has bid his Church
daily to pray And lead us not into temptation, has above all forbid his Church
daily to lead his people (committed to her charge) into Temptation, by their
very Prayers: Therefore in vain did some of your Zelots seek to corrupt the
Hebrew Text in Montanus his interlineary Bible of 1572. putting (...) instead
of (...), (though by Gods special providence the Press strangly miscarried, for
it is printed (...) in all that edition, which word is a mere Tragelaphus in
the Hebrew; That since you were not contented with Gods Text, you should be
ashamed of your own;) And this discovery we owe to your own L. B^ogensis in his
notations upon Genesis, where he says, Gu. Fabritius Pici Mirandulani
Principis autoritate nixus in Hebraicis illis Bibliis Regio operi adjunctis,
quibus Latina interpretatio inter contextus lineas inserta est, excudi curavit
(...) quanquam errore positum sit (...):) I say in vain did some of your Zelots
seek to corrupt the Hebrew Text, putting (...) instead of (...), Genesis 3. 15.
Ipsa for Ipse, to make good your Vulgar Translation, Ipsa conteret caput Tuum;
For if it had been said See shall bruise thy head, yet you had not found a
sufficient warrant to Invocate the blessed Virgin, because you cannot possibly
bring Her into the first Table of the Decalogue, to make Her a God or the
Object of Religion, Let my Prayer be set forth in thy sight as the Incense,
says the Prophet, Psalm. 141. 2. Prayer is the Incense of the Soul, and must be
set forth only in his sight who sees the secret recesses and sighs of the
heart; When the Jews went to burn incense and to serve other Gods whom they
knew not, (where Note, Burning incense is put for serving of God) the Lord said
to them, O do not this abominable thing which I hate, Jer. 44. 3, 4. And does
he not still say the same to Christians! is it less hateful now, then it was
then for any man to perform v^ws or to burn incense to the Queen of Heaven! may
not God as justly swear against us if we do so, as he did against them, That
his Name shall be no more named in our mouths? v. 26. Are not all but himself
as well to us as to them Gods whom we know not? Is not this intruding into
those things which we have not seen? Col. 2. 18. Surely none but God alone is
to be known or seen throughout the whole Bible, in all the precepts and
precedents of Religious worship: Therefore Invocation being an elicite and
proper act of Religion, cannot be applied to any that is not the proper object
of Religion; The Jews might as well have offered their corporal Sacrifice to
Abraham, as the Christians can offer this spiritual Sacrifice to St. Peter; For
to Him they do really offer it, who do say Sancte Petre miserere mei, aperi
mihi aditum caeli. O St. Peter have mercy upon me, open to me the Gate of
Heaven; and not in words to Him, but in sense to God; Nay Bellarmine himself
would have them offer this spiritual Sacrifice of Prayer to St. Peter not only
in words but also in sense; or else why does he say, Potest erigi basilica
Sancto Petro, ut qui ingrediuntur, ipso templi nomine, recordentur Sancti
Petri, eumque in eo loco tanquam Patronum Colant and deprecentur, lib. 3. de
Sanct. c^lt. cap. 4. 9. Respondeo. It is lawful to build a Church to St. Peter,
That they who enter therein from the very name of the Church was remember St.
Peter, and in that very place worship him as their Patron, and deprecate his
displeasure; So it seems God has said, My House shall be called the House of
Prayer, in regard of St. Peter, not in regard of himself; that we should pray
to the Saints, not to him.

Baronius is as stiff as Bellarmine for the worship and Invocation of St.
Peter. For he says concerning the payment of the Peter Pence heretofore by Ina
King of this Nation, Quem (sc. Petrum) scientes omnes Dominum esse suum,
propensiore studio colerent, and in opportunitatibus invocarent; (Bar. An. 740.
nu. 14.) Whom they all knowing to be their Lord, should worship with the
greater earnestness, and invocate him in their necessities: Who can but stand
amazed at the conscience of such Divines, that dare obtend to the People such
Divinity? teaching them plain Idolatry instead of Religion, and consequently
gross Infidelity instead of Faith; For he that is an Idolater, must also be an
Infidel; he that is faulty in the proper act of worship, must also be faulty in
the proper act of faith; for worship proceeds from Faith, according to that of
St. Paul, Romans 10. 14. How shall they call on him in whom they have not
believed? And as the formal nature of Idolatry consists in disowing the true
God, either for God, or for our God, or for our only God; so the formal nature
of infidelity consists in disowning Christ either for Lord, or for our Lord,
or for our only Lord and Savior; can any Saint be religiously worshipped or
invocated without a suspicion, if not a spice of this Idolatry in disowning God
for God, for our God, for our only God? or be acknowledged as our Lord and
Patron without a suspicion, if not a spice of this infidelity in disowning
Christ as Lord, as our Lord, as our only Lord? And in this case in which God
has declared himself to be a jealous God, the very least suspicion is to be
carefully avoided, because that alone may be a ground of jealousy: Yet this
has been the Jesuits Doctrine and practice ever since. I will allege but one
Sanchez for the proof of both; He in his opus morale de Praecep. decalogi, lib.
2. c. 43. says plainly that the first Commandment is concerning the worship
of God and the Saints; In hoc primo praecepto, quod de Dei and Sanctorum cultu
est; making the first Commandment require the worship of Saints no less then
the worship of God; as if Thou shall have no other Gods but me, were all one
with its contradictory, Thou shall have other Gods but me: This was his
Doctrine; And agreeable to this Doctrine was his practice; for when by reason
of his stammering he could not be admitted into the Jesuits College at
Granada, He fell a praying to the blessed Virgin to take away from him that
impediment, professing that he would never return home again, unless she
granted him his request; Neque irritae suere preces, Annuit adolescentuli votis
misericordiae matter, suumque alumnum balbutie liberavit (says his own College
in their praeface to his works) Nor were his prayers in vain; For the Mother of
mercy hearkend to the desire of the young man, and freed this her pupil or
petitioner from his stammering: These men have now left others nothing to do
but to correct the Prayers of the Holy Ghost, and of the Catholic Church, and
to persuade the World not to say hereafter Domine, but Domina labia mea
aperies, and os meum annunciabit laudem tuam, Not O Lord, but O Lady open thou
my lips, and my mouth shall show forth thy Praise.

Nay this is not all, But they farther tell us (out of Binius) That Damascens
Hand which had writ for the worship of Images, being cut off by a Saracene
Prince, was again restored through his Prayers to the Image of the blessed
Virgin; Sic dextra Damasceni, quae pro religio so Imaginum cultu scripserat, a
Saraceno Principe praecisa, quam Divinitus restituit clementissima Dei matter,
ad cujus ille Imaginem velut ad sacram anchoram, piis fletibus and supplice
fide confugerat; And shall we yet doubt whether they do make their Prayers to
Saints as to the Authors of those blessings which they pray for? when they
plainly tell us that the blessed Virgin alone did as much for Sanchez, as God
the Father had done for Moses, by curing his stammering Tongue; and more for
Damascence then God the Son had done for Malchus, by curing not his maimed ear,
but his maimed hand; And that she did both by her own power, because they both
had made their Prayers unto Her; what remains then but that she be Invocated
immediately as God, according to these men's Divinity; for having Gods Power, why
should she not also have Gods glory? Thus is Biels Spiritual Dalliance (for I
am willing to call it no more) turned by you into a mere Carnal Dotage; for he
says, The Father of Heaven has given half his Kingdom to the blessed Virgin,
(which was prefigured before in Esther, to whom King Ahasuerus promised the
like) for whereas there are two principal goods of the Kingdom of Heaven, to
wit Justice and Mercy, God has reserved the Justice to himself, but the Mercy
He has passed by Grant or by Deed of Gift to the blessed Virgin: Sibi
reservavit Justitiam, Virgini Mariae concessit misericordiam; Bielin Can.
Missae. lect. 8. What he fondly teaches, that you more fondly believe, and
most impiously practice; putting more confidence in, and making more addresses
to the blessed Virgin for mercy, then to the Eternal Son of God; Hence our Lady
with you is above our Lord, in the number of her Devotes, in the statiliness of
her Churches, in the multitude of her endowments, nay in the very power of
exorcisme; Her day is above His, Her Salutation above his Prayer; you teach
that nothing passes in Heaven without her express consent, That the style of
that Court is Placet Dominae, It pleases our Lady; That matters of Justice
come more properly from Christ, but expeditions of Grace from Her; So that it is
no marvail (says an unquestionable Author) if this Doctrine and practice have
div^rted the principal streams of affiance and love from Him who had the only
right unto them, and turned them upon those unto whom neither so great honor
is due, nor so undue honor can be acceptable: (Sands Survey of Religion, cap.
4.)

Jesu God, heal their Tongues that preach such Blaphemy instead of Divinity,
heal their Hands that write it, heal their Ears that hear it, and much more
heal their Hearts that believe it, and their Life's that practice it; that
though thy Truth has been outfaced by their Lies, yet their miracles may be
outvied by thy Power, and their Souls saved by thy Grace and Mercy: For all the
miracles they can falsely attribute to thy Saints, as if by their own power and
holiness they could heal the Body, (to make us go to thy Servants for help,
when we should go only to Thy self) are nothing in comparison of that great
miracle of thy power, and greater miracle of thy mercy, whereby thou art
pleased to heal the Soul.

I have been the longer upon this Argument, (as I was upon the former,) because
the false Invocations and Adorations used by you, have given others just
occasion to depart from you, even those who were under your own jurisdiction,
and much more those who were not; For as he that kicks against Heaven, stricks
up his own Heels; so a faction in your Church of late years kicking against
Gods authority, could not stand so fast as to keep their own: nor is it any
reason you should expect others to be dutiful to you according to the fifth,
contrary to that duty which they ow to God, according to the four first
Commandments.

16. But though others of your party argue much in this case from Authority,
yet you think fit to argue from reason, saying, Now since God puts this great
Trust in them with us, ought not we to put them in Trust by reverently
commending our selves unto them? no, says Reason, to which you have appealed;
much more no, says Religion, from which you have started: First, no, says
Reason; For that teaches us to invocate none that is not All-present to hear
our request, All-merciful to receive it, All-sufficient to grant it, and
Almighty to fulfill it; and therefore to Invocate no creature, which has none,
much less all of these:

Secondly, no, says Religion; And first the Religion that is in Heaven; I
heard the voice of many Angels round about the Throne, and thousands of
thousands saying with a loud voice, Worthy is the Lamb which was slain to
receive power and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory,
and blessing, Revel. 5. 11, 12. This is the Religion you must practice in
Heaven; and why should you practice any other in Earth, since you are taught to
pray, Thy will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven? you may safely take the
crowns of the Saints and Angels, and cast them before the Throne, giving glory
and honor and thanks to Him who was dead but now lives for ever and ever; for
so they do themselves, Revel. 4. 9, 10. But never was it seen in Heaven, That
any Saint or Angel did make so bold as to take the Crown off from our Saviors
Head, to place it upon his own: There this is the only dialect, Thou art worthy
O Lord to receive glory and honor, and power; for thou have created all
things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created, v. 11. And the dialect
should be here as it is there; so says the Psalmist, O come let us worship and
fall down and kneel before the Lord our Maker; as if he had said before no
other but only Him to whom we can truly say, For thou have created all things,
and for thy pleasure they are and were created; Therefore secondly, no, says
the Religion that is in Earth; that likewise answers no to your quaere, Ought
we not to put them in trust by reverently commending our selves into them? And
surely we ought not; For that very Apostle, who has written most concerning
the benefit and the assistance which the heirs of Salvation have by the Angels,
(Hebr. 1. 14.) forbids them to worship Angels for fear of endangering their
inheritance, Col. 2. 18, 19. Let no man beguil you of your reward, in a
voluntary humility and worshipping of Angels, intruding into those things which
he has not seen, vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind, and not holding the Head,
etc. where the Apostles full intent and scope is to dehort the Colossians from
the worshipping of Angels; first from the dangerous effect of it, no less then
the loss of eternal life, [Let no man beguil you of your reward] 2. from the
vain pretenses for it, viz. the obedience or submission we owe to them as to
our Patrons, and the need we have of their Patronage; the first has a show of
humility, but it is such as God never commended [in a voluntary humility.] The
second has a real guilt of curiosity, for it is such as God never taught,
[intruding into those things which he has not seen.] 3. From the wicked and
ungodly causes of it; and they are two; Pride of heart, [vainly puffed up by his
fleshly mind] and Ignorance of Christ as Head of the Church, And not holding
the Head from which all the Body by joints and bands having nourishment
ministered and knit together, increases with the increase of God: Angels are a
part of this Body as well as men; and this Head gives life to them as to us: As
all is Neighbor that is not God in the Law; so all is Body that is not Head in
the Gospel: The question is as unanswerable, if asked of St. Michael or St.
Gabriel, as of St. Peter or St. Paul, Is Christ divided? was Paul crucified for
you? or were ye baptized in the name of Paul? 1 Cor. 1. 13. Is Christ divided
from himself that He should not be the Head of Angels as well as of men? or is
Christ divided from his Body on Earth, more then from his Body in Heaven? Has
he put that part of his Body to convey life and motion, and nourishment to
this? or does he not convey life and motion, and nourishment to both parts
immediately by Himself? Was any Angel crucified for us, or were we baptized in
the name of any Angel? Was St. Paul a lover of Christ ((...) says Chrysostom.) in
denying this honor to the Apostles; and can we be lovers of Christ in giving
this honor to the Angels? Is it more lawful for us then it was for him, to
give the honor of the Head to any part of the Body? or can we look for a
reward of our service, if we serve any of the Body instead of the Head? Let no
men beguil you (says He) of your reward; (...), Let no man make you so run as
not to receive the Prize, or so run that you may not obtain; you may lose the
Prize by running out of the race, as well as by not running it: And you most
needs run out of the race, if you cannot see the mark or scope to which you
run; This mark or scope in it self is more visible then the Sun in the
Firmament; for it is the Sun of righteousness; why should you allow the
interposition of any Body betwixt Him and you, to remove him out of your sight,
who cannot be removed out of his own Sphaere? your sins as a cloud will obscure
him more then enough; Oh let not even your Righteousness obscure him more; If
you will needs put in a solid body betwixt him and you when you pray; how can
the eye of your Faith look upon him in your Prayer? You will here by Eclipse
his light from your selves, and bring darkeness upon your Souls: For will you
look with the Eye of your Faith upon Angels? then say they were delivered for
your offenses, and rose again for your justification, and now sit at the right
hand of God, making intercession for you; will you look with the eye of your
Faith upon your blessed Savior? then let not the Angels in betwixt Him and
you; for they will but hinder your sight, and keep you from seeing Him; Or if
you could with the eye of Faith, look on Christ through the Angels, yet were it
a piece of Infidelity so to do, because it is but intruding into those things
which you have not seen, (sc. in the Law and the Gospel,) and so being matter
of Religion cannot be Divine either in the evidence or in the assurance of
Faith: Your own Angelical Doctor speaks of this kind of Infidelity, Infidelis
non ut habens malam voluntatem circa finem, sc. Christum, sed ut habens malam
electionem circa media, quia non eligit quae sunt a Christo tradita; And from
thence say I, such a Worshipper is an Infidel, if not as having a bad will or
affection toward the end of his worship, which is Christ, yet sure as having a
bad choice or election of the means tending to that end, because he choseth
such means to worship Christ, as Christ has not appointed him: Nay indeed St.
Chrysostom in effect said so, long ago in his Comment upon this Text, (...):
There were some that said^ we ought not to come to God immediately by Christ,
but mediately by the Angels, for the other address was too high for us: Here Is
the choice of such means in Gods worship as God has not appointed; (for Saint
Peter says expressly, that we are to offer up spiritual Sacrifice acceptable to
God by Jesus Christ; 1 Pet. 2. 5. If the Sacrifice of Prayer may be Spiritual,
yet it cannot be acceptable but by Christ:) And it follows (...) little after,
(...): why do you let go the Head to lay hold on the members? (that is let go
Christ, to lay hold on the Angels) If you fall from the Head, you are utterly
lost: Here Is the reproof of such a choice as befitting Infidels, who know not
Christ to be the Head, nor the dangers and miseries of those men who fall from
this Head, rather then Christians, who do know him to be the Head, as well of
Angels as of men; and that both would alike perish, were it not for the
influence of life and motion derived to them, by being immediately joined unto
him. The like is the Judgment of Photius (as indeed he generally follows St.
Chrysostom;) But Theodoret not only condemns the Heresy, but also declares the
Heretics after this manner, Those who stood for the Law, stood for the
worshipping of Angels, saying, The Law was given by them: And this mistake
remained a long time in Phrygia and Pisidia, which made the Fathers in the
Council of Laodicea, the chief City of Phrygia, forbid the worshipping of
Angels: And (says he) to this day we may see amonst them, and their
Neighbors, the Oratories of St. Michael: And this they pretended to do out of
Humility, For that the great God of Heaven and Earth was invisible,
incomprehensible, inaccessible by men, and therefore they ought to go to Him by
the mediation of Angels: Thus far Theodoret, and this held for unquestionable
Truth above a thousand years amongst all Greek and Latin Divines, till your
great Annalist thought fi^ to question it; and therefore I crave you^ pardon if
I make bold to question him. For I had much rather say with Theodoret. That
they were heretics, then with Baronius, That they were Catholics, who
worshipped Angels, since next the holiness of the Holy Ghost, I believe the
holiness of the Holy Catholic Church and sure I am, such a grievous sin as
this, is inconsistent with true Holiness: For it is (...) rule of common
reason, approved both i^ the Ecclesiastical and in the Civil Law Paria esse,
aliquid omnino non facere, and non recte facere, They are both equal sin^ not
to do a thing at all, and not to do it righ^ly; not to worship God at all, and
not to worship him rightly, or as he has commanded; and consequently it is in
effe^ as great a Calumny to say the Catholic^ Church has had no Religion, as
to say she has had a false Religion: Since therefore the worshipping of Angels
is convince^ to be false Religion, we may safely infe^ it has not been, it
cannot be the Religion of the Catholic Church; And S^ Paul here proves it to
be false Religion. Per omnia genera causarum, in regard of all four causes;
that is to say, 1. False originally or efficiently, because it came not from
God, but from men presumptuously intruding into things not seen, and vainly
puffed up in their fleshly mind; 2. False formally, because it is not with God,
it holds not the Head; and therefore withdraws us from God, instead of uniting
us to him; whereas the very formal cause of devotion is the Union of the Soul
with God; 3. False materially, for it is a Voluntary humility and worshipping
of Angels, instead of God; 4. False finally, because it ends not in God, tends
not to salvation but to damnation, or to the beguiling us of our reward;
whereas what is formally Religion in the Union with God, is of it self finally
salvation in the fruition of God: Yet says Baronius, Theodoretum haud
foeliciter assequutum esse Pauli verborum sensum, quum in Commentariis dicit
haec a Paulo esse scripta, quod tum grassarentur Haeretici qui Angelos
adorandos esse jactarent; Theodoret was mistaken in St. Paul's meaning, when he
said that St. Paul writ this against those Heretics who then worshipped
Angels: He might as well have said that St. Chrysostom and Photius were also
mistaken; for they agree with Theodoret in the same sense of St. Paul's words;
And he might moreover to these have added St. A^brose, to show that the mistake
was no only in the Greek but also in the Lati^ Church; For though his Gloss
name star instead of Angels, yet the reason of (...) condemns the worshipping
of Angels Ut harum detentae culturis animae sub fi^ mamento obligatae
teneantur, ne sc, tendant ad suporiores caelos ad Deum omn^um adorandum; That
such kind of worship, (place it upon what creature yo^ will) detains the Soul
here below, and keep it from ascending into the highest Heaven that it may
there worship the ever livi^ God; Quod opera efficitur inimici, (...) semper
animas super terram humilia^ detineat -- Religionem simulans quu^ fit maximum
sacrilegium, which is t^ Devils chiefest Policy, to keep men's So^ still
grovelling on the Earth; and therefo^ such a kind of worship, though it may
prete^ to Religion, yet is it in truth no better the sacrilege; Maximum
sacrilegium, it is sacrilege in the highest degree, because (...) robs God
immediately in himself, not mediately in his tithes and offerings; it robs him
in his Glory, and not only in his Patrimony: And that you may not think the
Latin Church had forgotten this Truth in her doctrine, when many of her
members had forsaken it in their practice, I will here give you the Gloss of a
very late Interpreter, and that is of Jacobus Faber Stapulensis, who says thus
upon the same Text: Vocant hujus modi superstitiosi ad Religionem Angelorum,
privatas preces, ritus and sacrificia, and ea adoriuntur quae ipsi non
viderunt, and quae ipsi non cognoscunt; At quae monet Paulus and vidit and
cognoscit; Haec figurae, haec Prophetae, haec omnes Sancti, and Spiritus
Sanctus manifestat; proinde dat Colossensibus generale documentum, abstinendi
ab omnibus elementis mundi, sive Gentibus tradita fuerint ad cultum daemonum;
sive Judaeis ad antiquas ceremonias, sive superstitiosis ad dementationes
magicas, and animarum ludificamenta, quae universa corruptionem operantur: His
general meaning is this, They who call us to superstition, or to any false
worship of Angels or the like, call us to they know not what themselves; But
St. Paul who calls us to the true Religion, or to the worship of God in Christ,
calls us to what he has seen and known. For all the Types and Figures and
Prophets in the Old Testament, and all the Saints and the Holy Spirit both in
the Old and New, lead us to this worship: Therefore St. Paul gives a general
rule to the Colossians, (and in them to all Christians) of abstaining from all
the rudiments of the World in matters of Religion, (...) from so many cheats
and delusions and corruptions of their Souls; and since the worship of Angels
is not according to the Commandment of God, it must come under the rudiments
of the World, o^ (as St. Paul speaks) of a fleshly mind This interpreter does
in effect agree with the rest, and they all agree in this interpretation, That
St. Paul's main drift and purpose is to dehort us from all manner o^
superstition, and to exhort us to (...) Religion in the worship of God: Ye^
your great Champion enters the lists onl^ against Theodoret, challenging him of
(...) multiplicity of errors and mistakes, (an^ that justly, says his great
admirer, and (...) he were a Saint, his great Idolater, Bini^ in his notes in
Conc. Romans 2. sub. Syl^ Justam illust. Card Baronis censuram no^ evadit:) but
thus Baronius proceeds, S^ ergo errore semel lapsus, in alium graviorem
impegit, ut diceret Canonem 35 Council. Laod. de his haereticis esse
intelligendum, qui Angelos colendos esse docerent, quique in eadem regione
Asiae, Oratoria erexissent St. Michaeli Archangelo; incaute nimis quae a
Catholicis essent antiquitus instituta, Haereticis, quorum nulla est memoria,
tribuens: (Baron. An. 60. number. 20.) But so he passes from one error to
another, saying, That the Canon of Laodicea was to be understood of those
Heretics who taught that Angels were to be worshipped, and who had in that
Country erected Oratories or Churches to St. Michael the Archangel, very
unadvisedly ascribing that to Heretics whose memorial was perished with
themselves, which had been anciently instituted by Catholics: Alas poor
Theodoret, what ill luck had he to be a Protestant, to protest against the
worship of Angels, as taught and practiced by Haereticks, which (says this new
Doctor) was anciently taught and practiced by Catholics: But St. Paul had as
ill luck as he, who had protested against the same worship long before; And as
long as that Protestation stands good, we may very well claim him, and own our
selves in this case for very good Protestants, and for better Christians; And
because it is impossible for any to be good Catholics who wilfully contradict
St. Paul, (for such men are rather enemies then Servan^s of Christ, who reject
his Authority) we must say, not that Theodoret unadvisedly ascribed that to
Heretics, which had been anciently instituted by Catholics, (for what
Catholic did ever take upon him to institute the Truth, and much less the
false Religion?) but that Baronius unadvisedly ascribed that to Catholics,
which had been fondly instituted by Haereticks: But let us see by what
arguments he confutes Theodoret. Sane quidem nullum a Cerinthianis Haereticis
erectum fuisse in honorem St. Michaelis Archangeli Oratorium, ex nuper dictis
satis superque liquet, We have already proved that the Cerinthian Haereticks
did erect no Oratory to St. Michael the Archangel; Had he quoted any Scripture,
Fathers, or Council, Theodorete might have stood confuted; but sure his own
Ipse dixit may not stand against Scripture, Father, and Council, as a good
Confutation; For all his proof, to which he annexeth his satis superque liquet,
is only his own conjectural argumentation in these words, Cherinthum and
Haereticos qui mundi creationem Angelis tribuebant, non tamen sensisse eos
adorandos; Nam super Angelos virtutem esse divinam omnium supremam quam Deum
dicerent, omnes affirmabant; Chernthius, and those Haereticks who did attribute
the creation of the world to Augels, did not think the Angels were to be
worshipped, for they did all affirm that there was a supreme Divine Virtue
which they called God, above the Angels, The whole proof consists of these
two Propositions. 1o That the Cherinthian Heretics did not erect Oratories to
Saint Michael the Archangel, because they did not worship him. 2o That they did
not worship him or any of his fellow Angels, because they did acknowledge a God
above him and them; This Advocate pleads well for the Cherinthians (most
abominable Haereticks) but ill for his own clients; For he would persuade us,
that the Papists are more stupid and more impious then were the Cherinthians;
more impious in that they worship Angels, which the others did not; more stupid
in that not thinking the Angels made the World (as the others did) they have
less reason to worship them: But if he ^ath not betrayed his Clients, yet sure
he ^ath betrayed his cause, For what do Protestants say more, but that
Oratories may not be erected to Angels, because they may not be worshipped? And
what do Papists say less, but that there is a God above the Angels, although
they worship them; so that if the acknowledgement of a God above the Angels be
a good proof, that the Cherinthians did not, it is as good a proof, that the
Papists do not or at least should not worship Angels; and in this particular,
we may all join hands and hearts together as fellow Protestants; and our poor
ejected Ministers may say to your great Triumphant Doctors, We would to God
that not only you, but also all that hear you and us this day, were both almost
and altogether such as we are, except these Bond^: For if you would turn
Protestants with us in the True worship, we should not need turn Papists with
you in the Public worship of Almighty God; But till you have a True worship
according to the three first Commandments, we cannot envy your public
worship, according to the fourth.

Thus you see Baronius his Proof, is not so great as his clamor against
Theodoret, yet upon this proof alone does he infer this Conclusion, Angelos
venerari, non Haereticorum, sed Catholicae Ecclesiae mos fuit; The worshipping
of Angels was a Custom, not of Haereticks, but of the Catholic Church; Sure if
it had been so, the Greek and Latin Interpreters upon St. Paul to the
Colossians would not so unanimously have condemned it; For if this false
worship had gotten generally into their practice, it would also have gotten
into their Doctrine, as it has since into yours; which makes all your late
writers so zealous for it, and so copious in it, particularly Baronius who had
not the patience to stay longer then the sixtyeth year after our blessed
Saviors Incarnation, to find out this Custom, and had the confidence as soon
as he had found it, to foist it upon the Catholic Church, because he saw it
was practiced in his own: And the like favor has he showed to all your other
present corruptions, whether in Doctrine or in Practice, bringing them all into
the first century of years after Christ, that what their own grosseness
diminished from their native Verity, his wit and learning might add to their
pretended Antiquity: But concerning this your present corruption in Practice,
(I mean the worshipping of Angels,) he concludes thus; Id vero quam pure,
Sancte, religiose, etc. How purely, how holily, how religiously it has been
always practiced in the Church, I have showed in my annotations upon the Roman
Martyrologie, on the 8. of May: I was big with expectation of some invincible
arguments in his Martyrology, till I had consulted it; but there I found only
some several Apparitions of St. Michael the Archangel, no proof at all that the
Church had worshipped him, save only Baronius his own word, authentical enough
perchance with some of you (as it was with Binius) to bear down poor
Theodorete; but I hope not authentical enough with any to bear down St. Paul;
Therefore in vain does your Goliath speak of Purity in that which St. Paul
imputes to a fleshly mind, (then which nothing is more impure;) and of Holiness
in that, which St. Paul says beguils us of our reward, (for unholiness, it all
can do ^o more;) And of Religion in that, of which St. Paul says, And holding
not the Head, (for we cannot well say more of the greatest Irreligion:) And as
vainly does he impute that to the Catholic Church, which is so full of
Impurity, Unholiness and Irreligion; And this manner; of arguing is without
doubt good in it self; for it makes humane reason subordinate to Divine
Authority, as to an Infinitely higher Reason, laboring to prove what God has
commanded us to believe, even that his Catholic Church is pure and Holy, and
because it is so, admits not any such gross practice of Impurity and
unholiness; For what is made sin in it self by Gods Word, cannot by the wit o^
men be made holiness in Gods Church: But if this manner of arguing were not
good in its own nature, yet it were good against Baronius, who uses no other
argument to confute Theodorets Authority, but only his own deductions,
confounding those two Topics, which are so distinct in themselves, even Humane
Reason, and Humane Authority; proving the Cherinthian Haereticks did not
worship Angels, because he had found a reason, why they should not; whereas if
he would indeed have acted the part of a true Histor^an, or of a good Divine,
he should have con^uted Theodorets Authority by some greater and better
Authority; But that he saw was impossible for him to do, for the whole stream
of Ecclesiastical writers run with a full torrent and tide against him; and we
may well guess he was very much put to his shifts, when he was forced to put so
strange a gloss as he did upon the Council of Laodicea; for whereas the Fathers
there said, (Can. 35.) It becomes not Christians to leave the Church of God,
(...), And to name the Angels, (sc. in their prayers, as calling upon them,
instead of calling upon God) for that were to be guilty of a secret Idolatry,
((...)) and to forsake the Lord Jesus Christ, ((...),) (which in St. Paul's
language was (...), not holding the Head;) Baronius is pleased to say, That the
Canon is to be interpreted of those false Angels which the Heathen worshipped;
(falsorum Angelorum, eorum nimirum quos venerarentur idololatrae, venerationem
prohibuit, alludens fortasse ad Genii cultu^, etc. Bar. an. 60. nu. 23.) He
might as well have said that the Council made Canons for Heathens and not for
Christians, though they expressly say, (...), It becomes not Christians to leave
the Church of God; And that they had forbid such men to leave the Church, who
were never of the Chuch; had called them secret Idolaters, who were most open
Idolaters; had required them not to forsake Christ, who had never come near
Christ; and in one word, had called that worshipping of Angels, which was
indeed worshipping of Devils: Such dangerous Rocks are skillfull Pilots cast
upon, who will not stear by the Card of Gods Word, but let their own fancy
fill their Sails, for that is little better then a tempestuous wind called
Euroclidon, which will drive them up and down, either in Adria or in Tiber till
they have made Shipwreck of the Truth; And if you think me overlavish in th^s
expression, pray consider its a less immodesty in me to put a fancy upon your
Baronius, then it was in him to put a frenzy upon the Council: Is not this (...),
To be a slave to a received opinion? and why should that man think to
overmaster another judgment, who can be contented to enslave his own?

18. I now come to your last argument for praying to Angels, which is this,
least we should ungratefully slight them, contrary to Gods command, Exodus 23.
21. Observa ^um, and andi v^m ejus, nec contemnendum putes: This argument is a
strain higher then that of the Trent Catechist; For he only says, That the
Invocation of Angels is not repugnant to the first Commandment, huic legi non
repugnare; (Catech. Trid. de primo praecepto, cap. 3.) but you are not
contented therewith; you say farther, That Invocation of Angels is commanded in
the first Commandment; for you quote a Text for it which must be reduced to
that Commandment or to none, and so be accounted as no part of Gods Law, if it
belong not to that Commandment: But indeed the Text you quote is to be reduced
to the first Commandment, and consequently cannot concern any Angel, but must
concern only God; for though your Cardinal was so bold with the Laodicean
Council as to say, when that named Angels, it meaned D^vels; yet I hope, you
will not be so bold with the Holy Scripture as to say, When that names God, it
means Angels:

Thou shall have no other Gods but me, says the Text. Do not you say, we may
have none of the Heathens Gods, Bacchus, or Venus or Jupiter, which were evil
Angels; but we may have some of the Christians Gods, St. Michael, St. Gabriel,
St. Raphael, which were Holy Angels; Or if you must needs say it in obedience
to your great Master, (for you seem all as sworn homagers to your two Cardinals
Bellarmine and Baronius) yet a greater then he will confute your saying; For
the Holy Ghost calls the Angel you mention no less then God, yea then Jehovah
the everliving God, Exodus 13. 21. And the Lord went before them by day in a
pillar of a cloud to lead them the way, and by ^ight in a pillar of fire; This
is the Angel concerning whom its said, Observa eum, etc. Beware of him and obey
his Voice, and provoke er conte^n him not, as the context plainly shows, For
he will not pardon your trangressions, for my name is in him; and again v. 22.
If thou shall indeed obey his Voice, and do all that I speak; and v. 23. For
mine Angel shall go before thee, and bring thee in unto the Amorites, and I
will cut them off: Here are two persons indeed named, for he says mine Angel
and I^, but one and the same God, one and the same Lord, who requires their
Obedience, and promises his own gracious presence and Protection; Wherefore
all that this Text will afford you, is that the Eternal Son of God is called an
Angel, (as He was before, Genesis 48. 16.) not that an Angel is made a God, or
ought to be religiously worshipped: For though the Law was delivered by Angels,
and God might send a Guardian Angel with his People, yet here God and the Angel
are in effect made terms convertible, and therefore most signify one and the
same thing: If the Jews had interpreted these and the like Texts of the Angels
properly so called, it had been scarce possible for so great a number of them
to have turned Sadduces, and to have said There are no Angels; yet if the
Christians will needs interpret the same Texts of the Angels properly so
called, it will not be impossible for them to turn worse Sadduces, and to say,
There is no God; for they will have no Honor, no worship left for him; being
bound by these Texts so interpreted, to bestow it all upon the Angels; As the
mistaken Jew had no Angel in his Faith, so the mistaken Christian may have
nothing but Angel, (that is, no God,) in his Religion; and by this means come
to be the worser Sadducee: For he that will say Angels are to be religiously
worshipped, must go for that worship to the first Table, since that only treats
of the elicite acts of Religion, and consequently either must leave out God, or
join the Angels with God in all the four first Commandments, making them Gods
Copartners in all Adorations, Invocations, Dedications, consecrating to them
Liturgies, Churches, Priests, Sabbaths, and what not? and in effect say, There
is no God, whiles in his Religion he says, there are so many Gods.

But you are afraid of ungratefully slighting the Angels; why not more afraid
of ungratefully slighting the God that made them, and of whose command they
minister unto you? For even in this very place where it is said, Behold I send
an Angel before thee, to keep thee in the way, and to bring thee into the Place
which I have prepared, v. 20. it is also said, And ye shall serve the Lord your
God, v. 25. You may acknowledge that God sends a Guardian Angel before you to
keep you in your way, and to bring you into the Place which he has prepared
for your Soul, even to Abraham's Bosom; yet you may not worship or invocate
that Angel; for it is said expressly, ye shall serve the Lord your God; and
surely Invocation is the highest act of Religious service. Angele Dei qui
custos es mei, me tibi commissum pietate superna hodie illumina custodi, rege,
and guberna, Amen. This is your daily Invocation of your Guardian Angel; can
you suppose him to do all this and not suppose him to be God? if you can, pray
show me what can the Son of God, or the Spirit of God do more? why not rather
say Fili Dei, or Spiritus Dei, O thou Son of God, or O thou Spirit of God, then
O thou Angel of God, enlighten, keep, rule and govern me this day and ever: Is
not this indeed to ask grace of an Angel, which yet your own Cardinal proves
(from that of the Psalmist, Gratiam and gloriam dabit Dominus,) is to be asked
only of God? For what can grace or the Spirit of grace do more then enlighten
the understanding, then keep rule and govern the will and affections? Can any
but God alone have an immediate influence or operation upon the Soul of man,
who alone as he is omnipotent to make it, so he is omnipresent to possess and
keep it, and omniscient to guide and govern it? If a good Angel can immediately
by himself illuminate my understanding, may not also an evil Angel transform
himself into an Angel of Light, and deceive me with false Illuminations? And
what would become of my Soul, if any Angel had such a power over it? for how
should I then exclude the Devil from having the same power? I cannot but say
that I know mine own heart little, and yet sure my Guardian Angel knows it
less: If God alone be the Searcher of hearts, then he alone must be the
infallible guide and Governor of Souls: Therefore as I dare not say, O Angel
of the Lord, but O Lord, thou have searched me out and known me; thou know
my down-sitting and mine uprising, thou understandest my thoughts long before;
Thou art about my path and about my bed, and spiest out all my ways; So I dare
not say, Try me O Angel of God, but Try me O God, and seek the ground of my
heart, prove me and examine my thoughts; look well if there be any way of
wickedness in me, and lead me (this day and ever) in the way ever lasting, Ps.
139.

It Is an excellent observation of Abulen^is, Dicitur quod loquutus est Deus, ne
tantum beneficium vel tantus actus, quantus est dare legem, attribueretur
Angelo, ne crederent se Judaei obligatos Angelis, (Tossed, in Exodus 20. q. 1.) It
is said God spoke all these words at the giving of the Law, least if such a
great blessing had been attributed to an Angel, The Jews might think themselves
obliged to the Angels: The Jews might not think themselves obliged to the
Angels for giving the Law, and may Christians pray to them for assistance in
keeping it? If so, how will you answer your own Baronius, An. 60. n. 19. Quod
praecipuos Episcopos appellet Angelos, plane significat instar hominum Angelos
hominibus ministrare, nec tantae esse excellentiae, ut quae divina sunt, iisdem
tribuantur; The Spirit of God in giving the Title of Angels to the chiefest
Bishops, does plainly show that as men so Angels do minister unto men, and are
not of so great excellency, as that we should ascribe to them those things
which belong to God; All the world cannot say more against your daily prayer to
your Guardian Angel. He ministers to you no otherwise then your Bishop
enlightening you Instrumentally by propounding, directing, applying heavenly
thoughts to your understanding, not efficiently by infusing or increasing them;
And by this reason you may no more invocate him for Illumination then you may
your Bishop; for he is not of so great excellency that you should ascribe to
him those things which belong to God: Till you can say of him that he has
opened the eyes of your body to receive the Light of nature, how can you say to
him, Open the eyes of my Soul to rereive the light of Grace? Till you can say
of him, he has enlightened the darkness of the night, how can you say to him,
Enlighten the darkness of mine understanding? The Centurion had many servants
under him, and they all did come and go as he bade them, to do any Acts of
favorable assistance to the Jews; should therefore the servants have the
thanks and honor that was due unto their master? I find that when Lazarus died
he was carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom; yet I do not find that
Lazarus said to his Guardian Angel, (who doubtless was one of them,) that
carried him, Into thy hands do I commend my spirit; nor do I see how you can
say so to yours, unless you can also say unto him, For thou have redeemed me O
Lord thou God of truth; and if you cannot commend your Soul to your Guardian
Angel when you die, how can you commend your Soul to him whiles you live? You
may say with St. Stephen, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit, when it is to be
carried to him by the Angels, for they minister to this Lord; But you cannot
say, Lord Jesus receive my Prayers, when they are given or offered to his
Angels, for they are not fellow-sharers in his Lordship: And this instance
alone is enough to answer all your objections which you have gathered out of my
ejaculations; but if not, you may take another; The Psalmist says, The Angel
of the Lord tarrieth round about them that fear him, and delivers them, yet
he says not, O Taste and see how gracious the Angel of the Lord is, But O Taste
and see how gracious the Lord is, blessed is the man that trusts in him, Ps.
34. 7, 8. My Guardian Angel is a ministering Spirit for my comfort; but my God
alone is an all-sufficient Spirit for my content: None but he can give the
Spiritual gust and taste of a blessed immortality to my Soul, who has made it
immortal; and since my prayers are the chiefest means to procure this spiritual
gust or Taste to my Soul, how shall I pray to them who cannot give it? I desire
my Religion may be to me the beginning of my Salvation, (for so is Grace the
inchoation of Glory) and therefore cannot delight in such prayers as will not
give my Soul the Antipast of eternity, that is in such prayers as do not bid me
say unto my self, O Taste and see how gracious the Lord is, because they do not
ascend up so high as the Lord: For prayer being a spiritual colloquy with him
to whom we pray, why should I pray to an Angel, which probably may not be
present to partake of this colloquy, and indeed cannot partake of it, if it be
merely spiritual (that is only in the heart) or if he could, why should my
heart leave conversing with God, to converse with his Servant? Is not this to
undervalue that happiness which I can not deserve, should not desert? nay is it
not to undervalue prayer to make it the depression of the Soul to the Creature,
which God has appointed for the elevation of the Soul unto himself? What
though one Angel destroyed 185000. Assyrans, may we therefore say unto him,
Remember not our iniquities, nor the iniquities of our forefathers, neither
take thou vengeance of our sins? And if we may not pray to Angels for the
averting of Judgments, then sure not for the obtaining of mercies, since God
uses them as his instruments for the one as well as for the other: If we may
(as you infer) humbly pray them to do those good offices for us, which God has
appointed them, we may also humbly pray God, to give us leave to sin against
Him in our Prayers; for to break his Commandment is to sin against Him, and he
has expressly commanded, saying, Call upon me in the day of trouble, Psalm. 50.
15. In that he has said Call upon me, he has also in effect said, Call not
upon any of my Angels, for that is not to call upon me; Therefore dare I not
pray to Angels, for fear of bringing Judas his curse upon my prayers, of whom
it was said, Let his prayer be turned into sin, Ps. 109. v. 7. For if my prayer
be turned into sin, how will my sin be turned into Repentance? or my repentance
be turned into mercy and forgiveness; If my prayer end in sin, how will my sin
not end in damnation? your own Clement the 8. that corrected your Latin
Translation, (which was of much longer standing in your Church, then any of
your corrupt devotions) will rise up against you in Judgment if you will needs
continue still in these corruptions; For if he reformed your Bibles, why should
not you reform your Breviaries?

CHAP. VI. Of Justification.
1. THe way of Truth in the Doctrine of Justification by Faith, made dangerous
by men's debates, slippery by men's devices, yet the truth it self never to be
subverted or suppressed. 2. The danger of not walking circumspectly in this
way, by taking -- either faction or fancy for faith? 3. Gods Seers (or
Ministers) above all are to avoid this danger, and not to fear men's enmity for
preaching Gods Truth; 4. Pleasure in unrighteousness makes this Doctrine not
rightly preached, and not rightly believed; 5. The Articles of faith not given
to devour the Commandments; therefore no sacrilegious or unjust person can be
justified by faith in Christ; 6. This Gospel Truth to be embraced by Papists,
and not forsaken by Protestants, though it has been most abused of all others,
and was so from the first entrance of the Gospel, whence the Catholic Epistles
were written chiefly against the Solifidian Haereticks. 7. The Doctrine of
Justification delivered by St. Paul, (Rom 3.) in two Propositions; the one
Negative. That it is not by works, proved by 3. Arguments; The other
affirmative, That it is by ^aith, proved from all the causes of Justification,
viz. God the efficient, Christ the meritorious, Faith the instrumental,
remission of sins (through the imputation of Christ's obedience,) the formal
cause; And the declaration of Gods righteousness and man's glorying in God
alone, the two final causes thereof: These 2. Propositions afterward joined
together in one Dogmatical conclusion, That a man is justified by faith without
the deeds of the Law: which is again repeated, Gal. 3. and confirmed by Ten
arguments: 8. The best way of arguing in this heavenly Doctrine, is by
arguments that come from Heaven, agreeing not only with the analogy of faith
in the Doctrine they prove, but also with the analogy of the Text, in the
man^er of their proof: 9. That [Faith which is without works, justifies not,]
gives not works a share in justifying. 10. That [Charity is greater then
Faith,] gives it not a greater influence in Justification. 11. This Text, [Not
the hearers of the Law are just before God, but the doers of the Law shall be
justified] for faith is not in hearing but in doing, not in the ear but in the
heart; 12. St. James and St. Paul deliver one and the same doctrine concerning
Justification, [That it is by Faith in Chtist, not by works] but St. Paul speaks
of Faith more in relation to Christ, its proper Object, to teach the Jews the
necessity of Faith, St. James speaks of Faith more in relation to works, its
proper effect, to teach unsanctified Christians the obedience of Faith. 13. The
doctrine of Justification by Faith without works, is the whole scope both of
the Law and of the Gospel, as is particularly proved in the Epistle to the
Hebrews. 14. Good work are necessary consequents of the Faith that justifies,
not Causes of the Justification, and are no further required of us by any of
the Apostles or Prophets, in the judgment of St. Austin, St. Ambrose, and St.
Chrysostom; Therefore Justification by Faith without works, was then the
judgment of the Catholic Church, and indeed is now of the present Roman
Church, if we look upon her Devotions, not her Disputes. 15. To maintain
Justification by man's righteousness, is not only to forsake Christ's Church, but
also to destroy it. 16. Christ's imputed righteousness, blasphemously called a
Fiction by Bellarmin, piously acknowledged a Reality by Pererius his brother
Jesuit; But the Saints imputed righteousness is a mere fiction, both in regard
of the Imputation which has no promise of Gods acceptance, and in regard of
the righteousness which cannot challenge it, as being incomplete because of
Original and Actual sin; therefore not superfluous in the best of Gods Saints,
as (...) proved by several Texts of Holy Scripture, according to the exposition
of the Catholic Church. 17. All men being sinners, no man can be justified by
his own righteousness. 18. To be justified by works, is to be justified without
(if not against) Grace, Christ, and Faith. 19. It Is madness and wickedness for
man to set up his own, against his Saviors righteousness; yet
self-Justiciaries are guilty of this madness and wickedness, undervaluing both
Christ's death, and the Redemption thereby purchased for true blievers.

The sixth Exception.
IBidem sect. 3. page 196. Against Justification by works you allege, Being
justified by Faith we have peace with God, Romans 5. 1. -- But what faith? The
same St. Paul, Gal. 5. 5, 6. says thus, ex fide spem Justitiae expectamus; sed
fides quae per Charitatem operatur; Here are works required to Justification as
well as faith, which must proceed from charity, which according to St. Paul, 1
Cor. 13. 13. is greater then faith, and must needs therefore have the greater
influence in our justification: For as he says, Romans 2. 13. Not the hearers of
the Law, [there is faith] are just before God, but the doers of the Law [there
are good works] shall be justified.

The Answer.
1. HE that walks on battlements, had need take a special care of his footing,
because if he slip he must fall; and if he fall he must be dashed to pieces;
And such is now the walk of all Orthodox Divines in the way of Gods Truth,
especially this of justification, the main Gospel Truth; it is as if they walked
upon battlements; every step is slippery, and every slip threatens ruin; not
that God has left his way either dangerous or slippery, but that some men have
made it so; their debates have made it dangerous, their devices have made it
slippery: For some men have turns Devotion it self into Debate, to make Gods
way dangerous; and Doctrine it self into Devices, to make Gods way slippery;
And concerning such men it is the Apostle has said, Now as Jannes and Jambres
withstood Moses, so do these also resist the Truth, men of corrupt minds,
reprobate concerning the faith, (2 Timothy 3. 8.) They that use tricks and devices
to elude the sense, when they cannot evade the sentence of the Law, [Cursed is
every one that continues not in all things which are w^itten in the book of
the Law to do them, Gal. 3. 10.] do like Jannes and Jambres withstand Moses by
enchantments making themselves Egyptians, when God made them Israelites, or
making themselves Magicians, when God made them Divines only; they seldom cry
out Digitus Dei, This is the finger of God, though they be showed never so
plainly his own very hand writing to convence them o^f their resistance against
the Truth: For the same corrupt minds that make them resist the Truth, do also
make them reprobate, or of no Judgment concerning the faith; For who can be
judicious in the Faith but from the Truth? and therefore he that resists the
Truth, must needs be of no Judgment concerning the faith; And since we find
among all the multitudes of factious men so little Judgment concerning the
Faith, we cannot but feat that they have all (more or less) resisted the Truth;
I am the way and the Truth, says Christ; So that if the Christian look
directly and constantly on Him, he shall not walk out of the right way, nor
err from the saving Truth; Surely then it is because we have not looked on our
Savior, but on our selves, on our own Interests, that our strayings have been
so many from this right way, our errors have been so many against this
Soul-saving Truth; How far this may concern the grand factions of Christendom
I will not determine, but sure I am they whose Religion is rebellion, and whose
faith is faction, have no other Truth but their own phansies or imaginations,
and consequently can have no other God but their own Perverseness; Yet we doubt
not but as Aarons Rod swallowed up the Rods of the Magicians, so will Religion
at last swallow up rebellion, and Faith will swallow up Faction, and Truth will
swallow up Fancy, and Wisdom will swallow up Folly, if not so as to be
acknowledged of her enemies, yet so as to be justified of her Children; For the
Apostle has said most positively, though more comfortably, But they shall
proceed no further; for their folly shall be manifest to all: And he that has
promised concerning the Preachers of his truth, has much more promised
concerning the Truths they are to Preach, (especially those which so nearly
concern the salvation of Souls) They shall not be removed into a Corner any
more; But thine eyes shall see thy teachers, and thine ears shall hear a word
behind thee saying, This is the way, walk ^e in it, when ye turn to the right
hand, and when ye turn to the left, Isa. 30. 20, 21. 2. But if the Lovers of
Gods Truth will hope to obtain this promise of a word saying, This is the way,
they must endeavor to obey that command, see that ye walk circumspectly, Ephesians.
5. 15. (...) (says the Latin Church in the Text of Sixtus 5.) See therefore
how circumspectly ye walk, (...) (says the Greek Church in the Text of St.
Chrysostom) See therefore circumspectly how ye walk; Men that will not wander
in the bypath of error, must have their eyes in their heads to look about
them to see which is the way of Truth, and they must keep their eyes open in
their heads to look before them to walk in that way; If they want a good
circumspection to look about them, they may chance never come into the right
way; if they want a good Prospection to look before them, they may soon go out
of it; self-conceit is a great enemy to circumspection; self-interest is a
great enemy to prospection; and it is commonly one of these two (if not both)
that makes so many Christians not walk in the way of Truth, but choose faction
or fancy instead of Faith: This may seem to be far fetched, but it comes very
near my purpose, and I pray God it may yet come nearer some men's consciences:
For they who licentiously abuse this Doctrine of justification by faith in
Christ, choose fancy instead of Faith, and turn the Grace of God into
wantonness; They who wilfully oppose it, to set up their own righteousness,
choose faction instead of Faith, and turn the Grace of God into nothing: for as
man's age, so his righteousness is as nothing in respect of God, All my goods
are nothing unto thee, Psalm. 16. 2. Both alike with Elymas the Sorcerer, seek
to turn away others from the Faith, and may justly expect the hand of God upon
them selves to make them so blind, as not to see the Sun of Righteousness for
ever. God of his infinite mercy take away this mist and dark^ess from before
the eyes of all his servants, but especially of all his Seers; for if the light
of the world be darkness, how great will be the darkness thereof? If we delight
in the inner darkness here, how shall we escape the outer darkness hereafter?
If they were a rebellious people, lying children, children that would not hear
the law of the Lord, who said to the Seers, See not, (Isa. 30. 9, 10.) then
what are those See^s, who say to themselves See not, who shut their eyes
against the light, and shut their hearts against the Power of this Truth? [But
that no man is justified by the Law in the sight of God, it is evident; for the
just shall live by Faith, Gal. 3. 11. See the light of this Truth, for it is
evident; see we the Power of this Truth; for even the just shall not live by
his works, but by his Faith. The just shall live by Faith: q. d. The justest
must, that is, has that justice whereby he shall live eternally, from his
Faith, not from his works, from his Saviors righteousness, not from his own:
God speaking this soul-saving Truth so plainly to the understanding, and
pressing it so powerfully upon the Conscience, bids all Christian Divines
admire his goodness, in showing the great need and benefit of Christ, not
discover their own wickedness in seeking to undermine the very foundation of
Christianity: Accordingly St. Chrysostom. expounds that precept, [see ye walk
circumspectly,] of the Ministers of the Gospel. Observe, says he, how the
Apostle does forewarn (and forearm) the Preachers of Gods Truth, againg all the
oppositions of their and its enemies, (...), whole Towns and Cities waged war
against them, (which the Canonist signally expressed after this manner, Laici
clericis Oppido sunt infesti,) yet they are furnished with no other armor but
this to defend themselves, see that ye walk ci^rcumspectly: (...): That is,
Give your enemies no other occasion of their enmity, but only from your
Preaching (which is an occasion rather taken, then given) (...), let that alone
be the ground of their enmity, (...), Let no man be able to accuse you of any
thing else, (and then your adversaries will accuse God, not you.) An admirable
gloss, and seasonable for this Atheistical Age, wherein men will not believe
the Truth, because they have pleasure in unrighteousness, though St. Paul tell
them plainly, that they shall be damned for their unbelief: That they all might
be damned who believe not the Truth, but ^ad pleasure in unrighteousness, 2
These. 2. 12. 4. It is the pleasure in unrighteousness which makes either the
people not rightly believe Gods Truth, or the Priests not rightly preach it,
and particularly this Truth of Justification by Faith, which some of your
Priests care not to preach, because it will spoil their markets; and some of
our Priests had need preach more warily, for fear it should spoil our people.
It is only pleasure in unrighteousness that has hitherto opposed this Truth
in its doctrine, or poisoned this Truth in its belief; For why should a Truth
so clearly revealed in the word of Christ, so nearly concerning the glory of
Christ, so highly cond^ceing to the salvation of Christians, be so violently
opposed by some of your Priests in its doctrine, but that it pulls down the
prices of Masses and Indulgences, stopping the hands of silly and simple, but
yet liberal and munificent votaries? Hence it is that Demetrius-like for love
of gain, they raise an uproar against St. Paul (for it is not against us; it is
against him, or rather Gods Spirit in him, the main Preacher of this Truth,)
taking this for their chiefest Topics, for Maxima and locus Maximae, Sirs, ye
know that by this craft we have our wealth, Acts 19. 25. For no other reason
but covetousness can easily be alleged why the same men should so mainly cry
up the Imputation of their own and their Saints imaginary merits and
righteousness to the maintaining and filling the supposed Treasure of the
Church, and yet so mainly cry down the imputation of our blessed Savior's real
and allsufficient merits and righteousness, to the exhausting and emptying the
Treasures of the people; Thus it is clear, that pleasure in unrighteousness
has hitherto opposed the Truth in its doctrine, making Mammons Chaplains not
over zealous to serve God in searching out his Truth that they may believe it,
or over zealous to serve themselves in not preaching a Truth which they do
believe.

Again, why should so many other formidable Truths and reasonings concerning
righteousness, temperance, and judgment to come, in and from the mouth of the
same St. Paul, make a Heathen tremble, and not once move so many confident
Christians, but that this heavenly Truth of Justification by Faith, has been
hitherto amongst them not rightly believed, or poisoned in its belief? and what
venom can poison the operations of the soul, but only that of the Serpent,
the venom of sin, turning the grace of our God into w^n onness, (...), into
petulancy, insolency, and unsufferable contentiousness, (for so the Greek
Orator has joined these together (...), Isocr. in Panath.) contending against,
not for the Faith once delivered to the Saints, or which is all one, denying
the only Lord God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, Jud. 4. Such men do falsely
pretend Faith in Christ, who do not deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, who do
not live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world; for they cannot
look for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God, and
our Savior Jesus Christ; The Grace of God which brings salvation to others,
will bring the great damnation upon them, because they resist that grace,
betray that Savior, and belie their own Souls: For most certainly the greatest
miscreants that are would break off their sins by repentance, and their
iniquities by showing mercy to the poor, if they did with the eye of Faith see
a watcher and an Holy one coming down from heaven, and saying, Hew the Tree
down, and destroy it, Dan. 4. Or if they did hear with an honest and good
heart, (and Faith comes by no other hearing) that word of Christ's forerunner
in his first coming to save us, which is therefore the fittest to put us in
mind of his second coming to judge us, O generation of Vipers, who has warned
you to flee from the wrath to come? Bring forth therefore fruits meet for
repentance: And now also the axe is laid unto the root of the Tree; Therefore
every tree which brings not forth good fruit is hewn down and cast into the
fire, Matthew. 3. For surely that Faith cannot justify the sinner which cannot
justify it self, a Faith that has eyes and sees not the watcher, the Holy
one coming down from heaven, that has ears and hears not the crier, the
voice of one crying in the wilderness, prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his
paths strait; A Faith that lets men profess Christ^ans, but live and act
Infidels, hardening their hearts, stopping their ears, closing their eyes, lest
at any time they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and
understand with their hearts, and should be converted, and their Savior, the
Physician of Souls, should heal them. Thus it is also clear, That pleasure in
unrighteousness has hitherto poisoned this Truth in its belief, making men
take fancy for Faith, and think themselves in Heaven by their persuasion,
whiles they are even in H^ll, by theit affections and by their actions, not
regarding that word which they cannot deny, dare not gainsay; If ye were
Abraham's children (who is the Father of the faithful) ye would do the works of
Abraham, Joh. 8. 39.

5. For God gave us not the Articles of our Faith to be like Pharaohs lean
kine, to eat up the rules of his Commandments, the fat-fleshed and
well-favoured kine, such as were fit for Sacrifices for himself, much less such
as were offered to himself for Sacrifices; Therefore those can be no Gospel
Instructions which teach men to devour widows houses, nay, to devour Gods own
house, and not only his house, but also his glory and worship, under pretense
of Faith; for of these starveliug Documents, we may justly say now, and others
will be able to say to the worlds end, what is said of the starveling kine, And
when they had eaten them up, (even all the fat Kine, that came up out of the
river, and fed in the meadow, This is all the fatness of Sea and Land, which
their Forefathers had consecrated to the Service and Honor of God) it could
not be known that they had eaten them, but they were still ill-favored as at
the beginning, Genesis 41. 21. He that has commanded us to sanctify public
Persons, (as Mininisters) public times (as Sabbaths or Festivals) public
places (as Churches) to his own worship, will not, cannot justify those who
sacrilegiously rob and persecute his Ministers, mock and suppress his Sabbaths,
revile and profane his Churches: For it were very strange if such men who are
angerly reproved, and openly branded for sacrilegious, profane, blasphemous
persons, by the Spirit of God, should (if they still persist in their
Sacrilege, profaneness and blasphemy) be acquitted and absolved for righteous
and innocent persons, by the Son of God; The Spirit of God calls them
enemies, adversaries, and such as hate him, Psalm. 14. Therefore surely the Son
of God will not make them Saints, accept them as friends, reward them as
servants: Such a devouring Gospel as this was never of Gods teaching, though it
has been of men's practicing, to the discountenanceing of Gods Truth, and to
their own shame and destruction that have practiced it; For God will never
uphold those men in his Truth, who discourage others from embracing it.

6. Yet as long as Gods Truths are infinitely above all men's discouragements,
neither are your Priests excusable if they will not embrace them, nor ours, if
they do forsake them, notwithstanding both be as much discouraged, as either
open enemies or false friends and brethren can discourage them. What? shall the
Sons of God come no more to present themselves before their Father, because
Satan will come also among them to present himself before the Lord? Shall the
the Holy Angels be out of love with their own light, because the Devil himself
can, and does also appear an Angel of light? no more may we be out of love with
this heavenly Truth, of being righteous by the righteousness of our blessed
Redeemer, because Hypocrites and Atheists have made it an occasion of, or a
pretense for their abominable unrighteousness; For even immediately after the
first clear preaching of Justification by Faith, we find a strange generation
of licentious and ungodly men, who did boast of Faith in Christ without good
works, committing all manner of sin with greediness and without remorse. This
gave occasion to St. Peter, St. John, St. James, and St. Jude, (who all writ
after St. Paul,) to direct their styles chiefly against such vain boasters of
this empty Faith, and their Epistles were afterwatds peculiarly called
Catholic, for this reason amongst others, That they were all written in
Vindication of the true Catholic Faith, which did teach a man so to believe in
Christ as to have his life answerable to his belief. This account does St.
Peter give for himself, saying, I have written briefly, exhorting and
testifying, That this is the true Grace of God wherein ye stand, 1 Pet. 5. 12.
As if he had said, These two things I have chiefly proposed to my self in my
writing; 1. To testify the doctrine of the Gospel concerning the Grace of God
in Christ, to be the only doctrine to bring you to eternal Salvation. 2. To
Persuade you to stand fast and persevere in that doctrine, by leading your
lives answerable to your profession. And this account may we give concerning
the rest of the Authors of the Catholic Epistles; for thus the whole Argument
of St. John's first Epistle consists of those two principal parts of the
Christian Religion, The Promises, and the Precepts of the Gospel; For to the
Promises we must refer all that he speaks of Communion with God, of the
expiation of our sins by the blood of Christ, and of the hope of eternal life.
To the Precepts we must refer all that he speaks of true Faith in Christ, of
living godly and righteously according to that Faith, and of loving God
sincerely, or not loving the world, that we may live godly, and of loving our
Brethren sincerely not hypocritically, That we may live righteously: The like
may we say for St. James, and St. Jude, that their Epistles are chiefly against
the Solifidean Heretics, and are therefore filled with diverse exhortations to
several Christian Virtues which they had deserted, and with Dehortations from
the the contrary vices, which they had committed. And we may be Catholics in
this doctrine of Justification, according to these Catholic Epistles, and yet
still deny Justification by works; For it is only the Faith in Christ that is
justified by its works, but the man is still justified only by his Faith.

7. You are as zealous for Justification by works, as St. Paul is against it;
with what good Conscience I cannot say; but sure upon no good ground; yet you
have appealed to St. Paul himself, as the Judge of this controversy, to decide
on your side; and accordingly to St. Paul you shall go, who sure will very
little befriend you by his decision: For I pray what works can any man do which
are not comprised under The works of the Law? But it is St. Paul's most
absolute Determination, Therefore by the deeds or works of the Law, there shall
no flesh be justified, Romans 3. 20. He that looks upon the foregoing words
setting forth the abominable sins that were in the best of men then living, the
Jews, and in those times wherein they lived best, even the times of David and
Hezekiah, (for all the proofs here concerning their wickedness are taken out of
the Psalms and the Prophecy of Isaiah) will easily acknowledge that the words
though particular in their occasion, yet are universal in their Instruction,
and do set forth the general corruption of all men whatsoever, whereby they are
most grievous transgressors of the Law, and most odious in the sight, most
obnoxious to the Justice of God for their transgressions. This considered, He
must be led by the spirit of error, who will not see the evidence; and by the
spirit of contradiction, who will gainsay the power of St. Paul's conclusion,
Therefore by the works of the Law there shall no flesh be justified: for it
follows upon these Premises, No Transgressour of the Law can be justified by
the works of the Law; But all men whatsoever are transgressors of the Law;
Therefore no man whatsoever can be justified by the works of the Law; which is
as much as to say, That no man whatsoever can be justified by works; for all
works whatsoever are reducible to the works of the Law, as being done through
obedience to its authority; and not rightly done, but through compliance with,
and conformity to its righteousness.

And to this Argument he adds another, v. 27. which may be put into this
Syllogism.

The Law of works does not wholly exclude man's boasting in his Justification.

But, God will have man's boasting wholly excluded in his Justification.
Therefore, The Law of works does not justify.

The Major is further proved by Romans 4. 2. For if Abraham were justified by
works, he has whereof to glory. The Minor by Ephesians. 2. 8, 9. For by Grace ye are
saved through Faith, not of works, lest any man should boast; what remains then
for the conclusion, but that the Law of works does not justify? For if it
justified not Abraham, who had so good works, as to be called the friend of
God, much less will it justify me, who by my wicked deeds am become Gods enemy.
We have yet a third argument in this very place, v. 29, and 30. which concludes
thus, If Justification were by the works of the Law, then only the Jews, who
alone had the Law written in tables, could be justified, and God should regard
the salvation of no other people save of the Jews: But these consequents are
directly against the goodness of God, and the whole scope or Tenor of his Word;
Therefore so is that Antecedent, that Justification is by works of ^e Law.
These are St. Paul's three arguments in this place for his Negative conclusion,
which is against Justification by works. And he is not contented with this, but
he gives us also an affirmative conclusion, which is for Justification by
Faith. v. 24. Being justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that
is in Jesus Christ, which he fully explaineth and confirms from all the
causes of our Justification. The principal efficient cause, is God, of whom it
is said, v. 30. It is one God that shall justify by Faith and through Faith;
and this needs no other proof, because no other could give us our blessed Jesus
for a Savior, nor can give us Faith to be made partakers of his salvation. The
meritorious cause is Christ the Mediator betwixt God and man, v. 25. Whom God
h^th set forth to be a propitiation. The instrumental cause is Faith, v. 22.
The (...) of God which is by Faith of Jesus Christ upon all that be^eve, (for
there is no apprehending of Christ without (...), as there is no righteousness
and salvation without Christ) and again, v. 25. through Faith in his blood, not
excluding any other act of his Mediatorship, though instancing only in the
shedding of his blood, which was the chiefest act of his passive obedience,
whereby he merited for us the remission of sins. The formal cause (for
Justification being an action, and therefore an accident, cannot properly have
a material cause, though you by your inherent righteousness do a little
entrench upon this Rule of Logic) I say the formal cause of Justification is
expressed, v. 25. to wit, The remission of sins that are past through the
forbearance of God; not excluding sins present and to come, as if they were not
also remitted, but only nameing sins past, that we might not think
Justification does give us a liberty of future sininng. The formal cause then
of Justification is the remission of sins: For God does so far justify us, or
accept and account us for just and righteous, as far as he does pardon our
sins, and absolve and acquit us from condemnation for Christ's righteousness.
Thus it was God be merciful to me a sinner, which made the Publican go away
justified, St. Luke 18. 13, 14. not his own merit, but Gods mercy. And this is
that doctrine which St. Paul preaches with a Notum sit omnibus et singulis, B^
it known unto you therefore men and brethren, that through this man is preached
un^o you the forgiveness of sins; And by him all that believe are justified
from all things from which ye could not be justified by the Law of Moses, Acts
13. 38, 39. If forgiveness of sins and justification be not one and the same,
how is this a good consequence, [Through Christ is preached unto you the
forgiveness of sins, and by him all that believe are justified] For this cannot
follow, if to be forgiven and to be justified be not one and the same; for then
one thing is preached, another performed; one thing promised, and another
granted; But if they be the same, then we are sure this is good Divinity, that
the formal justice or righteousness for which God absolves us sinners in the
judgment, is not in and from our selves, but in and from our Savior, as it is
said, [By him all that believe are justified from all things from which ye
could not be justified by the Law of Moses;] whereas if our Justification were
for any inherent righteousness (whether Habitual or Actual,) it were not by
him, but by our selves; nor to be gotten by believing, but by doing; nor could
we be justified from all things at once and together, but from one thing after
another; not in an instant, but successively (for so we get our inherent
righteousness;) not by the grace and mercy of God casting all our sins upon our
Savior, that he may forgive them all at once and together, (for active
Justification which respects God absolving the sinners, is a forgiveing of all
sins at once and together for Christ's sake; though passive Justification, which
respects the sinner to be absolved, is a forgiveing of sins so often as the
sinner earnestly repenting, does by a lively Faith flee unto God the Son for
his merit, and to God the Father for his mercy;) In a word, if our
Justification were for any inherent righteousness, whether habitual or actual,
we could not be justified by the grace and mercy of God, casting all our sins
upon our Savior, that he may forgive them all; but by the Law of Moses,
casting us into a mould of righteousness, that we may not commit any sin,
norstand in need of forgiveness. And if this be so, we may bid farewell, i^ not
(...) to the whole Gospel of Christ, which is thus briefly but fully summed up
by St. Paul, That God was in Christ re^nciling the world unto himself, (so by a
Potential though only true believers by an actual reconciliation) not imputing
their trespasses unto them; 2 Cor. 5, 19. No man can be reconciled to God, who
is not justified before God; for all sinners are odious to God as his en^mies,
not reconciled unto him as his frien^s; therefore God looks upon a man as no
(...) (w^ch cannot be as he is i^ himself, but as he is in his Savior) when he
is reconciled unto him; and accordingly to be reconciled is to be justified,
that is, to be accounted righteous; for as the formal cause of our
reconciliation consists in the remssion or not imputation of our sins, (not
imputing their trespasse^ unto them) so does also the formal cause of our
Justification; for that is no other but an absolution from the guilt of sin;
For Justification is not a Physi^al but a Moral action of God, absolving the
sinner for the merit of Christ, even as Sanctification is not a Moral but a
Physical Action of God, cleansing and purging the sinner by the Spirit of
Christ: The one makes the sinner righteous, but the other only accounts him
righteous: And therefore Justification and Sanctification are as improperly
confounded as Moral and Physical or real Actions, For Moral actions work a
change only in regard of the man's relation, (as He that is adopted or
acquitted, is changed only in his relation, that instead of being guilty he is
made not guilty; instead of be^g a stranger, he is made a Son) But real or
Physical actions do work a change also in regard of a man's person, (as He that
is instructed or converted, has a real change wrought upon his understanding
and his will, and consequently is really changed in his person:) So that if to
justify be not merely a moral action, that is, To account as just, by
acquitting from the condemnation of the Law, (as we say) but be also a real
action, that is, to make just by a conformity to the Law, (as you affirm) then
it must needs work a real change in the Patient, making him righteous from
unrighteous, and from righteous more righteous, and by consequent Justification
will be one and the same thing with Sanctification, and so it will follow, that
the whole Tenor of the Text has hitherto misinformed us, and does still
misguide us; for therein these two are reckoned up as two several and distinct
mercies of Almighty God toward our sinful souls, and these wrought by several
means, God justifying us by the righteousness of his Son, and sanctifying us by
the power of his Holy Spirit; And from this ill consequence will yet follow a
much worse, That Sanctification will be supposed to be nothing; for it will
have nothing left to do, Justification having done its work before; and if it
have nothing to do, it cannot be an Action; and if it be not an action, it must
be nothing.

These Logical absurdities (besides others that are Theological) cannot well be
avoided by those who make inherent righteousness the formal cause of our
Justification; And therefore though we separate not inherent and imputative
righteousness, (which your insolent Dogmatist blasphemously calls Putative, as
if it were merely fict^tious, when as in truth all our righteousness is so in
respect of it) I say, though we separate not inherent and imputative
righteousness from one another, in the man that is justified, (for true Faith
always works obedience, and God will not, cannot justify the disobedient)
yet we must separate them from one another in the doctrine of Justification;
For it is only the Imputative righteousness which we have from our Savior, not
the Inherent righteousness which we have in our selves, which can acquit us at
God's Judgment seat, or absolve us as righteous, and consequently which may be
accounted the formal cause of our Justification.

Lastly, the final cause of our Justification is set down, first explicitly,
that it is the declaration of Gods Righteousness, verse. 25, and 26. [To declare
his righteousness] not only that this way of justifying a sinner, is according
to Gods Promise, both in words and Types in all the Old Testament, but also
that this promise was according to the rule of righteousness, because it
acquitteth not a sinner without a due satisfaction for his sin, nor without a
true and serious aversion from himself, and conversion to his Savior:
Secondly, the final cause of our justification is set down implicitly, That it
is our glorying or boasting in God alone; For whereas v. 27. he excludes all
other boasting, it is necessary he must include this, as himself says more
largely, 1 Cor. 1. 30, 31. Christ Jesus is made unto us wisdom, and
righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption. There is our Justification
set forth in it self, in its antecedents, and in its consequents; In it self;
for Ch^st Jesus is our righteousness to deliver us from the guilt of sin, by
acquitting and discharging us. In its antecedents, for he is our wisdom, to
free us from the blindness and darkness of sin, by enlighting and instructing
us. In its consequents; for he is our Sanctification in this life, to free us
from the pollution of sin, by renewing and cleansing us: and our Redemption in
the life everlasting, to free us from the miseries of sin, by receiving and by
glorifying us; That according as it is written, he that glories, let him glory
in the Lord; There is the final cause of our Justification. Christ Jesus does
therefore instruct us by his most holy Word, justify us by his allsufficient
merit, sanctify us by his most holy Spirit, glorify us by his all saving
Mercy, that we may not glory in our selves, but only in our Savior, from whom
we have both the Knowledge, and the Purchase, and the Procurement, and the
Enjoyment of our salvation.

The Apostle having thus severally proved, first his negative conclusion which
is against justification by works, and after that his affirmative conclusion
which is for justification by Faith, he at length joins them both together in
one Dogmatical determination, Therefore we conclude that a man is justified by
Faith without the deeds of the Law, v. 28. And this conclusion he again
repeateth, Gal. 2. 16. Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the
Law, but by the Faith of Jesus Christ; which he immediately confirms with no
less then Ten several arguments in the next Chapter, all alleged to confute
their foolishness in falling from Christ to the Law, from Faith to works in the
doctrine of Justification; And being alleged by the Apostle to confute their
foolishness, they will either the more easily prevent, or the more acceptably
reform and redress Ours.

The first Argument is this; You have received the gift of the Holy Spirit, not
by the works of the Law, but by the hearing of Faith, v. 2. but the gift of the
Holy Spirit is the best pledge of your Justification or Reconciliation with
God, (for he gives not his Spirit to his enemies) Therefore you are justified
not by the Law, but by the Gospel, or by the Hearing of Faith.

The second Argument is this: The same way that Abraham was justified, who is
the ^ather of the faithful, and to whom the Promise was made, The same way must
you be justified; But He was justified only by Faith: v. 6, 7, 8, 9.

The Third this: As many as are of the works of the Law, are under the curse,
ver. 10. but none that are under the curse, are justified.

The fourth this, The just shall live by Faith; but the Law is not of Faith,
ver. 11. 12. that is, The just obtains life and salvation by the free grace
of God apprehended by Faith in Christ; but the Law allows no such free grace;
for that promises life only upon the (now impossible) condition of perfect
obedience; The man that does them, shall live in them.

The fifth this, Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made
a curse for us, ver. 13. Therefore the Law could not justify us, for it did
curse us; and if it could, in vain was Christ made a curse for us; in vain
did he do and suffer so much for our Redemption.

The sixth this, To whom the Promises were made, to him they were performed;
but the Promises of spiritual blessings (and consequently of justification)
were made to Abraham's seed, not seeds, that is to Christ and his members; not
to them that should be under the Law, but only to them that should be in Christ.

The seventh is this, The Promise of spiritual blessedness was made to Abraham
long before the giving of the Law; therefore neither to be accomplished from
the observation, nor to be abolished by the obligation of the Law, ver. 17.
which is further argued, ver. 18. If the inheritance be of the Law, it is no
more of Promise; but God gave it to Abraham by Promise; therefore it is not of
the Law.

The eighth this, That which was a sign of enmity, cannot be a means of
reconciliation; but the Law was a sign of enmity betwixt God and man, as
appears in that it was ordained by Angels, not immediately by God himself, who
being offended had withdrawn his presence, which shows that men were at a
distance from, and at enmity with God; ver. 19, 20. Therefore the Law cannot
be the means of our access to, or of our reconciliation with God.

The ninth is this, The Law cannot give life to any man by exempting him from
the punishment of sin, nor give righteousness by exempting him from the guilt
of sin. ver. 21. 22. Therefore both righteousness and life are given only by
Faith in Christ.

The tenth and last argument is this, The office of the Law was to be our
Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, to show us the imperfection of our own,
and to make us desire the imputation of his righteousness, that we might be
justified by Faith, ver. 24. but the Law cannot go beyond its own office;
therefore no man can be justified either in whole or in part by the works of
the Law.

8. Thus have I mustred up S. Paul's Artillery to batter down our own, but to
keep up our Saviors righteousness in the doctrine of Justification, which
being a doctrine that came down from Heaven, is best maintained by arguments
from Heaven; For as humane reason could not teach it, so humane reason cannot
so well defend it; and does so much the worse oppose it; nor do I see how these
arguments can be answered, unless they can be denied; nor how they can be
denied, ^ince they are so exactly agreeable with the Analogy of the text, and
therefore cannot disagree from the Analogy of Faith. Many arguments have been
used by excellent Divines drawn out of several places of the holy Scriptures,
which have been agreeable with the Analogy of Faith, though not with the
Analogy of the text, and they have passed for good Theological arguments,
because they have been agreeable only with the Analogy of Faith; how much
rather should those arguments be taken for Theological, which are agreeable not
only with the Analogy of faith in the doctrine they prove, but also with the
Analogy of the Text in the manner of their proof? And surely if all Divines did
more use this way of arguing, they would have much less of Contention, and
much more of Conscience in their arguments: you have here showed me this good
way, and I was very glad to see it, and as willing to follow it; for in all
this Paragraph you have quoted nothing but Scripture; all the fault is, you
have made unwarrantable inferences from your quotations.

9. For first you say, Here are works required to justify as well as Faith,
because St. Paul says, we wait for righteousness by Faith which works by
love, Gal. 5. 5, 6. He says, the Faith by which we are justified is a Faith
working by love; you thence infer, that we are justified by our works as well
as by our Faith: you may as well say, because our eyes wherewith we see, are in
our heads; we see with or by our heads, as well as with or by our eyes: or
because our hands wherewith we handle are joined to our arms, we handle with
our arms as well as with our hands; for as the eye that is out of the head
sees not, and as the hand that is parted from the arm handles not; so Faith
that is without works justifies not; yet have works no more to do in
justifying than the head has in seeing, or the arm has in handling.

10. Again you say, Charity is greater than faith, and must therefore needs
have the greater influence in our justification. I cannot see the reason of
this consequence, no more than of that; a lion is greater than a Hare,
therefore he must needs run faster. If the Apostle had spoken of justification,
and had said Charity was greater than Faith, your consequent would have been
good; but speaking not at all of justification, your consequence cannot be good
concerning that, but must be made good concerning somewhat else, viz.
concerning those other things whereof he speaks, as particularly concerning
those admirable acts of suffering, not envying, not vaunting, bearing all
things, believing all things, hoping all things, enduring all things, to which
the soul is disposed by Faith, but in which it is confirmed and perfected by
charity: or concerning the everlasting duration and continuance of Charity; for
that shall never fail, but shall go with us into heaven, and abide there with
us for ever, because that very motion of the soul in the fruition of God
wherein consists eternal blessedness, is an act of Charity. But Faith being
of things not seen, must needs vanish when we come to see God face to face, by
a clear vision; and Hope being of things not enjoyed, must needs vanish when we
come to enjoy him by a full and immediate comprehension; only Charity which in
this life outpasseth Faith and Hope by more immediately uniting the soul to
God, shall in the next life outpasse it self, when it shall taste the
incomparable sweetness, and enjoy the immortal comforts, and feel the
incomprehensible delights and joys of that union. In these respects which are
named, it is most true that Charity is greater than Faith, but not in respect of
justification, which is not named, unless you will say the Apostle put more in
the Conclusion than in the Premises: nay, though it should be granted, that the
Apostle does not here speak comparatively but positively, or else that Charity
is greater than Faith, yet will it not follow, that Faith may not be greater
than Charity in some one respect, as particularly in this of justification; for
though Charity be the more noble in it self, yet Faith is the more needful for
us: Charity may have the absolute preeminence in regard of its excellency, and
yet Faith may have a comparative preeminence in regard of its use. Charity may
be the greater in regard of innocent men, who can steadfastly and comfortably
see God as he is in himself; but Faith must be the greater in regard of sinful
men, who cannot see God as he is in himself, either steadfastly because of their
weakness, or comfortably because of their sinfulness; and therefore must look
on him as he is in his Son, who took upon him our weakness to give us his
strength, and our sin to give us his righteousness: so far is it from a true
consequence, Charity is greater than Faith, and must needs therefore have the
greater influence in our justification.

11. You have yet one more Quotation to prove justification by works, and that
is, Romans 2. 13. Not the hearers of the law, [there is Faith,] are just before
God, but the doers of the law [there are good works] shall be justified; here I
cannot question your inference which you do not make, but I must question your
interpretation which you have made. For this place only shows that both Jews
and Gentiles might justly be condemned, because both had sinned against the
knowledge which God had given them of his law; but it does not show how either
might be justified: yet you have interpreted it of Justification and by your
interpretation have laid a kind of slurre and reproach upon Faith, saying, Not
the hearers of the law, [there is Faith] as if Faith were placed in the ear,
busied only in the hearing of the law, not considering that Faith is the gift
of God, (the most precious gift that ever he gave to sinful man, excepting his
Son, in and for whom he gives it) and that the gifts of God are to be received
with our thankfulness, unless we would have them recalled and reversed with
his repentance; for since we cannot deserve them, if we will not highly prize
them, we show our selves unworthy of what we have, and make our selves
incapable of having more: Come sir I will speak plainly, that I may speak
honorably of so great a gift. If Faith be not in our hearts, Christ is not
there, (for he dwells in the heart by Faith, Ephesians. 3. 17.) and if Christ be
not in our hearts, we can neither have good words in our mouths, nor good works
in our hands; for out of the abundance of the heart as the tongue speaks, so
also the hand acts; therefore pray lets have no more of this Divinity, [not
the hearers of the law, there is Faith] for what can any sacrilegious
Enthusiast say more, who robs God of men's hearts in regular and sound prayers,
to place all Religion in the ear? sure there were many hearers of St. Paul's
Sermon, for it was preached on the Sabbath, and in a place where prayer was
wont to be made, Act. 16. 13. who heard more than the law, (for they also heard
the Gospel) yet only one Lydia (for ought we know) was judged faithful unto the
Lord; and the text gives this reason of her Faith, whose heart the Lord opened
that she attended unto the things which were spoken of Paul: Therefore the
hearers of the law have not Faith, but the doers of it, (at least in vote and
desire, i. e. those who labor to do it,) yet they when they have done all are
taught to say, we are unprofitable servants, we have done that which was our
duty to do, Luke 17. 10. Their doings cannot fully reach the obligation of
their duty, and how can they be a satisfaction for their undutifulnesse? All
their works of righteousness, when they have labored to do all those things
which are commanded, and as they are commanded them, will leave them
unprofitable; and much more must their works of unrighteousness make them
unacceptable: so that you have only supposed a false Faith in the hearers of
the Law, not disproved Justification by Faith in the doers of it; for he that
says, not the hearers of the Law are just before God, but the doers of the Law
shall be justified, does not thereby suppose (much less aver,) any men to be
so complete doers of the Law, as to rely upon their good deeds for their
justification.

12. You might happily better have appealed to St. James, than to St. Paul for
justification by works; and yet neither would he have befriended this your
appeal, much less have justified that your position: for St. James does not
contradict the doctrine of St. Paul, but does only correct those who had
misunderstood, or at least misapplied it; bidding them add to their Faith
Virtue, (as St. Peter had done before, 2 Pet. 3. 5.) or not expect to be
justified by it: wherefore those two Apostles may very well be said to have
delivered but one and the same doctrine concerning justification, if we take
their words not as we please, but as they intended them: for St. Paul writing
against proud Justitiaries among the Jews, who sought for righteousness from
their own works according to the Law of Moses, and rejected the righteousness
of God by Faith in Christ, strongly denied Justification by works, meaning
works properly so called, that is to say, a perfect and perpetual observation
of the whole Law, because all men whatsoever (Christ only excepted,) had many
ways transgressed the Law: But St. James writing against licentious and
profane Hypocrites among the Christians, who pretending to Faith in Christ,
lived not according to the Rule of the Christian Faith, but altogether
neglected the study and practice of good works, affirmed Justification by
works, meaning by works the very obedience of Faith, or a working by love and
obedience: The one writ against the proud opposers, the other against the fond
Pretenders of Faith in Christ; therefore the one tells the proud Jews that
their works were not answerable to the Law in which they trusted, that he might
teach them the necessity of Faith in Christ: The other tell the hypocritical
Christians, that their works were not answerable to the Gospel of which they
boasted, that he might teach them the obedience of that Faith; accordingly as
often as St. Paul affirms, (in sense at least, if not in words,) That we are
justified only by Faith, so often he understands a Faith working by love,
Gal. 5. 6. or an unfeigned unhypocritical Faith, (...), such a Faith as belongs
not to hypocrites, 1 Timothy 1. 5. And as often as St. James denies that we are
justified only by Faith, so often he understands a Faith not working by love,
a Faith only in profession or in persuasion, not in obedience or in affection;
a Faith belonging to hypocrities, not to good Christians, a Faith in noise and
in word, but not in truth and in deed: as appears from the manner of his
expression, ver. 14. If a man say he has Faith; for the Apostle would not say
it for him, because he had only a dead Faith; A Faith without works, and
therefore without life (operari sequitur esse) the Faith of devils, from the
evidence or power of truth convincing the understanding; not the Faith of
Abraham or Rahab, from the acceptance and love of truth converting the will;
therefore these two positions are not contrary, A man is justified before God,
not by the works of the Law, (which he cannot have,) but only by Faith in
Christ, (which always works by love;) and A man is justified before God, not
only by Faith, (that is an historical knowledge of the Gospel, and an empty
profession of Faith,) but also by works, that is an affectionate love of the
Gospel, and a sincere obedience of Faith; The former position is maintained by
St. Paul against those Jews who rejected the Gospel of Christ: the latter
position is maintained by St. James against those Christians who profaned the
same Gospel: Both Apostles teach one and the same Justification by Faith in
Christ; only St. Paul speaks of Faith more in relation to its proper object,
(even to Christ) because he went to convince gainsaying Jews, and to make them
Christians; St. James speaks of Faith more in relation to its proper effect,
(even good works) because he went to convert revolting Christians, and to make
them good Christians: For so himself says concerning Abraham, See then how
Faith wrought with his works, and by work was Faith made perfect? ver. 23. He
says not By works was his justification made perfect, but only his Faith
whereby he was justified, requiring works only to the Faith that justifies,
but not to the act of justification: And after the same manner are we to
understand his conclusion, ver. 24. Ye see then how that by works a man is
justified, and not by Faith only: as if he had said, From this example of
Abraham you may gather, that it is not the wording but the working, not the
professing but the performing Faith that justifies a man before God; requiring
works in that man which is justified, but not denying to Faith the power and
prerogative of justifying.

13. You have well reconciled St. Paul with St. James in your question, [But
what Faith?] which intima^eth, that a just^fying Faith is such a (...) as
worke^h by love; but you have ill reconciled your self with St. Paul in your
position, That works are required to Justification as well as Faith; which
plainly asserteth the contradictory of St. Paul's doctrine: And surely it is not
safe for any Divine to differ in this Doctrine of Justification from St. Paul,
no more than it is safe for him to differ from the whole scope of the Law and
of the Gospel, since it is undeniable that Christ with his righteousness is
the end of the Law, and the subject of the Gospel; This is St. Peter's
Divinity, Act. 10. 43. To Him give all the Prophets witness, that through his
name whosoever believes in him, shall receive remission of sins, i. e. in one
word shall be justified: And indeed what were all the propitiatory and
expiatory sacrifices of the Law, but so many types of Christ's sacrifice upon
the Cross, who is the Propitiation for our sins? 1 John 2. 2. so that in truth
this part of the Ceremonial Law was little other than a dark representation of
the Gospel, foreshewing in shadows what the Gospel was to declare in substance,
that the Lamb of God should t^ke away the sins of the world; whence St. Paul
ascribes the Justification of the Jew and of the Gentile to one and the same
sacrifice, A^ Christ has given himself for us, an offering and a sacrifice to
God, for a sweet smelling savor, Ephesians. 5. 2. Their sacrifices did expiate sin
only by virtue of this sacrifice; And this is that which the same Apostle
proves to the Jews in his Epistle which he peculiarly sent to them, the sum
whereof is briefly this, That Jesus Christ (whom he did preach to them in that
Epistle,) being the eternal Son of God, coessential and coequal with his
Father, perfect God and perfect man in one and the same person, was that
Messiah which God from the beginning of time had promised, and in the fullness
of time had sent into the world, as the only King to Govern, as the only Priest
to reconcile, as the only Prophet to instruct his Church, according to the
Covenant made before the Law; to the types and figures given under the Law; and
all the predictions, explications, additions and confirmations by the Prophets:
so that unless they would reject all the documents given to them in their own
Law, and by their own Prophets throughout all the Old Testament, they must
thankfully acknowledge, heartily embrace, and dutifully obey Jesus Christ as
the sole Author of their redemption and salvation, or (to speak yet nearer to
our debate, though not to Gods Truth,) as the sole author of Justification, to
redeem them from the guilt; and of sanctification, to redeem them from the
bondage of their sins: This is the Doctrine of the whole Epistle to the
Hebrews, which is briefly delivered in the first words, and confirmed and
enlarged in the sequel of that Epistle; God who at sundry times and in diverse
manners spoke in times past unto the Fathers by the Prophets, has in these
last days spoken unto us by his Son; There Is our blessed Savior as Prophet to
instruct the Church. Whom he appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made
the worlds; There he is as King to govern the Church, which is his inheritance
as man, his workmanship as God. When he had by himself purged our sins; There
he is as Priest to offer himself for a Sacrifice to reconcile the Church; And
all the Epistle after this, (in the doctrinal part of it) is nothing else but
an enlargement upon these Three Heads, showing the necessity of Christ's three
Offices and the excellency of his Person according to each Office; viz.
according to his Kingly Office in the first and second; according to his
Prophetical Office in the third and fourth Chapters; and according to his
Priestly Office in the rest, till the nineteenth Verse of the tenth Chapter;
After which He treats of those Offices and Duties which belong to Christians,
and that in the same method or manner as he had before of the Offices belonging
unto Christ, first briefly summing them up together, and then fully and largely
explaining them; For so cap. 10. v. 22. He exhorts us to Faith and a good
Conscience; v. 23. To a firm hope and undaunted profession; v. 24. To charity
and to good works; v. 25. To the public exercise of all those duties of Piety,
which God had appointed for the nourishment and the increase of Faith, Hope,
and Charity; and the rest of the Epistle afterward is but an enlargement upon
these. Will you say because he speaks so much for good works in the latter part
of his Epistle, He therefore requires them to Justification, as well as Faith?
Look on the tenth Chapter, you will soon recall that saying; For there it is
proved, That the Law Sacrifices could not take away sin, (that is, could not
justify those who offered them,) by two irresistible Topics, ab absurdo, ab
impossibili.

First, From the command of the Law enjoining those Sacrifices to be repeated
every year, which had been needless (and therefore absurd) if the worshippers
could have been purged by them, so as to have had no more Conscience of sin,
verse. 23.

Secondly, From the nature of the Sacrifices that were offered, which were not
of so great an efficacy as to purge sin, much less of so great an excellency as
to expiate it; For it is not possible that the blood of Bulls and of Goats
should take away sins; v. 4. And surely he that makes it his work to show the
weakness of the Law-Sacrifices to take away sin, could not make it his intent
to set up the Gospel-Sacrifices, (whether of the Heart by Meditation, or the
Lips by Prayer, or of the Hand by Alms-deeds) as expiations for our sins: For
the same Objections still hold against the one, which were made against the
other. The necessity of their repetion is as great; the proof of their
imperfection is far greater; I ask the soul of the most religious Votary that
now lives, whether he dare say, that he ever prayed so devoutly, but that
either for want of firmness in his attention, or of zeal in his affection, he
needed to ask forgiveness for his Prayers. There was nothing of sin in the
worst of Legal; there is something of sin in the best of Evangelical
Sacrifices; and how then can it make an atonement for another sin? 14.
Therefore what ever be the excellency of good works as to Gods acceptance, or
the efficacy of them as to man's salvation; yet they cannot be so excellent as
to deserve, nor so efficacious as to procure the Justification of a sinner; no,
it cost more to redeem a soul, so that He (even the most righteous man that is)
must let that alone for ever. Non dabit Deo placationem suam, and pretium
redemptionis animae suae; He can give to God what may please his goodness, not
what may appease his anger, or satisfy his Justice; He can offer up the
homage, he cannot offer up the price of his soul; Accordingly we are bound to
interpret all these and the like Texts concerning good works, as declaring
their indispensable necessity, not as declaring their meritorious efficacy to
our salvation; as showing them ot be consequents of the Faith that justifies,
not Causes of Justification: That honor must be reserved only to the Eternal
Son of God, who alone had a righteousness able to hold weight in the balance
of the Sanctuary, and consequently who alone had a righteousness able to make a
sinner righteous; If I wash thee not, thou have no part with me, Joh. 13. 8.
being spoken to a man of infirmity, better merit than I can hope for,
notwithstanding all that I can do or suffer for my Savior, makes me say, That
unless his blood wash me I shall never be so clean as to have a part with him;
Therefore will I rely only upon his blood to make and keep me a true member of
his Body; for I see that St. Paul, who excelled all others in his Doings, and
in his sufferings for Christ (in labors more abundant) there was the
excellency of his doings, In stripes above measure, in prisons more frequent,
in deaths often, there was the excellency of his sufferings, 2 Cor. 11. 23. yet
dares not plead either for acquitment or acceptance with God from his own, but
only from his Saviors obed ence; And do count them but dung, (sc. all things
whatsoever, not the righteousness of the Law excepted) that I may win Christ;
And be found in him, not having my own righteousness which is of the Law, but
that which is through the Faith of Christ, the righteousness, which is of God
by Faith; Phil. 3. 9. A righteousness which is most truly called the
righteousness of God, for it is of God the Fathers giving, of God the Sons
purchasing. For none but God can take away sin, appease the wrath of God,
abolish the power of death and the tyranny of the Devil; therefore no
righteousness but the righteousness of God can have any thing to do in our
Justification, whereby sin is taken away, Gods wrath is appeased, and the power
of death and the Devil is abolished; If men alone can do this great work of our
redemption, what need we any more then man alone in the person of our Redeemer?
wherefore to admit any but the Son of Gods righteousness as the cause of man's
Justification, is to set open, if not to set up an inlet for Arrianism, which
forces Christian Divines to bring St. James to St. Paul in this doctrine of
Justification, that they may set up, not man's, but Gods righteousness; for if
we need a God to redeem us, why not also to justify us, since Justification is
the main work of our redemption; And indeed if men would be so ingenuous, as to
allow the Spirit of God the same constancy to himself, under the hands of
several Penmen, as of One, They would no more oppose St. James against St.
Paul, in this doctrine, then St. Paul against himself; For St. Paul has as
palpably rejected a Faith without works, as St. James; Though I have all Faith,
so as to remove mountains, and have no charity, I am nothing; 1. Cor. 13. 2.
And yet by so saying did never intend, and was never thought to thwart his own
doctrine concerning Justification by Faith in Christ, or to ascribe any share
of it to works, (which proceed from charity) or to make man a fellow-sharer
with God, by allowing our own righteousness to be (in the least respect) a
Partial cause of our Justification: And herein St. Augustine shows himself St.
Paul's Scholar, and therefore may justly challenge to be our Master; For though
he writ a Book of purpose to confute the Solifidean Heresy, which looked only
after Faith, yet has he not let fall any one passage to persuade us That works
are required to Justification as well as Faith; This himself professes, lib.
2. Retr. cap. 38. Interea missa sunt mihi a quibusdam fratribus laicis quidem,
sed divinorum eloquiorum studiosis, scripta nonnulla quae ita distinguerent a
bonis operibus Christianam fidem, ut sine hac non posse, sine illis autem posse
perveniri suaderetur ad ae^ernam vitam; quibus respondens librum scripsi, cujus
nomen est de Fide and Operibus: When I had received certain writings from some
Lay-brethren indeed, but studious of the holy Scripture, (mark the distinction
of Laymen and Clergymen in those days, but withal the free use of the
Scriptures not denied to Laymen) which did so divide and separate Faith from
Works, as to say without the one we might not be saved, but without the other
we might; I thought to answer them in a Treatise of purpose, which entitled of
Faith and Works; And in this Treatise, though by many Texts he proves that men
are bound to work out their own salvation, yet does he nowhere avow that they
shall be justified or saved by their works:

Thus himself declares the whole intent and scope of his Book, (as to this
argument) Quare illud jam videamus quod excutiendum est a cordibus religiosis,
ne mala securitate salutem suam perdant, si ad eam obtinendam sufficere solam
fidem putaverint, bear autem vivere and bonis operibus viam Dei tenere
neglexerint; (lib. de Fide and Oper. cap. 14.) Now let us consider that Tenent
which is to be kept or driven out of religious hearts, lest by an evil security
they should lose their own salvation, while they think to obtain it only by
faith, and neglect to live righteously, and by works of righteousness to keep
themselves in the way of Godliness; Here Is his whole scope and intention, To
keep religious hearts from carnal security in neglecting good works, not to
fill them with spiritual Pride in relying on them; and surely they must rely on
them very much, (to the dishonor of their Savior, and to the danger of their
salvation) if they look to be justified by them; nay a little after He plainly
excludes good works from Justification, though he require them in the Faith
that justifies; Quum ergo dicit Apostolus arbitrari se justificari hominem per
fidem sine operibus Legis, non hoc agit ut praecepta ac professa fide opera
Justitiae contemnantur, sed ut sciat se quisque per fidem posse justificari,
etiamsi legis opera non praecesserint; sequuntur enim justificatum, non
praecedunt justificandum: When therefore the Apostle says, we conclude that a
man is justified by faith without the deeds of the Law, his intent is not, that
because we have known and do profess the faith, we should contemn the works of
the Law, but only that every man should know he may be justified by his faith,
though he has not performed the works of the Law; For those works do follow
him that already is, not go before him that hereafter shall be justified: If
good works do not go before him that is justified, then the work of
Justification is done before they come; and if done before them, then most
surely done also without them.

Yet still the same Father reviles their opinion, who did think [That Faith
without works was available to salvation,] saying plainly, that to confute this
opinion, St. Peter, St. John, St. James and St. Jude did write their several
Epistles; That St. Peter speaks concerning this same opinion [of being saved
by Faith without works,] when he says, that some unearned and unstable men did
wrest St. Paul's Epistles to their own destruction, and therefore exhorts
Christians to all holy conversation and godliness upon this account, that such
men did at last most miserably perish in their sins: Sic itaque Petrus; his
ergo (i^quit) hominibus pereuntibus, quales oportet vos esse in sanctis
conversationibus et pietatibus? so says S. Peter, therefore since these men
perish, (for that application St. Aug. makes of his words, though not that
Lection) what manner of persons ought ye to be in all conversation and
godliness? ye therefore beloved, seeing ye know these things before, beware
least ye also being led away with the error of the wicked, [sc. this error of
being saved by Faith without works] fall from your own stedfastness; but grow
in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 3.
11, 17. But St. James (says he) is yet much more offended with such men,
Jacobus autem tam vehementer infestus est eis qui sapiunt fidem sine operibus
valere ad salutem, ut illos etiam Daemonibus comparet, etc. St. James is so
displeased with those men who supposed Faith could save them without works,
that he downright compares them to devils, saying, the devils also believe and
tremble; and tells them plainly their Faith was dead, and that they were
strangely besotted, who thought that such a faith which had not life in it
self, could be a means of procuring them everlasting life; (quousqu^ igitur
falluntur, qui fide mortua sibi vitam aeternam pollicentur) And St. Aug.
further assures us; that S. Paul himself had exactly taught the very same
Doctrine before. Sicut etiam ipse Paulus non quamlibet fidem quae in Deum
credat, sed eam salubrem planeque Evangelicam definivit, cujus opera ex
dilectione procedunt, and fides (inquit) quae per dilectionem operatur; Unde
illam fidem quae sufficere ad salutem quibusdam videtur, ita nihil prodesse
asseverat, ut dicat, si habeam omnem fidem, ita ut montes transferam,
charitatem autem non habeam, nihil sum; Ubi autem haec fidelis charitas
operatur, sine dubio been vivitur: (Aug. lib. de fide et over. cap. 14.) Even
as also St. Paul himself speaking of Justifica^ion and Salvation by Faith, did
not mean every Faith which believed in God, but a saving and a ^rue Evangelical
Faith, whose works proceeded from love; a Faith (says he) which works by
love; whence that Faith without works, which some thought sufficient to
Salvation, he so flatly avoweth to be nothing worth, that he plainly says,
though he had all Faith, so as to remove mountains, and had not charity, he
should be nothing; But wheresoever is this Faith working by love, there without
doubt the whole life is freight with good works: All his business is to
distinguish a true and false Faith, by requiring works to the Faith that
justifies; not to confound Faith with works in the act of Justification:
Again in the fifteenth Chapter, Illud quoque non video cur Dominus dixerit, Si
vis venire ad vitam, serva mandata, and commemoravit ea quae ad bonos mores
pertinent, si etiam his non servatis ad vitam veniri potest per solam fidem,
quae sine operibus mortua est; Illud deinde quomodo verum erit, quod eis quos
ad sinistram positurus est, dicat, Ite in ignem aeternum qui paratus est
Diabolo and Angelis ejus; nec increpat quia in eum non crediderint, sed quia
bona opera non fecerint, cap. 15. Nor do I see why our Lord said, If thou will
enter into life keep the Commandments, reckoning up those moral duties whereby
they were to be kept, if without keeping them, more might go to Heaven by a
dead Faith; nor how he will say to them on his left hand, go into everlasting
fire; condemning them, not because they had not believed, but because they had
not done good works answerable to their belief.

He tells the false believer, he should be condemned for want of works; he
tells not the true believer he should be acquitted for his works: where by the
way our Solifidians may take notice, that he^ is not like to be so full of
moral honest men who want Faith, (for how could their hearts sanctify their
hands, if Faith did not first sanctify their hearts?) as of believing men who
want moral honesty, having only such a Faith as to sanctify their mouths for
holy professions, but not their hearts by holy affections, nor their lives by
holy conversation. For so the same St. Aug. in the next Chapter; Si autem
Christus fundamentum, proculdubio fides Christi, per fidem quippe habitat
Christus in cordibus nostris: Porro fides Christi illa est utique quam
definivit Apostolus, quae per dilectionem operatur: Non enim fides illa
Daemonum, quum and ipsi credant and contremiscant, and fil^um Dei confiteantur
Jesum, potest (...) in fundamentum; Quare nisi quia non est fides quae operatur
per dilectionem; sed quae exprimitur per timorem? fides itaque Christi, fides
gratiae Christianae. i. e. ea fides quae per dilectionem operatur, posita in
fundamento, neminem perire permittit, cap. 16. If Christ be the foundation of
our righteousness, then without doubt the Faith of Christ is so too; for
Christ dwells in our hearts by Faith; but it is that Faith which the Apostle
defines to be a Faith working by love; for it is not possible that the Faith
of devils, who do believe and tremble, and confess Jesus to be the Son of God,
should be taken into this foundation; because it is not a Faith which works
by love, but which is extorted by fear: whereas the true Faith of Christ which
proceeds from the grace of Christ, that is a Faith which works by love,
being put in the foundation, will not let any man perish everlastingly: What
can be said more of a justifying Faith, but that it makes Christ to dwell in
the heart for the foundation of righteousness, and that it passes from the
heart to the hand for the operation of righteousness? In that this Faith
gives us Christ, it delivers us from the condemnation of sin; for where
Christ is, there can be no condemnation, Romans 8. II. In that it gives us good
works, it delivers us from the conversation of sinners, that we may live as
becomes Christians: This Faith cannot let us perish, because it will not let
us depart from Christ who is the Way, the Truth and the Life; the Way that we
should walk in, the Truth to direct us in our journey, and the Life to reward
us at our journeys end; But the Faith which does not this, as it proceeds not
from the grace of Christ, (but from the strength of our own conviction) and
tends not to the glory of Christ; So it is rather the Faith of Devils than of
good Christians, and may well let a man go to hell; for it may go thither along
with him; and therefore as it is not the foundation of righteousness, so it
cannot be the foundation of blessedness: Again the same Father tells us, That
though our blessed Savior had at first in effect called the woman of Canaan a
Dog, (it is not lawful to take the childrens bread and give it unto Dogs) yet
when he saw in her soul ^he fruit of that reproof, he changed his dialect, and
said, not O Dog, but O Woman, great is thy Faith; Non ait O canis, sed O
mulier, magna est fides tua; mutavit vocabulum, quia mutatum vidit affectum:
That Faith which Christ approved in her, had changed the affection; and it is
not possible but the Affection should change the Action: and therefore St.
James feared not to call an actionless Faith, or a Faith not working by love, a
Faith not of Christians but of Devils; Fidem non Christianorum sed Daemonum;
For they are not Christians, but Dogs and Devils who persist in ungodly
affections, and in unrighteous actions: nay indeed they are Infidels, so far
from having true Faith in Christ, that they do not know what is true Faith;
They rightly affirm (says he) that whosoever will not believe in Christ, does
in some sort sin against the Holy Ghost, and put himself under a necessity of
damnation; but they do not rightly understand what it is to believe in Christ;
for that is not to believe as Devils, but as Christians; not to have a dead
Faith, but a Faith living and working by love; Illud sane non absurd
intelligunt, eum peccare in spiritum sanctum, and esse sine venia reum aeterni
peccati, qui usque in finem vitae noluerit credere in Christum; sed si recte
intelligerent quid sit credere in Christum; non enim hoc est habere Daemonum
fidem, quae recte mortua perhibetur, sed fidem quae per dilectionem operatur;
Aug. ibid. cap. 16.

I have of purpose alleged many quotations out of St. Augustine, (indeed most
of them which concerned this argument) that all the world may see, that his
intent in confuting those mistaken brethren who thought to be saved by Faith
without works, was only to show out of ^t James and the other Catholic
Ep^stles, what Faith it is that justifies; sc. a Faith working by love; but
not to ascribe the glory of Justification either to works or love, because they
hold of mansrighteousness; but only to Faith, which holds of the
righteousness of the Son of God: I will now to St. Augustine further add St.
Ambrose, who in his Comment upon the Romans, cap. 3. has these words,
Justificati sunt gratis, quia nihil operantes neque vicem reddentes, sola fide
justificati sunt, They are justified freely by his grace, because working
nothing (sc. worth Gods acceptance, and their own acquitment) and making no
recompense, they are justified only by Faith through the gift of God; And again
upon those words, cap. 4. Credenti autem in eum, But to him that works not,
but believes on him that justifies the ungodly, he says thus, Sic decretum
dicit a Deo, ut cessante lege, solam fidem gratia Dei posceret ad salutem; The
Apostle tells us it was so decreed of God, that the Law ceasing, (sc. as to
that male diction, Cursed is he that continues not in all things to do them)
The grace of God should require only Faith to our salvation: we find no mention
of a Decree in the Text, either in the Greek Original, or in the Latin
Translation; yet St. Ambrose sets down the words thus, Ei vere qui non
operatur, credenti autem in eum qui justificat impium, reputatur fides ejus ad
justitiam secundum Propositum Gratiae Dei, To him that works not, but
believes in him that justifies the ungodly, his Faith is accounted for
righteousness, according to the Purpose of the Grace of God, not intending by
the addition of these words, according to the Purpose of the Grace of God, that
any should cavil against the true reading of the Truth (as of late some
Critics have taught us to do) but that all should understand the true meaning
of it, and no more question that in justification of the ungodly Faith is
accounted for righteousness, then they dare question the Purpose of the Grace
of God: This is palbably St. Ambrose his Doctrine; and therefore he asks him,
Is it possible the Jews should think themselves justified by the works of the
Law, according to the justification of Abraham, when they saw that Abraham
himself was justified, not by the works of the Law, but only by Faith? Quomodo
ergo Judaei per opera legis justificari se putant justificatione Abrahae, quum
vident Abrahamum non ex operibus legis, sed sola fide justificatum? He says
moreover, That our Apostle proved this from the Psalmist, pronouncing them
blessed unto whom the Lord imputes righteousness without works; Beatos dicit
quibus hoc sanxit Deus, ut sine labor and aliqua observatione, sola fide
justificentur apud Deum; He calls those blessed concerning whom the Lord has
determined, that without their own labor and any observation (of the Law) by
Faith alone they should be justified before Him; which are so clear and high
expressions for Justification by Faith alone, that for any Divine now to say,
works are required to Justification as well as Faith, is either to suppose the
Apostles and Prophets not to have known Gods intent and meaning, or to suppose
St. Ambrose and St. Augustine not to have known the intent and meaning of the
Apostles.

I must yet further add one more Testimony, (that in the mouth of two or three
witnesses this so heavenly Word of Truth may be firmly established) And that
shall be the Testimony of St. Chrysostom, who upon the two first Verses of the
fourth Chapter to the Romans, (where the Apostle speaks of Abraham's
Justification,) gives us this Exposition; (...): For as much as the Jews did
turn this point of Divinity upside down, because their Patriarch the friend of
God, was first circumcised, (sc. before he was accepted as a friend) The
Apostle is resolved to show them that even Abraham himself was justified by
Faith: (...): For that a man should be justified by Faith who had no works,
were nothing strange; But for one that flourished in deeds of righteousness,
not to be made just from them, but from his Faith, was very wounderful, and
does exceedingly declare the power of Faith; Therefore passing by all others,
he makes mention only of him, (that is of Abraham) Chrysostom. Aug. 11. in Romans in
principio: what should I add more witnesses? here are enough to show the
unanimous consent of Greek and Latin Church in this doctrine of Justification
by Faith without works; so it is not of our Invention; And they are consenting
with the Prophets and Apostles in this Doctrine; so it may not be of your
rejection; For you know who has said, If they hear not Moses and the Prophets,
neither will they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead, Luke 16. 31.
That is to say, in this present case they will not be persuaded, though one
that has passed under the Judgment of God should come from the dead to tell
them, That he had not been acquitted for his own, but for his Saviors
righteousness: I was the more desirous to insist the longer upon the Fathers,
because some late Protestants (to make their own writings the more acceptable)
have not stuck to say, That the Fathers did write either defectively or
obscurely of this point, whereas if they had written with a pen of Iron, or of
a diamond, they could not have written more Fully; and with a Sunbeam, they
could not have written more clearly; And because some Papists on the other side
(to make their Tenent the more passible) have not stuck to say that the Fathers
writ all fully and clearly for Justification by works; Let any unprejudicate
man judge, from these few quotations, whether all their fullness and plainness
be not to enlarge and explain this very doctrine of St. Paul, which you have
blamed in me, Therefore being justified by Faith, we have peace with God
through our Lord Jesus Christ; Romans 5. 1. Whereby he attributes not only our
Justification from the guilt of sin, but also our peace for the deliverance
from the terror of that guilt, only to Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ: But
because men of the contrary opinion do pretend to be wholly for the Church, it
shall not suffice me to have showed what the Catholic Church did believe and
profess in the days of St. Ambrose, St. Augustine, and St. Chrysostom, but what
the present Roman Church does believe and profess at this very day; for that
still teaching all her Communicants to pray on this wise, Effunde super nos
misericordiam tuam, ut dimittas quae conscientia metuit, and adjicias quod
oration non praesumit, per dominum nostrum; Pour down upon us the abundance of
thy mercy, forgiveing us those things whereof our Conscience is afraid, and
giving unto us that that our Prayers dare not presume to ask, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, 12. Sunday after Trinity, does plainly show and declare, That
forgiveness of sins and quietation of our Consciences are among those blessings
which our prayers dare not presume to ask, (and much less may hope to attain)
by any of our own but only by our Saviors righteousness; and what is
Justification but the forgiveness of sins? and what is the immediate effect of
it, but the quietation of our Consciences? God has made Remission of sins an
Article of our Faith, not a duty of our life, and his Church accounts them
Infidels who do not believe it. But if we can purchase it by our own works, it is
rather to be merited or to be deserved then believed. Let us then change the
daily Hymn of the Church and say, When we had overcome the wickedness of
life, we did open the Kingdom of Heaven to our selves that were workers; not,
when Thou had overcome the sharpness of death, Thou did open the Kingdom
of Heaven to all believers: The Church owns the opening of Heaven to Christ's
death, not denying true believers to be workers, but denying Heaven to be
opened by their works: And shall we say that Heaven is opened by our Saviors
merits, but entered by our own? 15. But see first if by saying so, we do not
only forsake Christ's Church but also destroy it; For none can shut the gates of
Hell, but He that has opened the gate of Heaven; The same righteousness shuts
Them (for they are many and wide) and opens This, (for it is but one and very
narrow) If man's righteousness can do so, let not Jerusalem be any longer
called by this name, The Lord our righteousness, Jer. 23. 16. But if she be no
longer so called, How will she be Gods Church? for withoubt dout the gates of
Hell will easily be able to prevail against Her righteousness, though not
against Her Saviors: Therefore the Church that Hell shall not prevail against,
must be founded on the Rock of Christ's righteousness, not on the Sand of man's
righteousness; for then God may soon come to have no Church, because the Church
may soon come to have no righteousness; surely it can have no such
righteousness as either to vanquish Hell, or to challenge Heaven: no such
righteousness as not for ever to say most justly what now she says, si
iniquitates observaveris Domine, Domine quis sustinebit! If thou Lord will be
ex^ream to mark what is done amiss, O Lord who may abide it? That man would be
very desperate who should answer this question and say, I may abide it; and
consequently that Divinity must needs be very dangerous, which must put him
upon such an answer for his Justification. This is for Christians to have a
worse opinion of Christ then had the Jews; for even Rabbi David upon these
words of Jeremy, The Lord our Righteousness, gives us this gloss, Israel
shall call the Messiah by this name (The Lord our righteousness) because in
his days the Justice of God shall be firmly established for ever;
acknowledging that a Justice which is to be established in us for ever, is not
to be obtained, may not be expected by and from our selves, but by and from the
Messiah, by and from him who is here called The Lord our righteousness: 16.
Yet your Bellarmine lib. 2. de Just. uses no less then ten Arguments to prove
that the imputation of Christ's righteousness in our justification, is little
other then a fiction or a vain and empty opinion; Justificationem non
consistere in Imputatione justitiae Christi; He says positively That
Justificatoin does not consist in the imputation of Christ's righteousness;
Sure St. Paul taught him not to say so; for he plainly rejects his own
inherent righteousness; and cleaved only to the imputed righteousness of
Christ, when he desired to be justified; Phil. 3. 9. -- That I may win Christ
and be found in him, not having mine own righteousness which is of the Law,
but that which is through the Faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of
God by Faith; He desired not to be found in his Own, but in his Saviors
righteousness, when he was to pass under Gods sentence; and he could not be
found in that, unless it might be imputed to Him; for being Another, it could
not be inherent in Him; Therefore if your Cardinals contradistinctions stand
for good in your account, (Vera mundities non Imputativa, arg. 9.) non vere sed
imputative tantum suum Christus sanctificavit populum (Arg. 10.) True
righteousness, not Imputative; and, If Christ sanctified his people not truly
but Imputatively, whereby He supposes Imputative to be not True; Then say that
St. Paul did forsake a True for a false righteousness, because he forsook an
inherent righteousness for an imputative; But take heed that in saying so, you
do not only injuriously callumniate St. Paul chosing to be justified by an
Imaginary righteousness, but also impiously blaspheme your Savior, by
supposing all that he did and suffered for sinners, to be made theirs only by
Imagination; And consequently, That Justification is but matter of fancy not
of reality, which the holy Scripture ascribes only to Imputed righteousness;
For the Text does plainly say, Abraham believed God, and it was counted or
imputed to him for righteousness. Romans 4. 3. And again v. 5. His Faith is
counted for righteousness; an^ v. 6. David describes the blessedness of the
man unto whom the Lord imputes righteousness without works; and again, v. 22.
It was imputed to him for righteousness: He that shall consider these Texts,
and say Imputed righteousness is a mere fiction, will scarce be able to wash
his hands from charging the Holy Ghost with teaching a Fiction, and may easily
keep the Holy Ghost from washing his heart from the guilt of that charge:
Pere^ius durst not so thwart the Text, (cap. 4. ad Romans disp. 2.) but says of
Abraham (as St. Paul had taught him,) That though he was just and holy; yet his
faith, not his holiness, was imputed to him for righteousness; Abraham licet
is justus jam esset and sanctus, propter fidem tamen, non propter opera,
Justitia dicitur esse imputata.

What a vast difference is here betwixt Two men, not only of the same Church, I
mean of Rome, but also of the same order? I mean of Jesuits; Bellarmine being a
zealous Disputant strives to bring the Holy Ghost to his Position; Pererius
being a judicious Commentator, strives to bring his exposition to the Holy
Ghost: For doubtless he had observed the Hebrew words, Genesis 15. 6. (to which
St. Paul here related,) to be these, (...) and Imputavit illud ei in justitiam,
And he, (that is the Lord) imputed it to him for righteousness,) So the Jewish
Doctor Solemon Jarchi (who best understood his own dialect,) glosseth those
words, He that is ^oly and blessed, imputed it t^ Abraham for purity and
Justice, (or righteousness,) because of the Faith through which he had
believed him: If Abraham were made just by imputed righteousness; then so also
are the sons of Abraham; therefore said the Prophet, Look unt^ Abraham your
Father Isa. 51. 2. exhorting all the sons of Abraham after the pattern of their
Father to trust in Christ, as says our Church in the contents, nay as says
Gods holy Spirit in the Text; For St. Paul argues from Abraham's Justification
to ours, That as he was not, so we cannot be justified by inherent, but by
imputed righteousness; For God is always like himself; not one to Abraham,
another to us; therefore as He justified Abraham, so He justifies us: And
Aquinas gives a demonstrative reason for it, saying, Tota Ecclesia quae est
mysticum corpus Christi, computatur quasi una persona cum suo capite, quod est
Christus, (3. par. q. 41. art. 1. c.) The whole Church which is the mystical
body of Christ, is computed but as one person with its Head which is Christ;
Abraham the Father of the faithful and all his children are members of one and
the same mystical body; therefore they have all but one and the same
righteousness whereby to be justified; And Christ is the Head of that
mystical body; therefore they all have His righteousness imputed to them for
their Justification; To set up another righteousness for this, is to set up
another Head; and to set up another Head, is to destroy the Body; The
righteousness of the Head is communicated and may be imputed to all the
members of his Body, because Head and Body make but one Person; But the
righteousness of one member is not communicable, and may not be imputed to
another member, because all the members make several persons; forasmuch as the
Body whereof they are members is not natural, but mystical; so we have (in the
judgment of Aquinas) great reason to believe the imputed righteousness of
Christ; but none at all to believe the imputed righteousness of the Saints:
For the Head has, but the members have not a communicable righteousness: For
though the Head and all the members make but one Person mystical, yet the
members make several distinct persons natural; and several distinct persons,
as they have their subsistencies, so they have their properties and operations
both alike incommunicable: Each member has its own righteousness not possibly
to be communicated to another, because it is confined to its own subject, and
therefore not truly imputed to another, because it is not communicated; This is
a kind of imputed righteousness, which is a mere figment or a fiction, but it is
a righteousness both taught and imputed by man, not by God; even in the
superfluous or superabunant righteousness of the Saints, put into the treasure
of the Church (if we may believe your Authors) to be communicated to those that
want merits or satisfaction of their own; either merits of their own working,
or satisfaction of their own making: This imputed rightousnesse of man is in
truth a mere fiction, both in regard of the imputation and in regard of the
righteousness.

First, In regard of the imputation; for it is againg the nature of Justice,
that one man's righteousness should be imputed for the satisfaction of another
man's unrighteousness, without his consent that is to be satisfied; but God
has nowhere declared, much less promised his consent to receive such
satisfaction; So that the imputing one man's righteousness to another, must
needs be vain, because God may be thought not to accept it; nay more, it must
needs be sinful, because man may be thought to prescribe, (if not to extort)
Gods acceptance; And if there be vanity and sin in the imputation, we must say
there is fiction in it; for having its very being in Vanity and sin, it cannot
have a real but a mere imaginary or fictitious being.

Secondly, This imputed righteousness of men is a mere fiction in regard of the
righteousness it self: For it supposes the righteousness of the creature to
make condign satisfaction to the Justice of the Creator, which is impossible,
because the one is finite, the other is infinite; Nay yet farther to heighthen
this impossibility (at least in our conception, though not in truth) it
supposes the righteousness of the creature, not only to satisfy for its own,
but also for another unrighteousnes; whereas it is the opinion of some of the
best Scholemen, even of Bernard, Scotus, and Gabriel, (if we may believe
Vasques) That no creature can have a righteousness adequate, or exactly
proportionable to the Justice of the Creator, (for it self, much less for
another,) from its own worthiness; but only from Gods acceptance; And that
Christ himself, as man, could not have merited forgiveness of our sins at the
hands of God, as having satisfied his offended Justice, if God had not been
mercifully pleased of his own free grace and goodness, to accept of his
satisfaction: Nullius creaturae neque adeo Christi apud Deum esse meritum and
satisfactionem simpliciter condignam, sed ex acceptatione ipsius Dei, qui
sponte sua ea satisfactione and merito vol^it esse contentus: Vasques in 3.
Thom. Disp. 5. c. 1. So that if the eternal Son of God did by his most condign
and complete righteousness, purchase for us forgiveness of sins and eternal
life, merito ex compacto non autem absoluto; only by compact or covenant, not
by absolute Justice, then what a vain imagination is it to think, what an
unwarrantable fiction is it to say, that one man's righteousness can be
meritorious to make another righteous which has no condignity, to challenge
acceptance for it self, and much less has any compact or covenant to be
accepted for another? And if it be not meritorious to exempt him from guilt,
how can it be satisfactory to exempt him from punishment? For satisfaction is
an act of Justice; but Justice will have the sin expiated, before it will have
the punishment remitted; wherefore though your great Doctor spoke without book
(surely without Gods book) when he said, That the least drop of Christ's blood
was a sufficient satisfaction for the sins of the whole world, and consequently
that all the other passions of Christ were merely superfluous as to our
redemption from eternal death, [Bellar. de Jndulg. l. 1. c. 4.] (For this
assertion makes God delight in Unnecessaries, which even nature abhorres,
merely by instinct from him; nay it makes him delight in some kind cruelty if
not as injustice, punishing our blessed Savior more then was needful for the
satisfaction of Justice;) yet if we should gratify him with the allowance
though not the approbation of this unwarrantable asserion, it would not do his
work, by laying a firm foundation of his surposed Treasury of the Church, built
upon the superfluous merits and passions of Christ, the blessed Virgin, and the
other Saints. 1. Because the Passions of Christ, though they were all infinite
in value from the dignity of the sufferer; yet were none of them superfluous
for the cause and ground of his suffering. 2. Because there it is not the same
reason of merit in the Saints as was in Christ; For even those actions of
Christ which proceeded from his humane nature, had their merit from his Divine
nature; as the flesh of Christ is said to give life, the obedience of Christ to
give righteousness, the blood of Christ to have redeemed the Church, not in it
self, but as the flesh, and the obedience, and the blood of the Son of God; The
Church of God which he has purchased with his own blood, Acts 20. 28. He shed
his blood as man; but he purchased the Church with it as God; Those doings and
sufferings of Christ which had their original from his Humanity, had their
excellency from his Divinity; not so the doings and sufferings of the Saints;
for though they proceeded from the spirit of God, yet were they the doings and
sufferings only of men, not of God; because the Spirit of God dwelled in them,
not by a Personal Union, but only by a powerful Communion. 3. Because there is
not the same reason of the acceptance of the Saints merits as of Christ's; For
Gods promise of accepting the sufferings of his Son for the expiation of our
sins is most evident; not so of accepting the sufferings of his servants, were
they more then enough for themselves; There is not in all the written word the
least contract or Covenant of Gods making That he would accept superfluous
merits, or sufferings, or satisfaction from some, when for defects and demerits
and dissatisfaction from others: Besides what a strange insolency is it for a
Divine to deny to Christian souls the Imputation of that part of Christ's
sufferings, which is absolutely necessary both for Gods satisfaction, and for
their own salvation; and at the same time to avow the imputation of that Part
of Christ's sufferings which he professes to be superfluous? For if necessary
sufferings or doings may not, how should unnecessary be imputed? But above all
it is a most abominable insolency to deny the imputation of Christ's
righteousness, which is both substantial and satisfactory, and to allow the
imputation of the Saints righteousness, which is not substantial (as to its
supposed superfluity,) and cannot be satisfactory if it could be superfluous;
it is not sufficient to justify them that have it, much less them that have it
not; The blessed Virgin her self did say, My soul does magnify the Lord, and
my Spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior: Ascribing to her God, not to her
self, the honor of her salvation; Therefore though she had a vast stock of
oil in her Vessel for her own lamp, yet I fear if any foolish Virgin, which
had not so, should say unto her, Give me of your oil, for my lamp is gone out,
she would turn the parable into a history and say, not so, lest there be not
enough for me and for you; Matthew. 25. 9. This answer the Text in effect gives
for her as for the wisest of all Virgins; and therefore it is most probable she
would give it for her self; and if so, (To let pass other absurdities,) It Is
certain you egregiously affront the mother of God in taking away her oil
without her consent, if you do not egregiously delude the sons of men, in
saying that her oil will serve to feed their lamps; you may as well say that
her good works will serve to nourish and sustain their Faith; or that her Faith
will serve to purge and save their souls.

And as for the other Saints, they cannot satisfy the Justice of God for
themselves, and much less for others, because there are two impediments of
their perfection in righteousness; (and an imperfect righteousness, if it
could be spared, would in vain be communicated) The first is, the impediment of
their Original, the second is the impediment of their Actual sin: They are both
affirmed together by the Holy Ghost, Prove. 20, 9, Who can say I have made my
heart clean? sc. from my original corruption, I am pure from my sin, sc. from
my actual transgression: He that cleanses the heart, knows best how far he
has cleansed it; we cannot cleanse our hearts but by his help and assistance,
(if we can, let us say no longer, Make me a clean heart O God) and he owneth no
such cleansing in this world, but which still leaves some uncleanness behind
it; He that has made no use of his assistance, is not at all concerned in this
Interrogatory, Who can say I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin?
He that has made the best use thereof, is most concerned in it, and
comprehended under it; therefore he cannot say I have made my heart clean, I am
pure from my sins, but he must lie to the Holy Ghost, and be so far from
cleansing his heart, as immediately to let in many unclean spirits the more to
defile it. For those two which God has joined together, all the wit and power
of man, cannot put asunder, even Satan's filling the heart, and lying to the
Holy Ghost; why has Satan filled thy heart to lie to the Holy Ghost? Acts 5.
3. And if Satan fills the heart of those who make this lie, then sure he also
fills the mouth of those who tell it: And therefore the Church of God, which
is the pillar and ground of the Truth, very much abhors this lie, making
this confession of her natural corruptions, But we are all as an unclean thing;
(Facti sumus ut Immundus omnes nos; so the Hebrew and Chaldee in the singular
number,) we are all but as one unclean man, to show the Uncleanness was from
nature which was as equally derived to All, as if all had been but one; and
making this confession of her personal corruptions, which proceeded from the
natural, and all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags, Isa. 64. 6. Wherefore
since Protestants and Papists both agree together in the former part of this
confession, as a Principle of Divinity, it is irrational in the Papists to
disagree from Protestants in the latter part of it, which is but a conclusion
proceeding from this Principle; For the natural corruption is the cause of the
personal, and therefore all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags, because we
are all as an unclean thing; This being the full argumentation, All who are
unclean, have an unclean righteousness; but we all are unclean, therefore we
all have an unclean righteousness; Quia opus justitiae immundatur
inquinamento, as says Aquinas, because our righteousness is defiled by our
unrighteousness; and by this we may fully understand that other text, If we
say that we have no sin we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us, 1 John 1. 8. For we are clearly guilty of a double lie; one against our own
souls, we deceive our selves; another against the Holy Ghost, (the Spirit of
truth) and the truth is not in us. Both are such pernicious lies as to bring
upon us inevitable destruction; for he that willingly deceives his own soul,
cares not for knowing the truth; he that strives to deceive the Holy Ghost,
cannot come to know it; For as he has not the truth in him, in that he
deceives himself; so he keeps the Spirit of truth away from him, that he may
deceive himself for ever: Nor can we possibly use any evasion upon this text,
as if some men might say they have no sin, though others cannot; for he must
think himself better than the best of Saints, the Disciple whom Jesus loved,
(and questionless he had a very good reason of his love,) who will needs say
he has no sin, though by saying so, he is sure to prove himself worse than the
worst of sinners; for he makes him a liar, who has promised forgiveness of
sins; and he makes his Word a lie; which has showed our need (or want of that
forgiveness, for in many things we offend all, Jam. 3. 2.) and he puts
himself out of their communion, who alone obtain forgiveness, even the
communion of true penitents, of whom it is said, If we confess our sins, he is
faithful and just to forgive us our sins, 1 John 1. 9. he that denies himself
to be one of this number, denies himself to be one of the communion of Saints
(unless St. John and St. James were no Saints) and consequently makes himself
incapable of the forgiveness of sins: Thus does the second Milevitane Council
gloss the words of St. John, that they were not spoken out of humility, but out
of necessity, and that the greatest, the necessity of Truth; Satis apparet hoc
non tantum humiliter sed etiam veraciter dici: Poterat enim Apostolus dicere,
Si dixerimus quia non habemus peccatum, nos ipsos extollimus, and humilitas in
nobis non est; sed quum ait, nos ipsos decipimus, and veritas in nobis non est,
satis ostendit eum qui se dixerit non habere peccatum, non verum loqui sed
falsum: It is evident that this was spoken, not only out of modesty, but also
out of truth; for the Apostle might have said, If we say that we have no sin we
extol our selves, and there is no humility in us; But when he says we deceive
our selves and there is no truth in us, he sufficiently shows, that whosoever
says there is no sin in him, does not speak truly but falsely: And thus also
does the same Council gloss the words of St. James, saying, The Apostle was
holy and just when he said, in many things we offend All; for why did he add
this particle All, but to show that he agreed with the Psalmist, who had said,
Enter not into judgment with thy servant; for in thy sight shall no man living
be justified? Psalm. 142. 2. and with Solomon, who had said, There is no man
that sins not, 1 King. 8. 46. And with Daniel, who had said, We have sinned
and have committed iniquity, Dan. 9. 5. and afterward added (ver. 20.) whiles
I was confessing my sins and the sins of my people; he would not say Our sins,
but My sins and the sins of my people, because he did foresee by the Spirit of
Prophecy, that some in after ages would be ready to put him and such as he,
(nay indeed much worse transgressors) out of the catalogue or number of
sinners: Quia futuros istos qui tam male intelligerent, tanquam Propheta
praevidit: -- And at last upon these and the like proofs, the same Council
denounces a terrible curse against those who should dare affirm, that forgive
us our trespasses was said by the Saints rather humbly than truly; quis enim
ferat orantem and non hominibus sed ipsi Domino mentientem, qui labiis sibi
dicit dimitti velle, and cord dicit, quae sibi dimittantur, se debita non
habere: For (say those Fathers) who can endure, that a man in his prayers
should tell a lie not to man but to God, saying with his mouth, Forgive us our
trespasses, and saying in his heart, he had no trespasses to be forgiven him:
Thus we have the authority of the Scripture and the authority of the Church,
both agreeing together in this doctrine, That all men are sinners; And though
this was but a particular National Council in it self, yet was it Universal and
Ecumenical in its authority, as consisting of Catholic Bishops, amongst the
rest Alipius and St. Augustine, (as appears by the Synodical Epistle to
Innocent the first) and having been approved by the Catholic Church, as
appears in that these words which are the 6, 7, 8. Canons of the second
Milevitane Council (in Binnius) for the Western, are the 115, 116, 117. Canons
of the Council of Carthage (in Balsamon) for the Eastern Churches.

17. Wherefore this being an undoubted Principle among all Christians (for who
can doubt that which comes to us Originally from the Scriptures, and
derivatively from the Catholic Church?) That all men have sinned, and come
short of the glory of God, (Romans 3. 23.) we cannot reasonably but only
perversely deny this conclusion, That no man can be justified by his own
righteousness: For having sinned, he must needs be under the condemnation of
sin, and coming short of the glory of God in his duty or obligation, he must
also come short of his own glory in his merit of justification: for his sin
which makes him come short of righteousness, must needs also make him come
short of being reputed righteous; For shall not the Judge of all the earth do
right? how then shall he acquit that man for righteous, whom he knows to be a
sinner? we find he has in effect given a contrary judgment already, Hag. 2.
12, 13. where this is the sum of his determination concerning two questions
which nearly concern this case; 1. Whether a man that is unclean may contract
purity from the touch of h^ly things? which he denies. 2. Whether Holy things
do not contract impurity from the touch of a man that is unclean? which he
affirms, and then makes this inference, ver. 14. So is this People, and so is
this Nation before me, says the Lord, and so is every work of their hands; and
that which they offer there, is unclean: The same reason holds in us as in
them: The Jew was unclean by the touch of a dead body, and so is the Christian.
O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death! Romans 7.
24. The Jew by his uncleanness did pollute the holy things; so does the
Christian, even those holy works that proceed from Gods Holy Spirit and Grace;
The holy things by their Purity, did not make him pure among the Jews, who was
unclean in himself; so is it also among the Christians; The best inherent
righteousness we have from Gods Grace, does not purge away the impurity of that
sin which we have from our selves; therefore we must confess that because of
our Original and actual uncleanness, every work of our hands, and that which we
offer to our God is unclean; and consequently our works cannot justify
themselves, much less can they justify us: And we find the same judgment of
God confirmed likewise in the New Testament, Luke 17. where the Lepers pray
heartily, Jesus Master have mercy on us; there is one good work of piety and
devotion; they obey readily in going to show themselves to the Priests as they
had been commanded; there is another good work better than the former, (for
obedience is better than sacrifice) And one of them when he saw that he was
cleansed, turned back and with a loud voice glorified God, and fell down on his
face, at our Saviors feet, and gave him thanks; there is many good works
together, one of devotion, he glorified God; another of zeal, with a loud
voice; a third of reverence, he fell down on his face; a fourth of humility, at
our Saviors feet; a fifth of praise and thanksgiving, he gave him thanks; here
is soul and body and all the powers and faculties of both, wholly set upon good
works; yet our Savior says, Arise, go thy way, thy Faith has made thee
whole, v. 19. So is it also in the leprosy of our souls; we are bound to pray
heartily, Jesus Master have mercy on us, and to show our selves to the Priests,
that is, to use all the means of salvation which God has appointed in the
communion, and by the Ministers of his Church, yet when all is done, if we will
speak with our Savior, we must say to the Leper, thy Faith has made thee
whole; The good works may be acknowledged as adjunct^, but not as causes of the
cure,; that must be attributed only to Faith in him who is the Physician of our
souls; For without doubt that holy ejaculation, The good Lord pardon every one
that prepares his heart to seek God, though he be not clean according to the
purification of the sanctuary, is a prayer as needful now as it was in the
days of Hezekiah, or it would not have been left upon record for us, 2 C^ron.
30. 19 It is the Lords Pardon, not the man's preparation, that makes him clean
according to the purification of the Sanctuary; and so Kimchi confesses in his
gloss upon those words, ver. 20. And the Lord healed the people, that is (says
he,) The Lord forgave their sin, according to that of the Psalmist, heal my
soul, for I have sinned against thee: The Lord pardoned their sins that he
might accept them; and why should not we say that pardon and forgiveness of
our sins is the best ground and means of our acceptance with God? For this is
the only way to be clean according to the purification of the Sanctuary, that
is, to be clean from all sin, even to be made clean, of which it is said, The
blood of Jesus Christ his Son (...) us from all sin, 1 John 1. 7. If I ha^ but
one sin left upon my soul (not washed away by Faith in his blood and the tears
of my own repentance) I shall not be clean enough to appear before the Throne
of his Grace, much less to appear at the bar of his justice: I shall not be
innocent enough to serve him, much less to be judged by him; I shall not be
able to stand comfortably before his mercy, and much less to stand confidently
against his Judgment: Therefore can I not hope to be saved by the first
innocence, that of obedience or of righteousness, but only by the second
innocence, that of Faith and repentance; And if any other man has a better
hope, I pray God he may not find a worse salvation: But surely God himself in
his consultation how to save the Israelites, concludes to do it, not by their
obedience, but by their Faith and repentance, Jer. 3. 19. But I said, How shall
I put thee among the children, and give thee a pleasant land, a goodly
heritage? There Is his consultation how to save them; And I said, thou shall
call me My Father, and shall not turn away from me; there is his conclusion to
save them by their Faith, and by their repentance; By their Faith, Thou shall
call me My Father; and by their repentance, Thou shall no^ tu^n away from me;
that is, not so turn away, but thou shall return again; and therefore this
promise is not to be interpreted of their obedience, but of their repentance;
he that is most obedient in some cases, cannot say he does not turn away from
God in other; but he that is truly penitent, can say it; for he is cordially
turning to him in all; Thus was it with St. Peter; look upon the course of his
obedience, you find him after his greatest undertakings, grievously turning
away from our blessed Savior; but look upon his repentance, you find him
earnestly turning to him; Christ assured him his Faith should not fail, and yet
he should deny him thrice; But we are sure his works failed, and may be as sure
our own works will fail; so we must trust to our faith, not to our works, if we
desire not to fail of our Justification.

18. And I would gladly know how your doctrine of justification by works can
agree with these three Scripture expressions, justified by his free grace, Romans
3. 24. justified by Faith, Romans 5. 1. and justified by his blood, Romans 5. 9.
For grace and works are set down as contraries mutually expelling one the other
in the matter of Justification, Romans 11. 6. If by Grace, then is it no more of
works; otherwise Grace is no more Grace; But if it be of Works, then is it no
more Grace; otherwise Work is no more Work; So also Christ and Works, Gal. 2.
21. If righteousness^ come by the Law, then Christ is dead in vain; So also
Faith and Works, Romans 3. 28. A man is justified by Faith without the deeds of
the Law; so that to be justified by Works, is to be justified without Grace,
without Christ, without Faith, unless we will make contraries not only abide
but also agree one with another; whereas in the doctrine of Justification by
Faith, all these expressions are as admirably reconciled among themselves, as
they are powerfully and plainly used to set forth our reconciliation with God,
For to be justified by Grace, and by Christ, and by Faith, are so far from
being contraries, that they all speak one and the same truth; namely this, That
we are justified through the free grace of Go^, for the m^rit and b^ood of
Christ, by a lively Faith applying that blood unto our souls, and our souls un^
our God: (...) a lively Faith is not wi^out works in the man (...) just^fieth,
though it be in the act of jus^ification; And therein it must be without ^ks,
that it may be with Christ; for if righteousness come by works, it cannot come
by Christ.

19. And what a madness is it for frail and weak flesh, what a wickedness is
it for corrupt and sinful flesh, to set up its own instead of its Saviors
righteousness? For though this doctrine may pretend to be most zealous for
obedience, yet is it in truth most averse from it, nay most opposite against
it; so says the Apostle, Romans 103. For they being ignorant of Gods
righteousness, and going about to establish their own righteousness, have not
submitted themselves to the righteousness of God; This was a great
disobedience in the Jews, but a greater in the Christians; for they might be
ignorant of the righteousness of God, who knew not Christ; not so we who know
him; Therefore if they in going about to establish their own righteousness, did
not submit unto the righteousness of God; then we by going about to establish
our righteousness, must needs moreover wilfully resist and disobey Gods
righteousness; And in vain do we talk of any other obedience, whiles we are
guilty of this resistance. Yet I fear he came very near this guilt who said
that justification by Faith alone, was a most pestilent doctrine,
(pestilentissimum dogma. Stap^eton qu. quodl. 3. c. 9. cum itaque) forgetting
sure that St. Paul had fi st taught it; And they who denounced Anathema against
those who maintain this doctrine, (si quis dixerit sola fide impium
justificari, Anathema sit, Council. Trid. ses. 6. can. 9.) forgetting sure that
St. Paul still maintained it; for their expurgatory Critics durst not expunge
this Position out of his Epistles, though they durst out of the Index made upon
them; And this guilt must needs be very dangerous, if not fully damnable,
because it labors to establish our own instead of our Saviors righteousness;
for so the same Council, can. 11. si quis dixerit justificari homines sola
imputatione justitiae Christi, Anathema ^it: If any say that men are justified
only by the imputation of Christ's righteousness, let him be accursed; Jesu
God, did thou give us thy righteousness to be imputed to us, to bless us by
taking away the guilt of our sins, that in thee all the Nations of the earth
might be blessed: (Genesis 22. 18.) and shall any Ministers of thy Gospel dare to
curse us, for relying upon the imputation of thy righteousness? was not our sin
made thine, that thy righteousness might be made ours? and how can it be made
ours but by imputation? or why is it made ours by imputation but only for our
Justification? so says the Text expressly, 2 Cor. 5. 21. For he has made him
to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of
God in him; As Christ was made sin for us, so we are made righteousness in
Christ; neither the one nor the other by inherence; therefore both alike by
imputation; for a third way is unimaginable; Therefore St. Augustine thus
glosses the forecited text, Ipse peccatum, and nos justitia; nec nostra, sed
Dei; nec in nobis, sed in ipso; sicut ipse peccatum non suum sed nostrum, nec
in se sed in nobis: He was made sin, and we were made righteousness, not our
own but Gods righteousness, nor in our selves but in our Savior; as he was
made sin, not his own but our sin, nor in himself but in us: That is, in one
word, we are so made the righteousness of God in him, as he was made sin for
us, to wit by imputation: Therefore neither St. Paul nor St. Augustine, neither
Scripture nor Church were much regarded by him, who made a mere scoff of this
imputation, as if it were a phansied Chimera of man's invention, and not a real
mercy of Gods Donation; And what else does that argumentation import, urged by
your great Doctor, si concupiscentia est verum peccatum, tum Christus non vere
sed imputative redemit nos a peccatis; (Bellar. de am. gr. lib. 5. c. 9.) If
concupiscence be a sin, then Christ has not t^uely, bu^ imputatively redeemed
us from our sins: why did he say imputative for putative, imputatively for
putatively, but only to persuade the world that imputation is but a mere
imagination? This seems to be the drift of his argument, to make good man's
righteousness, as that which is not at all infected by original, and therefore
may not be at all impaired by actual sin; and this is little less in the
business of Justification, than to make void the righteousness of Christ. It
was a wretchedness to say Concupiscence is no sin in the regenerate, which St.
Paul called a sin in himself, above ten times together, Romans 7. But it was
moreover a wickedness, to say that Redemption by Christ might upon any
pretense be called imputative, that is imaginary, (for so he is pleased to make
the word signify) which is the whole scope of Gods most holy word, and the
only support and comfort of men's sinful souls: By the first assertion he did
overmuch exalt our own righteousness, and took the ready course to bring us to
presumption; But by the second he did much more depresse the righteousness of
Christ, and so took the ready course to bring us to despair; (for if our
redemption be imaginary, our Salvation must be desperate) And betwixt these two
rocks of presumption and despair, it is hard for any man to sail so warily as
not to make shipwreck of his soul, it being equally dangerous for him to rely
upon his own, and not to rely upon his Saviors righteousness: Without doubt
holy David though he had served God with all his might, yet prayed to his dying
day, Enter not into Judgment with thy servant, and has accordingly bequeathed
this Prayer as a legacy to all Gods servants ever since (not excepting the most
diligent and the most dutiful) thus to pray for their Justification; and then
to pray most earnestly for it, when they are drawing nearest Judgment; That
the Justification which they have now in title or sense of the Law, they may
also then have in the sentence of the Judge, for that the one is not completed
without the other; and upon what ground can any man pray to God not to enter
into Judgment with him, who knows himself still under the Accusation and
Condemnation of the Law? (for the Judge must proceed according to the Law,) and
how can he be exempted from the accusation and condemnation of the Law, who
has broken it himself, but by the satisfaction of his surety? according to
that of the Apostle, Who is he that condemns? it is Christ that died, Romans 8.
34. No other satifaction but the death of Christ could consist with the Justice
of God; for that was indispen^able and required it, no other could consist with
the Truth of God; for that was infallible and had promised it; no other could
consist with the Office of Christ, who took upon him the nature of man, that he
might expiate the sins of men: no other could consist with our salvation, who
could not be saved unless our sins had been exp^ated: This was a ^urthen not to
be taken from off our shoulders, a yoke not to be taken from off our necks, but
only by the hand of the Messiah, in the Judgment of the Jews themselves: for
so the Chaldee Paraphrase interprets those words, Isa. 10, 27. The yoke shall
be destroyed because of the Anoixting, A facie Messiae, vel propter Messiam,
(...) The yoke shall be destroyed because of the Messiah; or by the power of
Christ: Our own hands which brought it, cannot remove it; our own hands which
made it, cannot destroy it; we may struggle till we break our necks, nay yet
more our hearts, but we cannot break our yoke; The Spiritual Assyrian that so
easily brought us down, can more easily keep us under; none can break his Army,
but He that has bruised his Head; none can rescue us from his captivity, but
he that has led captivity captive; even the Captain of our salvation: This is
the Justification God promises to Israel, (and I hope you will not say he
fails in promise, by giving another, or rather by giving none; for what is
merited or purchased by us, is not given us) saying, O ^srael trust in the
Lord, for with the Lord there is mercy, and with him is (...) redemption; And
he shall redeem Israel from all his sins; Psalm. 130. 7, 8. Say not you, he
shall redeem Israel from some sins, when God says from All: Say not you, From
sins before regeneration, by the first, but not from sins after it by the
second Justification; For as to such sins, the plenteous redemption is not with
the Lord but with Israel, and so you will quite contradict the Text. 1. In its
exhortation, O Israel trust in the Lord; For Israel may trust in the Lord to be
redeemed from his sins only till his regeneration, but in himself after it. 2.
In its assertion, For with the Lord there is mercy, and with him is plenteous
redemption; whereas it is rather to be said, (according to this supposition) For
with your selves there is merit, and with him is plenteous renumeration; or,
with your selves is plenteous redemption, to redeem you from your greatest
sins, those committed against the greater light and with the greater
unthankfulness, (for such are the sins after Regeneration,) But with the Lord
is only a ^cantie redemp^ion to redeem you from sins before your Regeneration,
when you neither had light to know them, nor power to resist them; By which
means you do in effect bid Israel Trust in himself all his life long, and in
God only some sew days (or perchance hours,) sc. no longer then till he is
Baptzed, or cleansed by the laver of Regeneration, since very few sober
Christians, and no one National Church does now defer the Baptism of Infants
longer then their very first Infancy; and most Divines do think That Infants
are regenerated when they are baptized. 3. You will contradict the text in its
promise, And he shall redeem Israel from all his sins; for you in effect say
That Israel shall redeem himself from the greatest part of his own sins:
Therefore pray let this Redemption continue till the last minute of your lives,
till it be perfected by Glorification, that it may redeem Israel from All his
sins; And since it is a Redemption from all sin, pray let it be called
Justification, unless you can teach us what else it is that redeemeth us from
the guilt of sin: I will conclude this point with that prayer wherewith our
blessed Savior concludes his life, and has taught us to conclude Ours, Into
thy hands Lord I commend my Spirit; This is certainly the best and the last
good work you can do, To commend your soul to God: Will you do this in your own
righteousness? then say not, For thou have redeemed me; but For I have served
thee O God thou God of Truth. Will you do this in your Saviors righteousness?
then be ashamed of that doctrine which does undervalue this Redemption: But do
what you will, and say what you can, These three Truths are irresistible, and
should be undeniable. 1. He only can absolve guiltiness, whose Justice makes
us Guilty. 2. He only can pronounce us Just, whose will is the rule of Justice.
3. He only can acquit in Judgment, who only is the supreme Judge; And
therefore since to be absolved from guiltiness, to be pronounced Just, and to
be acquitted in the Jugement, are all three comprised in this one word
Justificari, To be justified, we may not rely upon our selves but upon our God;
not upon our own works and righteousness, but upon our Saviors merits and
mercies for our Justification.

CAP. VII. Of Christ's New Testament or Covenant.
1. DIvines are not to make new works, much less new Divinity. 2. Testament and
Covenant though commonly used for the same thing, may have their several
considerations. 3. The Latin Interpreter highly magnified, whiles Beza is
unworthily taxed; yet He also promiscuously uses these two words; though both
are more delighted with the word Testament then Covenant. 4. The Catholic
Church prefereth Testament above Covenant in the Title of the holy Bible; and
the Sept. never use the word (...) Covenant, but (...) Testament, as it were by
special providence, because that word points at the death of Christ, and Gods
free Grace and mercy toward mankind more then the word Covenant. 5. No
Christian may oppose or diminish Gods free Grace in Christ. 6. Ill quarreling
with words which have Custom, Conscience, and Truth to justify the use of
them. 7. No assertion concerning the new Covenant ought to be Authentical which
is ambiguous, because that is to put Salvation upon unknown, if not upon
impossible conditions. 8. A definition of the New Covenant ought not to be such
as may fit the Old Covenant. 9. The Old and New Covenant put far asunder by
God, and not to be joined together by man; God will judge the world not by the
Old but by the New Covenant. 10. The Law as a Rule of Righteousness,
reinforced in the Gospel; but as a Covenant of Life, abolished by it. 11. The
Jews under the Law, expected to be saved by the Gospel; and whiles they
covenanted obedience, did hope for Salvation by Faith and Repentance. 12. The
Covenant of works pressed upon the Jews, to make them more thirst after the
Covenant of Grace. 13. Christ the Mediator of a better Testament then Moses,
because the Covenant of Grace has better promises and better conditions then
the Covenant of works: How these came to be called Two Covenants, and how they
differ one from the other not only in the administration, but also in the
expression. 14. St. Paul disputes against the Law, not materially in it self as
the Rule of righteousness, for so it is the end of the Gospel; but formally in
its use to the Jew as a Covenant of life; for so it stood in opposition against
the Gospel; And thus far we may proceed, without being Antinomians; and must,
that we confound not the New with the Old Testament. 15. The vast difference
betwixt the Old and the New Testament, as betwixt Agar and Sarah. 16. The
condition of the New Testament is not to be placed in Doing, but in Believing;
For Doing, as a condition of Life, belongs to Moses his Covenant, not to
Christ's Testament, if it be taken properly, that is for our Personal, and not
for our Virtual doing. 17. The true definition of the New Testament, admits
obedience into its constitution, but only Faith into its condition. 18. The
obligation of the New Testament not lessened by taking Faith for its condition;
and what Faith is required to fulfill the condition of the New Testament.

The seventh Exception.
IBidem sect. 5. page 244. Having said Christ is called the Mediator of the New
Testament, Hebr. 9. 15. not the Mediator of the New Covenant, as in other
places, you say also a little after, I am afraid of the Covenant, and fly to
the Testament: in the precedent Chapter, Verse 6. your Old reads Mediator of a
better Testament, and in the margent, Or Covenant; your New reads, better
Covenant; and in the margent, or Testament: This better is called ver. 8, and
13. by your New, The New Covenant, by your Old, The New Testament: In the
Original, The same word (...) is in all these places, which properly signifies
Testament; yet in all these places Mr. Beza constantly translates faederis
Covenant: Nay you your self are not afraid of the Covenant, but fly to it; For
in your ejaculation 20. using St. Paul's words, Heb. 12. you say, I am desirous
to come unto Mount Sion -- and to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant; yet
even there in the margent is, or Testament; And Mr. Beza contrary to his
custom translates Testamenti: Hence it appears that your own Translators use
these two words indifferently to signify but one and the same thing as mere
synonyma; insomuch as Mr. Beza above in the frontispiece writes novum faedus,
and a little beneath, Novum Testamentum; I cannot see then what comfort you can
have out of those words, Heb 9. 15. more then out of the rest; For in very deed
Christ's New Testament is no other then a new conditional Covenant with us, by
which we are bound cooperating with his Grace, to do very many things our
selves (docentes eos servare omnia quaecunque mandavi vobis, Matthew. 28. 20.)
for the obtaining of the promised inheritance, wherein if we fail, we shall
never attain thereto; For as your self say excellently well, A covenant does
wholly depend upon mutual conditions, which if either party fail, the Covenant
is broken and made of none effect.

The Answer.
1. It Is unwarantable in Divines to make new work, but it is unsufferable, (if not
unpardonable) in them to make new Divinity; They make new work when they raise
needless contentions and strifes about words; They make new Divinity, when they
contend for those Things which God has not taught, or against those Things
which God has taught in his most holy Word: This last and worst Age of the
world has been guilty of both; and this your last exception may justly seem to
come under the suspicion of the same Guilt; For the first part of it makes new
work, by raising a needless contention about words, Testament and Covenant,
which in common Scripture use are mere Synonyma, signifying the same Thing; And
the latter part of it would feign make new D^vinity, contending for such a new
Covenant as is not, whiles it labors to set up the Old, instead of the New
Covenant. 2. But what though Testament and Covenant are promiscuously taken in
their common use, and have one and the same signification? yet I hope in some
peculiar respects they may have distinct notions, and so come under several
considerations.

(...) and (...) P^esbyter and Bishop are promiscuously used in the New
Testament; will you therefore turn Presbyte^ian and deny the distinct Office
and Function of Episcopacy?

(...) and (...) are promiscuously used in the Monuments of the Church, this
being in the first Ephesin Council the inscription of Ne^orius his Epistle to
Cyril Patriarch of Alexandria (...), The Copy of the Epistle of Nestorius to
Pope Cyril, (for Patriach) will you therefore turn Protestant, and deny the
Supreme Jurisdiction now arrogantly challenged, and as insolently exercised in
the Papacy? I hope though you cannot gainsay the promiscuous and common use,
yet you will still maintain the distinct and peculiar considerations of these
two words; And I ask no more about the ^ow words Covenant and Testament, to
vindicate this my observation from domestic impertinencie, and from foreign
calum^e, which takes notice That Christ is called ^he Mediator of the New
Testament, Heb. 9. 15. not the Mediator of the New Covenant as in other places.
3. For even your own Latin Interpreter though in the Books of Moses he commonly
say Faedus orpactum, (as Genesis 17.) yet after them He does much more delight in
the word Testament, then in the word Covenant; as Psalm. 50. v. 5. Qui ordinant
Testamentum ejus super sacrificia, not those who have made a Covenant, but
those who have made a Testament with me by Sacrifice; looking through the
Sacrifices of the Law, upon the Sacrifice of Christ, and in his death seeing
that made a Testament, which was before but a Covenant; so again v. 16. Why
take thou my Covenant in thy mouth? Pactum meum, says Pagnine, and faedus
meum, says the Hebrew as before (...) my Compact or Covenant, but your Latin,
Testamentum meum, my Testament; And though Exodus 24. 7. he says Volumen
Faederis, the Book of the Covenant, yet Heb. 9. 4. he says, Arcam Testamenti,
The Ark of the Testament, notwithstanding the Ark was so called from the Book
that was kept in it; therefore either he should have said the Book of the
Testament, or he should not have said the Arc of the Testament; but as in
Exodus he said The Book of the Covenant, so in the Hebrews, he should have said
the Arc of the Covenant, using the same word in both places, (as the Seventy
Interpreters and ours do,) since both relate to the same Thing; I say not this
to blame your Interpreters, but to show you upon what slight grounds you have
blamed ours, and more particularly B^za for using the words Covenant and
Testament promiscuously; for he did no more then your own Latin Translators had
done before Him; Therefore since you have respect to the man with a gold ring
in goodly apparel, that in your account wears the rich clothing of Authority,
equally with the Original Text it self, and say unto him, sit thou here in a
good place, (which however the Ancient Fathers did vouch safe only to the
Original Text, placing the Greek Testament, but not any Translation of it on a
Throne in the midst of their assembly in the four first general Councils) you
may not justly say to the poor man in the vile raiment, (for such is Beza in
your account, as being a Protestant Interpreter, though you put the Master upon
him, that he may be thought a Gentleman rather then a Divine) stand thou here,
or sit here under my footstool, unless you will be Partial in your self, and
become a Judge of evil thoughts, James 2. 4. And yet even Beza himself prefers
Testament before Covenant, in the Title to his Translation, saying Testamentum
Novum, The New Testament, though he also add, sive Novum faedus Domini nostri
Jesu Christi, or the New Covenant of our Lord Jesus Christ, happily to show that
Jews and Christians had but one and the same Covenant to be saved by, one and
the same way of salvation, though under defferent forms of administration, and
that was through our Savior Christ, who was to them no less then to us, The
way, the Truth, and the Life.

But to return again to your Interpreter, (for I left B^za to follow him, that
(...) might say of Christ he was the Mediator of the New Testament, not of the
new Covenant, Heb. 9. 15.) it is very observable that Exodus 24. 8. he says Hic
est sanguis Faederis, This is the blood of the Covenant. But Mat. 26. 28. Hic
(for Hoc) est sanguis Novi Testamenti, Tb^ is the blood of the New Testament;
Nay those very words of Moses which in Exodus he interprets sanguis faederis,
The blood of the Covenant, Exodus 24. 8. in the Epistle to the Hebrews he
interprets, sanguis Testamenti, The blood of the Testament, Heb. 9. 20. Sure he
saw either more efficacy or more comfort in the word Testament than in the word
Covenant, or he would not have exchanged the one for the other in the
Interpretation of the very same Hebrew Text.

4. But why should I mention one single Interpreter (for so he is accounted,
though he be made up of two interpretations; the old Vulgar and St. Hieroms)
when the whole Catholic Church recording the Books which contain the mysteries
of our salvation, had rather call them the Old and the New Testament, ((...))
Then the Old and New Covenant, ((...),) seeking rather to bring the Law to be
called the Testament in compliance with the Gospel, then to permit the Gospel
to be called the Covenant, in compliance with the Law: And indeed, though the
Hebrew word (...) be rather (...) a Covenant between two parties both living,
then (...) a Testament, which supposes one party to be dead, yet the Sept.
never interpret it by (...) a Covenant, but by (...) a Testament; Symmachus
renders it (...) Psalm. 44. 18. but the Sept. there also hold to (...) surely by
some special Providence, and for some special reason; happily to show us, That
as all the Promises of God were Truth in Christ, so they were also Mercies in
him; as in Christ Jesus every Promise was Yea and Amen, so also in him alone it
was such, as to make us say of it, Amen, so be it; even the Covenant of not
drowning Noah with the world; Genesis 6. 18. (where this word is first used) and
of not drowning the world any more, (Genesis 9.) was no mercy but in Christ, the
promised seed, the Savior of the world; For what mercy is it, not to perish by
water, to be reserved to everlasting fire? to be suffered to prolong the
pleasures of a sinful life, that we may increase the torments of an eternal
death? Therefore I conceive the seventy Interpreters in rendering the Hebrew
Berith did make choice of the word (...) which signifies a Testament, rather
then of (...) which signifies a Covenant, that they might direct all men's
thoughts and desires only to Christ, and fix all their hopes and delights upon
him, for that the word Testament does as expressly point at our Savior
Christ's passion, as St. John Baptists finger did point at his Person, and does
in effect say what he said, Ecce Agnus Dei, Behold the Lamb of God that takes
away the sins of the world! for he took away ous sins, by his death, plainly
presignified, and necessarily included in the word Testament, because that
could not be ratified and confirmed without his death; For where a Testament
is, there must also of necessity be the death of the Testator, Heb. 9. 16. But
where a Covenant is, there must of necessity be the life of the Covenanter;
Therefore if I will have the full comfort of the death of Christ, overcoming
for me the sharpness of death, and opening to me the gates of everlasting life,
and rescuing me from the guilt of sin, the terrors of hell, and the tyranny of
the Devil; I must go to the Testament which tells me of Christ's death, not to
the Covenant which threatens mine own by showing me the multiplied offenses of
my sinful life: And in truth he that will deny this to be the proper
signification of the word Testament, must also deny St. Paul's argument, which
here depends wholly upon the proper signification of that word; And for this
cause (says the Apostle) He is the Mediator of the New Testament, that by
means of death, for the redemption of the transgressions that were under the
first Testament, they which are called might receive the Promise of eternal
inheritance; For where a Testament is, there must also of necessity be the
death of the Testator, Heb. 9. 15, 16. He says not the Mediator of the New
Covenant, which supposes the life of the Covenanter, but of the New Testament
which supposes the death of the Testator; and accordingly he places all the
strength of his argument in the word Testament, which by virtue of Christ's
death gave us redemption from transgressions, and admission to an eternal
inheritance; So that we had need go to the Testament, not to the Covenant both
for our Redemption and for our Inheritance: For the transgressions which were
under the Old Covenant, that of works (here called the First Testament, because
as it was repeated by Moses, it was not dedicated without blood, v. 18; 19.)
could not be expiated, but by the Redemption that was under the New Testament;
wherefore the Covenant puts us in fear of captivity and death, and it is only
the Testament gives us hopes of liberty and life; And accordingly the Apostle
uses the word Testament of purpose to proclaim the abundant Grace and
Goodness of God to mankind, that (after our fall) he was pleased to give us,
not a Covenant, but a Testament; For a Covenant is a matter of strict Justice,
having mutual conditions between both parties, which if either fail, the
agreement is of none effect; But a Testament is a matter of more Grace, as
being the conveyance of an inheritance without any harsh conditions imposed
upon the Heirs, and before any obliging offices performed by them; And such
was the Act of God to us sinful men, when we had disabled our selves to
perform the conditions of his Covenant; It was a Testament, to instate us in
the right of Salvation by the death of our Redeemer; and therefore the Apostle
sets it forth with the adjuncts and properties, not of a Covenant, but of a
Testament; For the proper adjuncts of a Covenant are not Blood, and the Death
of the Covenant-Maker, (which two alone are here mentioned, since a Covenant is
rather voided than established by death; but both these are the proper adjuncts
of a Testament, which though made before the death of the Testator, yet is not
established till after it, wherefore since our blessed Savior did presignifie
and promise his own death, and the effusion of his own blood by Typical
Sacrifices, till he verified that Promise by the real Sacrifice of himself upon
the Cross; the Spirit of God in this place, thought fit to make choice of the
word Testament, whereby to express this Act of his free Grace and favor
toward us; and sure no Minister of Gods Church may justly be questioned for
speaking after the dialect of Gods Spirit.

5. For what should a sinful soul do but gasp after Gods free Grace,
acknowledging it to be Grace, because she is ^worthy; and to be free Grace that
she may not be incapable of it; For as she may easily perish by opposing it, so
she must necessarily perish by not obtaining it: And the desire of opposing
Grace, must needs be a great impediment in obtaining Grace; for God that gives
Grace above our deserts, will not give it against our desires: since it is
expressly said, That God resists the proud, and therefore most resists
those that are most proud, even the proud in spirit who dare capitulate with
his Justice; but gives Grace to the humble, and therefore most Grace to those
who are most humble, even to the meek and lowly in heart, who rely wholly upon
his mercy: And this consideration alone, (though you see it is not alone) was
enough to make me say, and is enough to justify my saying, I am afraid of the
Covenant, and fly to the Testament; for by the Covenant I can look only for
Justice, which I am afraid to find; but by the Testament I can look for mercy,
which I desire to find here for the Comfort, hereafter for the Salvation of my
soul; And if any be so hardy as to venture his soul upon the terms of Justice, I
may allow him to have the greater confidence; but I cannot allow him to have
the greater Comfort, and I wish he may not have the lesser Salvation.

6. And whereas you tell me, Nay you your self are not afraid of the Covenant,
but fly to it; for in your ejaculation 20. using S. Paul's words, Heb. 12. you
say I am desirous to come to mount Sion, and to Jesus the Mediator of the New
Covenant; I crave leave to tell you, that this objection was far fetched, to
show you were willing to make it, and may be as dear bought, if I can show you
are not able to maintain it; For I was bound to allege St. Paul's words as I
found them translated, that none might be mistaken in my allegation; and I
found them thus translated, To Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant;
Therefore in that I alleged them so, I only showed my self not afraid of the
translation, but I might still for all that be afraid of the Covenant; For
custom that ought to regulate speech, which is established by it, ought not to
regulate conscience which it cannot establish; The Word may be confined, where
the Thought is at liberty; I speak for others, but I Think for my self;
therefore I must speak according to Custom, and yet may still think according
to Conscience; But I will not plead Custom when I may justly plead Comfort;
for in these words is nothing at all to terrify my soul, but very much to
comfort and to settle it; For it is said, The Mediator of the New Covenant,
which is every jot as comfortable as the Mediator of the New Testament; for it
directs our hearts as immediately to our blessed Savior; since as the New
Testament was confirmed, so the New Covenant was signed and sealed with his
Blood, the only Balm to heal wounded Spirits, the only Anchor to settle
floating consciences; Nay yet more, here is Jesus expressly named, To Jesus
the Mediator of the New Covenant; so that if I were afraid of the New Covenant
(as you may justly be, who seem to make it all one with the Old) yet I ought
not to be afraid of Jesus the only Author, Preserver and Redeemer of my life,
the only joy and blessing and comfort of my death; You say I am not afraid of
the Covenant; I know I am not afraid of Jesus; nor do I say, I am desirous to
come to Mount Sinai, where the Covenant properly so called was repeated, but to
Mount Sion, where the Testament properly so called is really fulfilled, and the
inheritance conveyed thereby is actually possessed; And the words that I
quoted, import no less, I am desirous to come to Jesus the Mediator of the
New Covenant; For the reason of my desire is, because He is the Mediator of
the New Covenant, the Covenant of Grace, not of the Old Covenant, the Covenant
of Justice, or of works, for Moses was the Mediator of that, at least as it
was renewed on Mount Sinai,) but of the New Covenant, the Covenant of Grace,
whereof Jesus was the Maker, to put Mercy in it; and is the Mediator, to put
me into that Mercy: Thus you see it is a threefold Cord, twisted with Custom,
Conscience and Truth, as with three twists; which labors to pull down this
your Objection, the Custom of speech, the Comfort of conscience, and the Truth
of the Gospel, all three concurring together to make me say, I am desirous to
come to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant; and seeing, this, I suppose
you will no longer seek to maintain such an Objection; for it is not ingenuous
to stand against Custom, not Religious to stand against Conscience, not Honest
to stand against Truth.

7. And thus much in answer to the Verbal part of your exception, whereby you
have made me some new Work; I now come to the real part of it, whereby you seem
very willing to make some new Divinity; for if it be not True, it must be
called New, by that infallible Rule, Id verum quod primum, That is Trust which
is Oldest, as coming immediately from the Ancient of days, or from the first
Truth: For in very deed (say you,) Christ's New Testament is no other than a new
conditional Covenant with us, by which we are bound, cooperating with his
Grace, to do very many things our selves, for the obtaining of the promised
inheritance, wherein if we fail, we shall never attain thereto: which seems to
me a very strange Assertion, for so you have vented it; and yet a more strange
definition, for so you seem to intend it: The Assertion is strange, because it
is Authentical, and yet withal Ambiguous, such as may be much admired, but
little approved; For he that will speak positively, ought not to speak
doubtfully, as you are positive in denouncing the irrecoverable loss of
Heaven, but doubtful in declaring by what means we may prevent that loss; you
speak with authority enough to terrify us, but not with perspicuity enough to
instruct us: You say plainly, We are bound to do very many things for the
obtaining of the promised inheritance, wherein if we fail we shall never attain
thereto: But you say not one word concerning any of those things wherein we are
bound not to fail; So you put our Salvation upon unknown conditions, which is
the way to fill our souls with perplexity instead of piety; and since what is
not known, cannot be done, you may also put our Salvation upon impossible
conditions, which is the way to turn our perplexity into desperation, our
desperation into damnation.

8. And I think this is enough to prove it a strange Assertion; for it does not
explain, but rather obscure the thing defined, as agreeing more with the Old
than with the New Covenant; For put Moses his Old Testament, instead of Christ's
New Testament, and you shall not need change any one particle of the whole
definition; but it will all agree with the one as well as with the other, and
so it may go after this manner, For in very deed, Moses his Old Testament is no
other than an old conditional Covenant with us, by which we are bound,
cooperating with Gods Grace, to do very many things our selves for the
obtaining of the promised inheritance, wherein if we fail, we shall never
attain thereto: So that you have given us a Definition that will fit the Old
Covenant as well as the New, and therefore truly fit neither, since it cannot
fit both, which must needs be a very strange definition, confounding that
Covenant it should explain, for which cause it is Unlogical, very strange to
reason; and making that one Covenant which God has made two Covenants, for
which cause it is Untheological, very strange to Religion; For he which has
said, Those things which God has joined together let not man put asunder, Mat.
19. 6. has thereby said (according to the rule of Contraries,) Those things
which God has put a sunder, let not man join together.

And God has put the Old and the New Covenant as far asunder, as he has put
Heaven and Hell: as he has put Salvation and Damnation: For by the Old
Covenant Do this and live, all mankind after the Fall, must have perished;
there is the Damnation; But by the new Covenant, Believe and thou shall live;
none that lay hold on Christ and keep with him, and stick to him, shall perish;
there is the salvation: For S. Paul has told us expressly, that God will judge
the World, not by the Law which will condemn the most innocent and the most
righteous, since the loss of our first innocen'cy and righteousness, but by
the Gospel, which will condemn only the unrepenting and unbelieving sinner; In
the day that God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ according to my
Gospel, Romans 2. 16. never any yet, though he had a most innocent hand, had so
innocent an heart that he durst say, his secret thoughts were innocent;
wherefore he must needs be condemned in the Judgment, if God should Judge him
according to the Law, and not according to the Gospel: Nor yet will the Gospel
acquit him if he be not innocent, any more than the Law will acquit him,
because it has the same precepts of innocence with the Moral Law, according to
which precepts the last Judgment will be given and pronounced; only it will
accept of his innocence by Faith and Repentance, whereas the Law will accept
only of his innocence by perfect Obedience. The Judgment is not like to be the
less righteous for being according to the Gospel, but the more merciful;
because though Jesus Christ in Judging us will proceed according to the Rule of
the Law, (which is the same with the Rule of the Gospel) yet he will not
proceed according to the Covenant of the Law, Do this and live, but according
to the Covenant of the Gospel, Believe and thou shall be saved.

10. For the Moral Law is to be considered as a Rule of Righteousness, Do this;
and as a Covenant of Life, Do this and live; (as if it said You shall not live
unless you do this:) The Law as a Rule of Righteousness, Do this, is repeated
and reenforced in the Gospel; but as a Covenant of Life, intimating we shall
not live unless we do this, it is abolished by the Gospel. And so much of the
Gospel was revealed to the Jews even whiles they were detained under the Law,
as to let them see they were not saved or delivered, because they had performed
the Duty, but because God would perform the Mercy of his Covenant; for this is
the only reason that is given of their deliverance out of Egypt, God remembered
his Covenant with Abraham, with Isaac and with Jacob, Exodus 2. 24. which is
farther explained and confirmed by the Prophet Ezekiel, in his story of their
rebellions in Egypt, in the Wilderness, and in the land of Canaan, Ezekiel. 20.
where all along the reason of Gods saving and delivering them, is only his own
undeserved goodness and mercy; For when he looked upon their breaking the
Conditions, then it follows, I said I will pour out my fury upon them, ver. 8,
13, 21. But when he looks upon his own Promise in the Covenant, then it
follows, But I wrought for my names sake, ver. 9, 14, 22. Throughout the whole
Chapter there is a kind of dispute, betwixt Gods Justice and his Mercy; His
Justice calling for their destruction, but his Mercy interceding for their
deliverance: And this God would have registered not only by way of doctrine for
their instruction, but also by way of praise and thanksgiving for their
Devotion; Hence we find it also recorded in the Psalms, which were the
chiefest part of their Liturgy, as Psalm. 89. If they break my Statutes, and
keep not my Commandments, ver. 32. Nevertheless my Covenant will I not break,
ver. 34. And again, Psalm. 106. ver. 23. He said he would have destroyed them;
why did he not perform his saying? Moses his chosen stood before him in the
gap; and if we look into Exodus 30. we shall find that Moses stood in the gap
and besought God by three arguments. 1. By his former benefits which would be
lost, ver. 11. but that prevails not, because they had abused them. 2. By his
own glorious Name, which would be dishonored among the Egyptians, verse. 12.
but niether does that prevail; for better his Name be dishonored among his
Enemies then among his Servants. 3. By his Promises made to the Fathers, ver.
13. and that alone prevailed; for after that it presently follows, And the Lord
repented of the evil which he thought to do unto his people, v. 14. The cause
of their Salvation is wholly imputed to Gods goodness, which made him promise
them mercy before they were his Servants, and show them mercy after they had
revolted from his Service: And though Christians are grown so wan'on as to
dally with Christ, or so bold as to contest with him about their Salvation;
yet it is clear the Jews did look to be saved only by their Messiah, which is the
same with our Christ: For their Faith passed through the blood of all their own
daily Sacrifices to the Blood of Christ, to which they had relation, and from
which they had their virtue; as appears from the Title of the 22. Psalm, as
it is explained in the Chaldee Paraphrast, A Psalm to praise God withal at or
for the powerful and perpetual oblation of the morning; showing that this Psalm
was given to the Priests and Levites, that it should be sung by them every
morning to direct all their thoughts unto, and fix all their hops upon the
death and passion of Christ (whereof this Psalm was rather a History then a
Prophecy) through whom alone all their oblations were powerful, and for whom
they were Perpetual; through whom they were accepted, and for whom they were
continued.

11. And this the Jews themselves did know very well, or else their Priests and
their Scribes could not so readily have answered, That Christ was to be born in
Bethlehem, and have cited the Prophecy of Micah to justify their answer,
(Mat. 2.) For thus it is written by the Prophet, And thou Bethlehem in the Land
of Judah art not the least; The Prophet had said, Thou art the least, sc. in
thy self; but they said, and St. Matthew from them, Thou art not the least, sc.
in relation to Christ, who was the Governor to come from thence, (for thus
both sayings are true in several respects,) And since it is very probable that
the Priests and Scribes themselves first made this change, and that St. Matthew
only related the same as he found they had made it; It Is evident that even in
those times of greatest blindness They had light enough to see Christ, though
they had not Grace enough to receive Him; Thus they looked unto Christ in all
their worship which shows they hoped for Salvation more from their Faith then
from their Obedience, even whiles they were held under the Law as the Covenant
of Obedience; And therefore by the same reason they could not but also hope for
salvation, more from their Repentance then from their Righteousness, because
their Faith in Christ being commanded and accepted, did show the relaxation of
the Law as it was the Covenant of Obedience, and consequently did promise the
acceptance of unfeigned repentance, instead of impe^able Righteousness; Hence
that General Rule of one of their greatest Doctors (R. David Kimchi, upon Jonah
3. 9.) Omne verbum quod loquitur Deus malefacere filiis hominum, est sub
condition si non refipuerint, (...), Every word which God speaks threatening
to do hurt to the sons of men, is to be understood with this condition, If they
do not repent; so that the curses for transgressing the Moral Law, which were
incurred through default of Obedience, were not inflicted but for defect of
repentance, and that even under the Law, whiles it remained in its greatest
force, as the Covenant of works and of Obedience; For even then was it a part
of the Jews Faith to believe, and of their Religion to give thanks after this
manner, Praise the Lord O my Soul, and all that is within me praise his holy
name; Praise the Lord O my soul, and forget not all his benefits; which
forgiveth all thy sin, and heals all thine infirmities, which saves thy life
from destruction, and crowns thee with mercy and loving kindness; Psalm. 103.
What better Faith can any Christian have, then to believe that God (for Christ's
sake) forgiveth all the sins he has committed, heals all the infirmities he
has contracted, saves his life from the destruction he has deserved; And
what better Thanks giving can any Christian use, then to say, Praise the Lord O
my soul, and all that is within me praise his holy Name, Praise the Lord O my
soul, and forget not all his benefits.

12. So that if Christians will not go to the Gospel, they may go to the Law;
if they will not go to the New, they may go to the Old Testament for a
mitigation of the Covenat of works; for even under the Law was a mixture of the
Covenant of Grace, Teaching salvation by Faith and Repentance; For indeed
presently after the fall of Adam, whereby man had not only broken the Covenant
of works, made Genesis 2. 17. but had also disabled himself for ever keeping it,
God was in mercy pleased to establish the Covenant of Grace, and with it a new
hope of Salvation in the promised seed, Genesis 3. 15. though he thought fit
afterward again by Moses, to repeat the Covenant of works, (Exodus 19. 5.) and
to hold the Jews a long time under it, through the Pedagogie of the Law, that
he might prepare the souls of men, by acknowledging their own sinfulness, to
hunger and thirst after his righteousness, and by seeing how short they came
of the Covenant of works, to fl^e for refuge to the Covenant of Grace; For
neither did the Jews themselves obtain Salvation by the Covenant of works,
which they did outwardly and openly profess in the Moral Law, but by the
Covenant of Grace which they did covertly profess in the Ceremonial Law,
pointing directly at the death of Christ in its Sacrifices: For God himself
has told us, That the Jews continued not in the Covenant he made with their
Fathers when he brought them out of Egypt, that is, the Covenant of works, and
therefore he had Promised by his Prophet Jeremi^ such a Covenant to the
Christians wherein they should be able to continue, even the Covenant of Grace.

13. For this is the main scope and drift of the Holy Ghost, Heb. 8. to show
that Christ was the Mediator of a better Covenant or Testament then that
whereof Moses had been the Mediator, because Christ's Testament was established
upon better Promises: v. 6. For the first or the old Covenant by Moses, had in
it such dark promises as through man^ ignorance could not well be uderstood,
and such hard conditions as through man's infirmity were not possible to be
kept; and this he proves, first from the effect, They continued not in my
Covenant. 2. From the sad consequent thereof, and I regarded them not verse. 9.
But the second or the New Covenant by Christ, had such plain and clear promises
as might well be understood, and such easy conditions as might well be kept,
which accordingly he proves from the manner of Gods giving the second Covenant,
and from the Covenant that was given. 1. From the manner of Gods giving the
second Covenant, which was not outward according to the letter that kills,
but inward according to the Spirit that gives life; I will put my Laws into
their mind, and write them in their hearts, v. 10. that is, I will give them an
understanding to know me, and a will to love me; so that this Covenant being
not given without the Spirit of Grace, is very fitly called the Covenant of
Grace, because there is Grace given with it enabling us to keep it; which is
very well hinted in that expression of yours, cooperating with his Grace. 2.
From the Covenant that was given, wherein the Promise was, I will be their God,
The condition was, They shall be my people: which Covenant of Grace though it
had been made with Adam, Genesis 3. and explained to Abraham, Genesis 17. and
confirmed to Isaac and Jacob, long before the giving of the Law, yet was
afterward so obscured and darkened by the Repetition of the Covenant of works
under the Law by Moses, That the Covenants of the Old and of the New Testament,
are considered by St. Paul as Two several Covenants; and that first by Moses is
looked on as the worser; this second by Christ as the better Covenant; for if
that First Covenant had been faultless, then should no place have been sought
for the second; For finding fault with them, he says, I will make a new
Covenant; v. 7, and 8. A new Covenant, though not absolutely in it self, yet
comparatively in regard of us; and that not only in the Administration, but
also in the very Expression; both according to its promise, and according to
its condition; For though the substance of the Covenant be the same both to Jew
and Christian, as to Gods intention, promising salvation to both alike, only in
and through our most blessed Redeemer, yet because of its different
expressions, it may nor be called the same in their apprehensions; for it was
neither apprehended nor received by them as the same. For surely the Christian
can not but think, that he has both better Promises and better conditions, and
consequently a better Covenant then the Jew, since these two are the parts of a
Covenant; For all shall know me says God, verse. 11. to comfort the Christian
against his Ignorance; And I will be merciful to their unrighteousness; ver.
12. to comfort him against his Infirmities: whereas the Law did only show the
Jew his Ignorance and his Infirmity, but did remedy neither: And upon this
account the Spirit of God says of our blessed Savior, That he is the Mediator
of a better Covenant; better not only accidentally or extrinsecally, for the
burden that is taken from it, and for the Grace that is given with it; but also
better formally and intrinsecally (after some sort) for the better promises and
better conditions that are given in it; For to the Jew who had Moses his veil
cast over his face, and Moses his yoke cast upon his neck, the promise of the
Covenant was clouded with darkness, and the Condition of the Covenant was
clogged with difficulties, nay indeed with impossibilities; But to the
Christian, to whom that Veil is don away, and from whom that Yoke is taken away
in Christ, both the Promise is clear and the Condition is easy; He has told
us so, who made it so, My yoke is easy and my burden is light; Matthew. 11. 30.
For the promise of a Redeemer which was only foretold and prefigured to the
Jew, is verified to the Christian; and the condition of perfect Obedience which
was enjoined to them, is fulfilled for us; That Obedience which Moses required
of the Jews, Christ has performed for the Christians, according to that of the
Apostle, Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness to every one that
believes, Romans 10. 4. What is the end of the Law but righteousness? even
perfect righteousness? And the true believer has that both positively from
the imputation of Christ righteousness, and negatively from the
non-imputation, or from the remission of his own unrighteousness. Therefore it
is no wonder that the Covenant under the Law and the Covenant under the Gospel
are considered as two several Covenants, and that under the Gospel is called
the Better; for that Covenant must needs be better which promises Salvation
upon a possible, then that which promises it upon an impossible condition; And
such i^ the Covenant of the Gospel or the Covenant of Grace, promising
Salvation upon Faith and Repentance; whereas the Covenant of the Law or the
Covenant of works did promise Salvation only upon perfect Obedience.

14. And hence it is That St. Paul disputes so eagerly against the Law, calling
it our Jailer to shut us up in prison, Gal. 3. 23, Our Scholemaster to keep us
under the Rod, Gal. 3. 24. Our Accuser to work wrath, Romans 4. 15. nay our
Executioner to minister death and condemnation, 2 Cor. 3. 7, 9. not speaking of
the Law materially as it is in it self, but Formally as it was then in its use;
For the Law in it self is the rule of Justice and Holiness, even an undefiled
Law, converting the Souls both of Jews and Christians, and in that respect the
very end and scope of the Gospel. 1. And if we thus consider the Law, it is all
one to be Antinomian and to be Antichristian: But the Law in its use to the Jew
was a Covenant of life and Salvation, requiring of him perfect Obedience if he
would be saved, and in that respect (besides that it engaged to ritual
observances) the Law stood in opposition against the Gospel. 2. And if we thus
consider the Law, we must be Antinomian, that we may not be Antichristian:
wherefore the same Apostle St. Paul entering a comparison between the Ministers
of the Law and of the Gospel, proves that the Ministry of the Gospel is so
far more excellent then the Ministry of the Law, as the Gospel of life and
liberty is more glorious then the Law of death and condemnation; 2 Cor. 3. For
says he, the Law or the Old Testament, was only external, of the letter that
kills; But the Gospel or the New Testament is internal, of the Spirit that
gives life, ver. 6. 3. The Law was of the letter, showing us our duty, and
killing us for not doing it: The Gospel is of the Spirit, giving us grace to do
our duty, and life for doing it: So excellent is the New Testament above the
Old, in its conditions: Again, The Law was obscure, as it were veiled with
Types and shadows, with a kind of curtain before it, that the Children of
Israel could not steadfastly look to the end of it, because their minds were
blinded, and even unto this day, when Moses is read, the vail is upon their
heart, v. 13, 14, 15. But the Gospel is clear and perspicuous, making us with
open face behold a^ in a glass, the glory of the Lord, v. 18. So excellent also
is the New Testament above the Old in its Promises; Therefore to confound the
Gospel with the Law, or the New with the Old Testament, is to confound light
with darkness, life with death, liberty with bondage.

15. This made St. Paul so vehemently expostulate with, or rather exclaim
against the Galathians, saying, Tell me ye that desire to be under the Law, do
you not hear the Law? Gal. 4. 21. He justly upbraids them with desiring it
(says St. Chrysostom.) (...), For it was not a thing that had been of his
Preaching, but only of their own phansying; not a thing that God required, but
that themselves desired; not a matter of their Obligation, but only of their
Contention, to be under the Law, as it was a Covenant of Life and Salvation;
and accordingly he confutes this their desire even by the Law it self; showing
that if they looked into the Allegory therein delivered by Moses, they would
find as great a difference betwixt the Old and the New Testament, as was
betwixt Abraham's two wives, Agar and Sarah; which represented the said two
Testaments: For as Abraham had two wives, the one a bond woman, the other a
free woman; so God had made two Covenants or Testaments with mankind, the one
under the Law which gendred unto bondage; the other under the Gospel, which
has free born children; These are the two Covenants, ver. 24. And as Agar
though accounted fruitful, yet brought but a small progeny to Abraham by
Ishmael, whereas Sarah who was looked upon as barren, brought a great progeny
to him by Isaac; So the Old Testament brought forth children to God only in the
confines and precincts of Judea, but the New Testament is fruitful over the
face of the whole Earth; Therefore it is said, Rejoyc^ thou barren that bear
not; for the desolate, that is, The Christian Church represented by Sarah, has
many more children than she which has an husband, that is the Jewish Synagogue
represented by Agar, ver. 27. And as Agar had children borne after the flesh,
or according to the course of nature. But Sarah had children born after the
Spirit, or by virtue of Gods Promise; So the Old Testament (for what appeared
in the letter) had nothing but the ordinary strength of nature to bring forth
children; but the New Testament has the extraordinary Grace of God; Now we
brethren as Isaac was, are the children of Promise, ver. 28. Again, as Ismael
was of an unquiet and malicious disposition, hating and persecuting his brother
Isaac; So those who look to be saved by the Old Testament, trusting to
themselves and the endowments of nature, do scoff and persecute those who look
to be saved by the New Testament, trusting to their Savior, and the endowments
of his Grace; As then he that was borne after the flesh, persecuted him that
was borne after the spirit, even so it is now, ver. 29. Lastly, As Ismael was
at length cast out of his Fathers house, and Isaac was made his sole heir, so
those that rely upon Moses and look to be saved by the Old Testament, will be
excluded out of Gods family; whereas those who rely upon Christ, and look to be
saved by the New Testament, will without doubt be admitted to his heavenly
iuheritance; Cast out the bondwoman and her son, for the son of the bondwoman
shall not be heir with the son of the freewoman, ver. 30.

16. But why should I labor to add light to the Sunbeam, the most glorious
beam of the Sun of Righteousness; for by the consent of all Christians, the
very ground upon which Christianity is justified against Judaisme, is this,
That the Old Testament delivers but the figure and the shadow of the New;
wherefore we can go to the Old Testament only for the figure and shadow, we
must come to the New Testament for the body and substance both of our Religion
and of our Salvation.

So vast a difference is there betwixt the Old and the New Testament, both in
Gods and in his Churches account; yet you seem to confound these two Testaments
by saying, The New Testament is a conditional Covenant by which we are bound to
do very many things our selves for the obtaining of the promised inheritance,
wherein if we fail, we shall never obtain the same; For this definition places
the obtaining of our inheritance, not in Believing, but in Doing; whereas
perfect obedience was the condition of Salvation in the Old, but Faith is the
condition of Salvation in the New Testament; There the primum Praedicatum, the
first thing Preached, was Do this and live; Here the primum Praedicatum, the
first thing Preached, is Repent for not doing, and Believe in him that has
done it, and you shall live. There perfect obedience was not only the
obligation of the persons Covenanting, but also the condition of the Covenant;
here though it is still the obligation of the persons Covenanting, (for God
has not lost his right of cluiming, nor Gods Law her power of requiring
perfect obedience) yet is it not the condition of the Covenant; for the New
Testament promises life upon true Faith, which the Old. Testament promised
only upon full and perfect obedience; and though it bids us obey as well as the
Old, yet it annexes not the conveyance of life upon our Obeying, but upon our
Believing, requiring our obedience as a duty of Rightteousness; but not making
it the condition of life; And whereas you say, The New Testament is a
conditional Covenant, binding us to do very many things our selves, for
obtaining the promised inheritance, I challenge you to name that one thing to
which you dare annex your Fac and vives, Do this (as you ought to do it) and
live, upon doing of which, (so exactly and perfectly as Gods Law requires,) you
dare be so hardy as to venture your soul, or so easy as to hazard your
Salvation; I doubt not but you will be glad to admit of a mitigation, and pray
God to accept of your serious endeavor instead of your exact performance; and
of your true Repentance instead of your due Obedience; and of your Saviors
complete doing it for you, instead of your incomplete doing it for your self;
and then your Fac and Vives, will be but our Creed and Vives; your do this and
live, will be but our Believe in him that has done it and live; and you will
become one of those Evangelical brethren whom your proud Justitiaries now so
scoff at; or having broken the condition of the Covenant, that is perfect
Obedience, you must be contented to lose the Promise of the Covenant, that is,
eternal Salvation; for your self have approved that saying, (which I think no
Divine is able to disprove,) A Covenant does wholly depend upon mutual
conditions, which if either party fa^l, the Covenant is broken and made of none
effect: which was the reason assigned by me, why I was afra^d of the Covenant,
and did fly to the Testament, because I found better Conditions in the
Testament (properly so called) than in the Covenant; and it is something
strange, you should at the same time dislike my Doctrine about the Testament,
and yet approve the reason of it about the Covenant; For my part, I cannot but
think it nearly concerns all Christian Divines, as the Trustees of Gods Truth
and of their neighbors souls, (least they should betray them both together)
not to clog Christ's Covenant of Salvation with impossible conditions, such as
God has not required, and man cannot perform, even with the conditions of
impeccable righteousness, and perfect obedience in and from themselves, which
have been fulfilled and are to be expected only in and from their Savior: For
he that said to his Apostles, Docentes eos servare omnia quaecunque mandavi
vobis, Mat. 28. 20. did likewise say to one of them, and in him to all the
rest, Testificans Judaeis atque gentibus, in Deum poenitentiam, and fidem in
Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum, Act. 20. 21. He that said by St. Matthew,
Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded, to make his
people zealous of good works, did also say by St. Luke, testifying both to the
Jews and also to the Greeks, Repentance toward God and Faith toward our Lord
Jesus Christ, to make his people see their works were not so good but that they
needed Faith and Repentance to make them better; and therefore God though in
Justice he required their most perfect obedience, perfect in parts according to
the Tenor of all his Commandments, and perfect in degrees, according to the
rigor of them, yet he was pleased in mercy to accept the will for the deed,
sincere obedience for perfect obedience, the entire endeavor for the full
performance, and had accordingly in this Covenant of Grace annexed their
Salvation not to the condition of their perfect obedience as in the Covenant of
works, but to the condition of their Faith in Christ who was made obedient to
the death, even the death of the Cross, to make an atonement for their
disobedience: Both the Covenants were made with Adam for all mankind; the
Covenant of Works before his fall, the Covenant of Grace soon after it; And
though they were very near joined in time, (for Adam is generally thought not
to have stood one full day in his innocence,) yet are they very far separated
in nature, even as far as Justice and Mercy in God, or innocence and sin in
man; the one Covenant being to save the Righteous by the Rules of Justice, the
other being to save the sinner by the pleas of Mercy: The Covenant renewed to
the Jews by Moses was that of Works, to keep them in bondage that they might
gasp and sigh and groan after their Redeemer; The Covenant renewed to the
Christians by our Savior Christ, is that of Grace, to enstate them in
liberty, that they may see the Mercy and enjoy the Comfort of their
Redemption. What was of Grace or Mercy in the Covenant by Moses, was not from
Moses but from Christ: Not from the Covenant, but from the Testament; and
therefore that was properly called a Covenant, because it gave life only upon
the strict Rules of Justice; But this is more properly called a Testament,
because it gives life upon the relaxation of those strict Rules of Justice, and
admits the condescensions and mitigations of mercy: Each Covenant is
Conditional, promising everlasting life only to those who keep its Conditions;
Bur the Covenant of Works promises life upon the Condition of Doing, accepting
only of perfect Righteousness and Obedience; The Covenant of Grace promises
life upon the Condition of Believing, accepting of Righteousness and Obedience,
if it be sincere, though it be not perfect; that is, Accepting of Repentance
for Obedience, and of Faith for Righteousness: So that the New Testament by
Christ, though it be a conditional Covenant as was the Old by Moses, yet has
it not the same Condition with that, (as your words import) but a Condition
quite different from it; sc. the Condition of Believing, instead of doing: For
so it is said, God having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless you in
turning away every one of you from his iniquities, Act. 3. 26. In that our
Jesus came to bless us by turning us from our iniquities, it is evident we must
turn from our sins, or we cannot have his blessing; But in that it is He that
blesses us, it is as evident our blessing depends not upon our Obedience, but
upon our Faith; not upon our Own, but upon His Righteousness: Wherefore though
we allow and affirm, that all things must be done by Christians which Christ
has commanded, and that Christ has commanded all the moral duties, that were
before commanded by Moses, (for, Be ye perfect even as your Father which is in
heaven is perfect, Mat. 5. allows not a less, but rather requires a greater
perfection under the Gospel than under the Law,) yet we dare not take our
Personal doing, that is, our doing by our selves for the condition of the New
Covenant, as if our Salvation depended upon that, but only our Virtual Doing,
that is, our Doing by our blessed Savior, whose obedience is made ours by the
power of Faith; or our hearty desire of Doing, and sorrow for not Doing, which
is accepted as Obedience by the power of Repentance; Bona opera per peccata
mortificata reviviscunt per poenitentiam, is the general Tenent of the School,
good works that have been buried by sin, are revived by Repentance; As our sins
have power to bury our good works, so our Repentance has power to raise them
up again; which clearly shows it is not our Righteousness, but only our
Repentance that is above our sins; For our Righteousness may be overcome and
conquered by our sins, but our sins cannot be overcome and conquered by our
Righteousness, (we must go to our blessed Redeemer for that conquest,) but only
by our Repentance. 17. Wherefore I will make bold to change your definition and
say, Christ's New Testament is a new conditional Covenant with us, by which we
are bound to repent for not perfectly doing all those things our selves, which
God has commanded us, and to believe in him that has perfectly done them all
for us, that we may obtain the promised inheritance; in which condition if we
fail, (sc. of believing, but not of Doing) we shall never attain thereto, for
to put Doing (properly so taken, and it is not for a Divine to speak improperly)
as the Condition of life or Salvation, is to set up the Covenant of Works, not
the Covenant of Grace, and that is to puzzle, not to Preach true Christianity:
We find Adam had but one poor Commandment upon the first Covenant, viz. Not to
eat of the fruit of one single Tree among so many, and he kept it not though he
was endued with strength to keep it; he was to do but one thing whiles he had
his perfect strength, and he did it not; And how can you say, that a better
Covenant binds us to do many things, or else to forfeit our inheritance, now we
have lost our strength, and are not able to do rightly and perfectly so much as
one? Therefore pray let the Condition of life in the second Covenant, not be
our Doing, but our Believing; not our entire Obedience, but our entire
Repentance; And let him alone have the glory of perfect Obedience, who came
from Heaven to purchase it: and the rather because he purchased it, not for
himself but for us, allowing the benefit of it to his Servants, though he
reserve the glory of it only to himself: we must do the best we can to keep
off, and to east out the great Dragon, that old Serpent called the Devil and
Satan; but pray let it be only the seed of the Woman that shall break this
Serpents Head; and let not us think we are able to break it. Nor have you made
the condition of Salvation any whit lighter or easier by saying we are bound to
do many things our selves, then if you had said we are boun^ to do all things;
For if Doing be the condition of life, it must reach to All Things that are to
be done; else not Doing will be the Condition as well as Doing: And without
doubt, if we can do any one thing so exactly and perfectly as fully to satisfy
the Obligation of the Law, we may do many, and consequently All, and then what
need we the seed of the Woman to break the Serpents Head, since we can break it
our selves? for if we can take away his sting, we may easily break his Head;
Now the sting of the Serpent is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law:
Therefore if the Law be fully kept, sin can have no strength, and the Serpent
can have no sting.

I do not think there is in all Christendom so religious a Votarie but will
confess that the old Serpent has at some time or other by his sophistry
beguiled him, with his venom defiled him, by his power overcome him, and that
therefore in himself he has been captivated under Ignorance, guiltiness, and
infirmity, even through his actual sins, and should still have been detained
under that captivity, if God had not mercifully given him such a Redeemer who
was pleased to be his Prophet to instruct his Ignorance, his Priest to expiate
his guiltiness, and his King to strengthen his Infirmities; If he confess
this, he has great reason to mistrust his own doing: If he confess it not, He
has the greater reason to instruct himself. For his ignorance keeping him from
the knowledge of what he is to do, his guiltiness keeping him from the desire,
and his weakness keeping him from the power of doing it, he cannot hope to be
saved by his Obedience, but by his Faith; not by his Doing, but by his
Believing, Thus St. Paul preached the Covenant of Grace, saying, He was an
Apostle of Jesus Christ, according to the Faith of Gods Elect, and the
acknowledgement of the Truth which is after Godliness; there is the Obligation
to righteousness in the Covenant of Grace; But this righteousness is not the
condition of life in that Covenant; for it follows, In hope of eternal life
which God that cannot lie promised before the world began, Tit. 1. 1, 2. The
eternal life is not annexed to man's performance, but to Gods promise; not to
man's duty, but to Gds mercy: For this promise of eternal life was made before
man was created, and it was made to Christ, (the eternal Son of God,) on man's
behalf, That all who should believe in him according to the Faith of Gods
Elect, and the acknowledgement of the Truth which is after Godliness, should
through that Faith come to eternal life: Upon this Promise did God seek us when
we were lost, restore us when we were dead, reconcile us when we were his
enemies, and upon this same promise will he save us now we are his Servants:
For though all men are liars and fail of their Godliness, yet God that cannot
lie will not fail of his promise; Thus again says the same St. Paul, For if
when we were enemies we were reconciled to God through the death of his Son;
much more being reconciled we shall be saved by his life, Romans 5. 10. There was
first an Atonement to be made for our reconciliation, before there could be a
Covenant made for our Salvation: And as man's righteousness did not make the
Atonement, so neither does man's righteousness fulfill the Covenant: we are
eternally obliged (and should be wholly devoted) to our blessed Savior for both
alike; as That we have been reconciled, so also that we shall be saved; And
therefore we must take that for the condition of Salvation in the Covenant of
Grace, which sends us immediately to Him, to wit Our believing; and not that
which sends us to our selves (though it proceed from him) to wit Our Doing:
Thus has the common mother of all Christians, the Catholic Church, taught all
her sons to pray, That in all our works begun; continued and end^d in thee, we
may glorify thy Holy Name, and finally by thy mercy obtain ever lasting life;
placing all the hopes of eternal life, not in man's Duty, but in Gods mercy;
that is, not in Doing but in Believing: He that is constantly prevented in all
his Doings by Gods most gracious favor, and as constantly furthered by his
continual Help, must needs have the best confidence of his Doings, yet may not
hope to obtain the promised Inheritance of everlasting life by Doing, without
being a Schismatic in receding from the Unity, and a Heretic in departing
from the Verity of the Catholic Church in this excellent Prayer, unless we
will say, which were impious once to think, That the Catholic Church teaches
such Devotions as are contrary to her own Doctrine.

18. Nor does this assertion any whit lessen the Obligation, though it does
very much sweeten the condition of the new Testament; It is the same in effect
with the old Covenant as to the Matter of its Command, though not as to the
form of its promise; for it requires what we are bound, but it accepts what we
are able to perform; It commends our entire Obedience, but it assures Life upon
our unfeigned faith and repentance; And it is so far from diminishing or
lessening any wilful sin, (either of omission or of commission) that it rather
augments and aggravates the same; For whereas wilful offenders did before
trample under foot the Word of God, whereby they should have been restrained;
now they also trample under foot the Blood of God, whereby they have been
redeemed from their fins. Tell me what is wanting in their Obligation who are
bound by promise and vow to these three things. 1. To fosake the Devil and all
his works, the pomps and vanities of the wicked world, and all the sinful lusts
of the flesh. 2. To believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith. 3. To keep
Gods holy will and Commandments, and to walk in the same all the days of
their life; And every child that is trained up in our Church, knows he was
bound to all these when he first received the Seal of the New Covenant, and
therefore cannot but look upon all these as the material parts of his
Obligation by that Covenant, and upon himself as a most perfidious wretch if He
wilfully fail in any part of his Obligation, and as a most miserable wretch if
he do not earnestly repent of his failings; But will you therefore say, That
because he has failed in these, he has forfeited his Salvation? Is Doing all
these (as they ought to be done, for else it is not doing of them) the formal
part of the Covenant of Grace, or the condition of life in that Covenant? May
we not say That he forsakes the world, the flesh and the Devil, who does not
follow and is not led by them? That he believes all the Articles of the
Christian Faith, who cries out with tears, Lord, I believe, help thou my
unbelief; and that he keeps Gods Commandments, who prays with hearty sorrow,
Lord have mercy upon me, and with hearty desire, Incline my heart to keep thy
Law, or write all thy Laws in my heart I beseech thee: If we may say so, then
this is that which God requires to our Salvation, and by this we perform the
condition of that Covenant by which we hope to be saved: wherefore though Doing
be derived into the Constitution, yet it is not derived into the Condition of
the New Covenant: The Constitution of the New Covenant is, (as it was of the
Old,) according to Justice, exacting the complete performance of our Duty (as
it is said, This day thou art become the People of the Lord thy God; Thou shall
therefore obey his voice and do his Commandments, Deuteronomy. 27. 9, 10.) and that
is properly called Doing: But the condition of the N^w Covenant is merely
according to mercy, accepting our sincere resolution for our complete
performance, and that is properly called Believing: This is the Condition which
we must fulfill or we can have no right to the promised Inheritance; And since
this is the only Condition we can fulfill, we may not put in another instead of
this, no more then we may put our selves out of the Hope and Right to Gods
Promises; And we Protestants do conceive we have the greater reason to oppose
your merit of works, because That has been a means to make you oppose the
grace and mercy of Gods New Covenant: yet to show to you and to all the world,
That we so stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made (...) free, as
to abandon all manner of Libertinism, we acknowledge no other Faith to fulfill
the Condition of the Covenant of Grace, but such as teaches us to fulfill all
manner of righteousness; A Faith that devotes the whole man to God; In his
understanding by knowing and believing; In his will, by loving and embracing;
In his affections by desiring and prosecuting; In his Actions by conforming and
obeying: A Faith that believes in whole Christ, even in Jesus Christ our Lord,
receiving him in all his Offices, not only as a Priest to reconcile us by his
death, there is Jesus; and as a Prophet to instruct us by his word, there is
Christ; but also a King to rule and govern us by his Laws, there is Lord; A
Faith that believes not only speculatively to sanctify the contemplation, but
also Practically to sanctify the conversation, having a firm resolution of
obeying Christ in all things, and a serious repentance for its defects and
wants of Obedience; And such a repentance that devotes the whole life to God by
an entire aversion from all sin, and by an entire conversion to all
righteousness, with the whole powers and faculties both of soul and body; of
soul to detest sin, of body to decline it; of soul to hunger and thirst after
righteousness, of body to endeavor and to act it; He that is not thus
qualified (in some degree,) does falsely think himself in the state of Grace;
and he that is not in the state of Grace, does in vain hope to be saved by the
Covenant of Grace; and concerning such a man the question is now as
unanswerable (and will be to the worlds end) as it was at first making, Can
Faith save him? Jam. 2. 14. For the Faith that fulfils the condition of the New
Covenant, labors for our full conformity with our blessed Savior, and laments
and bewails all our failings and defects in the persuit and desire of that
consormity; It lays an absolute necessity upon us of loving what God
commands, if we hope to attain what God has promised; It requires a sincere
obedience of all, does not allow a wilful disobedience of any one of Gods
Commands: yet for all this if we will needs say, That Doing or Obedience and
Righteousness is the condition upon which Salvation is pomised to Christians,
we must take Sorrowing for Doing, Repentance for Obedience, and Faith for
righteousness, or we must teach a new Covenant of our own, not of Gods making:
sure I am, the Holy Church has taught us both to say, Deus qui conspicis quia
ex nulla nostra action confidimus, Lord God which see that we put not our
trust in any thing that we do; And she has taught us to say so at that Time
when we are to prepare for our strictest Doings, sc. those which accompany our
Lenten Fast; for this is the collect of Sexagesima Sunday: So far is Holy
Church (which is much holier then the best of her members) from placing the
hope of life and Salvation in her Doings: wherefore in this doctrine (as in
most others that we reject,) your late Churchmen have sided against holy
Church, and consequently our Churchmen can the better justify their siding
against them.

CAP. VIII. The Conclusion.
1. THe Doctrines and Practices of Papists (as such) are so grossly against the
known word of God, as to make all those of our Communion inexcusable, who out
of pretense of not having a flourishing Church, choo^e not to have a
flourishing Religion.

2. Their foretelling the mischiefs now befaln us, was no more from the Spirit
of Prophecy, then their contriving or effecting them from the spirit of Piety.

THus have I gone through all your exceptions, as plainly as I could, but much
more largely then I intended; For the more I enquired into them, the more I
found cause to dislike them, and could not but fully express my dislike for
their sakes, who by the effrantery of your late emissaries, and by the impiety
of our sad times are almost, if not altogether, persuaded to forsake the Church
wherein they were made Christians, under fond hopes of bettering their
Christianity: They are so beguiled with the pretense of your flourishing
Church, as to abate (though I hope not to abandon) the love of their own Saving
Religion; not considering, that the same argument (of a flourishing Church)
which is now used to make Protestants turn Papists, would once have made all
Orthodox Christians turn Arrians, and may at this time make Papists turn
Mahumetans; and ere long, (if the sword proceed to cut and carve out Religion)
may chance make Protestants and Papists both turn Atheists: Sure it is not just
nor safe for Christians to go to Church as Dogs, (no more than to go to Hell as
Devils,) for Company; since they cannot hope to be saved for the greatness of
their communion, but for the goodness of their Religion, And since the business
of Religion, is the love and the honor of God; How can you seek the Patronage
of the Creature, as if he were more friendly and loving to you than the
Creator, and not sin against this love? How can you religiously adore or
invocate the Creature, as if he were equally to be honored with the Creator,
and not sin against this Honor? The Angels [see thou do it not] is in this
case most justly our Negative, and (though your men commonly say we are all for
Negatives) yet is the same Angels [worship God,] as justly and as readily our
Affirmative.

Do not then ask me where is my Church? till you can answer me, where is your
Religion? For it is not in the adoration of Saints and Angels, much less of
their Pictures, Relics and Images, because that is against the second
Commandment; Nor in the invocation of Saints and Angels, because that, if
mental, is against the first; if Vocal, is also against the third Commandment;
and I hope you will not call that Religion, which is directly against all Gods
Commandments concerning the substance of Religion: i. e. against all the three
first Commandments: Rather consider that by setting up your Church against
Gods Word, you do in truth pull down your Church, since that can neither have
Religion, nor Communion, nor Jurisdiction, neither Verity, nor Unity, nor
Authority, but from Gods Word, unless you will allow your Church to be a
Society of your Own, not of your Saviors making; that is, to be a Combination
of sinners, instead of being a Communion of Saints: As for our parts, we cannot
but think it very impious and injurious for the Trustees of Gods Truth and men's
souls, to seek to baffle any private man's reason by inferring to him false
conclusions; much more to seek to baffle his Religion by imposing on him false
Principles, whether in doctrine against the Creed, or in works against the
Decalogue. And such are the Conclusions and the Principles of Religion you have
obtruded in your exceptions, and your Zealots would obtrude upon our belief and
practice, By which alone, (though I let pass all the rest,) it is evident to
common sense; that Protestants are not so faulty in receding from Papists, as
Papists are faulty in receding from Gods Truth, Bring you Gods Truth and your
Church together, and blame us if we keep our Church and your Church asunder;
But till you do so, though you more love to make Objections, yet we can better
justify the making them; For whiles you object against our Church, we object
against your Religion; and doubtless those Objections more savor of Truth, and
are less in danger of blasphemy, which are righteously made against a false
Religion, than those which are unrighteously made against a true Church,
because the one are made for God, but the other against him: This is plain,
that whiles we object against your doctrine and worship, we dispute for the
Decalogue and for the Creed, whereas you cannot object against any doctrine
that we profess, or any worship that we practice (by the order of our Church,)
but you must dispute against an Article of the Creed, or a Commandment of the
Decalogue: And though I will not undertake to justify all our opinions, much
less all our practices; yet for these doctrines wherein our Church dissents
from yours, and for this worship for which our Church separates from yours, I
dare boldly say, God is not angry with us, though you be. 2. And here I cannot
but add one observation, which though it concern not your exceptions, yet it
very much concerns our defense, that the world may not think us forsaken of
God, because we are oppressed by men: And that is this; Your writers indeed
heretofore designed us to this very same destruction, (we now groan under,) by
their Predictions; but it was whiles they plotted it by their contrivances, that
the common rout might repute them Prophets, whiles they were no other than
murderers; Hence as soon as we had withdrawn from you (I mean as to your
corruptions, though not as to your Communion) they filled all their Comments
with dire praesages against us, that if any of them come to pass, the ignorant
multitude might impute the mischief to the Reformation, as if that had been
Prophetically blasted by the Spirit of God, which was only injuriously reviled
by the perverseness of men.

I will instance but in one, and that was by Pererius the Jesuit, in his
Comment on Genesis 15. 16. If any man (says he) do wonder why God suffers the
power of the English to continue so long, let him consider what is here said,
That the sins of the Amorites are not yet full; Veniet etiam aliquando tandem
Anglicae iniquitatis complementum, veniet tempus Divinae Vindictae: Quod tempus
si quis dixerit non long nunc abesse, is a vero, ut mea conjectura fert,
minime aberraverit (...) The time will come, that the sins of the English will
also be full, and then God will certainly take vengeance on them; and if any
man think that time not to be far off at this instant, in my opinion he is not
mistaken: This man out of his zeal to the Sea of Rome, could not choose but call
us Amorites, because he could not make us Papists, and accordingly would needs
threaten us with ruin and destruction from God, whiles it was designed and
complotted by men; for this direful prediction of his was vented near about the
time that the Powder Plot should have been executed, and that by such to whom
himself was very near in Privacy, if not in Confederacy; However, there is no
more the Spirit of Truth in foretelling such dismal Tragedies, then the Spirit
of Piety in contriving or in acting them; If there be, you must say the
Hugonotes in France were Prophets concerning the most barbarous murder of Henry
the fourth; for after the first blow given him, they told him, That for denying
God with his mouth, by professing Popery, he was struck in the mouth; and bad
him take heed of denying God in his heart, by embracing Popery, for then he
would be struck in the heart. It Is known what afterward befell that Heroical
Monarch (though without the least of their contrivance who foretold it) yet if
you will account them Prophets for foretelling it, you must say, That for a
Protestant to acknowledge the Pope, is to deny God; and that a reconciliation
to the one, is a Renuntiation of the other: But I can allege another Presage
concerning our Churches destruction, from one as contrary to your Pererius, as
both were contrary to the true Catholic Church, and that was our Brightman
upon the Revelation, who threatened that God would spue us out of his mouth,
because we were as Laodiceans, neither hot nor cold; for though we had heat
from the reformed doctrine, yet we still had cold from the unreformed
Discipline, because (forsooth) that had been polluted and tainted by Popery:
This man thought we had not gone far enough from Rome, (as Lot from Sodom) to
be saved from destruction: Pererius said we had gone too far: So either for
going or for not going, we must expect to be like sheep appointed for the
slaughter, not only in the words but also in the wishes (if not in the
contrivances) of both Factions, who though they differ in the Premises, yet
agree in this wicked Conclusion, Nolumus hunc regnare, we will not have this
man to reign over us; only the one Faction refuses Christ in his word, the
other in his Church, neither considering that it is no credit for them to do
what Pilate and Herod and the Heathen Soldiers did before them; and no
discredit for us to suffer, what Christ and his Apostles have suffered before
us.

I could also allege the most Judicious yet more pious Hookers Presage, That
the age of our Church was like to be as the age of man, which by trouble and
sorrow might come to four score (or a hundred) years, but that he mourned as a
Dove to think that the wickedness of men would seek to destroy the goodness of
God in giving us so well Tempered and so well Ordered a Church; not crooked as a
Raven, to show his desire of our Churches destruction; For clearly he thought
our Religion (as it was then established) like temperamentum ad pondus, of too
pure a constitution to be of any lasting continuance; But to leave uncertain
predictions, and to return to unerring Divinity; If we be Amorites for
maintaining Gods Truth, I pray Sir tell me what is it that can make you
Israelites? Either let your Writers disprove our Religion, or not disparage our
Com^nion; For though our sins may make us Amorites, yet Gods Truth cannot but
keep us Israelites: And whiles we keep that, as we cannot think God does make
the Prophecies of your Spirit, so we are sure he will hear the prayers of his
Own, and this among the rest, Deliver Israel O God out of all his troubles,
especially out of all those troubles which they endure for being thy Israel,
Amen, Amen.

O pray for the peace of Jerusalem, They shall prosper that love thee.

Deo Trin-uni gloria in aeternum.

