THE HUSBANDMAN'S JEWEL, DIRECTING

How to Improve Land from 10l. per Annum, to 50l. with small charge by
Planting. Making Cider as good as Canary, for 5d a Quart or less; To Improve
Land by draining, and by Hemp, Saffron, Liquorice; To Brew Ale and Beer, make
Cider, Meed, Mum, Metheglin, and other Liquors, to order Bees and Silkworms;
Destroy Vermin etc, To which are added, the Arts of Angling, Hawking, Fowling,
Ringing, etc, Directions to cure all diseases, of Horses, Oxon, Cows, Bulls,
Calves, Sheep, Lambs, Goats, Swine, Dogs, Conies, Hares, Poultry and singing
Birds at 12d. charge; To Improve Clover and St. Foin; To make Table drink for
families, both sick and well, at a Farthing a Gallon worth Gold, good against
all Distempers; And to cure all outward Sores or Pains, Aches. etc, at a Penny
charge, with diverse other matters.

LONDON, Printed for G. Conyers, at the Ring in Little Britain. Price. 1 s.

THE Husbandmans Jewel, etc.
To Improve Land to 50 or 100 Pound per Acre per Annum.
IT IS evident in many places, especially in the fenny Country, that by draining
the fens, that Bogy Lands, not worth 2s an Acre, has been improved to 5 or 6
Pound by Corning, etc, and Mr. Blithe, in his Excellent Book of Husbandry, says
that if you Plant Boggy Lands, with Willow and Sallow, and such like Aquaticks,
draining it first well and deep, it will be worth 5 Pound an Acre though before
it was not worth 2s an Acre, and in 11 or 12 Years, the Wood on that Land may
be worth 60 Pound an Acre. Also in Kent they have improved Ground not worth 6s
an Acre, to six Pound by Planting in their Hedge Rows, Fruit Trees, about 16 17
or 20 yards distant, the more Room the better, from one another, and one sort
of Fruit or other will prosper* on any Ground, and if you plant 160 Trees, of
the best Pipins and Red-streaks on an Acre, it may reasonably be supposed that
one with another, they will yield 320 Bushels, and 20 Bushels of Apples usually
makes a Hogshead, so that there will be 16 Hogsheads on an Acre, and these will
make 8 Hogsheads of Royal Cider, which at 2d per Quart, is 2 pound an Hogshead,
so that the 8 Hogsheads will yield 16 Pounds. But this Cider Royal may be worth
9d per Quart, and then an Acre will amount to near 40 Pound per Acre, and the
Grass will grow the between your Trees, or Gooseberry, or Currants may be
Planted betwixt, which is best, for the Grass is apt to be sour and bitter, and
by this method you may Probably make 8 Pound per Acre more, so that in the
whole by a modest computation 50 Pound per Acre may be made, but some affirms
that above 140 Pound an Acre may well amount to in a Year, but however the
Product, no Question will be very great. Now to make Cider equal to Canary, to
a Bottle of Cider, Botled in March, put two spoonfuls of the Spirit of Clary,
sold at the Apothecarys, and will be about a penny charge, and if you put a
little lump of Loaf Sugar, and a spoonful of Brandy, and let it stand about a
Week, it will make Cider resemble Canary, so near, that a well exercised
Pallet, shall not know the difference: A Planter Writes that if in March you
put a spoonful of Spirit of Clary to your Cider, it will equal Canary, without
any more a do, but you may strenghten it with* Spirit of Brandy and Clary* and
sweeten it, and put in your Ingredients more or less as you think fit, this
Spirit is a strong Spirit but very wholesome, and has the perfect flavor of
Canary, see more of this by and by, and Read a Book Called the way to get
Wealth, by making 23 sorts of Wine equal to French, and also to make diverse
other Liquor, and other Curious Matters; and also remember that these English
Liquors are more wholesome for the Body than French. etc, Every Nation
affording that which is most proper for it is Natives, and the great advantage
that would accrue to the Nation, by Promoting our own Liquor, may be supposed
near a Million a Year, that is spent in Poreign Liquor. Also by Marl and Soil
great Improvement Inland is to be made as appears about the City of London,
and what has been done, may by the like good Husbandry be done again.

To Improve Land.
COnsider from whence the cause of Barrenness proceeds, whether from Heat or
Cold: if from Heat and it lie near any River convenient, over flow it, and when
it is pretty well soaked, open Trenches to draw it off: then Mud it over with
the Casting of some Ditch, Lake, Pond, etc. Instead of Dung, spread the soil
when dry, and breaking the lumps in the nature of Dung Harrowing, and after a
large Shower of Rain, turn it up with a large Plow and let it lie till some
more showers have fallen on it, and then Plow it over again lightly, and sow
your Seed and you will have a large Crop, a Third more than usually.

If the Ground be Cold, lie low and Moorish, subject to Weeds, Flaggs, Rushes,
etc. Make Trenches lower than the Weeds to Drain it thoroughly, or it will
signify nothing, then marle it over with Marle or Chalk, and let it lie till*
the Rain dissolves it, then Plow it in high Land Ridges, that the Water may
fall off into the Furrows, turning the soard downwards, that it may Rot more
speedily, thus let it lie a Month or six Weeks or more; then scater over it
Wood-Ashes, Sea Coal-Ashes, or Soap-Boilers Ashes; let them be washed in by the
Rain, and then with a Trenching Plough in convenient places draw the Water out
of the Furrows, into Water Courses, and then sow the Seed, and in a Year or two
the Ground will be good, if not two subject to overflow, and when you have done
with it for Corn, lay it Fallow, and by marling it every other Year it will
afford Excellent Grass and become good Pasture.

To improve pasture if it lie Low and wet, whereby it Chills the Roots, and
produces Weeds, etc. Cast on it Hogs Dung, Horse Dung and the Dung of any
Fowls, mingled with Slack'd Lime, or Lime Stones, which being well soaked,
Plough up the Land, turning down the Green Soard, yet raise the Ridges of the
Land but a little sloping, and so run a Trench Cross-ways very deep, or as you
see it otherwise convenient, and lay it Fallow; by this means it will be much
dryer, and the next Grass young, sweet and tender.

If your Ground be a Burning Sand, then Osie it over (as before directed) and
if it is troubled with Ant-hills, open them to the bottom, or rather lower, and
the wet will drive them away, and if you Scatter Slacked Lime or burnt Pitch
and Brimstone on them, and it will kill them. If with Mole-hills, at the end of
March, or beginning of April, take their Nests, or set a Pott Trap in the
Ground, even with the surface in their Tracts and they will fall into it. If the
ground is troubled with Gaurse Tansie, Fern, Thistle etc* pull them up, Hoe or
strike of the Tops, that the Root that remains being over Charged with Sap may
Perish.

And to raise immediately a good Soard, and prevent Weeds growing, you must
Dung your Grounds, and spreading the Dung suffer the Rain to soak in, levelling
the Land with a Rowler, and suffer not heavy Cattle, if it lie Low, to Graze
when the Rain has made it soft, for by treading they will spoil it is growing
when soft; and if you intend it for Hay, then no Cattle must come in it after
Lady Day, least by Croping too near the young blades of Grass, they spoil the
first cut, and hinder the latter also. Read more of these things in Blith's
Husbandry a Book wrote by Experience, and the only Book of Husbandry Extant,
the Fourth Edition with large Aditions. Sold at the Ring in Little Britain.
Price. 3 s,

To improve Ground by Hops, Flax, Liquorice and Saffron.
FOr a Hop Garden, choose a good mellow Ground, and rich Ground, not two hot,
moist nor Cold, well sheltred by Trees from strong Winds that may rend the
Vines from the Poles, turn it up deep with a Plough or dig it with a Spade, and
cast it up into little hills or Rows, with Alleys betwixt the Hills about two
foot distant from each other, then take your best Sprouts, or for want of them
the Growth of slips, and making four or five holes in a Hill, crumble in some
Mold lightly, and put the slips or Sprouts into the holes, and so cover them
up, do this in the beginning of April, observing, if time will permit, the Moon
to be in the Increase, and to every Sprout that rises well, fix a Pole and
suffer that to twist about it. Observe to set them all Inclinning toward the
South, that the Sun may the better compass them, for this is most evident, a
bending Pole has more Hops than an upright. And a Gentlemen in York shire,
places his Hops in such sort that one Plant may not shadow another, but that
his whole Garden receives the fullness and strength of the Sun Beams at once,
whereby his Hops are more kindly, and the Bells much larger than any other Hop
Ground, whose Poles are erected and stand upright after our ordinary and gross
manner. To return I say fix the Pole for them to twist about it, the Pole being
8 or 9 Foot above Ground at least, being full of Snags, for the better
supporting the Vine. At Lamas Tide, you will find them Belled and when you find
them fit to cut, cut the Vines by the Root and take them off with the Poles
into a plain place and gather them, dry them on a Kiln, and Bag them up, an
Acre of Hops are sometimes worth 100 Pound.

To Improve Land by Flax.
PLough up a considerable mellow Ground, and having a good sort of Seed sow it
in the middle of April, if possible in the Moons increase, having before
improved the Land with fat Soil from the streets, or some Olse place, casting
the Seed 2 Bushel to an Acre and when it appears above Ground, whilst young,
take care that the Weeds over grow it not, tho when it has out slipped them it
needs no Weeding, for the Land being some what moist it will grow to an
Extraordinary height; when ripe, which is known by the Yellowness of the
outward Rind, and the swelling of the Seeds, then must you pluck up the Stalks,
and bind them up in little bundles, suffering them to dry in the Sun, then lay
the bundles in Water, soaking them with heavy weigth, and when you find the
Rind loose, then are they steeped enough* then take them out and unloose them,
again drying them in the Sun, and strip off the Rind, which you must hackle on
Crins of Iron, etc. Fit for use. an Acre well managed, will bear 30 or 40
Pounds worth of Flax, when dressed and ordered to the purpose. Hemp Seed
steeped in plain Saltpeter, diluted in Water, and other fit Earthy substance,
in its due time, arrived to the Talness that it rather seemed a Coppice of Wood
of 14 Years growth, than plain Hemp.

Of Planting and Grafting
IN Planting observe when you remove any Tree to mark it in the Rind, that you
set it the same way it grew first, bring with you as much of the natural Earth
as you can, and over and above, adding a small matter of Dung and fresh Mold,
cuting off part of the top Branches, that they may not draw away too much Sap
before its well Rooted.

In Grafting there are several methods to be observed, and first when you have
taken the Scion, which must be from the body of the Tree, and not a top Twig;
You must saw off your Stock, about 3 or 4 Foot above the Ground, then cuting
the Twig flat at the great end, but not the Bark off, slit the Stock with a
Knife or Chisell, and put in the Scion that both barks may toutch, then with
Dung and Clay, well tempred together bind it up close that neither Air nor Bugs
can enter and let it continue.

Secondly there are some who bore a hole a sloap into the heart of the Tree,
and so put the Scion in. Thirdly, they take a Bud from one Tree and slitting
the Bark of another Tree* let it in and so close them together. Fourthly there
are those that slice off a Bud, or Scion with the entire Bark and plaster, and
by opening the Bark of a Branch into another Tree, and all these ways sometimes
hit.

In Grafting the Fig will grow on a Mulbery, the Apple or Pear, on a Quince or
Crab, the Damson on a Wild Thorn, Peach and Cherry upon a Peach, the Apricock
on a Plumb, the Wal-nut upon the Ash, the Quince on the Barbary, the Almond on
the Philbeart, the Vine upon the Cherry Tree and so of other, which are better
and improved by Grafting.

To improve Liquorice.
LIquorice greatly improves Ground, and is of a lasting quality; to order it,
dig your Ground very deep, then mellow the Mold, and cast it up into Banks,
making Alleys between the Banks, being about two Foot high, then take your
Crown-slips, and make Holes with a setting Staff, upon the Banks in a line, put
in the slips, having first crumbled in some soft Mold, covering all but the
Top, and as the Leaves sprout, draw the Earth about them, with a small Hoe, and
Water not the Plants, except the Weather be excessive dry, and then but very
little, and that in the Evening: and because you can expect but little Benefit
of these Plants, the First and Second Year, you may Sow Onions, set Potato's,
Beans, Cabbage, or any thing of the like nature between them, and the 3d Year
about the beginning, you may draw and dig the Plants, and dry them in a
Hot-house, Killn or Stow, and a good Acre of Liquorice will yield 90 Pound.

To improve Saffron.
SAffron is a great Improver of Land and will grow in indifferent good Ground,
where it is not Stony nor two wet, and in this case having Ploughed your Ground
into Ridge Lands, as for Corn or Pease, take your Roots, a Bushel of which
will set an Acre, and having drawn a Drill with a large Hoe, place them therein
with the spurns downwards, about three Inches assunder, then draw another
Drill, so that the Mold of it may coverup the former, and in that place, others
in the same manner, and so successively till you have set the Roots, and when
they Spring up draw Earth about them, and these set in the beginning of July,
and if the weather be exceeding dry, you may sometimes Water the Top Ranges,
and in September, the Blew Flowers appears, and in it upon opening three or
four Blades of Saffron, which you must observe to gather out Morning and
Evening for a Month together, the Flowers Continually increasing. The Saffron
being gathered, made a Kiln about half the bigness of a Be Hive of Clay and
Sticks, and so putting a Gentle Fire of Charcoal under it, tend it by often
turning, till you have reduced, three Pound of wet Saffron, to one dry, an Acre
may yield 40 or 50 Pound, the two Crops for the Root will yield no more,
without being renewed or Transplanted. Read more at large of these things in
Blith's Husbandry.

Of FLAX.
FLax will yield 30 or 40 Pound an Acre, Baren Sandy and Heath Ground is best
for it, and after Flax, Turnips; one Acre of good Flax is Accounted worth 3 or
4 Acre of the best Wheat, and the Liquor has much advanced the goodness
thereof. The best time to Sow it is about the beginning of April, presently
after a Shower of Rain, some Sow it to the End of May, and some after.

A Gentleman Planted 100 Ashes, and Lived to see them Sold for 500 Pound at 50
Years growth. Blithe Husbandman page 163.

If you cover Cherry, Plums or other Fruit Trees, with a rough Canvas, or other
Cloth in Summer, and wetting of the Cloth often, it will keep the Fruit back a
long time, that you may have it when others are gone.

If you put a Branch of a Cherry, Vine, Apricock, etc. in at a Window, and nail
it to the Seeling of the House, Fruit will grow within Doors.

A hot Bed of Horse-dung laid a Foot high, and supported on the sides, and
Mould laid thereon 3 Fingers deep. If you Sow Cucumber-Seed, Turnip-Seed, Wheat
or Pease, it will come up half an Inch above the Ground in two Days; this is a
Notable Experiment. Try also Cherries, Strawberris and other Fruit, that are
dear when they are Early.

Strawberries watered once in three Days with Water wherein Sheep Dung is
steeped, or Pigeons Dung will come early, a good and Profitable Experiment.

Cankered Fruit Trees.
CAuse the Earth to be taken away round it, about four Feet from the Stem, and
about 5 or 6 Inches deep, and in room thereof cause Stones to be set close and
near together, in dirt taken out of the Highway, instead of Gravel after the
manner that Streets are paved, and it will Prosper, and bear to admiration; do
the same to other Trees, with a proportionable quantity of Chalk, and ramm it
fast about the Trees, and it will have the like Effect as the Paving; though it
will not last so long as Paving.

To make Trees grow much.
WHen any Young Trees, as Ash, Elm, Birch, Oak, but Ash especially, are in
their Bodies about two Inches Diameter, which they are at three or four Years
growth, then take a piece of a Coat of mail, or some such like Net of small
Wier, or Hair Cloth and putting it in the Palm of your Hand, rub it pretty
hard, but not to tare off the Bark; twice in a Year, and you will find such
Trees will out grow the rest very much.

Mr. Wolridge says, That if our Waste and common Down Grounds were enclosed, it
would Feed more Sheep and Cattle by half than they do lying open; and that in
case ten Acre were Sown with Clover-Grass, Turnips, Cole-Seed, Parsely, or the
like, they would feed as many Cattle or Sheep, as 100 Acres of the same Land
would do that is laid waste.

To make Butter better than ordinary, without seting the Milk for Cream.
AS soon as the Milk comes from the Cow, and is strained, then Charn it, as
usually Cream is done; also the Cheese made of the Butter Milk will be better
than the best two Meal Cheeses that you ever did eat; and one Pound of this
Butter shall be better than a Pound and half of the best Butter made of Cream.
Probatum. Hartlib's Legacy.

Urine. In Holland they preserve the Cows Urin as carefully as the Dung for
their Land; old Urine is very Excellent for the Roots of Trees, Columella says,
That a good Husband may make 10 Load of Dung for every great Beast in his Yard,
and as much for every one in his House, and one Load for small Cattle, as Hogs;
this is strange to us, and I believe there are many ill Husbands by this
Account. I know a Woman near Canterbury, who saves in a Pail, all the
droppings of Urine, and when the Pail is full sprinkleth it on her Meadow,
which causes the Grass to grow much, at first it looks Yellowish, but after a
little time it grow'd so wonderfully, that her Neighbors were like to have
accused her of Witchcraft. Hartlib.

St. Foin, or Holy Hay, commonly called Cinquefoin.
ITS a mighty improver of dry and barren Ground, and excellent for feeding
Cattle, in France they sow these Seeds, and Oats a like quantity, on Ground out
of Heart, and Mow their Oats only the first Year, that it may root well, yet
they may Mow it the first Year, but its not so well, but the Year following you
may, and so for seven Years, it commonly bears four Loads or more on an Acre;
after seven Years break it up, and Sow it with Corn till it be out of Heart,
and then Sow it with St. Foin, as before, for it does not impoverish Land as
other Annual Plants do, but enriches it, when the Roots is turned up by the
Plow; I have seen it thrive well in England on Chalky Banks, where nothing else
would grow, and such dry barren Ground is fittest for it; (as moist Rich Land
is fit for Clover-Grass and great Trefoil) (though St. Foin will grow pretty well
on all Lands) and will Flourish, it Rooting deep, when other Grass is Parched
by heat; but wet Lands soon corrupts its Root. For the right managing of it,
observe these Rules, or it will come to little.

1. Make your Ground fine, and Kill all other Grass or Plants. for they will
choke it. 2. Be not too sparing of Seed, for the more you Sow the thicker it
will grow. 3. Expect but seven Years Crop, and then Plow it up, or Sow it again
with the same Seed or other Grain. 4. Let not Sheep or other Cattle bite them
the First Year. 5. Your best way is to make your Ground Fine, as when you Sow
Barley, and Harrow it even, and then to Plow these Seeds in alone, without any
other Grain, as Gardners do Pease, but not at so great a distance; but make
your Range about a Foot distance one from another, and they will see it Flourish
like Green Pease, especially if you draw the Plow through them once or twice
that Summer, to destroy Weeds and Grass; and if you do thus great Clover and
other Seeds, may be mowed twice the first Year. There is another sort at Paris,
called La Lucern, which is not inferior to St. Foin, but rather better for dry
barren Land, and is to be managed as St. Foin. Thus you may improve barren
Ground of 2 or 3s. an Acre, to forty or fifty Shillings an Acre. There is a
Grass at Madrington near Salisbury, that is 24 Foot long, with which they feed
Hogs. I question not, but if the Seeds of it were fown in Rich Meadows, it will
yield Extraordinarily.
Mr. Worlidge says, That for Clover-Grass, a Rich light Land, warm and dry,
will afford a great Profit: that a Parcel (...) Ground, a little above two
Acres of Clover-Grase (...)Year yielded in May two Load of Hay worth 5 l. the
next Crop of Seed was ripe in August, and yielded three great Loads worth 9 l.
that Year, the Seed was 300 l. which with the Hay was Valued at 30l besides the
after Pasture. Another president is, that on 4 Acres grew 12 Load of Hay at
twice Mowing, and 20 Bushel of Seed; one Load of Hay that was Mowed in May, was
worth two Loads of other Hay, and the after Pasture three times better than any
other, though four Acres in one Year yielded eighty Pounds.

Another. That 6 Acres of Clover, did maintain 6 Months 10 Oxen, 13 Cows, 3
Horses, and 25 Hogs, Valued at 40 l, besides Winter Herbage. It will prosper
pretty well on any Ground that is not poor. Clover-Grass lasts but three
Years. An Acre of Ground will take 10 Pound of Clover-Crass-Seed, in Measure
about half a Peck. The more you Sow the better; some have Sown 16 Pound on an
Acre with good Success; let your Seed be the best, and then in March or April
Sow your Clover-Grass upon your Barley and Oats being harrowed, or you may Sow
it alone, and you may cut it about June the first Year. If you Sow it alone,
the best time is about Michaelmas, and about the end of May you may cut the
first Crop, the exact time is when it begins to knot, and after feed it with
Cattle till January: if you will preserve Seed, expect but two Crops that Year,
the first as before, the second must stand till the Seed comes to a dead
ripeness. After your Seed is Thrasht the Cattle will Eat the Stalks, but if too
Old they will not. After two Years standing, if you let it shed its seed, it
will store it with Clover; and one Acre of this Grass will feed as many Cows as
5 of the other common Grass, and your Milk will be much better, and exceed in
quantity, and it fattens well. In Flanders they cut it daily, as your Cattle
eat it, and give it under Trees, or in Sheds in Racks. Let not your Cattle at
first eat too much of it least they furfeit. When its thoroughly dry, in March
Thrash it.

Of Bees, and how to manage them to great Advantage.
BEes are both Delightful and Profitable, if managed with Care, in order to
which, I shall give those short Directions.

If you have no Stocks of Bees, but (...), I advise you first, not to give
Money for them, but some other Commodity; for though there be nothing in it but a
Superstitious Observation, yet things often dishearten People that are apt to
credit such Reports. Having Purchased, you must be sure to carry them gently in
a Sheet between two Persons, on a Pole, in the Nightime, that they be not
disturbed, nor their Combs disordered; the best time to remove them is in
April, and then carry them to a Pleasant Place, lest they leave you, nor must
you immediately open them after you have placed them in your Garden, but wait
till they are at rest, which you will know by their ceasing humming; be sure
place them that the Hive Mouth be to the Rising of the Sun, observthat the Air
and Water, as also Herbs, Trees and Flowers about them be very Wholesome. Those
they much delight in, are Rosemary, Cassia, Thyme, Saffron, Bean-Flowers,
Mustand Seed, Flowers, Pinks, Mellilot, Poppy, Roses, and all Sweet Flowers,
Herbs and Trees. Those they dislike, are Worm-Seed, wild Cucumbers, Elms,
Spurge, Laurel, Southernwood, and all bitter Herbs and Trees, delighting most
in Valleys, and near Purling Streams. The best Honey is extracted from Thyme,
the next best from Wild Thyme, and the third from Rosemary, though there is good
Honey where none of these grow: also where your Clovergrass, St. Foin, etc,
grows, good and much Honey is produced. Be sure, if you intend to mind Bees,
that you be cleanly and sweet, and Eat no stinking things, as Garlic, Onions,
etc. least they sting you, and keep their Hives clean from Cobwebs, Moths and
other Filth, or they will not thrive. Read more of these Matter in Mr. Worlidge,
his Complete Bee-Master, price 6 d. and Rusden of Bees. price 1 s. 6 d. and
Butler of Bees, price 1 s. The only three Books Extant on this Subject. All
sold at the Ring in Little-Brittain. In the beginning of April Bees begin to
Work, and if they stand in a Pleasant place, they will work so cheerfully, that
they will afford Honey three times in a Summer, viz. the latter end of May, the
latter end of July, and the latter end of August, if the Summer be temperate;
though if you would have them subsist well in Winter, to take their Honey in May
and July is sufficient,

If it happen that by reason of the Young Brood, the Hive be overcharged, which
by their clustriug about the Mouth of it, and Humming, you may plainly discern;
prepare a New Hive, ready rubbed, with Fennel, Bean-Tops, Thyme, Balm, Marjoram,
Bean-Flowers, Milk and Honey, Hyssop, Mallows, and with some of these rub the
Hive well, but rather with a Sprig, or Branch of the Tree they swarm on, then
dip such Sprig or Branch in Mead, or Honey and Water, or with Milk and Salt, or
Salt only; and when you have rubbed the Hive well with the Herbs, that it is wet,
observe the coming out of the Young Bees for several days, especially when the
Sunshines hot on them, least they Swarm on a sudden, and take Wing and Fly
away, which is prevented by Ringing on a Warming-Pan or Candle-stick, etc, when
you see they are settled either on Tree, Hedge or Ground; if they settle on the
Ground, lay the Hive prepared as before directed over them. If on a Tree, take
your Hive rubbed with Sweet Herbs, and let one hold up the Hive, and another
with a gentle Hand shake the Bough they hang on, that they may fall into the
Hive, them immediately set it on a large Cloth, and take Boughs that are Green,
and put just under the place you take the Bees from, and cover them with some
more Boughs, and the Corner of The Cloth they stand on, and let it rest till
all the Bees are gave (...). If in a hard Winter Honey fail, then replenish
their more with Brown Sugar mixed with Anniseed-Water, till its just Liquid,
and by fiting long pieces of (...) Cans with it, and then put the Cane gently
into the Mouth of the Hive. You may give them also Honey and Raisins after the
same manner. Be sure you cover them with warm Housings of Staw, and feed them
with Care, and they will reward your Pains Bountifully.

Thus I have given you the Opinion of several of the best Authors, for the
improving of this Noble Insect, and that with as much Brevity as possible.

Its said Bees will not Fly away, if you smear the Holes of their Hives with
the Dung of a Calf newly Killed, Wicker.

Bees will not Fly away, if you bruise the Leaves of the Wild and Garden
Olive Tree together, and about the Evenings anoint their Hives with the Juice,
or else with Water and Honey, both the Walls and the Hives.

To know if Honey is mixed, or falsified, throw some into the Fire, and that
that is false, will not burn clear. Diophans.

The best Water for Bees, is That that runs through Stones and Pebbles, and is
very clear. This makes them Healthful, and makes good Honey, and you must lay
in great Stones and pieces, of Wood for them to pitch upon, when they drink. If
you have no Running Water, bring it to them from a Well or Fountain, in Pipes,
least they fall Sick with carrying Water.

In taking Honey, you ought to leave them a Tenth part, both in Summer and
Winter, but in Winter you must take but one third part. Dodymus.

How to Order Silkworms the right way.
THe Silk Worms feed chiefly on Mulberry-Leaves, the scarsity thereof is the
cause of their fewness; some say they will feed on Lettice, Dandelion,
Poplar-Trees, Plum Trees and Apple Trees, but I leave the certainty of it to be
tried by Experience; In the beginning of May, the Mulberry Trees begin to
spread their Leaves, and the Silkworms Eggs, are at it were adapted for a
release from their Imprisonment; that if you lay them in a Window, in the Sun,
or keep them in a warm place about you, but keep them warm in the Night, and
they will quickly appear in a new form, cut them some Paper full of little
holes, and lay over them, and some of your young Mulberry, Leaves over that,
these Worms will Easily find the way to the Food, and as fast as Hatched apply
themselves to the Leave; after they betake themselves to the Leaves, place them
on Shelves or Tables, at a distant convenient, according to the Number of
Worms, and Proportion of place you have for them; in their feeding thy are four
times sick, about twelve or thirteen Days after they are Hatched, and from that
time Successively every Eight Days and their sickness, lasts two or three
days, then feed them but little, which is but to Relieve such as are past their
sickness, before the rest, and those that do not fall sick so soon; the time of
feeding them is Nine Weeks; and then feed them twice a Day, laying Leaves over
them, and they will soon make way through them* and as they grow in bigness, and
strength, feed them more Plentifully and often. Observe the Leaves be clear of
Rain or Dew before you give them, in case they be wet, spread them on a Table,
you may gather them, and keep them two or three days, in case you live Remote
from Mulberry Trees, or the Weather prove bad, rid their Shells often off their
Dung, and Remainder of their Leaves, by removing the Worms, when they are fast
on new Leaves laid on, for then Easily you may remove the Worms with the
Leaves; A Principal means to preserve them, is keeping clean the Shelves of the
Room, also give them some Air in warm Weather, and keep the Room warm in cold
Weather, keep them not in a cold moist Room; nor too near the Tiles or Top of
the House: They will look clear of an Amber Color, when they are feed as long
as able, and are then ready to go to Work, therefore with Heath made very
clean, make Arches, betwixt their Shelves, or with Lavender, Rosemary-stalks,
and upon those the Worms fasten themselves and make their bottom, which is
finished in fifteen days, but the best way is to make small Cones of Paper, and
with their sharp ends downward, place them in Rows, in each of which put a
Worm, as they appear to you to be just going to work, and then they will Finish
their bottom most Complete.

When their bottoms are Finished, take as many as you intend for Breeders, then
lay them by themselves, and in Four or Five days time, the Worms within will
Eat their wayout, then put them together on some Piece of old Say, or the
backside of old Velvet, or the like, made fast at the Hangings or Wall of the
House or on a Tables; these Flies will then Engender, and the Male having spent
himself dies, and the Female does the like when she has Lain her Eggs, then
with the point of a Knife, put them on a piece of Say, or old Velvets, keep
them in a Box among Woolen Clothes, till next Spring; the Female will lay
abundance of Eggs, but a few kept for Increase is Sufficient; the Residue put
into an Oven after Baking of Bread, that it be only hot enough to kill the
Worms, for their gnawing their way out prejudices the bottom, then take the
Bagg, having obtained the bottoms, and having found the end, put twelve or more
in a Basin of Water; where a little Gum Traganth is mixed, and then you will
Easily wring them, if you feed them not well, the Silk is small and Easily
breaks.

Prognostics of the Weather.
HOw to know when it will be fair, for four or five days together which seldoms
fails.

When the Wind has been in the North, or North-East, two days, without Rain
and sits there the third Day, then go your Journey if the Air be clear.

How to know when it is like to Thunder.
WHen the Wind has been South two or three days, and it grow very Hot, or when
you see Clouds rise with great high Tops like Towers, as if one Cloud were upon
the Top of another, and joined together with black on the nether side, then it
is like to be Thunder and Rain suddenly in many places.

How to know when it is like to be a wet Spring and Summer, and Danger of
Rotting Sheep.

If the Eighteen last Days of February, and the Ten first Days of March, prove
for the most part Rainy, then the Spring Quarter, and the Summer Quarter are
likely Rainy for the most part, this I have Observed, these Forty Years, and
found much benifit by it, if a drought enters in that Season, it is like to be
so the most part of the Spring Quarter, if not the Summer Quarter too, and by
that Reason there will be scarcity of Hay.

If October and November be for the most part Rainy and Warm, then is January
and February, like to be Cold and Frosty; on the contrary, if October and
November be Frosty and Snow, then January and February, for the most part open
Weather.

If in the Autumn Quarter ground be Flooded, that ground will Rot Sheep, though
you give them never so good Hay.

If there be no Floods, in the Spring Quarter and Summer Quarter, then Sheep
are not Subject to Rot, in the Autumn nor Winter Quarter.

To destroy all sorts of Vermin.
TO Kill Rats and Mice, take Wheat Flower and bitter Almonds, and make them
into a Past, and lay it into their holes, and it will Kill them.

Another, cast Hemlock seed, into their holes, and it will Kill them.

To catch Moles, lay a head of Garlic or Onion before the holes, and they will
Immediately come forth.

To Kill Weasels, Wheat Flower, Sal Armoniack made into a Past, with some
Honey, throw it where the Weasels usually come, and they will eat it and it
Kills them.

To Kill Pismires, Origanum beaten to Powder, and strewed before their holes
and it Kills them.

To Kill Bugs, or Fleas, take Rue and Wormwood a good quantity, boil them about
a quarter of an Hour, then take some common Salt, the more the better and use
it as before.

To Kill Lice and Nits and to cure Scabby Heads; Stave saker, and Fresh Butter
mixed together, and the Head anointed with it, kills Lice,

To Kill Caterpillars, take Lees of Oil and Ox piss, and boil them together,
then cast it upon the Trees or Bushes and it kills them.

To preserve Cattle from Flies, take oil wherein Bakeleer has been boiled, and
anoint the Beast with it, and they will not come near them.

To make abundance of Cream.
TAke a Skiming dish full of the Top of the Milk, add to it four spoonfulls of
scraped Sugar, and a drop of good Runnet, then stir them together, that they
may thicken a little, then set it in a warm Place, and a great deal of Cream
will rise in an Hours time.

To Fatten any sort of Fowl in Fifteen Days.
TAke Nettle seed, and Leaves gathered and dried in their proper Season, beat
them to Powder, and make them into Past with Wheat, Bran and Flower, adding a
little sweet Olive Oil, make this up into little Lumps, Coop them up and daily
feed them with it, giving them to Drink, Water that Barley has been boiled in,
and they will be fat within the time Proposed.

For Burns or Scalds.
MIngle Lime Water with Linseed-Oyl, by beating: them well together with a
Spoon and with a Feather Dipped in it, anoint the place, grieved till the Fire is
gone.

To Brew Ale and Beer.
AN Ingenious Author says, That we may Brew as good Liquor at London as either
York or Nottingham affords, and that our Derby Malt, Water and Hops, is as good
as theirs, and that the difference lies only in the Brewing and well Ordering
it. 1. He advises to put to one Quarter of Malt 75 Gallons of Liquor, or
River-Water, letting it Boil for one Hour, and so proportionably for a greater
or lesser quantity, and to every Quarter of Malt half a Pound of Hops; your
Malt being ready in the Mesh-tub, pour so much Water on it as will wet it quite
through, insomuch that the Mesh may be raised in the Tun a considerable hight;
then cover it up with Cloth very close two Hours, preserving the remaining part
of the Liquor very hot in the Coopper, if not Boiling. Next the two Hours being
expired, work your Mesh with proper Instruments very well, till you can discern
no dry Malt in the Mesh; this done let your Mesh Tun run gently into a
convenient Vessel, and when you have let it run about half an Hour, according
to the largness of the Mesh, put on the remaining part with a Pail, throwing it
all over the Mesh by degrees. 3dly. Your Worts being all gathered and emptied
from the Vessel wherein you have gathered it, into the Copper, and the Hops put
therein, boil it three Hours at least, then empty your Copper into the back
Cooller. 4thly. While your Worts are Milk-warm, clear it in your guile Tun,
while it runs clear from dregs; you may put your dregs into a Flannel Bag, and
drain a quantity off clear, and of the Strongest Liquor from them. 5thly. To
your Worts 54 Gallons from a quarter of Malt, put two Quarts of good Yeast, and
let it work 24 Hours beating it in three or four times a day, according to the
Season; Winter requiring great Care. The Guile being well wrought, Tun it up
into well Seasoned Vessels, leaving liberty for it to Work for about half a
Day, then bung it up so close. Let your Cask stand undisturbed 6 or 10 Weeks,
and it will be Fine and Strong. He says that if by accident it does not Work, a
Remedy is; Take the Whites of two Eggs, and half a quartern of Brandy * beat
them well together, and pour them into the Guile * if the Drink is in the Cask,
pour it into the Bung, and lay a warm Cloth over it, and in an Hours time it
will work briskly. Remember you under-lay you Cloth that you cover your Vessel
with, that it may have room to begin to work, then take off the Cloth. Another
way, take a quarter of an Ounce of Zinziber Powder, 2 Ounces of fine Loaf
Sugar, mix them well with some of the Liquor being warm, and pour it in. The
best time for Brewing is March and October.

A way to clear Ale or Beer, though never so thick.
TAke a Pint of Water, half an Ounce of unslackt Lime mix them well together,
let it stand three Hours, and the Lime will settle to the bottom, and the Water
as clear as Glass, pour the Water from the sediment, and put into your Ale or
Beer, with half an Ounce of Isingglass well boiled, and in five Hours time or
less, the Drink will settle and clear. This quantity will serve a Hogshead.

To make Cider equal to Canary and very cheap.
Cider, of which Red Streak is best, is a good Stomach Liquor, purifies the
Blood, is Diuretic, and roots out the Scurvy. To make Cider as good as Canary,
you must make Sweets thus. Take 112 Pound of Sugar, Water 8 or 10 Gallons, in
which 30 or 40 Eggs are well beaten and dissolved; put your Sugar into your
Kettle or Vessel on a gentle Fire, and put to it 4 Gallons of the Egg Water,
stir all about till the Sugar is dissolved, when it boils put in more
Egg-water, to keep it from boiling too high; and thus continue putting one
Quart of another for about an Hour, till your Egg-water is spent. But if you
prepare your Egg-water in Parcels, to wit 4 Pints at a time, its the best way,
so will the Eggs carry away all the foulness of the Sugar, making it rise in a
Scum, and then take it clear; thus having done, boil it to the consistency of a
Syrup, which will be clear and pure and cold, is to be put into your Cider with
a little Coriander seed bruised and tied in a Rag, and this Syrup I call sweet.
Observe that you may make them of Brown or White Sugar, the White makes your
Cider a pale Color, and the Brown of an Amber Color; the latter may do as
well, and this will not stand in 6d a Quart; put in of this sweet two or three
Gallons, more or less as you please, but let your Cider be racked the last
time, and past the fermentation before you put it in; thus mix your sweets and
the Spirits you intend to put in together, with a little quantity of Cider,
stir them well together, and put all into the Hogshead of Cider, stirring them
all together 7 or 8 Minutes with all your strength, with a strong Staff at the
Bung-hole, then stop it close, and draw none off till three, or four or five
Months, and then its fit to Drink. In making it resemble Canary, you must use
more sweets and Spirits; if you put in the Spirits before Permentation, they
will evaporate and be lost. That your Cider thus mixed with sweets and Spirits,
may ever drink well, it must first be put up into Wooden Casks, and then kept
its due time to incorporate as aforesaid; you may first make trial of a Vessel
of seven Gallons, putting in three Quarts of Spirits, and two Quarts of sweets;
and after Twelve Weeks it will be as strong and Pleasant as Candry, and then
you may Bottle it up. This Liquor will keep in a Cask three Years, if you keep
the Cask full, but observe that in eight Weeks time, the Liquor will waste
about two Pints, which be sure fill up again with Liquor of the same strength,
or stronger; and thus it will grow better and better. If you chance to keep it
too long, and it becomes unpleasant as old Hock, then take one Hogshead of your
stale Cider, and one of Tart New Cider, before it is quite fine, and mixing
them well together. Tunn them up in two other Hogsheads, adding the proportion
of Spirits and sweets to the quantity of new Cider, and then it will be as good
as ever it was and speedily fit to drink* Wormwood Cider. To make this, you do
by adding Wormwood to Cider Royal, as you do to Wines; and this is Excellent to
procure Appetite, and cause Digestion.

If you would make Cyder-Royal as strong as French Wine, take a Hogshead of
Cider, and add some part of another Hogshead to it, and Distill off the Spirit;
this Spirit rectify a second time, and then put into the remaining part of the
Hogshead of Cider, fill up the Hogshead with other fresh Cider; stir it about
well, and keep it close stopped, except one Day in 9, 10, or 20, you let it lie
open 5 Hours, and thus in three Months its fit to drink* and will be as strong
as French Wine. To make it as stron^ as Canary, add half as much more of the
Spirit to (...) Hogshead as you did the former, and two or three Gallo^^ of
sweets more or less, to please the Palate, and it w^^^ be as strong as Canary.
Experience is gained by makin^ many Trials. 1. That Cider of the strength of
French Wine, requires to every Hogshead of Cider 4 Gallons of Spirits, or Cider
Brandy, which is not a Pint of Spirits to four Quarts of Cider, 2. The second
Cider of the strength of Canary, requires of Spirits 6 Gallons, or Cider
Brandy, to every Hogshead, that makes about a Pint and a half of Spirits to a
Gallon of Cider, and about three quarters of a Pint of sweets to the like
quantity.

The Spirit of Cider is Extracted by Distillation, in a Copper Vesica, Tinned
within, with its Worm, from Cider in all respects, as they make S. V. And
observe if the Cider is pricked or acid, its better for Spirits, and yields a
larger Quantity then that of the best Cider. Salmon.

I am apt to think, that if you put two Spoonfuls of this sweet, made as
aforesaid; and one Spoonful* of Spirit of Clary, and a spoonful of Spirit of
Cider into a Pottle, it will be very Rich in a Months time, and will not stand
in above 6d or 7d a Bottle. Try Experiments, by putting more or less, till you
please your Palate. I conceive with Syrup of Clove-gillyflowers or Spirit of
it, or any wholesome Spirit or Syrup, you may make what tasted Wine you please.
By this Method, Perry, Cherries Currants, Gooseberry Wine, may be made to
resemble Canary, and as good and wholesome. Doctor Hartman says he has observed
that Brandy, Spirit of Wine or Grain, and other Spirits, if they are Fine may
do; and that he has experienced, that the Spirit of Molosses, Raisons, and the
Lees of good Wine, with other Fruits if rectified and drawn fine, are as good;
and that a rectified Spirit of Malt will serve where Spirit of Cider is not to
be had. He says that the first he completed was, thus, He put six Gallons into
a Vessel, two Quarts of Syrups or sweets, and three Quarts of the Spirit of
Cider, which after two or three Months he found to be as strong and Pleasing as
Canary. He says further, that twenty eighth Pound of Sugar will make four
Gallons of sweets, and so proportionably, and the Whites of 8 or 10 Eggs well
stirred and put in as before directed.

To make Mead.
TAke four Pound of Honey, three Gallons of Water, you may put two or four, as
you would have it in ^^ength; mix or dissolve them, and then let them boil
gently, and clarify with nine or Twelve Whites of Eggs, taking off the Scum,
being only Blood-warm; then add a Pint of Ale-Yeast, or a small Leaven
dissolved in a Pint of the Liquor, and let them work, then Tunn it into a
Vessel, and being well settled, Bottle it up.

Note. 1. That the Liquor ought to be so strong of Honey that it may bear an
Egg, and break and boil the shells with the Whites of your Eggs; for present
spending you may put the Juice of two Limons to a Gallon, and you may if you
please add Cloves, Cinnamon, Nutmeg, Limon-peel, Ginger, to make it taste
according to the Palate, or you may let it alone. Some put Marjoram, Mint,
Thyme, Balm, or what other sweet Herbs they like; let it stand 12 days before
you Bottle it, and it will be fine. In a Months Bottleing its fit to drink: if
you work it with yeast, have a great care to draw it into Bottles; presently
after the Working is over, as in 14 or 18 Days; for Working it with Yeast,
makes it soon grow stale, sower and dead, before you are aware; but if you
singly work it of it self, and by the Suns help, or a gentle Sand-heat, or B.
M. without adding Yeast* or Leaven, it will keep 12 Months, if filled to the
top, and stopped close; if you put Spirit of Clovegilly-flowers into it, it makes
it a curious Red Color.

To make Pleasant Mead.
PUt a Quart of Honey to a Gallon of Water, with about Ten sprigs of Marjorum,
and five of Bay, boil all these well together, and when it is Cold, Bottle it
up, and in Ten days you may drink it.

To make Metheglin.
TAke four Pound of Honey* Water 15, 18 or 20 Pound more or less, as you would
have it in strength, dissolve and mix, then put Mint, Sage* Rosemary, Balm,
Thyme, Bay Leaves, Angelica, Savory, Roman wormwood, Geranium Moscatum
Origanum, Smallage, of each a handful; Ginger, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Mace, Cloves,
all in gross Powder, and tied up in a Bag, of each two Ounces, boil it an Hour,
and clarify with the Shells and Whites of Eggs only, taking off the Scum, then
strain it through a Cloth into Wood Vessels, and being Blood-warm or cool, Tunn
it up. Note, 1, Some People will put to every Gallon of Liquor a Pound of Black
Currants well bruised. 2. Keep your Vessel always near full. 3. Cover the
Bunghole with a Plate of Lead lying loose on, that the Working of the Liquor
may lift it up as need requires. 4. That as it works over, you still sill* it
up, but not to the Brim, with fresh Liquor of the same fort. 5. That having
done working in a Months time, stop the Bung close. You need not work it with
Yeast nor Leaven, for it will Work of it self. Some hang the Spices in a Bag,
not. Boiling them with it at all. For present Drinking, take the Whites of
three Eggs, three spoonfuls of Wheat Flour, beat them together, and mingle
well with your Liquor, and it will presently work, when done, stop it close
with Clay tempered with Salt. 6. If for long keeping, put in a Pound of Hops to
every Barrel; in twenty four Weeks draw off the clear into another Barrel, or
Bottle it. This will keep many Years. This opens Obstructions, and Cures
Consumptions. Salmon.

PUNCH.
TAke a Quart of Water and a Quarter of a Pint of Brandy, a little Vinegar or
Verjuice, or Limon Juice, or Lime Juice, which of them you can get, a little
Nutmeg and Sugar, or a little Ginger; and if you please a little Treacle to
Color it.

To make Punch.
TAke two Quarts of Water, one Pint of Lime Juice, three quarters of a Pound of
fine Sugar, mix and dissolve the Sugar, then put three Pints of choice Brandy;
stir them well together, and grate in a Nutmeg. This Liquor chears the Heart,
and revives the Spirits beyond any other Liquor, Moderately drunk it helps
Digestion, restores lost Appetite, and makes the Body profoundly Healthful, and
able to resist the assaults or all Diseases. Salmon.

Juniper Cider, or Wine to make.
PUt 10 or 12 Berries dried in a Bottle, or a proportionable quantity to a
Hogshead, Ginger may be used with good success, and it makes it brisk; Dried
Rosemary put into it makes it Pleasant; Wormwoom put into Cider tastes as
Wormwood Wine; Juice of Rasberries, as good as Rasberry Wine; Elder-berries
Juice the same. Clovergilly-flowers dried and steeped in Cider, gives a rare
Tincture and Flavor, and thus you may make Wine of Cider of any Dry'd-Flowers,
Leaves and Roots whatever. Query, whether the Chemical Oil of Mace, Cloves,
Mutmeg, etc. will not do the same, put in with some sweets, as before is
directed.

Brumswick Mum to make.
TAke 63 Gallons of Water, and boil till the third part is consumed, then Brew
it with 7 Bushels of Wheat-Malt, and one Bushel of Oatmeal, and one Bushel of
ground Beans; Tunn it, but not too full at first: put 3 Pound of the inner Rind
of Firr, of the Tops of Birch, and Firr, of each 14 Ounces, and three Handfuls
of Cardus Benedictus dried, two Handfuls of Flower of Rosa Solis, of Betony,
Burnet, Marjoram, P^^ny-Royal Flowers, Elder, and with Thyme, of each one
Handful and a hall, and three Ounces of seeds of Cardamum, Barberries bruised
one Ounce. Put them into the Cask, your Liquor having wrought a while with the
Herbs, let the Liquor Work over the Vessel as little as you can, fill it up at
last, and stop it, and put in then some New Laid-Eggs, the Shells not broke nor
cracked; Stop all close, and Drink it 25 Months Old; some add, Horseradish
rasp'd 6 Handfuls, and alike quantity of Watercresses, Brooklime, and Wild
Parsley. If Mum is carried* by Water, it is the better.

Artificial White Wind to make.
N. B. REd-streak Cider 8 Pound, good English Brandy and Spring Water, of each
1 Pound with white Sugar half a Pound, mix and let it gently ferment and
meliorate, after some Months it will have Color and taste of White Wind.

Claret Artificial to make.
N. B. REd-streak Cider 8 Pound, English Brandy (freed from it is flavor)
Spring Water Juice of Bramble-Berrys, of each 1 Pound, white Sugar half a
Pound, Roch-Allom about half an Ounce mix and stop it up till it is Fine. Note.
Instead of Bramble-Juice you may use Alkanet-Root, which gives a true Claret
Color Salmon.

Secrets of Sports.
HOw many Changes in Bells, may be Easily told, set down 1, and under, set down
2, then Multiply 1 by 2 it is 2 that is 2 Changes in two Bells; then set down 3
under 2 and Multiply 2 by 3 it is 6, so there is 6 Changes in 3 Bells, do thus.

Then put down 4 under 6 thus, Multiply 6 by 4, and it is 24. So there is 24
Changes in 4 Bells.

3/6 4/24
120 Changes in 5 Bells. 720 in 6 Bells. 5040 in 7 Bells. 40320 in 8 Bells.
362880 in 9 Bells. 3628800 in 10 Bells.
The Changes in 3 stand thus.
1 2 3 1 3 2 2 1 3 2 3 1 3 1 2 3 2 1 1 2 3

A cheap Family Drink:
A Drink most excellent to be drunk at Meals, or in the Morning, or any time of
the Day, for all sorts of People, either Sick or Well, both Winter and Summer,
and will not cost a Farthing a Gallon. Its excellent against Stone and Gravel,
and for any other Obstruction, it strengthens the whole Body and quenches*
Thirst beyond any other Liquor, it begets Cheerfulness, extinguishes all
Flushings and Vapors, cause good Digestion, purges by Urine powerfully, if a
Quart or more be drank in a morning fasting its good against Stone, Gravel and
all Griping pains of the Bowels, it cleanses the Stomach and Vessels if furd by
Intemperance, it prevents Fumes and Vapors, carrying the Windy matters its
proper way, good against shortness of Breath, or any ill habits of the Stomach;
its excellent against Scurvy and Dropsy and is in all respects friendly to
nature; and they that accustom themselves to it, will find more benefit then I
have here set down, in Winter, drink it warm as Milk, and in Summer too you may
warm it to that degree of Heat you usually do Ale or Beer: which rather betters
it than the Contrary.

Take a spoonful of ground Oatemeal and temper it with Water as you do to put
into broth, then add a Quart of clear Water to it, Brew it 6 or 7 times out of
one Cup or Pot into another and its done.

An universal Medicine for all Wounds or diseases.
GOD is often pleased to manifest his great Power in things, that seem very
little in our esteem, as appears by this Medicine of chewed white Bread, I was
struck by a new shoed Horse on the Shin-bone: my Leg swelled that my Bone was
forced to be cut, I laid some chewed white Bread to my Leg when I went to Bed,
and next Day the Pain was gone. My Hand was bit through by a mad Dog, I laid
this to it and Cured it in four Days, I have Cured diverse Green Wounds with it,
I Applied it but six times, and Mollifyed a Corn so, that I took it out Core
and Root, and it grew no more, I Cured my self of an old Pain in my Shoulder by
it, a great swelling in my Throat, Occasioned by a violent Cold, it broak out
like the Kings Evel. I Cured it in four Days, a swelled Leg, Putrifyed, and
great Holes in it, and all over full of Tulch and Rottenness, that it was
conceived to be a Gangren, I Cured with it; a Pruning Hook stuck through my
Thumb-nail and all, I Cured with it, also one run into the Knee with a Rusty.
Raper, so Festred, that it was thought it must have been out off; I Cured one
Black and Blew from Elbow to Shoulder by a blow, and many other I Cured; the
quality of it is to stench Blood, draw out Poison, or a Thorn, to ease Pains
and heal greeved places, Read more of this and abundance of Curiosities in a
Book called the way to get Wealth, by making 23 sorts of English Wine equal to
French, Metheglin, Rum, Rack, Coffee, Tea, Mum, Cider and 40 sorts of Ale in a
Minute; to make Corn produce a treble Crop, to dress Fish, Flesh and Fowl,
Accounts cast up of great use to Traders, to Write Letters, Accounts where
Coach, Carts and Wagons Inns, to Compound bad Debts, and recover them, and
abundance of other Curiosities. Also another Book Entitled the way to save
Wealth by living well for 2d a Day, to save Coals, Shoes, Candles, Soap, and
Cloth in making a shift, to Angle, order Bees and Silkworms, Cattle Powltry,
etc. to Improve Land by Hops, Flax, Liquorice to destroy Virmin, to speak by
Signs; and 20 in the Room shall know nothing of it, aod by this means; cheating
at Cards is plainly Demonstrated, to feed Horses fatt without Corn, Hay or
Grass, with many other Curiosities. Also another Book Entitled a Thousand
Notable things, teaching speedily to Read, Write and Indite Letters, to speak
any Language speedily, the Laws of the City, Observations in Planting,
Gardening, and Grafting, to catch Birds, to Build and save Lime, a cheap way,
to take spots out of Cloths, the use of Dullidge-water, to know what Weather
will happen, Rules of Health and how to live long, of Moles, Riddles, Dreams,
Stories; to make all sorts of Ink, to make fine Pictures, of Perfuming, Dying,
Coloring, with 900 other Curiosities, price of each Book. 1 s. 6d. Sold at
the* Ring in Little*Brittain.

To cure the Farce or Scurf in a Horse.
HAng a Toad about the Neck of a Horle, in a little Bag, and it will Infalibly
cure him, it must be a live Toad; and this I am told cured a Child of the Evil
hung about its Neck in a Bag a live, and hang there till it dies and Stink.

The Angler's Instructor.


TO be a Complete Angler observe these things following.

1. His Clothes ought to be of a dark Color.

2. Let your Angling Rod be light and taper, and the top pretty stiff, and about
4 yards long.

3. The best time to provide Fishing Rods, is from the 11th of December to the
middle of January, being then freest from Sap, Hasle, Black Thorn, Crab-Tree
and Yewswitches are mostly used. Let your Stocks and Tops be taper and smooth,
and each joint neatly suited, bind them together 16 Months with straight poles
among them, that they may not wrap. If you use a Firr Angle rub it with Aqua
fortis and it gives a curious Chestnut Color.

Proportion your Rods and Lines according as the Rivers, Ponds, etc. are in
largeness; your Lines also must be in strength proportionable to the Fish you
expect to catch; For the color of the Hair, if there be any difference, I
prefer a pale water Green, which you may dye thus; Take a Bottle of
Allom-water, a good handful of Marygolds, boil them till a yellow Scum arises,
then put half a pound of green Copperas, and half a pound of Verdigrease, and
beat them to powder, put these into the Allom-water, then put in the Hair, set
them to cool 12 Hours, then take out the Hair and let it dry.

Let your Line for the Artificial Fly be stronger than the Ground Line for the
Trout.

5. Your Shot ought to be fastened about a foot from the Hook. Your Float, if a
Quill, make thus, Take two soft Goose Quills, cut the Heads of each, about an
Inch and a half, then shut them together like a Pin case, fastenwith melted
Shoomakers Wax, put a Pill of the same Wax within the end, to keep out Water,
with 2 Caps or Rings made of Quill, to slip on each end of the Float, for the
Line to go between; some use a Cork cut like a Pear, and bored through with a
small hot Iron, then put in a Quill of a fit Proportion, then on a Grindstone
rub it smooth.

6, In the next Place be provided with a Plummet to try the Depth of the Water.

7. Have Bags of Linen and Woolen for all sorts of Baits, and a little
Wherstone to sharpen your Hook and also be provided with a Landing Net, and a
Penknife, etc. All your Tackling in Order, go to the River, and find a Place,
if you can, that has a gravelly or smooth Bottom, and about 2 or 3 yards in
depth, the Stream not too swift, then about a yard from the place you design to
Fish at, cast in a quarter of a Peck of Grains, or as many more if you please,
dip them first in the River, that they may sink the better, and about an Hour
after you may begin to Fish; for by that time its probable the Fish may have
found them. If you have not Sport in an Hour, you may conclude there is none,
or else that Perch and Pike are there, that live on small Fish.

8. Then plumb the Ground, and Fish about 2 Inches from the Bottom; the best
Summer Bait, except in April and May, their Spawning time, when they are not
gone, should be large Wheat, ordered as Furmety, which may be kept 15 or 20
days in Water or Beer, putting in fresh as the Skins grows upon it, if you keep
it in Water, when you put any in a Box for present Angling, put Wort, or Ale,
or Beer, to it a while, or you may boil good Grain, as Wheat, Malt, etc. in
Milk till it is soft, or in sweet Wort which is full as good, and peel off the
outward Rine, which is the Bran, and so use it; or if you please you may fry it
in Milk and Honey, or steep it in strong scented Oils, as Spike, Amber, Ivy,
Polipody, Anise, Turpentine, Oil of Peter, Assa Faetida. etc.

Your Hook thus baited with a Corn, the point covered with a thin Rind, that
you may see the White on one side, cast in your Line above the Stream, near the
side, the Float being upright, swimming down the Stream, when you see the Float
sink, strike pretty quick, according to the strength of your Line; if the Fish
is too large, make use of your landing Net, and after the catching 3 or 4
Fishes, cast in a handful of Grains, and now and then lifting the Float above
Water, and so you may catch many Fishes.

For Ground Angling, use it only Evening and Morning, in hot Sun-shiny Weather;
but if cloudy, at any time of the day.

In Winter choose the middle of the Day, and where the Sun shines on your Pace
warm, and bait with a little white tail'd Worm found in old rotten Thatch, when
you Angle after a shower, endeavor to have the Wind on your Back, coming from
South or West, the Sun on your Face.

When the Earth is hot and dry, it is to no purpose to Angle, or when the Rivers
are out, or hasty showers much move the Waters, or when the North-East Winds
blow strongly and cold.

The best time to Angle is, 1. When the Weather is calm and clear, or cool and
cloudy, the Wind gently blowing.

2. When a sudden shower has a little mudded the Water, then with a red Worm
Angle at the bottom in a Stream, and you will have sport.

If you Fish for Carp or Tench, from Sunrising till 8 or 9 in the Morning, and
from four in the Afternoon till Night. Fish bite best at a Fly after a shower
that has not mudded the Water, and the best Months for the Fly are March,
April, May and June.

Salmon bites best about three in the Afternoon, especially from May to
September, and when the Water is clear, and a little Wind, and the Wind blows
against the Stream.

Barbel bites best early in the Morning, and till ten a Clock, from the
beginning of May till the beginning of August.

Perch bite all Day in cool cloudy Weather, but chiefly from Eight in the
Morning till Ten, and from three in the Afternoon till five,

Pike bite best about three in the Afternoon, in clear Water and gentle Wind;
August, September, and all Winter he bites all Day long, April, May, June and
July, he bites best early in the Morning.

Bream bites best from Sunrise till 8 or 9, in muddy Water and a brisk Wind,
and in Ponds, the higher the Wind the better; and Fish in the middle of the
Pond: In June July and August, in a gentle Stream or nigh it.

Roach and Dace bite all Day long, but best at the Top.

Gudgeon bites in April, and till he has spaw'd in May, and generally all the
Day long, in or near a gentle Stream; Angle for him in a gravelly bottom,
stirring the Sand with a Pole or Rake, and they will bite the better.

Flounders bite best April, May, June July, in a swift Stream, and sometimes in
a still Deep.

Trout bites best in a muddy Water, in dark, cloudy, Windy Weather, from 8 till
10 in the Morning, and from 3 till 4 or 5 in the Afternoon; March, April, May
and June are the chiefest Months. When you catch the first Fish, take out his
Belly, and you may see his Stomach, take it out tenderly, for if you bruise it
you lose your Labor, and with a sharp Knife cut it open, and you will see what
Food he takes at that instant.

Keep out of sight when you Fish, and let the Sun be in your Face, or you will
have but little Sport, for if the Sun is on your Back, your Rod will with its
Shadow fright them.

To preserve your Hazel Rods from Worm and Rot, rub them twice or thrice a Year
with Linseed Oil, Satlate Oil, or fresh Butter unsalted, or Tallow, very well
inside and outside, if hollow.

In Summer time when Cattle come to the Fords, then Dung drives the Fish to
the lower end of the Ford; then Angle for a Cheven, with baits proper for him.

The Eyes of Fishes are an excellent bait for most fort of Fishes.

Baits of all sorts.
BAits for Salmon, is a great Garden Lobworm or an artificial Fly.

Trouts take the Brambling, and all sorts of Worms, and all sorts of Flies
Menows, young Frogs, Marsh-worm, Flag-worm, Dock-worm, Cod Baits, Bob,
Caterpillars, Wasps, Gentle Bees, Grashopers and Bark-worms.

The Umber takes the same Baits, especially the Fly and Cod-bait.

The Barbel takes Cheese, Pastes, Gentles, large Worms and salt Beef.

The Perch takes red Worms of all sorts, more especially Branding, and
Lob-worms well scoured, also Bobs, Gentles, Cod-baits, Wasps, Menow, and some,
all baits except the Fly.

Tench takes large Worms, but better if they smell of Tar, which you may put a
little to the Worms you fish with before you Angle, letting them lie a short
time left they die. Also Paste scented with Tar; Oils, Bread, Grain boiled
soft, Cods-baits, Gentles and Marsh-worms.

Carp takes sweet Pastes, Gentles, Worms, Cod-baites, Grait boiled, Bobs and
Wasps, and sometimes with a natural Fly.

Pike Pastes Gudgeon, Roaches, Dace, Leaches, Smelts, young Frogs, and almost
all sorts of Baits except a Fly.

Eels take great red Worms, Wasps, Beef, Guts of Fowls, Minows. Gudgeon takes
Cod bait, Gentles, Wasps, the natural and artificial Fly.

Bleak takes the same bait as the Gudgeon.

Dace, Roach and Bleak takes Cod-baits, Worms, Flies, Bobs, Paste, Wasps,
Cherries, and all sorts of Worms bred on Trees; Ant Flies they greedily bite at
under Water, near* the Ground 6 Inches.

Chevin or Chub takes Bobs, Minow, all sorts of Earthworms, Flies of all sorts,
Cod-baits, young Frogs, Cherries, Bees and Grasshoppers at the top of the Water,
Cheese, Grain, Beetles, Waspes and Humble-bees.

Bream takes red Worms, Paste, Waspes, green Flies, Butterflies, a Grasshopper
his Legs cut off.

Flounders and Shads take red Worms, Waspes and Gentles.

Minow, Loach, Miller's thumb or Bull-head, take Worms or Gentles.

To make Pastes.
TAke Manchet, the fattest old Cheese, Suet of Mutton Kidney,, a little strong
Runnet, mix them equally and finely together, then Color it with a little
Turmerick; this Paste takes Chub, etc.

For Carp and Tench, mix Crumbs of Bread with Honey, or take Kidney Suet, as
much Cheese, Flower or Manchet, soften it with clarified Honey. Cherries,
Sheep's Blood, Saffron, and Manchet made with Paste.

You may add to any Paste, Assa Foetida, Occulus Indiae, Oil of Polipody of the
Oak, and the Gum of Ivy; and be sure to all your Pastes add a little Flax or
Cotton-wool, to keep your bait from washing off. Man's Fat, and the Fat of the
Thigh Bone of a Heron, makes an Ointment that rarely fails.

Paste will keep very long, if you put clarified Honey and Virgin's Wax into it.

To Angle with an artificial Fly, that is, a Fly in the likeness of a natural
Fly; you must have Fur, Feathers, Wool, Down, Silk, Woasted, Bears hair,
Camel's hair, Badger's hair, Spaniel's hair, Dog's hair, Sheep's Wool,
Mo-hair, Cow-hair, Camlets, Furs, Hackles or Feathers of a Cocks neck or tail
of several Colors, Silk of all Colors, Wire and Twist, Silver Twist, Gold
Twist, Silver and Gold Wire* (Read more of these in a Curious Book lately
Printed called, The Anglers sure Guide. Sold at the Ring in Little Britain,)
and the like, suitable and proportionable to the Fly you would imatate. The way
to make them, is with soft Wax and Silk, binding first the Wings on, and
afterward shapening the Body and Head, with such Colors as to resemble the
Color of the Fly you design to Angle with, and be sure let the Belly be the
same, and wet your Materials e're you go to Work. Use a larger body'd Fly when
the Water is muddy or dusky, than in clear Water; and be sure always keep your
Fly in continual motion. When the water is clear and low Angle with a small
body'd Fly, with slender wings; and when the water begins to clear after Rain,
and is of a brownish Color, then use a red or Orange Fly, if the day is clear,
then a light colored one, with a little Body and slender wings; if the water
be dark or a Whey Color, let your Line be suitable, and twice as long as the
Rod. Another way of Angling is called Trouling, which is mostly for Pike; the
baits are Roach, Gudgeon, Dace, Minow, Loach or Frog, put on the Wire, that the
Head being downwards, it may look as if it were playing in the Water, sometimes
managing it high, and then low, near the Place that Pike haunts, when he has
taken it, give him Line, and he will carry it to his Place of Abode, and there
paunch it, then range abroad for more, and this you discerning by the Lines
Motion, wind it up till the Slackness cease, then with a jerk hook him,
observing this, as for all other Fish, that you do it contrary to the Motion of
the Fish, and be sure let your Tackle be strong. To Angle for a Pike at the
Snap, use a double Spring-hook, for he usually holds the bait so fast betwixt
his Teeth, that it is hard to get it forth, or strike him; then with a
Spring-hook, the Wire will draw through the bait and hook him if your hook be
long; If he lie still, or move slowly after he has taken the bait, and you
cannot find which way his Head lies, strike directly upward and you will hardly
miss him. He greedily takes a Minow after the same manner.

Of the Haunts of Fishes.
TO be an experienced or complete Fisher, at leisure times try all waters where
you suppose Fish are.

Angle for Perch in gentle Streams of reasonable depth by a hollow Bank. For
Salmon, in large, swift Rivers that ebb and flow, gravelly and craggy. For
Trouts in purling Brooks, or Rivers very swift, strong, or sandy bottomed. For
Carp and Tench in still waters, Ponds muddy, and where Weeds and Roots of Trees
are, For Elee, in muddy Rivers and Ponds. For Bream, Pike, or Chub, in fandy or
Clay Rivers, Brooks or Ponds, wherein Bull-rushes and Flags grow. For Roach,
Dace, Barble and Ruff, in sandy and gravelly deep water, shaded with Trees. For
Umber, in clayey Marshes, Streams running swift. For Gudgeon, in small, sandy
or gravelly Rivers; they bite best in Spring. Shad, Peel, Mullet and Flounder
Thwait and Scant, are found near the Sea, or in brackish Rivers. counting Ebb
and Flow, where the bottom is fine sand or gravelly; and sometimes all the Fish
I have mentioned are found in diverse waters, therefore try all waters, as above
directed.

To keep Baits.
RED Worms keep in a bag of Red Cloth, with a handful of chopped Fennel, mixed
with half as much fresh black Mould, will preserve and scour them; or nettles
chopped small and put in the bag, or keeping them in moist Moss will do it; or a
Dish-clout dipped in Mutton Suet, and wrap them in it, will keep them well. All
other Worms with the Leaves of the Trees they grow on. Cod-baits, Bob and
Canter must be kept as you find them.

Great white Maggots keep in Sheeps Tallow, and to scour them, put them in a
warm Bag made of Blanketting, with Sand. Frogs and Grasshoppers, in long Grass
and in wet Moss, and when you spend them, cut off the Legs of the Frog, and the
Wings of the Grasshopper.

Flies, use as you take them. Wasps, Hornets and Humble-Bees, dry in an Oven,
their Heads dipped in Sheeps Blood, and dried again; then keep them in Boxes for
use.

Curiosities in Angling.
EEls. Take a Bottle of Hay, and put in the middle of it Sheeps Guts or
Garbage, then tie it up close with a Cord about the middle, then sink him to
the bottom of the River over Night, and leave the Cord out, then when you come
next Morning early, pluck out the Bottle suddenly, and you will catch many Eels
sticking fast in the sides of the Hay.

To bring Fish to the place you desire. Boil clean Water, then put Barley into
it, when it bursts: then put Liquorice, a little Mummy and some Honey, and beat
them together in a Mortar into a stiff Paste, and boil about the Quantity of a
large Nutmeg of this Paste, with a Quart of Barley, till it grows like Glue,
then lay it for ground bait, and all the Fish will come to it.

An Artificial Cod-bait.
MAke the Body of yellow Beeswax, and the Head of Black Duben, and black Silk,
or make the Body of yellow Wash-leather, or Buff, or Shammy, and the Head of
black Silk. This bait takes Salmon, Trout, Grayling, Tench, Roach, Chub, Dace,
Ruff, Bream, Barble, etc.

Of Baits in general.
OBserve, that Fish takes such baits freely, as the Season or Months afford;
therefore when you Angle Morning or Evening, beat the Bushes about the Rivers
or Ponds, and such Flies as you find there fish withal, or imitate them with an
Artificial Fly. And also see what Worms or other Infects sit for baits stick on
the Leaves or Grass, or are in the Water, and Fish withal, and you may expect
good Sport.

To take Fish in the Night with a Light. Take a Glass in shape of an Urinal,
very deep, put as much Clay into the bottom of it, as to sink the Mouth of it
within an Inch of the Water, floating with pieces of Cork tied about the Neck
to keep it steady and upright, then place a Candle in it by sticking it in the
Clay Socker, anointing the outside of the Glass with Oil of Asper, this will
make all the Fish come about it, then with a Net you may take abundance of Fish.

Proper Flies for every Month.
February. PAlmer Flies, little red Brow, the Silver Hackle the plain Hackle,
the Gold Hackle, the great blew dun, the great dun, the dark brown.

March. The early bright brown, the little whirling dun, the Thorn-tree Fly,
the whitish dun, the little black Gnat, the blew dun, the little bright brown.

April. The little dark brown, the small bright brown, the Violet Fly, the
great whirling dun, the Horse. flesh Fly, the yellow dun.

May. The green Drake, the dun Cow, the black May Fly, the Stone Fly, the
little yellow May Fly, the Camlet Fly, the great Drake, the yellow Palmer, the
Turkey Fly; the black flat Fly, the little dun, the brown, light the white Gnat,
the Cow Lady, the Peacock Fly, the Cow-turd Fly.

June. From the 1st to the 24th. The Stone-fly and green Drake, the Barn-fly,
the Owl-fly, the purple Hackle, the Flesh-fly, the purple Gold Hackle, the
little Flesh-fly, the Ant-fly, the Peacock-fly, the little black Gnat, the
brown Gnat, the green Grasshopper, the brown Hackle, the dun Grasshopper.

July. The Orange-fly. the Badgers-fly, the Wasp-fly, the little white dun, the
black Hackle, the black brown dun, the Shell-fly.

August. The Fern-fly, the late Ant-fly, Harry-long-leg, the white Hackly.

September. The late Bagger, the Camel brown Fly.

October. The same Flies that were used in March.

Artificial Flies how to make them, and the Season they are to be used in.
IN April a Stone-fly is in Season, the body of it is made with black Wool,
made yellow under the Wings, and under the Tail, the Wings made of Mallards
Feathers.

May at the beginning, a ruddy Fly is in Season, make the body of red Wool
wrapped about with blew Silk, the Wings make of the Wing of a Drake and a red
Hackle.

The yellow or green Fly is made of yellow Wool, his Wing made of red Hackle
and the Wing of a Drake.

The dun Fly is made of black Wool, and sometimes dun, in season in March, his
Wings made of Partridge Feathers, black Drake's Feathers, and the Feathers
under his Tail.

The black Fly in season in May, made of black Wool, and wrapped about with
Peacock's Tail: his Wings the Feather of the Wings, of a brown Capon, with the
blew Feathers in his Head.

In June the said yellow Fly is in season, made of black Wool with a yellow
List on either side, the Wings of a Buzzard, bound with broken Hemp.

Also the Moorish Fly in season in June, made of duskish Wool, the Wings the
black Feathers of a Mall Drake.

Also in the middle of June, the Taring Fly made of Bear's Wool, the Wings
made contrary one against the other of the whitish Feathers of a Mall Drake.

In July the Wasp Fly in season, made of black Wool, wrapped about with yellow
Silk; the Wings made of the Feathers of a Buzzard or Drak.

The Shell Fly good in the middle of June, made with greenish Wool, wrapped
about with Pearls of a Peacock's Tail, the Wings made of a Buzzards Feathers.

The dark Drake Fly, made of black Wool, wrapped about with black Silk, in
season in August; the Wings made of the Feathers of a Male Drake with a black
Head.

The May Fly, made of greenish colored Cruel or Willow Color, and darken it
in most Places with waxed Silk or ribb'd with a black Hair, or some of them
ribb'd with a Silver Thread, and such Wings for the Color, as you see the Fly,
to have at that Season.

The Oak Fly, the Body made of Orange paring and black Cruel; the Wings, the
brown of a Mallard's Feathers.

To take Pikes.
TAke what quantity of blown Bladders you please, and at the mouth of it tie a
Line longer or shorter, as the Water is in depth, bait your Hooks Artificially,
and put them into the Water, and as the Wind blows them gently, the Pike will
strike himself, and make pleasant Diversion, by flouncing about, when spent
take him out, the same may be done by tying your Line at the Leg of Ducks or
Geese.

To take a Pike as he lies sleeping and sunning in fair Weather, with a Loop or
Net.
MArch and August is the best time: Take a long Pole or Rod that is light and
strait, on the small end fasten a running Loop of twisted Horse-hair and Silk,
or made of Wyre of a large Compass, which gently draw on him, and when it is 5
or 6 Inches over his Gills, hoist him up, if it is a small Pike, draw it not so
far on, make no Noise in walking nor speaking, if he lies so that you cannot
conveniently noose him, touch his Tail with the Rod, and he will turn as you
please; also with a hand Net, putting it gently under Water, guide it just
under him, and lift it softly till you just touch him, and then do it as quick
as you can.

Baits for Fish.
TAke Oculus Indiae, soft Cheese and Honey, and Crumbs of White Bread, make it
into a Paste, and throw little Pellets into the Water, and the Fish will swim
above the Water.

Of FOWLING.


LET your Net be made of the best Pack-Thread, well twisted and dried, and for
great Fowl, let your Meshes be two Inches at least form point to point, the
larger the better, provided the Powl cannot creep through. Let the Net be about
2 Fathom deep, and 6 in length, is the best, verge it on each side, and at
either end; extend it with long Poles, that the lower end of the Poles may be
fastened with a piece of a Line or two Stakes fast driven into the Ground; And
observe to do this at the Places where Birds feed and haunt in the Mornings,
and you may expect Sport.

To take Birds with Lime twigs.
THus you must make it; At Midsummer, peel the Bark from the Holli-Trees, and
fill a Vessel and put running Water to it; then boil it over the Fire till the
white and gray Bark rise from the green: Take it off the Fire, drain the Water
well away, and then separate the Barks, and take the green, lay it on some
moist Floor and close Place, and cover it with Weeds, and let it lie about a
Fortnight, and in that time it will rot, and turn to a slimy Substance; and
then put it into a Mortar, beat it well, and then take it out and wash it in
some running Stream, till the foulness is gone. Then put it in a close Earthen
Pot, let it stand five days; look to its purging, and scum it. When clean, put
it into another Earthen pot, and keep close for use. As for your Setting-dog,
it must be elected and trained thus; He must be of good Scent, and love
naturally to haunt Fowls, the Land Spaniel is best, being of a good nimble
size, and courageous Mettle, which you may know by his Breed; and being of a
good Ranger, etc. Then the first Lesson is to make him crouch and lie down
close to the Ground, and its done by frequent laying him on the Ground, and
saying to him, Lie close; and upon his doing well, give him a bit of something
to cat, and if he does not well, chastise him with Words not Blow.

Next, To creep to you with his Body, and his Head close to the Ground, by
saying, Come nearer, Come nearer, or such Words, to understand and do it, and
entice him with showing Bread, and the like, thrusting down any rising part of
his Head or Body, and threatening him roughly if he flies far, with a good jerk
or two with a Whip-cord to reclaim his Obstinacy.

And repeat his Lessons, and encourage his well doing, and you may exercise him
in the Field, as you walk along, calling him from his Ranging to his Duty, and
teach him to follow you close at the Heels in a Line or String, without
straining. When he is a Year old, and the Season fit, go in the Field, and let
him Range obediently. If he babbies or causelessly opens, correct him by lathing
him, or by biting the root of his Ears, when you find he approaches the haunt
of his Patridge, known by his whining, and willing, but not daring to open.
Then speak and hid him take heed, if notwithstanding this he'roln in and spring
your Partridge, or opens, and so they escape, then correct him soverely: Then
cast him off to another haunt of a Covey, and then if he mend his Error, and
you take any by drawing your Net over them swiftly, reward him with the Necks,
Heads and Pinions of the Partridge.

For your Water Dog, the Instruction above for the Setter will serve any, by
fetching a Glove, or the like, and keep him very much under, and to observe
your Commands.

The longest Barrel is the best Fowling Piece, above 6 Foot long, with an
indifferent bore, under an Harquebuse. And observe shooting with the Wind, and
side ways, or behind the Fowl, not in their Faces, having your Dog in Command,
not to stir till you have shot.

Small Birds to take; A very good way*
YOU must take about three handfuls of Wheat Bars, let the straw remain to them
about a Foot long, and lime that and not the Ears, then stick them up in Frosty
Weather, that the Ear may bend, and your straws bend Archwise, you may do this
in Snow, and scatter a little Chaff over it, and fasten down a Bird if you have
it, of the same kind you design to take, let the Ears be spread single and then
the Birds flocking to pick them, and attempt to fly away, the straw to be sure
laps their Wings, and brings the Birds down again, and this way you may, take
great Numbers, you may fix them for Sparrows on Barns or Thatched Houses, and
not only get the Birds, but abundance of Corn by destroying them. Low Belling.
This is chiefly practiced in open Countries, from October till March, is the
properest Seasons, and the manner is as follows.

In an evening about 8 or 9 a Clock, when the Moon does not shine, take a Low
Ball of a moderate size, that it may be managed by one man in one Hand, in
having a deep and hollow sound, you must also have a Net with small Mashes
about 20 yards long, and as broad as four or five Lands may be covered with it,
and you must go into Fields where the Stubble has not been much trod*; but in
high and fresh Wheat Stubble is the best. The Bellman must go foremost, and
toll it distinctly and dolefully, letting it strike now and then on each side,
and you must follow with the Net born up at the four corners, and on each side
must be carried a Pan of Live Coals without any blaze, and then pitching your
Net where you suppose the Game is: Then make little bundles of Stubble and set
them on a blaze, or carry Links for that purpose; then with making a noise or
hitting the Stubble, rowse the Fowl, if any be under the Net; So they being
entangled you may take them. Then go to another haunt, but you must put out the
light of the Stubble whilst you have occasion for it again. In this case the
noise of the Low bell astonishes them; and makes them lie still; but the Light
makes them rise by afrightning them, but be sure you make no other noise till
you think your Nets are over them.

Batt Fowling the manner of it.
OBserve where that Birds roost in great numbers, as they generally do in
Stubs, Hedges or Trees; then go in a dark Night, and have a Wicker with a
handle to hold on high, in which Place pieces of Links or great Candles to make
a great Light, some have a Pan to make a Fire, and carry it at their Back; but
then one must put Fire on as fast as it burns out, then let one go with a Pole,
and beat the contrary side, and two or three be with you, carrying long Boughs;
and when they are unroosted with beating they will come flying about the Light,
so that they with the Boughs may easily strike them down, if among Shrubs, as
in a wood, let one on each side beat at a pretty distance: This must be done in
a pure still Night.

To take wild Ducks, Geese, Herns, Sea-Gulls, etc.
DRive a Stake into the Ground two or three Foot long just by the Waterside,
then take a strong Horse Hair Line with a large hook fastened to it, and bait it
with Fish, or Frog, or Guts, etc. And let your Line or Lines lie in the River,
and they will swallow it, and so hang that you may take them, some lay in the
same manner Snares made of Horse Hair, and often catch them by the Feet as they
swim about.

Partridge to take.
THE first thing yo do is to find the Partridges haunt which is mostly in
standing Corn, where they breed, as also in Stubble after the Corn is cut; but
in Wheat Stubble till it is trodden very much, and then they repair to fresh
Barley Stubble, and the Furrow among the Clots, long Grass and Brambles, are
sometimes their lurking Places. For a Covey of twenty and upwards, in the
Winter they sit in dead Grass in upland Meddows, or fog under Hedges* or under
the Roots of Trees or among Mole Hills, etc. Their haunts are various and
uncertain, and though some by the Eye, by distinguishing the Color from the
Ground; and others by the Ear, by hearing the Cock call after the Hen, and the
Hen's answering, and their chattering at joy at meeting; but to find Partridge
the best way, is as you do the Pheasant, by the Pipe or Call and they will come
near to you, and count their number and then to your Sport: You must surround
your Covey, prepare your Nets, and prick a stick fast in the Ground, and tie
the one end to it, and then let your Net fall as you walk briskly round,
without stopping, and cover the Partridge; then rush in and frighten them, and
as they rise they are taken.

To take them with Bird-lime do thus, you must call first near to their haunts;
if answered, stick your Lime Straws about a Cross in rows at some distance from
you; then call again, and as they come near to you they will be fastened by
your Straws, and so become your Prey. This way is used with great success in
Stubble Fields, from August to September, and in Wood. To take them with Rods,
and in Pastures, do as for the Pheasant. The most pleasing and diverting way of
taking Partridges is with a Setting Dog, and he having set them use your Net,
and by this Rule and Method; the Quails, Rails, Moorpoots, etc. Are to be taken
and are for Hawk flight too; And here I make an end of the material part of
Fowling.

An approved way to dare and take Larks in the day times.
GEt Nets in the form of a Hoop or Scoop Net, such as Fishers land Fish with,
and it must be made of fine Thread, but a small Tramel Net will do better. Then
carry a Lark Hawk, or Hobby upon a Pole into the Field, where the Larks haunt
about Harvest time; then beat them up with a Dog, and observe where the Flocks
Light; then creep as close to them as may be, then on a sudden hold up your
Hawk on a Pole, and so soon as ever they perceive him they will be so afraid
that you may easily draw your Net over them, and they will not offer to stir,
for they are so fearful of the Hobby which pray on them about this Season, that
they will rather let you take them than they will offer to rise for fear of the
Hobby, and you may continue this Sport till Michaelmas, then the wild Hobby
leaves this Country, or that Exercise: and the Lark is more confident and not
to be affrighted.

How to take Rooks, Jackdaws and most others Birds that pull up and spoil the
Corn.
TAke thick brown Paper and divide a Sheet into eight parts, and make them up
like Sugar Loaves, and then Lime the inside of the Paper with Birdlime; let
them be limed four or five days before you set them, then put some Corn in
them, and lay forty or more of them under the Clods of dirt on the Land, early
in the Morning before they come to feed, then stand at a distance and you will
see most excellent Sport; for as soon as a Pidgeon, Rooks, Crows, etc. Come to
peck out any of the Corn, it will be about his Head, and then he will fly bolt
right up very high, and when he is spent, come tumbling dowu as if he had been
shot in the Air, and you may take them at Plowing time, when the Crows and
Rooks follow the Plow, but you must then put in Maggots and Worms of the
largest size.

Snares to take Birds and Woodcocks, and how to set them and to make them.


TAke a stick of a pretty height, about two Foot high, and stick them slaunting
on the sides of the Furrows; then fasten to them a Horse-Hair Line, and in
Moonshiny Nights when the Corn begins to spring, especially those next the
Hedges or Banks, and make a running noose in the Line, hanging about 3 Inches
from the Ground, and set severally; and set them about 9 Foot distance from one
another. And when Woodcocks come at such Places as are their usual Haunts, the
Loop being wide enough, the foremost will run his Head thorough and finding
himself entangled by the closing of the Noose, he will neither cry out nor
struggle, but stand still till you take him; but you need not take him
presently; for those that follow, though going aside, will turn into the Furrow
again, and you may take as many in half an Hour, as you have set Snares, if
they much haunt the Places, and these serve for Snipes, near Springs, where
they haunt; but then they must be higher, and take them as they are alighting;
that when they are fastened they cannot reach the Ground, and you must be very
ready, or else they will get loose.

Of the Stalking Horse and Fowling piece.


THE best Fowling Pieces are five Foot and half or six Foot long, with an
indifferent Bore under Harquebuss, pound your best sort of Powder, and let your
Shot be well sized, and not too big; for then it scatters too much: And if too
small it has not weight not strength sufficient to do execution on a large
Fowl. In Shooting observe always to Shoot with the Wind if possible, and rather
behind the Fowl or side-ways, than full in their Faces; and* observe you
shelter your self behind a Hedge, Bank, Tree, or any thing else that may keep
you from the sight of the Fowl; and be sure to have your Dog at your Heels, and
at good Command, not to stir after you have Shot, till you bid him; but
sometimes the Fowls are so shy, there is no getting a-near them, without a
Stalking Horse, which must be some old Jade trained up for that purpose, who
will gently and as you will, walk along with you, but for want of such a live
Horse you may cut out the resemblance of one in Canvas, or Match Paper, pasted
together a sufficient breadth and length, with Ears, Legs and Tail, and all the
Parts proportionable, which you must Paint to the lively Color of a Horse, and
something like Grass at his Nose, and his Head being stooping as Grazing, and
you may do this either stuffed or flat, but the latter is more easy to carry;
there are other things that are used for shelter in this case, as in woody
Places, a Bush in Marshes and Rivers, Bents or Rushes, or such things as grow
there: But these being unusual to Motion, you must move them very slowly, or
else the Birds will take flight and be gone.

To take Birds or Rabits.
TAke seed of Letice, Popy, Henbane and Hemlock, or some of them will do, boil
them in Dregs of Wine, and then boil some Wheat in it, and strew where they
come and it will make them drunk, for Rabits use Oats.

Easy and New Invented Plows.
The description of Trenching Plows.
SIx or seven Laboring men, in light Ground it is usual to have to follow the
Plow, and that at some distance each with their Spades, taking some proportion
to cast up the Earth from the bottom of the Fourow, on that was turned over by
the Plow. By this means an Acre of Ground may be Plow-trench'd in a day, as
well as if it had been wholly done by the Hand; the Plow going before, and
turning in the Sword or Turf, and the Spades coming after and covering it with
Earth that is light, makes it fit for diverse sorts of Tillage to be Planted in
it, this saves a great deal of the Charge of Trenching wholly by the Spade.

But there is a Cheaper and easier way to Plow Trench Land, without the Spade
at all, and that is, by making your Plow, that it may under cut the Earth, and
cast it over, instead of the, usual way of Plowing, for the usual way of
Plowing, the Plow is made pointing and is forced under the Sword, and by the
spreading of the Plow, and help of the turning board, you force the Earth from
- ward which requires much more strength, than if the Plow were made of a
breadth proportionable, from the Shares point to it is hinder part, and the Sword
or Earth carried from the bottom, and a turning board cast from - ward; and then
you may either add a second Colter, and share to succeed the former (fixed to
the very same beam) about 4 or 5 Inches lower, which said second Colter and
share will cut and take up another course in the bottom of the Trench, and
carry it higher.

And then the turning board will throw it on the first Plowing, or else you may
make another to cast higher then the first to follow it. Each of these Plows
require but half the strength of the common forcing Plow, for that it Cuts
Raises, and casts the Earth over without any side forcing at all.

You may make this Plow 5, 6, or 7 Inches broad, or more according to the
Nature of the Ground and strength you design to use, whether 1, 2, or 3, Horses
to draw it and it will serve not only to Plow and Plow-Trench Land, but it will
also serve to pare off the Turf of Ancient Pasture Land, in order to burn it,
for the Foot on which the fore end of the Beam rests, may be made to stand
higher or lower as you please to have it; to the end it may cut thicker or
thiner; and being as broad, will do that sort of work as well as your breast
Plow, and with 6 fold; more speed Worlidge says, he has made a model of it,
that answers what is here proposed, and had he an Ingenious Assistant should
soon bring it to perfection, but these hints he hopes may prove sufficient.

To make a Denshireing Plow.
THis must be drawn by one or two Horses. It must have 2 Wheels or Trundles; If
they are low, then let your paring Plow rest on the Axis, but if larger Wheels
are found more proper, then fix your paring Plow at some distance under the
Axis, and both ways let it have a long stave or handle, that the Labourer by
lifting up or pressin down the same, may cause the Turf to pare thin or thick
as he likes best, or as the unevenness of the Lands requires, let him Regulate
his Labor. This way with one Horse and 2 men, and a Skillfull-man to Regulate
and Guide the Plow, you may pare 2 Acres in a Day or more, if the Ground be but
smooth and even, but if the Ground is full of Hills, Stumps, etc. It must be
done over again, and then 2 men and one Horse may pair the one Acre a Day, as
well to the full as with a breast Plow, and more easily and cheap, a fourth part
at least both in Charges, and in time an Ingenious Man will quickly a mend any
Error such an Instrument may meet with, and it is so Beneficial and easy to be
done, that I commend it highly to those that may have occasion.

There is lately a Steel-plow, invented by one dwelling in Catteaten-street
London; which with one Man and 2 Horses or 2 Oxen, may be Plowed any Land
whatever, as soon as double the men and Cattle, performed by common Plows,
Worlidge says, he has seen the Model, which was well made and true, and
Questionless, will far exceed the common or usual Plows, and it may cost 30 or
40s extraordinary being of Steel, it will soon repay it if 2s a Day can be
saved by it, there is a French Plow, also much like our double Plow, already
described, which carry 2 Furrows at once, the Description and use you have in I
Houghtons Collection of Husbandry, to which I refer you.

To take Moles, kill, Foxes, etc:
Paxamus says, that an Earthen Jug or Pot, large Belied, and narrow Necked, and
put into it Chaf or Straw, Chopped Rosin, Bees Wax, and some Brimstone, and
Cederwood, mix them together, then set them on fire; then put the Neck of the
Bottle into one hole, and stop all the holes besides that one, and passages
where the Moles pass, your smoke Kills them or drives them away presently.

Another. Take white Helibor, or the Bark of Dogs Cole, which you please,
powdered, mix it or them with Wheat Flour, or Barley Meal, or Rye-flower, and
with Milk and Wine, make it into a Paste; put this into their holes, and they
eat it and it Kills them.

Some keep Cats in Gardens, and tame Wesells, that will destroy them:

Some use to fill the Holes with Marking-stone, and wild Cucumber Juice, and
pour it into their Holes.

Some pour Oil of Lees into their Holes only; Pliny.

Some set Traps at the mouth of the Holes with Hair.

Some with a Bough fastened down in the Ground, take them, or take Pitch, Rosin,
and Brimstone, with some loose Tow or Rags, put into an Earth long Neck Pot
with a great Belly, Fired and put into their Holes, Stifles them.

Or a deep Earthen Pot let in the Ground in their Stracks, just even with the
surface of the Earth they fall in and cannot get out; if this is wisely set, it
takes many, especially in Bucking time, which is about March.

Another Incredible way. A Mole catcher and his Boy, in 10 Days time in a
Ground of 190 Acres, laid down for Tillage, took near three Bushels of Old and
Young, by casting up their Nests only, which are always built in a great Heap
as big again as the rest easily disern'd, and then presently the Old ones would
come to look their Young, which he would snap up presently also, or, if you
have a convenience of Water bring it over the Ground, and it will destroy them
as far as it goes.

To kill Moles:
TO take them in Trenches, spoils much Ground, therefore take a Mole Spear, or
Staff, and where you see them cast, go lightly, but not on the side 'twixt them
and the Wind, least they hear you, and at the first or second putting up of the
Earth, strike them with your Mole Staff downright, and mark which way the Earth
falls most, If she cast toward you strike some what over, If she cast up toward
the Left Hand strike somewhat on the Right Hand, and so on the contrary, to the
casting up. In plain Ground strike down and there let it remain, then take out
the Tongue in the Staff, and with the spitle or flat end dig round about your
grains to the end thereof, to see if you have Killed her, if you have mist her
leave open the Hole, and step a side a little, and perhaps she will come to stop
the Hole again, for they love but very little Air, and then strike again, but
if your miss her, pour into her Hole a Gallon or two of Water and that will
make her come out for fear of Drowning, mind them going out in a morning to
feed, or coming home when fed, and you may take a great many.

To take Moles when you Plow:
TAke a she with a large Vessel full of Water, and when you see any new Mole
Holes cast up, being opened with the Plow, pour therein Pitchers or large Cans
of Water, and that will make them in a little time come out, and thus you may
destroy them in Plowed Land or Pasture, in Corn Lands, make Treuches in
Springtime to take them.

To take Moles another way.
IN March and April, the Ground is soft, and they run shallow, and also after a
Rain, and by Bank sides, and in the Rout of Carts and when you see such newly
wrought tread it down always softly, and then at her Accustomed Hours, which is
usually in Spring time, from about 6, 8, and 11 in the Morning, and in the
Evening about 3, or 4, or 7, she will stir up the Earth in the said Trenches,
and* so go from Trench to Trench, and then watch diligently, and hearken, and
you will either hear her or see her at Work, moving the Earth in the Trench,
then stop down the broad end of your Staff, cross the Hole behind her, and with
your Foot before her, so stop the way behind, with your Staff, and before with
your Foot, and this takes her up with your Spattle; Moles go abroad generally
about Sun Rising or soon after, in Dry or Hot Weather, Moles seldom go abroad
but in the Morning, but in moist Weather, twice a Day, Forenoon and Afternoon,
in Frosty Weather they Work under Trees, and thick Hedges and Bushes, In wet
Seasons and in Winter they lie most in wet Banks of Hedges, under the Roots of
Trees and, in Hills and come out every Morning to go a broad (if it is Dry) 2
or 300 Yards from the Holes, and after an Hour or two feeding return home, then
observe where they have been, and there make Trenches or chop the Earth down
with the Spattle or broad end of the Mole Staff, which he has before raised or
passed through, and there tread it down with your Foot in your Trenches lightly
and the longer the Trenches are the longer she is a pasing through it, make
Trenches in the most convenient place in the Ground, if you make them neigh
their Holes, it is best to take them going out, or in going home, make their
Trenches along by the Hedge-sides or Nigh Banks, and Roots of Trees for that is
best.

Another. Some say that in Gendering time, if you lead or draw a Bitch Mole in
a String a long the Ground, the Buck will Grice her, and so you may Catch them
in Pots set in the Ground.

Put a dead Mole in their common Haunts, makes them for sake them.

Another. The best Instrument to destroy them is made thus.
TAke a small Board of about 3 Inches and a half broad, and sive Inches long,
on the one side thereof, raise 2 small round Hoops or Arches, and at each end,
like unto the two ends, Bail or Hoops of a Carriers Wagons, or a Tilt-Boat,
large enough that a Mole may pass through them: in the middle of the Board,
make a Hole so big that a Goose-quill may pass through, then is that part
Finished, then have in a Readiness, a short Stick, about two Inches an half
long, about the bigness that the end thereof may just enter the Hole into the
middle of the Board, also you must cut a Hasle, or other Stick about a Yard, or
Yard and half long, that being stuck into the Ground, may spring up like unto
the Spring they usually set for Fowl, etc. Then make a link of Horse-hair very
strong, that will easily slip, and fasten it to the end of the stick that
Spring, also have in Readiness, four small hooked sticks, then go to the
Forrough or Passage of the Mole, and after you have opened it, fit in the
little Board with the bended Hoops downwards, that the Mole when she Passes
that way, may go directly through the two, semicircular Hoops, before you fix
the Board down, put the Hair spring through the Hole in the middle of the
Board, and place it round that it may answer to the two end Hoops, and with the
small sticks, and gently put into the Hole to stop the Knot of the Hair spring,
place it in the Earth in the Passage, and by thrusting in the four hooked
Stick, fasten it, and cover it with Earth, and then when the Mole passes that
way, either the one way or the other by displacing or removing the small Stick
that hangs, Perpendicularly downward, the Knot passes through the Hole, and
the spring takes the Mole about the Neck, though this description seems tedious,
yet this is very plain and easily performed, these Vermin being so very
prejudicial even worse to Ground than Swine, I have enlarged the more upon it.
And refer you to Mr. Blith's Husbandry, a Book all Husbandmen ought to peruse,
being Reprinted with large Additions.

To take Foxes.
TO take your Foxes, take 2 large Fish Hooks and hang them on Branches of
Trees, hang them from the Ground, that the Fox may Leap at it before he can
catch it, cover it with Beast Liver, Flesh or Chicken, and when he catches at
it the Hook holds him, and when you have baited, drag Raw Flesh a Cross in his
usual Paths or Hants unto the Gin, and that Excites him to the place of
Destruction.

Another. Foxes will eat no Hens that have eaten a Pox Liver.

A Spring Trap.
TAke a thick Hasle, stick it fast in the Ground, make a string fast to the end
of it, and to this string make fast a small short stick with a Nick in the
lower end thereof, made on the very upper side thin thereof, the Pole is bound
down with it to another stick set in the Ground fast, with a nick likewise
under, then open the end of the string, set it in some Dung or where you
please, when the Fox plucks the upper string aside, then the Nick slips, and
the Pole starts, and holds him up by the Neck.

To learn a Dog to stand upright, and Exercise as a Soldier, by taking to the
right and left.
BEtwixt your Fingers hold a Piece of raw Flesh, and thus you may make him run
a Figure of 8, or Dance the Hay, having a Whip at each end in your Hand, and so
off as you swing it he will jump over it.

2. If you would make him go Lame of 2 Legs, or on all four, or cross Legged,
strike him on the Legs with a small Stick.

To make him Pace, Trot or Gallop.
ABout his Neck tie a string, holding the end in your Hand with a Whip, lashing
to the Left and Right as you please, and thus you may make him Dance on the
Rope, stand in the Pillory; go up a Ladder Backward, and what you please.

Let your Dog be Young that you teach, and very Hungry, and when he is
Tractable encourage him, and when otherwise beat him well.

FINIS.

