Episcopal Admonition BY THE Right Reverend Father in God, Dr. Joseph Hall,
Late Lord Bishop of EXETER, Sent in a LETTER to the House of Commons, April 28.
1628.
Gentlemen,
FOR God's Sake be wise in your well meant Zeal: Why do you argue away precious
Time that can never be revoked or repaired? Woe is me, while we dispute our
Friends perish, and we must follow them; Where are we, if we break (and I
tremble to think) we cannot but break if we hold so stiff. Our Liberties and
Proprieties are sufficiently declared to be sure and legal; our Remedies are
clear and irrefragable: What do we fear? Every Subject sees the way now chalked
out for future Justice, and who dares henceforth tread besides it? Certainly,
while Parliaments live, we need not misdoubt the Violations of our Freedoms and
Rights: May we be but where the Law found us, we shall sufficiently enjoy our
selves and ours; It is no season to search for more: Oh let us not whilst we
over-rigidly plead for an higher strain of Safety, put our selves into a
necessity of Ruin and utter despair of Redress. Let us not in the suspicions
of Evils that may be, cast our selves into a present Confusion. If you love
your selves and your Country, remit something of your own Terms; and since the
substance is yielded by your Noble Patriots, stand not too vigorously upon
points of Circumstance. Fear not to trust a good King, who after the strict
Laws made, must be trusted with the Execution. Think that your Country, nay,
and Christendom, lies on the mercy of your present Resolutions. Relent, or
farewell Welfare.

From him whose faithful Heart bleeds in a vowed Sacrifice for his King and
Country, EXETER.

LONDON, Printed for C. G. 1681.


