A Christian Legacy; Consisting of two Parts: I. A Preparation for Death. II. A
Consolation against Death.


Nullum sacrificium est Deo magis acceptum quam Zelus Animarum. Greg. Mag.

1 Cor. 10. 17, 18.

He that glories, let him glory in the Lord; for not he that commends
himself is approved, but whom the Lord commends.

By EDWARD HYDE, Dr. of Divinity, and late Rector Resident of Brightwell in
Berks.

Printed by R. W. for Rich. Davis in Oxon. 1657.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader,

WHen first made a Member of Christ, (though it were at the very entrance of
your life) you did then receive your summons for death; for you were baptized
into the death of Christ, buried with him by baptism into death, Romans 6. 3, 4.
And that same Baptism, as it still gives you a Rejoicing in Christ Jesus our
Lord; so it bids you, by That rejoicing to die daily, 1 Cor. 15. 31. And indeed
you are not fit to live, till you are prepared to die. You are not truly fit to
live, unless you live to God; and if you live unto him, you cannot be
unprepared to die unto him. The Man lives to himself, and dies, as he lives, to
his own corruption; but the Christian lives to his Savior, and accordingly
dies to his glorious Resurrection; For none of us lives to himself, and no man
dies to himself; for whether we live, we live unto the Lord; And whether we
die, we die unto the Lord; whether we live therefore, or die, we are the Lords,
Romans 14. 7, 8. It is a great privilege to live to Christ; but a far greater
privilege to die to him. By living to Christ you get the victory over your
enemies, and the terrors of their insolency; but by dying to him, you get the
victory over your self, and the terrors of your own conscience: By living to
Christ you get the conquest over life; but by dying to him, you get the
conquest over death: Neither shall the world be able to make you live
unquietly; nor the Devil be able to make you die uncomfortably. So that if you
do not want the preparation for death, you cannot want the consolation against
death: And in this respect it were much to be wished, That all the Lords people
were Prophets, or if they had rather, Preachers, to reason with themselves, as
S. Paul reasoned with Faelix, of Righteousness, Temperance, and Judgment to
come, Act. 24. 25. That all their Trembling or Quaking, might begin and end
here, and none remain till hereafter: The reasoning about Righteousness, how it
would confound our misdemeanors against our Brethren? The reasoning about
Temperance, how it would confound our misdemeanors against our selves? The
reasoning about Judgment to come, how it would confound our misdemeanors, or
rather outrages against our God? All these would be speedily confounded by such
kind of reasonings, though all have been such as have affrighted Earth, and
amazed Heaven. And truly much better were it, that our reasonings should
confound our misdemeanors, then that our misdemeanors should confound us; and
make us even ashamed, with Joseph's Brethren, to see the face of our own Brother
in this world, and much more afraid, with Isreal's enemies, to see the face of
God our Father, in the world to come. However, whether we will thus turn
preachers or not unto our selves, yet it is not to be denied but there are some
men who are bound to preach, not only to themselves, but also to others;
according to that charge committed to them, and that trust reposed in them,
Luke 22. 32. Et tu conversus, confirma Fratres: And when thou art converted,
strengthen thy Brethren; For that Minister is not truly thankful to God for his
own conversion and confirmation, who makes it not his chiefest business to
convert and to confirm others.

Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we persuade men, 2 Cor. 5. 11$ They
that most know the terror o^ the Lord, ought most to perswad^ men, to be ready
to appear before him that they may not be terrified at hi^ appearing; and they
most know tha^ terror, who most know it not only Rationally or Doctrinally by
their st^dies, and contemplations, but als^ Experimentally or Practically, by
the^ summons, and by their sufferings: For as sickness is a summons unto death,
(...) is suffering an experimental dying (...) Those therefore who have most
fe^ either sickness or suffering, have (in a^ probability) most known the
terrou^ of the Lord, and they ought most (...) persuade men; Under the notion^
sickness, the Author of this small Tre^ tise may own to know the terrors o^
the Lord; for he looks on himself (...) one newly come from the dead, an^ yet
still going to the dead; and therefore the fitter to put others in mind of
dying: nor is he troubled that his writing is so full of weakness and
infirmity, which is the Indisposition of his body, if it may be thought full of
conscience and empty of curiosity, which is or should be the Disposition of his
soul; For it is proper for a sick man's hand to sympathize more with his heart
then with his head, and to delight rather in lineaments of reality, then of
fancy: Wherefore you may here expect such a handwriting as appeared to
Belshazar, Dan. 5. which sets down nothing but Numbering, and Weighing, and
Dividing; Numbering of your days, Weighing of your sins, and Dividing of your
self. This is like to be the main subject of the first part of the Legacy,
which is to be the preparation for death; after these (God enabling) shall
follow several comforts and consolations, 1. Against sickness, which numbereth
your days.

2. Against Judgment, which will number your sins. 3. Against Death which will
divide your soul from you^ body, and bring it to Judgment: And these are
intended for the second part of the Legacy, as the Consolation against death:
God make both these a^ they are intended, to him that written them, and to those
that shall rea^ them. So prays,

Yours in our common Saviour^

E. H.

Errata.
Page 4. l. 6. stud^es, r. study; p. 10. l. ult. man, r. for man; p. 73. l.
21. Scil. Bonam, r. sa^ Bonav. (sc. Bonaventur) p. 128. l. 12. cuie, r. cur^ p.
190. l. 24. to him, r. to have; p. 231. l. 13. 20. now here, r. no where; p.
345. l. 18. but most (...) worthy, r. but more unworthy; p. 364. l. 13. T^
Common Law, r. The Canon Law.

The Preparation for Death; consisting of Three Chapters, Mean, Tekel, Peers;
Mean, or Numbering of your Days. Tekel, or Weighing of your Sins. Peers, or
Dividing of your Person.
CHAP. I. Mean, or Numbering of your Days.
Consisting of four Sections;

1. Of man's Mortality and Immortality. 2. Of the Knowledge of man's mortality.
3. Of man's Vanity, and the Knowledge thereof. 4. Of the Difficulty, Necessity
and Excellency of that knowledge.
SECT. I. Of Man's Mortality and Immortality.
MAN'S Life is but a Race of mortality, and is then only well Run, when it comes
to a blessed End. Others may run Faster, but he makes the best Speed, that
first gets to Heaven: So run that ye may obtain, 2 Cor. 9. 24. Now a Blessed
Immortality may be obtained two ways. 1. In Affection, 2. In Fruition; This
latter is to be expected at Gods leisure, but the former cannot be too soon
obtained; The very first step of Mortality should thus tend toward
Immortality; For as many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were
baptized into his Death, Romans 6. 3. when we were yet scarce entered into our own
Life, we were Baptized into his Death: which shows, that in truth we were not
so much born to live, as we were born to die; Well the man may think himself
born to live, but sure the Christian (that is baptized into the Death of
Christ,) must know that he was born again, only to die. For thus we all brought
a body of death with us into the world, Romans 7. 24. as well as a breath of
life, Genesis 2. 7. And must therefore learn to dye in the beginning, as well as
in the end of our days: Saint John says of himself, And when I saw him, (that
is Christ,) I fell at his feet as dead, Rev. 1 17. So is it with us, when we
truly see Christ, we sall down at his feet as dead, and yet do not lose our
Station, but only mend it; For whereas before we stood in our selves by thus
falling we stand in our Savior. No Christian is a loser by being dead with
Christ, no more then Christ was a loser by his own death: For indeed, death is
the only way for them both, to a Joyful Resurrection: I am He that lives, and
was dead, and behold I am alive for evermore, Rev. 1. 18. The Death was but for
a short time, but the Life is for evermore; This is such a Funeral as ought to
be kept without Mourning, and is better solemnized with Joy and Triumph, then
with Sorrow and Lamentation. For this Mortal must put on Immortality here on
Earth, or it will not be fit to put it on hereafter in Heaven; This Mortal must
put on Immortality, before it put off it self; Immortality in Affection, or it
will never put on Immortality in Fruition.

SECT. II. Of the Knowledge of man's Mortality.
THE Knowledge of Mortality is more then a Science, it is also a Sapience; O
that they were Wise, that they understood This, that they would consider their
latter end, Deuteronomy. 32. 29. Here is Sapience and Science Joined both together:
Sapience is a knowledge of Principles, Science is a knowledge of Conclusions;
This knowledge of Mortality is Both; Teaching a man to join his last Ending to
his first Beginning. The serious studies of Mortality, will make a man in His
Moment to imitate God in his Eternity. It will make us Alpha and Omega in our
Nothing, as God is, in his All. So to think of our First, as to think of our
Last. For this is for a man to consider his latter End: To know the greatness
of Mortality he is under, from within him, from without him, from above him,
from below him: from within him, by the contradiction o^ his nature, those
irreconcilable contrarietics in his constitution; From without him by the
Contentions an^ Violences of wicked men, his irreconcil^ble Enemies; who a^
wicked men, have their feet swift to she blood; and as Enemies, will yet make
the^ swifter to shed his blood; and as irreconcilable Enemies, will not give
over that swif^ness, till they have shed it: From abo^ him, The God of heaven
calling for hi^ Breath, which he did but lend him for t^ Run his Race: From
below him, The D^vils of Hell sorry to see him Running t^ wards Heaven if he be
Tending thither, an^ so desirous to interrupt his course, or glad of his
running toward Hell, if his Race tend that way, and so willing to Precipitate
and Hasten him thither.

This consideration of Mortality is fully expressed by the Psalmist, as it
ought to be Practiced by us, Psalm. 39. 5. Lord let me know mine end, and the
Number of my Days: so the Septuagint, The Number of my Days: you cannot know
a Number without Joining the First and the Last unites both together. So is it
also in knowing the Number of your Days, you must take in your last day, or
you cannot have your full Number: Omnem creed Diem tibi diluxisse supremum: But
the Hebrew says, The measure of my Days, now a measure is in continued
quantity, but Number is in discrete quantity. It seems it is not yet fully
Resolved in the Text, by what quantity the length of man's life is to be taken,
whether by Magnitude or by Multitude; For if it be taken by Magnitude, it is so
small a measure that it may seem almost indivisible, but a span long; And yet
even so, it is rather taken by Multitude; for, what is a span but a Multitude
in Magnitude, the space betwixt the thumb and the little finger, when they are
severally extended to make one measure? And therefore the Septuagint says,
Behold thou have made my days old: Such as are already past and gone; For
whiles it is yet passing over, it is no day, you have but only the present minute
of it; when you have the whole day, you have nothing left, it is gone before
you can have it: So is your life, it is but a minute whiles you have it, and if
it be more, you have it not: It is gone before it comes to be more, or can be
more in your Account. And therefore in this case of Numbering our Days, we must
fetch our Arithmetic from Heaven; no Artist on Earth can teach it us, but only
the Spirit of God; so teach us to number our days, Psalm. 90. v. 12. A very
Unquoth Arithmetic, to number that which is not; To number days whiles they
are yet Passing, which cannot properly be numbered till they are Past: And yet
without this Arithmetic there is no applying the Heart unto wisdom: Diu Fuit,
non Diu Vixit, He had a long Continuance, but he had a short Life, is true of
every one that Numbers not his Days till they be spent. Here must be Numerus
Numerans, before Numerus Numeratus; The Number Numbering, before the Number
Numbered.

God Numbreth the stars, and calls them all by their Names: Yet the stars
first Are, before they are Numbered. But man Numbreth his Days before they Are:
The Number is before the thing Numbered. He Numbers not what is past, that he
may prolong, but what is to come, that he may Redeem his time: And it nearly
concerns him so to do, for his Days are like a shadow that declineth, Psalm.
102. 11. The shadow when it is declining waxes longest, for the Sun is
setting: but then presently it waxes nothing, for the Sun is set. So is the
life of man, as a shadow, (nay as the dream of a shadow,) it never seems
long, till it is declining: and then, in a short time it is nothing at all:
wherefore it is all one for a man to measure his shadow, and to measure his
life, Both then being of shortest continuance, when of longest extension: which
made the Psalmist desire above all things to know his frailty, Ps. 39. 4. That
I may know how Frail I am: or according to the Hebrew, of what Time or Age I
am; which is thus glossed by Aben Ezra, How long I shall stand among the
Inhabitants of the Age. Not one word of the gloss, but reads a large Lecture of
Humane Frailty; How long I shall stand: To wit, thus tottering and shaking,
ready every minute to fall and tumble into my Grave: Among the Inhabitants,
such as are to be turned out of doors at the pleasure of their Landlord; Of
the Age, which is always going away, and to be known only by its succession,
not by its continuance: This is the true way to keep me from being one of those
who are called Viri de Tempore, or Homines Seculi, Psalm. 17. 14. Men of the
Age, or men of the Times; even to think mine own life in this to be like time,
that it is of no consistency, to be measured only by its succession, not by its
continuance. Every man is Vir Seculi, a man of the times in his condition; but
it is only the wicked worldling is so in his conversation. Dupliciter Aliquis
est in seculo, per corporalem Praesentiam, per mentis Affectum, (says Aquinas)
A man may be said to be of this world in two Respects, either for the presence
of his Body, or for the Affection of his soul: All men alike are of the world
in the first Respect, but only wicked and ungodly men in the second: For he
that knows himself a son of Eternity, will scorn to make himself a slave of
time. Shall my soul submit to my bodies Vanity, because my body is made capable
of my souls Eternity? Oh no; Rather let Eternity pass from the soul to the
body, then Vanity pass from the body to the soul; That was taken from the
Earth, the proper place of changes and chances, but This came from Heaven,
where is neither chance nor shadow of change: For if I would have God Remember
my Time, I must remember his Eternity: Remember how short my time is, Psalm. 89.
47. Remember how I am as the Age or Time, (so the Hebr.) That is, always
passing away: The Chaldee Paraphrase thus: Remember that I am created or made
of dust: There Is the cause of this Fluxus in corpore, of the Seculum or Age
within us, whereby our bodies are always in motion, never at rest: For like as
Saint Augustine ingenuously confessed time from the first instant of the
creation, yet because he could not place any succession in the Heavens, before
they were distinguished and had an orderly motion, he placed it in the Angels,
saying, There was successio in mente Angelica: succession in the mind of the
Angels. So may we say, were there no Time, no Age without us, There would be
Time and Age within us: For there would be motion in the bodies of men; and
wherever there is motion, there must be also Time to number the parts of that
motion. There is therefore time within us, because of the continued motion of
our bodies, that tends to the Rest in the Grave, the dust naturally returning
thither from whence it came; In so much that Gabriel is not afraid to say,
Christus si non fuisset Passus, stante miraculo fuisset senio mortuus, (Bid. in
3. sent. did. 16.) That if Christ had not been put to Death by the Jews, yet
he would have dyed at last merely of Age, unless you will suppose him kept
alive by miracle. But sure we are, This is true of all mankind else, whether
it were true of Christ or not. Every man making what haste he can, to be
Resolved into his first dust, so that he needs no enemy to destroy him, having
a civil war in his own body, till he has destroyed himself.

SECT. III. Of man's vanity, and the knowledge thereof.
IT is Good for every man to call to mind the Vanity of his condition, that he
may be the more careful not to admit Vanity either into his Affection or into
his Action: or man is subject to a Threefold Vanity. One in his Condition,
Another in his Affection, a Third in his Action; his Condition is Vain, in that
it is unsatisfactory; his Affection is Vain, in that it is unlimited; his
Action is Vain, in that it is unrighteous: This made the Preacher say, Vanitas
Vanitatum, and omnia Vanitas; Vanity of Vanities, all is Vanity, Eccles. 1. 2.
Solomon said this as a Preacher of Repentance unto himself, and his saying is
Registered, that he might also be a Preacher of Repentance unto us. Nay indeed
in this respect should every man be a Preacher unto himself, for it is (...) in
the Foeminine Gender, to show that (...) Nephesh is to be understood Anima
predicans, and we may thus translate the Text, Vanity of Vanities, and all is
Vanity, says the preaching soul. Kimchy in his Roots thus expounds (...) Hebel
Vanity, Res quae non est quicquam, A thing which is nothing; and he there tells
us that the Jewish Doctors did so call the Breath that comes out of man's
mouth, for that it is such a thing as presently cease, and comes to nothing.
But in his Commentaries upon this place, be says, Vanity is that which has no
subsistence; no stability, and will not endure the Touch, as if you touch a
Bubble it is gone; wherefore the Ancient Latins properly called man, Bul^ lam,
a Bubble, That is Vanity, in Kimchies Gloss; And Aben Ezra goes further saying
thus, That All things are called Vanity, even those which seem most firmly
Rooted, and to have the surest subsistence: Ho^much more the Actions of men
which are b^ mere Accidents, and the thoughts of m^ which are but Accidents of
Accidents?

And it is much to be observed, Tha^ what the Son here speaks of all things
i^ general, The Father before him had spoken of man only in particular, Psalm.
39. 6^ Certe omnis Vanitas omnis Homo consiste^ Surely every man in his best
consistency is a^ Vanity. That is, in his Sons Language, Vanity of Vanities.
And again ver. 7. Certe in Imagine seu simulachro ambula^ homo: Surely man
walks in a vain Imag^ or show: His best works are more for Appearance then
for Subsistence. Virtue is more looked after, in its Appearance then in its
Existence, Secundum Apparentiam magis quam Secundum Existentiam; A Distinction
ingenuously delivered by Aquinas, but shamefully Justified by us, who had
rather walk in Show, then in Substance, in Vanity then in Reality: But yet the
Psalmist speaks more plainly, Psalm. 62. 9. Surely men of low degree are Vanity,
and men of high degree are a Lie: to be laid in the Balance they are
altogether lighter then Vanity: Where it is evident, that if Man were put in
one Scale, and Vanity in the other, Man would be found lighter then Vanity it
self. O my God, weigh not my best Righteousness in the Balance of thy
Sanctuary, without putting my Saviors merits into the Scale; For if I be
lighter then Vanity, How can I hold weight with a blessed Eternity? The Jews
observe that the Father spoke one thing concerning mankind, which he left to
his Son to explain after him, and that was this, Psalm. 144. 4. Man is like to
Vanity; for he tells us not to what Vanity, whether the greater or the lesser;
but his Son comes after and explains him, saying, that he is like to that
Vanity which is most Vain of all others, Similis Vanitati Vanissimae; like to
that Vanity which is Vanity of Vanities. Again, the Son spoke one thing of
mankind, which is best explained by the Father; to wit, that of Eccles. 6.
12. All the days of his Vain life, which he spends as a shadow; For, he
tells not what shadow; but here the Father explaineth the Son, saying, A
shadow that passes away, Psalm. 144. 4. His days are as a shadow that passes
away. Both Father and Son agree in this, that man is Vanity in the highest
degree, so that no words are able sufficiently to express it, and no Heart able
sufficiently to conceive it. He lives in the shadow of Life, and that shadow of
Life is quickly and easily changed into the Darkness of Death; In the midst of
Life he is in Death, and had need take care lest in the midst of Death, he be
in Hell: In the midst of Life he is in Death through the Vanity of his
Condition, and had need be the more careful, lest in the midst of Death he be
in Hell, through the Vanity of his Affections and of his Actions; For it is a
most terrible expostulation, which remains upon the File, against all men
whatsoever, whiles they shall remain in their own Vanities, Jer. 2. 5. Thus
says the Lord, What Iniquity have your Fathers found in me, that they are gone
far from me, and have walked after Vanity and are become Vain? This walking
after Vanity, as it is the great Sin, so it should be the great Vexation of our
souls: not only that it makes us become vain, but also that it casts an
Aspersion of Iniquity upon our God: according as Saint Basil has spoken most
divinely in his Sermon concerning the love of God and our Neighbor; The Devil
will at the last day object it as matter of Reproach against our Lord and
Savior, that we have Despised and Disobeyed him; and will very much Boast that
he neither created us nor dyed for us, and yet that we have been his diligent
followers in the breach and contempt of Gods Commandments: And this Reproach
(says he) against my Lord, is more dreadful to me then the Torments of hell,
that I should give the enemy of the Lord occasion to Blaspheme him, who Dyed
for my sins, and rose again to make me Righteous.

SECT. IV. Of the Difficulty, Necessity and Excellency of this knowledge of
Mortality.
IT nearly concerns man to know Vanity, That he may know himself, and much more
that he may desire to know his Savior; And therefore it is no wonder that this
knowledge is invested with very great Difficulty: For our Mortal having put on
Sin, cares not to put off it self: David had been long pursued, and was like to
be cut off every moment by his rebel Subject and ungracious Son, before he
learned this Prayer, Lord let me know mine end: And though when he heard of
Absoloms death, he said, Would God I had dyed for thee, O Absalom my son, my
son, yet he did not thereby so truly show a desire of his own Death, as a
Horror for his sons Damnation: He knew that a wilful Rebel dying in his
Rebellion, was not to be punished only with one death, but was to undergo a
second death. The like is to be said of dying in any other wilful sin
whatsoever, unrepented; And therefore it is not possible for any man to desire
God to part his Soul from his Body that he may Die, till he has parted Sin
from his soul, that he may not be afraid of the second death; for he cannot but
say Leave not my soul destitute, or naked and bare, Psalm. 141. 8. But let it
still be clothed with my Flesh, and its Insirmity, till thou shall be pleased
to cloth it with my Savior and his Righteousness: For better is it for me to
Live in misery, then to dye in it: Better for me to live in the Infirmities of
my Body, then to dye in the Iniquities of my Soul: Hence proceeds the great
Difficulty of learning this lesson, because our own fear makes us unwilling to
learn it: But this same knowledge, as it is opposed by great Difficulty, so it
is extorted by a far greater necessity: for our Mortal must put off both its
sin and itself; nay must therefore put off its self, that it may put off its
sin: Excellently Theodoret, and most like a Christian Divine, in his Questions
upon Genesis says, God would not suffer Adam to eat of the tree of life after
he had eaten of the forbidden fruit, that he might not suffer sin to be
Eternal. Therefore death is to us a Remedy, not a Punishment; it is a Medicine
to cure us of our sins, rather then a Judgment to corment us for them. Our
Flesh is not so near our Body, as our Sin is near our Flesh; and therefore God
has in mercy appointed us to put off our Flesh, that with it we might put off
our Sin. Thus is it most necessary for us to know our Mortality, That we may
know an end of our sin and misery; and this knowledge as it has a great
necessity, so it has yet, a greater excellency: For he that knows truly how to
put off himself, cannot but also know how to put on his Savior; And sure there
can be no knowledge of like necessity with this, and much less of like
excelleny with it: yea doubtless I count all things but loss, for the
excellency of the Knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, says Saint Paul, Phil. 3.
8. And let my sou^ say so too. For all other knowledge i^ excellent either from
the Object or from the Subject; but this only is excellent from the term or end
of it; one knowledge is more excellent then another, either for the exactness
and perspicuity of the Demonstration (says Aust. 1. de An. c. 1.) or for the
height and sublimity of the notion; either for the certainty of the Subject, or
for the excellency of the Object. In the knowledge of earthly things, the
science has its excellency from the Perspicuity of the Demonstration; In the
knowledge of Heavenly things the science has its excellence from the Sublimity
of the Notion: Thus far Aristotle could go, but no further, That some sciences
were more excellent ratione subjecti, others ratione objecti; but we must here
add a third excellency (unknown in Philosophy, yet undoubted in Christian
Divinity) ratione termini: For the knowledge of Christ Jesus our Lord is most
excellent of all others, not only from the Object, for that he is the
brightness of his fathers glory, and the express image of his person, Heb. 1.
2. And from the Subject, for that h^ is the true light which lights every man
that comes into the world, John 1. 9. But also from the Term or end of it: For
this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus
Christ whom thou have sent: Joh. 3. 17. Did they not know their own temporal
Death, they would not care to know thy eternal Life; Did they not know the
Vanity which themselves have contracted, they would not so heartily desire to
know the Glory which thou have provided; Did they not know themselves, they
would not labor to know their Savior; and yet all the world cannot show us
any knowledge like this knowledge of Christ Jesus our Lord, which thus begins
in Majesty, goes on in Perspicuity, and ends in Glory.

CHAP, II. Tekel, or weighing of our selves and of our sins.
SECT. I. Weighing of our selves.
WHiles man is in the st^ of Nature, as he^ under the Curse a^ Dominion, so is
he also under the Blindness a^ Darkness of sin: for he^ing he does hear and
does not understa^ and seeing he does see and not percei^ Act. 28. 16.
Therefore it is necessary t^ the soul first weigh her self, before the^ weigh
her sins. Now the soul may (...) weigh her self in her own Balance, but^ the
Balance of the Sanctuary; by consid^ing not what she is in her own, but w^ she
is in Gods account: Quanti pretii est Anima cujus Redemptio est Dei Filius? Of
how great price is the soul of man, which could not be Redeemed but by the Son
of God? Of how great mischief is sin unto the soul, which does make it forfeit
the benefit of that Redemption? I should not easily debase my soul by sin, if I
did but consider seriously, what she is in Gods Account: what she is in the
Account of God the Father who created her after his own likeness: what in the
account of God the Son, who Redeemed her with his own blood: what she is in the
account of God ^he Holy Ghost, who Sanctifies her, that ^he may be sealed to
the day of Redemption, Ephesians. 4. 30. O veneranda Trinitas, O ado^anda Unitas; per
te sumus creati vera Ae^ernitas; per te sumus redempti; summa tu Charitas. This
consideration will bring the soul to know the state of Grace, and then she will
never be at Rest till she know her self to be in that state. For if the soul be
^ot in the state of Grace and Salvation, she must needs be in the state of fin
and dam^ation; A third state of souls is not Revealed, may not be Phansied.
Holy Ignatius Determines excellently concerning this ^oint, in his Epistle to
the Magnesians; I say there are two several Stamps and Impressions of men: some
are of the True some are of the False Stamp; The Godl^ man is of Gods own
stamp, true curran^ money; The Ungodly man is of the Devil^ stamp, a piece of
counterfeit and false coin^ ((...)) Not that God made two several sorts of men
in the Creation; But tha^ the Devil has since got a power over a^ wicked men
by their own Election; so tha^ the ungodly and unbelievers do now be^ the Image
of the Prince of Darkness. The Godly and the ^aithful do bear the Imag^ of God
the father, and of our Lord Jesus Christ. Thus far (in effect,) S. Ignatius, S.
P^ters second Successor in the Bishopric o^ Antioch, and had from him learned
thi^ Divinity; who in his first Epistle, first Chapter, and third ver. Blesses
God for having begotten us again to a lively hope, thereby teaching, that those
can have no lively hope whom God has not begotten again^ The same is also
Saint Paul's Divinity, (for the spirit of Verity is always the spirit o^ Unity,
speaking indeed by several mouths but still one Truth) who plainly
contradistinguisheth the state of Gentiles and the state of Christians, the
state of Nature an^ the state of Grace, Ephesians. 4. 13, 17, 18. So that we all
either walk as Christians, till we come in the Unity of the Faith, and of the
knowledge of the Son of God unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature
of the fullness of Christ; or we walk as Gentiles walk, in the vanity of their
mind, having the understanding Darkened, being alienated from the life of God
through the ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their heart.

Nor is it enough for a man to know the state of Christians in General, but he
must moreover labor to know his own state to be truly Christian in Particular:
according to that of the same Apostle, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Examine your selves
whether ye be in the Faith, Prove your own selves; know ye not your own selves
how that Jesus Christ is in you except ye be Reprobates? The words import a
standing Relation of the soul to God, as he is the giver of Life and Salvation,
as if he had said, Examine your selves whether ye be in that Faith, without
which it is impossible to please God: whether ye so come to God, as to believe
that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him, Heb.
11. 6. Examine your own selves whether ye be in that faith, by which Christ
Jesus dwells in you, and you in him. The^ is no man to be excused from this
Examination, from this Self-tryal, much less to b^ Exempted from it: For the
Apostle speaks very Passionately concerning it, an^ we may take this for the
meaning of h^ speech: Have you been so long called (...) the faith of Christ,
and do you not yet kn^ whether ye be truly in that Faith? If you (...) not know
it, then examine and prove yo^selves; If you do know it, then examine a^ prove
your Faith; For you must know the Jesus Christ is in you, or that you are in a
m^ miserable condition, such as is the condition^ Reprobates, not of good
Christians: whereby is evident that every man is bound to kno^ his own
Spiritual state or condition; whither he be in the state of Sin, or in the sta^
of Grace; whether he be in the state of S^vation, or in the state of Damnation;
whither he be in the state of Faith, or in the sta^ of Infidelity: Nor is this
knowledge gott^ by looking abroad, but by looking at hom^ not by searching into
Gods secrets, but o^ own; So says the Apostle, Romans 10. 6, 7, 8, (...) The
Righteousness which is of Faith speak^ on this wise, Say not in thine heart,
Who she ascend into Heaven? (to wit that he m^ reveal to me from thence Gods
will concerning my salvation) for that is to bring Christ down from above (to
deny that Christ is already come down from heaven, of purpose to show us the
way up thither) Or who shall descend into the deep? (to wit, to rescue me from
the power of death and hell) that is, to bring up Christ again from the dead,
(to deny that Christ is risen from the dead, and has conquered the power of
death) But what says it? The word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy
heart, That if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall
believe in thine heart that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be
saved. As if he had said, What needs any man trouble himself about cu^ious
Questions, to know whether he be in ^he state of Salvation? for that's a thing
which he can best know from his own mouth, and from his own heart. If his ^eart
be true to his Savior by a lively Faith in his death and Resurrection; And if
his tongue be true to his heart by a ^oyful Profession of that Faith; If his
Faith ^e agreeable to the word of Christ, and his ^fe be agreeable to his
Christian faith, ei^er by his Innocence or by his Repentance; ^f his Inner man
be true to Christ, and his ^uter man be true to his Inner man; He needs neither
Rove in uncertainties, no^ Dive into Curiosities, nor distract himself with
Perplexities, for he is undoubtedly in the state of Salvation; The Spirit of
God says to a man in such a condition Thou shall be saved; Upon these Premise^
of Faith and Obedience (here specified b^ Confession) it would be Unlogical,
an^ much more Untheological, to deny the Conclusion, the state of Salvation,
Tho^ shall be saved. And if you shall yet desire to know whether you have a tr^
Faith or no, I must tell you, that as the life of the Soul is the life of the
Body, s^ Faith is the life of the Soul: For Chri^ dwells in the heart by
Faith, Ephesians. 3. 17. And as life is known to be in the body b^ its sense and
motion, so also is life known t^ be in the Soul: First, by its sense, for (...)
has a feeling of its own sins and groan^ under the burden of them; It has a
feeling of Christ's merits and mercies, and r^joyceth in the comfort thereof.
Secondly, by its motion: The Affections are the fee^ by which the soul moves:
Hence tha^ saying, Anima est, non ubi Animat, sed u^ Amat, The soul is not
where it lives, b^ where it loves; consequently the soul tha^ places its love
in God, has its life in God Omnia sunt Vita in Deo, quae non vivunt in
seipsis, says the Angelical Dr. most Angelically, All things are life in God,
even those things which have no life in themselves. Creatures that are dead in
themselves, are alive in God: Creatures without life are life in him: Creatures
that have life in themselves, yet in God have a far better life. Thus men in
themselves have but a Momentany, a Corruptible, an Indigent, an Inglorious
life: But men in God have a life of Eternity, of Incorruption, of
Al-sufficiency, and full of Glory: would thou then live Eternally,
Incorruptibly, Contentedly and gloriously? Go out of thy self, O Devout soul,
and live in God: Go out of thy self by thy Affections, which will carry thee
from earth to Heaven, from thy self to thy Savior, and will make thee, whiles
thy body is below, mount up on high, Placing thy heart where thy Treasure is,
(for Christ alone is the Treasure of Souls, who alone is the Savior and Lover
of Souls) even in Heaven; nay in the highest part of Heaven, at the right Hand
of God. This is the Apostles advice, Col. 3. 1, 2. If ye then be risen with
Christ, seek those things which are above, where Christ sits on the right
hand of God: set your Affections on things above, not on things on earth. And
we may very well turn this Advice into an Argument, to prove that we are indeed
Risen with Christ, because we do seek those things which are above, where
Christ sits on the right hand of God: because we do settle our affections on
things above, not on things of the earth; but withal we must carefully observe
the nature of this proof.

For 1. It is not a Violent, but a Voluntary motion of the Affection that is
her^ required; the things above are such as w^ seek with Desire, and find with
Delight (...), Quae sursum sunt q^aerite, seek those things which are above.
No^ turn Seeker after men's new Phansies, b^ after Gods old Mercies, Psalm. 25.
6. The Tender mercies and thy loving kindnesses, f^ they have been ever of old;
It is in the Hebrew, Quia a seculo ipsae, No Verb at a^ to signify any Time,
to show they were before all time, from everlasting, and sha^ continue beyond
all time, to everlasting. (...) is the consideration of these everlasting
me^cies that makes the soul to seek after G^ the father of mercies: Not the
Fear of he^ but the Love of heaven: It is not a Viole^ but a Voluntary motion.
That is the first.

2. Secondly, Again, It is not the motion of one Affection, but of all; for
(...), set your affection, is spoken Indifinitely, and therefore, since in a
matter necessary, Universally: It is not some affections for God, some for the
World; for so had wicked Balaam Number. 23. 10. saying, Let me die the death of
the Righteous, And yet he loved the wages of Unrighteousness, 2 Pet. 2. 15. But
all the affectious must be for God. For as a man cannot live the life of nature
and have his Heart divided, so much less can he live the Life of Grace.
Therefore all the Affections; His Affections are settled Universally. That is
the second.

3. Thirdly, This motion of the soul is not without Deliberation and great
Judgment. For it is grounded upon the consideration and belief of Christ's
Resurrection [If ye then be risen with Christ] The consideration That Christ
has opened the Kingdom of Heaven to all believers, makes him Believe. The
consideration That Christ sits on the right Hand of God in the Glory of the
Father, makes him Seek those things which are above, where Christ sits on
the right Hand of God: His Judgment goes before his Affection; the word (...),
requires no less; He has seriously computed with himself, and sees there is
but one Pearl of great Price unto his Soul, and for that he will sell all that
he has to buy it, Mat. 13. 4. 5. His Affections are settled judiciously on
Christ, that is the Third.

4. Fourthly and lastly, This motion of the soul is not without right Order;
for it begins from a right Principle, and therefore must needs end with a
blessed conclusion. He is not moved with the Fear of Gods Majesty, but of His
mercy, Psalm. 130. 4. But there is forgiveness with thee that thou may be
feared. The Unregenerate fears God for his Vengeance, but the Regenerate fears
him for his Forgiveness: He looks not on God as he is in himself, A consuming
Fire; but as He is in His Son, a still small voice. God is a still small voice,
only in his Enternal Word. In him he will speak Peace unto his People and to his
Saints, Psalm. 85. 8. But if he speak not in His Son, Then he is a God speaking
out of the midst of the Fire, Deuteronomy. 4. 33. And his Voice is accordingly with
Thunderings and Lightnings, a voice great in Power, and full of Majesty, such
as breaks the Cedars of Lebanon, Psalm. 29. and is able to rend our stony
Hearts, but by no means to comfort and raise up our dejected Souls. Wherefore
the true Believer looks upon God in Christ, where Christ sits on the right
hand of God. The right hand of God is terrible in it self, but not now Christ
is sitting at it: The Psalmist calls upon God to pluck His right hand out of his
Bosom, to consume his Adversaries and his blaspheming Enemies, Ps. 74. And
which of us is not so much Gods enemy as to be speedily consumed, Did not the
son of God, our blessed Savior, sit on his Fathers right hand, to keep him
from plucking it out of his Bosom to consume us? Or when he plucks it out, to
interpose betwixt us and it, That God cannot strike us but through the loins of
his only begotten and only beloved son: So secure is that Soul which is in
Christ, That it may draw near with a true Heart in full assurance of Faith,
Heb. 10. 22. Even to the right Hand of God: It Is an orderly motion of the Soul,
Going to God in Christ, That is the fourth. If your Affections carry your soul
to God thus Voluntarily, thus Universally, thus Judiciously, thus Orderly. It Is
an invincible argument, an undeniable Proof that your soul lives in God, and
therefore may comfortably from him expect Everlasting Life; For you may then
say with Saint Paul, Gal. 2 20. I am crucified with Christ; nevertheless I
live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me; And the life which I now ^ive in the
Flesh, I live by the Faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave Himself
for me. Many men have measured their Faith by the strength of its persuasion,
and have mistaken Themselves, for they have taken Fancy for Faith: but never
was any man mistaken in his Faith, who measured it by the strength of its
Affection. This is the surest way to know whether you have a true Faith in
Christ, and whether your soul does truly live in him by that Faith: And if you
shall yet further ask, what degree of Faith is required to make the soul ascend
up unto its Savior? I must answer, it is not the measure or the Degree, but
the Sincerity of Faith that makes it a saving Faith, and places the man that
has it, in the state of Salvation: wherein we may see the infinite Goodness of
God toward the souls of men: For were such or such a degree of Faith required
to justify a Sinner, no man could ever have any comfortable Assurance of his
Justification; for no man can exactly know the Degree of his own Faith; And he
that believes the most steadfastly, had need to say, Lord I believe, Help thou
my Unbelief, Mar. 9. 24. He may undertake for the Sincerity, He cannot for the
strength or measure of his Faith.

But now since it is the True and Lively Faith that justifies, it is enough
that a man only know he does truly believe, and so rest and rely upon the
merits of his Savior, for his justification. For this is the Apostolical
Benediction, Grace be with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in
sincerity, Ephesians. 6. 24. Sincerity, not sufficiency of love is the Touchstone to
try the Soul, whether it be in the state of Grace. The Apostle says not in
Abundance, for fear of disturbing the Peace of souls, (for who can tell when he
loves the Lord Jesus Christ abundantly, considering how often He sins against
Him?) But He says, In sincerity, to establish and confirm the Peace of Souls;
For every one that Loves, knows the sincerity of his own love, the Soul
being an Infallible judge of its own Act in the Quality, when it may easily be
mistaken in the Quantity. Saint Peter's threefold denial of his Master, had
stopped his mouth from Professing the Abundance, but not from Professing the
sincerity of his Love; Yea Lord (says he) Thou know that I love Thee: John
21. 15. He knew well the sincerity of his own Love, or He durst not have
appealed to the Searcher of Hearts to be Judge of that Sincerity, As if he had
said, Though I do not know That I love thee sufficiently, yet I do know That I
love thee truly and sincerely: And thou know it too: nor could (...) truly
say, Thou know that I love thee, if I did not know it my self: O happy man,
whose conscience bears him witness, That he Truly Repents, Truly Believes, and
Truly Loves. For He can promise to himself not only Admittance to God, but also
Acceptance with Him. For if he can say from the bottom of his Heart^ Lord I
repent, He must be comforted i^ This, That He who came to call sinners to
Repentance, Mat. 9. 13. will not reject a Sinner that is Repenting: He tha^
promised to spare a whole Nation for one Converts sake, (Jer. 5. 1. if but one
of them did Seek Truth who had formerly despised it) will much more spare that
soul in which himself has wrought a true Conversion; For he cannot despise the
works of his own hands, though he cannot but despise and abandon the works of
Ours. Those words then of the man that was born blind, God hears not sinners,
had little reason to Trouble Saint Augustine for fear no man's Prayers should be
heard, for that all are sinners, which made him find out this exception rather
then exposition, Verbum coeci adhuc inuncti, i. e. nondum illuminati, and ideo
non est Ratum: This was the saying of a blind man before his eyes were fully
opened to see, or his heart was illuminated to know the truth, and therefore it
holds not: But we need no such exception: for this is one of those common
Notions which the Devil and Sin could not blot out of the hearts of men: and
therefore we find it in effect avowed by a Heathen Poet, Hom. Il. a. (...), God
hears those that obey him, and consequently hears not the disobedient and
unrighteous, which is all one with this, God hears not sinners; and this may
be verified (says Aquinas) de Peccatore in quantum est peccator, (22ae. qu.
83. art. 16.) Of sinners as far forth as they are sinners, for so God hears
them not, yet he may and does hear them as penitents: God hears not such
sinners as are willingly and wilfully under the Power and Dominion of sin, such
as are habitually sinful, and still remain in the state of sin: For A man may
be a sinner, yet not be in the state of sin. That notes a Momentany Action, but
this a standing Relation, or a settled continuance; status notat Dispositionem
cum quadam immobilitate, (says Aquinas.) That makes a man unworthy of Gods
Favor, but this makes him incapable of it: So says the Prophet, What has my
beloved to do in mine house, seeing she has wrought lewdness with many, and
the holy Flesh is passed from thee? when thou do evil then thou rejoycest,
Jer. 11. 15. These words show the state of sin, and the miserable condition of
that state; The state of sin is the working of lewdness with many, and
rejoicing in that work; neither Reluctancie before it, nor Repentance after it;
And the miserable condition of that state, is, not to have to do in Gods house,
i. e. Not to have any right to the Word and Sacraments; for the Holy Flesh here
(says R. David) is the Flesh of Gods Altar. An Impenitent sinner has nothing
to do with that Holy Flesh; and if he will needs intrude himself to have to do
with it, yet it shall not be Holy Flesh to him, he shall have no benefit of its
Holiness: Nay to him it shall be in its effect, what it is already in his
account, an unholy thing, Heb. 10. 29. Impura es ipsa, ac proinde non potes non
impurare omnes oblationes tuas, says Trem. Thou thy self being in the state of
impurity, can not but make all thy offerings impure. Thy Prayers will be
turned into sin, Psalm. 109. 7. And how then can thy sin not be turned into
Death? Therefore he that will offer to God an acceptable offering, must first
offer himself: For if God accept not the person, he will not accept the
offering. The Lord first had respect to Abel, then to his offering, Genesis 4. 4.
Wherefore it nearly concerns every Christian to forsake all his sins, and to
assure himself that he is in the state of Grace and Acceptance with God, for
that else he cannot be assured that either his Prayer or his Praises will be
accepted: And how shall we better know the state of Grace, then from his mouth,
whose hands, nailed to the Cross, made it? And whose side, Pierced on the
Cross, poured it forth to us? And he plainly tells us that our state is either
of God, or of the Devil, John 8. 42. If God were your Father you would love me:
From whence we may infer, they that do love Christ have God for their Father,
and consequently are in a Good, in a Happy state: But v. 4. 4. Ye are of your
Father the Devil, and the lusts of your Father ye will do: From whence we may
infer, they that will needs do the lusts of the Devil, have the Devil for their
father: Not simply they that do the lusts, but they that wilfully do them. The
Text it self gives us this Distinction, saying, (...), ye will do them: For
there is a great difference betwixt (...) and (...), Facio, and Volo Facere; I
do, and I will do. For Saint Paul says of himself, the evil which I would not,
that I do, Romans 7. 19. and yet proves that he is in the state of Regeneration,
notwithstanding his doing it: Now if I do that I would not, it is no more I
that do it, but sin that dwells in me, v. 21. Sin may dwell in me, but I may
not dwell in sin: If I do that evil I would not, it is because sin dwells in
me: But if I will that evil I do, it is because I dwell in sin, and am one of
those of whom it is said, ye are yet in your sins, 1 Cor. 15. 17. He says not,
your sins are in you, but you are in your sins; not, they possessed by you, but
you possessed by them: not, they have a being in you, but you have a being in
them. This Regiment of Satan does not come to Quarter with you against your
will, but you have made an Invitation to them, and Provision for them: they
find the house swept and garnished, and look upon it as their own; and so have
their Habitation with you, as that they also have Dominion over you. And in
this respect does our blessed Savior say to the Jews, ye shall dye in your
sins, That is, in the Guilt, and under the Bondage of your sins, unless by
faith in Christ you get out of that Guilt, out of that Bondage; for so it is
said, If ye believe not that 'I am he, ye shall dye in your sins, John 8. 24.
To live out of Christ, is to live in sin: and to live in sin, is the way to die
in sin: and to die in sin, is to die eternally: For he that dies in sin, is an
eternal sinner, and is therefore justly punished with eternal death. Peccavit
in suo aeterno, says Saint Greg. He sinned in his eternity, and yet his whole
life was but a span-long. The reason is, He that sins impenitently, would sin
eternally, if he might live eternally. He sins eternally in his Resolution,
though not in his Action, and shows whose child he is, by doing the works of
his Father, and wilfully doing them, The works of your Father ye will do. A man
may do the lusts of the Devil, and yet be the child of God: but he cannot
wilfully do them, and continue in that wilfulness, but he must be the child of
the Devil: He alone has Right in him, and he will claim his Right: He will
claim him as a Father claims his child. For this is the specifical difference
betwixt the Regenerate and the Unregenerate; Both are sinners, but the one
sins eagerly with desire, and Habitually with delight; the other desires
not to sin, and delights not in sinning. Though he may sometimes do the work
of the Devil, yet it is against his will, for he Desires and delights to do the
work of God. And that's the reason our Blessed Savior has taught such a man to
call God his Father, and he would not have taught him to call God so, were he
indeed not so: For truth teaches no man to tell a lie, much less in his
Prayers: wherefore in that we are taught to say Our Father, it is evident that
we are bound to be in the state of Regeneration, or we have no right to say our
Prayers. For we are not taught to say Our Father in respect of our corporal
Creation, (for so God is the Father of the wicked as well as of the Righteous)
but of our spiritual Regeneration: That God is Our Father by spiritual
Generation, for that according to his Abundant mercy he has begotten us again,
to lively hope, 1 Pet. 1. 3. For of his own will begat he us with the word of
truth, Jam. 1. 18. And if God be Our Father by Spiritual Generation, then are
we also his sons by Adoption, and can rightly and truly say Our Father, and all
the Petitions after it, without giving the Lie to our own Consciences. Whereas
a man that is in the state of sin, cannot truly say any one Petition of the
Lords most Holy Prayer. He cannot say, Our Father, for he will not be the son
of God: He cannot say, Hallowed be thy name, for he delights to profane it: He
cannot say, Thy Kingdom come, for he fears nothing more then its coming: He
cannot say, Thy Will be done, for he resolves against the doing it: Wherefore
if you ask me how shall sinners not yet converted say to God, Our Father: I
Answer, if they truly desire to be converted, and to become his children, they
may say so, as the Prodigal son resolving to arise and go to his Father, though
he were not yet come unto him, had a right of calling him Father, Luke 15. 18.
For an unfeigned desire of conversion shows a true convert, God accepting the
will for the deed, As working in us to will, no less then to do, of his own
good pleasure. And the best man that is, will meet with inextricable
Difficulties, if he Ground the Truth of his conversion upon the Ability of his
Performance, and not upon the sinceritity of his desire. Saint Bernard tells of
a very Religious Monk, who undertaking to say his Pater Noster without the
least A vocation or A version of his thoughts from God, (which another
professed that he could not obtain to do, by all the fasting and prayer that he
had used for many years) convinced and condemned himself by his own mouth,
before he had gone over half the petitions, interposing such an Impertinency in
his prayer, as plainly showed that his mind was on earth, whiles his tongue was
in heaven. I conclude then, that only those sinners among the sons of men have
no right to their Pater Noster, but do hypocritically and falsely say the Lords
prayer, who neither are, nor desire to be the children of God; who so are
sinners, as that they also are in the state of sin, and desire to continue in
that state: For how can that man have a right to pray, who before he prays,
has set his heart against his God, and whiles he is praying, does set his own
tongue against his heart?

SECT. II. Weighing of our sins.
EVery man shall bear his own burden, says the Apostle, Gal. 6. 5. And it will
con^ern every wise man to see he has no greater burden then he is able to
bear. Of all burdens, none is so heavy as sin: ^or other burdens can only press
down to ^earth, but this presses also down to hell: Therefore above all other
burdens, it is a ^oint of wisdom to be rid of this burden of ^in. But how shall
we rid our selves of it? Who will take it from us? who will bear it ^or us? The
Psalmist has told us, Psalm. 55. ^2. saying, Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and
he shall sustain thee. If it be thy wi^est course to cast upon him the burden
of ^hy Body, then much more the burden of ^hy soul: Say then to him as Hezekiah
did, O Lord I am oppressed, Undertake for me, Isa. 38. 14. Thou did bear the
heavy ^urden of thy Cross, that thou might ^ear the far heavier burden of my
sins; This is the burden that most oppresses me: this is the burden that I
most earnest^y beseech thee to undertake for me, and to take from me; thou
did admit of one to help thee bear the burden of thy Cross, but of none to
help thee bear the burden of my sins; Therefore I can flee to none for hel^ but
to thee alone; Thou only were able to^ satisfy the Justice of an angry God,
and (...) beseech thee to make me a joyful Partake^ of that blessed
Satisfaction. One Ange^ was enough to strengthen thee to bea^ the burden of the
sins of the whole world^ But all the Angels in Heaven are no^ enough to
strengthen me to bear the burden only of mine own sins; therefore I slee^ unto
thee to undertake for me; Be thou my^ Pledge, my (...), to pawn Lift for Life,
soul for soul in my stead, That (...) who have forfeited both life and soul i^
my self, may Recover them both in my Pledge, in my Undertaker. But I may not
hope to be so easily rid of my heavy burden by desiring to lay it upon another
shoulders, unless I first lay it on mine ow^ Heart. For if my Savior were so
exceeding sorrowful for my sins, it is great reason I should be sorrowful for
mine own Sins, which alone caused his greate^ Sorrow: And How can I be sorry
for my Sins, till I know the burden of them How can I know their burden till I
have weighed Them in the balance of the Sanctuary? There I shall find, that
sin is directly opposite to the Goodness of God, and therefore must needs be as
odious to Him, as His own Goodness is amiable to Himself: There I shall find
that the wilful Sinner is a Rebel against the King of Heaven, does despise
the Golden scepter of his mercy, and would put him down from the Throne of his
Majesty: There I shall find that every Sin Unrepented separates from God; Isa.
59. 2. Your Iniquities have separated betwixt you and your God;) Grieves his
Holy Spirit, excludes and expels Grace from the soul, nay excludes and expels
the soul from it self, bringing Darkness on the Understanding, Perverseness on
the Will, Forgetfulness on the Memory, Debility and weakness on the Power of
Action; So that by Sin the soul is neither rightly Intellective, nor Retentive,
nor Affective, nor Active: Most ingeniously the Casuist, Dicat Saluberrimum
Peccavi, cujus Singulae literae indices illi esse possunt miseriae in qua
constituitur. Let the Sinner frequently and Heartily cry Peccavi, the several
Letters of which word will put him in mind of His several losses and miseries
by His sins; as for example; P Praemiis omnium meritorum privatus: e Egestate
oppressus: c Coecitate mentis percussus: c Charitate divina spoliatus (...) a
Amaritudine repletus: v Viam perdi^tionis ingressus: i Iram Dei meritus (...)
(Reginaldus de Prudentia in Confessario^ cap. 5.) Innumerable are the miseries
o^ the impenitent sinner, yet reducible All t^ these seven Heads: 1. That he
loses the benefit of his former righteousness. 2. Tha^ he is oppressed with
many wants; (an^ above All with the want of Repentance.) 3. That he is smitten
with blindness in hi^ Understanding. 4. That he is out o^ Gods Favor. 5. That
He is full of bitterness. 6. That he is in the way of Pe^dition. 7. That he is
under the wrath o^ God; And the word Peccavi in Latine^ will put Him in mind of
All these (...) and as it will show him His Disease, so^ will also Help him to
his Cure. For H^ that truly cries Peccavi, does truly fe^ the burden of his
sin; and thereby has a^ interest in that gracious invitation, an^ more
gracious Promise made by our ble^ sed Savior, Mat. 11. 28. Come unt^ me all ye
that labor and are Heavy-laden (there is the Gracious Invitation) and I wi^
give you Rest. (There Is the more graciou^ Promise;) Wherefore let me ever b^
sure, cordially to say Peccavi, I have sinned, and let me conceive this to be
the meaning of my saying, I have sinned not only ignorantly or negligently out
of common Infirmity, but also Impudently against knowledge, Presumptuously
against conscience, Unthankfully against the means of Grace, Scandalously
against the Power of Grace: There have been in my sins the Three great
Aggravations of sin, Contempt, Ingratitude, and Scandal: I have sinned with
greater Contempt, because God has revealed himself farther to me then to
Others; With greater Unthankfulness, because God has given me greater light
and strength of Grace to resist Sin, then he has given unto others And with
greater Scandal, because I have given occasion unto others of inceasing the
number and burden of their sins: For though it is a great Impudence to commit
Sin, yet is it a far greater impudence to Conceal or to deny it. By committing
sin I do grievously offend: but by concealing Sin I do shamefully, (or rather
shamelesly) Affront my Maker; In committing sin there is a fowl disagreement of
man's heart from the Law of God; but in out-facing it, there is yet farther a
more horrid disagreement of man's Tongue from his own Heart; O how Great, How
Grievous is this Schism, this Division, when a man is divided both from his God
and from Himself? from his God by Apostasy, from Himself by Hypocrisy: Not to
do what is bidden him, that's his Apostacy: To deny what he has done, that's
his Hypocrisy. We read in Jeremy the Prophet, of a People in whose skirts was
found the blood of the souls of the Poor Innocents, and yet they boasted of
their own Innocence: But shame was the end of their boasting; for so it
follows, Behold I will plead with thee, because thou say I have not sinned,
Jer. 2. 34, 35. Here were some far from God by committing sin: but further by
denying it: contrariwise, Luke 18. 13. we have gone far indeed from God by sin,
but near him by repentance. Far from God by committing sin, but near him by
confessing it. He stands afar off whiles he says God be merciful to me a
sinner; but by so saying he presently gets nearer; He would not lift up his
eyes, but he did lift up hi^ heart to Heaven: O the modesty of a true Penitent,
who takes the ready course to be Acquitted, and yet acquit^ every one besides
himself! He dares no^ harden his Forehead, for fear that should harden his
Heart: And though he has made his soul odious in the sight of God by sin, yet
he will not make his sin more odious in the sight of God by his Impenitence;
For what shall we say of that wicked woman in the Proverbs, who commits her
wickedness in secret, and when she comes forth wipe^eth her mouth and says
all is well, Prove. 30. 20. What shall we say of her? We must needs say that by
wiping her mouth she defiled it: For had she come into Gods presence with a
Penitent heart and an humble confession, though her sin had ^tuck upon her
lips, it had not stuck upon ^er Soul; But now wiping her mouth, and saying all
is well, she has multiplied ^er sin, and increased her wretchedness: ^or
whereas before with Unchaste Magdalen she had seven Devils, now she ^ath eight,
and the last Devil is worse then ^l the rest. A dumb Devil, that Seals up ^er
lips, and permits her not to cry out to ^e Son of God for mercy: so that in ^ch
a wretch, The end is far worse then ^e beginning: The beginning is sin, but ^e
end is worse then sin: Can there be ^y thing worse then sin which is directly
opposite to Gods own Goodness? Yes, there can, there is; Impenitency in sin i^
worse then sin: For whereas sin opposes the Goodness of God, Impenitency
defyeth it: By committing sin I do displease my maker, but by defending it
(...) shall despise him: Wherefore I will abhor my self in dust and ashes, not
seek t^ cloak or disguise my wickedness, but acknowledge and confess it,
saying, Peccavi, I have sinned: I have sinned Impudently Presumptously,
Unthankfully, Scandalously: but God forbid I should sin Impenitently: This is
the fittest Arraignmen^ of a sinner at the Bar of Gods justice wherein there
needs no witness to accu^ him, no judge to condemn him: H^ own conscience is a
thousand witnesse^ and himself his own judge to pronoun^ the Sentence of
Condemnation: So, it w^ with Job, saying, I have sinned, wh^ shall I do unto
Thee, O thou preserver (...) Men? Job 7. 20. As if he had said, the^ needs no
evidence but mine own for (...) Conviction, Peccavi, I have sinned, I a^ fully
convinced of my sins, and the^ needs nothing to my Confusion but (...)
Conviction, what shall I do unto thee thou Preserver of men? q. d. I am no^ at
my wits end, at the end of my wits, though at the beginning of my Trouble: I
have hitherto done I know not what, and now I know not what to do: I have
heretofore troubled my conscience, and now my conscience troubles me: Because I
have sinned against my Maker and my Preserver, against him in whom I live and
move and have my being: I have sinned against thee O thou Preserver of men, and
what shall I do, since by my sins I have put my self out of thy Protection and
Preservation? What shall I do? but confefs my Sin, with as much sorrow, as I
committed it with Delight: For I am under a grievous guilt, a heavy load, an
Unsupportable burden, and give God thanks for placing me in a Church which has
taught me thus to confess my Sins, the remembrance of them is grievous unto us,
the burden of them is intolerable: and thus to pray for deliverance and
redress, Receive and comfort us who are grieved and wearied with the burden of
our sins, much like that Prayer of the greek Church, (...), O Lord raise me up
and make me right and strait by the hand of thy saving Help and Mercy, who am
now bowed and pressed down to Earth (I had almost said to Hell) with the
grievous and deadly burden of my sins: Thou did lay thy hands upon the woman
that had a spirit of Infirmity 18. years, and was bowed so together that she
could in no wise lift up her self, and immediately she was made strait, and
glorified God, Luke 13. 11, 12. The burden of Iniquity has been more years
upon me, then the burden of Infirmity had been upon her, and has not only
Bowed, but also Thrown me down, and still keeps me under: Thy Hand O Lord is
not shortened that it cannot save, and loose me from the burden of mine
iniquity, as it did her from the spirit of her Infirmity: sweet Jesus lay thy
merciful hands on me, that I may be Immediately made strait, as she was, and
Glorify God: For this is a grievous and (...) deadly burden, (...), A
grievous, and yet withal, A Fatal Burden; A Burden that brings grief with it,
and Damnation after it: such is the burden of any wilful sin whatsoever, till
Faith and Repentance have unloaded the conscience. Most divinely Saint
Chrysostom: If all my Righteousness be as Filthy rags, Isa. 64. 6. (...), what
shall be said of my filthiness and of my unrighteousness? Surely if my best
righteousness has the aspersion of sin, then are my sins most exeeeding
sinful: But we all generally herein are like the Pharisees, ready to bind
Heavy burdens and grievous to be born, and lay them on other men's shoulders,
Mat. 23. 4. whereas this is a burden that we should ^her lay every man on his
own Heart: The evil of our neighbors Heart we cannot know, and yet are very
desirous to know it, though that knowledge tend directly to our damnation,
either for our malice or our Curiosity; The evil of our own hearts we can know,
yet care not to know it: though this knowledge immediately conduce to our
salvation, either by our Humility or by our Repentance: For that man is worse
then Simon Magus, who is in the very gall of bitterness, and in the bond of
iniquity, and yet scorns to say to the Successors of the Apostles, Pray ye unto
the Lord for me, that none of these things which ye have spoken come upon me;
Acts 8. 23, 24. For whatsoever God has spoken in his word against impenitent
sinners, he cannot but fear will come upon him, and it is just he should know
it will so, that he may not still continue in his Impenitency: Sin does at
first grieve the God without us, maker of Heaven and Earth, but at last it will
grieve the God within us, our own Consciences; It is at first Vastans
Conscientiam, to waste thy Conscience, that from a little conscience thou may
have no conscience: It will be at last Aggravans Conscientiam, to burden thy
Conscience, that from no Conscience, thou may come to all Conscience. It is
best then for the sinner to be his own ^ndemner, that he may not be his own
executioner: For it is a sign he is in Bethesda, in the house of Grace, if he
find his Conscience, (like those waters) Troubled within him: For being
Impotent by reason of his sins, whether Blind or halt, or withered; whether
Blind in his Understanding, or halt in his Affections, or withered in his
Actions, He cannot be healod till He step into the Troubled waters; which
though they are the worst to let him see his Face, (for all will appear in
broken lineaments) yet are they the best to help him heal his soul: Be not
afraid then to step one step further into these waters, as long as it is a good
Spirit from God that troubles them: The Disciples being in a storm, and seeing
Jesus walking on the Sea, and drawing nigh unto the ship, were afraid, till
they heard and knew his voice, then they willingly received him into the ship,
and immediately the ship was at the land whither they went. So when thy soul is
in a Tempest, though Jesus himself be coming nigh, thou will be afraid, but
when he is fully come, thou will most willingly receive him, and immediately
upon his reception, Thou will be at the Haven of a Blessed Rest: for himself
will say unto thee, Let not your heart be troubled, ye believe in God, believe
also in me, John 14. 1. A true Believer should not be troubled, for by his
faith he is more then Conqueror: And yet he is often troubled; for by reason of
his weakness, and of his unworthiness he does sometimes not perceive the
conquest of his Faith: His own Conscience so convincing him, that he cannot but
be much troubled at the conviction: (...), says Aristotle. There is a twofold
Redargution or Conviction; The one proceeding from the Confutation of the
Cause, the other from the Confutation of the Person. The Cause is often
overthrown, when yet the Person still retains his former confidence; The
Arguments of men may Confute, and yet not Convince; they may convince, and yet
not Extort the acknowledgement o^ a Conviction: But the Argumentts of the
Conscience are truly and fully Convictive, because they are truly and fully
Demonstrative: And that in such a kind of Demonstration of which the
Philosophers words are most really verified, (...), Demonstration is not to
confute the man in his Person, for he may be Contumacious and Refractory, but
to confute him in his Reason and in his Judgment. Such is this Demonstration
of Conscience, It seizes on the inward man; If that plead the Cause, if that
Dispute and make an instance against the Respondent, no sophistry, no elusion,
no evasion will serve his turn, but his heart is troubled, his countenance
dejected, and his tongue silenced, so that he can say nothing in excuse, much
less in justification of himself, but is forced to fly to his Saviors
All-sufficient Merits, and Al-saving mercies, (and it is a happy violence that
so forces him) saying with the blind man in the Gospel, Jesus thou son of
David, have mercy on me. And though many charge him that he should hold his
peace (even very many sins and unworthinesses) yet he cries the more a great
deal, Thou son of David, have mercy on me, till Jesus stand still, and command
him to be called, and say unto him, What will thou that I should do unto thee?
Then will his Answer be, Lord that I might receive my sight, not so much to see
mine own sins, as thy mercies, thine infinite, thine undeserved mercies. Thus I
would receive my sight, to see the light of thy countenance, and I shall be
whole. This was that admirable prayer in the Greek Liturgies. (...), Lord
appease and allay those invisible tumults of mine own breast, which so much
disquiet and torment my soul: Other enemies may be resisted, and happily
vanquished, but this internal enemy is altogether inexpugnable, and always
gets the victory over us. Appease these invisible wars: we are much frighted
with visible wars, but the invisible are infinitely more terrible, for these
will frighten even the Soldiers themselves, who make it their Work, no less
then their Profession, to disturb and frighten others: And they are called
invisible wars, not only because they alone can see them who feel them, but
also because they are the most fatal and dangerous, even as an enemy is most
dangerous when he is least seen; most to be feared, when he is least to be
discovered. Conscience does then war most dangerously, when most privately,
most unsuspectedly, and does then most hurt thee, when it does least wound
thee, when it will not strike, till it be too late for thee to ward the blow:
For then Sin lies at the door, Genesis 4. 7. Robets, it lays down o^ coucheth
like some wild beast, at the mouth of his Cave, as if he were asleep, bu^
indeed watches and waketh, and is ready to fly at all that come near it: So
is sin in (...) man's Conscience, Couchant rather then Dormant; it sleeps Dogs
sleep, that it may take the sinner at the greater advantage and fly the more
furiously in his face Conscientia dormit respectu motionis, non observationis;
Conscience may seem to sleep, when indeed it does not, for when it sleeps it is
only i^ regard of motion, not in regard of observation. When it does least
check thee, it does mos^ observe thee: It spares thee a while, to torment thee
for ever; It spares thee here, to torment thee hereafter; A most cruel mercy to
observe the sin, and let alone the sinner To Register the wicked deed, but not
to Reprove him that did it. And this is all the mercy that a seared, a benumbed
Conscience does afford when it does most befriend us. It will not cut, that it
may kill: It will not convince, that it may confound: It will not accuse, that
it may condemn. Wherefore I will awaken my Conscience to Arraign me here, that
it awaken not it self to Condemn me hereafter: for that must, that will prevail
at length, and that with such an evidence, to which I shall not be able to
plead not Guilty, and much less to withstand the Guilt. It will come upon me as
Poverty upon Solomon's sluggard, like an Armed man, not only as a Valiant man,
with power to overcome me, but also as an Armed man, with frights and terrors
to over-aw me. David a man of war, who said he would not fear though an Host
encamped against him, nay encompassed him round about, Psalm. 27. 3. and 3. 6.
yet durst not look one sin in the face, but when Nathan had said unto him, Thou
art the man, and his own conscience had attested the saying, he presently gives
over the thought of Denial, or Tergiversation, and much more the spirit of
contradiction, and Prostrates himself before the mercy seat, not being able to
stand in the Judgment, and cries out, I have sinned against the Lord, 2 Samuel
12. 13. He had sinned once by commiting his sin, and durst not sin again by
lessening it: He neither desired to extenuate the guilt of Sin in himself, nor
to aggravate it in another; and they generally go both together, no man being
so ready to accuse and condemn his Brother, as he that is resolved to Acquit
and Justify himself; Spiritual Pride causes thee to think thy brother the
greater sinner, but indeed it makes thee so; But consider awhile proud
Justitiarie, is it not practical Blasphemy in the highest degree, for thee to
set and settle thy self in Christ's Judgment Seat, and there to become a Judge
of souls? He that said Judge not, that ye be not Judged, has in effect told
thee, that if thou do Lord it in his Tribunal here, thou shall tremble and
quake before it hereafter. The Joints o^ thy knees (with Belshazzars) shall
then be as loose, as is now thy tongue. The words o^ the Psalmist are much to
be observed, Psalm. 109. 30. He shall stand at the right hand of the poor, to
save him from those that condemn his soul. Christ will leave his Throne at the
right hand of God, rather then fail to stand at the right hand of the poor; and
what poor they are he takes such a care of, Himself has told us, Mat. 5. 3.
The poor in Spirit. The Kingdom of heaven is most theirs who least assume it to
themselves: Who think they are not worthy of a being upon earth, they shall be
surest of a being in heaven; they think themselves not worthy to kneel upon the
earth, because it is the footstool of the most high God, much less worthy to
look up to heaven, because it is his Throne; but he thinks them most worthy to
be Translated from the earth, and to be admitted into heaven; saying, For
theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. These are the poor that our Savior Christ
does always stand by, (and indeed they alone do constantly stand by him,
though others pretend more to be his servants.) And why does he always stand
by them, or (as the Text speaks) at their right hand? even to save them from
those that condemn their fouls, or as it is in the Hebrew, to save from the
Judges of his soul, or to save his soul from Judges. To save him from the
Judges of his soul, for though they condemn him, yet he will acquit and save
him: or to save his soul from Judges; That is, (as our other Translation reads
this verse,) To save his soul from unrighteous Judges: For no Judge can b^ so
unrighteous as he that Judges another man's soul; For his Judgment proceed^ not
out of inclination to Justice, but merely out of pride or malice, so that it
is^ perverse Judgment: It proceeds not from a lawful Authority, but from
Self-wi^ and Presumption, so that it is an usurpe^ Judgment: And it proceeds
not according to the Rules of Prudence and Discretion, but of folly and
madness, so that it i^ a foolish and rash Judgment. Christ i^ the only
Over-seer and Bishop of o^ souls, 1 Pet. 2. 25. Do not presume to go^
visitation in thy Saviors Diocese: Judg^ no man's soul but thine own: So shall
tho^ not be Judged of the Lord, for two Reasons, For not Judging others, and
for Judging thyself; Here at home thou mai^ rightly Judge, and as rightly
condemn nay if thou do but Judge, thou must condemn, it being all one for a
sinner t^ Judge his own soul and to condemn it And the more he Judges the more
he co^demns. Like Ezekiels Vision, chap. 8^ The more he looks, the worse he
likes, v^ But Turn thou yet again, and thou shall s^ Greater Abominations: and
v. 13, Is^ again the same: so is it in the Vision of ou^ own sinful souls; This
must still be the Epiphonema, the Burden, the concluding sentence, Have thou
seen This, O son of man? Turn thee yet again, and thou shall see greater
Abominations: Though thou have already seen most wondrous strange and horrid
sins, such whose very thought must needs affright the soul, and therefore whose
guilt must needs oppress it, yet thou must still look to see Greater
Abominations: when thou have seen all manner of wickedness in thine heart, and
sins there as Firebrands of hell for Torment, but as the stars of heaven for
multitude, some of the greater, some of the lesser magnitude, but yet
altogether Innumerable, and every one too too Great; when thou have seen all
this, and imagined more then thou can see, yet this saying must be the
conclusion of all, Have thou seen this, O son of man? Turn thee yet again, and
thou shall see greater Abominations then These. Thou can not turn to look
upon, or rather into thy self, but thou will still find out some new
Abominations, and if thou find none, it is because thou thy self art the
Abomination of Desolation; so Abominable, as reserved to Destruction; or
because thou art all Abomination, and therefore think nothing Abominable; as
that Breath which is mo^ corrupt and unsavory, can least discern (...) own
corruption and Unsavoriness: whi^ is therefore the greater, because the le^
discerned: But let us a little view this v^sion more particularly, and in it
our ow^ hearts; we may here observe the wickednes^ of Israel, both toward God
and toward Man's: toward God by Idolatry, 1. I^ worshipping of Baal, (here
called the Image of Jealousy, ver. 3. and 5. because it made God jealous, and
we know Idolatry is forbidden with this reason, For the Lord thy God is a
jealous God^ 2. In offering Incense to creeping things ver. 10. 3. In weeping
for Tammuz^ ver. 14. 4. In worshipping the Sun^ ver. 16. Toward men by
cruelty, ver. 17. For they have filled the Land wit^ violence.

And is not all this Idolatry the sin o^ thine own heart? is not all this
Cruelty the sin of thine own hand? First for the Idolatry, the sin that thou
think thy self least guilty of, when Thou followest thine own Fancy in
serving God Thou worshippi^ Baal, (Nomen Idoli, quia illud colentium Dominus)
That's now thine Idol, nay indeed thy Lord and Master, and has gotten Dominion
over thee, nor is there any Image more dangerously worshipped then ^hine own
Imagination; God is a jealous God in all Idolatry, but in none so much as when
thou makeft thy self thine own Idol.

Again, when for vile and base respects, or sordid advantages, thou
transgressest the Duties of Piety, Justice, or Charity, Thou then offerest
Incense to Creeping things, ^ay thy self art creeping on Earth, when ^hou
should be ascending into heaven: (...). When thou bemoanest thy temporal
Losses with too much pensiveness of Thought, as being much more grieved for the
wasting of thy treasure, then of thy conscience, Thou then weepest for Tammuz;
for he was among the Egyptians as Ceres among the Romans, The God of the
Harvest: And lastly, when thou do basely temporize for thine own ends, Having
men's persons in admiration because of advantage, Jude 16. Thou may properly
be said to Turn thy face toward the East, and to worship the Rising Sun; Thus
will thine own heart (if thou look into it) accuse thee of Isreal's Idolatry,
and in the next place thou must hold up thy Guilty hand at the Bar, and be
arraigned for his cruelty; For if Saint Augustines Rule be true, Qu^ non
Pavisti, occidisti; whom thou have (...) fed, thou have starved; whom thou ha^
not filled with meat, thou have fille^ with violence: whom thou have not
Relieved, thou have Destroyed: we need n^ send thee among the outrageous
Plundere^ to take thy share in this accusation [They have filled the land with
Violence.] For i^ that thou have not helped those who have been wronged, thou
have helped to wron^ them; in that thou have not fed the hungry thou have
starved them: in that thou (...) not taken in the stranger into thine house
thou have thrust him out of his own; (...) that thou have not clothed the
naked, tho^ have stripped him: Thus shall thou be a^ reigned, and condemned at
the last day, no^ only for thy Commissions, but also for thy Omissions, Mat.
25. 41, 42. But an^ if also for thine Omissions, then certainly and much more
for thy Commissions For making others hungry, and thirsty, an^ poor, and sick,
and naked; Thus if thou sha^ look impartially into thine own Bosom thou will
there find this Vision, thou wi^ there see all these wicked abominations; b^
turn thee yet again, and thou shall see greate^ Abominations then these, which
are indeed the effects of these; not only dismal repre^tations of thine own
sins, but also a ^e dismal representation of Gods judge^nt; Thou have been
guilty of sins un^rthy of a man, and now thou must ex^ct to feel a judgment
worthy of God: ^sd. 12. 26. my Flesh trembles for fear ^hee, and I am afraid
of thy judgments, (...) 119. 120. This is the very abomina^n of desolation,
when a man finding ^self under the terrors of Gods impar^l, and inevitable, and
insupportable justice ^ks under the burden, and has so many ^smal Fiends
rather then thoughts for (...) inmates of his despairing soul. This was ^ins
case, which is therefore so expressly (...) down, that it may not be ours, Genesis
^13. And Cain said, My punishment is ^eater then I can bear, or my iniquity is
^eater then that it may be forgiven; The ^rds will admit both interpretations:
for ^e same word signifies both Iniquity and ^ishment, and indeed it is
iniquity alone ^at makes the Punishment (for were it ^t for sin, though we
might be Afflicted, ^t we could not be Punnished) and that ^akes it
intolerable: For a wounded ^irit who can bear? Another may ^ound my body, but
it is only my self that can wound my soul; The sores of (...) body may be very
painful, but it is only sins, the sores, the wounds of my soul^ are
intolerable: A wounded spirit who bear? Prove. 18. 14. O thou who (...) wounded
for our Transgressions, and w^ blood is the only balm to heal the wo^ of our
Souls, make us in Time to thirst (...) gasp after thy blood, that so we man
recovered of all our wounds; Give u^ hearty Sorrow for our sins, but wi^ gives
us thy immortal comforts in (...) Sorrows: Sorrow for sin is a G^ Sorrow, nay A
Sorrow according to (...) ((...) 2 Cor. 7. 10.) (...) Godly Sorrow, because it
begins from (...) and ends in God: and it is a sorrow (...) cording to God,
having him not only for Efficient and final, but also for its for cause: A
sorrow according to the ex^ple of the Son of God, Mat. 26. My ^ul is exceeding
Sorrowful, even Death; The soul of the God of Life was rowful unto the Death:
(...) my soul is encompassed round about with row: whence so much Sorrow to him
(...) was the only Joy of heaven and earth, (...) proclaiming his indulgences
on earth, (...) made an eternal Jubilee in heaven? ^ence so much grief to him,
who is the ^ight of men and Angels? even from the ^ath of God against sin,
though himself ^d never sinned: Because of this was he ^rrowful and very heavy.
Was the bur^ of my sins heavy upon my Saviors ^l, and shall it not much more
be hea^ upon mine own? Did he cry out for (...) sins, as if God had forsaken
him, and ^all I still be silent and not fear that ^od will indeed forsake me? I
Knowledge (...) fault (says the true penitent) ^d my sin is ever before me,
Psalm. 51. 3. (...) if he had said, my sins are ever ^ore Almighty God, and
shall they ^t be also before me? they are open in (...) sight, and shall they
not be so in mine? that we would consider how far we have ^t-gone David in his
sin, and yet how far ^ort we come of him in his Repentance? ^r sin, though it
is the work of darkness, ^t may not hope to be covered or con^led by it; it is
never invisible, but al^ies comes to light: God sees it, man him^f sees it: and
happy is the man who sees ^n due time; for that is the only way to ^ake God not
see it, but turn away his ^es from it: yet if he see it never so late,

CHAP. III. Peers, or, Dividing of our Persons.
SECT. I. The Soul Divided from the Body, while it lives by a Voluntary
Separation conversing with it self, and with it^ Savior.
A GOOD man can never want Good company; so^ if he may not have it from his
neighbor, he may have it from himself: Me Interr^gans, mihique respondent quum
solus essem, tanquam Duo essemu^ Ratio and Ego, says Saint Aust. (lib. 1.
R^tract. c. 4.) Unde hoc opus Soliloquia nominavi; I did Question and Answer my
self as if we had been Two, Reason and I, whence I called that work, my
Solilequies: And indeed a man's safest way of talking, is to talk with himself;
so will his tongue not defile his body (as Saint James complains,) but purge
his Soul: not set on fire the course of nature, but thirst after the welsprings
of Grace: not it self be set on fire from Hell, but inflame the soul with the
love and desire of Heaven: He that talks most with himself, is like to answer
for himself: For the right Judgment of things is made by the Conscience, which
looks not on Time, but on Eternity. The soul must Answer by it self alone
without the body, and therefore had need consult with it self ^lone about its
Answer; not admit the flesh unto consultation, which will deprave the
judgment, and cannot rectify it. Mundus ^egacosmus intrat in microcosmum, i.
e. (...) Animam, scil. Bonam in itinerario men^is; This Great world was made to
enter in^ man, the Lesser world (for the soul is ^ble to receive it all, and
yet still must ^ontinue empty) But man himself was ^ade to enter into a better
world: Enter ^ou into thy Masters Joy, Mat 25. 23. ^he world above is too big
to enter into ^s, we must enter into it: Therefore it is better to know this
world then to love because by knowledge this world ente^ into us: but it is
better to love the wo^ above then to know it, because by lo^ we enter into that
world. And surely is like to have the happiest entrance, t^ soonest knocks at
the door: For so^ there will be, who will say, Lord, L^ open unto us, who will
have this answer, (...) rily I say unto you, I know you not; Mat. (...) 11, 12.
Wherefore it is necessary that t^ soul be divided from the body, even wh^ it
dwells in it, that so it may by a volunta^ both prevent and facilitate its
violent se^ ration: For if she be accustomed to the o^ she will never fear the
other. Thu^ may be a Separatist, and be no Schis^ tick: by Separating from my
self, but (...) from my brethren. The Jews pha^ much of Gods speaking with his
own J^ cial house, and when they find him spe^ ing in the plural number, (not
know^ the mystery of the Trinity, or not ca^ to acknowledge it) do only tell
us, he is (...) sulting with his own Judgment: ((...) Solomon Jarchi on
Cantic. 8. v. 5. and (...) How much more ought man to con^ with his own soul,
that by so doing he^ also consult with God? For the soul, more it descends into
it self, the more it ascends unto its Savior; God alone having the Privilege
to be within the Soul, as the Soul alone has the privilege to be within the
body.

Therefore let me have frequent Colloquies with mine own soul, that I may have
frequent Colloquies with my Savior: my Colloquies with my self will wean me
from the love of earth: my Colloquies with my Savior will make me in love with
heaven; my Colloquies with my self will show me the Vanities of the world, the
Infirmities of the flesh, the Malice of the Devil, and the sight of these will
make me say with the Psalmist, O that I had wings like a Dove, then would I
flee away, and be at Rest, Psalm. 55. 6. When the spirit of a Dove will not give
me Rest, such may be the wickedness of men; yet the wings of a Dove will give
it me, such is the goodness of God: when condescending to man by patience and
meekness will not, then ascending to God by prayer and meditation, will give
Peace and Rest unto my soul.

My Colloquies with my Savior, will show me his All-sufficient merits, His
Almighty power, His Al-saving mercy; And the first of these will make me
Abandon the worlds Vanity, that I may retire to his Al-sufficiency: he has
ascribed sufficiency to his Grace, 2 Cor. 12. But he has reserved the
Al-sufficiency to himself. The second will make me acknowledge mine own
Infirmity, that I may rely on his Omnipotency, as says the Apostle, most
gladly will I glory in mine Infirmities, that the Power of Christ may rest upon
me, 2 Cor. 12. 9. For if the power of Christ rest on me, sure I cannot but have
rest in it. The third will make me not fear the Devils malice, whiles I place
my whole trust and confidence in my Saviors everlasting and Al-saving me^cies;
For blessed be his undeserved goodness, I have a Savior who is able and
willing to save, a Jesus whose name is salvation, whose presence is salvation,
whose work is salvation; they are all three Joined together, John 11. 21, Then
said Martha unto Jesus, Lord, if thou had been here, my brother had not dyed:
He is Jesus, there is Salvation in his name, thou shall call his name Jesus, for
he shall save his people from their sins, Mat. 1. 21. If thou had heen here,
there is Salvation in his presence; My brother had not dyed, there is salvation
in his work: therefore must my soul be always near my Savior, that it may
never be far from his Salvation: It must converse with him, and therefore it
must be united to him by the spiritual and blessed Union which is wrought by
Faith, by Hope, by Charity. For without this Union I may not hope for that
Conversation.

The Union or Conjunction of the soul with Christ by Faith is expressed, and in
that required, Ephesians. 3. 17. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith: Not
in your Heads by Fancy, but in your Hearts by Faith: not float in your
Brains, but sink down into your Breasts: Wherefore let me be sure to cherish in
my soul this heavenly gift of Faith, by refraining my mind from vain
Curiosities, and bringing into captivity every thought to the Obedience of
Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 5. and by cleansing and purging my will and affections (for
true faith is in the will no less then in the understanding) from all
filthiness of the flesh and of the spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of
God, 2 Cor. 7. 1. For Impiety does directly dispose the soul to Infidelity; And
they that are men of corrupt minds, (though of never so clear Judgments) are
also reprobate concerning the Faith, 2 Timothy 3. 8. The Union of the soul with
Christ by hope is expressed, and withal required, Isa. 26. 3. Thou will keep
him in perfect Peace, (Heb. Peace Peace, the peace of a Good Conscience here,
of a blessed eternity hereafter) whose mind is staid on thee, because he
trusts in thee: and v. 4. Trust ye in the Lord for ever, for in the Lord
Jehovah is everlasting strength: God takes it for an honor to be trusted; and
he that most trusts him, most honors him: and he that least honors him, least
trusts him; Offer the sacrifices of Righteousness, and put your trust in the
Lord, Psalm. 4. 5. He that offers not the sacrifice, cannot have the trust; For
he that does not think it sit to honor him, cannot think it safe to trust him:
therefore let my hope in Christ be such as becomes a Christian, and much more
such as becomes Christ: such as becomes a Christian, not provoking him whiles
I trust him; and much more such as becomethChrist, trusting him with what he
cares to be trusted, that is, my soul; and for what is worth his trust, that
is, my Salvation.

The Union or Conjunction of the soul with Christ by Charity is expressed, and
in that required, 1 John 4. 16. And we have known and believed the Love, that
God has to us; God is love, and he that dwells (...) love, dwells in God,
and God in him; here we must observe, that the soul is uni^ed unto Christ, not
by every kind of love, ^ut by a Right, a Great, a Firm love: a right love,
which loves him before all things, for (...) loves him upon this ground,
because he ^oved us first, We have known and believed ^he love which God has
to us: A great love, which loves him above all things, so that ^he soul wills
not for it self but for God: ^ares not to know any thing but by him, ^or desire
any thing but for him, nor do any thing but with him; nay yet more, ^ares not
to live, or move, or have any being ^ut in him and to him alone; He that tru^y
Loves, dwells not where he lives, ^ut where he Loves, He dwells in Love:
Thirdly and lastly, a Firm Love, which loves God beyond all things, by a love
that has an everlasting continuance, (...) love not capable of being
corrupted, and therefore not of being interrupted: For where the love of God is
without corruption (as in Heaven) it is also without Interruption; where it is
a pure love, there it is also an Everlasting Love: A love so desiring an Union,
as to be fully resolved against a separation: He that dwells in Gods love, will
not endure the thought o^ being put out of his dwelling: And He tha^ dwells
in love dwells in God, and God i^ him. Excellent is the Rule of the Casuist^
Spiritale bonum divinum consistere in Amicitia inter Deum and Hominem, ac per
hoc i^ consentire, conversari, convivere and colloq^ cum Deo; (Cajetane in
summula, verb^ Acedia.) The Spiritual good of man, o^ the blessing of the Soul
consists in this, the a man has friendship with God, and consequently that he
lives for him, to him, wit^ him, in him; Lives for him by consent, t^ him by
conversation, with him by cohabitation, in him by contentation: And this i^ the
friendship that the good Christian has with Christ, whiles he converseth with
him, or rather is united to him, by Faith, Hope, and Charity; For according to
Aristotle's rule, 8. Eth. c. 5. there may be (...), but not (...), There may be
Good will in those that live far asunder, but Friendship only in those that
live together; (...), An habitual, not an Actual Friendship: And he proves it
by this Proverb, (...), That the neglect o^ want of Friendly salutes, and
compellations, has dissolved many men's Friendships: So is it also in this
Spiritual Friendship: he that will have Christ for his friend, must be sure
constantly to live with him, wholly to rely on him, and daily to call upon him:
for want of friendly compellations has made many lose his friendship, first
falling into a strangeness, then into a sullenness, and at last into a plain
dislike and discontent with their Devotions, which makes them not care to have
their conversation, where they do not expect to have their contentment:
Wherefore above all things, O my soul, never let go the exercise of thy Faith,
Hope and Charity, that thou may never let go thy Savior. Thy faith will best
exercise it self about his bitter passion: thou will see him in the garden
sweating blood, Thou will see him on the Cross dropping blood, with his feet
nailed fast to stay for thee, with his hands stretched out to embrace thee,
with his Head bowed down to hear thee, with his side ready open to receive
thee: This will be the best exercise of thy faith, that God having already
punished thy sins in his own beloved Son, will not in mercy, cannot in justice
punish them again in thee his most unworthy servant; Hence will thy heart be
filled with compassion for his sufferings, and much more with compunction for
thy sins: Hence will thy mouth be filled with Thanksgivings to him for
suffering, and thy whole Life with a blessed conformity to his sufferings;
Knowing it is a faithful saying, For if we be dead with him, we shall also
live with him: If we suffer, we shall also reign with him, 2 Timothy 2. 11, 12.
Thy hope will best exercise it self about his powerful Resurrection; Thou will
there see a great Earthquake, and a great Man-quake; Thou will there see a
great Earthquake which opened the Graves, so that many of the bodi^ of the
Saints which slept, arose, Mat. 27. 53^ And That Earthquake will much more open
thy Heart, to let into it the Blessed Hope, that is full of Immortality and no
less full of comfort, the hope of a glorious Resurrection of thy body to the
lif^ everlasting: Thou will there also see a great Manquake, the keepers of the
sepulchre^ the Roman Soldiers, trembling and shaking for fear of the Angel,
though (poo^ mercenary Souls) they were soon afte^ bought out of their Fright,
and as soo^ bought out of their Faith: A little pa^ more then ordinary made
them forg^ ^eir Fright, and forgo their Faith: It mad^ them turn Preachers,
though it kept them from turning Christians: but their Do^trine was accordingly
fit for Mammons Chaplains, fit for money Preachers, It was ^he denying of
Christ's resurrection; when ^we meet with such Preachers, we have reason to be
afraid of such Doctrine. Soldiers can easily teach others to serve them, but
they can hardly teach themselves, much less others, to serve God: And now you
may also, (if you please) see a third Quake, more terrible then the other two;
not a quaking of Earth, nor a quaking of bodies, but a quaking of souls, in the
first Sect of Quakers; They who before quaked for fear of an Angel, now much
more quaking for fear of Devils: But be not you, O Christian Souls, afraid of
that sight, The Angel himself saying, Fear not ye, for I know that ye seek
Jesus which was crucified, Mat. 28. 5. not seek, much less help to crucify
him: This reason does no less concern all other seekers, that seek Jesus which
was crucified, then it did the women: They may well seek without fear, for they
are sure to find with joy: They shall find that their Lord is risen, and
calls them to rise with him: Immediately in their souls, Immortally in their
bodies, Incorruptably both in souls and bodies: This will be the best exercise
of thy hope, that Christ the Head being risen, will make thee his member,
partaker of his joyful Resurrection which consideration made our Church
compose a choice Hymn of purpose for Easter day, to express the joy and
exultation o^ true Christian souls for the Resurrection of Christ: And I
suppose none will condemn her of singularity or novelty concerning that Hymn,
although it is not to be found entirely either in Greek or Latin Liturgies:
for there is no doubt of her communicating with the Church of Christ, whiles
she communicates with the Spirit of Christ; And in this Hymn she immediately
communicates with the Spirit of Christ, because it is all taken out of his
Word, Romans 6. 8. and 1 Cor. 15. 20, etc. And though the Hymn it self may
possibly be taken out of good Christians mouths, yet surely the Joy of it can
never be taken out of their hearts, That Christ Rising again from the dead now
dies not, Death from henceforth has no power upon him; and in that it has no
power upon him, I am sure it shall not long have a power upon me; And that
other, Christ is risen again, the first fruits of them that sleep; (...) (...),
says Theophil. He that goes first, sure has some to follow him; There cannot
be first fruits, but there must be after-fruits: This is my Hope, the head
being risen will not leave his members for ever in the dust; My soul and my
body cannot be now so unwillingly parted, in the Death, As they shall hereafter
be joyfully United in the Resurrection from the dead: Lastly, Thy love and
charity will best exercise it self about his glorious Ascension: Thou will
there see hin attended on Earth by his Disciples, ready to receive his
Instructions; Thou will there see him attended in the Air by a Cloud, ready to
receive his Person; Thou will there see him attended in heaven by millions of
Angels and glorified Souls, ready to congratulate his reception: If these
considerations will not make thee love the Christan Faith that teaches such
heavenly mysteries, it is because thou have dull affections; If they will not
make thee love thy Savior Christ, who has prepared such heavenly mercies, it
is because thou have no affections: This will be the best exercise of thy love,
to inflame thy soul with the contemplation of those Unspeakable joys, which
cannot more Inflame, then they will content it: Christ ascended into heaven,
What have thou to do but in heart and mind thither to ascend after him, that
thou may continually dwell with him? He is gone to prepare a place for thee;
what have thou left to do, but to prepare thy self for that place, and beseech
him to assist and bless thee in that preparation?

SECT. II. The soul Divided from the body, when it dies, by a violent
separation.
THE Soul of man had no subsistence before his body, and is therefore unwilling
to have a subsistence without it. Creatio and infusio sunt simul respectu
animae, is the Tenent of the School, The soul is not created till the body be
fitted to receive it; so that in the same instant wherein it is Created, it is
also received into the Body: And that's the reason, That coming clothed into
the world, she is so much troubled to think that she must at last go, as it
were, naked out of it: Hence it is, that though we groan in this tabernacle,
being burden^d with the miseries, and much more with the sins of our Flesh, yet
we do not desire to be Uncloathed, but cloath^d upon, that mortality might be
swallowed up of Life, 2 Cor. 5. 4. That is, we would so lay aside our burden,
as not to lay aside our Flesh; and would have our mortal bodies, not by Death
put off their mortality, but by a change put on Immortality: Wherefore the
Union of the soul with the body being altogether natural, the separation of the
soul from the body must needs be against nature: Consequently, it is not
possible that a mere natural man should deliberately desire to die: for nature
cannot desire its own destruction: and therefore a deliberate desire of Death
cannot possibly proceed from nature, but from grace, which alone can make a man
both live contentedly, and die comfortably: and where there is a great measure
of grace, there is also a great measure of contentment in life, and of comfort
in death: In so much that if we do not wilfully shut our eyes, we cannot but
see: if we do not wilfully shut our hearts, we cannot but believe: if we do not
wilfully shut our mouths against the truth, we cannot but confess, that Godly
and Relig^ous men do continually dye with more P^tience and comfort then we
dare live; b^ the original of this Patience and of this Comfort is not from the
man, but from the Godliness: For thereby alone he is able t^ say with Saint
Paul, For me to live is Christ and to dye is gain, Phil. 1. 21. To me t^ live
is Christ, for I die unto sin; to me t^ die is gain, for I have lived unto
righteousness. Or else as Beza expounds that place mihi enim est Christus and
in vita and in morte lucrum, Christ is a gain to me, both i^ life and death. To
talk of gain in death to a natural man, were to make him mad, or to think you
so: for he loses his soul he loses himself; but to talk of gain i^ death to
the spiritual man, is to make him the more sensible of his spiritual comfort
and Condition: for the less he has of the Flesh, the more he has of the
Spirit; So that though death takes from him his Body, yet it gives him his
Soul; though it take from him his Soul, yet it gives him his Savior. Be it
then that death takes from him all things but his God, yet sure that it gives
him. Christ is my gain whether (...) live or dye. For whiles I live, I live
unto him the only Author, Preserver and Redeemer of my life, that when I shall
dye I ^ay die unto him the only Joy, and Comfort, and Repairer of my Death;
that whether I ^ve or dye I may still be his: Thus did ho^y Job comfort himself
against the miseries ^f his life, and the terrors of his death, ^aying, I know
that my Redeemer lives, Job 19. 25. as if he had said, I know that I ^m as one
forsaken and forlorn, yet I ^ave a Redeemer. I know that I seem as ^ne ready to
be swallowed up by death, yet he who swallowed death it self up in victory, he
lives, I know that my Redeem^r lives; and hereupon do I ground my Faith, my
Comfort, and my Assurance; my Assurance is infallible and undeniable, for ^t
proceeds from knowledge, I know; I am as sure that my Redeemer lives, as that
I shall die; my faith is firm and immovable, for he is mine, none shall ever
separate me from him, he is my Redeemer; my comfort is heavenly and immortal,
answerable to those Divine fountains of Faith and hope from whence it flows;
it is the comfort of eternal life; for in that my Redeemer lives, I am most
confident, that in him and by him I shall also live; for when Christ who is our
life shall appear, then shall we also appear with him in Glory, Col. 3. 4. An
assured hope, a constant faith, an immortal comfort; these were Jobs only
supports in his greatest afflictions, (and his were so great, that we can
scarce imagine, but sure we cannot endure greater:) never was his body in worse
case, never was his soul in better. Afflictions in the body then have the right
end for which they are sent, when they make our souls magnify the Lord, and
our spirits rejoice in God our Savior. The devil intended to have added to
Jobs misery by increasing the Torments of his body, but he did indeed add to
his happiness, by increasing the Devotion of his soul: Man's extremity is Gods
opportunity: he then most helps us, when we can least help our selves; when I
am weak, then am I strong, 2 Cor. 12. 10. and by the Rule of Proportion, when
weakest then strongest; when weakest in my self, then strongest in my Savior:
yet dare I not venture to stay till the weakness of my body give strength unto
my soul. For had not Job been a man perfect and upright in his health, he would
scarce have showed so much perfection and uprightness in his sickness. What
then should be the work of my health; but to prepare for sickness? what should
be work of my sickness, but to prepare death? Then shall I so live as prepared
death, then shall I so die as prepared Judgment: then shall I so live and die
prepared for Christ and his Kingdom Grace in this world, of Glory in the ^ld to
come: Let me snatch away this ^ry from my adversary, Lest the King ^odom say, I
have made Abraham Rich. (...). 14. 23. Lest hell and the grave say, I ^e thrown
this man upon his knees: no ^nk to him for his devotion: it is bare ^ed and
necessity, mere extremity and ^r that makes him devout: Happy is ^t man whom
this worlds Afflictions ^ve driven nearer to his God; but much ^ppier is he
that has made this approach his maker by voluntarily Afflicting mself: for
seldom is there so much sin^rity, but never is there so much Glory that
Repentance and Devotion, which oceeds rather from compulsion then ^om election,
rather from necessity then ^om choice. Let the mercies of God in^te me to
Repentance and amendment of ^e in my health, and let me not expect his
^dgements in my sickness; lest instead of ^eing amended, I be confounded: For
if be afflicted in the flesh, and not comforted in the spirit, then will death,
w^ was appointed to the end, be but the ginning of my afflictions: For what
(...) we say? was Jobs body (now becom^ most as loathsome as the Dunghill w^ he
sat upon) a fit emblem of Immo^lity? and yet whosoever shall look into own
soul with an impartial eye, will (...) there much less hope and comfort of
e^nity, then Job found in his body. (...) how then can he contentedly compose
h^self for Death? I answer, he must do as did, cast but one eye down upon
himself lift up the other to his Redeemer: when looks down upon himself, he
finds not^ but worms to destroy his body, v. 26. (...) when he looks up to his
Redeem^ then in my flesh (says he) shall I see G^ What a strange contrariety
is here, Wo^ and Flesh, Death and Life, Destruct^ and seeing God! The Worms are
(...) loathsome that turn to Flesh; The Death not terrible that ends in Life;
The D^struction is most welcome that ends in ^ing God: but yet still, worms in
theselves are worms; death in it self is death^ and destruction is destruction:
and wor^ as worms are loathsome; death as death terrible: destruction as
destruction can^ welcome; and the body is invaded by ^ms, captivated under
death and de^ction, when the soul is separated from and therefore we cannot but
look on (...) as a violent separation, which com^s a Rape upon Nature, and
conse^ntly must needs be an unwelcome ^est, such as we are unable to exclude,
yet much more unwilling to entertain. ^erefore the soul while it is in the
state conjunction with the body, though it now by reason of sin in a miserable
state, is that state natural, and consequent^ desirable: nor is it easy to
define how it need be made miserable, before it can made not desirable; for we
may easily ^ern a very great desire of life in most (...), because the greatest
miseries are not ^e of themselves fully to expel that desire: ^t the soul
whiles it is in the state of sepa^ion from the body, is in a state altogether
natural, or rather contra-natural, for ^s as long as she continues so, she has
(...) the perfection of her own nature: it be^ as natural for humane spirits to
be with ^ies, as for Angelical spirits to be with them; which Aquinas has
excel^tly proved in this manner; (Ia. p. q. 89.) ^all Intellectual Substances
the Intellective Virtue or Faculty is from t^ fluence of the Divine Light;
which (...) the farther it is diffused from God more it is divided in it self;
and the n^ is divided, the more it must needs ^minished. Hence it is that those
Intelle^ Substances which are farthest from (...) such as are Humane spirits,
having the share of the Divine light, have so the weakest Intellectuals: and
^quently are not able to understand (...) by such universal forms and
represe^ons by which the Angels are able t^ ^derstand them. Therefore it is
nece^ that the Souls of men be united unt^ ^dies, thereby to be made capable o^
universal forms and representations, such as are imprinted in the Angels had
God given unto men no other w^ understanding, then he has given^ Angels, they,
not being able to under^ distinctly by such universal forms a^ Angels, could
not have had a part^ and distinct knowledge of any thing, only a general and
confused knowle^ so it is clearly for the better, that Hu^ Souls be united unto
Bodies, because i^duceth to the bettering of their u^standing. But this reason
conce^ the soul of man no longer then whiles it is here on earth; whereas it is
evident that the desire of Reunion with the body, accompanies the soul also
in heaven: for though she there understand by a far more excellent and noble
way without the Body, then she does here in the Body: yet does she still desire
Reunion with the Body, and not think her own bliss so complete, till she may
have it in and with her old companion, her first friend and acquaintance.
Excellently the same Aquinas, (12ae. qu. 4. ar. 5.) Desiderium Animae separatae
totaliter quiescit ex part Appetibilis, quia habet id quod suo appetitui
sufficit, sed non totaliter requiescit ex part Appetentis, quia illud bonum
non possidet secundum omnem modum quo possidere vellet, and ideo corpore
resumpto beatitudo crescit non intensive, sed extensive. The desire of the
separated souls that are in Heaven, is fully satisfied as to the object, or the
thing that they desire, for they have all the blessedness that they can wish:
But not as to the subject or their manner of desireing, for they have not their
blessedness so as they do wish it, because it is not yet communicated to their
bodies: wherefore after the Resurrection of the Body, the blessedness of
Glorified Souls is said t^ increase, though not intensively, as if t^ bliss
should be greater in it self, (for the are already admitted to the vision and
fr^ition of God,) yet surely extensively, because it shall be greater in
respect of the^ that enjoy it, when it shall be commun^cated from their Souls
unto their Bodies And therefore the Glorified Souls of me^ do exceedingly
desire, that their Blessedness should be so communicated, because their
supernatural Bliss does not extinguish, cannot exclude their natural Desire,
which is, to be united to their Bodies Accordingly Aquinas tells us, that to
the perfect consummation of man's Bliss, is required, not only a perfect
Disposition o^ his Soul, but also of his Body; and tha^ both antecedently and
consequently to hi^ Blessedness. Antecedently, or before he i^ Blessed: for
else his Body would clogg hi^ Soul, and divert it from the Beatifical vision:
And Consequently, or after he i^ Blessed; for the Soul cannot but communicate
her Bliss and Glory to the Body: (12ae. q. 4. ar. 6.) Therefore that which was
a Natural Body at the separation, shall be made a Spiritual Body at the
Reunion: and being once made a Spiritual body, the Soul shall have Power to
keep (...) ^o for ever, according to that of Saint Aug. ^am potenti natura Deus
fecit Animam, ut ^x ejus plenissima Beatitudine redundit in ^nferiorem Naturam
Incorruption is vigor; With so powerful a Nature has God endued the soul of
man, that when her self shall come to be perfectly Blessed, she will be able to
Transmit her Bliss and Incorruption to the body. Wherefore let ^y soul be
separated from this natural body, by which it is corrupted, that it may ^e
united to that Spiritual body by which ^t shall be perfected.

The Second PART: OR, The Consolation against Death.

Preface.
HE that will fully comf^ the Soul of man again Death, must comfort against
sickness, that commonly goes before it; (...) against Judgment t^ always
follows after it. So that this^ consolation must branch it self into these t^
Chapters.

The Comforts of the Soul against Sickn^ The Comforts of the Soul against
Death^ The Comforts of the Soul against Judgment.

It is as easy for those in health to g^ advice to the sick, as it is hard for
the (...) to follow it. But every one that can g^ Advice to the sick, cannot
give them c^ fort in their sickness. The best that any of us can say in this
kind, is, The Lord comort you. And yet surely there are some men who are
obliged, if not enabled by their Calling, to speak more comfortably then
others, no less to body-sick, then to sin-sick Persons: Those men whose
peculiar Duty it is to visit the sick, and consequently to comfort them: For
they may not do as Jobs Friends did, come to Grieve with him, and then help,
not to Assuage, but to Increase his Grief. For they by so doing, are looked
upon, not as Gods, but as the Devils Instruments, though they were of the
Posterity of Abraham, and therefore undoubtedly instructed in the true Relion,
according to that Testimony given of Abraham, by God himself, Genesis 18. 19. For
I know him; that he will command his children and his household after him, and
they shall keep the way of the Lord. Yet these men were so faulty in their
conferences with holy Job, that God himself says of them, they had not spoken
right concerning him, and that his wrath was kindled against them, Job 42. 7.
Whereby it Appears, that Jobs former exclamations against them, proceeded not
from the impotency of his Passion, but from the justness of his cause, when he
said, ye are forgers of lies, ye are all Physicians of no value, Job 13. 4.
Medici Idoli, so Jarchi expounds the word, and parallels it with that of Zach.
11. 17. where we tanslate it the Idol shepherd, and may here so too, The idol
Comforters; Men that made a show of Comfort, but afforded none at all, no more
then if they had been but mere Idols: Nay that's not all, they afforded him
dicomforts instead of comforts, wherefore he calls them also miserable
comforters, Job 16. 2. Hebrew, consolatores molestiae, troublesome comforters
are you all; And sick men may, (in this Brainsick age of ours,) quickly have
enough, if not too much of such comforters; Men that scarce can settle others
consciences, having so much unsettled their own: Which made Saint Paul come
with a Benedictus in his mouth, (and surely it was in his heart before it was
in his mouth, when he considered what a great mercy it was in God, toward
those in distress, to give either true comforts or true comforters, saying,
Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, The Father of
mercies, and the God of all comfort, who comfort us in all our Tribulation,
that we may be able to comfort them which are in any trouble, by the comfort
where with we our selves are comforted of God, 2 Cor. 1. 3, 4. The Apostle
begins here with thanksgiving according to his accustomed manner in all his
Epistles, but contrary to his custom does he apply this thanksgiving wholly to
himself, The reason was, (says Beza) Because the Corinthians did begin to
despise him for his Afflictions; (the common course of the world, to despise
that Church that is in Affliction) Therefore he answers confidently for
himself, that though he had been much afflicted, yet he had been much more
comforted: and he rejoiced the more in his comforts, because God had comforted
him for that very cause, That he might be able and willing to comfort others.

Having thus considered the Author of all true comfort, and the Instruments he
is pleased chiefly to use in comforting, and how they are bound to comfort, as
his Instruments: It follows that in the next place we consider the comforts
themselves; Which are then most given from God, when most wanted by men; For it
is very observable, Jer. 33. That Gods promises to the Jews were then Greatest,
when their own miseries were so: For he there promises to the captivity, A
gracious Return, a joyful State, and a settled Government, when they were even
now transplanted from Jerusalem to Babylon; Surely to teach them and us, that
his promises were to be understood spiritually in Christ, and so to be
fulfilled; That when they had least comforts in themselves, They might have
greatest comfort in their God; that in the greatest temporal miseries, he did
use to afford the greatest spiritual mercies; That when the body is most
afflicted, the soul is, or should be most comforted: Thus we look on sickness,
as a very great discomfort of the Body: And yet even that may be made a greater
comfort to the soul; And truly from those very considerations for which it is a
discomfort to the body, and they are Three, Because it afflicts the Flesh,
Because it weakens the Flesh, Because it wastes the Flesh:

CHAP. I. The Comforts of the soul against Sickness.
SECT. I. The sickness of the Body is a Comfort to the soul, in that it
Afflicts the Flesh.
THIS age loves Paradoxes, that is, (strange opinions) And these may justly be
thought the strangest of all others, which seek to make us in love with
sickness, that cannot but make us out of love with the world and with our
selves; but be it so, since we could never have a fitter time to be out of love
with the world, because now it is so bad, nor with our selves, because we help
to make it worse: Welcome then a sickness to comfort the soul, since health is
made (...) uncomfortable to the body, as bad times (...) worse men can make it:
And indeed in the respect sickness is a comfort to the Sou^ whiles it afflicts
the Flesh, in that it bring^ us to God, and God to us: For man being afflicted
in his body, and finding no re^ in himself, immediately makes his addresse^ to
God, that he may find rest in him: T^tianus told the Heathen Greeks so much
that when thy were sick, then they would send for their gods to be with them,
a^ Aggamemnon did at the seige of Tro^ send for his ten Counselors; (...): And
surely they who never think of God in their health, yet are desirous he should
think o^ them in their sickness: In their Affliction they will seek me early,
Hos. 5. 15. Wherea^ before it was, They will not frame their d^ings to turn
unto their God, ver. 4. And (...) affliction make those seek God who before did
not regard him, then surely it cannot but make those who did seek him before
they were afflicted, to seek him much more in their affliction: Mine eyes are
ever toward the Lord (says David) for he shall pluck my feet out of the net,
Psalm. 25. 15. When his feet were most at liberty he desired not to look much
away from God, for fear of falling into some snare: But when his feet were
entangled in the ^et, then his eyes were ever toward him.

The Prophet Jeremiah prophecieth con^erning the Jews, that after their return
from Babylon, They should serve the Lord their God, and David their King: He
means ^he Son of David (says Kimchi) the Messiah: And surely whereas before
their Captivity they often fell into idolatry, yet after it they were never
guilty of that sin: And who will not call that a happy Captivity in which they
left their Idolatry behind them? So is it also in our distresses, it is a
happiness, not a misery, which brings a man nearer and nearer to his God:
Ismaels Name bids him believe that the Lord will hear his affliction, for so
says the Angel to Hagar, Thou shall call his name Ismael, because the Lord
has heard thy affliction, Genesis 16. 11. But Isreal's faith bids him believe that
the Lord will not only hear his affliction, but also bear it: In all their
affliction he was afflicted, and the Angel of his presence saved them; Isa. 63.
9. What Comfort like the comfort of Salvation? What greater Comfort of
Salvation, then that Christ is with us, ready to save us? It is he that is here
called the Angel (...) Gods presence, or of Gods face; first because in his
eternal Priesthood he does a^waies minister before the face of God, m^king
Intercession for us, Heb. 7. 2^ Wherefore he is able to save them to the utt^
most that come unto God by him, seeing he e^ lives to make intercession for
them. Second^ because he is the express image of God, i^ so much that whosoever
has seen him has seen the Father, John 14. 9. This A^gel of Gods presence is
most with us in o^ afflictions, and is therefore then m^ with us, that he may
be afflicted with u^ Our groans are His groans, Our sighs a^ His sighs, Our
tears are His tears. T^ Psalmist did say, Put my tears into thy Bott^ Psalm. 58.
6. But we must say farther, put m^ tears into thine eyes. For as Christ is the
Angel of his Fathers face, so he looks upon every true Christian as the Angel
of h^ own face: and loves to be there most, when he most sees his own face, his
own image.

And will you know when he most see^ his own image in you? It is then when
(...) sees himself fully represented, not only i^ your doings, but also in your
sufferings In all your Affliction he is Afflicted. Le^ your soul then rejoice
for a double cause that it has so good a Companion, that it ^ath so great a
Comforter. For lest you should be troubled at the hiding of his ^ace, he has
taught you to see his face in ^our own; For when you can most truly ^ay, Behold
and see if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, Lam. 1. 12. Then do you
^ost truly resemble him, who was called A man of sorrows, Isa. 53. 3. This is
the first comfort of the Soul in Sickness, when it Afflicts the Flesh,
because that Affliction brings us to God, and God to us. A second follows,
Because that Affliction makes us conformable to Christ our Savior. Justine
Martyr (in his second Apology for the Christians) has observed, that there is
scarce any Prediction or Prophecy concerning our Savior Christ the Son of God
to be made man, but the Heathen Writers, (who were all after Moses) did from
thence invent some Fable, and feign it to have been Acted by some one or other
of Jupiters Sons. Only The Prophecies about the Cross of Christ they have taken
for the ground of no Fable; (...), They have not among their Fictions told us
of any one of Jupiters sons that was Crucified, that Acted his part upon the
Cross. And he gives this Reason for it, Because the mystery of the Cross was
so Covertly foretold, that the Heathen could not understand it. And indeed we
do not find in all the Hebrew Bible so much as the direct name o^ a Cross, or
Crucifying: There is mention made of a Tree, and of Wood, but not of a Cross;
of Hanging and of Lifting up, but not Crucifying. However, we may we^ suppose,
that if the Heathen had understood the Prophesies concerning Crucifying the Son
of God, yet they would have thought such a Disgrace not fit to have been
Fastened upon any of the sons of their Idol gods; And therefore would rather
not have any such Narrative, then have the reproach and shame that accompanied
it. But we Christians see the only Son of the only true God, being found in
fashi^ as a man, humbling himself, and become Obedient unto death, even the
death of the Cross. And that for this Reason, That all they should follow the
example of his Patience, who do hope to be partakers of his Resurrection: For
so himself has said, He that takes not his Cross, and follows after me, is
not worthy of me, Mat. 10. 38. (...), He that takes it not of himself, without
another proferring: He that takes it not as a thing belonging to him, but
rather as a burden imposed upon him: He that takes it not where he finds it,
but only when it is offered him; For that is the proper signification of (...),
to take a thing of your own Accord, whereas (...) is properly to take a thing
from another hand: And it is observable that our Savior here says, His
Cross, not My Cross, to show it belongs to us, no less then it did to him: And
without doubt he requires every Christian to take up the Cross so willingly, as
if it were a matter of choice, not of necessity: such a Treasure as he would
take up of himself if it lay in his way, and not tarry till another should
bring it him. So desirable a thing is Christ's Cross in it self, (though not so
to flesh and blood,) were it only for this Reason, that it makes us conformable
to himself: It makes a man here on eatth conformable unto him who is the very
beauty of heaven; Insomuch that my zeal to the truth bids me say, whiles the
Conscience of mine infirmity makes me afraid to say it, I had rather with the
Martyrs and Confessors have my Saviors Cross, then with their Persecutors, the
Worlds Crown: And though I much distrust mine own shoulders, yet dare^ not
disclaim so holy a burden; And indeed if I would adore any Relics, it should
be a piece of that shoulder, which did first help bear my Saviors Cross, for
that of all others was certainly most like him, and therefore most worthy of
Adoration. But if conformity with Christ in Affliction be not, yet surely
conformity with Christ in Glory is exceeding comfortable: And that is yet a
third comfort of the Soul in the sickness of the Body whiles it Afflicts the
flesh, because Affliction is a necessary condition of our own Salvation: so
says Saint Paul, Romans 8. 17. For in that we are Joint-heirs with Christ, we
must look to come the same way that he did to this Inheritance: That is, we
must look to suffer with him, that we may be glorified with him. This
consideration alone, That Affliction was so necessary a condition of Salvation,
troubled the most Reverend, and most Religious, and most Learned Bishop
Davenant, upon his deathbed: A man of singular Uprightness and Integrity, and
of so exemplary Godliness, that thereby he truly honored God, delighted
Angels, and converted many men: yet this man upon his Deathbed having no sin
to trouble his Conscience, had this Text to trouble it, Heb. 12. 6. Whom the
Lord loves he chasteneth. For not being able on the sudden to Recount his own
chastenings, he had some short doubtings in himself concerning Gods love
toward him: He thought he had not drank of his Saviors cup; and therefore
could not see how he should sit with him in his Kingdom. And yet surely our
Saviors words, ye shall indeed drink of my cup, Mat. 20. 23. were verified
concerning Saint John, no less then concerning S. James, though but the one was
murdered by Herod, the other dyed peaceably in his bed: For even he also was a
Martyr in the Preparation of his Soul, (as appeared by his Banishment,) nay
indeed he was also a Martyr in the Affliction of his body, though not by a
corporal Martyrdom in shedding his blood, yet by a Spiritual Martyrdom in
crucifying his flesh, and so being under a continual Death by a daily
Mortification: Martyrium horrore quidem mitius, sed diuturnitate molestius, as
says Saint Bernard: Which kind of Martyrdom, though it has less of the
Horror, yet has it more of the Trouble. For the burning coals were not the
less hot, because when Tiburtius walked upon them barefooted, he thought
himself to have walked upon Roses, (as says Aqu. 22ae. qu. 123. art. 8. c.)
Nor is the constant Practice of mortifying the flesh, the less to be accounted
a Dying daily, because Saint Paul looked on it as the work of his Rejoicing in
Christ Jesus. Excellently Saint Hierom, Recte dixerim quod Dei Genetrix Virgo
and Martyr fuit, quamvis in Pace vitam siniverit; I may justly say that the
mother of our Lord was a Virgin and a Martyr, though she ended her days in
Peace. For indeed true and constant Virginity is in it self a kind of
Martyrdom, in that it is a mortifying of our members that are upon earth;
wherefore Saint Paul says (...), Col. 3. 5. That is, make them dead, which is
yet more express in the word (...), Rom 8. 13. That is, Put them to Death. And
doubtless such a righteous soul that daily chasteneth himself in the school of
mortification, might have seen Gods Rod chastening him by his own hands; but
yet he not seeing the Rod in another hand to chasten him, (for he dyed before
the late Overflowings of ungodliness made the world so full of misery, and yet
more full of sin) He could not but have some doubtings concerning Gods
chastisement, and that made him have likewise for a time, some Doubtings,
though no Distrust concerning Gods Love; because the Text says so expressly,
Whom the Lord loves, he chasteneth. And why then should not we say, O Lord,
let us taste and see thy chastisement, that we may taste and see thy love? O
taste and see that the Lord is good, Psalm. 34. 8. You will taste his goodness
in the most bitter Potion, you will see his goodness in the most bloody
scourge, if you do but seriously consider that Whom the Lord loves, he
chasteneth, and consequently whom he most chasteneth, he most loves. Wherefore
since thy loving kindness is better then life; Psalm. 63. 3. though thy
chastisement take away my life, yet I desire not thou should take away thy
chastisement, as long as that gives me the true sense and feeling of thy
loving kindness. Gods Rod ^s it self a very good Lesson, and does here
accordingly set down a Two fold Document, Documentum Amoris, Documentum
Salutis. A Document of his Love, for loving and chastening go together; And to
be without Correction, is to be without Filiation, v. 8. But if ye be without
chastisement, then are ye Bastards, not Sons: And a Document of our Salvation;
For his chastisement is as it were a Plowing and Tilling of our Souls, to make
us bring forth more fruit, even the fruit of unfeigned Righteousness, and the
fruit of everlasting Peace, ver. 11. It yeildeth the Peacecable fruit of
Righteousness unto them which are exercised thereby: The peaceabl^ fruit of
Righteousness: These words may be called Eshcol, For they are a whole clustster
of grapes, (Number. 13. 24.) yet not to be carried between two upon a staff, being
no less in effect then That Etern^ weight of Glory: or indeed, the who^e
Kingdom of Heaven: for if you Press these Grapes, and squeeze out the wine tha^
is in them, you will find Righteousness an unfeigned Righteousness, which is
the Kingdom of Grace: And you will fin^ Peace, an Everlasting Peace, which is
the Kingdom of Glory: And this is the who^ Kingdom of Heaven, the Kingdom (...)
Grace, and the Kingdom of Glory: An^ as unfeigned Righteousness is the way t^
bring us to Everlasting Peace: So is correction and chastisement, the way to
brin^ us to unfeigned Righteousness: Where in we shall see very much to
exercise o^ Piety, but nothing at all to disturb ou^ Patience; For all
chastening is but for a few ^yes, ver. 10. whether it be by our others on
earth, or by our Father in ^aven; For neither takes the Rod out (...) delight,
but only out of necessity: and ^erefore is soon ready to throw it away ^ter a
little chastening: And a chastening ^at is but for a few days cannot call ^r
many groans: A chastening that is ^t for a little time, cannot require any ^eat
patience: And though our Fathers (...) earth chastening us after their own
plea^re, may chastise us both unjustly and ^measurably: unjustly as to the end,
un^easurably as to the manner of their ^astening: yet surely our Father in
hea^n does not so: He chastens not unmea^rably, because much less then we
deserve; ^even the Damned souls in hell are pu^shed citra condignum, says
Aquinas, with ^uch less then condign Punishment) ^d he chastens not unjustly,
because for ^r Profit, That we might be partakers of ^s holiness: And therefore
if we owe sub^ction and reverence to the Fathers of our ^esh, much more to the
Father of spirits: and the rather because the Reward of our ^tifulness to them
is but the prolonging (...) a momentary and a miserable life: But the Reward of
our dutifulness to the ^ther of spirits is to live blessedly, and live
eternally, ver. 9. and 10. Therefo^ we must be sure in this case, to follow o^
Saviors advice, John 7. 24. Judge (...) according to the Appearance, but judge
rig^teous judgment, For what though no cha^ning for the present seems to be
joyous, b^grievous, ver. 11. yet does it not foll^ because it seems not so,
therefore it is n^ so: Ab eo quod videtur, ad id quod est, n^ valet
consequentia: To argue from the which seems to be, to that which really (...)
were a most absurd way of argume^ For this would prove the greatest Hyp^crite
to be the most Religious man, beca^ he most seems to be zealous of Religion So
neither may we think that chastening not joyous because it seems not so: (...)
though it bring grief to the body, yet (...) suredly (being rightly taken) it
bring joy unto the soul. And this is a very su^stantial Reason why we should
not repi^ that God has annexed Affliction as^ necessary condition of our
Salvation; y^ may we farther to this, add these oth^ Reasons.

First, because though our present affl^ction be never so great, yet it is
nothing i^ respect of our future Glory: so says Saint ^ul, Romans 8. 18. For
Ireckon that the ^fferings of this present time are not worthy be compared with
the Glory which shall be ^vealed in us: If you will compare them in ^eir
Continuance, The one is momenta^, the other is eternal: If in their Quantity ^e
one is little or nothing, the other so ^eat that it may be reputed All in All:
If (...) Quality, the one scarce deserves our no^ce, the other challenges both
our atten^ons and affections: So that in all three ^spects, The Comparison is
very unwor^y: the one are not worthy to be compared ^ith the other.

Secondly, because our present Affliction ^nduceth to the assurance of our
future ^lory. Therefore Saint Peter exhorts us (...) rejoice in the fiery
Trial, and gives this ^eason for our rejoicing, In as much as we ^e Partakers
of Christ's sufferings, That ^hen his Glory shall be revealed, we may be ^ad
also with exceeding joy, 1 Pet. 4. 13. (...) is a siery trial, but that Fire
will both ^rge your soul, and Prove your Faith: ^our soul being purged, will
let heaven it (...) you; your faith being proved, will let ^ou into Heaven; For
it will testify unto ^ou, That Christ would not have made you partaker of his
sufferings, if he had intended to make you partaker of his gl^ Let him then
punish temporally, tha^ may spare Eternally: Let him chastise body, that he may
save my soul, and unto me the Joy of his Salvation.

Thirdly and lastly, because our Pre^ Affliction conduces to the increase of
Future Glory. Justine Martyr in 79. Quest. ad Orthodoxos, Asks the Re^ why,
when Josiah is commended in Scripture above all the Kings of Is^ and Judah, for
his zeal to Religion, 2 Reg. 25. yet himself was slain by the sw^ and his sons
after him carried into Ca^vity: which was a greater misery then fell any of the
worser Kings: and he g^ this Answer to his Question, (...): time of recompense
and reward for the who do the works of Righteousness, is in this, but in the
next World: And ind^ they may here expect to suffer for t^ Righteousness, but
not till hereafter to Rewarded for it: And they must with greater comfort
expect this, because the present sufferings are for the increase their future
reward: according to t^ ^f 2 Cor. 4. 17. For our light affliction which (...)
but for a moment, works for us a far ^ore exceeding and eternal weight of
Glory; Our Afflictions can work for us, when ^e cannot work for our selves; our
^ufferings can do more then our Doings. We dare not say that our Actions shall,
^ut we dare and must say, that our Afflictions shall work for us that exceeding
and ^ternal weight of glory. This is indeed a very great comfort to the
Afflicted, that Affliction is a necessary condition of their own Salvation. And
yet there is another comfort not far short of this in the Doctrine of Piety,
but before it (if possible) in ^he Practice of Charity, That our Affliction is
the ordinary and usual means of others Salvation; for sure this must needs be
a very great comfort to every good Christian, that God should make him the
happy ^nstrument of bringing others unto Christ; Saint Paul was so zealous of
his brethrens Salvation, that he could have wished himself accursed, to have
procured their eternal Blessedness, Romans 9. 3. And Dives was so careful of his
brethren, that he desired Abraham to send one to them from the dead, to
testify unto them, lest they also come (says he) into this place of torment,
Luke 16. 28. If you cannot arriv^ to that pitch of charity which Saint Pa^
brought with him from the third Heaven^ yet you may be ashamed not to have tha^
Charity which Dives had with him when he was in hell; That Charity was so great
as to make him look upon the Salvation o^ his Brethren, as the Alleviation of
his ow^ eternal Torment: How much more wi^ it make thee look upon it as the
Alleviation of thy Temporal Affliction? Saint Pa^ tells the Colossians, He did
rejoice in his sufferings for them, Col. 1. 24. How were his sufferings for
them, unless it were to confirm their Faith? and if his sufferings did confirm
their Faith, how could he eve^ sufficiently rejoice in them? according as h^
says, Who now rejoice in my sufferings; he would not stay so long for his Joy,
as ti^ his pain and sorrow was past, nor did thin^ it enough to rejoice after
his sufferings, bu^ also in them: who now rejoice in my sufferings; (...);
(says Saint Chrysostom citing this Text (...) in Gen.) If he rejoiced in his
Afflictions, when cou^ he be sorrowful? Let us accordingly examine the reasons
of his Joy, for this Doctrine is so much against flesh and blood, that if we
can not prove it to be rational, we shall scarce admit it to be Religious: The
reasons of his joy were three; for Christ's sake, for his own sake, and for
their sakes: 1. For Christ's sake, because ^hey were the afflictions of Christ,
not in ^is own Person, (for of those afflictions it ^s said, Isa. 63. 3. I have
trodden the wine^ress alone, and there was none with me) but ^n his members;
not in his natural, but in his mystical body. 2. For his own sake, because
there was a want and imperfection, and a kind of emptiness in him till he did
^uffer; therefore he says, And fill up that which is behind of the afflictions
of Christ in ^y flesh; That is yet empty which must be filled up; that is yet
wanting which is be^ind. 3. For their sakes, therefore he says, ^y sufferings
for you, and for his bodies ^ake, which is the Church; His sufferings did
conduce to their salvation, not by way of merit or satisfaction, as if he had
meant ^o jussell Christ from his cross, but by way of example or imitation,
because he was so well contented to be crucified with him and for him. This
example of piety, and pati^nce, and perseverance, was so much for their
Edification, that he says it was for them: accordingly as he says again, 2 Timothy 2. 10. Therefore I endure all thin^ for the Elects sake, that they may
also obta^ the salvation which is in Christ Jesus wi^ eternal Glory; O the
admirable priviledg^ of a sanctified soul, to pay a Debt of s^ upon the score
of Grace! Suffering is (...) Debt that I owe for my sin (and blessed be the
mercy of Heaven which accept of a Temporal, in exchange for an etern^
suffering) but if I suffer so patiently, s^ contentedly, so thankfully, as that
I bene^ others by my example, Then do I pay the Debt of sin upon the account of
Grace^ Then do I endure chastisement for other sakes, as well as for mine own;
I endure (...) things for the Elects sakes, that they may (...) so obtain the
salvation which is in Chri^ Jesus; as if he had said, That they seei^ me
possess my soul in patience, may al^ learn to possess theirs so too; for the
sa^ Christ who is All-sufficient to me in m^ sufferings, will be as
All-sufficient to the^ in theirs: Though the merit of my sufferings cannot
advantage them (for the sa^vation is in and of Christ Jesus, not in a^ of his
servants, but only for them) yet t^ example of my sufferings may advantag^
them; my sufferings can do them litt^ good, but I that suffer may do them much
good; And indeed we cannot doubt, and therefore may not deny, but that God ^oth
oftentimes visit his choicest servants with the sharpest afflictions both in
health and sickness, merely for others sakes: that those whom before they had
examples of ^iety, they should now have examples of ^atience; that those who
had followed Christ so far, as they had most benefited others by their doings,
(for he went about doing all manner of good) might also follow him a little
further, even to his Cross, and most benefit others by their sufferings: A
thing in it self very desirable to attain, and therefore very comfortable when
attained; For any man may in some sort advantage his Brother by his doings, but
only the good Christian by his sufferings: the doer may be the savior of the
body, but it is ^hiefly the sufferer that is the savior of ^he soul; God
having appointed three ways for man to benefit his neighbor; By speaking, by
doing, and by suffer^ng; but as speaking is out-vied by doing, so doing is
out-passed by suffering. If thy affliction divert not thee out of the right
way, it may be a means to convert another to it; Justin Martyr confesses that
the constancy of the Christiaus in their sufferings was the chiefest motive
that converted him to Christianity; (Apol. ad Sena^ Rom.) saying to this
effect, I my self (says he) was once a Platonist, and did gladly hea^ the
Christians reviled; but when I saw they feared not death, nor any of those
miserie^ which most frighten all other men, I began to consider with my self
that it was impossible for such men to be lovers of pleasure more then lovers
of piety; and that made (...) first think of turning Christian.

O what an immortal comfort will it be unto thy soul, to be a means of
converting or confirming others by thy sufferings, when thou can no longer by
thy speaking nor by thy doing! for so shall thou sav^ two souls together, thine
own and the Brothers; and by saving his soul from death, shall hide a multitude
of thine ow^ sins, Jam. 5. 20. This being the priviledge^ true Christian
patience; To hide other me^ sins from us, and much more to hide ou^ own sins
from God; for though it cann^ expiate any one, yet it can hide a multitu^ of
sins.

But let us in a word sum up these comforts of the soul from the affliction
affliction^ the body, and they will appear to be these four: First, it brings
us to God, and Go^ to us: Secondly, it makes us conformable with Christ our
Savior: Thirdly, it is a necessary condition of our own salvation: Fourthly,
it is an ordinary means of others ^alvation: Join all these together; and when
thy flesh is most afflicted, then let ^hy spirit be most comforted, and most
thankful to God for his spiritual and immortal comforts, which in that they
have been spiritual, do plainly show they shall be immortal.

SECT. II. The second comfort of the Soul in sickness, is, that it weakens the
flesh.
IF I would rejoice as a man (at the weakening of any) it should be at the
weakening of mine own enemies; if as a Christian, it should be at the weakening
of the enemies of my God; Here then in the weakening of my flesh I may have true
joys, for as much as that is both my Gods and mine own enemy: 1. It is Gods
enemy, Romans 8. 7. The carnal mind is enmity against God; for it is not subject
to the Law of God, neither indeed can be; Sapientia carnis, says the vulgar
Latin) The wisdom of the flesh is enmity with God; what the is its Folly? The
minding of the flesh, fai^ the Greek. If the mindings of the flesh (...) enmity
with God, what then are the a^ings of it? and we may see the reason (...) the
enmity, For it is not subject to the L^ of God; (...), the word spea^ two
things: first, being in order, then b^ing in subordination; the flesh will not
(...) ordered, and therefore it will not be subo^dinate: It is an obstinate, a
perverse R^ bell, that hates all subjection, and therefore much more hates the
Law that requires i^ It is admirable to think that Christ to^ our flesh, that
he might be made under the Law; but we as long as we are in the flesh desire to
be above all Law; the reason is, the purity of his flesh, the corruption (...)
ours; (...), says S. Job^ 1 Ep. 3. c. 4. v.) Sin is a transgression of t^ Law;
and not only so, but also a privatio^ ordetestation, or abolition of the law;
(...) is both; And the flesh is guilty of such si^ for as it sins against the
Law by transgres^ on, so it would fain sin without the Law b^ abolition; and
does not only forsake t^ Rule of obedience, but also as much as (...) possible
destroys it, by wishing there were no Command to restrain it, no Lord to
overruled it, no Judge to overawe it.

Thus is the flesh not subject to Gods Law, as a wilful Rebel is not subject
to the Law of his Supreme Governor, not ^onely by an actual transgression, but
also by an habitual detestation of it: This is the Reason why S. Paul puts
Christ against Belial, 2 Cor. 6. 15. For Christ was obedient to the death, but
Belial will not endure to think of obedience: Therefore (...) and (...),
unrighteousness and undutifulness are put as terms convertible; for Belial is
no other but sine Jugo, one without a yoke, that is, without law: One that
looks upon Law as a yoke, and will be sure not to put his neck under it; such a
Belial is the flesh, and is therefore Gods enemy; for to be without Law, is to
be without God, since Law is no other but the Reason of God, or at least,
Reason derived from God; Divine Law is the Reason of God, Humane law is Reason
derived from God.

But secondly, the flesh is also mine enemy; for in being Gods enemy, it must
also be mine: whereof the Apostle would fain make us all sensible, when he
concludes his discourse concerning the flesh with this terrible Epiphonema; So
then, they that are in the flesh cannot please God, Romans 8. 8. A^ what was he
himself when he said this (sait^ S. Chrysostom, (...). in Gen.) was he n^ in
the flesh? yes, He was in the flesh as (...) clothed with it, but not as one
besotted by i^ (...). He says not, the^ which are compassed with the flesh,
bu^ they which are captivated under it, the mind nothing but the things of the
flesh they cannot please God; Non utique utiquei^ substantia sed in cute, as
Tertullian e^pounds it: Not they which are in the substance of the flesh, but
they which are in the cares of the flesh; They which care only for the flesh;
for that is properly to be i^ the flesh: to be governed by the flesh, o^ rather
buried in it; To have all ou^ thoughts of it, all our desires for it, all ou^
delights in it, all our longings after it: The^ that are so, are in the flesh;
and they that are so in the flesh, do not truly look after God, and much less
care to please him: Therefore either Siricius must recall his first Dogmaticall
Epistle, wherein he says in effect that to marry is to be in the flesh; or St.
Paul hi^ Apostolical determination, 1 Cor. 7. 9. It i^ better to marry then to
burn: And it is no matter whether you speak concerning the marriage of Priests,
or of other men, since Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob were Priests (as the first
born of their families) and yet S. Ignatius, after he had as highly extolled
Virginity, as it is worthily to be extolled, is contented at last to pray to
God, that he himself, though a Virgin, might sit at the feet of Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven, which were all three married men: whereas
if to marry were indeed to be in the flesh, and consequently not to please God,
those holy men had been better never to have married, although by their
marrying they had this privilege, to be the Progenitors of Christ; For much
happier was the blessed Virgin her self, in the judgment of S. Augustine, that
she did bear our Savior in her soul, then that she had born him in her body:
He that pleases God does bear Christ in his soul, in whom alone God is well
pleased; and we are sure that those men pleased God, or they should never have
enjoyed him: we must then say that Siricius was no infallible Doctor; for if to
marry is to be in the flesh, it cannot be better to marry then to burn; For it
is certainly much better to burn here, then to burn in Hell; and to be in the
flesh is nothing else but to provide fuel for Hell fire: For such as do not
desire to please God, sure do not please him; and such as do not please God
here, cannot enjoy God hereafter; such men need no enemy to destroy them, they
have already destroyed themselves; they are buried alive, they have changed
(...) into (...) and made their body the sepuchre of their soul; and therefore
says St. Chrysostom, The Spirit of God calls them not Men, but only Flesh
Genesis 6. 12. And God looked upon the earth and behold it was corrupt, for all
flesh ha^ corrupted his way upon the earth (...), He dot^ not now vouchsafe to
call them men, but only flesh; And doubtless, whosoever has most of the
corruption, has most of the flesh; and whosoever has most o^ the flesh, has
least of the man in him; and he that is all flesh, and no spirit, is in trut^
all beast and no man: which made o^ blessed Savior in his Sermon concerning
the necessity of Regeneration, say unt^ Nicodemus, That which is born of the
flesh is flesh, John 3. 6. so flesh, as it is nothing else; the unregenerate is
nothing but flesh so far from being spiritual, that he make^ his very soul
carnal. Tell me now whether it be possible for any other, to be so fatall^
mine enemy as is mine own flesh; For other enemies can only hurt my body, but
my flesh can and does also hurt my soul; making it the soul of a beast rather
then of a man: And the breath of such a soul is Articulated into a voice,
saying, Take thine ease, eat, drink and be merry, Luke 12. 19. If thou had
the soul of a Hog, (...), says Saint Basil, what else could thou say unto
it? And as the flesh makes a man here fit company for beasts, so it will make
him hereafter sit company for Devils: of which the Apostle has accordingly
forewarned us, Romans 8. 13. For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die; ye
shall die whiles you live, and much more when you are dead; you shall now die
spiritually, but you shall then die eternally: The want on widow is dead while
she lives, 1 Timothy 5. 6. And much more so is the wanton soul: Nay, twice dead,
says Jude, ver. 12. Feeding themselves without fear, twice dead: Feeding
themselves after the manner of swine, without fear, (not (...) but (...), as
the Greek Critics distinguish) and fed as swine only to the slaughter, fed
not for life, but for death; D^plicem hic mortem notari, unam in qua nati sint,
alteram in quam sua defectione inciderint, says Beza; Here is mention made of
a twofold death. One in which their corrupt nature had plunged them; Another
in which by a corrupt life they had plunged themselves: Carnal men that live
after the flesh, are twice dead whiles they live, and yet after they are dead,
comes infinitely a worfer death: what a mercy then is it of God to send us
sickness to weaken the flesh which is an enemy, that cannot be conquered till
it be weakened? weakened in its affections, in its infections, in its
defections: The affections of the flesh are as the sons of Zervia to David, too
hard for us, 2 Samuel 3. 39. Though we be anointed as he was, and have received
the holy Unction, yet they will commit their outrages, and it will be a long
time before we shall get so much mastery as to slay but only one of them at
the Horns of the Altar: The infections of the flesh are to us as the Leprous
men were to the Samaritans, so exceeding dangerous, that we have little reason
to endure their company, 2 Reg. 7. 3. Only we cannot do as the Samaritans did,
shut them out of our Gates; they will come in whether we will or no, and will
bring their leprosy along with them; Lastly, the defections of the flesh are
to us as fatal and deadly as the defection of Abner was to ^osheth, 2 Samuel 3.
10. which translated ^e Kingdom away from him; only we ^ve a greater loss by
these defections ^en he had: for we lose the Kingdom of ^eaven. The affections
of the flesh are ^isterous, the infections of the flesh are ^ngerous, the
defections of the flesh are ^eadly; O then for the blessing of a sick^ess to
shelter my soul from this storm, to ^eliver my soul from this danger, to
reco^er my soul from this death!

SECT. III. The third Comfort of the soul in sickness, is, that it wastes the
flesh.
THe more the body is pampered, the more the soul is starved; therefore ^ith
St. Paul, Flesh and blood cannot inherit ^e Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 15. 50.
(...), ^ith Epiphanius Haer. 42. He speaks not ^is of the flesh, but of wicked
men in the ^esh, (...), sait^ ^he same Author in another place, Haer. 66. ^e
speaks of the works of the flesh: And yet is he not fully satisfied, but gives
moreover a third exposition, (...), he speaks not of (...) slesh which is
sanctified, and labou^ please God, but of that flesh which is (...) in sin, and
seeks only to please it s^ Let me not then complain of the wasti^ of my flesh,
since that so much tends the advantage and improvement of (...) spirit: For I
must decay in my nature that I may increase in my spiritual streng^ be an
imperfect man in my self, that may be a perfect man in Christ Jesus Ephesians. 4.
13. The fullness of Christ ca^ not well be in me, without mine own em^tiness:
For as in Philosophy there is (...) penetration of bodies, so in Divinity the^
is no penetration of souls; If I will ha^ my Savior be in me, then I must not
(...) in my self: for he has said, If any man w^ come after me, let him deny
himself: that is his body and his spirit, says Hugo; Corp^ in divitiis, and
deliciis, Spiritum in intellect^ and affectu; Let him deny his body in no^
regarding riches nor delights; Let hi^ deny his spirit, in not trusting to his
ow^ judgment, in not following his own affections; Let him thus deny himself
both in ^ody and in spirit, that he may be fit for my Cross, and that my Cross
may fit him ^or me: And who will not upon this consideration say with holy
Ignatius (Epist. ad Rom.) (...): Let me be meat for wild beasts, so God be a
portion for me: Let the beasts devour me, so my God receive me; Let my foul
disease destroy my body, so as my God receive my soul; I will make no provision
for my flesh, and take no care of it, if so be by putting that off, I may put
on the Lord Jesus Christ: the unruliness of the flesh rejects him as a Lord to
Govern; The uncleanness of the flesh hinders him as a Jesus to save, (for he is
of purer eyes then to behold iniquity, Hab. 1. 13. And therefore of purer hands
then to touch it, and of a purer heart then to save it) Lastly, the
undutifulness of the flesh hinders him as a Christ to instruct (for he will
teach none that says not to him as Samuel did, Speak Lord, for thy servant
hears, 1 Samuel 3. 10.) I will therefore gladly put off my flesh, that I may
put off my unruliness, my uncleanness, my undutifulness: Thus I will gladly put
off my self, my unruly, my unclean, my undutifull self, that I may wholly put
on my Savior as Lo^ as Jesus, and as Christ; as Lord to gove^ me, as Jesus to
save me, and as Christ to i^struct and to direct me; Christus susce^ fidelem ad
curandum, docendum, tuendu^ dirig endum, says Hugo: Christ has u^dertaken the
true Christian, to heal him, to teach him, to defend him, to direct him To heal
him as Jesus, to defend him a^ Lord, to teach and to direct him as Christ (I
know that the Messiah comes which is called Christ; when he is come, he will
teach u^ all things, Joh. 4. 25.) And all these mercie^ will he most readily
bestow on me when (...) most want them, and fly to him to supply my wants; when
I am most sick, he will most heal me; when I am most weak, he will most defend
me; when I am least capable of other instructions, then will he most teach and
instruct me; when I am least able to guide my self, then will he undertake to
direct and lead me in the way everlasting: There are some things that he has
to teach me, which whiles my strength is in me, I am not fit to learn: I must
therefore be content to lose my strength, that I may gain these Instructions.
There are three impediments in men, which either keep them from the knowledge
of Gods Truth, or hinder them in knowing it (says Aquinas) hebetudo ingenii,
Occupationes Temporales, torpor addiscendi, Their natural incapacity, Their
temporal distractions, and their spiritual slothfulness; All these proceed
from the grossness of the flesh; Let that vanish, these will vanish with it.
The natural dullness as to heavenly things, decaies with the nature; The
temporal distractions vanish with the time; The spiritual slothfulness is
shaken off with the flesh that brought it on the soul. Thus I must confess my
flesh needs be much wasted to make me live well, but much more to make me die
well: for whiles that is in its vigor and lustiness, it will scarce afford me
time to pray, much less sincereness and fervency in my prayers: I will then
rejoice in the wasting of my flesh, because it will promote the working of Gods
Spirit: Nor is this my only comfort, that whiles I wast in flesh I grow in
Grace; but I am also comforted in this, that whiles I wast in my flesh, the
shame wastes that deforms me, the sin wastes that depraves me, the burden wastes
that depresseth me; For man's flesh is Deformed, Depraved, and Depressed by the
sin that dwells in it.

First, Man's flesh is deformed by sin for had there never been sin in the
flesh, there would never have been deformity i^ it: neither deformity from the
want, no^ from the indisposition of any member; s^ brought in both deformities:
and though at the Resurrection God will take awa^ from the bodies of the wicked
the deformity that is in them, from want or defect of any of their members, for
he will justify his own Creation; yet he will not take away the deformity that
is in their bodies, proceeding from the indisposition or defect of a due
proportion in their members; for he will not justify their sin, and therefore
not abolish that deformity, which is in punishment thereof: St. Paul tells us,
There is a natural, and there (...) spiritual Body, 1 Cor. 15. 44. And yet he
speaks of one and the same body: (...), says Epiphanius, Haer. 64. not
another, but the same body which i^ now natural, shall then be spiritual: And
indeed St. Paul himself speaks of the Individuum Demonstrativum: This
corruptible, this mortal; Magis enim express non potera^ loqui, nisi eutem
suam manibus teneret, says Tertullian; He could not have spoken more expressly,
unless he should have pinched up his flesh with his own fingers to show it us.
Accordingly, Ruffinus says, the Church did providently profess the Doctrine of
the Resurrection, in saying, Hu^us carnis resurrectionem, the resurrection of
this body or of this flesh; to wit, this same flesh in Substance, but not in
Qualities: It is now the flesh of a natural body, and is accordingly clogged
with corruption, mortality, infirmity, and gravity or grossness; It shall then
be the flesh of a spiritual Body, and accordingly Incorruptible, Immortal, full
of Power, and full of Activity: For these are the four Properties assigned to
the body at the Resurrection; 1 Cor. 15. (...), called by the School,
Impassibilitas, Claritas, Agilitas, Subtilitas; The contraries whereof are in
the same body as long as it is a natural body, to wit, Corruption, Dishonor,
Weakness, and Grossness: which are all as so many natural Deformities of or in
the Body, whereby it becomes unamiable to it self, and unproportionable to the
soul that does inform and should govern it: So that though the body be never so
beautiful in outward appearance, yet whiles it continues in the state of
disobedience to the soul, it continues also in the state of deformity; And
disobedience will not be out of it as long as sin is in it: Corpus gloriosum
est ex totali subjection^ ad Animam, says Aquinas, The body is not glorious
till it has learned a total subjection to the soul, even as the soul is not
glorious till it has learned a total subjection to its God: And the same
Author asserting, That the Body of man has a most convenient disposition,
makes it good by this distinction, Non simpliciter sed s^cundum comparationem
ad finem, not simply but in comparison of the end for which it was made, that
is, the operations of the soul, Therefore though Heavenly Bodies are much more
beautiful then is man's body, yet a Heavenly Body had been less convenient for
a man then an earthly body, because a Heavenly Body had been impassible, and
consequently incapable of Sense; And the soul of man knows nothing naturally,
but by and from the Senses: Wherefore as an Artificer making a File or Saw to
cut, does not make it of Glass but o^ Iron; for he looks not after the beauty,
but after the use of it, and cares not that it is the less beautiful, so he
may have it the more useful: So did God in making man not a Celestial, but a
Terrestrial Body. Wherefore if the necessity of Nature has ^ut man's body under
a comparative defor^ity, to make it the less glorious; How much more has the
corruption of Nature ^ut the same Body under a positive Deformity, to make it
the more inglorious?

Secondly, man's flesh is depraved by sin; As it is deformed, so it is also
depraved by ^t; Nor may we here allege, as before, the necessity of nature;
for though the deformity of man's flesh may in some sort be ascribed to the
condition of his nature; yet the depravation of it, may not; for God may be the
Author of a comparative deformity, for that is but a lesser good; but by no
means of a positive depravation; for that is in it self, an Evil, or a Sin;
and he cannot be the Author of Sin. Wherefore it is a dangerous Position, which
some late Divines have greedily embraced, and as violently maintained, That
there was the same inordinate propensity in the nature of man to the works of
the flesh before the Fall, as is in it since the Fall; Only then it was
restrained and fettered by original justice, or righteousness, but is now let
loose by original sin; This opinion is in it self dangerous, because it casts a
blasphemous aspersion upon God; For he is the Author of Nature, and therefore
the Author o^ the necessary conditions thereof, as w^ those that flow from the
matter as from the Form; but in its consequences it i^ no less then damnable;
For if it be granted, that the rebellion of the sensitive Appetite against the
dictates of Reason, dot^ flow from the very principles and being (...) the
flesh, then it must follow, that it cannot be a sin; for what is natural is no
sinful, sin being no less a Monster o^ nature, then a Monster is a sin of
nature; and consequently, that a man man in and of himself attain to such a
perfection of righteousness, as to say merely ou^ of humility, not according to
the truth forgive us our trespasses, A tenent anathematized by the second
Milevitane Council, (in which Alypius and St. Augustin^ were present, as
appears by the Synodica^ Epistle,) in the? Canon, in these words, S^ quis
asserat haec verba dominicae orationis demitte nobis debita nostra, a sanctis
di^ humiliter non veraciter, Anathema sit the very same with the 117. Canon in
the Council of Carthage, as it is set forth b^ Balsamon, who thus puts it into
Greek (...) (...). And when yo^ see Binius and Balsamon so well agree, yo^ may
look on the Tenent, not as Anathema^ized by one Council, but by the Catholic
Church: Therefore we must conclude that ^his inordinate desire of the flesh
against ^he spirit in man, is not a condition, but a ^orruption of his nature;
and entered ^ot into the flesh, till sin entered into the spirit: Then, and not
till then, did the body refuse to be subject to the soul, when the soul refused
to be subject unto God: then that which before was a body of life, was
presently made a body of death, Romans 7. 24. Not of Gods, but of man's own
making: God made the body, but man made the death: The soul in that it is
united to the body, has by nature an inclination to the things of the body;
but it has only by sin, not by nature, an inordinate, an unruly inclination
to them: The desires of the flesh are from nature, but it is only from sin
there is a depravation and irregularity in any of those desires. Thirdly, man's
flesh is depressed by sin; for it cannot be depraved by the guilt of sin, and
not be depressed by the burden of that guilt: Wherefore we may justly complain
of a weight that is upon us, whiles we cannot but complain of the sin that does
so easily beset us, Heb. 12. 1. Man now groaning under a twofold burden, the
one of his flesh, and the other of his sins, which is the heavier of the two,
and makes the burden of the fles^ the more burdensome and unsupportable And as
in sin there is macula, reatu^ poena; The pollution, the guilt, the punishment;
So in the flesh because of sin ther^ is Deformity, Depravation, and Depression;
Deformity from the pollution, Depravation from the guilt, and Depression from
the punishment of sin: I will therefore be glad and rejoice in the wasting of
my flesh, as I would rejoice in the deliverance from my blemish that most
deforms me from my corruption that most deprave^ me, and from my burden that
most depresses me: It is a sweet contemplation of Aquinas, (12ae. q. 42. art.
5.) That spiritual things, the more we consider them the greater they appear,
so that we may lose our selves in the consideration of them (if at least we can
be said to lose our selves, whiles we seek and find our God) But Corporal
things the more we consider them, the less they appear, and vanish by degrees,
till at length they are quite los^ in their consideration: So is it with my
flesh; the longer I consider it, the more i^ wastes, and becomes less in my
opinion: And therefore it is but reason that the ^onger I wear it, the more it
should wast, and become less in its own substance, till ^t length it come to
nothing.

CHAP. II. The Comforts of the Soul against Death.
THere is nothing more profitable for us then to think of death; yet of all our
thoughts that is the least welcome, and the most terrible: for death is the
King of Terrors: when nothing else will draw us unto God, that will frighte^ us
to him: when nothing else will frighte^ us from our beloved sins, that will
mak^ us afraid of sinning: whence it is the wis^ man's advice, Remember thy
last end, an^ sin no more: Excellent is the Casuis^ distinction of Articulus
mortis verus (...) Praesumptus, That there is one point o^ death in Truth,
another in Presumption Articulus mortis non intelligitur solus il^ in quo quis
moritur, sed etiam ille in quo ^ori probabiliter timetur, says Navar. The
point of Death is not only that where^ a man does actually die, but also that
wherein he may probably dye; so that any ^mminent danger, any dangerous
sickness ^s to be looked on as the point of Death; Nay, yet further (according
to the Christianity, though not the Criticism of Ca^uisticall Divinity;) there
being not one moment of our life exempted from the ^anger of Death, the point
of Death does (...) effect pierce through our whole life, ^uch more should it
pierce through our ^earts: As many mischiefs as are in the ^orld, so many
dangers; as many dangers, (...) many Deaths: Let this wicked world ^en have
this privilege, That though it is ^e worst that ever was to teach a man to ^e,
because its doctrines are so dubious; ^et it is the best that ever was to teach
a ^an to die, because its practices are so ^ngerous: Welcome then all ye
mischiefs ^d outrages of ungodly men, for their ^es that suffer them, though
not for ^eir sakes that do them; We can easily ^sh the one less sin in their
doings, ^t we may not wish the other less bene^ in their sufferings: See the
admirable Providence of God toward his Prophet he throws him into prison to
keep him from starving, Jer. 37. 21. (for by tha^ means he had a piece of Bread
when many others had not, even till all the bread i^ the City was spent:) He
keeps him in prison, to keep him from being butchered by the sword of the
Chaldeans, Jer. 38. 28. Finds out an Ethiopian to be his preserver when the
Princes of Judah were his persecutors, ver. 7. (more charity in one Pr^selite,
then in many Apostates:) yet would not let Ebedmelech prevail for his
enlargement, lest the Prophet should have lo^ his life (as the rest did, when
the City wa^ taken) by gaining his liberty: Carcer (...) obsonio and pro Asylo;
quid ni and mors (...) lucro? When his prison was his Grana^ and his Dungeon
his security; tell me wh^ could be his loss; for sure Death wo^ have been his
gain: Do your worst the^ O ye ravenous Wolves that seek to d^vour the flock of
Christ; Well, you (...) deny them a place to live, but sure yo^ cannot deny
them a place to die; And the look upon the troubles and afflictions (...) their
life, as so many Calls or Summons (...) Death: For God says unto them mo^
particularly, as he did to his Prophet Jer. 18. 2. Arise, and go to the Potters
House, and there I will cause thee to hear my words: They are sent to the
Potters House: that ^s, they are bid to consider their own frail^ty and
mortality, that so they may the more attentively hear Gods Word (The Word of
Piety and Patience that he is preaching unto them) and the more benefit by
hearing it; For many a man that will not hear Gods Word in Gods own House, will
hear it in the Potters House, when he shall consider that his body is no other
but a polished Potsheard; to day a very weak and brittle, and to morrow,
perhaps, a broken Vessel: For Theophilus (lib. 2. ad Antol.) gives us this very
similitude, As a Vessel in the hand of a Potter when it is faulty in the
making, is therefore broken that it may be fashioned and formed again, till he
make it perfect and complete; So is the Vessel of man's body, broken in pieces
by the hand of God, because it is now quite out of order, that it may be formed
and fashioned again, and by that means become a glorious and an incorruptible,
and an immortal body: wherefore it is not amiss going to the Potters House, not
only for Gods sake, but also for our own; For we need not fear being broken by
that hand which alwaye^ mends in the marring: Man's hand often mars in the
mending, brings a Deformation instead of a Reformation, but Gods hand always
mends in the marring: What then have you else to do in this world, but to live
innocently, and to die comfortably, that so you may live in the Faith, and die
in the hope of a better world? The day will come when a little innocence will
go further with you then the greatest Patrimony; therefore keep your Innocence,
though you lose your Patrimony: Facile contemnit omnia, qui credit jam se esse
moriturum, says St. Hierom: He that thinks himself a dying man, will be sure
to keep himself an Innocent man; and will rather forsake all here, then carry
guiltiness away from hence; He can easily contemn the smiles of this world, and
therefore cannot fear the frowns of it: For he believes that Rule of the
Casuist to be true, though not pleasing Divinity, Mortem potius far debet
quam consentire mortali peccato, That he is bound rather to suffer death, then
to consent to any deadly sin; The reason is plain, for that the death of the
body is as nothing to the death of the soul: All death is the privation of some
life: The corporal death is the privation of the life of nature; the spiritual
death is the privation of the life of Grace; the eternal death is the privation
of the life of Glory; yet is the Eternal Death not called the third, but only
the second Death; because the spiritual Death is indeed no other then the
Inchoation of the Eternal, and awaits only the corporal Death to be its
completion. Apoc. 20. 6. Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first
Resurrection, on such the second death has no power: But it has a power on
the rest, though it has not yet the exercise of that power: The second death
has power on a wicked man whiles he lives, though not the exercise of that
power till he dies: Therefore the wicked and ungodly man has great reason to
fear the first, because he cannot but expect the second Death: But whosoever
has his part in the first Resurrection (and it is our shame if we have not a
part in it, for let every one that names the Name of Christ depart from
iniquity, 2 Timothy 2. 19.) is blessed and holy, and blessed in that he is holy:
His holiness being to him the Inchoation of blessedness, and the life of Grace
the beginning of the life of Glory: such a man has little reason to fear the
first death, because on him the second death has no power, and not having
power on him while he lives, shall much less have power on him when he dies:
yet do not Divines think it necessary to exempt the most righteous man that is,
from the fear of death: They only think it necessary that he be furnished with
comforts greater then his fears: Comforts enough to conquer his fear, though
not enough to expel it: Suarez is of opinion, that the blessed Virgin her self
received extreme Unction, and Fillieucius says positively, that if you will
suppose a man by special privilege preserved from all sin, yet it will not
follow that he should not need extreme Unction, because he is capable of the
principal effect of it, which is, Confortatio contr^ mortem, a comforting and
strengthening against Death: And though many Divines do much doubt whether
there be any suc^ aertue in extreme Unction as to comfort against Death, yet
none do doubt but even ^he most righteous may need such com^orts: Our Savior
himself had an Angel strengthening him: Thou have need of more: and blessed be
his goodness, he has given thee more: Thou have his Spirit, God the Holy Ghost
to strengthen thee: Nay, thou have his death, to comfort thee in thine; and
that's the only reason why when Christ himself so much feared death, yet many
Christians have willingly embraced it, because death was not conquered to him,
but it is now conquered by him to us: yet, Not my will, but thy will be done,
is the greatest degree of perfection we can rationally expect, when this bitter
cup shall come to be tasted; For certainly that could not but relish very ill
to any mortal palate, had not the Savior of the world himself tasted it, and
by tasting the bitter Potion therein, sweetened the Cup to those that should
taste it after him: Solus Christus sensit amaritudinem mortis, in cujus anima
omnes vires ac Potentiae fuerunt per speciale miraculum conservatae, says
Gabriel in 3. sent. Did. 15. Christ alone did feel all the sharpness, and taste
all the bitterness of Death, in whose soul alone all powers and faculties were
preserved in their full vigor and sense by special miracle; But we will not
argue the case whether the pains of death be most felt in the sensitive or
intellective parts of the soul; and whether they that have the strongest senses
have always the strongest pains; For sure we are, what are the pains of death
none do know, but those that cannot come to tell us; yet we have reason to
believe that they are so violent as to be able to shake the tallest Cedar of
Libanus, much more the shrubs of Carkemish: To terrify men of undaunted
resolutions, much more such as have too much guilt to have too little fears, or
else the Church would never have taught us to pray, O Holy and merciful
Savior, thou most worthy Judge eternal, suffer us not at our last hour for any
pains of Death to fall from thee; Thou art our Savior, we cannot fall from
thee but we must fall from our salvation; and the pains of Death will make us
fall from thee, unless thou show thy self our merciful Savior to sustain us in
the hour of Death, as thou have sustained us all our life. And why did thou
taste the vinegar at thy death, and not till then give up the ghost? (John 19.
30.) but to teach me to pray, O my God, let me not taste the vinegar, when I am
to give up the ghost, since thou thy self have tasted it for me: so says thy
Apostle, Heb. 2. 14, 15. For he also himself took part of the same flesh and
blood, that through death he might destroy him that had the power of death,
that is, the Devil, and deliver them who through fear of Death were all their
life time subject to bondage: We see here a twofold effect of Christ's death:
The one was to conquer the Devil that had the power of Death; The other was to
deliver us that were under the fear of Death, and fled to him for deliverance;
The Devil had the power of Death till he was conquered, and he was not
conquered till the death of Christ; till then he kept the keys of Hell and of
death, but then Christ took them away from him, and does ever since keep them:
Apoc. 1. 18. I am he that lives and was dead, and behold I am alive for
evermore, Amen: and have the keys of Hell and of Death: Then let me not fear to
pass through the gates of Death whiles my Savior keeps the keys of it to open
the Grave; Let me not fear to pass by the gates of Hell, whiles my Savior
keeps the keys of it to shut the Gates: Yea, though I walk through the valley
of the shadow of death, I will fear none evil, for thou art with me, Psalm. 23.
4. Thou art with me to uphold me in that walk that I fail not; to direct me in
that valley that I stray not; To enlighten me in that shadow that I stumble
not; Christ's guidance cannot but afford a very safe conduct, which is not
unfitly expressed by these four words, Educit, Deducit, Adducit, Introducit; He
brings out, He brings on, He brings to, He brings in: First, Educit, he brings
the soul out, to wit, out of the Body; for it may not go till he call, and then
it must; O my soul, never be afraid to go from thy body, when thy Savior
calls thee to go along with him: Secondly, Deducit, He brings the soul on, to
wit, on the way to Heaven; And himself (says Justin Martyr in Tryphon) did
pray to his Father to guide his soul at his death, that we might know how to
pray to him to guide our souls, Psalm. 22. 20, 21. Deliver my soul from the
sword, my Darling from the power of the Dog, save me from the Lions mouth: He
thus prayed on the Cross immediately before his death, (for it is the Tradition
of the Church, That Christ said all the 22 Psalm upon the Cross, though the
Evangelists mention only the first words of it) to teach us to pray, when we
die, That God, who alone can, would deliver our souls from the Dog and from the
Lion, (...) That he would turn away the evil Angel, (who is compared to a Dog
for his impudency, to a Lion for his violence) least he should catch our souls
at their going out of our bodies; We know the Devil is called the Prince of the
Air, and we may be sure he would not let any man's soul pass from earth to
Heaven, were not he ready to convey it thither, to whom is given all power in
Heaven and in Earth, and over Hell: Thirdly, Adducit, He brings the soul to,
that is, to God; Man when he dies, his body returns to the dust, but his spirit
returns to God that gave it; All spirits return to God at the hour of death,
either as to a Father, or as to a Judge, and Christ brings them all to him; The
spirits of wicked men as to a Judge for punishment; The spirits of good men as
to a Father for mercy; Whence that admirable prayer of our Church for the sick,
That whenever his soul shall depart from the body, it may be without spot
presented unto thee through Jesus Christ our Lord; Christ presents all souls
unto God; but the souls of the impenitent and unbelievers, in the spots they
have contracted by their sins; The souls of those who by Faith and Repentance
have laid hold on his Righteousness, he presents without spot: Those souls that
are in their sins shall be rejected; those souls that are in their Savior,
shall be received; There is no man at that day but will be speechless, who has
not the Eternal Word to answer for him.

Fourthly and lastly, Introducit, he brings the soul in, that is into the state
of Eternal blessedness, to see and enjoy him who is the blessed and only
Potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, who only has immortality,
dwelling in the light which no man can approach unto (unless Christ bring him
in) whom no man has seen or can see, to whom be honor and power everlasting,
Amen: 1 Timothy 6. 15, 16. No man has seen him or can see him in this corruptible
body, but the Saints now do see him in their incorruptible souls, and do
ascribe unto him his honor and power everlasting: Accordingly the Angelical
Doctor makes it his business to confute those, who said that the souls of the
Saints separated from their bodies, do not come to their bliss till the day of
judgment, quod quidem apparet esse falsum autoritate and ratione, which (says
he) is apparently false, as we can prove, both by authority and by reason, (and
all the world is not able to afford better proofs, or gainsay them) 1. By
Authority; for the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 5. 6. Whiles we are at home in the
body, we are absent from the Lord; and he gives the reason of that absence in
the next verse, for we walk by faith, not by sight; whence it appears, that as
long as a man walks by faith, and not by sight, not seeing the divine essence,
he is not yet present with God; but the souls of the Saints when separated from
their bodies, are present with God; for it follows verse the eighth, We are
confident, and willing rather to be absent from the body, and to be present
with the Lord; whence it is manifest, that the souls of the Saints separated
from the body, do walk by sight, seeing the essence of God, and consequently
enjoying everlasting blessedness: 2. By Reason; for the understanding in the
exercise of its operation, needs not the body, but only for some phantasms or
representations; but it is manifest that the divine essence is not to be seen
by the help of any phantasm or representation: Wherefore since the immediate
bliss of the soul consists in the Vision of the divine essence, it cannot
depend upon the body, and consequently the soul without the body may be, and is
undoubtedly blessed. Thus Aquinas, 12ae. qu. 4. art. 5. Showing himself in this
an exact Scholar of the Text, and as great a Master of Reason: And truly i^ we
rightly consider the matter, that Christ has opened the Kingdom of Heaven to
all Believers, what can shut it against a believing soul departing hence, but
only sin^ And that cannot shut it, neither for its guilt, nor for its blemish
and pollution; For the guilt of sin is taken away from the believing soul by
the imputation of Christ's Righteousness; And the pollution of sin is also daily
diminished in it, by the operation of Christ's Spirit during life, and quite
taken away from it at the hour of death, even at the very instant of its
departure; This is the judgment of some excellent Schoolmen; So Gabriel in 3.
Sent. did. 15. Animae, in mortis instantia, datur impeccabilitas and
impassibilitas. God gives to the soul at the very instant of death,
impeccability that it cannot sin, and impassibility that it cannot suffer; O
what a happy instant will that be, wherein we shall be delivered from our sins,
and from our sufferings! And agreeable to this, Alexander Ales our own
Countryman of Merton Coll. in Oxford, and Tutor both to the Seraphical and to
the Angelical Doctor, gives the distinction of Gratia Baptismalis,
Poenitentialis, Finalis, (Par. 4. qu. 15. membr. 3. art. 3.) That some Grace ^s
Baptismal, which rules and governs in the soul by virtue of the Sacrament; some
Poenitential, which causes an imperfect subjection and conformity of the will
to God, and this takes away all mortal sin; And some Final, which makes the
will and all its faculties wholly subject and conformable to God, and this
takes away both mortal sin and also venial; But this grace is given only at the
last instant of our life; for which reason happily it is called final Grace, as
coming only at the end, only to men departing hence, to fit and prepare their
souls for God: For nothing impure or unclean can enter into the Kingdom of God;
and therefore the soul, before it can enter in thither, must be quite purged
from all manner of impurity and uncleanness, which is accordingly done (says
he) by final Grace; For though other grace does conquer sin, yet it is only
final Grace that quite expels it; The soul not being wholly freed from that
disorder which it has contracted from the body, till it again depart from the
body; If this be so, what have I to do, but to long for a happy departure? that
is, to make the best use I can of Baptismal and Poenitential Grace, that my
soul may he delivered from the dominion of sin; and to expect that final grace
which shall deliver it from the very inhaesion of sinfulness: To bless God that
has given me grace in life to purge my soul from sin, and that will give me
grace in death to perfect my soul in Righteousness: That he parting all sin
from my soul, before he part my soul from my body, I may at the end of my weary
pilgrimage, lay me down in peace and take my rest; Lay me down in that peace
which this wicked world cannot give, and this tumultuous world cannot take
away; the peace of a good conscience here, of a blessed eternity hereafter; And
take my rest in the bosom of the earth my mother, but in the arms of God my
Father, even that Rest of which it is said, Heb. 4. 3. For we which have
believed, do enter into rest: A Rest into which neither our disturbance can
enter with us, nor our disturbers after us, unless as they have troubled others
by their sins, so at length they trouble themselves much more, by their
Repentance; A Rest into which he has already entered, who is both able and
willing to keep us in everlasting rest: A Rest of a quiet, of an uninterrupted
sleep; For so he gives his beloved sleep, Psalm. 127. 2. The Grave is a place
of corruption in it self, but to the servants of God it is a place of Rest;
Thence were Churchyards anciently called sleeping places, Coemiteria or
Dormitoria, wherein the bodies of the Saints were laid to their last Rest: The
Ancients did think fit to name their burying places from the rest, not from the
corruption that was to be found in them: Athanasius tells us, that a man may be
said to be corruptible both spiritually and corporally; Spiritually when he
sins, as the Scripture says, They are corrupt, and become abominable in their
iniquities; And Corporally when he dies: which corporal corruption (says he)
has three Names, (...). Mors, Putrefactio, Interitus; Death, Putrefaction, and
Destruction: The death is when the soul is separated from the body; The
Putrefaction is when the flesh of the body decays; But the Destruction is when
also the bones are consumed; And he says, that the body of Christ was subject
only to the first corruption, which is by Death, not to the second by
Putrefaction, and much less to the third by Destruction; The like is Damascens
Divinity; (lib. 3. de orth. fid. cap. 28.) (...). This word Corruption imports
two things: Either the separation of the soul from the body, or the Total
dissolution of the body; (for he has joined (...) and (...) in one.) From the
first the body of Christ was not exempted; from the second our bodies cannot be
exempt: The body of Christ which knew no sin was subject to the first degree of
corruption; But our bodies that have been all over infected with sin, and
defiled by that infection, are also subject to the other two degrees of it.
Christ tasted of death, Heb. 2. 9. But we must swallow it down; He fed on
death, for he tasted it at his own pleasure: Death feeds on us, for we must
taste it against our wills; and not only taste it, but also eat it down:
Corruption first seized upon our souls, and from thence passed to our bodies;
It was to our greatest disadvantage that it seized upon our souls; But it is to
our greatest advantage that it seizes upon our bodies: For unless they should
be quite destroyed, sin which first caused mortality, would in the corrupt
remainders and Relics of our bodies, it self have a kind of immortality,
whereas Righteousness alone is, and ought to be immortal: And therefore it is
very probable that those who shall be found alive at the last day, (of whom the
Apostle has said, We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed, 1 Cor.
15. 51.) shall have a change, not only Equivalent to a Death, but also to a
Total Destruction; For sin must totally be destroyed: And therefore also our
bodies that have lodged it, and have been defiled by it; That there may not be
left the least monument of sin in the New World, wherein shall dwell nothing
but Righteousness, 2 Pet. 3. 13. And now me thinks I can find a Paradise in
Golgotha, ever since my Savior has been there; and bid hearty welcome to those
worms which shall destroy that flesh which would have destroyed me; For I can
now safely conclude, that neither in regard of my soul nor of my body ought I
to fear Death; which certainly is not so formidable in it self, as it is
generally in the worlds opinion: For if the Rule be true, Nomen quasi Novimen:
The name of every thing is that whereby it is best known and discerned; then by
the name of death we may best know and discern the nature of it: And these are
the chief Names whereby the Scripture expresses it, A Sleep; A Change, A
Departure, A Dissolution; and none of all these Names is terrible; and why then
should the thing it self be so? But if there be any terror in the thing, yet
we are sure that in the Text there is a comfort greater then the terror.

First, Death is called a Sleep, Mat. 9. 24. The maid is not dead, but
sleeps; And though wicked miscreants who believed not the Resurrection,
laughed at our blessed Savior for calling death A sleep, yet let all good
Christians rejoice that it is so, and give him thanks for making it so: It is a
comfortable Gloss which the third Toletan Council, cap. 22. gives upon those
words of John 11. 35. Jesus wept; For they say, Dominus non flevit Lazarum, sed
ad vitae hujus ploravit Aerumnas resuscitandum, Jesus did not weep that Lazarus
slept, but that he was again to be awakened to see the miseries, and feel the
mischiefs of this wicked world: It Was said before, verse 11. Our friend Lazarus
sleeps: And he that said it, having made his death a sleep, was troubled that
he should awaken him so soon from his sleep: In vita vigilant Justi, ideo in
morte dicuntur Dormire, says St. Augustine: The good man when he dies is said
to sleep, because he watches and waketh all his life; but a wicked man sleeps
all his life, and awakens only at his death: Soul take thy rest, says the rich
worldling; He lulls his soul asleep: but what follows? Thou fool, this night is
thy soul taken from thee; Thy sleep shall soon be over, together with thy life,
and Vengeance and Death they shall awaken thee; For have thou slept all thy
life, and would thou also sleep at thy death? Have thou slept all the while
thou were here, and would thou also sleep, now thou art going hence? Have
thou slept when God bad thee awake, and would thou also sleep now that he
bids thee die? No; Thou may not any longer expect rest, ease and
tranquillity; For thou shall certainly have disconsolation at thy departure,
grief in thy passage, and shame at thy journeys end, when thou shall appear
before Gods Judgment Seat, and shall not be able to give any account at all of
thy life, (no more then the Soldiers could of Christ, Mat. 28.) for thou were
asleep: Thy Death would have been a sleep, if thy life had not been so.

Secondly, Death is called A Change Job 14. 14. All the days of my appointi^
time will I wait, till my Change come: The Sept. (...), I wi^ wait till I be
made again: If death be thy making, Tell me what can be thy marring? A happy
change doubtless, which is nothing but a new making of that which is quite out
of Order: And thus says St. Chrysostom did Symmachus expound the words,
(...), (...) my holy Nativity, or my holy Nature come; The nature which I now
have i^ full of corruption, full of unholiness, so that my own flesh is not so
near me as i^ my sinfulness; O for a regeneration of my body as well as of my
soul, that I may be born again in my flesh, as I am in my spirit: Nor is there
any thing that can more truly sweeten the thought of death, the^ this
consideration, that it is a change; For we are already in so bad a condition,
that we cannot well fear our Change should be for the worse; And if we be truly
sensible of our own condition, it is most sure tha^ our change will be
infinitely for the better: For so says the Apostle, Phil. 3. 20^ 21. For our
conversation is in Heaven, from whence we also look for the Savior, the Lord
Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like
unto his glorious body; as if he had said, we find nothing on Earth worth
conversing withal, therefore our conversation is in Heaven: we know that our
body is now vile and loathsome, and therefore we look for the Lord Jesus Christ
to Change and Fashion it like unto his Glorious Body; Here are two great
changes, which the men of this world, that are most given to change, least care
for; A change of the soul from being on Earth to be in Heaven, [for our
conversation is in Heaven.] A change of the body from Vileness to Glory, [who
shall change our vile body, that it may be like his glorious body.]

Thirdly, Death is called, A Departure; and so does Abenezra expound the
forenamed word in Job, (...) Chaliphathi, my change; that is, (says he) (...)
Halicathi, my departure: For the Jews express man's Birth, as a Coming, and his
Death as a Going: So Eccles. 1. 4. One generation goes, or Passes away, and
another comes; Generatio vadens, and Generatio Veniens: The first is put for
the Dying, the latter for the living Generation of mankind. And the first
Council of Nice, can. 13. speaking of Dying men uses a word that only
signifies going forth, (...), De iis q^ exeunt; And again, (...); If any man
be ready to Depart hence not to deprive him of that necessary Provision which
God has appointed as hi^ food for his last journey; meaning the Holy
Eucharist; for though many me^ now account it as nothing worth, yet the
Primitive Church thought there was great danger to that Christian soul that
went hence without Receiving it, (and much more without Desiring it) or they
would not have dispensed with all their Ecclesiastical Discipline to restore a
sid^ person to the Communion, which they did again deny him upon his recovery,
till he should give the Church full satisfaction: But thus we see they looked
upon a Christians Dying, only as upon a Going out of his body; exit e corpore,
says Saint Hierom, of devout Lea, she is gone out of the body, when indeed she
was dead; And what then, though I go out of my self, (and yet it is but the
worst part of my self) as long as I go to my Savior? why should I not joyfully
sing with good old Simeon, Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace;
since, I have the very same Ground and Reason of my ^ong that he had, even
this, For (...) (...) have seen thy salvation, Luk 2. (...). (...). (...) do as
clearly see thy salvation (...) (...) Eye of Faith, as he did with the Eye of
Flesh; and so far I have the advantage of him; he saw himself embracing his
Savior, I can more oversee my Savior embracing me.

Fourthly and lastly, Death is called A Dissolution, Phil. 1. 23. Desiderium
habens dissolvi, Having a desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ: Two
very great comforts at once; the first, That I shall be dissolved; the second,
That I shall be with Christ: Which two being joined together in All true
Christians, happily made Saint Cyprian take Saint Paul's Dis^olution for an
Assumption; for whereas ^he Apostle says, 2 Timothy 4. 6. The time ^f my
Dissolution is at hand; The good Father recites him, saying, The time of my
Assumption is at hand; not to furnish ^ur Critics with a various Lection, for
^aint Cyprian was not Pur-blind, to read (...) for (...); nor has the church
been so false as to change the reading, but to furnish our Divines with various
Exposition; For Death, as it is Dissolution in regard of the body, the^ is the
first Comfort, To be dissolved; So^ is an Assumption in regard of the soul
there is the second comfort, To be wit^ Christ. For the first, let Themistius
spea^ (a Heathen Author) (...); we say, The Death is a Dissolution, for the
same reason that we call the body a Bond, becau^ it binds, and manacles, and
fetters the soul; and who would not be Dissolve^ or Loosened, that is in
Fetters and Bonds The wanton desire of imaginary Liberty has brought many
into Thraldom: A^ it is a wonder if the serious sense of re^ Thraldom, should
not in an ingenuo^ soul, increase the desire of true Liberty Bring my soul out
of prison, that I m^ praise thy Name, Psalm. 14. 2. v. 7. It Is Vassalage, a mere
Bondage not to prai^ Gods Name; If others hinder me from praising it, they make
me a Bondma^ though they may pretend to have stretch^ not only their
Purse-strings, but also the Heart Strings, and to have expended (...) only
their money, but also their blood the Purchase of my Liberty: If I hinder my
self, (whether by my sins, or for my pleasures) it is I that imprison my self;
And because my flesh cannot but hinder me, it cannot but imprison me: for the
service of God is perfect freedom, and therefore the soul cannot be truly free,
till she come thither, where she shall do nothing else but serve him. A
privative liberty, not to be enthralled in bondage, a Heathen could see in
Death: But a good Christian may farther see also a positive liberty, To have
his soul and his spirit enlarged, according to that of Psalm 119. v. 32. I will
run the way of thy Commandments, when thou shall enlarge my heart: when the
heart is most enlarged, it is most at liberty; and the heart is most enlarged,
when it most runs the ways of Gods Commandments: most readily, because without
the sluggishness of the flesh; most speedily, because without the ^og and
weakness of the flesh; most incessantly, because without the weariness of the
flesh: This is my first comfort in Death, that I shall be Dissolved or Loosened
from all my Bonds and Impediments; and yet this second is far greater then
this, That I shall be with Christ: For Saint Paul spoke not these words
Personally lest I should think that this Personal privilege was to pass away
with himself (according to the rule of the Law, Privilegium personale transit
cum persona; But (...) spoke them Doctrinally, that I should believe, what was
at that time true Doctrine for his Instruction, and comfortable Doctrine for
his Consolation, was for ever to be so to all true Believers, both for their
Instruction and for their Consolation: For it is evident, That the
Convert-Thief upon the Cross cannot be looked upon as a privileged person, and
yet it was also pronounced concerning him, Dying in the true Faith of Christ,
though he had not lived in it, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise: He
was so to depart from himself, as without doubt to be with his Savior in
Paradise, not in Purgatory: Bellarmine himself confesses, de Purgatorio
incertum est: And none ever durst say, That the humane soul of Christ was at
all in Purgatory; But sure we are, That he is not now there, and as sure that
they that are dissolved to be with him, cannot be where he is not. I am
unwilling to go from this Argument, because I am willing to come to my Death,
as to my sleep for rest: As to my Change for Advantage; As to my Departure from
all Inconveniences for relief; As to my Dissolution from all Impediments for
redress: The Eyes of my body are content to be closed, so as the Eyes of my
soul may be the more opened: There are two Eyes of my soul, as of my body; the
one of Contemplation, which is as the left Eye; the other of Affection, which
is as the right Eye. When the Eyes of my body are nearest shutting, the Eyes of
my soul will be nearest opening; and from seeing the light of Nature, I shall
go to see the light of Glory: As for me, I will behold thy face in
righteousness, says holy David, Psalm. 17. 15. teaching me to lie down in this
faith; and again, I shall be satisfied when I awake, with thy likeness,
comforting me, That I shall rise again in this Vision; For if the former part
be my faith, the latter will surely be my Vision. I know that I shall part with
my dearest Relations, but I also know, that I received them upon this
condition, to part with them. And besides, there is none of these but will be
infinitely bettered to me, by losing these; for he has said it, who is able to
make good his word, Mat. 12. 50. Whosoever shall do the will of my Father which
is in heaven, the same is my Brother, and Sister, and Mother. Tell me, if there
be any Relations nearer and dearer the^ these; and tell me, whether these can
be so comfortable in Earth, as they are in Heaven. What loss is it then to me,
though Death take from me All, while it gives me him who is All in All? The
Spirit of God says unto every faithful soul (Psalm 4. 5. 10.) Hearken O
daughter, and consider, forget also thine own people, and thy Fathers house; so
shall the King greatly desire thy beauty; for he is thy Lord God, and worship
thou him. Non est ergo magnum ^tu obliviscaris and dimittas Populum tuum, and
Domum Patris Tui, ut te totum ejus servitio submittas; Quoniam ipse dimisit
Coelum, and se totum dedit, ut tibi serviret; says Hugo. He requires no great
thing of thee, To forgo thy Fathers house on Earth for his sake, who did forgo
his Fathers house in heaven for thy sake; He was thy Lord, and yet did that to
serve thee; Thou art his servant, and will thou stick at doing this to serve
him? But you will say, Herein consists my greatest perplexity; For I know that
I must go to him as my Lord to Judge me, but I do not know how I can stand in
that Judgment, that so I may find him my Father to receive me, and my God to
save me: But for this, I refer you to another Chapter, as being a Piece of
Divinity that most concerns another world.

CHAP. III. The Comforts of the Soul against Judgment.
SECT. I. The terrors of the last Judgment.
THere is a time for a Minister to be a Boanerges, a Son o^ Thunder, to
proclaim God^ final Judgment against Impenitent sinners, that he may bring
them to an earnest Repentance, for that Impenitency is the highway to
damnation: But there is also a time for him to be a Barnabas, a Son of
Consolation, t^ proclaim Gods mercies to the Penitent that he may bring them to
a lively faith for that true faith is the highway to salvation.

Galatinus reports, That the Jews did use to give a strong intoxicating wine to
those that were condemned to die, that by disturbing their judgments, they
might have the less terrible apprehensions of their approaching Death; wresting
that Text of Prove. 31. 6. Give strong drink unto him that is ready to perish,
and wine unto those that be of heavy hearts: A miserable way of Comforting was
this, to take away the pain, by taking away the sense and the understanding; To
quiet the conscience, by drowning it: Had it not been more mercy in the Jews,
to have given the guilty a bitter potion to awaken his conscience, then a
pleasing potion to benum and to besot it? For it is good the soul should weep
with Mary, (John 20. 11.) when she cannot readily find out Christ, because it
is sure, the weeping soul can never lose him: Wherefore it will be requisite,
that I first set before your eyes the terrors of the last Judgment, that you
may see your sins; and then the comforts against those terrors, that you may
see your Savior.

As concerning the terrors of the last Judgment, they are set down in few
words, but many Frights, 2 These. 1. 7, 8. When the Lord Jesus shall be revealed
from heaven with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them
that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; who
shall be punished with everlasting Destruction, from the presence of the Lord,
and from the glory of his power, when he shall come to be glorified in his
Saints, and to be admired in all them that believe, in that day. Observe the
terrible manner of this Grand-Assizes; The Judge shall visibly come down from
heaven, and bring his Posse Comitatus with him, even his mighty Angels, to
execute his final Sentence; which shall be a Sentence for the punishment of
sense, [they shall be punished with an everlasting Destruction] and for the
punishment of loss, [from the presence of the Lord.] That is, A Sentence for
all punishment that is imaginable, and for more then is endurable: And this
Judge shall come down in flaming fire, a Real, a Material, a Corporal, not a
Metaphorical, or an Imaginary, or a Spiritual fire; and this fire he shall
bring along with him from heaven, not expect it to meet him from hell, (that
shall lose none of its own former flames, but receive more) and therewith
consume this corruptible and corrupted world, 2. Pet. 3. 7. And after that,
throw all the Devils and wicked men into that same fire, and then throw the
fire it self, with them, down into hell, there to increase the torments of
those miscreants for ever, that had before fire from hell to torment them; but
then they shall also have fire from heaven to increase their torments. God, as
he shall be glorified and admired in his Saints, because of his undeserved
mercy; so shall he also be glorified and admired in those sinners, because of
his righteous Judgment: And therefore, though their Judges fire will be so
terrible, because of the flame, yet their own sins will be much more terrible,
because they alone minister the fuel to that fire; For the Books shall be
opened, (The Book of Gods Remembrance, and the Book of their own Conscience)
And they shall be Judged out of those things which are written in the Books,
according to their works, Rev. 20. 12. Then in both Books shall they see such
works Registered, as call for a Judgment worthy of God, because they had not
only an Impiety, but also an Impenitency unworthy of man: And as they shall
first see those works to their terror; so sha^ they after feel them to their
torment: no^ a work that had putrefaction and corruption in it, but shall have
its worm after it For corruption of sin begets a worm in the soul, as
corruption of Death begets worm in the body: Vermis oritur ex putredine, (...)
mordit illud in quo oritur, says Bonaventure; A worm is begotten of
filthiness, an^ feeds on that which beg at it; so is the wo^ of conscience, it
is begotten of corruption even of sin, the only corruption of the soul and it
frets, and corrodes, and gnaws, and bit^ that soul which gave it being. So that
there must needs be all manner of terrors, terrors from within, where their
worm dies not; terrors from without, and the fire (...) not quenched, Mark 9.
46. And to all these terrors, we must yet further add this terrible example
out of Saint Peter, 2 Pet. 2. 4. For if God spared not the Angels that sinned,
but cast them down to hell, and delivered them into chains of darkness to be
reserved unto Judgment: Here is a kind o^ an imperfect speech, called' (...)
his passion caused him to break off, without making the Inference; but our own
consciences will thus make it up for him; for if God spared not the Angels that
sinned; much less will he spare men (the more ignoble creatures) that would not
repent them of their sins; and if he cast the Angels down from heaven into
hell, then surely he will not admit wicked men from hell into heaven; and if he
delivered the Angels into chains of darkness to be reserved unto Judgment,
then much more will he deliver those wicked men, whom he has brought to
Judgment, to be cast into that daarkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing
of teeth; For there was before an inner darkness in their sin, and it is but
just there should be an outer darkness in their punishment. They that before
would not see the light, then shall not see it; for though they shall dwell in
everlasting burnings, yet shall they have such fire as shall only afford Heat
to scorch them, not Light to comfort them; For then shall the fire that is
prepared for the Execution of Gods Judgments upon sinners, be divided by the
Word of the Lord, says Saint Basil; All the light that is in it, shall be for
the comfort of the Saints; that is, shall return back to heaven again, from
whence it came down, (as was said before) but all the Heat that is in it, shall
be for the torment of the sinners: So that in heaven shall be all the Light,
and none of the Heat; in hell shall be all the Heat, and none of the Light:
(Saint Basil in his Sermon upon the Judgment to come, (...)) There will
Pashur, that injuriously smote Jeremiah the Prophet, not be Pashur, noble and
excellent, but Magor-missabib, fear round about, Jer. 20. 3, 4. Est enim Pashur
idem quod excrescens Princeps, vel scindens seu aperiens locum; Magor vero
Pavor, says Zegedine: Then shall those who now only make way for their own
Greatness, only give way to their own Fears: They that now think they have not
room enough to live, shall then think they have too much room to Die. This is
so certain a truth, that it is set down by way of History, as if it were
already done; not of Prophecy, as if it were to do, Rev. 6. 15, 16. And the
Kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief
Captains, and the mighty men, and every bondman, and every freeman, hid
themselves in the Dens, and in the Rocks of the Mountains, and said to the
Mountains and Rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from the Face of him that sits
on the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb; For the great day of his wrath
is come, and who shall be able to stand? We may answer, They who now are most
likely to fall; for it is evident, that they who now are a terror unto others,
shall then be a terror to themselves; the great men, the mighty men that now
engross all, will then think they have too much; for they will wish the Rocks
and the Mountains to fall on them, and think that weight nothing to the burden
of their sins: They will desire to be hid from the face of him, in whose
presence is the fullness of joy; and from the wrath of that Lamb, which alone
delivers from the wrath of God; They will be afraid to see their Redeemer,
how much more to see their Judge? They will not know how to look upon him as a
Lamb, such as he is in himself; much less will they know how to look upon him
as a Lion, such as their sins have made him: They will be terrified at the
thought of their neglected Deliverance, and much more at the voice of their
denounced Damnation.

But I dare not proceed further in these terrors, for fear they should prove
greater then the greatest of our comforts, as we are able to receive them,
though not so great as the least of our sins, as we have despitefully committed
them: For it is not proper to bring a soul laden with sin to a servile, but to
a godly sorrow; not to a sorrow that works fear to confusion, but that
works repentance to salvation: A sorrow that is not without hope, as well as
not without fear, and has hopes as far greater then its fears, as it has
fears lesser then its sins. For a sorrow that is without hope, is but the
beginning of Hell Torments; And it is not safe bringing our souls too near
hell-gate, for fear the Devil should lay fast hold of us when we are there, and
pluck us quite in: Nay indeed it is not necessary; for we are bound to believe,
that our blessed Savior Descended into he^, that he might keep us from
Descending thither: All our labor then must be to enquire which is the best
way to prevent these terrors, that they may not seize upon our souls; and if
they have seized us, which is the readiest way to expel them.

SECT. II. The best way to prevent the terrors of the Day of Judgment.
THE best way to prevent these terrors, is to practice what we have been
taught to pray, even to lead a godly, a righteous and a sober life; A godly
life, according to Gods Eternal Order, the Order of Religion; a Righteous life,
according to man's external Order, the Order of Government; and a sober life,
according to our own internal Order, the Order of Reason: But because some will
the less regard this, or any other sound Divinity, if it be taught them by the
Church (thereby showing themselves, in one and the same act, no less unthankful
to Gods mercy, which gave them a Church to teach them the true way of
godliness, then undutiful to Gods Authority, that they will not be taught) it
is necessary to show how God taught it the Church, before the Church taught it
us; for so says Saint Paul, Tit. 2. 11, 12. For the grace of God that brings
salvation, has appeared to all men, teaching us, that denying ungodliness and
worldly lusts, we should live soberly and righteously, and godly or religiously
in this present world; denying ungodliness and worldly lusts: Not Gods
Ordinances, Gods Sacraments, Gods Authority, not the undoubted exercise of
godliness, making all these by our denyals to be thought ungodliness: Such a
denial as this, must needs be Antichristian, and will justify Hyppolitus his
gloss, who in the Greek word of denying, ('(...),) has according to its
numeral letters, found out the number of the Beast, 666. We cannot deny the
exercise of godliness, as if it were ungodliness; Heavenly practices, as if
they were earthly and worldly lusts, but our denial will help make up the
number of the Beast: If we will needs be denying, let us deny our selves: for
that denial will make us live soberly, and righteously, and religiously in this
present world; soberly in regard of our selves, by subduing our Affections to
Reason; righteously, in regard of our Brethren, by subduing our Actions to our
subdued Affections; and religiously in regard of our God, by subduing both our
Reason and our Affections to Religion. Thus if we do, we shall not be guilty of
any inordinate work, and consequently we shall not fear any punishment, which
is but the act of some violated or offended Order, Vindicating and Revenging it
self: I say, if we live soberly, and righteously, and godly in this present
world, we shall not need live, and much less die in fear, lest any of those
orders, under which God has placed us, should rise up against us to punish and
to depress us: But whiles we are under guilt, we cannot possibly be above fear;
for it is the property of all Order, to suppress the contrary Disorder, and
consequently to punish it; and sin being a breach of these three Orders, the
Order of Reason, the Order of Justice, and the Order of Religion, is
accordingly punished by them all; And therefore the sinner that has not his
sin forgiven him, cannot be exempted from the fear of all these three
punishments; neither from the fear of internal punishment by the remorse of his
own conscience, which proceeds wholly from the Order of Reason, (for it is from
Reason that a man has a conscience, first to admonish him, and at last to
torment him, because he would not be admonished) nor from the fear of external
punishment by the hand of outward Government, which will never leave stretching
it self out, till it has reached the Malefactor, and brought him to suffer
according to his doings: nor from the fear of eternal punishment, proceeding
from the wrath of God: So nearly does it concern us to ful^ill all
righteousness toward God, our selves and our neighbors, that we may be
exempted from all fear of punishment, either from God, or men, or from our
selves, that is to say, our own consciences: This is the best way to prevent
the terrors of the Judgment to come, even to keep our selves in the first
innocence, the innocence of Obedience; but because we have all lost this, and
do continually lose it, we must therefore the more earnestly follow, that we
may the more happily apprehend the second innocence, the innocence of
Repentance.

For there is no protection against fear, but only innocence; which since we
cannot have by our Obedience, we must seek to him by our Repentance: And
therefore it will not be amiss for every good Christian to follow Saint Paul's
example, who says of himself, Acts 24. 16. Herein do I exercise my self, to
have always a conscience void of offense toward God, and toward men; (...); we
may look upon this as Saint Paul's Asceticks (although here is not one rule
concerning a Monastic life) or as his exercitium quotidianum; for so Beza,
ipse me exerceo, Herein do I exercise my self. His daily exercise was this, to
have a conscience void of offense toward God; which they cannot have who are
guilty of superstition; and a conscience void of offense toward men, which they
cannot have who are guilty of faction. Good Lord, how few is the number of
those (in such an innumerable number of Christians) who have a conscience void
of offense, both toward God, and toward men; since there are so few, who are
not guilty, either of superstition or of faction? Herein a man must exercise by
himself, that will exercise himself; for in such depravations and distempers of
the world, what he gets of the company, he may chance lose of the exercise: and
indeed, since the exercise wholly concerns the conscience, it is most fit that
every man exercise both himself and by himself, and accordingly Catechize his
own soul, how far he has had a conscience void of offense toward God, and
consequently in that regard toward himself (for in loving God, he loves
himself, and therefore there is no Text that says, Thou shall love thy self,
but only, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self; for the Text that says,
thou shall love the Lord thy God, includes in it loving thy self, which cannot
be but in relation to God; And lastly, a conscience void of offense toward men;
every one must examine himself, how he has observed his Order toward God by
Faith and Obedience, in believing his Promises, in doing his Commands: How he
has observed his Order toward his neighbor, by Justice and Charity, whether
that Order be Civil or Ecclesiastical; for he can shake off neither, and
therefore must satisfy both: Lastly, how he has observed his Order toward
himself, by Temperance, Soberness, and Chastity, bringing his body under his
soul, and bringing his soul under his God; for he cannot (...), unless he does
(...); He cannot be wise to be sober, unless he be sober to be wise.

Thus he must examine himself concerning all these three Orders, and what he
finds concerning any of them defective in his Obedience, he must labor to
make up speedily by his Repentance; for which cause our Church does laudably
require the distinct rehearsing of all the ten Commandments, and the people
after every Commandment, to ask God mercy for their transgression of the same,
that so we might be sure to pass by no one sin unrepented; which they can
scarce do, who yet are called to repentance upon more strict terms then we are,
since the second Commandment is not in so great repute with them, as to have
any Interrogatory concerning it: But he that heartily asks God forgiveness for
his transgressions against every particular Commandment, since every sin is a
transgression of some Commandment, is sure to pass by no sin whatsoever without
Repentance; for he does really and explicitly repent of those sins which he
knows and remembers, and does virtually and implicitly repent of all the rest:
which is a thing we should all make sure of, since there is nothing but
Innocence can arm us against Judgment; and there is no innocence, but either
in obedience, or in repentance: wherefore, it being impossible that any man,
conceived and born in sin, should quiet his conscience by the perfection of his
obedience, (for in many things we offend all, Jam. 3. 2. an^ having offended,
must fear to be punished it is most necessary that we all labor to quiet our
consciences by Repentance: a^ bless God, who though he has require^ Obedience,
yet has also granted Repentance unto life, (Acts 11. 18.) and would not have
granted it, if he would not have accepted it: Do then as did that godly
Centurion Cornelius, (a fit pattern no^ only for all military, but also for all
sedentary men) give much Alms to the people, (for sure if there be not a
redeeming, ye^ there is a breaking off sins by Alms-deeds and iniquities by
showing mercy to the poor, Dan. 4. 27.) and pray to God always; that is, be so
far from taking away what is another man's, as to be ready to give of thine own;
give of thy substance (...) thy Brother, (for his Poverty has no^ disannulled
his Fraternity) give thy self to thy God, and it shall be with thee, as it was
with Cornelius, thy Memorial shall be with God, thy Comfort with thy self, thy
Conversation with an Angel. No man can be exempted from the terrors of (...)
dreadful Judgment, but he that dares trust God with his soul; and no man dares
trust God with his soul, that is not either Inno^ent or Penitent: And if you
will ask me, which of these two dares trust him most, (...) who my self am
laden with sin must say, ^he Penitent; For the Innocent offers un^ God his own
Righteousness, but the ^enitent offers unto him his Sons Righte^sness; and
certainly, he dares most trust ^od, who offers him that Righteousness, which he
is sure God can least refuse in ^dgement.

SECT. III. The best way to expel the terrors of the Day of Judgment.
THE greatest happiness of a Christian, is not to be troubled in Consci^ce; but
the next to this, is speedily to be ^livered from all his troubles: He is
hap^st that prevents the terrors of a guilty ^nscience; but he is next happy
that ex^ls them: And we have all most need to ^k after this, for there is
guiltiness enough ^thin the most innocent soul to betray it, ^d open the doors
to let in these terrors, and therefore we must labor to see the be faith
enough in the guilty soul, to exp^ and thrust them out again. And surely the
Doctrine of Justification by Work though it pretend to be a great friend
Righteousness, yet is it, in this respect, great enemy to the Righteous, w^ can
never attain to that perfection Righteousness, as to be able to stand up his
own legs in the last Judgment: The^fore Saint Paul imputes our peace (...)
God, to Justification by faith, Romans 5. Being justified by Faith we have peace
(...) God, through our Lord Jesus Christ: (...) is a League that cannot be
broken, a Pe^ that cannot be disturbed, which is thro^ our Lord Jesus Christ,
of whom the (...) from heaven said, This is my beloved S^ whom I am well
pleased, Mat. 3. 17. (...) that voice cannot but speak comfort to according to
the Learned Zanchies g^ lib. 4. de Tribus Elohim, cap. 1. (...) beneficia iis
paucis verbis docet Pa^ Christum nobis Communicari, Dilecti^ Reconciliationis,
Adoptionis, seu Reg^tionis; Three (great) blessings in^ few words does the
Father himself (...) us, are communicated by Christ to good Christian; the
blessing of Love ^e is beloved in himself, we beloved in ^m; the blessing of
Filiation or Adopti^n, for he was his Son by nature, we his ^ns by adoption and
grace: And the ^lessing of Reconciliation, for God is well^leased with Christ
for his own sake, and with us for Christ's sake. For, wherefore ^d there come
forth blood and water out of thy side O sweet Jesus? was it not that ^he water
should wash my soul, and the blood should heal it? I confess, that I have
^ierced thee by my sins more deeply then ever the soldiers spears pierced
thee; yet ^et me still look on thee by a lively faith, that the Scripture may
be daily more and more fulfilled, which says, They shall look on him whom they
pierced, John 19. 37. Thus did holy men heretofore look upon thee; nor had
Saint Bernard any other answer to return to the Devil when he accused him, as
he supposed, at Gods Judgment Seat, but only this, Fateor, non sum Dignus Ego,
nec propriis possum meritis Regnum obtinere Coelorum; Caeterum duplici jure
illud obtin^ns Dominus meus, Haereditate sc. Patris and merito Passionis,
Altero ipse contentus, Alterum mihi donat, ex cujus Dono jure illud mihi
Vindicans non confundor; in vita S. Bernardi, lib. 1. cap. 12. I confess that I
am not worthy, nor can I plead mine own merits, why I should obtain the Kingdom
of heaven; But my Lord having a double right thereto, one from his Father by
inheritance, the other from himself by the merit of his Passions; he being
contented with one of them, has given the other unto me; and I claiming heaven
by his gift, cannot be confuted, and much less confounded in my claim. Thus
has Saint Bernard taught me to answer the Devil; and sure he is too old, too
cunning a Sophister to be answered by any Fallacy: There is no silencing him
but by a downright Truth, whose evidence is undeniable, and whose power is
unresistable. Nay yet more, Thus has Saint Anselm taught me to answer God
himself, in the form of Visitation of the sick, anciently used in this Kingdom,
(for Saint Anselm that used it, was Archbishop of Canterbury) who after some
questions to the dying man concerning his Faith and Repentance, thus concludes
his exhortation, for the quieting and settling of his conscience: (I will put
the words into English, as thinking it most reasonable, that what equally
concerns All, should be in a Tongue equally understood by All.)

Therefore still give him, (that is, your blessed Savior) thanks, whiles your
breath is in your body, that he was pleased to die for you; place all your
confidence in his death; commit your self wholly to it, involve your self
wholly in it, cover your self wholly with it: And if God go about to Judge
thee, say unto him, Lord, I object the death of my Savior Jesus Christ,
between me, and thee, and thy Judgment; If he say, That thou have deserved
damnation; then say unto him, Lord, I object the death of my Jesus between me
and my evil deservings; And I bring with me the merit of his most worthy
Passion, instead of the merits which I should have had, but alas I have not:
Then let the sick man say thrice, Into thy hands Lord I commend my spirit; and
let those that stand by, say so with him; and let him die securely, for he
shall never see the Eternal Death.

Thus did the ancient Church think it not only comfortable, but also
conformable Divinity, That Christ alone should answer all Objections that were
made against the soul; And yet a Church much antienter then this, did believe
and teach the same truth, even the Church in the Apostles times, Heb. 3. 6.
Whose house are we, if we hold fast the confidence, and the rejoicing o^ the
hope firm unto the end. Whose house ar^ we; that is, all we that are
Christians, the whole Catholic Church; for particular men and Churches are but
several stones in this living building; it is the whole Christian Church that
is the House of Christ: And that is his House upon this condition, If it hold
fast the confidence, and the rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end; as if he
had said, By the same means that we are built up in Christ, we are still
preserved in his building; By the same means that we are contained, we are also
continued in his House; that is, by Faith and Hope in him: By holding fast the
confidence, and the rejoicing of the hope unto the end: By laying hold on my
Savior, I get into his Mystical Body, and by keeping my hold, I continue in
it: The Syriack translation instead of Confidence, here says, The uncovering
of the face, to show that there is not left in the true Believer, the
conscience of any one sin unrepented or unsatisfied, (through the
All Sufficiency of his Saviors satisfaction) which may make him cover his
face, either out of shame, or out of fear to look upon God; either out of
shame, because of his own unworthiness, (for by faith he has his Saviors
worthiness to make him confident) or out of fear, because of Gods
unplacableness, for by hope he has a cause to rejoice, not to fear; therefore
it is said, The rejoicing of our hope: And the same Apostle moreover, gives the
reason of this saying, Chap. 4. v. 15, 16. For we have not an High Priest which
cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but was in all points
tempted like as we are, yet without sin; Let us therefore come boldly unto the
throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of
need: What is the hope that we can rejoice in, but the hope of Eternal Life?
And we have this hope, because we have a great High Priest that is passed into
the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, v. 14. He is passed in before us, to make
way for us to follow after him; Nor ought we to be dismayed at our infirmities,
since he is touched with the feeling of them; for himself was tempted, to
strengthen us in our temptations; that in his strength we should encounter
them, and by his strength should overcome them: Let us therefore come boldly to
the Throne of Grace, etc.

Wherein we have set forth the manner and the reason of our going unto God; The
manner, it must be with a holy confidence, in the righteousness of our
High Priest, [Let us come boldly] The reason is twofold, the first concerns
our God, because he has erected a Throne of Grace to pardon us, not of
Judgment to condemn us [unto the Throne of grace.] The second concerns our
selves, That we may obtain mercy and find grace, to help us in time of need:
What help so welcome, as that which helps in time of need? What time of need so
much wants help, as that wherein we can neither help our selves, nor have any
else to help us, the Hour of Death, and the Day of Judgment? In this time of
need it is, that our High Priest does chiefly help us; he will make
intercession for us, when we shall not be able to speak for our selves, at the
hour of death; he will make answer for us, when we shall not be able to answer
for our selves, at the day of Judgment: What though the Devils will then
busily accuse me, as long as his righteousness shall be interposed in answer
for me? what if my conscience does condemn me, as long as his satisfaction does
acquit me? Why should not my soul joyfully say, I will go forth, (even out of
my body) in the strength of the Lord God, and will mention thy Righteousness
only, Psalm. 71. 16. Though I dare not go forth in mine own strength, for fear I
should fail in my journey, or miscarry at my journeys end, yet I dare go forth
in his strength; Though I dare not mention mine own Righteousness at the Bar of
Gods Justice, yet I dare mention my Saviors Righteousness [I will make mention
of thy Righteousness, even of thine only:] Having therefore boldness to enter
into the holiest by the blood of Jesus, by a new and living way, which he has
consecrated for us through the Vail, that is to say, his Flesh, and having an
High Priest over the House of God, let us draw near with a true heart, in full
assurance of Faith, Heb. 10. 19. Here are three singular benefits, that all
they have who have Communion with Christ, to assure them of their entrance into
heaven, when they depart from the earth; The first is, That the door is opened
unto them, and they have such a right to enter as cannot be doubted, must not
be denied [Having boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus.]
The second is, That the way which leads thither is a safe way, keeping all
from death that walk in it, [A new and lively way.] And also, A ready way, such
as they may hope to walk in, notwithstanding their infirmities, because he has
made it plain for them, for he has consecrated it for us through his flesh.
The third is, That the House whither they are to go, is wholly disposed and
ordered by their high Priest, who both guides them in the way, and is ready to
receive them at their journeys end, [Having an High Priest over the House of
God] These being the Premises, That the door is open, and we have a right to
enter; that the way is both safe and plain; that the House whither we desire to
go, is wholly ordered by our own High Priest, who guides us thither, and is
ready to receive us there; what else can be the conclusion but comfort and
confidence? what have we else to do, but to draw near with a true heart, in
full assurance of Faith? A true heart, that is true to its Savior, by
believing in full assurance of faith; that is true to it self, by drawing near
according to that belief: And surely, the Apostles invitation is as urgent for
us to draw near to the Church Triumphant, as to the Church Militant, because
all power is given to our Savior Christ, as well in heaven as in earth, Mat.
28. 18. He has power over the House of God in heaven, as well as over the
House of God in earth: And where he has power of the House, we need not be
afraid to enter: For as he has made the passage for us, to pass from the
bondage of sin and Satan, to come into his Kingdom of Grace: So much more has
he made the passage for us, to pass from his Kingdom of Grace, to come to his
Kingdom of Glory: And if we have already passed from Death to Life, much more
shall we pass from Life to everlasting Life: If we have already passed from
Nature to Grace, much more shall we pass from Grace to Glory: For the distance
betwixt Nature and Grace is much greater, and harder to be passed, then the
distance betwixt Grace and Glory; for nature scarce affords a capacity of
Grace, but grace is the very Inchoation of Glory.

Profitable; If thou will not help us for our miseries which we have deserved,
yet help us for thy mercies which thou have promised; For thy Goodness is more
willing to forgive, then thy power is to punish: And thy blood cries much
louder for pardon and forgiveness, then our sins can cry for punishment: Thou
have not yet forgiven so much as thou have promised; and thou have not promised
so much as thou have purchased: One drop of thy blood had been a full and
sufficient satisfaction for the sins of the whole world, but thou wast pleased
to shed many drops of it, to show that there was satisfaction still left for
the sins of many worlds: Lord, has thy blood satisfied for more sins then we
can commit, and shall it not satisfy for those sins that we have forsaken and
do detest? Have thou purchased mercy for more then do repent, and will thou not
show mercy on those to whom thou have given Repentance? Have thou been so long
calling us, that thou should at last reject us? Have thou so long promised
salvation, that thou should at last deny it? Thou have purchased Redemption
for us by thy blood, thou have promised it in thy Word; Thou have purchased
more then thou have promised, and have thou promised less then thou will
perform? I am thy Debtor for the Purchase, and I owe thee more then I am able,
if not more then I am willing to pay: But thou art my Debtor for the promise; I
could not oblige thee by my desert, but thou have obliged thy self by thy Word,
and the Obligation is much the stronger for being of thy making, then if it had
been of mine. This is the Obligation that I trust to, the Obligation whereby
thou art obliged to thy self, to thine own blood, to thine own truth, Help thy
servant whom thou have Redeemed with thy precious blood, and to whom thou have
promised the benefit of this Redemption in thy Word: Thou will Judge me for
those sins for which thou thy self have satisfied, and is it possible that the
sentence of thy Judgment should disannual the merit of thy satisfaction? How
comfortable are those words of thine to my guilty soul, The Father Judges no
man, but has committed all Judgment to the Son, John 5. 22. For when I look
upon the Father, I must needs say of him, Our God is a consuming fire, Heb. 12.
29. He is as fire, and I am as stubble, easily consumed; my sins have made my
soul combustible, which his goodness had made impassible; Have so much fuel
about me and within me, that I cannot but dread the fire: therefore I do most
exceedingly rejoice, that the Father will not Judge me, but has committed all
Judgment to the Son; For in the Son I cannot but see Flesh of my Flesh, and
Bone of my Bone; And since no man yet ever hated his own Flesh, Ephesians. 5. 29. I
will not think that the Savior of man, will be the first to hate that Flesh in
me, which he has in himself; I will then no longer stagger at those words of
the Apostle, That the Lord the righteous Judge has laid up a Crown of
righteousness for them, and will give it to them, and to them only that love
his appearing, 2 Timothy 4. 8. For now I my self cannot but love it; I cannot but
love his appearing as my Judge, when my soul does magnify him as my Lord, and
my spirit does rejoice in him as God my Savior: For to me, being thus prepared
and disposed as I ought, it is all one to look for that blessed hope, and to
look for the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ,
who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, Tit. 2. 13.
He gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity; and
therefore it is nothing else but looking for that blessed hope, to look for his
appearing to the completing of our Redemption. Divines tell us of a threefold
Advent or Coming of Christ to Holy and Religious men; Adventus ad Redemptionem,
Consolationem, and Remunerationem; his coming to their Redemption, to their
Comfort, and to their Reward: His first coming was in the Flesh, when he took
on him their Nature; His second coming was in the Spirit, when he imparted unto
them of his grace: His third coming will be in Power, when he will impart unto
them his Glory. His first coming was to Redeem them, his second coming to
Comfort them, and therefore his third coming cannot be so much to Judge as to
Reward them: Himself has said no less, John 6. 40. This is the will of him
that sent me, that every one which sees the Son, and believes on him, may
have everlasting life: Lord, thou have opened mine eyes to see thee here by
Faith, and will thou not hereafter open thy self, that I may see thee by clear
Vision? And what privilege is it, that I may have everlasting life here, where
it is not, if I may not have it hereafter, where it is? And yet for
strengthening my faith, thou have said much more, to show that I cannot believe
enough of thy goodness, John 3. 36. He that believes on the Son, has
everlasting life. And again, John 5. 24. He that hears my Word, and believes
on him that sent me, has everlasting life, (it is as sure as if he had it
already) and shall not come into condemnation, (though he shall be Judged, yet
he shall not be condemned in Judgment) but is passed from death to life. He is
already passed from the Death of sin to the Life of Grace, and shall assuredly
pass from the life of Grace to the life of Glory: And indeed, what is the sum
of the whole Gospel, but the Promise of Eternal life upon condition of Faith in
Christ? This is the Record, that God has given to us Eternal life, and this
life is in his Son, he that has the Son has life, 1 John 5. 11, 12. Have I
life, in having thee my Savior, and can I lose it in having thee my Judge? O
the immortal comfort that my soul enjoyes, to think, that though I have been to
my Master in heaven, a far worse servant then Onesimus was to Philemon, not
only to run away from him, but also to rob him, yet upon my true Repentance, my
Savior will say to his Father on my behalf, as Saint Paul did to his friend,
If thou count me a Partner, (and truly, he is his Partner in the same Godhead)
receive him as my self, (now he is invested with my righteousness) if he has
wronged thee, or owes thee ought, put that on mine account: (Saint Paul to
Philemon, v. 17, 18.) O Lord, I owe thee so much, that I can never say
sufficiently, and much less may leave off saying, Forgive us our debts; yet
since thou have already put my debts upon thy Sons account, how will thou let
them lie still on mine? Did thou not punish thy Son, that thou might spare
thy servant? Or can thou in Justice punish the same sin twice, once in my
Surety, another time in me? It was the great necessity of thy offended Justice
to punish the sin; and is it not as great a necessity of thy satisfied Justice,
to spare the sinner? I will not then say, He is to be my Judge, whose Majesty I
have honored, whose mercy I have embraced, whose glory I have promoted, whose
goodness I have proclaimed, whose presence I have desired, for if I have done
any of these, yet it was not I, but the grace of God which was with me, 1 Cor.
15. 10. And yet for that very cause alone I must needs confess, that those are
thrice happy, who have so far been assisted by Gods grace, that they can, not
Pharisaically, but Truly say this; for though it was his mere mercy to give the
grace, yet it is in some sort his Justice, both to continue, and to regard his
own gift; So says Saint Paul, God is not unrighteous, or unjust, to forget
your work and labor of love, which ye have showed toward his Name, Heb. 6.
10. where this is in effect his argument; He that desists from a just work,
justly begun, is unjust; But God is not unjust; therefore he will not desist
from those good works he has begun in you, so far as not to perfect them, and
much less so far as not to reward them, But I am contented to pretend to no
such happiness. This is the immortal comfort of the Righteous; Let my soul look
after the comforts of the sinner, wherein I am not like to have the less
remedy, because I am sure to have the more company: I will say then, He is to
be my Judge, whose Majesty I have contemned, whose mercy I have neglected,
whose glory I have hindered, whose goodness I have denied, whose presence I
have shunned: But withal, he is to be my Judge for those sins for which I have
already Judged and Condemned my self; and will he for these, Judge and condemn
me the second time? This is scarce agreeable with his Justice, much less is it
agreeable with his mercy; For the Apostle says, If we would Judge our selves,
we should not be Judged, 1 Cor. 11. 31. I ask, how should we not be Judged? not
temporally? that were not to be loved; For whom he loves he chasteneth, Heb.
12. 6. And Saint Peter says, That Judgment must begin at the House of God, 1
Pet. 4. 17. and sure we are, that his love begins there, and comes down to
particular men but as they are parts of his Family or Household; we must
therefore say, That if we would Judge our selves, we should not be Judged
Eternally; For most universally true, is that Rule of the Civil Law, Favores
sunt Ampliandi, all matters of Favor are to be enlarged: Gods mercies if they
could be with Restriction, they could scarce be without Repentance; and what a
cruel mercy were this, not to Judge Temporally, that he might Judge Eternally?
I say then, I have Judged my self for all my sins, and therefore believe that I
shall not be Judged of the Lord; that is, not so Judged as to be condemned in
the Judgment: For sin, as it must be Judged, so it can be Judged but once: If
I have Judged my self for it, I shall not be Judged of the Lord: I shall then
be enabled to pray in Faith unto my Savior, Enter not into Judgment with thy
servant, Psalm. 143. 2. And I am sure, that praying thus in Faith, I shall find
him my Advocate, and not my Judge. Why should I then be dismayed for fear of
that Judgment, wherein he is to be the Judge, who at first suffered for me as
my Surety, that he might satisfy his Fathers Justice, and my debts: Has ever
since prayed for me as my Intercessor, and will at last Plead for me as my
Advocate?

SECT. V. Comforts against Judgment, from the manner of the Judges proceeding.
THere is none that is guilty, but the Law will; none that is innocent, but the
Judge may condemn him: what then can be the comfort of a Malefactor, but that
he shall have his Trial by a favorable Law, and by a more favorable Judge?
And this is my comfort against the Judgment to come, That my Judge will
proceed to a favorable Trial with me, because according to that Law which will
not easily condemn me, and with that mind which will readily acquit me: For I
have confessed my sins, and therefore may not doubt but that He is faithful and
just to forgive me my sins, and to cleanse me from all unrighteousness, 1 John
1. 9. He is faithful to forgive my sins, because himself has promised
forgiveness; He is just to forgive my sins, because his Son has purchased
forgiveness; And how shall he then not cleanse me from all unrighteousness by
his Holy Spirit, and seal unto me the assurance of that forgiveness? And if I
be cleansed from all unrighteousness, why should I not be rid of all my fears?
How can I look upon him as an angry Judge, when I have found him a most
merciful Father? If God will not withdraw his Anger, the proud helpers do stoop
under him, Job 9. 13. That is, the Angels (says Jarhci) that are the Helpers
of Egypt; for he there takes Rahab for Egypt, (as indeed it may signify,)
which we interpret Proud; And proves out of Dan. 10. 13. That particular
Nations have particular Angels, as it were their Patrons in heaven, ready to
intercede on their behalf: Some late Divines have unadvisedly enlarged those
Patrons, finding out amongst men some tutelarie Saints, which having
righteousness over and above to serve their own turn, are able to spare enough
to help others: Hence that strange kind of Invocation, O Thomas Didyme succurre
nobis miseris, ne damnemur cum impiis, in adventu Judicis: O good Saint Thomas
help us, that we be not condemned in the last Judgment; when alas, the Saints
will have enough to do to help themselves; and the best of them all may say to
his Petitioner, If the Lord do not help thee, whence shall I help thee? 2 King.
6. 27. But be it so, that there may be Phansied such lofty and puissant
Helpers, for they can never be Proved; yet sure we are, that if God withdraw
not his anger, even those Helpers must stoop under him; as it is said, Job 4.
18. Behold he put no trust in his servants; that is, his Saints, his best
servants; for the Text makes it an universal Negative, admitting of no
exception; and we may not doubt it concerning any man, when we cannot deny it
concerning any Angel, as it follows, And his Angels he charged with folly:
Therefore if these mighty Helpers cannot in this day of anger help themselves,
much less can they help me: If God withdraw not his anger, they must stoop; and
if they must stoop, all that lean and rely upon them, must needs fall. I will
then look after such an Helper as may be able to stand himself, and to support
me; for else it cannot be worth my while, and much less worth my Devotion to
pray to him for help; and truly I can find none but the Eternal Son of God, who
is able to withdraw the anger of his Father, because he was able to satisfy
his Justice; and yet having him my Helper, it will not be safe for me to argue
and dispute, but only to pray and deprecate, as it follows, v. 15. Whom though
I were righteous, yet would I not answer, but I would make supplication to my
Judge: And what is the supplication that I would make unto him? Even that which
his own holy Spirit has taught me to make, and will cause him to hear, That he
will not be extreme to mark what is done amiss, Psalm. 130. 2. Lord hear the
voice of my supplications; for what? even for this, that thou should not mark
iniquities; as it follows, If thou Lord should mark iniquities, O Lord, who
shall stand? But there is forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared.
This is the favorable proceeding by which I hope to be acquitted; for why have
thou taught me to believe the forgiveness of sins, unless I may attain what I
do believe? And if I may attain forgiveness of my sins here, how shall I be
condemned or punished for them hereafter? since that is no forgiveness, which
either holds guilty to condemn, or holds as guilty to punish and torment: I do
then believe that God will proceed in Judging me, not according to the Law
which requires an absolute obedience without sin, but according to the Gospel
which admits of Repentance for the forgiveness of sins: Thus has the Doctor of
the Gentiles long since determined, Romans 2. 16. In the day when God shall Judge
the secrets of men by Jesus Christ, according to my Gospel; Not according to
the Law which will condemn all that have been guilty of any sin, but according
to the Gospel which will condemn none but the unbelieving and impenitent
sinners: For the Gospel pronounces sentence of Absolution to all that Believe;
So Mark 16. 16. He that believes and is baptized shall be saved; but he that
believes not, shall be damned; Where damnation is denounced, not for breaking
the Law, but for rejecting the Gospel: And again, John 3. 16. For God so loved
the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him
should not perish, but have everlasting life. The words speak four such truths
as the Angels desire to look into, and men can never enough look upon, yet four
Miracles rather then Truths. 1. That God who was provoked to inflict Death,
should offer Life, and that Everlasting Life. 2. That he should offer it to the
world which had so provoked him. 3. That he should offer it, by sending his
only begotten Son away from himself into the world. 4. That he should so send
this Son as to give him, giving his only Son, the Son of his love, to give life
to those that hated him, and more deserved his hatred; That whosoever believes
in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. Since then I know that I
believe, why should I fear that I shall perish? Why should I think that I shall
not have this everlasting life, which the Father has promised, the Son has
purchased, and the Holy-Spirit has sealed; for I can say, with a thankful
heart and a cheerful voice, In Te Domine speravi, ne confundar in aeternum,
Psalm. 71. 1. In thee O Lord have I put my trust, let me never be put to
confusion, deliver me in thy righteousness: I pray not to be delivered in mine
own righteousness, but in thine; Deliver me in thy Righteousness O God the
Father of heaven, for thou have promised deliverance; Deliver me in thy
Righteousness O God the Son Redeemer of the world, for thou have purchased
deliverance; Deliver me in thy Righteousness O God the Holy Ghost, proceeding
from the Father and the Son, for thou have sealed both the Promise and the
purchase of deliverance; Deliver me in thy Righteousness, O Holy, Blessed and
Glorious Trinity, three Persons and one God, for I trust on thy Promise, on thy
Purchase, on thy Seal for deliverance: For with thee is the Fountain of life,
in thy light shall we see light, (Psalm. 36. 9.) My soul desires nothing but
Life and Light; for as a Spirit she was made for Life; as an Intellectual or
Rational spirit she was made for Light: And she must go to God for both; She
must go to him for Life, for with thee is the Fountain of Life; and she must go
to him for Light, for in thy Light shall we see Light: And the Life is before
the Light, even as Living is before Seeing: The soul cannot work before she
sees, and she cannot see before she lives, so that Life is in truth given
before the work, and cannot possibly be given for it: And will you know who
gives both Life and Light? Saint John will tell you, John 1. 4. In him was
Life, and the Life was the Light of men; Life and Light both proceed from the
Eternal Son of God; and Life before Light; I had Life in him, before I had
Light from him; He purchased the Life, before he gave the Light, and therefore
sure he has not given the Light to take away the Life. I know it is said, That
we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may bear
the things done in his body; according to that he has done, whether it be good
or bad, 2 Cor. 5. 10. And I confess I have done very bad things in my body; but
since my Savior has already born them for me, must I still fear to bear them
for my self? Christ is called The Mediator of the New Testament, Heb. 9. 15. It
is not said, The Mediator of the New Covenant, (as in other places) but of the
New Testament; for a Covenant does wholly depend upon mutual conditions, which
if either party fail, the Covenant is broken, and made of none effect; But a
Testament is a thing merely of Grace and Liberality, without any condition; and
so may be fulfilled, merely out of the goodness of the Testator: And this
goodness is the support and comfort of my soul; I am afraid of the Covenant,
and I fly to the Testament, even to that Testament by which I am made a child,
an heir, even an heir of God, and joint heir with Christ, Romans 8. 17. Wherefore
I cannot but hope that he will Judge to me the Inheritance which he has
already given me by his own Will and Testament: For I look for him to appear
the second time without sin unto salvation, Heb. 9. 28. not only without sin in
himself, for he never had any, but also without sin in me and all his members,
from whom he has taken away all: For the death of Christ is doubly beneficial
to all true Believers; First in respect of his Priesthood, that he has
expiated their sin. Secondly in respect of his Testament, That he has given
them an Inheritance; I dare not deny the first, the benefit of his Priesthood;
for he is the Lamb of God that takes away the sin of the world; And why should
I doubt the second, the benefit of his Testament, since he did therefore take
away the sin, that he might give the Inheritance?

I confess, that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor.
6. 9. whether Fornicators, or Idolaters, or Adulterers, or Thieves, or
Covetous, or Drunkards, or Revilers, or Extortioners, or guilty of any other
kind of unrighteousness like to these; but my belief is, That I having repented
of my unrighteousness and forsaken it, shall no longer be accounted as
unrighteous: For so it follows, such were some of you; but ye are washed, but
ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus; and by
the Spirit of our God; In that it is said, ye were such before ye were washed,
and justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and sanctified by the Spirit of
our God, it is evident that after your Justification and Sanctification you are
not such. Be it then taken for granted, which cannot be denied, for truth
himself has said it, That every idle word that men shall speak, they shall
give account thereof at the day of Judgment, Mat. 12. 36. yet sure, not if
they have given an account of it already; or rather, Christ has given an
account for them, in that they have by a lively faith embraced his
All-sufficient satisfaction, and by an earnest Repentance are admitted to it
and instated in it: Their sins shall be laid open before the face of men and
Angels, as David's, or as Saint Peter's, to the glory of Gods Justice in
acquitting them; not as Saul's or Judas's, to the glory of Gods Justice in
condemning them.

If it shall be Recorded, (for it is a Problem of Divinity, that the Text has
not so positively determined, but that learned men think they may abound in
their own sense concerning it) I say, if it shall be Recorded how David and
Saint Peter sinned, it shall also be Recorded how they repented: If it shall be
declared that Demas did forsake Saint Paul, having loved this present world, 2 Timothy 4. 10. it shall also be declared, that the same Demas did afterward
repent and turn back again to Saint Paul, whiles he was still a Prisoner of
Jesus Christ, and then became his fellowlabourer, Epist. to Philemon, v. 24.
For without doubt, as much as they shall be terrified at the sight of their
sins, so much they shall be comforted at the sight of their faith and
repentance. In Christo simul summum Gaudium and summa Tristitia, says Gabr. in
3. sent. did. 15. In Christ there was the greatest Joy and the greatest
Sadness at the same time, though not in the same respect; his Joy was from his
union with God; his Sadness was from his union with man, and the imputation of
our sins: And possibly (think some) it may be so with the best Christians, in
that great and dreadful day, when their bodies shall be reunited with their
souls, and all their sins represented, whether of Body or of Soul: They may
have the greatest sorrow (say they) in regard of themselves and of their own
sins; and yet have the greatest Joy in regard of their Savior, and of his
freegrace: Saint Paul prays for Onesiphorus, That he may find mercy of the
Lord in that day, 2 Timothy 1. 18. Therefore it is probable he shall need mercy in
that day, though he shall not need so much as he shall find: And Saint Peter
speaks of blotting out sins in the times of Refreshing and Restitution of all
things, Acts 3. 19, 21. that is, at Christ's second coming; for till then there
will not be a restitution of all things: And this consideration, though it is
not cause enough why the living should pray for the dead, (and yet without
doubt, it is one of the best causes that can be alleged) yet sure it is cause
more then enough why the living should pray for themselves, even after their
Justification, and still say, Forgive us our trespasses: For it seems there is
some kind of forgiveness, at least a general Absolution, reserved until the day
of Judgment. What is it then? will there be the same terror to the just and
to the unjust? No doubtless: And this may appear from the very Titles which are
given by Saint Paul to the day of Judgment, Romans 2. 5. And they are three, A
day of Wrath, A day of Revelation, and A day of Righteous Judgment. The day of
Righteous Judgment does equally concern all sinners, whether they have been
Penitent or Impenitent; but the day of Wrath concerns only the Impenitent
sinners; and the day of Revelation does likewise chiefly, if not only, concern
them: I say, the day of wrath concerns only the Impenitent sinners, such as
after their hardness and impenitent hearts, have treasured up unto themselves
wrath against the day of wrath: But to those that have faithfully and
penitently served God (for true Faith never yet went without Repentance) it
will be a day of Exultation and Redemption; he has called it so, that has
made it so, Luke 21. 27, 28. Then shall they see the Son of man coming in a
cloud, with power and great glory, sc. to Judge the world: But what then? must
ye therefore (that have been his Disciples and Followers) be terrified, as if
he were coming to take Vengeance of you? No, you must then look up, and lift up
your heads, for your Redemption draws nigh: This same day, that is to them a
day of Vengeance and a day of Wrath, is to you a day of Redemption, to lift up
your heads, and much more a day of Exulcation to lift up your hearts: And so
also the day of Revelation, does chiefly, if not only, concern those who are
concerned in the day of wrath; for, as for the Believers and the Penitent, if
there shall be any Revelation of their sins (for some do doubt it) it shall be
so in order to Gods Justice, as not to their punishment: For the Text plainly
says of them, I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no
more, Jer. 31. 34. And so again, All his transgressions that he has committed,
shall not be mentioned unto him; whatever shall be done concerning the
Revelation of his sins, shall be done only that Gods Justice may be cleared in
his Absolution, not that his soul may be terrified by the Representation. What
then, though I shall see, with Ezekiel, a hand sent unto me with a Roll, a
dismal Roll, written within and without full of all the sins that ever I
committed in Thought, Word and Deed, as long as I shall not see written
therein, Lamentations, and Mourning, and Woe unto the sinner? For Christ Jesus
that came into this world to save sinners, will assuredly in the next world
complete that salvation: I will then willingly say with Saint Paul, Quorum
primus Ego, Of whom I am chief, 1 Timothy 1. 15. Or with the ancient Missal.
(Dominica secunda post Epiph. feria quarta) Quorum primus Ego Ego sum, Of whom
I, I am chief. The earnestness of my Repentance, shall bring me to an often
Repetition of my sins; I will rather add to their number in my confession of
them, then diminish from it; I will rather say, That I am a double sinner, then
that I am no sinner: For being a Penitent sinner, that is, one of those sinners
that Christ came to save, as I have been chief in the sin, so I shall be chief
in the salvation: The more I have seen mine own sins, the more I shall see the
salvation of my God: It is a most comfortable observation of Divines, That our
Savior Christ is now here in all the Bible called invisible; And therefore
that Doxologie in 1 Timothy 1. 17. Now unto the King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible,
the only wise God, be honor and glory for ever and ever, Amen; is to be
expounded of God the Father, because the Word invisible is in it; and our
Savior Christ is now here in all the Bible called invisible: And truly,
blessed be his mercy, I have hitherto found it so; for when I have most seen my
sins to trouble me, I have most seen his salvation to relieve me: And sure I
am, that though my sins should be never so visible at the last day, yet they
shall not be half so visible as my Savior: For I shall then certainly with
Saint Stephen see Jesus standing on the right hand of God, Acts 7. 55. I shall
see him standing up, as ready to give sentence; but surely that sentence will
be for me, not against me; For he is not willing to give sentence against me;
but sure he cannot give sentence against himself, that is, against his Word;
For a sentence against his Word, is against himself: His Word therefore being
the truth, because it is his Word, who is the truth: Therefore the sentence
that shall be given at the last day, can be no other then what is given
already, in Gods Word and in mine own conscience; His Word has pronounced a
merciful sentence, and I must never leave Rectifying my conscience, till that
pronounce sentence according to his Word.

SECT. VI. Comforts against the last Judgment, from the sentence that shall be
pronounced.
A Sentence that is resolved on before the hearing of the cause (though not
pronounced till after it) must needs be the sentence of an unrighteous Judge,
and is most like to be the sentence of an unrighteons Judgment; But shall not
the Judge of all the earth do right? Genesis 18. 25. And how then can we now have
comfort from the sentence he will pronounce at the last day, since he cannot
resolve upon a sentence before the hearing of the cause, nor can we know before
hand what is his resolution? I answer, The cause is heard here, and the
sentence is pronounced here, though many men will not take notice of it; And
that which shall be pronounced hereafter, shall not be a new sentence, but a
Publication of the old; which may not unfitly be called an old sentence, since
it has been twice pronounced here already, once in Gods Word, another time in
our own consciences; For the Spirit of God does here Judge us in Gods Word; And
the Son of God will not thwart or contradict the Judgment of Gods Spirit, but
only ratify and confirm it: The word that I have spoken, the same shall Judge
him at the last day; John 12. 48. that is, the sentence at the last day shall
be but a declaration and confirmation of the sentence that is already spoken in
the Word: And happily in this respect it is said, That the Apostles shall Judge
the world, not only in regard of their persons, as all other Saints shall Judge
it, by approving the sentence of the righteous Judge; but also in regard of
their Doctrine, which shall be the rule of Judgment: Wherefore if we can have
comfort from the sentence that is already passed upon us by the Apostles, we
may have also comfort from the sentence that will be passed upon us by their
Master: And truly, if we be not Hypocrites or Apostates, but true and constant
Christians, we may have very great comfort from the sentence that is already
passed upon us by the Apostles: A comfort which no partial Judge here can give
us, though he resolve to come with omnia been, and to admit of none but of
white suffrages: for in vain does the spirit of man set it self to absolve
those whom the Spirit of God does con^emn: And a comfort, which no unrighte^s
Judge here can take from us, though he ^esolve to write his sentence, as Draco
did ^is Laws, in Characters of blood: For in ^ain does the spirit of man set it
self to ^ondemn those whom the spirit of God ^oth absolve: For this is the
sentence ^assed upon us by the Apostles, He that ^elieveth on the Son has
everlasting life, ^ohn 3. 36. The whole Doctrine of the New Testament driving
at this, That true ^aith in Christ, as it is not to be supposed without a true
Christian life and conversation agreeable to the faith; (for it is in ^ain to
profess Christian, and to live Athe^st, or to act Infidel) so it cannot but
de^iver the true Believer from the guilt and ^urden of all his sins: For all
the whole Gospel is nothing else but a Sermon upon ^his Text of our Saviors
own choosing, John 11. 25, 26. I am the resurrection and ^he life; he that
believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live; And whosoever ^iveth
and believes in me, shall not die for ^ver: Words properly used by the Church,
as they were spoken by Christ himself, at the burial of the dead: For they are
the chiefest comfort against Death, because they are the chiefest comfort
against Judgment: And so has the beloved Disciple explained them, that leaned
in his Masters bosom, and thence got this soul-healing and soul-saving
Divinity; But if we walk in the light as he is in the light, we have fellowship
one with another; and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son, cleanses us from all
sin: And again, If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us
our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness, 1 John 7. and 9. Here is
the true comfort against Judgment; for if my soul be cleansed from all sin and
unrighteousness, I shall have reason not to dread, but to desire the coming of
my Judge: And this Christian consolation cannot be separated from the true
Christian Faith, that is to say, Faith in the blood of Christ which cleanses
us: And this Christian Faith cannot be separated from a Christian conversation,
walking in the light; nor from a Christian Communion, we have fellowship one
with another: nor from Christian Repentance and Contrition, if we confess our
sins: And wheresoever we find this Christian Faith, and Christian Conversation,
and Communion, and Contrition, we may not deny the Christian Consolation: For
God himself has said, Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, Isa. 40. 1. They that
are Gods people, may not be deprived of Gods comforts: And what are his
comforts? but (as it follows) that our warfare is accomplished, and our
iniquity is pardoned: The beginning of the pardon, is the end of the war; her
warfare is accomplished, and her iniquity is pardoned, do both speak one and
the same comfort unto the soul, do both signify one and the same peace:
Completa est malitia ejus, says the Vulgar translation, for militia, by a
small mistake of the letter, as we may suppose, but none of the sense; For our
malitia is our militia, our iniquity is our warfare; The Hebrew word here used,
signifies not only the work, but also the time of war: And Rabbi David says,
the Prophet here means The time that Jerusalem was to pass in Banishment or
Captivity: So that if we join the Text and the gloss together, we shall find,
that sin is a time of war, of banishment, and of captivity: Of war with God; of
banishment from God: And of captivity, not under God, for he can be no Tyrant,
but under the Devil: A sad time certainly, as full of fears and jealousies, as
empty of joys and comforts; an^ therefore that must needs be a joyful time
wherein this warfare, this captivity, thi^ banishment is at an end, because our
sin i^ pardoned: To say this, is to speak truly to the heart, which is the
Hebrew expression for speaking comfortably: All other comforts go no farther
then the ear then the outward man, that his stock is increased, his request
granted, his cause advanced; it is only this comfort that enters into the
heart, and revives the inner man, that the time of his warfare, banishment, and
captivity are at an end, because his sin is pardoned: And this is the
comfortable sentence that is already pronounced in Gods Word, That he pardons
and absolveth all them which truly repent, and unfeignedly believe his holy
Gospel: All our labor must be to get this same sentence derived from Gods Word
into our own consciences; And then surely, in the mouth of two such witnesses
(the least whereof is no less then a thousand) it is no doubt but the testimony
will be fully and firmly established: For as the word does witness the thing
infallibly true in it self; so will the conscience witness it insallibly true
to us: The use of a witness is either for information in defect of evidence, or
for confirmation in defect of assurance; and an infallible witness is both
these together; For he gives evidence from his testimony, and assurance from
his infallibility: Such an infallible witness is a good conscience, that is
grounded and established on the Word of God, and thence collecteth this
comfortable sentence; Whosoever truly believes and heartily repents, shall
not come into condemnation; But I do truly believe, and heartily repent;
therefore I shall not come into condemnation. The major proposition is clear by
the testimony of Gods Word; the minor is clear by the testimony of our own
consciences, which can certainly tell us whether we be hypocrites or true
Believers; whether we be Sheep to hear the voice of Christ, and to follow him,
that he may give us eternal life, John 10. 27, 28. or whether we be Goats to
follow our own hearts lusts, so to persist and perish in our sins: and the
conclusion cannot but follow the premises. Read over the sentence that is set
down, Matthew 25. and thou will easily, by comparing thine own actions with
that sentence, see whether at the last Judgment thou art to be set on Christ's
right hand or on his left: Thou will easily see which part of that sentence
concerns thee; And that part which thine own conscience pronounces of thee
here, thy Judge will both pronounce and confirm hereafter: I hope that with
Mary thou have chosen that good part, and if so, cannot but assure thee, it
shall never be taken from thee, Luke 10. 42. For Christ will never reject any
man that has sat at his feet to exercise his humility and patience; and heard
his Word, to exercise his Piety and Obedience: He will never say, Depart from
me, to those who here did love his company, and enjoy his communion: And what
is their work who are of his communion, but to know, and love, and praise him?
And they that are thus of his communion on earth, can you think he will
excommunicate in heaven? Saint John sets forth this Judgment of the conscience
very fully in few words, 1 John 3. 19, 20, 21. saying, v. 19. And hereby, (that
is, by loving in deed and in truth, not in word or in tongue, as appears from
the former verse,) we know that we are of the truth, and shall assure our
hearts before him; That is, we know that we truly love him, and therefore may
be well assured of his love; For he that loves is assured of love; for which
cause Beza thus renders Saint James his words, Mercy rejoices against
damnation, James 2. 13. For he that is truly merciful, has a special promise
to assure him of mercy, that he shall not be condemned in the last Judgment;
and this hard-hearted Age of ours would doubtless much more incline to mercy,
if we did seriously consider, that the sentence of condemnation (Mat. 25.) is
denounced against the unmerciful; not against the unjust for taking away, but
against the unmerciful for not giving; but yet if against the unmerciful, much
more against the unjust; for as justice is before mercy in order of nature, so
is also injustice before unmercifulness; wherefore though we discourse of
assuring our hearts before God more then any others, yet we must needs have a
much less assurance of his love, because we our selves know that we do love
only in word and in tongue, not in deed and in truth; as it follows v. 20. For
if our heart condemn us, God is greater then our heart, and knows all things;
and therefore can and will condemn us much more then our heart; for this is the
true meaning of the words, not (as they are commonly explained) That we ought
to oppose the greatness of Gods mercy being ready to acquit us, against the
sentence of our own heart that is ready to condemn us; For indeed the words are
not spoken to comfort a distressed, but to terrify a guilty conscience: It
being the Apostles intent to persuade us above all things both to get and to
keep a good conscience, that we may not condemn our selves, and then we may be
assured that our God will not condemn us; as it follows, v. 21. For if our
heart condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God, sc. that he will not
condemn us; For the whole argument in brief is this; If our conscience now
condemn us, God will also condemn us at the last day: But if our conscience
acquit us, God will also then acquit us; the conscience acting Gods part before
hand, in condemning the guilty, and acquiting the innocent; whether they have
the first Innocence, that of Righteousness; or the second Innocence, that of
Faith and Repentance: and the same Doctrine is again reinforced, 1 John 4. 17,
18. Herein is our love made perfect, that we may have boldness in the day of
Judgment, because as he is, so are we in this world: Here is both the good
Confidence, and the ground of it, the good Conscience: The confidence is, That
we may have boldness in the day of Judgment; The ground of that confidence is
this good conscience, Because as he is, so are we in this world; for this is in
effect the Syllogism: Whosoever is here like him in Piety, shall hereafter be
like him in Glory: but we that truly believe in him, are here like him in
Piety, therefore we shall also be like him in Glory: He that has that Good
confidence, upon this Good conscience, as he may not be ashamed of his hope, so
he shall not be disappointed of it; for he is sure to stand in the last
Judgment, because he has the Eternal Son of God to support him; on the one
side with his All-sufficient merits, on the other side, with his All-saving
mercies: Two such supporters, to which he cannot trust too much, for which he
cannot glorify Christ enough, though he glorify him world without end. Amen.

Deo Trin-Uni Gloria, in secula seculorum, Amen.
A sick man's Cordial, composed of three Ingredients.
I. Contemplations. II. Ejaculations. III. Devotions.
Contemplations on Isaiah 53.
Verse 3. O MY Beloved Savior, wast thou despised and rejected of men, and
shall not I learn to despise and reject my self, that I may be like to thee,
approved of thee, and received by thee? Wast thou a man of sorrows, and
acquainted with griefs, who knew no sin? And shall I, who came into the
world with sin, look to go out of the world without sorrow?

Verse 4. Did thou so patiently bear the griefs, and carry the sorrows that
were due for my sins? And shall not I patiently bear the griefs and carry the
sorrows that are due for mine own sins? How could I have sorrows, if I had not
sins? and why should I not have patience, now I must have sorrows? Wast thou
stricken and smitten of God and afflicted, who wast his only begotten, and most
dearly Beloved Son? And shall I look to escape the scourge who heretofore have
been his enemy, and still am his undutiful and unworthy servant?

Verse 5. I will look upon my wounds and maladies, as upon so many cures and
remedies; Upon my bruise, (for I am all over nothing else) as upon so much
soundness, since both wounds and bruises are inflicted, not as satisfactions
for my sins, but as checks and amendments of my sinfulness: For he was wounded
for my transgressions, and bruised for mine iniquities; therefore my wounds and
my bruises are not now to pacify the wrath of the Father, but to make me
conformable to the Son: And the chastisement of my peace was upon him;
therefore I will not repine at my chastisement, since I have my peace; It being
indeed but a chastisement to correct the sinner, not a punishment to avenge the
sin: And since I am healed in my soul, I will not fear being wounded in my
body; For with his stripes I am healed, and mine own stripes do but make me the
more to see the want, and the more to crave the benefit of his healing.

Verse 6, and 7. I have been a sheep in my strayings, for I have turned to mine
own ways; O make me also a Sheep in my sufferings, not once to open my mouth
when thou shearest me, clipping off all the comforts of my life; no nor when
thou slayest me, bringing on all the torments o^ my sickness; no nor when thou
slayest me, bringing on all the pangs and horrour^ of my death: That as my
Savior was oppressed and afflicted, yet opened not his mouth; so I may be kept
from murmuring and repining in all my oppressions and afflictions: For I may
well be as he was, Meek and Patient, since thou have laid min^ iniquities on
him; but if I follow not his Meekness and his Patience, I fear I shall again
lay mine iniquities upon my self.

Verse 8, and 9. He was cut off from life, whose generation was life; and what
can I expect but death, who had it in my very birth? who was corrupted when I
was generated, and therefore not only in regard of my death, but also in regard
of my life it self, must say to corruption, thou art my Father, and to the worm
thou art my Sister and my Mother. Who shall declare his Generation? For he was
begotten of his Father before all worlds; But who shall declare my corruption?
for I was corrupted when I was begotten by my Father, before I came into the
world: He was taken away by death, but he was taken away from a mortal, a
miserable, and a contemptible life; so let me be taken away (good Lord) from
mortality, misery and contempt, to Immortality, Blessedness and Glory.

My life has not left much for my death to take away from me; Lord let my
death take from me all that is left but my Savior, and let it fully give me
him.

He was brought to prison that he might be Judged, and he was brought to
Judgment that he might be condemned; and his death was his Release, both from
Prison and from Judgment: Lord make my death so to me: make my death my
Release from prison; for whiles I am in the body, I am imprisoned, fettered
with the bonds of sin and corruption: But bring my soul out of this prison,
that I may praise thy name; then the righteous shall compass me about; for thou
shall deal bountifully with me; (Psalm. 142. 7.) A most happy Jail-delivery for
my soul, for then the Righteous shall compass me about, and not sinners; nay
more, then I shall be compassed about with Rightousness, who now am compassed
about with sins, and that not so much with other men's, as with mine own sins:
Thus make my death my Release from Prison, and make it also my Release from
Judgment: For thy Son has been Judged and condemned for me, that I might
escape the Judgment of thy condemnation: Lord I ask not that thou would not
Judge me (for after death comes Judgment, Heb. 9. 27.) I ask only that thou will not condemn me when I shall be Judged: And this is agreeable with thy very
Justice (though I wholly appeal unto thy Mercy) not to condemn and punish the
same sin twice: Thou have already condemned and punished my sins in my Savior;
O then let me escape thy condemnation and thy punishment: He was Judged for
mine Unrighteousness; O let me stand in the Judgment for his Righteousness.
For the transgression of my people was he stricken: Lord thou have placed me
among thy people, and therefore I must believe that he was stricken for my
transgressions; Nay, thou have brought me nearer to thee, and made me one of
thine own Family, having admitted me thy servant: Nay, thou have brought me yet
nearer to thee, and made me one of thine own Inheritance, having adopted me thy
child. I deserved not to be among thy people, and I am placed among thy
servants; I deserved not to be among thy servants, and I am accepted among thy
children. O then correct me good Lord, as a Father in thy Pity, to amend me,
not as a Judge in thy Fury to confound me: Thou did redeem me with thine own
most precious blood, that thou might convert me: And how then will thou
Judge me, being redeemed with that blood, that thou may condemn me? Well may
my sins be condemned of thee who art the Righteous Judge; for I who have been
the sinner, and who still am an unrighteous man, cannot but condemn them, and
my self for them: But surely thy precious blood can never come under
condemnation; nor my soul, whiles thou look upon it as washed with that
blood.

Thus thou have given me a pledge of delivering my soul from the terrors of my
death by conquering them; and from the severity of Gods Justice, by satisfying
it; And thou have also prepared a deliverance for my body: for in that thou
made thy grave with the wicked in thy death, thou have sanctified the grave
as a Repository for my dead body, till my flesh shall be totally wasted
therein, and with my flesh, all the sin and wickedness which has so long dwelt
in it, and cannot be destroyed before it: And thou will at last raise me from
thence after thine own likeness, that I may come from the grave, as thou did
go to it, not having violence in mine hand, nor deceit in my mouth, nor
wickedness in mine heart.

Lord let it be thy pleasure thus to deliver me; Make have O Lord to help me:
Take away all my sin from my soul, and then (as soon as thou please) take
away my soul from my body: That having no unrepented sin in my life, I may have
no unsufferable sorrow in my death; but may find comfort in it, deliverance by
it, and glory after it.

Amen.
Contemplations on Heb. 12.
Verse 1, and 2. IN my troubles and distresses, either of my body or of my
soul, I cannot bestow my time better then in looking about me for help: And in
looking about me for help, I cannot bestow mine eyes better then in looking up
to heaven; For my help comes from the Lord who has made heaven and earth,
Psalm. 121. 2. And if I look up to heaven, I shall soon spy there a bright
cloud, even a cloud of witnesses, to enlighten me, that I stumble not in my
ways for any darkness of my understanding: And if I look up yet higher through
that cloud, I shall behold a far greater light, even the Sun of righteousness
to inflame me and to quicken me, lest I should sit still, when I am bound to be
walking, for the dullness of my will, and the deadness of my affections; for
above that cloud dwells he who is the brightness of Gods glory, and the
express Image of his person, Heb. 1. 3.

Wherefore my sight may not be terminated or bounded by this cloud of
witnesses: But through it I must be looking unto Jesus the Author and Finisher
of my Faith, if I desire the comfort of my faith when I most want it, even in
the day of my visitation, and at the hour of my dissolution.

And indeed, where should a good Christian fix either his eye or his heart, but
only on Christ? And I may here see Christ in his Mystical body, that is, in his
Church, the cloud of witnesses; And Christ in his natural body, that is, in
himself, Jesus the Author and Finisher of our Faith: And the same Christ in
either body, destitute, afflicted, tormented.

O Lord, how many arguments are here alleged to persuade me to behave my self
with great constancy, humility and patience, in those conflicts and agonies
which I must expect as a Christian, unless I will renounce communion with
Christ, and embrace an unwarrantable and an unprofitable Christianity? I think
there is a Lion in the way (as said Solomon's sluggard) ready to devour me; and
I see nothing but briers and thorns in it, ready to entangle my feet, and to
tear my flesh; But God tells me, it is the ready way to heaven, and the Race
that I must run if ever I hope to get thither; Let us run with patience the
race that is set before us: If it be my race, then I must run it; if it be set,
then I cannot remove it; if it be set before me, then I cannot decline it.

And truly I cannot deny but it is set before me by the dispensation of Gods
Providence, and the indispensable Duty of my Christian vocation: And therefore
I give him hearty thanks, that he has so plainly showed unto me the manner of
running this race, and the reasons that I have to run it.

The manner of running this race is twofold.

First, I must forsake my self, and all my selfishness; that is, all those
things to which I have naturally an immoderate desire, and in which I have
naturally an immoderate delight; let us lay aside every weight, and the sin
which does so easily beset us: For what am I, or what is my flesh but a weight
that does beset me, rather then befriend me, even an unprofitable, and an
unsufferable burden? And what else comes from me, or cleaves to me, but only
sin? Which living in me, cannot but work with me, (Operari sequitur esse,) and
working with me, cannot but defile my purest and my best works.

Secondly, I must fix mine eyes and mine heart only upon my blessed Savior,
looking unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of our Faith: Looking to and on
nothing else, either within me or without me, but only Christ, whether in the
way of my sanctification, for he is the Author of my faith, whereby alone my
heart is purified and sanctified; Or in the way of my salvation, for he is the
Finisher of my Faith, whereby alone my soul is saved.

It is he that has brought my soul from Infidelity to Faith, whereby I now see
through a glass darkly; It is he that will bring my faith to a clear vision,
whereby I shall see him face to face.

The Reasons I have to run this race, are drawn from that grand Topic which
works so much upon all the world, that Pelagius thought thereby to shift off
Original sin from man's nature, and to put it only on his imitation; This Topic
is the Commonplace of example.

And first, I have the examples of all those holy men that were before Christ,
who through their faith in Gods promises, and constancy in their faith,
possessed their souls in great patience whiles they lived, and resigned their
souls in great comfort and contentment when they dyed: This innumerable company
of Saints, is here called a cloud of witnesses; and it is such a cloud as must
needs at some time or other drop down many cool showers, able to allay, if not
to extinguish, the flames of my greatest fiery trials.

Secondly, I have the example of Christ himself; he is the Author of my faith,
he is the Captain of my salvation, that marches before me to this battle,
instructing me by his Word, encouraging me by his Promises, supporting me by
his Assistance, confirming and rejoicing me by his Communion: And this example
of our Savior Christ, is recommended to me in three respects: First, because
of its powerful efficacy in working; for he is the Author and Finisher of my
Faith: And he that works my Faith, will also make my Faith work this
patience: Secondly, from its exact conformity with my present condition, in
that no misery has befallen me, which did not first befall him who made and
redeemed me: Nay his Cross was much heavyer, his shame was much greater then
mine can be: yet he endured the Cross patiently, defpised the shame
courageously, and by this patience and courage, is set down at the right hand
of the Throne of God: Thirdly, from its unavoidable necessity, in regard of my
present Obligation: For it is not left to mine own choice, whether I will
consider this or no, but I must needs consider the example of Christ, or I
cannot be a good Christian.

Verse 3. For consider him that endured such contradiction of sinners against
himself, lest ye be wearied and faint in your minds. What though mine own heart
be given to contradict this rigid way of suffering? yet he that is greater then
mine heart, has gone before me in the very same way, and has passed through
far greater contradictions.

He looked on the Joy that was set before him, not on the contradictions that
were round about him, and he now lives and reigns in his glory, and has
promised that if I do suffer with him, I shall also reign with him, 2 Timothy 2.
12. He is at the beginning of my sufferings, either to inhibit and stop them,
that they shall not invade me: or to proportion and stint them, that they shall
not overwhelm me: if he show me not a way to avoid them, he will give me a
courage to encounter them: nay moreover, strength to conquer them: and an
adversary, though he may be more securely avoided, yet he is more gloriously
conquered: He is also at the middle of my sufferings, to encourage and support
me in my conflict, lest I should be wearied and saint in my mind, as I cannot
but be wearied and faint in my body: he had but a weak Cyrenian to help him
bear his Cross, but he himself does help me bear mine: He had but an Angel to
strengthen him, but he sends the Holy Ghost to strengthen me.

Lastly, he will be at the end of my sufferings to reward me: nay he himself,
who is now my shield to succor me, will at last be my exceeding great reward
to content me: my exceeding great reward in all respects, for exceeding my best
ability to deserve him: exceeding my best capacity to receive him: exceeding
my best activity to enjoy him as he is in his own greatness: Be it then that my
affliction is very great, yet sure I am my reward will be infinitely greater:
but indeed my affliction cannot be great in it self, it is so only in my
opinion: The spirit of truth says, it is but light and momentary; For our
light affliction which is but for a moment, 1 Cor. 4. 17. It is light, and
therefore not great in quantity; It is but for a moment, and therefore not
great in continuance: And well may this light and momentary affliction work
patience in me, since it does work glory for me: Nay a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of glory: Though it be light and momentary in it self, yet it is
weighty and eternal in its reward: For our light afliction which is but for a
moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory; whiles
we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen:
for the things which are seen are temporal, (and so is also the smart and
misery which is felt) but the things which are not seen are eternal; (and so is
also the glory which shall be enjoyed:) These are Reasons sufficient why I
should gladly follow the Apostles advice, consider him that endured such
contradiction of sinners; for so shall I not be enforced to endure the
contradictions of mine own sins, whiles impatience suggests one temptation to
me, and infidelity another: For though these two sins are inseparable
companions, because there cannot be impatience without some kind of infidelity,
yet are they such twins as were Pharez and Zarah, (Genesis 38.) They cannot come
into my soul, but they will make a breach betwixt themselves; (one drawing
this, the other that way) nor can they tarry in my soul, but they will make a
breach betwixt my God and me.

Therefore the holy Apostle in this case appealeth to mine own conscience,
saying, Verse 4. ye have not yet resisted unto blood, striving against sin:
thereby calling me to witness against my self, that I am yet far short of my
duty in my strivings against sin, because I have not resisted unto blood;
whereas flesh and blood are to be resisted in the first place, as being that
weight which does so easily beset me, and must therefore be soonest laid aside.

I ought then in this quarrel to undertake a double strife; A strife against my
self, and a strife against my sins: for whiles I strive against my sins, my
flesh and blood will strive against me: And if I do not resist so far as to
thrust away my flesh and blood, how shall I thrust away my sins? If I do not
lay aside my self, how shall I do to lay aside my greatest weight?

But least I should not regard this appeal, (for Appeals to the conscience are
often made, but seldom regarded) in the next place, he appeals to Gods most
holy Word; plainly showing, how earnestly that calls upon me to be patient
under Gods hand, and zealously enforces many Reasons for my patience.

Verse 5. And ye have forgotten the Exhortation which speaks unto you as unto
children: I am called upon to be patient, not as a servant for fear, but as a
child for love: He is pleased to invite me by way of exhortation, he might have
enforced me by way of command; yet I may not forget his exhortation, unless I
would have him forget my supplication; for if I regard not his speaking to me
as unto a child, how shall he regard my speaking to him as unto a Father?
Wherefore if I desire with joy and comfort to say Our Father; I must be
attentive and obedient as a child; nor can I forsake the temper of my patience,
but I must forfeit the benefit of my ^iety; and consequently lose all the
com^orts of my Devotions, which yet alone, in these times of rapine, are left
me for my ^nsequestrable comforters.

I may not then neglect to hear this Exhortation, which calls upon me to be
patient; much less may I neglect those Reasons which are alleged for my
patience; and powerful Reasons they are.

First, because chaistisement is an effect of Gods love; for Verse 6. whom the
Lord loves he chasteneth. Was ever yet any man angry with God for loving him?
and why then should I be angry and offended at the effects and tokens of his
love? For thy loving kindness is better then the life it self, Psalm. 63. 3.
What then, though thou take away my life by thy chastisement, if so be thou
give me thy loving kindness which is far better? What is my life in it self,
without thy love? O then take away my life as it is in it self, and give it me
as it is in thy love: I desire not to live in mine own life, but in thy
loving kindness.

Secondly, because chastisement is a proof of my adoption, Verse 7, and 8. For
what son is he that the Father chasteneth not? But if ye be without
chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then are ye Bastards, not Sons.

If I be not one of his Sons, what expectancy can I have of his inheritance?
And if I be not under his correction, how can I be assured I am one of his
sons? Wherefore let me rejoice for being under the discipline of his
chastisement, as for being under the care of his Fatherly protection: And let
me be afraid of not being chastised on earth in this mortal life, as I would be
afraid of being bastardized from heaven, and declared illegitimate as to the
inheritance of immortality.

Thirdly, because chastisement is a testimony of my obedience Verse 9. We have
had Fathers of our flesh, which corrected us, and we gave them reverence; shall
we not much rather be in subjection to the Father of spirits and live? Would I
be accounted an obedient child? I must show my self so, not only by my doing,
but also by my suffering; For my active obedience may be very much for mine own
sake, because I expect a Blessing; but surely my passive Obedience is merely
for my Fathers sake, because I know my duty.

If therefore I desire to be truly dutiful to my Father in heaven, let me show
him reverence whiles he punishes me, and not only whiles he cherishes me: And
let me consider him to be the Father of spirits, and I shall be sure to show
him this reverence; for I shall never deny him the subjection of my spirit, and
much less of my flesh; I shall be willing to trust him with my soul, and shall
not desire that he would trust my soul too long with my body.

This the natural man looks on as the highway to destruction, but the
spiritual man knows it is the way to salvation; for thus did Christ himself
pass to life, even by being obedient unto the death: Let me labor to follow
his example, for I have no reason to hope to fare better then he did, and sure
Iam, I cannot fare worse: Let me accordingly desire to kiss my Fathers hand
then chiefly when it holds the rod wherewith he strikes me; or rather, let me
desire to kiss his rod: for it is much better for me, that his scourging should
testify my obedience, then extort it: And if my weak and sinful flesh, whiles
it is yet wedded unto my soul, shall deal with me as Jobs wife did with him,
and say, Do thou still retain thine integrity? curse God and die; Let me be
sure to give her the same answer as he did his wife, Thou speak as one of
the foolish women speaks; what? shall we receive good at the hand of God, and
shall we not receive evil? Job 2. 10. This is the true way, not to bless God
and die, but to bless God and live: for so it is in the Hebrew, Bless God and
die; And Jobs wife speaking in that holy language, had her tongue sanctified,
though not her heart, in so much that she did not say, Curse God and die,
though she meant it, but bless God and die: I say, this is the way not to bless
God and die, but to bless God and live, and I may well say it again and again,
for so says the Apostle, Shall we not much rather be in subjection to the
Father of Spirits and live?

Fourthly, Because chastisement is a furtherance of my sanctification: Verse
10. For they verily for a few days chastened us after their own pleasure, but
he for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness: Good Lord, can I
not be partaker of thy holiness, until thou chasten me! then let thy hand spare
me no longer; for in thus sparing, it will most severely punish me, since there
is no greater punishment, either in this world, or in the next, then not to be
partaker of thy holiness: Our fathers on earth by chastening us after their own
pleasure, and not for our profit, do often make us partakers of their sin, even
of that impatience whereby they do either unduly or unmeasurably chasten us;
But our Father in heaven is never peccant either in the manner or in the end of
his chastening; not in the manner, for he takes no pleasure in scourging us,
and therefore cannot do it either unduly, or unmeasurably: Not in the end, for
he aims only at our profit in scourging, that he may brush away, or strike off
some excrescencies of our flesh, or some adherencies to it, thereby to make us
partakers of his holiness in a far greater proportion and measure, then
otherwise we could have been.

Fifthly, Because chastisement is a furtherance of my salvation; Verse 11. Now
no chastisement for the present seems to be joyous, but grievous;
nevertheless afterward i^ yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness unto
them which are exercised thereby. If I look no further then after mine own Joy,
it is most evident that I cannot endure, much less desire chastisement; because
that for the present is not joyous but grievous; but if I look after my Masters
joy, I must enter into it the same way that he entered; he entered into his joy
by sufferings, and so must I. Ought not Christ to have suffered these things,
and to enter into his glory? Luke 24. 26.

He suffered that he might enter into his own glory, which was undenyably his
from all eternity; and shall I hope to enter into that glory without suffering?
Ought Christ to have suffered, and ought not the Christian to expect suffering?

Surely, it hehoved Christ to suffer for these three Reasons,

Propter Remedium Peccatorum.
Propter exemplum Virtutum.
Propter complementum Scripturarum.
For the expiation and redress of sin, by his Merit.
For the propagation of Righteousness by his Example.
For the fulfilling of the Scriptures by his Obedience.
As the Seraphical Doctor teaches.

Now tell me which of these Reasons is not a fit and sufficient ground for my
sufferings.

Have I not Brethren to be edified by my example, who seeing my patience in the
day of my visitation, may also glorify God in the day of theirs?

Has not my God a Word to be fulfil^ed, which has expressly said, That we must
through much tribulation enter into the Kingdom of God? Acts 14. 22. Have not
(...) my self much sin to be redressed and amended? For though I will gladly
impute the expiation of all my sins only to my Saviors sufferings, yet I may
with humility, and (I hope) not without some truth, impute the amendment of
many of them, to mine own sufferings.

The ground has been tilled, and the tree has been pruned: And why should not
this tilling and pruning yield the peace^le fruit of righteousness unto me that
have been exercised thereby? I have been ^ng and often ploughed (as it were)
and broken up, and harrowed by the hand of God, and why should I not be
somewhat amended and improved by his good husbandry? I have been long and often
^ned (as it were) in my flesh by his ^harp knife, cutting off my superfluities,
(...) make me the less sinful, and the more ^ruitful: And why should I not
bring ^rth good fruits in due season? even t^ peaceable fruits of
righteousness, or the fruits of righteousness, which bring forth peace, the
peace of a good conscience here, and of a blessed Eternity hereafter.

Therefore earnestly desiring to walk in this righteousness, I will hope to lay
me down in this peace: And at the end of my wearisom Pilgrimage, to take my
rest in the arms of Gods Eternal mercy, though now I groan under the hand of
his Justice; For so laying me down to sleep, none shall ever be able to take
either me from his arms, or my rest from me.

Amen.
The sick man's Ejaculations.
To the Reader,

THese Ejaculations are Eighty in number, and they are like man's years in Moses
time, when they come to that same number, full of labor and sorrow; though
this latter age of the world will not let it self tarry so long for labor, nor
others tarry so long for sorrow: And they are therefore called Ejaculations,
because they are as it were so many dartings of the soul, (upon some reflection
or thought either of man's misery, or of Gods mercy) sent up toward Heaven: All
aiming at one mark, though from several occasions, and after several ways;
That is, at the rest of the soul in God: Nor may you here look for curious
method, but for Religious matter: sometimes you will find the sick man's soul
troubled for fear of death; sometimes almost inflamed with the desire of it;
sometimes bemoaning the disturbance of his body; sometimes fearing the
distemper of his soul; sometimes affrighted with the thought of Judgment;
sometimes rejoicing against it. If you find any thing to comfort you in your
extremity, thank not me for speaking to my self, but thank God for speaking to
your soul: And be not troubled that your Passions, like these Ejaculations, are
not orderly, so as they be Religious: Trouble and sorrow cannot look after
Order, but they must look after Religion: And a sick man's expressions are not
so much beholding to his head to make them Methodical and Eloquent, as to his
(...) to make them affectionate and devout: And God grant your sickness may
make yours so.

Ejaculations.
1. GRant Lord that I may be dead unto sin, before I am dead unto the world;
that being planted together in the likeness of thy Sons death, I may be also in
the likeness of his Resurrection: That like as Christ was raised from the dead
by the glory of the Father; so I walking in newness of life, may have a
comfortable death here, and a glorious Resurrection hereafter.

2. Destroy in me, O God, the body of sin, before thou destroy in me the body
of flesh; that I may be justified from my sins whiles I live, and freed from my
sins when I shall be dead: Make me to lie down in comfort, because by my death
I shall wholly die unto my sins: Make me to rest in hope, because by my
Resurrection I shall wholly live unto my God.

3. Make me to look upon my sickness, (my tedious and terrible sickness) as
upon thy Visitation, that I may bear it patiently; Make me look upon my death,
as upon my Release, that I may take it comfortably.

4. O thou who would be crucified before thou would be glorified, and did
suffer pain to enter into Joy, make me submit to thy Cross, that thou may
prepare me for thy Crown: Make me contentedly to suffer with thee in this
world, that I may triumphantly reign with thee in the world to come.

5. O Lord I have Judged my self, let me not be Judged of thee, so as to be
condemned; for it is agreeable with thy Mercy to save the sinner, though thou
destroy the sin: And it is agreeable with thy Justice, not to punish that sin
in me, which thou have already punished in my blessed Redeemer.

6. O Lord thou did make thy beloved Son perfect with sufferings, and I
cannot hope thou will let thy unworthy servant be perfected without them: O
then let not my sufferings betray the imperfections of my flesh, but conduce to
the perfections of my spirit; and make me ever willing to suffer, since thou
can and wilt make me perfect by suffering.

7. O thou God of peace that broughtest again from the dead our Lord Jesus
Christ, that great Shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting
Covenant; Make me perfect in every good work to do and suffer thy will, working
in me that which is well-pleasing in thy sight, and working for me that which
is profitable for my salvation, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever
and ever, Amen. (Heb. 13. 20, 21.)

8. O blessed Jesu, the chief Cornerstone, on which alone is laid for us the
foundation of a blessed Eternity; the Rock upon which thy Church is built, and
all our souls rely: Be merciful unto me, and give ear unto my prayers, and to
my sighs and groans when I cannot pray: Be unto me a fountain of comfort
whenever my heart is in heaviness, and my body is in pain, that my soul may
have continual health, and joy and rest in Thee, and in thy Merits and Mercies
for evermore.

9. Lord make me desire the dissolution of my earthly house of this Tabernacle,
that I may have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the
heavens; for I know that whiles I am at home in the body, I am absent from the
Lord: Make me therefore willing rather to be absent from the body, and to be
present with thee my God; for in thy presence is the fullness of joy, and at thy
right hand there is pleasure for evermore: And make me labor, that whether
absent or present; I may be accepted of thee, through the righteousness of thy
dearest Son, my only Lord and Savior, Amen.

10. Give unto me true sorrow for my sins, that thou may give me true
comfort in my sorrows: Grant I may have peace in thee, whiles I have
tribulation in the world; and make me be of good cheer in all my tribulations;
for thou have overcome the world, and wilt not let the world overcome me.

11. O Lord Jesus Christ, who have overcome the sharpness of death, and opened
the Kingdom of heaven to all Believers: Make me ^ot to fear death, since thou
have made that ^n Inlet into thy heavenly Kingdom: My-sins had shut the gate of
Paradise against my soul, but thy Merits have opened it again: O let me
earnestly desire to enter in, for thou art gone thither before ^e, that thou
might be there ready to receive me, and retain me with thy self for
evermore, Amen.

12. Lord when shall this corruptible put on incorruption, and this mortal put
on immortality, that in me may be brought to pass that saying, Death is
swallowed up in Victory; O death where is thy sting, O grave where is thy
victory? The sting of death was sin, till sin was expiated: The strength of sin
was the Law, till the Law was fulfilled; But thanks be unto God which has
given me the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ, both over my sins and over
his Law, in this great contestation: Having imputed my transgressions unto my
Savior, that my sin might be expiated; and having imputed my Saviors
righteousness and obedience unto me, that his Law might be fulfilled: Therefore
being justified by faith, I have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ,
by whom also I have access by faith into his grace, and rejoice in hope that I
shall at last have access into his glory.

13. O Lord Jesus Christ who art the Resurrection and the Life, be unto me Life
in Death; be unto me Resurrection from the Dead; and so guide me through Death,
that it may be my passage into everlasting Life, there to see, and to bless,
and to enjoy thee, who art the Redeemer and lover of souls, and live and
reignest the King of Saints, with the Coeternal Spirit in the glory of God the
Father.

14. My soul truly waits still upon God, and still shall wait upon him, for
of him comes my help; He verily is my strength and my salvation, even in
weakness and in destruction: He is my defense so that I shall not greatly fall:
And if through mine infirmity I do fall, by his power I shall rise again, and
be able to stand fast, being supported through the Merits and Mercies of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

15. O Lord see the blood of thine immaculate Lamb which takes away the sin of
the world, sprinkled on my soul, that thou may see no sin in it: And when
thou see that blood, let the destroying Angel pass over me, never to return
again; and let the Comforter come unto me, and remain with me for ever.

16. O dearest Advocate, be pleased to intercede and plead for me, and to
answer all the accusations which the Devils will allege, and mine own
conscience will witness against me in the day of Judgment: That I being made
the monument of thy Mercy, who am the purchase of thy Blood, may bless and
praise thee among thy Redeemed in the Land of the living for ever and ever.

17. O thou Eternal Son of Righteousness, who risest with healing in thy wings,
heal thou me, and I shall be perfectly healed: Show me the light of thy
countenance, to dispell all the mists and clouds which now threaten to bring
darkness upon my soul: Turn thy merciful eyes toward me, that I may see thy
glorious face in thy heavenly Kingdom, where no tears shall dim my sight, no
sighing shall interrupt my speech, no fears shall disquiet my heart, and no
sadness nor amazement shall disturb or discompose the blessed rest of my soul
with thee, the longing desires of my soul to thee, and the infinite delights of
my soul in thee, and in thine All-sufficient Merits, and All-saving Mercies for
evermore.

18. O Savior of the world, save me, who by thy Cross and precious blood have
Redeemed me: Help me O my God at all times, but most especially at this time,
now I am least able to help my self, or my friends to help me: Intercede for me
by thy precious death and passion, in all my distresses, but then most when I
shall least be able to speak for my self, at the hour of Death, and in the day
of Judgment: Be now, and then, and ever my defense, and make me know and feel
that there is no other name under heaven given unto men in whom and through
whom I may expect health and salvation, but only thy Name O my Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ.

19. O Lord God, which art the giver of all good things, and never repentest of
the good gifts which thou have given, give unto me health and ease, as long as
they shall be blessings from thee, and give me thy grace to desire them no
longer: And when thou most take from me these or any other comforts of this
mortal life, then Lord most increase and multiply upon me the joys and
comforts of a blessed Immortality.

20. Lord I am desirous to go out of my self, and out of this vale of misery,
that I may come unto Mount Sion, and to the City of the living God, the
heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of Angels, to the general
Assembly and Church of the firstborn, which are written in heaven, and to God
the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect; and to Jesus the
Mediator of the New Covenant: O thou who have prepared these immortal joys for
my soul, prepare my soul for these joys, that being made a Citizen of thy
heavenly Jerusalem, I may be able to join in consort with the Angels thy
firstborn there, and with the spirits of just men made perfect since them; who
now both together make but one Quire, and are always singing Hallelujah, and
worshipping him that lives for ever and ever.

21. O blessed Jesus, thou only comfort of miserable and distressed sinners,
consider my distress; Look upon mine adversity and misery, and forgive me all
my sin. O thou blessed Mediator betwixt God and man, intermediate for me: Let
the unspotted righteousness of thy life, be an acceptable sacrifice for the
multiplied unrighteousness of mine: And let the bitter pangs of thy death, keep
from me all the bitterness of the temporal, and much more the pangs and
horrors of the eternal Death: Thou did taste the gall and vinegar when thou
gave up the Ghost; therefore I beseech thee keep me from tasting it: Thou
did seem to be forsaken of thy God, O let not me b^ forsaken of thee: But
grant that I putting my whole trust and confidence in thy Merits and in thy
Mercies, ^ay from henceforth most cheerfully serve thee in all holiness and
pureness of living, and most faithfully persist in thy service by a resolved
constancy, contentedness, and patience of dying; That I may yet more and more
know thee, and the power of thy Resurrection, and the fellowship of thy
sufferings, being made conformable to thy death, that so I may attain to a
joyful Resurrection of the dead, to give praise and thanks unto thy holy Name,
world without end.

22. O thou Eternal Son of God, who did take upon thee the nature of man,
that thou might lead a miserable life, and undergo a shameful death; I
beseech thee sweeten unto me all those present miseries of my life, which thou
have already sanctified, in that thou have born them; and all those possible
horrors of my death, which thou have already conquered, in that they durst
assail thee to bear them: That I who of my self am in death even in the midst
of life, may through thee my blessed Savior, find life in the midst of death,
and glory after it, to glorify thee who art the Lord of death, and the Giver
of life, Amen.

23. O holy Jesus thou only Redeemer of souls, who by 'thy death have overcome
death, and opened unto us the gate of everlasting life. I most humbly beseech
thee, that as by thy special grace preventing me, thou do put into my mind
good desires of departing hence and of being with thee; so by thy continual
help I may bring the same to good effect, and at last joyfully depart in thy
peace, for that mine eyes have seen thy salvation, my heart has believed it,
and my soul goes hence to enjoy it, and with it, thee my blessed Redeemer, who
with the eternal Spirit art most high in the glory of the Father, one God
everlasting, Amen.

24. O thou who layedst down thy life for my Redemption, make me ready to lay
down my life at thy command; Teach me more and more to despise the Treasures
and the Pleasures of this world, which have in them a double vanity; that they
are transitory; that they are not satisfactory: As they cannot give me true
content whiles I possess them, because they are not satisfactory; so let them
not create in me any discontent when I must have them, because they are but
transitory: O make me lay up for my self a stock of Treasure and of Pleasure in
heaven, by (...) true and lively faith, working zealously ^or thee, relying
wholly on thee, and ^onging earnestly after thee for ever.

25. Lord where is my Treasure, but only in him that bought me? who is my
everlasting Portion, that only God could give me, and men cannot take from me.
And where should my heart be but where my Treasure is, even in heaven and
heavenly things? I will therefore from henceforth live by the faith of the Son
of God who died for me, and gave himself for me: And living by that faith,
though I may dwell on earth, yet I shall live in heaven, nay in the uppermost
part of heaven, even at the right hand of God; there will I live always with
thee, O my blessed Redeemer, adoring thy Excellency, reverencing thy Majesty,
loving thine Authority, enamoured with thy Perfections, and joyfully depending
on thy Mercy: That though my continuance be still with men, yet my conversation
may be with thee my God and Savior, by love earnestly longing for thee, by
hope wholly trusting on thee, by desires steadfastly cleaving to thee, and by
delight always rejoicing in thee: So shall my soul, when it departs out of
this earthly Tabernacle, be received into thine everlasting habitations, there
to bless and enjoy thee, who with the Father and the Holy Ghost live and
reignest, one God world without end, Amen.

26. O Lord, who have called to thee all those that travel and are heavy laden,
and have promised to give them rest, have mercy upon me thy distressed servant,
who now am in a restless condition: what ease and repose thou denyest unto my
body, I beseech thee give unto my soul, that though my flesh does not enjoy the
sweet and comfortable rest of sleep, yet my spirit may enjoy that everlasting
rest and repose which is always to be found in thee: O grant that a promise
being left me of entering into thy rest, I may not come short of it through my
unbelief; but that by going out of my self and living in thee, I may forthwith
enter into that internal rest which is to be enjoyed here in the presence of
thy grace, and may continue and abide therein till I shall come to that eternal
rest which is not to be expected till hereafter, nor to be enjoyed but only in
the presence of thy glory.

27. O Lord God, the God of my salvation, teach me to cry day and night before
thee, that so thou may still save me: and let my prayer enter in, whither I
am not worthy to enter, even into thy presence: Incline thine ear unto my
calling, since thou have inclined my heart to call upon thee: for my soul is
full of trouble, and my life draws nigh unto hell: But draw thou nigh unto my
soul, and I shall be delivered from all my troubles; and though thou have put
my lovers and my friends away from me, and hid mine acquaintance out of my
sight, yet let me ever see the light of thy countenance, and I shall not be
troubled for not seeing them; and make me rejoice in thine everlasting love,
and I shall find no want of my other friends and lovers.

28. O Lord I cannot deny, but that having been at enmity with thee, I deserve
to be clothed with shame, and covered with mine own confusion as with a Cloak;
But O cloth me with thy Sons righteousness, and therewith cover my shame and
my confusion. I am unworthy in my self to pray for mercy, for Judas-like I have
betrayed my Savior, O make me worthy in his blood, not only to pray for it,
but also to obtain it.

29. O Lord my foot has often slipped, but thy mercy has hitherto held me up,
that I have not fallen into the pit of destruction: Let thy Mercy O Lord still
hold me up, and in the multitude of sorrows that I have, or shall have in my
heart, by reason of my sins, let thy comforts evermore refresh my soul; For
thou make me find trouble and heaviness, that I may call upon thy Name; and I
do call upon thy Name, that thou may deliver my soul: O Lord I beseech thee
deliver my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my feet from falling,
that I may walk before thee in the Land of the living: That I may walk
carefully and conscionably before thee, because thou see all things; That I
may walk reverently before thee, because thou rulest all things; That I may
walk thankfully before thee, because thou give all things; That I may walk
comfortably before thee, because thou savest all things, and wilt in mercy save
me: O let me so walk before thee here in this world, as one that has a hope to
live with thee hereafter, in the world to come: Let my soul awake from the
sleep of sin, to give glory to thee, because I trust that when I shall awake
from the sleep of death, I shall receive glory from thee.

30. O thou worthy Judge-Eternal, I tremble at the very thought of thy
Judgment, and how then shall I tremble at the sight of my Judge? For mine own
mouth does most grievously accuse me, and mine own heart does most impartially
condemn me, and mine own conscience cannot but set its seal to the justness of
my condemnation: But I believe that thou will come to be my Judge, who have
already come to be my Savior, and I therefore pray thee to help thy servant
whom thou have Redeemed with thy most precious blood; O Lord in thy Justice,
when thou shall be most ready to condemn me, remember the Mercy whereby thou
did come to save me; and hear thine own precious blood crying out to thee for
my salvation, and hear not my grievous sins crying out against me for my
condemnation; for what will thou do with thy Mercy, which moved thee to shed
thy blood, if thou will not forgive sinners? what will thou do with the Merit
of thy blood that has been shed, if thou will not save sinners? O Lord I
appeal unto this Mercy which has promised forgiveness of sins, and to this
Merit which has purchased salvation for sinners, and in this Mercy and in this
Merit I cannot but hope to stand in the Judgment.

31. If the Lord himself had not been on my side, now may my soul say, if the
Lord himself had not been on my side, when the Devils and mine own conscience
rose up against me, they had swallowed me up quick, when they were so
wrathfully displeased at me; Yea the waters had drowned me, and the stream had
gone over my soul; but praised be the Lord which has not given me over for a
prey unto their teeth; My soul is escaped even as a bird out of the snare of
the Fowler; the snare is broken, and I am delivered; My help stands in the
Name of the Lord, which has made heaven and earth; and which hates nothing
that he has made.

32. O Lord Jesus Christ, which upholdest all things in heaven and in earth,
make me evermore to put my whole trust in thee; in the state of health and
prosperity to trust in thee for preservation; in the state of sickness and
adversity to trust in thee for deliverance and relief; in all states to trust
in thee for grace and benediction: That in the distresses of my body, I may be
comforted for the salvation of my soul; in the distresses of my soul, I may be
comforted for the mercies of my Savio^: Let me submit my soul to thee in piety,
by doing righteously, that thou may not punish me; and having failed of
that, let me submit my soul to thee in patience by suffering contentedly when
thou do punish me for my sins: Let me not despair of thy Mercy, when I have
most provoked thy Justice, that thou may in Justice remember Mercy, and in
Mercy remember me; Let me never say in my heart through impatience or
infidelity, There is no God: Let me never wish in my heart, through
impenitency, that there were none: Let me not say in my heart before I sin,
There is no God, least I sin with greediness: Let me not wish in my heart,
there were no God, after I have sinned, lest I sin without Repentance: But make
me set thee always before me, both in thy Majesty as coming to Judge me, that
I sin not; and in thy Mercy as willing to save me, that I despair not when I
have sinned: And be thou always with me by thy special grace, that I perish
not in my sins. O thou which art the joy of Angels, be also the joy of my
sinful soul; speak salvation to me, who can speak nothing but damnation to my
self: Be unto my sinful soul sanctification from sin, that thou may be to my
sanctified soul salvation from death: That I may at last stand with that great
multitude who shall stand before thee clothed with white robes and palms in
their hands, to cry with a loud voice, saying, Salvation to our God which
sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever, Amen.

33. O Lord, who art so merciful unto sinful man as to vouchsafe to be his
Guide and Governor; and so constant in thy Mercies as to guide and govern him
all his life even unto death; I beseech thee to be my Guide in this my greatest
perplexity, now that my body is as it were bitten with fiery Serpents, and my
soul dwells among Scorpions: Now that torments and tumults are without me,
temptations and discontents are within me: O be thou ^igh at hand, that none of
all my outward ^r inward vexations may either disturb my ^fety, or betray my
innocence: Let God ^ise in my heart, and let all his enemies ^ere, that is, all
my impatient thoughts, (...) scattered: Like as smoke vanishes, so (...) them
vanish at the presence of God; and my soul be joyful in the Lord, it shall
^ejoyce in his salvation.

34. O God, thy Charets are twenty thou^nd, even thousands of Angels, O set ^me
of them compass me about, as they ^d thy servant Elisha, whiles I am living,
and let others of them carry my soul into ^brahams bosom when I shall die, as
they ^d thy servant Lazarus: That these thy ^inistring spirits, which are sent
forth to ^inister for them who shall be heirs of sal^tion, may also minister
for me thy most ^worthy servant, not only in my sick^ss, to succor and defend
me, but also in ^y death, to direct and convey my soul; (...) by thy
appointment they have brought ^e to those everlasting mansions, where I ^all
together with them, always behold ^e face of my Father which is in heaven,
^men.

35. O Lord, thou have commanded me t^ break off my sins by repentance; but I
have broken off my soul from thee by sin, an^ widened that breach by my
impenitency. Wherefore it is but just that I who have s^ often grieved thy
Spirit, should now at (...) grieve mine own: For I have often re^turned to
those sins, which by mine ow^ mouth had so terribly accused me, and b^ mine own
default so grievously wounde^ me: But I beseech thee to fill my hea^ with
Repentance, which I have so often filled with sin, and let me have that sorro^
here, which may keep me from confusion hereafter: For if thy servant Peter we^
three whole days, nay all his life long, f^ denying thee thrice, out of a
sudden pass^ on: What tears, what repentance is nee^ full to the washing away of
my sins, wh^ have so often denied thee upon deliber^tion? If Mary Magdalen wept
so gri^vously for seven Devils, shall not I mu^ rather for seventy seven more
unclean sp^rits? She was not then thy servant, wh^ she entertained those impure
guests; I ha^ been a long time thy friend, thy brothe^ thy son, and yet have
given these thi^ enemies my best entertainment; She (...) ^ot in the Devils
again, after they had ^een cast out; but I have swept and garnish^d the room
for them; make me therefore ^ood Lord all my life long to wash thy ^et with my
tears, that thou may wash ^y soul with thy blood, and so at last pre^nt it
without spot and blemish before ^he heavenly Father, in thine eternal and
everlasting Kingdom, Amen.

36. Lord let me often find the influence of thy grace in heavenly thoughts,
that I may often feel the influence of thy mercy in heavenly joys: I have many
sad and dismal sorrows from my self; O give unto me true comfort in my Savior;
let my trouble be in the day when thou will hear me, and not in the day when
thou will Judge me: There is no trust but may deceive me, save only my trust in
thee; there is nothing in which I may not miscarry, but only thy Mercy: O Lord
let my trust be so in thee, that though I have miscarried in all the desires,
and designs, and delights of this world, yet I may not miscarry in thy Mercy,
but may have the joys and delights of the world to come, through Jesus Christ
our Lord, Amen.

37. Be thou exalted Lord in thine ow^ strength, so will I sing and praise the
power: Thy strength is that which strengthens souls, and thou love to show
thy strength in our weakness; Lord let thy strength be made perfect in my
weakness so shall I most gladly rather glory then repine in my infirmities,
whiles the power of Christ doth-rest upon me, and my soul does rest upon thee
and thy Mercies in Jesus Christ.

38. O Lord who forgivest the sins of the penitent, and coverest those sins
which thou forgivest, I beseech thee to accept my repentance, and to cover all
those sins which I desire thee to forgive; That I may have the blessing of him
whose unrighteousness is forgiven, and whose sin is covered: For if my sins
should be all discovered to my self, they would fill me with fear; if they
should be discovered to others, they would fill me with shame: And how will thou discover them either to my fear or to my shame, since thou can not
forgive them, unless thou cover them? O then be pleased so to cover my sins
here, as not to discover them again hereafter; so to hide my transgressions in
the day of thy Mercy, as not to lay them open in the day of Wrath: Or if thy
Justice shall require that all my sins be revealed in the day of the revelation
of thy righteous Judgment, let the atonement also for my sins be then
revealed, which I have labored to make, and thou have promised to accept
through the Merits and satisfaction of thy Son and our Savior, Jesus Christ.

39. O thou who art gracious and righteous, and in thy righteousness teach
the upright the way of innocence, and by thy grace leadest sinners in the way
of repentance; Have mercy upon me thy most unworthy servant, and grant that my
great defects and wants of the first righteousness, that of Innocence, may be
supplied by the fullness of the second righteousness, that of Faith and
Repentance: And make mine eyes look so diligently to thee, that I may never
again want care in looking to my self; Order my steps in thy Word, and so shall
no wickedness have dominion over me: Order my heart in thy Faith, and so shall
I have dominion over all my wickedness; for though my fears shall force me to
say, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this
death? yet my Faith will be able to suppress that saying, and suggest unto me
this heavenly comfort and triumph, I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord.

40. O Lord I am in the midst of many troubles and sorrows by reason of my
sufferings, and much more by reason of my sins; but thou have promised that the
righteous shall rejoice in the Lord, and put his trust in him, and all they
that are true of heart shall be glad, (Psalm. 64. 10.) O then make me true of
heart, that I may trust in thee, and be truly righteous: And give unto me true
righteousness, that thou may give unto me true joy: There is no true
righteousness but the righteousness of thy Son: There is no true joy but the
joy of thy Spirit: O thou Father of Mercy, give unto me the righteousness of
God the Son my Redeemer, that thou may give me the joy of God the Holy Ghost
my Comforter, to be with me and to remain in me for evermore.

41. O Lord thou have brought upon me so much misery, that I cannot love my
condition; And I have so much sin, that I cannot love my self: Wherefore I
beseech thee to fix my love wholly upon thee, that my soul may thirst for thee,
and my flesh also may long after thee, in this barren and dry Land where no
water is, either to cleanse, or to refresh, or to revive me; That looking for
thee in holiness, I may behold thy power and glory: For my soul cannot truly
thirst for thee, till my flesh also long after thee, since whiles my flesh is
in love with the profits and pleasures of this life, my spirit cannot but lose
the desire, and neglect the pursuit of the life everlasting: O Lord thou have
taken away from me most of the profits, and all the pleasures of this life; O
take from me also the love of it; That I may not fear to lose that life which I
do not love, nor love that life which I am sure to lose: but let me so love
thee, as to live in thee, that I may not fear the loss either of my life or of
my love.

42. O Lord I am assaulted by vexations without, and by temptations within; and
to whom should I fly for succor but only to thee, who art not so displeased
for my sins, but that thou will be appeased by my repentance? O give unto me
that repentance which thou will accept, and take from me that displeasure which
I so fear, Thou can defend me with thy favorable kindness as with a Shield;
O Lord I ask no other defense, but only this defense of thy Mercy, to defend me
from my self and all my sinfulness: to defend me from thy wrath and from all
the punishments of my sins: Though thou leave me destitute of all other
defense, yet let thy loving kindness evermore defend me, according to that
eternal love wherewith thou have loved me in the Son of thy love, our blessed
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

43. O Lord thou have hitherto guided me by thy counsel, and thou will
hereafter receive me with glory: Therefore have I none in heaven but thee,
because none else can receive me with glory; and there is none upon earth that
I desire in comparison of thee, because none else can guide me with true
counsel: O Lord pardon my strayings from thy directions as thou have been my
guide, that thou may receive me into thine habitation, and be my glory for
Jesus sake, Amen.

44. O Lord make my soul willing to depart and go from hence, because it here
dwells among the enemies of my peace; even among mine own sins and fears, which
disturb the peace of a good conscience here, and threaten to destroy the peace
of a blessed eternity hereafter: Make me to long for that blessed minute which
will restore to me perfect innocence, and will transmit me into everlasting
peace; even that peace of God which passes all that I do understand, and will
fulfill all that I can desire: Lord now let thou thy servant depart to
this peace, that thou may at once deliver me from all my troubles, for his
sake who has shed his precious blood to purchase this peace for me, Jesus
Christ the only righteous, Amen.

45. Lord give unto me an earnest repentance to cleanse and purge my soul from
dead works, that thou may give unto me a true and lively faith, to settle
and establish my soul in the light of life. That acknowledging and bewailing
mine own demerits and unrighteousness, I may by the Merits and Righteousness of
my blessed Redeemer, obtain remission of all my sins whereof I now stand guilty
before thy Judgment Seat; and the assurance of that remission sealed unto my
conscience by the testimony of thy holy Spirit; that I may not be terrified
with the thought of death, being delivered from the terrors of Judgment, and
having that righteousness interposed in answer for me, which cannot but answer
all the accusations of the Devils, and all the attestations and convictions of
mine own conscience: O my blessed Advocate, do thou come to plead for me, and
then come Lord Jesus, come quickly, Amen.

46. Lord make me daily more and more to see the manifold miseries of my
pilgrimage, whereby I am a stranger to eternity, and a so journer with vanity,
burdened and clogged with a heavy weight of flesh, and a far heavyer weight of
sin: That I may heartily pray to be delivered from all those burdens and
miseries, and not be afraid least thou should hear my prayer; but that my
soul providing to return into her own Country, may accordingly have longings
and earnest desires after the Land of Promise, and after the heavenly
Jerusalem, and after thee my God, who there live and reignest world without
end, Amen.

47. Lord make me patiently to undergo this punishment of my body, but
earnestly to long for the deliverance of my soul: Make me thankful for that
small ease and refreshment thou give me on earth, but much more for the
eternal rest thou have provided for me in heaven; grant that though I have
affliction in the world, yet I may have peace in thee, and may rejoice in that
peace, for thou have overcome the world: grant that though I am weak in my
body, yet I may be strong in my soul, for thou art the strength of souls: grant
that though I find pain and anguish in my flesh, yet I may find joy and comfort
in my spirit, for thou art the God of spirits: grant that I may not look on thy
hand scourging me with an evil eye, whiles I believe that the thoughts which
thou think toward me, are thoughts of peace and not of evil: and that
though thou give me a sad beginning, yet thou will give me an expected end;
(Jer. 29. 11.)

48. I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against
him; and I may well bear it patiently (nay rather, take it thankfully) since it
is his great goodness to punish temporally, that he may spare eternally: For he
will at last plead my cause, and execute Judgment for me; he will at length
bring me forth to light out of this dismal darkness, and I shall behold his
righteousness, and he will not behold mine unrighteousness: Then shall I say
with great joy, Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquities, and
passes by transgressions, and retains not his anger for ever, because he
delights in Mercy: Therefore he will turn again, he will have compassion upon
me, he will subdue mine iniquities, before he suffer death to subdue me; and he
will cast all my sins into the depth of the Sea, before he will cast me into
the deep of the earth, (Mich. 7. v. 9, 18, 19.)

49. Art thou not from everlasting, O Lord my God, mine holy One, and I but
only of yesterday, and for a moment? I shall not die, whiles thou art my
Resurrection and my Life; O Lord thou have ordained these pains and sicknesses
for Judgment, and O mighty God thou have established them for correction: O
Lord let them prove so to me, as Judgments to advise me, and as Chastisements
to amend me; for thou art of purer eyes then to behold evil, and therefore sure
of purer hands then to embrace it; and thou can not look on iniquity, and
therefore sure wilt not encourage it: O then let this thy visitation so purge
away all evil and iniquity from me, that thou may both encourage my soul in
my life, and embrace it at my death, (Hab. 1.)

50. O thou the high and lofty one, that inhabitest eternity, whose Name is
Holy, thou that dwell in the high and lofty place, but with him also that is
of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to
revive the heart of the contrite one; be pleased to look upon the great
humiliations of my body, and the unfeigned contritions of my soul; That thou
may dwell with me, and I may be revived in the spirit, whiles I am daily put
to death in the flesh: And do not contend for ever, neither be thou always
wrath, least my spirit should fail before thee, and the soul which thou have
made; for the iniquity of my conversation thou wast wrath and smotest me; but
for the abundance of thine own mercies heal me, and restore comforts to me and
to my mourners; and give unto me true joy and peace in Jesus Christ our Lord
(Isaiah 57. 15, etc.)

51. O Lord I have been long clothed with filthy garmens, even by the
corruptions and pollutions of the flesh: And Satan is standing at my right hand
ready to tempt me here, and to accuse and torment me hereafter; But O Lord I
beseech thee to say unto Satan, The Lord rebuke thee O Satan, even the Lord
that has chosen his servant rebuke thee: And take away the filthy garments
from me, and say unto me, behold I have caused thine iniquity to pass from
thee, and I will cloth thee with change of raiment, even with the
wedding garment, the righteousness of that immaculate Lamb, the Lord Jesus
Christ; so shall I appear before thee with comfort, stand before thee with
confidence, and remain before thee with joy for evermore, (Zach. 3.)

52. O Lord thou have left me a Promise of entering into thy Rest, O let me not
come short of it and not enter into it; But since I have a great High Priest
that is passed into the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, an High Priest touched
with the feeling of my infirmities, let me through him come boldly to the
Throne of grace, that I may obtain Mercy, and find Grace to help in time of
need, (Heb. 4.)

53. O Lord my strength and my fortress, and my refuge in the day of
affliction, I desire to come unto thee from the ends of the earth, where I have
inherited lies and vanity, and things wherein there is no profit; but I beseech
thee cause me to know thy hand and thy might, and take not away thy peace from
me, even lovingkindness and Mercies, Jer. 16. v. 19, 21, and 5.

54. O Lord the Hope of Israel, let no distress whatsoever make me forsake that
blessed. Hope which thou have given me; for all that forsake thee shall be
ashamed, and they that depart from thee shall be written in the earth, because
they have forsaken the Lord the Fountain of living waters: O Lord I have often
forsaken thee by my sins, yet let me not be ashamed, because I return again to
thee by my Repentance; O Lord I have often departed from thee by my
transgressions, yet let me not be written in the earth, because I now at last
thirst for thee the Fountain of living waters: Heal me O Lord and I shall be
healed, save me and I shall be saved; so shall thou be my praise now and for
evermore, Jer. 17. 13, 14.

55. O Lord my soul is heavy, and my body is sick unto the death; But do thou
bring me health and cure, and reveal unto me abundance of peace and truth;
cleanse me from all mine iniquities whereby I have sinned against thee, cause
my captivity to return, and have mercy upon me, according to thine infinite
mercies in Jesus Christ, (Jer. 33. 6, 8, 26.)

56. O Lord thou have added grief to my sorrow, for I have fainted in my
sighing, and I find no rest; yet do thou forbid me to add sorrow to my own
grief, and to say, woe is me now, because that which thou have built thou have
broken down; and that which thou had planted thou have plucked up, even this
whole Land; Therefore thou forbiddest me to seek great things for my self, for
behold thou have brought evil upon all flesh, and how should thou not bring
evil upon my flesh, which is the most sinful of all? O then suffer me not to be
a seeker of mine own discontents, rather then of thy redresses, whiles I look
after great and good things, in such miserable and wretched times, but make me
thankful that thou have hitherto given me my life as a prey unto me in all
places whether I have gone, that remembering what thou have given me, I may not
repine for what others have taken from me; assuring my self, that there is yet
another life to come which thou will give me, not as a prey that I should fear
losing it, but as an inheritance that I should long to possess it in thee and
with thee for ever, Amen. Jer. 45. 3, 4, 5.

57. O Lord bring my soul out of this prison of the flesh, and the shackles of
sin and misery, that I may wholly and entirely give thanks unto thy holy Name
for all thy Mercy and great Deliverances, and most especially for this the
greatest of all, That thou will deliver me from my self, from the burden of
mine own flesh, from the bondage of mine own corruption, from the thraledom of
mine own body: And wilt set me at liberty that I may do nothing else but serve
thee, whose service is perfect freedom, and whose wages are life, and light,
and joy, in beholding thy presence for evermore; for I earnestly desire only
those Mercies wherein thou do infinitely delight, who love to show Mercy to
penitent sinners in the Son of thy love, our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ.

58. O Lord pour not out thine indignation upon me, blow not against me in the
fire of thy wrath, but deliver me from this brutish and burning disease; or if
thou will in thy Justice make my body as fuel for the fire, yet in mercy
deliver my soul from the everlasting burnings, (Ezekiel. 23. 31, 32.)

59. Grant Lord that I being risen with Christ, may seek those things which are
above, where Christ sits on the right hand of God; that I may henceforth set
mine affection on things above, not on things in earth; always remembering
that I am dead, and my life is hid with Christ in God, and always rejoicing,
that when Christ who is my life shall appear, then shall I also appear with him
in glory, (Col. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4.)

60. Lord make my tongue sing of thy praises whiles I have breath; and when I
shall be breathless, make my heart bear two parts, to fill up that blessed
Harmony; that my soul may praise thee whiles it is in the state of union with
my natural body; and much more when it shall be in the state of separation from
it, and shall be joined in consort with the holy Angels, and with the beatified
spirits: And most of all, when it shall be in the state of reunion again with
that same body being made spiritual: That I being at last all spirit, both in
soul and body, neither my heart may be wearied in thinking, nor my tongue in
speaking thy praises to all eternity, Amen.

61. I will thank thee O Lord my God with all my heart, and I will praise thy
Name for evermore; for great is thy Mercy toward me, and thou have delivered
my soul from the neathermost hell, and wilt receive my soul into the highest
heavens, there to give thee thanks and praises for evermore.

62. All the days of my appointed time will I wait till my change come, (Job
14. 14.) Lord grant I may so wait, that I may receive my wages, and that my
change may come seasonably, speedily and happily: A seasonable change not to
find me unprepared for it: A speedy change to deliver me from the pains of
sickness, and from the pangs of death: And a happy change to let me in to the
fruition of thy glory and eternal life, Amen.

63. By thine unknown sufferings, O my blessed Redeemer, intercede for me in
all my pains and sufferings, that I may find Mercy and obtain Relief: And make
me always remember and confess that my sins are far above my sufferings, so
shall I suffer patiently; and that thy Mercy is far above my sins, so shall I
suffer comfortably, and hope for a joyful end of all my sufferings.

64. Lord grant that my conversation may from henceforth be in heaven, that my
soul may be prepared to go thither, and know how to busy it self there; that I
may with joy look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ from thence, who shall
change my vile body, that it may be like his glorious body, according to the
working whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himself, (Phil. 3. 2.) O
Lord work that blessed change in my soul, to subdue all its carnal affections
by a heavenly conversation, before thou workest that miserable change in my
body, to subdue its natural constitution by an unnatural destruction: And
according to that mighty working whereby thou art able even to subdue all
things unto thy self, in the first place subdue all my sinfulness.

65. Lord speak the word only and thy servant shall be whole; speak the word of
comfort in my distress, and the greatest comfort in my greatest distress: say
effatha to my heart that it may be opened to receive thee; say effatha to the
heavens that they may be opened to receive my soul; yea say unto my soul thou
art my salvation, for thou only who art All-sufficient, can speak unto my
soul, and thou only who art All-merciful, wilt speak comfort to it: And though
for my sins thou art justly displeased, yet for thine own Mercies thou will not
long continue in that displeasure; for thou have proclaimed thy self to be the
Lord, The Lord God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering and abundant in
goodness and truth, keeping Mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, and
transgression, and sin: Lord say unto me thy unworthy servant, that my sins are
forgiven me, and that I may go hence in peace, for my faith has saved me, even
that faith whereby I wholly trust in the Merits and Mercies of thy eternal Son
Jesus Christ.

66. Hear my prayer O Lord, and consider my desire, hearken unto me for thy
truth and righteousness sake, and enter not into Judgment with thy servant,
for in thy sight shall no man living be justified; And let not mine enemy
persecute my soul; and (if it be thy will) let not my disease smite my life
down to the ground, nor lay me in the darkness, as men that have been long
dead; But if it be thy pleasure to torment and to destroy my body, yet let not
my spirit be vexed within me, nor my heart within me be desolate: But make me
so remember the time, and thy works past, that I may be comforted in the time
and thy works to come; that stretching forth my hands and lifting up my heart
unto thee, I may lay hold on thee by a lively Faith, Hope and Love, and at last
come to enjoy thee by a blessed vision, comprehension and fruition; And my soul
gasping unto thee as a thirsty Land, may be satisfied with the dew of thy
heavenly blessings for evermore.

67. O Lord remember that I am the work of thy hands, the image of thy
counte^ance, the price of thy blood; And have mercy on me as thy work, as thy
image, and as thy purchase; for the paternal bowels of God the Father that
created me; for the bleeding wounds of God the Son that redeemed me; and for
the unutter^ble groans of God the Holy Ghost that sanctifies me, O Lord hear,
O Lord forgive, O Lord strengthen me in my sickness, receive me at my death,
and acquit me in the Judgment, Amen.

68. Hear me O Lord, and that soon, for my spirit waxes faint, hide not thy
face from me, lest I be like unto them that go down into the pit; O let me hear
thy lovingkindness late in the evening of this life, and betimes in the morning
of Eternity, for in thee is my trust; show thou me the way that leads in the
truth, and unto the life, for I lift up my soul unto thee: Deliver me O Lord
from mine enemies both corporal and spiritual, for I fly unto thee to hide me;
Let thy loving Spirit lead me forth out of this Land of unrighteousness, and
lead me into the Land of righteousness: Quicken me O Lord for thy Name sake,
(and then most, when I shall be nearest death) and for thy righteousness sake
bring my soul out of all her troubles that I may give thanks unto thee, with
those blessed spirits which lived here in thy fear, departed hence in thy
favor, and now are with thee in eternal joy and glory, (Psalm. 143. v. 7, etc.)

69. Deal thou so with me O Lord God, according to thy Name, that in the
greatest bitterness of my soul, I may both see and confess that sweet is thy
Mercy: O deliver me, for I am helpless and poor, and my body is tormented
without me, and my heart is wounded within me, (Psalm. 109. ver. 22, 23.) but be
thou ease to my body, and joy to my heart in Jesus Christ.

70. O Lord I confess to thy glory and min^ own shame, that when I call to mind
the ^oulness of mine own transgressions, I am ^shamed; when I call to mind the
exact^ess and severity of thy Justice, I am afraid ^o lift up mine eyes to
heaven, or to look ^owards the place where thine honor ^welleth; But O look
thou down upon ^e with the eye of pity and compassion, ^ho am altogether
unworthy to look up unto thee with the eye of hope and confi^ence, and relieve
me in my sickness, and ^eceive me at my death for thine infinite mercies in
Jesus Christ.

71. I will always give thanks unto the Lord, ^is praise shall ever be in my
mouth; yea my soul shall make her boast of the Lord, ^or I sought him and he
heard me; yea ^e delivered me out of all my fear: I had (...) eye unto him and
I was enlightened, I ^ave tasted and seen how gracious the lord is, blessed be
my soul for trusting (...) him, and blessed be his grace for working (...) my
soul that trust, to rely and depend upon his Mercy for evermore, (Psalm. ^34.)

72. Lord touch my tongue with a coal from ^hine Altar, to take away the
pollution of my lips; and touch my heart with the immortal flames of thy love,
to take away the deadness and dullness of my thoughts; that both tongue and
heart being purged from the filthy dregs of flesh and sin, I may in my greatest
infirmities labor to praise thee according to the greatness of thy glories:
And because I cannot sufficiently praise thee whiles I am in this corrupted and
corruptible body, take my soul in thy due time away from hence, that I may in
thy heavenly Jerusalem sing unto thee acceptable and immortal praises for ever
and ever, Amen.

73. Righteousness and equity, O Lord, are the habitation of thy seat; O let
righteousness and equity be fixed in my heart, that thou may therein fix thy
habitation Mercy and Truth shall go before thy face; O let Mercy and Truth be
always in my soul, (Mercy to forgive, Truth to be for given) that when my soul
shall go out of my body, it may joyfully go before thy face, and rejoice in thy
presence for ever more; for blessed are the people O Lord that can rejoice in
thee, they shall walk in the light of thy countenance; Lord thou have given me
the first part of this blessing to rejoice in thee here on earth, O give me
also the second part of it, that when I shall go hence, I may walk in the light
of thy countenance hereafter in heaven, Amen.

74. Who am I O Lord God, and what is this my house of clay that thou have
brought me hitherto? And this was yet a small thing in thy sight, O Lord God,
but thou have spoken also of thy servant for a great while to come, even for
the days of Eternity; that thou will at last bring me to thy self: For thy
words sake, and according to thine own heart, have thou done all these great
things, to make thy servant know them and enjoy thee: And now O Lord God, the
Word that thou have spoken concerning thy servant, establish it for ever, and
do as thou have said; for thou O Lord God have spoken it, and with thy blessing
let the soul of thy servant be blessed for ever, 2 Samuel 7. 18.

75. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to
his abundant Mercy has begotten us again unto a lively hope, by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead; to an inheritance incorruptible and
undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in heaven for us: O Lord let me
not fear being deprived o^ my earthly inheritance by death, whiles (...) find
in my self the work of this Regeneration, and cherish in my self the hope of
this resurrection: But let me ever be kept by the power of God through Faith
unto salvation, ready to be revealed in the last time, that I may therein
greatly rejoice, though now for a season I am in heaviness through manifold
temptations, 2 Pet. 1. 3. That the trial of my faith being much more precious
then of Gold that perishes, though it be tried with fire, may be found unto
praise, and honor, and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ.

76. O thou who have given me the soul of thy Christ and of my Jesus to
sanctify me, the body of Christ to nourish and strengthen me, the blood of
Christ to redeem me, the stripes of Christ to heal me, the agonies of Christ to
comfort and to refresh me, give me also the wounds of Christ to hide me, that
thou may not Judge me; or the Merits of Christ to cover me, that I may be
acquitted in the Judgment: O Lord who did not despise man transgressing and
falling from thee, do not despise me repenting and returning to thee; but as
thou have opened unto me a door of faith and repentance unto life, so shut not
that door against me now I am desirous to enter in by it, and to come to thee;
O Lord I believe, help my unbelief: O Lord ^repent, increase my repentance; and
give unto me that repentance whereby thou wi^t accept me, and that faith
whereby I may receive and embrace thee for ever.

77. The Lord make me faithfully to remember, and thankfully to consider, and
constantly to believe, that he who spared not his own Son, but delivered him up
for me, will also with him freely give me all things; or rather, has already
with him freely given me all things that I was capable to receive, and now is
enlarging my capacity, that he may enlarge his own bounteous liberality: He is
making me capable of receiving more, that he may freely give more: He has made
me capable of receiving himself, his Son, his holy Spirit, by Faith, Hope and
Love; He will now make me capable of receiving and enjoying himself, his Son,
his holy Spirit, by vision, comprehension and fruition; A vision that shall see
him as he is in his excellent glory; A comprehensio^ that shall fully receive
and firmly retai^ him; And a fruition that shall perfectl^ enjoy him, and
perfectly rejoice in him One God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost world without
end, Amen.

78. Abide thou with me O Lord Jesus Christ, for it is toward evening with me
and the day is far spent of this my toilsom and troublesome life; And though my
eye be holden that I do not see thee whiles I have sad communications with mine
own heart, yet be thou pleased still to tarry with me, and to sit at meat with
me, and to bless to me the holy repast of eternity, and mine eyes shall soon be
opened to see thee, and my heart shall be opened to receive thee; And do not
vanish out of my sight, till thou have brought me to see thee in thy heavenly
Kingdom, Amen.

79. God be merciful unto me and bless me, and show me the light of his
countenance in my passing through Death, and be merciful unto me, in bringing
me to everlasting life: The Lord bless me and keep me, the Lord make his face
to shine upon me, and be gracious unto me; The Lord lift up ^is countenance
upon me, and give me ^eace: God the Father preserve me in my ^assage by his
Almighty power: God the ^on guide and direct me by his All-seeing wisdom: God
the Holy Ghost assist and comfort me by his All-sufficient Grace and Goodness,
and bring me to everlasting life, Amen.

80. Now the God of hope fill me with all joy and peace in believing, that I
may abound in Hope, through the power of the Holy Ghost, (Romans 15. 13.) And the
Lord shall deliver me from every evil work, and will preserve me unto his
heavenly Kingdom, to whom be glory for ever and ever, Amen. (2 Timothy 4. 18.)

The sick man's Devotions.
To the Reader,

DEvotion is seldom Cordia^ when it is constrained, and i^ is commonly
constrained, when either Fear or Pa^ makes a man devout: For then he may seem
to have taken up Saul's resolution, 1 Samuel 13. 12. Therefore said I, the
Philistines will now come down upon me, and I have not made supplication unto
the Lord; I forced my self therefore and offered a burnt-offering: So is it too
too frequently with those men who neglect the motives and means of prayer
whiles they are in health, and leave all their suplications to be made in their
sickness, or any other great extremity: for whiles ^y vainly fear, lest custom
should make ^ir prayers uncordial or undevout, they ^erably find that
compulsion does indeed ^ve them to be so: since therefore either ^tom of
praying will steal away thy heart, thou fondly think; or contempt of
praywill harden thy heart, at I flatly averr; now in good time what thou have
to do; a fantastical fear is no excuse for run^g into a real mischief: Whiles
thou ^ishly fear lest thy heart should be stolen, (...) impiously causest
thy heart to be harden^ Consider therefore what the Prophet ^uel has taught
thee to say, and do, in thy ^resses to thy Maker; since God has set (...)
appointed him to direct and guide thee ^y Devotions: And do not as Saul did,
(...) without a Priest, or with a Priest of ^e own choosing (perhaps of thine
own ^ing) offer thy burnt-offering, lest Samuel (...) at the end of thy
sacrifice, and say unto (...) as he said unto him, v. 13. thou have (...)
foolishly, thou have not kept the com^dment of the Lord thy God, which he
^manded thee; this reproof, as it does ^rly concern thee, so it will
undoubtedly si^e thee; for when God has given thee a sure Guide for thy
Devotions, (even such a Church, as neither the wit of man can prove, nor the
malice of Devils can make guilty, either of Faction or of Superstition.) If
thou will not go along with this Guide, but wilt needs gad after thine own
imaginations, thou do indeed follow Saul in his sin, and art like to follow
him in his punishment; thou appeasest not wrath, but provokest it; thou
forsakest God, and take heed he forsake not thee: Wonder not then if you find
many of Samuels words, that is, much of the Churches dictates, in these
Devotions, but know it is because God has taught Samuel to pray, that he might
teach you; And having taught you to pray by Samuels Devotions may perchance not
hear your prayers, (eve^ as he accepted not Saul's offering) out o^ Samuels
Communion: However you may certainly by this gleaning of some few grapes see
what store of good wine was and is in the whole Vintage: And I hope you will
no^ have good wine, only to see and to look upon but also to taste, and to make
good use of it Or confess, it is your own wilfulness tha^ you, (I will not say,
your prayers) are either Faint or Dry for not tasting it.

The sick man's confession of his sins.
I Confess unto thee, O Lord God Almighty and most merciful Father, that I have
sinned against heaven and against thee, and am not worthy to be called thy Son;
nor to have any portion in thine inheritance, because I have been hitherto so
unthankful for thy Mercy, so unreverent toward thy Majesty, and so undutiful
to thine Authority: wherefore innumerable troubles are most justly come upon
me, and my sins have taken such hold of me, that I am not able to look up, yea
they are more in number then the hairs of my head, and my heart has failed me:
But O Lord let it be thy pleasure to deliver me, make have O Lord to help me,
and comfort the soul of thy distressed servant, for unto thee O Lord do I lift
up my soul, gasping for that Mercy and Forgiveness which thou have promised to
Repentant-sinners, for the Merits of thy dearly beloved Son Jesus Christ our
Lord, Amen.

Or this.
Almighty God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Maker of all things, Judge of
all men, I acknowledge and bewail my manifold sins and wickedness, which I from
time to time most grievously have committed by thought, word and deed, against
thy Divine Majesty; provoking most justly thy wrath and indignation against me:
I do earnestly repent, and am heartily sorry for these my mis-doings; the
remembrance of them is grievous unto me, the burden of them is intolerable:
Have Mercy upon me, have Mercy upon me most merciful Father, for thy Son our
Lord Jesus Christ's sake; forgive me all that is past, and grant that I may ever
hereafter serve and please thee in the newness of my life, or in the
contentedness and patience of my death, to the honor and glory of thy Name,
through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
The sick man's Absolution or Remission of sins, to be pronounced by himself
alone, when he cannot have the benefit of a Minister to absolve him.
HAve mercy upon me O God after thy great goodness, and according to the
multitude of thy mercies do away mine offenses; wash me thoroughly from my
wickedness, and cleanse me from my sins, and absolve me from the guiltiness of
all my transgressions according to the Promise of Mercy by thy Word, the
Purchase of Mercy by thy Son, and the Pledges of Mercy by thy holy Spirit, made
and given to Repentant-sinners, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and
of the Holy Ghost,

Amen.
Or this.
Almighty God our heavenly Father, who of his great Mercy has promised
forgiveness of sins to all them which with hearty repentance and true faith
turn unto him; have Mercy upon me, pardon and deliver me from all my sins,
confirm and strengthen me in all goodness, and bring me to everlasting life,
through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Then likewise he shall say.

O Lord open my heart, that thou may open my lips.

O Lord open my lips, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise.

O God make speed to save me.

O Lord make have to help me, That I may with a thankful heart and with a
cheerful voice sing and say unto thee,

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost,

As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be world without end, Amen.

Praise ye the Lord; I praise the Lord.

The sick man's Psalm. (Psalm. 6.)
1. O Lord rebuke me not in thine indignation, neither chasten me in thy
displeasure.

2. Have Mercy upon me O Lord, for I am weak, O Lord heal me, for my bones are
vexed.

3. My soul is also sore troubled, but Lord how long will thou punish me?

4. Turn thee O Lord and deliver my soul, O save me for thy Mercies sake.

5. For in death no man remembereth thee, and who will give thee thanks in the
pit?

6. I am weary of my groaning; every night wash I my bed, and water my couch
with my tears.

7. My beauty is gone for very trouble, and worn away because of all mine
enemies.

8. Away from me all ye that work vanity, for the Lord has heard the voice of
my weeping.

9. The Lord has heard my Petition, the Lord will receive my Prayer.

10. All mine enemies shall be confounded and sore vexed, they shall be turned
back and put to shame suddenly.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.

The sick man's first lesson. Job 19. 25, etc.
I Know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon
the earth: And though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh
shall I see God; whom I shall see for my self, and mine eyes shall behold, and
not another, though my reins be consumed within me.

His first Canticle.
I praise thee O God, I acknowledge thee to be the Lord.

O praise our God (ye people) and make the voice of his praise to be heard.

Which holds our soul in life, and suffers not our feet to slip.

I will go into thy house with burntofferings, and will pay thee my vows which
I promised with my lips, and spoke with my mouth when I was in trouble.

O come hither and hearken all ye that fear God; and I will tell you what he
has done for my soul.

I called unto him with my mouth, and gave him praises with my tongue.

If I incline unto wickedness with my heart, the Lord will not hear me.

But God has heard me, and considered the voice of my prayer.

Praised be God which has not cast out my prayer, nor turned his Mercy from me.

Praise the Lord O my soul, and all that is within me praise his holy Name.

Which forgiveth all thy sin, and heals all thine infirmities.

Which saves thy life from destruction, and crowns thee with Mercy and
loving kindness.

Praise the Lord O my soul, whiles I live will I praise the Lord, yea as long
as I have any being, I will sing praises unto my God.

Lord make me so to praise thee here, whiles it is my duty; that I may exactly
know how to praise thee hereafter, when it shall be my reward: For therefore
with Angels and Archangels, and with all the company of heaven, do I now laud
and magnify thy glorious Name, because thou have given me an assured hope,
that I shall with them hereafter, evermore praise thee and say, Holy, Holy,
Holy, Lord God of Hosts; Heaven and Earth are full of thy glory, Glory be to
thee O Lord most high.

The sick man's second lesson. John 5. 24.
VErily verily I say unto you, he that hears my word, and believes on him
that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but
is passed from death unto life.

His second Canticle.
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel for calling me to the knowledge of himself,
and to faith in his Son, and to Communion with his holy Spirit: Lord I believe,
help thou my unbelief: And grant me so perfectly and without all doubt to
believe in thy Son Jesus Christ, that my faith may never be reproved; and my
person and my prayers may always be accepted in thy sight through Jesus Christ
our Lord,

Amen.
Or this.
In thee O Lord have I put my trust, let me never be put to confusion; but rid
me and deliver me in thy righteousness, incline thine ear unto me and save me.

Be thou my strong hold whereunto I may always resort; Thou have promised to
help me, for thou art my house of defense and my Castle.

As for me I will patiently abide always; and will praise thee more and more.

My mouth shall daily speak of thy righteousness and salvation; for I know no
end thereof.

O what great troubles and adversities have thou showed me? and yet did thou
turn and refresh me, yea and broughtest me from the deep of the earth again.

Therefore will I praise thee and thy faithfulness O God, playing upon an
instrument of Music; Unto thee will I sing upon the Harp, O thou holy one of
Israel,

My lips will be fain when I sing unto thee; and so will my soul whom thou have
delivered; and ever wilt deliver according to thine infinite Mercies in Jesus
Christ.

The sick man's Creed, or the Confession of his Faith, by way of prayer.
I Believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth; Grant me Lord
so to believe in thee my Father; that as a Father pittieth his own child, so I
may find and feel that thou art pitiful and merciful toward me.

Grant me so to believe in thee as my Lord and my God, that I may find the
eternal comfort of being thy servant; and that as the eyes of servants look
unto the hand of their masters; even so my eyes may wait upon the Lord my God,
until he have Mercy upon me.

Grant me so to believe in thee as my Father, God and Maker, that I may always
rely on thy Fatherly Goodness; that I may always submit my self body and foul
to thy Almighty power, and that I may commit my soul unto thee (not only in
well-doing, but also in well-suffering) as to my saithful Creator.

Grant me so to believe in Jesus Christ thy only Son my Redeemer, that from
this Jesus I may have salvation; from this Christ I may have the holy Unction;
from this thy Son, I may have spiritual adoption.

Grant me so to believe in God the Holy Ghost, that from this God I may be
inspired with true godliness, from this Holy-Spirit I may be sanctified, and
made a member of the Catholic Church, and both live and die in the Communion
of Saints: And that from this spiritual Comforter I may be filled with
spiritual comforts and consolations for evermore, even with the immortal
comfort of the Forgiveness of my sins, of the Resurrection of my body, and of
the translation of my soul to the life everlasting, Amen.

Or this.
O blessed Lord God, who fillest heaven and earth with the Majesty of thy
Glory, and with the Riches of thy Mercy: Let not my sinful soul be empty; but
let me evermore be filled with dreadful apprehensions of that great and
glorious Majesty wherewith thou will hereafter come to Judge me: And with
comfortable apprehensions of that great and gracious Mercy, whereby thou have
already come to save me; that I may never want grace to prevent and keep me
from sinning; nor Mercy to pardon and forgive me all my sins; nor the testimony
of thy holy-Spirit to assure me of that pardon and forgiveness: That though
thou kill me, yet I may put my trust in thee, and even at the hour of death may
be able to say with a strong heart, though with a weak voice, I believe in God
the Father my Creator, in God the Son my Redeemer, in God the Holy Ghost my
Comforter; That this my Father will provide for me health and ease, and all
other comforts of this world, as far as they shall condu^e to his glory and to
my salvation; And has provided for me a Portion and Inheritance in the world
to come.

That this Redeemer has redeemed my soul from the bondage of Sin and Satan,
and will also at the last day redeem my body from the bondage of death and
corruption.

That this Comforter will not leave me comfortless, when I most want and most
ask his comforts; but that he will be with me according to his Promise, and
will keep me in all places whither I go, (of sickness, of life, of death) and
will bring me at last to the Land of Eternal rest, for he will not leave me
till he has done that which he has spoken to me of, Genesis 28. 15. till he has
translated me from his holy Church-Militant, to his holy Church-Triumphant; And
to that Communion of Saints whereof he is the only head, who is the King of
Saints: And to that blessed company of sanctified spirits, which have
mercifully received the forgiveness of their sins, do earnestly expect the
resurrection of their bodies, and do incessantly enjoy the life everlasting,

Amen.
The sick man's Collect for the Day.
O Sweet Jesus, who come from the bosom of thy heavenly Father, to heal the
brokenhearted, to preach deliverance to the Captives, and recovery of sight to
the blind, and to set at liberty them that are bruised, show also these thy
Mercies at once and together, in showing Mercy on me, who am now broken and
bruised, and under great blindness and captivity.

The eye of my soul is so dim by reason of my sins and of my sufferings, that I
cannot clearly see thy Merits; The hand of my soul is so weak, that I cannot
eagerly reach after them, nor strongly take hold of them: Thus am I a captive
under miserable blindness and weakness: But show thou me the light of thy
countenance, and that will recover my sight, and release my captivity: For in
thy light I shall see the true light everlasting, and in thy countenance I
shall enjoy it: O thou Son of righteousness, which know not any going down,
and gives^ ^fe, food, and gladness unto all things, vouchsase to shine into my
mind, that I may not either through the weakness of the flesh, or the assaults
of the Devil, any where stumble to fall into impatience or infidelity, or any
other grievous sin, but may be able to stand steadfastly through thy supporting,
and to walk on constantly in the way of Piety and of Patience, till by thy good
guiding and conducting, I may at last come to the life everlasting: As thou
still hold open the eyes of my weak body to behold the light of nature, so
be pleased daily more and more to open the eyes of my sinful soul to behold the
light of grace, till thou bring me to enjoy the light of glory, there to
glorify and praise thee for ever,

Amen.
The sick man's Collect for Peace.
O God which art the Author of our peace for thine own Mercies sake, but the
Author of our troubles only for our sins; Give unto me thy unworthy servant
that peace which this wicked world cannot give, and which this tumultuous and
troublesome world cannot take away; and defend me in all the assaults of my
afflictions both corporal and spiritual, that I surely trusting in thy defense,
and wholly submitting to thy providence, may not fear the power of any
adversity whatsoever, through the might and for the mediation of Jesus Christ
our Lord,

Amen.
The sick man's Collect for Grace.
O Lord our heavenly Father, Almighty and everlasting God, which have safely
brought me (through many dangers, and troubles, and diseases) to the beginning
of this dangerous and desperate sickness, defend me in the whole continuance of
the same with thy mighty power; and grant that herein I may fall into no sin,
neither run into any kind of danger, whereby I may become either impenitently
sinful, or uncomfortably miserable; But that all my doings and all my
sufferings being ordered by thy Governance, I may always do that which is
righteous in thy sight, and suffer that which may be profitable for mine own
salvtion, through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
The sick man's Letany.
O God the Father of heaven, and of all Mercies, have Mercy upon me a miserable
sinner: And grant that in the greatest extremities and anguishes of my body, I
may find the greatest comforts and refreshments of my soul: Grant that when I
am most tormented in my flesh, I may be most relieved in my spirit: That though
my loins are filled with a sore disease, and there is no whole part in my body,
yet my soul may magnify the Lord, and my spirit may rejoice in God my Savior;
for he has regarded my low and miserable estate, and he will relieve it.

O God the Son Redeemer of the world, and of my sin-sick and sinful soul, have
Mercy upon me a miserable sinner; and take away all my sins, that thou may
take away all my miseries: As thou have made me a happy Believer, so also make
me a joyful partaker of thy Redemption: and then most especially, when I shall
most feel my self as it were swallowed up of grief and destruction, through the
pains and torments of my increasing sickness, or the pangs and horrors of my
approaching death: Be thou my comfort in distress, my strength in weakness, my
health in sickness, my joy in sadness: Be thou my life whiles I am living, and
my Resurrection from the dead: that though I walk through the valley of the
shadow of death, I may fear no evil; for thou art with me to conduct me through
the dangerous downfalls of that valley; to direct me through the dismal
darknesses of that shadow; and to sustain me in the dreadful dissolution of
that death: O thou who now sit on the right hand of God making intercession
for me, reject me not when I am making intercession for my self; for through
thy death I hope for life; through thy life I hope for glory; through thy glory
I hope for eternal glory: And in that hope do I now commend my spirit into thy
hands, for thou have redeemed me, O God thou God of truth: And thou will save
me O God thou God of Mercy, because I have believed thy truth, and do rely upon
thy Mercy: Therefore do I wholly resign my self, body and soul unto thee,
submitting them both to thy good will and pleasure either for life or death;
beseeching thee to Receive my soul and to Restore my body; and to grant that I
may be able to stand upright in the dreadful Judgment, being supported by the
arm of thy All-sufficient Merits and All-saving Mercies, to bless and praise
thee O my blessed Redeemer, world without end.

O God the Holy Ghost proceeding from the Father and the Son, have Mercy upon
me a miserable sinner, and give unto mean assurance of thy Mercy, that thou
may give unto me an abatement of my misery: O thou which art the Comforter
of thine Elect, give unto me daily more and more the heavenly comforts of mine
Election; and in the greatest agonies and distresses of my body, transfix my
soul with the most joyful apprehensions and the most firm persuasions of thine
everlasting Love and undeserved Mercies toward me in Jesus Christ: That
neither the apprehensions of a sad and miserable life, nor the fears and
terrors of an uncomfortable death, may ever be able to affright my soul, nor
to disturb that sweet peace, res^ and repose which my spirit now has and
desires to have in thee the God of spirits who give unto those souls that
are o^ thy Communion, the antepast of eternity the blessed anticipation of
immortal joy (...) O my God, my Stay, my Comforter, unto thee do I fly for the
comforts of immortality: Like as the Heart pants after the waterbrooks, so
pants my soul after thee O God: My soul thirsts for God even for the living
God; when shall (...) come to appear before God? when shall I drink my fill of
the waters of life to quench my thirst? O let my tears no longer be my meat day
and night, whiles mine own troubled thoughts say unto my soul, Where is now thy
God? for surely my God is in heaven; whatsoever pleases him that does he in
heaven and in earth (...) and though for a while in the evening of this life I
have sadness upon earth, yet in the morning of eternity I shall for eve^ have
joy in heaven, Amen.

O Holy, Blessed and Glorious Trinity three persons and one God, have Mercy
upon me a most miserable and wretched sinner, and therefore most miserable and
wretched, because a sinner: because I have sinned against heaven, and against
thee the God of heaven: But since thou have given me grace through the
confession of a true faith to acknowledge the glory of the eternal Trinity, and
in the power of the Divine Majesty to worship the Unity; I beseech thee that
through the stedfastness of this faith, I may be absolved from all my sins, and
also be defended from all adversity, which live and reignest, one God world
without end, Amen.

Remember not Lord mine offenses, nor the offenses of my forefathers, neither
take thou vengeance of my sins: spare me good Lord, spare me thy most
afflicted, but most unworthy servant, whom thou have redeemed with thy most
precious blood, and be not angry with me for ever.

Spare me good Lord.

From this and all other evil and mischief of my body, from the more afflictive
and contagious sin of my soul, from the crafts and assaults of the Devil,
either against my body or against my soul; from the fear of thy wrath, and from
the sentence of everlasting damnation,

Good Lord deliver me.

By thine agony and bloody-sweat, help and assist me in all mine agonies: By
thy Cross and Passion, make me conqueror in all my sufferings: By thy precious
death and burial, sweeten my death, and sanctify my grave: By thy glorious
resurrection and ascension, raise me up again at the last day, and glorify me;
and by the coming of the Holy Ghost give unto me now amidst the torments of my
life, and the terrors of my death, the immortal comfort of a blessed
resurrection to eternal glory; And in this my distress, by this thy special
assistance help and comfort,

Good Lord deliver me.

In all time of my tribulation and adversity, which thou have now sent me: In
all time of my wealth and prosperity, if thou shall be pleased once again to
send it me, in the hour of my death, and in the day of Judgment,

Good Lord deliver me.

I that am a sinner, do beseech thee to hear me O Lord God; And that it may
please thee to rule and govern thy holy Church universally in the right way:
And to deliver this thy distressed and oppressed Church from all her sins, and
from all her troubles, and to restore her to her former Truth and Peace,

I beseech thee to hear me good Lord.

That it may please thee to let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand, and
the Son of man whom thou have made so strong for thine own self, and so will
not we go back from thee; O let us live, and we will call upon thy Name; Turn
us again, O Lord God of Hosts, show us the light of thy countenance and we
shall be whole,

I beseech thee to hear me good Lord.

That it may please thee to defend and strengthen all Bishops and Ministers of
thy Church; That notwithstanding the manifold oppositions, contempts and
persecutions of disobedient and gainsaying people, they may still uphold thy
true and lively Word, and thy holy and blessed Sacraments; and by their
preaching, and administering, and their living, and dying, may set them forth
and show them accordingly,

I beseech thee to hear me good Lord.

That it may please thee to be a Father to the Fatherless, whom my sins have
helped to make so, and whom my repentance cannot, but thy Mercy can relieve: To
be a husband to the widow, a comfort to the comfortless, and to relieve all
that be desolate and oppressed, and to show thy pity upon all exiles, prisoners
and captives, especially those that suffer imprisonment and captivity, or
banishment for the cause of righteousness, for the Doctrine of a Catholic
Faith, or for the duties of a Christian life,

I beseech thee to hear me good Lord.

That it may please thee to have Mercy upon mine enemies, persecutors, and
slanderers, to turn their hearts, and to forgive their sins, and to save their
souls; and to make me forgive, as I desire to be forgiven; and to make me
desire to be forgiven, as I stand in need of forgiveness; and to make my ways
to please thee, that thou may make mine enemies to be at peace with me,

I beseech thee to hear me good Lord,

That it may please thee to give us all true repentance, that thou may
forgive us all our sins, not only our negligences and ignorances, but also our
perversnesses and profanesses, and to endue us with the grace of thy holy
Spirit, that we may lay aside our own animosities, self-interests and worldly
advantages, and join together with one heart and mouth to praise thee, and to
glorify thy holy Name, not looking after fond pretenses and fading vanities,
but looking for that blessed hope, the glorious appearing of the great God, and
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,

I beseech thee to hear me good Lord.

Son of God, I beseech thee to hear me. O Lamb of God that take away the sins
of the world, take away my sins also, inwhom alone there is a world of sin; and
grant me thy peace, and have Mercy upon me: O Christ hear me, and as thou
came to redeem me when I was utterly lost, so I beseech thee suffer me not to
be lost now thou have redeemed me.

Lord have Mercy upon me.
Christ have Mercy upon me.
Lord have Mercy upon me.
And remember me according to the favor that thou bear unto thy people; O
visit me with thy salvation, that I may (once more if it be thy will) see the
felicity of thy chosen, and rejoice in the gladness of thy people, and give
thanks with thine inheritance, through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
The sick man's Benediction.
BLessed be the Lord God, even the God of Israel, which only does wondrous
things.

And blessed be the Name of his Majesty for ever; and all the earth shall be
filled with his Majesty; and my soul shall be filled and revived with his
Mercy, Amen, Amen

The Lord Jesus be within me to strengthen, without me to assist, before me to
direct, behind me to defend and protect, beneath me to uphold and sustain,
above me to receive my soul.

Let the power of the Father preserve me, the wisdom of the Son guide and
enlighten me, the operation of the Holy Ghost quicken and revive me in my
passage through the gates of death, and bring me into everlasting life.

The blood that ran from the wounded heart of my blessed Savior, which has
purchased for me abundance of grace in my life, of comfort in my sickness, and
of hope in my death, wash my soul from sin and from iniquity, that it may be
presented without spot or blemish before the righteous Judge of men and Angels,
in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost,

Amen.
The sick man's Valediction.
LORD I am willing to forsake all to follow thee; O let me follow the Lamb
whithersoever he goes: I willingly forgive all men, and heartily desire all
men to forgive me; that though I came into this world hating my God, yet I may
not go out of it hating my Brother: for God (with whom I hope to dwell when I
go from hence) is love, and he that dwells in love dwells in God, and God
in him, 1 John 4. 16.

I follow after, to apprehend that for which also I am apprehended of Christ
Jesus.

This one thing I do, forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching
forth to those things which are before, I press toward the mark for the price
of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all, Amen. Phil. 3. 12, 13, 14.

The sick man's Preparation for his Departure.
I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand, 2 Timothy
4. 6.

Now therefore I pray thee, if I have found grace in thy sight, show me now thy
way, that I may know thee: that I may find grace in thy sight, and consider
that I am one of thy people.

And he said, my presence shall go with thee, and I will give thee rest.

And he said unto him, if thy presence go not with me, carry me not up hence;
for wherein shall it be known here that I have found grace in thy sight? is it
not in that thou go with me?

And the Lord said, I will do this thing also that thou have spoken, for thou
have found grace in my sight, and I know thee by name.

And he said, I beseech thee show me thy glory; so says my soul O Lord; and
because no man shall see thee and live, I desire to die, that I may see thee,
Exodus 33. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.

Unto him that is able to keep me from falling, (into the pit of everlasting
destruction) and to present me faultless before the presence of his glory with
exceeding joy, do I recommend my soul, even to the only wise God our Savior,
to whom be glory and Majesty, dominion and power, now and ever, Amen. Epist. of
Saint Jude, v. 24, 25.

The Lord shall preserve me from all evil; yea, it is even he that shall keep
my soul.

The Lord shall preserve my going out, and my coming in, from this time forth
for evermore, Amen. Psalm. 121. 7, 8.

The sick man's Departure or Dismission.
ARise ye and depart, for this is not your Rest, because it is polluted; it
shall destroy you, even with a sore destruction, Micah 2. 10.

Return unto thy Rest O my soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee.

For thou have delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my feet
from falling.

I will walk before the Lord in the Land of the living, Psalm. 116. 7, 8, 9.

There remains therefore a Rest to the people of God. Heb. 4. 9.

Lord I willingly go out of this world, that I may enter into that everlasting
rest, Amen.

I have set God before me, he is at my right hand, I shall not fall;

Therefore my heart is gland, and my glory rejoices, my flesh also shall rest
in hope;

For thou will not leave my soul in hell, neither will thou suffer thine holy
one to see corruption.

Thou will show me the path of life; in thy presence is fullness of joy; at thy
right hand there are pleasures for evermore, Amen. Psalm. 16. 8, 9, 10, 11.

To me to live is Christ, and to die is gain.

I have a desire to depart, and to be with Christ.

Lord now let thou servant depart in peace, that he may rest in hope, rise
in joy, and reign in glory,

Amen.
A sick man's Resignation.
Psalm. 31. 5. Into thine hand I commit my spirit; thou have Redeemed me, O Lord
God of Truth.
THere is nothing more the duty of a good Christian, then whiles he lives to
possess his soul in patience, and when he shall die, to resign his soul in
comfort. And indeed, he must possess his soul in patience, that he may resign
it in comfort: He must possess his soul in patience, as not being fully
contented, much less fully delighted, with his present ^ndition in this world;
wherein he can^t but see very much to trouble him, but ^thing at all to
satisfy him: Help Lord, ^h the Psalmist, (Psalm. 12. 1.) in great ^ation of his
heart; and we may gather threefold reason why he is so vexed; (...) the godly
man cease, the faithful fail, ^d they speak vanity: Defectus sanctitatis
(...) affectu, veritatis in intellectu, sanctitatis (...) ^ffectu, says
Alensis. The defect of holi^ss in the will, of truth in the understand^g, of
innocence in the action: This is ^e threefold defect that makes the good
^ristian possess his soul, not in delight as ^on choice, but only in patience
as upon ^cessity; because he wants holiness in his ^ill, and cannot love God;
because he ^nts truth in his understanding, and ^not know God; because he wants
in^grity in his action, and cannot honor ^od as he is bound and desires to do.
This the reason that he possesses his soul, not delight but in patience; and
the trouble ^at he finds in his possession, makes him (...) think himself of a
Resignation: The ^ssessing his soul in patience whiles he ^es, makes him Resign
his soul in com^t when he is to die: And here we have the form of that
comfortable Resignatio^ Into thy hands I commit my spirit, thou ha^ redeemed
me, O Lord God of truth. I hop^ no man will say, that this set form of the
Resignation of his soul, does stint Go^ Spirit, which teaches him how to
Resig^ his own: For sure we are, that he use^ this same form, of whom it is
said, G^ gives not the spirit by measure unto hi^ John 3. 34. And if a set
form did not co^fine the spirit in him who received it not b^ measure, much
less can it confine the spir^ in us, who have it measured from him Well may set
forms teach us rightly t^ commend our own spirits to God, but the^ cannot
possibly make us confine his Spirit. Had there been any such inconveniency
(...) using of set forms, the Spirit of Go^ would not have provided us so many
se^ forms of Prayers and Praises in the Psalm and other parts of the Text: so
that no objection can be made against set forms o^ Prayer, as such, which may
not be retorte^ to some undervaluing, if not underminin^ of the Scripture it
self, the very light o^ our eyes, the breath of our nostrils, and the joy of
our hearts: We may not then hearken to this objection, above all the rest
unless we will say, That the Spirit of Go^ did intend to confine himself: Or
the Son ^f God did intend to confine his own Spirit in us, when he absolutely
prescribed a ^t form in his own most holy Prayer, com^anding it to be said,
Luke 11. 2. when ye ^ray, say, Our Father: nay yet more, un^ess we will say,
that the Son of God did ^ntend to confine his own Spirit in himself, when he
used this very particular form, (...), Into thy hands I commend my spirit, Luke
23. 46. For it is the very same Greek Text in both places, and the very same
translation in the vulgar Latin, though we in English have seemed to make a
Verbal, but not a Real difference: And therefore it is evident, that our
blessed Savior by using this set form, has sanctified it for our use, and
taught us thereby how to Resign our souls to him that gave them; And indeed,
the Spirit of God had sufficiently sanctified it before; so that now we have
this Resignation doubly sanctified to us by the spirit, and by the Son of God;
so happy a thing is it for us seriously to consider, and much more sincerely to
love it, to give it a place in our meditations, and much more in our
affections; And indeed it does challenge both; nothing so fit to busy our
contemplations as these words, Into thine hand I commit my spirit; nothing so
powerful to work upon our affections as these words, Thou have Redeemed me O
Lord God of truth: But since good Meditations do produce good affections, and
good affections do increase good meditations; it is manifest that God has
joined them together, and therefore we may not put them asunder. And indeed the
whose verse concerns one and the same thing, considered in it self, and in its
cause; Resignatio, Resignationis causa; The Resignation of the soul, and the
cause of that Resignation; The Resignation of the soul, Into thy hands I commit
my spirit; The cause of that Resignation, Thou have Redeemed me O Lord God of
truth: The Resignation of his soul is as ours should be, remarkable for its
seasonableness, for its fullness, for its willingness, Resignatio Opportuna,
Plena, Voluntaria; It is first opportune or seasonable; secondly full or
plenary; thirdly free or voluntary: First it is an opportune or seasonable
Resignation; for he was now in great danger, and in greater distress; Pull me
out of the net that they have laid privily for me, v. 4. He was already partly
ensnared, and did fear lest he might in time be wholly entangled in the
miseries and mischiefs of this sinful life, if he should retain his soul too
long, and that makes him think of Resigning it: He well understood his dangers
and his distresses, and that made him look toward his Deliverer, and after his
Deliverance: It Is not unseasonable at any time to resign our souls to God; for
he may call for them when he pleases, and we ought to be ready at his call; But
it is most seasonable, when we see our selves either in imminent danger, or in
irremediable distress; then it is proper to follow the example of Eliah, 1
Kings 19. 4. He requested for himself that he might die; and said, Satis est
nunc Domine, Accipe animam meam; It is enough now O Lord, take away my life: It
is enough for me in regard of this world, says R. David; It is enough for this
wicked world; for I have lived too long to see so much wickedness, and to be
able to redress none, and yet desirous to stay longer to help increase All;
Thus far in effect a Jew could go; but let Christians go farther in their
Gloss, and say moreover, It is enough for thy glory, and enough for my
salvation: It is enough for thy glory, for thou have miraculously preserved me
in my life; it is enough for the good of mine own soul, for thou have made me
sensible of, and thankful for thy miraculous preservation: And when can I
better desire thee to take my soul, then now it actually has this sense of
thine undeserved Mercies, and this thankfulness for them? Yet Tremelius,
seeking for the reason of this prayer out of the tenth verse, thus pithily
enlarges his Gloss; Abjectio Tui Foederis, Cultus Tui Destruction, Prophetarum
tuorum coedes, and mei persecutio, faciunt ut mortem expetam: That the children
of Israel have forsaken thy Covenant, thrown down thine Altars, slain thy
Prophets with the sword, and seek my life to take it away; These things that
have hitherto made me weary of life, do now make me even desirous of death: Nor
may we think so Religious a Prophet would have carried with him the guilt of
Impatience, much less of Uncharitableness to his grave: For it was the
indispensable necessity of Gods Truth, and the unfeigned zeal of Gods glory,
that extorted from him this most grievous complaint; And indeed, when the true
Religion and worship of God is in danger or in distress, though we our selves
be in neither, yet is it not fit for us to admit of the comforts of this world;
then if any say, Fear not, for thou have a Son, thou need not be troubled
that the Philistims have gotten the conquest over Israel, for thou art in a
happy condition, thou have a goodly inheritance, and a Son to inherit after
thee; yet must thou not answer, neither regard it, unless thou would have a
weak dying woman rise up against thee in Judgment, 1 Samuel 4. 20. Then must
Ichabod be all thy saying, that is, where is the glory? not where am I, what
will become of me, or of my Family? But where is my God, where is his glory?
For if the glory be departed from Israel, how can a true Israelite desire to
abide in it? Thine eyes are not opened to see thine own and other men's
wickedness; thine heart is not opened to be sorry for it, and to repent of it,
unless thou be ready in such a case as this, to cry out and say, Woe is me, that
I am constrained to dwell with Mesech, and to have mine habitation among the
Tents of Kedar, Psalm. 120. v. 4. This was the method of his prayer, who
questionless prayed with Gods Spirit, Psalm. 119. First, Give me understanding
according to thy Word, v. 169. Then, Deliver me according to thy Word, v. 170.
till he had a right understanding of his misery, he knew not how to pray for
his deliverance: But as soon as he fully saw the one, he could not choose but
heartily pray for the other: Resignatio opportuna; This Resignation of his soul
was opportune and seasonable; that is the first.

And as his Resignation was opportune and seasonable, so it was also full and
plenary; In manus tuas; Into thy hands: as if he had said, I desire to reserve
nothing in mine own hands, but do resign all into thine: The Common Law is very
careful that a Resignation be whole and entire, without any reservation: And
Navarr tells us, that he that has another Resignation, must be very cautelous
in allowing him any thing out of his living, for fear there may be a suspicion
of a Simonaical contract: (Potest quotannis Resignanti quid Donare, si id
faciat ob Amorem Dei principaliter coram Deo, absque tamen ullo pacto: And
again, Gratitudinem erga Resignantem Caute exercere debet, ne praesumatur id
facere ob Confidentiam;) Will not ehe Law be satisfied without a full
Resignation, and do we think God will be satisfied without it? Or what were it
for him to accept of part of thy soul, but to allow himself to be but half a
God? Thou must therefore either Resign all to him, or keep all to thy self: For
thou can not divide the Sacrifice, unless thou will divide the Deity: And
since thy All to him is nothing, thou can not give him less then All, but
thou must profess him worthy of less then nothing: He has required All thy
soul, and All thy might, and All thy strength; and it is a most abominable
undutifulness, and a more abominable unthankfulness, not to give him what he
requires, since thou can not give him what he deserves; Therefore it must be
a full Resignation, Resignatio Plena; that is the second.

And indeed it will be full, if it be free; it will be Plenary if it be
Voluntary, which is the third condition, Resignatio Voluntaria; it must be a
free and a voluntary Resignation; [I commit my spirit,] If I would reserve any
thing to my self, it should be my spirit; the innermost part of my self, but I
also commit that; and as I commit it into thy hands to dispose as thou
please, so I freely commit and commend it to thy disposal: A man may renounce
his property upon Compulsion, but he Resigns it properly upon Choice or
Election. And so do good men give up their souls to God, freely and willingly,
whereas wicked and ungodly men do it against their wills; Thou fool, this night
shall thy soul be required of thee, Luke 12. 20. As if it were taken away by
force, not voluntarily Resigned; which was a great sin in him, that he did not
willingly resign his soul to God, who created it; but a much greater sin in
thee, if thou do not willingly resign thy soul to the Son of God who Redeemed
it, and who alone can save it; especially when he himself has taught thee this
form of a Resignation; whence it was that in the Gospel on Palm Sunday, the
Priest in the Latine-Church was to make a stop when he had read these words,
Jesus when he had cried again with a loud voice, yielded up the Ghost: He was
here to pause, and to say his Pater Noster, Ave-Marie, and In manus tuas Domine
Commendo spiritum meum, before he proceeded to the next verse; As if it were
Unchristian-like in us not to Resign our souls to our Savior Christ, when we
see him as it were Resigning his soul, merely to prepare a place for ours: I
ask then, Dare thou trust thy soul in thine own hands? Is it not already much
the worse for thy keeping so long; and will it not still be worse if thou keep
it longer? Can thou resign it now as pure as thou did first receive it, and
will it not contract the greater impurity, the longer thou deferrest and
delayest thy Resignation? Consider that Saint Paul says, It is a fearful thing
to fall into the hands of the living God, Heb. 11. 31. wherein every word has
its weight, a weight too heavy to lay upon thy soul: (...), It is the most
terrible of all terrors, for it is spoken of death: (...), To fall: None are
properly said to fall into Gods hands at their death, but they that would needs
keep themselves out of his hands during their life: They then fall into his
hands, because they did not before deliver their souls unto him; whereas those
that desire to live unto God, do willingly give themselves into his hands, and
do still continue in his hands whiles they are here, and so cannot be said to
fall into his hands when they go from hence: Those only that go out of his
hands in their life, are truly and properly said to fall into his hands at
their death: And they find how fearful a thing it is to fall into his hands;
because they find him a living God: He seemed to them as it were asleep before;
and his own good Spirit complaining that he had so long born with such
miscreants, uses their own words in his complaint, Psalm. 44. 23. Awake, why
sleep thou O Lord? Nay he seemed to them little less then dead, Psalm. 14. 1.
The fool has said in his heart there is no God: It is in the Hebrew, there is
no Judges; if a God to see him ((...)) yet not a Judge to punish him; They
either thought him as it were asleep in not regarding their wickedness, or as
it were dead in not revenging it: But now they find him a waking and a living
God: That his eyes are open to see them, and his hand stretched out to reach
them: and therefore they must needs be infinitely troubled, that they are
against their wills, fallen into his hands.

For though King David chooses rather to fall into the hands of God then of
men, 2 Samuel 24. 14. yet is it only in regard of this, not of the next life: In
this life he would not willingly fall into the hands of men, of ungodly,
unpeaceable, unplacable men, for their tender mercies are cruel, Prove. 12. 10.
But in the next life, he would not fall into the hands of God: And it is an
admirable observation of Saint Chrysostom upon that plave, (...) We that are
under persecution fall into the hands of men; but they that are our persecutors
fall into the hands of God; And this of the two is the more terrible fall. O my
God, though thou let me fall into mine enemies hands, yet let him never fall
into thine: Draw thou near to him in Grace and Mercy, and draw him near to thee
by Faith and Repentance: Be thou reconciled unto him, that he may be reconciled
unto thee, and willingly give himself into thy hands: For it is so fearful a
thing to fall into thy hands, that I cannot but pray against it, even for my
greatest persecutors: I cannot hate mine enemy so far as to wish him that
mischief: O then let me not so far hate my self, as to bring it upon mine own
soul: Let me willingly commit and commend my spirit to thee every day, that
being in thy hands all my life, it may not fall into thy hands at my death: Not
fall into thy hands as a Malefactor that fled from thee, to be Judged and
Tormented: But be received into thy hands as a child that flies to thee to be
pardoned and protected: For when we have said all, and tried all that we can
say, this is the only way to be a good Christian, and that according to the
first and best patterns or presidents that have been given us of Christianity;
for so its said of Barnabas and Paul, Men that have hazarded their lives for
the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ; It is more in the original, (...); Qui
tradiderunt animas suas; Men that have given or delivered up their souls for
the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ: He that will be a good Christian, must
endeavor to be as ready to deliver up his soul to Christ, as he desires Christ
should be ready to receive it: And we are very much encouraged so to do; for we
cannot be so ready to give our souls, as he is ready to take them, which puts
me on the second general part of my text, (for I am willing to form my thoughts
upon this argument into a farewell-Sermon for a Vale to the world)
Resignationis causa, the cause of this Resignation, for thou have Redeemed me O
Lord thou God of Truth: Wherein we have indeed two causes; First the fullness of
the Redemption, For thou have Redeemed me. Secondly, the faithfulness of the
Redeemer, O Lord thou God of truth.

First, the fullness of the Redemption; for it had a threefold fullness; a
fullness of Excellency, a fullness of Appearance, a fullness of Redundancy; which
is Bonaventures distinction concerning our blessed Savior, (lib. 3. sent.
did. 13.) Quod est loqui de Plenitudine secundum Excellentiam, and secundum
Apparentiam, and secundum Redundantiam: We may speak of the fullness of Christ
according to its Excellency, according to its Appearance, and according to its
Redundancy; for Christ had a fullness of Excellency from his first conception;
And he had a fullness of Appearance from the descent of the Holy Ghost upon him;
for then his excellent holiness was made apparent to all the world, by the
testimony of the Father and of the Holy Spirit: And he had a fullness of
Redundancy from the time that he sanctified his disciples and servants, by the
communication and participation of his holiness: And this same threefold
fullness is in this Redemption; A fullness of Excellency or Perfection in the
nature of it; (...), have Redeemed; A fullness of appearance or manifestation
from the Author of it, Thou, thou have Redeemed; And a fullness of Redundancy
from the subject of it, me, Thou have Redeemed me. First there is a fullness of
Excellency or Perfection in this Redemption from the nature of it, (...), Thou
have Redeemed; So says the Master of Greek Criticisms, (...). This word is
properly used concerning the Redemption of Captives, that are Redeemed with a
price: For they that are otherwise delivered then by a price, (...), are said
rather to be Rescued then to be Redeemed: (Eustath. in Iliad. a.) Here is then
a Redemption as excellent as the price that was paid for the Captives, and that
was the blood of the Eternal Son of God: A price that was infinitely more worth
then all the whole Creation both in heaven and in earth, which has in truth no
other preciousness but what it has from this price; is no farther precious
then as it is sprinkled with this blood.

Secondly, A fullness of appearance or manifestation in this Redemption from the
Author of it. Thou, thou have Redeemed; Thou whom God has appointed heir of
all things, by whom also he made the worlds, and who art the brightness of his
glory, and the express image of his person, Heb. 1. 2, 3. This heir of all
things came to make us partakers of his inheritance: The same God that made the
world by his Power, and governed it by his Wisdom, Redeemed it by his Mercy: He
that was the brightness of the glory of God, and the express image of his
person, was pleased to make himself of no reputation, and took upon him the
form of a servant, and being found in fashion as a man to humble himself, and
become obedient unto death, (Phil. 2. 7.) That by his death he might destroy
death, and by his rising to life again, might restore to us everlasting life:
But that is the third fullness in this Redemption; A fullness of Redundancy, from
the subject of it; Me, Thou have Redeemed Me; Thou, Me: Heaven and Earth are
meet together in the Mystery; But Heaven and Hell are met together in the
Mercy of this Redemption: God and Man in the Mystery, but God and sinful Man
in the Mercy of it: Me in my Nature was a great mystery; but Me in my Sins was
a far greater mercy. Thy love did seek me when I did not deserve it; Thy care
did keep me when I did not observe it; O let neither Love nor Care forsake me
now I do desire it: And indeed thou have promised not to forsake us; And that
is the second Reason we are so willing to Resign our selves to thee, the
faithfulness of our Redeemer, O God thou God of Truth: Thou art powerful in thy
performances as God, and faithful in thy Promises as the God of Truth: As none
can resist thy power in performing, so none may distrust thy truth in
promising: It was thy Mercy that made thee promise, but it is thy Truth that
makes thee keep thy promises: Mercy and Truth are together in God, as Cruelty
and Falseness go together in man; Though I have no right to thy Mercy from it
self, yet I have a right to thy Mercy from thy Truth; And thine own Holy Spirit
has taught me to claim this Right, Heb. 13. 5. For he has said, I will never
leave thee nor forsake thee; He said it to Joshua, yet will have me believe, he
said it to me; for though that promise in its occasion was particular, and
concerned only Joshua and those with him, Josh. 1. 5. yet in its document it
was universal, and concerned all the faithful servants of God that should be to
the end of the world; for that promise was made to Joshua as Leader of the
people, and therefore belonged in common to him and to them, even to the whole
Church of the Jews: And by the same reason belongs to us now as it did to them,
even to the whole Church of the Gentiles; For there is no difference between
the Jew and the Greek, or Gentile; For the same Lord over All, is rich unto all
that call upon him, Romans 10. 12. If we call upon him as Joshua and the
Israelites did, we have the same interest in his promises as Joshua and the
Israelites had; He will be as rich in Mercy to us, as he was to him and to
them; or else in vain has his Apostle said, For whatsoever things were written
afore-time, were written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort
of the Scriptures, might have hope, Romans 15. 4. Where is the comfort of the
Scriptures if it be not in the Promises? or what promise can be the ground of
our hope like this, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee? A promise which
he made in Mercy, as Lord over All, and therefore rich in mercy to All that
call upon him; But a promise that he keeps in truth, as being the same Lord
over All; That is, one and the same constantly in himself, and therefore not
diverse in his Word, nor in his Promises: O God thou God of truth: As God, thou
art a Creditor to All by thy Mercy, All borrow of it, All depend on it, All are
obliged to it: But as a God of Truth thou art a Debtor to All, that is, to All
that call upon thee; for the Promise, though it be universal, yet it is
conditional. Thou art a Debtor to All by thy Truth: they have an Interest in
thy Promise, claim it as their Right, look to it as their Treasure, look on it
as their Comfort: Debtor fidelitatis, non Justitiae, God is to man a Debtor of
faithfulness, though not a Debtor of Justice: A Debtor of faithfulness, because
of his own Word, though he cannot be a Debtor of Justice, because of man's
Merit: As he is God, he has provided Mercy, (for as is his Majesty, so is his
Mercy) But as he is the God of truth, so he has moreover assured it: In this
assurance did Saint Paul comfort himself, 2 Timothy 1. 12. For I know whom I have
believed, and I am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have
committed unto him against that day; (...), Depositum meum servare; God is
contented to be our Depositarius or Trustee, to keep that which we commit to
him, so it be worth his trust, or fit for his keeping: And nothing is fit for
his keeping, which has relation to this day, or any thing of this world; but
only that which has relation to that day, or to the world to come: Therefore I
may commit nothing else to him as to my Depositary or Trustee, but only my
soul, which alone can remain and a bide till that day: And if I commit my soul
unto him against that day, he will see it then forthcoming as safe as I can
desire, and more safe then I can deserve: This is the (...), The Depositum,
Saint Paul speaks of; And the word used by him is a Noun derived from the Verb
used in my Text, (...), I will Depose, Into thy hands will I Depose my spirit;
Saint Paul's (...), wholly agrees with this (...), his Depositum with this
Deposing; The thing that he commits to Gods trust, is, his spirit, his soul,
which he commits into his hands, as the only Trustee of souls: And it is much
to be observed, that the word (...), in the Greek Text, is not in the Present,
but in the Future-Tense, so that it is to be rendered, not I do depose, or
commit, or commend, but I will depose, or commit, or commend my spirit; to show
to us man's uncessant Dutifulness, and Gods uncessant Faithfulness. First man's
uncessant Dutyfulness; for this act of Resigning the soul, is a continued act;
it is a thing long in doing before it can be well done; It requires great
preparations, greater deliberations, and greatest Resolutions; And after all
our Preparations, and Deliberations, and Resolutions, it is still a motion that
is rather in fieri, then in facto esse, rather completing, then completed;
that has more perfection from the time to come, then from the time present or
past; more perfection in the Purpose, then in the Performance; in the
Resolution, then in the Execution; (...) I will commit: No man can so fully
Resign himself to God as he ought; and though our blessed Savior could and
did, yet to teach us this Document of humility, he also speaks as if he had not
done it; for he says, (...), as well as David, I will commit; As if something
were still behind, something still more in the Resolution then in the
Execution: For though the grace of union in Chirst was infinite, the grace
whereby he took his humane soul; yet the habitual grace was not infinite, the
grace whereby he resigned his soul; But God is infinite, as in himself, so also
in his Obligation; and an infinite Obligation requires an infinite
Satisfaction, which to a Finite nature must needs be rather in the Purpose then
in the Performance, for which cause our blessed Savior himself thought fit to
say, not (...), but (...), (...) I do commit, but I will commit my spirit: O
Lord let me never think I can ^o too much, when thine own Son has ^ught me
that I can never do enough: He said I will do it, when he had done it; shall I
say, I have more then done it, when cannot do it? Did he speak by way of
^xtenuation in his works, and shall I ^hansie a Supererogation in mine? Did ^e
seem to intimate something less in his ^erformance then was in his Obligation;
and shall I dream of Performing more then was Obliged? O let me never come to
^at height of Impiety as to neglect my ^uty, much less to that height of
Impu^ence as to over value it: Let me never ^y, I Do, or Have done; but only I
will ^o, accounting it thy greatest mercy to my ^oul, that thou give the will
to do; and ^he greatest security of my soul, that thou ^cceptest the will for
the deed.

Secondly, Gods uncessant faithfulness; for David could not have said, I will
commit, by a continued act of giving, if he ^ad not believed Gods uncessant
faithfulness in a continued act of receiving; Gods faithfulness is as
everlasting as himself: And that makes him look upon his trust as never fully
discharged, but as always newly undertaken; And he would have us believe that
he is as careful of it, and as faithful in it, as if he did every moment newly
undertake it; for this same (...), in the Future-tense, which does show man's
continued act in resigning his soul to God, does also import Gods continued act
in receiving souls that are resigned unto him; that he is always ready to
Receive them, and always as careful to Retain them, and will be as faithful to
Restore them: He Receives them by his Mercy, he Retains them by his power,
(non^ is able to pluck them out of his hands, Joh^ 10. 28.) He will Restore
them by his Truth; And he will Restore them infinitely better, then he can
Receive them; contrary to all other Trustees, who generally Receive much better
then they Restore^ Never any man gave his spirit to God in his lifetime,
though but for an instant, b^ an holy Contemplation or Affection, bu^ he
received it again much better then he gave it: How much more shall he that
gives him his spirit at his death by a full and free Resignation, receive it
again infinitely better at the last Resurrection Wherefore let us pray unto him
that h^ will be pleased to make us ready to resign ^ur souls to him without
reluctancie, and ^areful to resign them without spot or ^emish, being thoroughly
washed by the ^ars of our own Repentance, and by faith (...) our Saviors
blood, that so he may ^ceive them into his Mercy, and sanctify them by his
grace, and satisfy them with ^is glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord and only
Savior, to whom with the Father and the Eternal Spirit, be ascribed all honor
and glory, be performed all boun^en duty and obedience, from this time ^orth
and for evermore, Amen.

Quod de te per te loquimur, da transeat ad te,
Utque tui simus, nos age, solus habe.
FINIS.

