THE LAVVFVLNES AND VNLAVVFVLNES OF AN OATH OR COVENANT Set down in short
Propositions agreeable to the Law of God and man, and may serve to rectify the
conscience of any reasonable man: very fitting for every man to take into
serious consideration in these undutifull times, whether he has sworn or not
sworn to any late or new Oath or Covenant made by any subordinate Authority
whatsoever.

Printed at Oxford by Leonard Lichfield. 1643.

To MY DREAD SOVEREIGN, THE KINGS MOST Excellent MAJESTY.
May it please your Matie,
AS one, whose heart (amongst many thousands) bleeds with the sad thoughts of
the woeful Divisions of our dear Fellow Subjects; and unfainedly pitties the
mis-guidance of those poor well-meaning souls amongst them, whose credulity
has heedlesly betrayed them into a zealous error; I have let fall these few
Propositions; which I have presumed to set down, not as in the way of a
Challenger; for, most (if not all) of them are such, as be not capable of
Contradiction; but rather of a faithful Remembrancer to my dear Brethren, of
those Points which they cannot but know, and yield: as well supposing, that
nothing but mere want of consideration can be guilty of this perilous
distraction, in them, who profess to love their King, and the Truth.

Now the good God of heaven open the eyes and hearts of us all, that we may
both see, and be sensible of the invaluable blessing of our peace, and the
happy freedom of his Gospel, which we do comfortably enjoy under Your
MAJESTY'S sweet and religious Government, to the wonder, and envy of all other
Nations; and compose the hearts of all your Native Subjects to meet Your
MAJESTY'S most gracious indulgence, with all humble thankfulness.

And the same God forbid that any of us should be weary of our happiness: and
be drawn to do any act that may (before all the world) pour shame upon our
holy profession; whose chief glory it has always hitherto been to render us
still loyal and obedient, and in this very regard, to triumph over the false
religion of our opposites. Such shall be ever the prayers of

Your Maties most humble, and faithful Subject, and ancientest Chaplain, JOS:
EXON.


