A REVIEW AND EXAMINATION Of a PAMPHLET lately published, Bearing the Title of
PROTESTERS NO SUBVERTERS, AND PRESBYTERY no PAPACY, etc.

By some lovers of the Interests of CHRIST in the Church of SCOTLAND.

EDINBURGH, Printed Anno Dom. 1659.

A REVIEW and Examination of a Pamphlet lately published, Bearing the Title of
Protesters no Subverters, and Presbytery no Papacy, etc.
THough it be a sad affliction to the spirits of men, who love and thirst after
Peace, to be kept in a continual fire of Contention; yet we do not think it
strange that desires and endeavors to quench that flame, which has been so
long burning in this Church, meet with no better entertainment from these
Witnesses to the way of the Protestation, Authors of this Pamphlet: Who, being
(as we have just cause to believe) some of the prime contrivers and promoters
of these evils regrated and complained of, they do well not to trouble the rest
(many of whom we believe, would not have joined in this Answer) to give any
expression of their sense of the Overtures of Union made to them, nor put them
to spend their spirits and time that way: But (this being their own more kindly
element) they will be at the pains to put this Piece in their hands, printed in
such a volumn as it may be a Vade me^um wherever they go: That so
honest-minded Ministers and People (who, we persuade our selves, are weary of
debates, and might be drawn to an Union, were it not for such who for their own
ends keep up the Rent) may, in so far as they can prevail, not only be induced
never to think of Peace more upon the terms offered, as they express their
design in the close of their Postscript; but may be affrighted (as they are
pleased to speak of us, page 15.) from their Mother Church and Brethren as
Monsters, as a company of Arians dealing with an Athanasius, and as Tyrants,
Popes, and Prelates, whom our fathers opposed; and may drink-in these corrupt
principles of Church government here propined: whereby every man is taught to
do what is right in his own eyes; to call any thing of Church Government which
crosses his humor, but alterable and humane; and when he pleases to think
his Judge does him wrong, if he cannot thrust him out and set himself in his
seat, then to slight and contemn him; yea, and to make every ordinary Minister
an Apostle, who had not their call by men, and so were not subject to them in
that matter.

As the sight of this Pamphlet has quickened our desire, yet more and more to
mourn over the sad and deplorable case of this poor Church (so long afflicted
with these distempers and confusions, without hope of healing, and so
grievously reproached and exposed as a laughing stock to her enemies, and a
grief to her friends) and to spread it before the Lord who knows her
affliction and reproach: So we desire these men may seriously lay to heart the
account they have to make for their continuing thus to disquiet and toss the
Church and People of God in this Land, and to ponder how truly the Spirit of
God has given warning that divisions will breed errors, whereof they give sad
proof in this Piece, as to the point of Government. And whereas they design
themselves Witnesses to the way of the Protestation; we wish them to consider,
that as to bear witness to an untruth or wrong cause is an horrid sin; so,
however they arrogate that style of Witnesses, yet their consciences can tell
them, they give their testimony without any great hazard, having verified that
they are rather seeking their own things, than the things of Jesus Christ.
However, let them for us brook their title of Witnesses, and let the Reader
add such epithets thereunto as he thinks they deserve.

If we should draw out a Reply proportionable to their practice, who have
published so many sheets in answer to little more than one sheet, it might
certainly be said, we had very little to do beside; Sure we are it should be
very little to edification. And though we might have satisfied our selves with
some Animadversions only upon their new principles, leaving other matters,
which either are spoken to already in print, or are matters of fact, which
(however they busk them) are seen in their own colors by them who know us
both, and impartially observe us: Yet considering their great trade has been
to make more use of stories and reproaches than arguments, and that those may be
more taking with the simple and unadvised than stronger reasons; and withal
that we are bound to say somewhat in defense of the Overtures of Union, which
they endeavor to render so odious: Therefore we shall, with all the brevity we
can, take a view of this whole Pamphlet: hoping that in matters of fact, which
cannot be got proven to the world in print, our assertion deserves no less
credit in name of this poor Church, than theirs, whose interest it is to defame
her, lest otherwise they incur the title of Schismatics and Disturbers: We
being always ready to make-out before the Judge competent, the truth of our
assertions. Yet it is not to be expected that we should dwell on every thing
they start here, nor jangle on every thing in the by: but only that we take
notice of what is most material. And therefore in the very entry, we shall
leave sober men to their own thoughts of the insolent and vain Title of that
Pamphlet, so injuriously reflecting upon this Church and the Government
established therein. Nor shall we descant much upon the designation of the
Resolutioners, and Resolution-party, which they are pleased to confer upon us;
yea, and upon this National Church in the generality of her Judicatories:
Seeing (to omit the injustice of branding us with the name of a Party) if they
will add the Epithet of Public (which they deny us not either) to our
Resolutions, they will sound better in any indifferent ear, than any private
designs of men, destructive to the public, and tending to advance their own
particular interest; And we could easily repay them with designations as true,
and more unsavory to them, were it our work to be so employed. And though they
are pleased to call these Resolutions, Rotten Resolutions, page 85. Yet we
doubt not but they will be fragrant in the Churches of Christ, as a Truth of
God, when they shall be dead and rotten, and their opposition thereunto
unsavory. We shall as little trouble our selves with what is said of the
Representation, seeing we believe themselves do judge it is more easily traduced
than solidly answered; And as to what they are pleased to speak of our Reverend
Brother whom they call our Agent, page 15, 16. As that Representation
contains nothing unworthy to be owned by him, or whereof he needs or will
be ashamed; So, the innocence of his agency to prevent the evils they were
endeavoring to bring upon this Church, and his carriage and integrity in
managing that Trust, are so well known at home and abroad, that we believe he
needs not write Apologeticks against the slanders of their tongue or pen, which
they have either in this Piece, or upon other occasions, most unjustly cast
upon him. They are pleased to let out reflections tart enough upon persons,
both dead and alive; to which we shall only say, That such reasonings of theirs
are no dainties to us, to refute men's Arguments and overcome them in their
cause by branding their persons; and that as we think the graves of the dead,
who are gone out of the world without public scandal, ought to be inviolable;
So if those who are alive be not studying so much the more to approve
themselves to God, sure they make a bad use of that scourge of their tongue,
wherewith they have been so much and so often smitten these diverse years
bygone. And whereas they are afraid we should forget we have some among us who
were Prelaticall, and therefore do so often tell us of it: and do tell us also,
(which indeed we never knew before, and having searched this testimony they
would have us credit, we find it an untruth, disowned by him upon whom they
father it) That some of us of late did profess our respect to the
Congregationall way, and our dislike of the subordination of Kirk-Judicatories,
page 10. We wish them to consider that this reflection, of being Prelaticall
(as they term it) does not reach some of us only, but others of the worthies
of Christ elsewhere, who did not at first see the evil of that way. And as we
desire they may not forget, that the most part of those who were honored by
Christ to be most eminently opposite to that course, yet alive (as it has
pleased the Lord in great and remarkable mercy to preserve them in His Church
to this day) some two or three, at most, only excepted, are also opposite to
the way of these Witnesses: So also that they do not charge that too hardly
upon any of us, which they know may be retorted upon some of themselves. And we
are confident, that who so know their way, and their confidents and bosom
friends, of whom chiefly they have been making use in promoting their cause,
will easily discern who run nearest to Independency. Papists were wont to be
thought no fit men to defend the Protestant Religion; and it may be thought
they are none of the fixedest Presbyterians, whose (not only persons, but)
projects in reference to that Government are owned as their own cause, by men
whose principles are known (even the Witnesses themselves being judges) to be
opposite to that Government, and that even when real Presbyterians, unconcerned
in us or our differences (save in so far as they are friends to Truth, and to
us for the Truths sake) do disown, yea, and act against their way.

But passing these, and many the like passages, We shall take notice of their
Book as it is an Answer to the Declaration, wherein three things will be worthy
our pains to enquire after. 1. How they have acquit themselves in Answer to
that Charge of their small respect to the established Church Government, and
their encroachments thereupon? 2. What entertainment they give to the Overtures
of Union? 3. What their Doctrine concerning Subordination is? which they do
twice speak to, But we shall speak to all in one place.

Before we can enter particularly on these, Two Exceptions against the Title
and whole tenor of the Declaration must first be removed out of the way:

First, Their sense of the whole scope and tenor of the Declaration, is, That
however we pretend to Union and Peace in it, yet for the matter of it, it
looks like no such thing, but is an heap of bitter invectives and reproaches,
and that (like rude painting) without the words in the Frontispiece it would
never have been owned for any such thing. This charge they set-off, both with
Scripture and a poetic vein, page 4, 5. And again, page 74. they quarrel our
raking into the bowels of bygone actings, while we make an offer of peace, etc.

This challenge, we take it, does relate to the Narrative of the Declaration,
premitted to the Offers of an Union, wherein some account is given of their
former irregular actings and projects. And we shall not insist to regrate how
much the Scriptures are wrested or misapplyed throughout this Piece, and how
unsuitable, in our judgment, it is to let loose a poetic humor upon so sad a
subject, which calls for our mourning rather than our mirth; as they have of
late begun the taking up of that way in their Pasquils put in peoples hands.
But as to the matter it self, had we to do only with these Witnesses, we could
easily answer them, That whatever others unconcerned might judge of the
suitableness or unsuitablenesse of that Narrative, in reference to the scope
and purpose of the Declaration; yet, if that Narrative be true (of which we
shall hear afterward what they say) and if they be the persons chiefly guilty
of carrying-on these courses, it were more fitting they were laying them to
heart, and testifying their abhorrence thereof, by joining with their Brethren,
than thus to carp and quarrel when their faults are laid open before them in
love. And to speak it seriously, though we are content to bury all those,
provided they would hearken to an Union in the Lord: yet we are confident the
Lord is ill pleased with their way therein, and requires they should repent
and mourn more for the wounds they have given their Mother, than their practice
hitherto declares them to have done. But to express our selves further, for
the satisfaction of all; we do ingenuously profess, that, so far as we know
the mind of those who emitted that Declaration, their scope in that Narrative
was no other than what is expressed in the close thereof* page 8. Namely, that
it flowed not from any design either to defame or irritate, or to charge these
destructive courses upon all of them: But they conceived (and we do still
conceive) that Narrative was necessary in that way of application to them; Not
only to vindicate themselves before the world and all good men, that they
contended not about trifles in their opposition to these encroachments; nor yet
only to prove their love to peace, in that they would follow, and were willing
to agree with those who had so far injured the Church and them: But that even
in order to Union, they held it their duty to inform those with whom they were
dealing, what the tendency of their courses was, (which possibly many who went
on in the simplicity of their hearts, and joined with them in some things,
could not discern; never suspecting that their Leaders would so far wrong the
Government they pretended so much to maintain: and the prime Actors, being
carried-on in the heat of their passion and contradiction, were not in a frame
seriously to consider of the matter) that so they might choose rather to close
with us, than to continue in that posture, which could not but inevitably draw
them to many the like courses, still the longer the worse. And however the
matter of Union succeeded, (wherein their acquaintance with the humors of such
as these Witnesses made their fears far exceed their hopes, which the event
since has sadly confirmed) yet they thought it necessary to have this on
record as their Testimony in behalf of the Church of Scotland, against these
usurpations and encroachments, and an exoneration of their consciences in
discharging their duty to their Brethren, if so be they will still run-on in
courses which draw-on so sad consequences, rather than join in the work of the
Lord. As these things may sufficiently vindicate the Authors of the Declaration
in this particular; so we do not think this needed have hindered peace, had
these Witnesses been very earnest for it. For though it was then complained how
they had defamed their Mother Church and Brethren, and now we are sure they owe
us nothing of this coin in this Pamphlet; yet we sincerely profess we are so
far from being irritated, (however grieved) that for our part, we thirst the
more for an Union in the Lord, as perceiving there will be no end of fruitless
jangling, while we continue at this work; and are content that, upon an Union,
there be the fairest way can be devised for burying all these things in
oblivion.

Secondly, They have another quarrel at the Title of the Declaration: for,
whereas it is called A Declaration of the Brethren who are for the established
Government and Judicatories of this Kirk, they challenge this upon a twofold
account.

1. That the Authors thereof should claim to such a title, even in reference to
those of their own judgment, it being but the deed of a Juncto acting in an
extrajudicial capacity, and not proceeding from any Church Authority; That many
of our Brethren were not privy to it, nor are satisfied with it, and that it
has not been owned (as they were made to expect) by Church-judicatories, nor
tendered to the Protesters by them; But that Synods being put to it by them,
did refuse to declare themselves whether they would own it or not, till the
other Brethren should first declare themselves satisfied therewith. This is
their language, page 7, 8. But afterward finding it was owned by Judicatories,
they add a Postscript, page 119, 120. wherein they quarrel, partly, the
wronging of the liberty of Presbyteries and Synods, that such a Paper should
first be published by private persons, and then endeavors used to engage the
Judicatories in the approbation thereof: and partly, the different ways of
Presbyteries in order to that Paper; some not having as yet owned or tendered
it, some approving but a part of it, others all of it; some taking Instruments
in the hands of civil Notaries of their tendering thereof to their Protesting
Brethren; and some, upon the Protesters refusing to condemn the practices and
proposals mentioned in that Declaration, as contrary and destructive to the
Government, having declared them to be such as dissent from the Government it
self.

To all this we give this return* 1. We need not trouble the world, far less
do we owe these Witnesses (in the posture they now are) an account how or by
whom that Declaration was contrived. As they pretend themselves not altogether
strangers to the mind of their Brethren in these matters, page 4. So the
publishers of that Declaration can give a good account of the sense of their
Brethren throughout the Land, which gave a rise to that business: yea,
themselves might have spared this challenge, had they remembered the Conference
for Union, Anno 1655. As we suppose they did not think they were treating with
a Juncto then, to make peace with them only, but did expect an Union in all the
Judicatories of this Church, had they agreed* and yet themselves did treat but
in an extrajudicial capacity, and those with whom they treated were but some
very few in comparison of those who are opposite to them, and acted also in an
extrajudicial capacity, though they knew the mind of their Brethren through the
Country: So they may remember that the Declaration contains little or
nothing, for matter and substance, but what was treated on there. Their
Proposals for extrajudicial Committees were rejected there, though indeed they
had not then gone the length to seek to have them imposed on this Church. They
will not complain that the Overtures for Union, mentioned in the Declaration,
were not heard of there; since they tell us afterward that more was then
offered, page 75. And for their irregular actings, they were not omitted in the
Remedies for bygones, and Cautions for preventing the like in time to come. And
as to the slanders they cast upon this Church, and the matter of the Order
concerning Intrants to the Ministry, we hope they do not believe it is a
Juncto only, that are dissatisfied therewith. From all which it does appear,
that what was spoken-to in that Declaration had been looked on formerly by
themselves, as the judgment of those who were opposite to them, and yet they
must enquire whose it is, and who do own it. 2. As to the after-approbation of
the Declaration by the Judicatories, we shall not insist to tell them, how ill
it rellisheth to hear them condemn the publishing of extrajudiciall Papers, or
want of regard to the liberty of Judicatories, whose practice it has been
those years bygone to trample on Judicatories, and to obtrude their
extrajudiciall Papers upon them. We do only remark, that they are very
industrious to find quarrels; for, in the beginning of the Pamphlet, they leave
it as an imputation, that that Paper was not owned by Church-judicatories, and
when they find it otherwise, they start a new quarrel. But to the thing it
self, As upon the one hand, it has been the constant practice to deal in these
matters of Union i^ an extrajudiciall way; and so the publishing of that
Declaration in that same way cannot be quarrelled: So, if Judicatories have
voluntarily (without the encroaching of any upon their liberty to engage them)
judged it necessary to approve it for the matter, that so it might be more
effectual for promoving an Union, we see not what wrong is done to
Judicatories thereby; Nor do we see any contradiction betwixt these two, that
materially it was their judgment before, (though it had not been the ordinary
way to publish matters of that kind first by the Judicatories, seeing we wanted
a General Assembly, and no other Judicatory could declare for all the Church)
and that since they have formally owned it to prevent all cavillations against
it, such as now those Witnesses urge to render it uneffectuall, as being but a
private Paper. 3. It being now (as we are informed) generally owned by the
Judicatories, and that before we had any knowledge of this their Answer's
coming to the Press, (say what they will to the contrary) it is not very much
to edification that we should search throughout the Country for an Answer to
what they allege of some Synods entertaining their motions concerning the
Declaration, or of matters of fact about the way of owning it, especially when
their general discourse leaves us to our conjectures, what Judicatories in
particular they would reflect upon. This we will confidently maintain, That
some Presbyteries not owning of the Declaration judicially as yet, is no
argument that they will not own it, or (suppose they do not own it
judicially, nor tender it to their Brethren, who are more peaceable than
elsewhere, and free from any accession to these disorders complained of) that
they do not approve of it; That though other Presbyteries did only own the
Overtures of Union at first, (waving the Narrative) if so be they might bring
up their Dissenting Brethren to accept thereof, yet this may well prove their
peaceable temper, but not their disallowing of the Narrative, as their after
approbation thereof has made manifest; And that what ever they say of the
dissatisfaction of some of our judgment with it, or some parts of it, (which
though it be not proven, yet we willingly grant it can never be expected that
any should own all the particular expressions in a concluded Paper which they
cannot alter, nor is it necessary they should do so) yet there are none of our
Brethren but they own the matter, and do concur in condemning their
Declinatours, irregular practices, proposals, and what else is condemned
therein, and in approving the Overtures of Union. Nor do we see any cause why
they should quarrel, that Brethren appointed to tender the Declaration to such
of them as do not meet in Presbytery with their Brethren, should return an
authentic testimony of their diligence to them who sent them; seeing that is
not unusual in diverse cases without any imputation upon men. And for what
they say, some declared of their dissent from the Government; though we can
speak nothing as to the truth of the thing, nor do we know from what particular
Presbyteries to seek information; and we know some Presbyteries challenged by
them upon this account, have vindicated themselves that they never meant to
charge upon them, that intentionally they did dissent from it; yet they will
not soon satisfy and silence all who have that opinion, that their principles
and actings tend that way.

2. Another quarrel they have against the Title, is, that hereby the Authors
of the Declaration do exclude them as not being for the Government: for, so
they complain of the Title and other passages in the Declaration, page, 11, 12.
To which this answer in the general may suffice, That it is a truth, we are
for the settled Government and Judicatories of this Church; it is also true,
they have dissented from us in the matter of that Government, not only in
quarrelling and endeavoring to overturn the constitution of two successive
supreme Judicatories of this Church; but (as we will hear more fully afterward)
in projecting and endeavoring to lay aside the ordinary way of exercising that
Government, by the Judicatories instituted by Christ, and yet continued with
us, and to act in a new and extrajudiciall way. And therefore, though we will
not judge of there intentions, and the Authors of the Declaration never minded
that designation, as exclusive of them: yet, we fear not to assert, that these
actings and proposals of theirs, are (upon the matter, and as to the nature and
tendencie of the work, which is all they can fasten upon the passages of the
Declaration cited by them) contrary and destructive to the Government, and
consequently had need to be the better looked to by them, who would clear
themselves of any such imputation.

This (in the particular prosecution of it) leads us to the first head
propounded; And seeing they spend much of this Pamphlet in vindicating
themselves in this particular, we will therefore examine how they acquit
themselves, leaving their defense about the matter of Subordination till the
close of all, as was said before.

In the general, they clear themselves of this charge, partly, by a solemn
profession, that their fear of our ruining the Government, and other Ordinances
of God, and the work of Reformation, and their desire to edify His Body, made
them differ from us, and act these things which we call irregular, disorderly,
and destructive: Partly, by appealing to their actings, in professing,
preaching, printing for this Government and no other, in owning themselves as
members, obeying just Sentences, etc. and partly by solemn taking God to record
in this matter. So page, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. To this general we answer, 1.
Whatever they retain of respect to that Government, yet this Piece will
abundantly clear that they will never own it in any hands but their own; They
will not submit to Judicatories, nor allow of a General Assembly, so long as
the plurality is opposite to them, as we will after hear* And as their actings
are not only really destructive to the Government as it is now established and
exercised in this Church, (which way of expressing our grievance we know not
why they carp at, page 18. seeing their acknowledging themselves members of
Presbyteries and Synods, etc. page 13. seems to us to import an approbation
of the exercise thereof in our Judicatories, as an Ordinance of Christ) but
inconsistent with the exercise of Presbyterial Government in any reformed
Church, no less than in this: So we fear that those tentations they allege to
have been cast in their way, page 16. (though we deny that ever any just
provocation has been given) have prevailed more to hide the tendendencie of
their way from some of them than they are aware, being but too well known to be
impatient of any contradiction. 2. As to what they allege of their fears of
us; This is not the proper place to discuss the other particulars concerning
our ruining the Ordinances of God and work of Reformation. And whatever they
allege of this, Yet no desire of theirs to edify the body of Christ, nor any
wrong supposed to be done by us, can warrant them to do a real wrong to the
Government, and so sin against God, who needs not their sinful courses either
to promove any of His holy ends, or to prevent hurt from the sin of others. But
as to the matter of the Government (which is the question in hand) and their
fears of us; As we are confident they will get no Compurgators in this cause
among un-byassed men, friends to this Government: So, we hope impartial
observers will here take notice of their spirit and way (whereby they may know
them the better in other things) who dare assert to the world, That they
overturn Judicatories, act in matters ecclesiastical contrary to the
established order, and out of the road-way, as themselves afterward confess;
do drive designs to have the exercise of the Government turned out of the
right channel, in the most material things entrusted to the Judicatories by
Christ, and do make and keep up a rent in this Church: And all this they do (if
we believe them) lest we should ruin the Government, who in all things observe
the order constantly practiced in this Church since the late Reformation. Men
would rather say, that these actings speak that they will really ruin it upon a
fear that we may ruin it (take the matter in their own sense) but in effect
they do so, when we are endeavoring to maintain it. 3. As to their solemn
taking God to record in this matter, we shall not meddle with it, nor with
their sincerity in it, as not belonging to our cognition; nor are we bound to
take never so solemn professions for current payment (which will amount to no
more than this, that they seriously believe their way is not contrary to that
Government which they believe to be of God) so long as we find men's actings,
whereby we may judge of their respect or disrespect to the Government so far as
is incumbent to us, whatever their own inward real thoughts be. And here we
must tell them, that all they allege (of their professing, preaching and
printing for it, of meeting in Presbyteries and Synods, as members, and of the
obedience they profess to yield) will never speak out their respect to it,
while they have not spared to break the Judicatories of the Church, in a time
of so many errors, and when her unity was so necessary, and so have exposed
her as a prey; and while they have not only publicly traduced this Church in
her Members and Judicatories, to the saddening of friends, and triumphing of
enemies; but they themselves will do nothing, nor suffer any thing, but what
they are pleased to account right and just, let the Judicatories conclude never
so often, and have never so much to say for the justice of their proceedings.
These are practices which we know not if their coming to the Judicatories, and
observing what they like of their proceedings, will set off as consistent with
respect to the Government.

But these Witnesses proceed more particularly to vindicate themselves, by
answering to these things which are laid to their charge as evidences of their
wronging the Government. These they profess ( page 66.) to have insisted on,
for clearing of themselves and taking away of that rock of offense upon which
we have stumbled. And we do heartily wish they were able to do it convincingly;
for, it would be most refreshfull to all of us to find all the Members of this
Church friends indeed (and not in name only) to the Government of the Church.
But we are sorry to find, that in stead of rooting out old jealousies, they
have started new principles which do confirm them, and beget more fears.

And here, in the entry of this debate, we do once for all entreat the
judicious Reader to consider how these men, who pretend so fair to adhere to
Order and Government, and to walk after the pattern of our pious progenitors,
do in effect but trace the steps of the Remonstrants or Arminians in the
Low Countries, For who so will be pleased to peruse the Acts of the Synod of
Dort, with the Preface thereunto prefixed, (Edit. in folio) will find that (not
only in their Protestations, the tenor and reasons whereof do homologate that
Protestation of the Arminians against the Synod of Dort; but) in the most of
their projects and practices here defended, they have so exactly paralleled
them, as if they had set them before them as their copy. Their tumultuous and
disorderly way of planting Congregations (of which we will hear more afterward)
was the very practice of these Remonstrants, who made it a great part of their
work to obtrude upon vacant Churches, Ministers addicted to their opinion,
excluding (wherever they could) all others, though never so well qualified,
and orderly called and desired by the Churches, In which they did not only
misregard the inclinations of the people (who by that means were put to hard
shifts) and despise the judgment of Classes and Synods, but made use of force
and power, Praefat. page 20, 21. ad annum 1611. Neither wanted they a pretense
for these and the like irregularities, contrary to the established Order, taken
from the distempered state of the Church; whereof it was then told them,
themselves had been indeed the cause, and their pretending thereof was in
effect a gloriation that they had so far disordered all matters, that they
could not be remedied, Act. Synod. page 87, 88. This is also pretended here,
page 32, 33. and does deserve the same answer. That Order procured by some of
our Brethren (to which somewhat is here also spoken) wanted not its own pattern
among the Remonstrants, who (that they might increase their own party, and
seclude others from the Ministry) procured that the election of Ministers
should be (not according to the Order established in that Church before, but)
by four of the Magistrates (who, for the most part, then in Holland were
addicted to them) and other four to be deputed by the Presbytery, Praefat.
page 26. ad annum 1614. As they with us have made themselves a distinct body,
and keep their own meetings under the name of the Godly Party; So also did the
Remonstrants set up their meeting apart from the rest of their Brethren, for
carrying-on their own ends, Praef. page 15. As these Remonstrants by bitter
invectives in Pulpits and infamous Libels in writ and print, did revile the
Protestant Doctrine and Teachers, to render them odious, and draw people into
their faction, Praef. page 14, 20, 21. and frequently: So, this Church has met
with the same measure from such as these Witnesses, as is notour to the world,
and abundantly clear from this very Pamphlet. We have here a great debate for
Committees of equal numbers of both judgments, to be chosen by the respective
parties: And in this also the Remonstrants have led the way to them, who being
but a few number in that Church, to make themselves strong and equal with the
Orthodox, did urge it as the first of those conditions, upon the granting
whereof they would join in a Synod, that the Synod should consist of
Commissioners of equal numbers of both parties, each to be chosen by their own
party, Act. Synod. page 65, 66. As now it is urged that men ought not to submit
to Sentences of lawful Judicatories which they count unlawful, and
accordingly men who are censured do still continue in the exercise of their
Ministry, pretending that the Sentences are unjust: So also the Remonstrants
maintained they could not submit to any Sentence, save in so far as they were
convinced in consceince of the equity and justice thereof; and when they were
censured, they did counteract and go on in the exercise of their Ministry.
Act. Synod. page 66. and Praef. page 20. And when it was laid to their charge,
that by Non-submission they did violate their engagement at their entry to the
Ministry, they used the same shifts (for most part) which are now cast in our
teeth, Act. Synod. page 87, etc. These and many the like passages recorded in
that Preface, and rejected and refuted in the Synod, may show that it is not
without cause we are suspicious of their ways, whom we find to walk in these
paths, which had well nigh ruined that Church. And who so desires further
satisfaction in this matter, we entreat that (beside the Preface) they will
ponder the Remonstrants Conditiones habendae Synodi, with the Answer of the
Synod of Delph thereunto, and the judgment of the foreign Divines upon their
Declinatour, especially of those of Geneva; All which are recorded in the Acts
of that Synod. But we come to the particulars.

I. They vindicate their Protestations against the two last Assemblies, as not
being destructive to the Government, because they profess the contrary in
these very Protestations; and these Protestations were only made against undue
qualifications of, and prelimitations made by, persons assuming the exercise of
Government, which the duty they owe to the Government and preservation thereof,
constrained them to testify against, after the example of our fathers of old.
And they think it strange that the Authors of the Declaration should wrap up
the authority of those two Assemblies, and of that part of the ministerial
Church which is of their judgment, in the very being of the Government, as if
the Government could not be owned nor subsist, the authority of these meetings
being denied, and the corruptions of men discovered and acknowledged. So page
17, 18.

Answ. This would have been judged strange doctrine in the General Assembly,
1638. where it is put in the Sentences of several of the Prelates, that
declining and protesting against the Assembly is censurable with summar
Excommunication; and yet these Prelates did pretend reasons of their deed no
less valid (themselves being Judges) than they think their own to be in their
judgment. Yea, we are not forgetful how it was asserted also before our
differences, by a leading man of that party, acquainted with the Acts of this
Church, That protesting against an Act of a General Assembly, or of Delegats
having their power, did deserve the same censure. But as to these their
Protestations, seeing they do here not only endeavor to vindicate themselves,
as doing no wrong to the Government thereby, but all along lay the corrupt
constitution of these Assemblies as a crime, to our charge, and do pretend it
as a warrant for their irregular actings, and a great obstruction to unity: (as
may be seen throughout the Pamphlet) We must once for all put them in mind,
that this matter has been spoken to already, the nullity of their proceeding
in these Protestations discovered, their exceptions against these Assemblies
(again repeated in this Pamphlet) answered, and the practice of our
forefathers cleared and vindicated, partly in the Observations upon our
differences, and partly, in the late Representation, which are unanswered to
this day. And therefore it does concern them to satisfy unbyassed men with
more solid arguments than naked assertions, especially in a matter of such
importance, against which so much has been argued, and upon which they lay so
much weight, and which, if it prove to be wrong, they must undoubtedly conclude
themselves among the most turbulent men that have lived in a true reformed
Church. In the mean time, till they bethink themselves of this, we must tell
them, 1. Their fair Professions in their Protestations will not blind the eyes
of discerning men, to make them believe that they did not wrong the Government
thereby, but had a care of the preservation thereof. Experience teaches, that
worst of courses do usually lay claim to fairest of pretenses, and that
Innovators do ordinarily intend the quite contrary to what they pretend; though
we shall be far from judging so of many who followed that course in the
simplicity of their heart. 2. As to their quarrelling, that we wrap the
Authority of these Meetings and the plurality of other Judicatories (which is
the ministerial Church of our judgment, as themselves confess all-along) in
the very being of the Government: Though we confess Presbyteriall Government
is an Ordinance of Christ, and might be owned and subsist, albeit there were
not a Church in Scotland; Yet we are sure, it is not men's respect to the
abstract notion of Church Government, or to the exercise thereof in Vtopia,
that will prove them friends to it, while in the mean time they oppose it as it
is exercised in the Reformed Churches. And therefore, as we are far from
judging the discovering of men's corruptions to be destructive to the
Government, (provided the matter be orderly pursued, and judicially made out,
not alleged only) So we do constantly maintain, that their rejecting of the
Judicatories of this Church, as not worthy of their trust, upon the account of
the corruption of the plurality thereof, does in effect overturn the Government
in this Church, and strikes against it in all Reformed Churches also, there
being (through the mercy of God) generally as fit Officers among us as else
where. And, as to their Protestations, we fear not to assert, that thereby they
have given the saddest blow to the Government of this Church, of any it has
met with since the Prelates were removed: For hereby they have opened a door to
all confusion; And as they have stricken at the being of two Assemblies* So
their Reasons (if of any weight) will conclude as strongly against others
before these: and their example may teach others (as well as themselves) to
decline all Church-judicatories so often as they please. 3. We wonder how they
can allege prelimitations of these Assemblies as a proof of their nullity,
(suppose the charge were true, as it has elsewhere been proven to be a
calumny) when yet they will admit of no Assembly as lawful, without
prelimitations enough, yea, where we are the plurality, as they express
themselves, page 91, 93. and elsewhere. This is indeed to give out with one
measure, and take-in with another.

II. As to the charge of their planting Congregations in a disorderly way, and
counteracting to the determination of Judicatories, in that matter, They do
upon the matter confess the thing (and indeed the world knows they have
acted in a tumultuous and disorderly way, which themselves acknowledge to be a
fault great enough. page 19.) only they strive to mollify it diverse ways.

First, by giving an account of the causes moving them so to do, which are at
length deduced, page 19, 20, 21, 22. Namely, That by the Public Resolutions,
and the Constitution and Acts of the late Assemblies, malignant men have got up
their head in Congregations and Presbyteries, to bring-in others like
themselves, and hold-out able and godly men. All which they think might
persuade them to a preterition of some things otherwise fit to be observed in
the course of formality and order.

Answ. 1. This is indeed a very notable testimony they give their Mother Church
in the day of her reproach from adversaries, that (except where they are
pleased to give charity, and that is where themselves bear sway) we have no
Church, either Judicatories or Congregations, wherein order is to be observed,
but an heap of rubbish, wherein there may be good stones, but no structure: so
that they must take odd ways of neglecting both Presbyteries and Congregations
in planting of Churches. Impartial observers will discern what good service
this is to the opposites of our Church and Government, and what a dash is
hereby given to all the Reformed Churches, among which this was accounted none
of the worst. 2. As to what they say of the constitution of the Assembly at St.
Andrews and Dundee, That business (as is said) has been already cleared in
the Observations and Representation, and that these who differed in judgment
about the Public Resolutions, were neither cited to the Assembly (as here they
allege) but such only as persisted to preach against these Resolutions after
conference, were referred to it, as was the custom in like cases. Nor were
they excluded from being elected, seeing some of them were chosen by
Presbyteries where the plurality did differ in judgment from them, and they
did both sit and act in the Assembly, till they were pleased to decline it and
go away. 3. Whereas they lay the weight of this charge of the corruption of the
Church upon the Public Resolutions, and long ago in their Nullity, they
profess that their Protestation, and other the like actings, do stand or fall
upon the justice or iniquity of these Resolutions; and all-along in this Piece,
it is their great argument, both to justify their actings, and their not
accepting the Overtures of Union. We cannot but again put them in mind, that
naked assertions in this particular will not satisfy judicious men, seeing if
they cannot by Scripture and sound Reason condemn these Resolutions, they will
not only be found in an error, but to have rent a true Church in the
prosecution and maintenance thereof: And, we believe, unbyassed men will judge
it very unreasonable, that they should take liberty thus to start new Quarrels
and Debates, as they do in this Pamphlet, till first they make it appear they
have Truth on their side in these Debates upon which they first began the Rent.
They know that both in the Observations, and more fully in the Representation,
this Question has been debated with them. And they would do well to satisfy
the world with an Answer to these, before they draw such conclusions, as that a
Church must be thus overturned, because these Resolutions are owned by it. We
are content that that Question (Whether in the case of an Invasion, all the
Subjects of a Nation may lawfully be employed by the Magistrate, for the
defense of the Public, and their own private interests and concernments?) be
taken into consideration by all Reformed Churches, and are confident that they
will abominate our Brethrens principles; who not only do resolve the Question
negatively, but have bred so much confusion, because the Church did own the
affirmative as orthodox, though with much tenderness and many cautions, and
that after that the Nation had been already weakened, not only by former
strokes, but by the divisive courses of those, some of whom are not yet wearied
of that trade. What can be concluded from this opinion of our Brethren, but a
condemnation of all the Protestants in Europe? who (not only in the case of
invasion, but otherwise) do not scruple to join in the Armies of their supreme
Magistates and Confederates, even though they be Papists. But we shall not
insist to repeat what has been spoken more largely on this subject: Only, till
they make good their assertion in this, the most of their other assertions and
practices, mentioned in this Pamphlet, will want a bottom to rest upon, and can
be looked upon no otherwise than as the furious actings of men, ruining a
Church because she will not err with them. 4. What they speak of the
Mock-repentance of those men who were admitted by the Public Resolutions, may
easily be answered, if we consider, (1.) That seeing by unanimous consent, Anno
1648. the body of the People who had concurred in the matter of the Engagement,
were ecclesiastice purged of that scandal, at a solemn Humiliation, a very few
only were left to be the subject matter of that debate. (2.) If these men who
were not taken-in with the first, might have been employed for the defense of
the Nation without the profession of their repentance; yea, suppose they had
been of another Religion (as we believe is made out in the Representation) Then
certainly the Question about their Repentance is extrinsick to the lawfulness
or unlawfulness of the Public Resolutions, though de facto it be an untruth,
that these Resolutions were approved before it was determined that such as were
to be admitted, and had not yet given evidence of their repentance should be
required to do it. (3.) When these men were enjoined by acts of Assembly before
our differences to repent of their former courses, under the hazard of
Excommunication; why is it accounted a crime for them to obey, or for the
Judicatories to receive them? (4.) When the far greatest part of them were
admitted to repentance, long before these Resolutions came to be debated, yea,
before the Assembly, 1650. why is the odium thereof cast upon the Resolutions,
or upon the Commissioners of the Assembly, 1650, who did assert them, and the
Assembly, 1651. who did approve and ratify the Judgment of the Commission?
(5.) When some of the chief of those who were admitted to give evidence of
their repentance, about the time of the debate of the Resolutions, were
examined, tried and admitted by men of their own party and judgment, why do
they lay it at our door as a mock-repentance? (6.) When the Rule concerning
their admission to repentance was found, why is the misapplication thereof (if
any there was) charged upon the makers of the Rule, or the approvers of the
Resolutions? and why is the wickedness of some few desperate persons (which is
all we believe they can instruct, if any thing at all) laid to the charge of
all who gave evidences of repentance for these courses, as proving them all to
have mocked God, and that Church Order must be violate, rather than they have
any hand in the election of a Minister? 5. As for what they say of the Acts of
these Assemblies, debarring men of their judgment from the Ministry, and from
being members of Presbyteries and Synods; If those Resolutions be found just
and orthodox, and those Assemblies to have been lawfully constituted, (as we
are confident to make-out both) they can have no just reason to carp at these
Acts concerning those, who (not content to be dissatisfied, or to have
sufficiently exo^ered themselves in that matter) do still continue to oppugn
the same in public preaching. Yet we add further, that here was no tentation
to break order, seeing, so far as we know, none of these Acts have been put in
execution, and we are sure they have acted irregularly in planting of Churches,
where ex certa scientia we know that, out of love to peace, men of their
judgment are admitted Elders both in Presbyteries and Synods, and where no
Intrants to the Ministry are put to give obedience to any of these Acts. 6.
Whereas they assert that, by reason of these Resolutions and Acts, malignant
men have got up the head in Presbyteries and Congregations, to keep out godly
men from the Ministry, and to bring-in others like themselves, who make sad
the hearts of the godly, etc. (1.) If they mean by malignant men in
Presbyteries, those who do own the Public Resolutions, and the late
Assemblies, and consequently are opposite to them upon that account, and because
they will not hearken to any terms of Peace, unless they get all their will
in these particulars: We confess they will find us all not ashamed to own that
course, which yet we will not grant to be malignant, but are ready to abide the
trial, whether the characters of Malignants, held forth by this Church, be
more applicable unto them than to us in these things, and in their and our late
actings. But for any men who own malignant courses in our Judicatories, or are
opposite to the work of Reformation, in Doctrine, Worship, or Government, or to
true Holiness, we confess we know them not; (except what such as these
Witnesses may be guilty of) And if such a charge be made-out against any, we
are confident the Judicatories will satisfy the world, that they are not such
a corrupt crew as they are said to be in this Pamphlet. (2) As for their power
in Congregations, though we may be bold to challenge them upon the truth of the
assertion, that these men bear any such sway in Congregations, at least in any
considerable number of them: Yet, (supposing it were so) we desire they may
condescend, if in any Congregation, any of these men have endeavored to
bring-in a Minister, who is not orthodox in his judgment, of competent
abilities for the work of the Lord, and of a blamlesse and godly conversation.
Though possibly they, and others than they, be not desirous to have a
Protester, (at least some of that stamp) if it were but upon the very account
of what is owned in this Piece, that being once in, he would play Pope among
them, and not submit to his competent Judges, save in so far as he pleased to
reckon their proceedings just, and so they should have a poor life with him.
However, this also is but a pretext only as to their violation of order; seeing
(though there were nothing to say against the thing it self) they have acted
irregularly where there was no such shadow of a pretense, but have violently
born down the members of a Congregation, the plurality (if not all) of whom
have been straight from the beginning of the late Reformation. With all, we
never dreamed (till Mr. Rutherfurd started it in his Preface to his late
Survey, wherein we are sorry to find so much drop from his Pen to the prejudice
of his Mother Church, and (as we conceive) to the disadvantage of the cause he
maintains in his Book) That we and they had differed about the admission of
those persons to Church Communion upon their giving signs of repentance: But
they still yielding that we might take them in to Church Fellowship and
communion, did deny the consequence, that therefore they might be admitted to
Camp-fellowship; (how rationally they did so, let unbyassed men judge) Now, if
these men be ecclesiastice purged from their scandals, and admitted to
communicate in Ordinances; common sense will dictate, that they cannot be
denied the privilege of Church Members, in making choice of those who are to
dispense these Ordinances unto them. We find indeed that the Assembly, 1649.
appointing these who had been upon the Engagement to be received to give
evidences of their Repentance, did ordain also that some ranks of these should
not be admitted to be Elders in Judicatories, but according to an Act of the
Assembly, 1647. But these Witnesses do so speak in generals, that we know not
whether those persons they talk of, be such as ought to be secluded by that
Act, or whether they quarrel their actings as members of the Congregation
only, or as Elders also. And we do the rather question this, because we find
they do not stick to passe-by the plurality of Elderships where no such
exception can be taken. Beside, that Act, 1647. (to which the other relates)
does debar them from Ecclesiastical charge, only till the report of the
evidence of their Repentance be made to the Synod and General Assembly, and
their consent obtained to their bearing charge, which we suppose was done in
the General Assembly, 1651. where the Resolutions and admitting of these
persons were, after grave examination, approven. And further, It is in that Act
provided, that if any be already received into the Eldership of a particular
Congregation, yet he shall (not be extruded, but) not admitted to be a member
of Presbytery, Synod, or General Assembly, without the approbation and consent
aforesaid, which does not seclude him from having hand in the election of a
Minister in that particular Eldership. We grant also that the Assembly, 1649.
in the Directory for election of Ministers, do appoint that where the
Congregation is disaffected and malignant, the Presbytery provide them with a
Minister. But that cannot be extended to any persons, who, being Ecclesiastice
purged from their former miscarriages, do not of new involve themselves in any
the like course. And however, it is the Presbytery, and not Brethren of other
Presbyteries, acting in an irregular way, who are entrusted in this matter. But
the truth is, the scope and way of these Witnesses, and such as homologate
their principles, is, under this and the like pretexts, to lay aside
Presbytery, Eldership, Congregation and all, if they be not of their mind, and
upon the desire of never so few of their party, to obtrude a Minister upon the
whole Congregation, that ^o they may increase their faction. (3.) As for the
character they give of Ministers admitted by us, whileas they cry-up those whom
they admit irregularly, we repel it as a foul calumny, and do again repeat what
has formerly been asserted to the world, That we have admitted as many able
and qualified men since our differences, as has been done in any so much time
since our late Reformation. And though we are really unwilling to rake into
that which calls us all to mourn; Yet our duty to defend Christ's Order in His
own House, necessitateth us to say, That if these Witnesses will remember what
mark God has put upon their irregular actings in the person of one, who (as we
remember) was the first in this Kirk obtruded by them in a violent and
disorderly way, on a Congregation, upon the account of piety, we think it may
warn them to be sober in these assertions. For our part, we trust we have
obtained mercy to love piety, and have much longed to see more fruits of it
among those who make so much noise, among which we esteem this a special fruit,
if men were more sober and orderly in their walk, and more sparing in talking
of their piety, and crying-up of themselves. And thus, we have done with this
first part of their Apology, wherein we have insisted the longer now, that we
may save our selves much labor when we shall so often meet with these things
again in this Pamphlet.

Secondly, But lest it might be objected, that no such faults of the
Judicatories and Congregations did warrant them to sin and break Order: They
mollify their practice further, page 22. by telling us that what they do is a
sinlesse preterition of some things, otherwise fit to be observed in the course
of formality and order; and that as they do nothing sinful and evil of it
self, so they do nothing from contempt or disrespect to the least point of
order, and have kept within the bounds warranted and allowed unto them of God.
This general seems to us very strange Divinity, that the intruding of a
Minister against the consent of the plurality of the Eldership and
Congregation, to whom belongs the giving of the Call, and without the
concurrence or consent of the Presbytery, to which that Congregation is
subordinate, to his Ordination, is but a sinlesse preterition of a formality,
and no transgression of the bounds warranted of God. And we cannot but look
upon them as scorning us, when they say they break Order, but not out of
contempt or disrespect to it. But afterward, page 34. we find them endeavoring
to clear this matter further, where, in stead of saying any thing to the
interest of the Congregation wronged by them, they take it for granted that the
man is lawfully called by the Congregation whom the Presbytery conspireth to
keep-out; Which indeed is unhandsomly to beg a great part of the Question,
beside the unjust aspersion cast upon the Presbytery. And as to the wrong done
to the Presbytery by others meddling to ordain a Minister within their bounds,
they are pleased to rectify our judgments and conceptions, by telling us (in
application of their distinction betwixt the essentials and circumstantials of
Presbyterial Government, premitted, page 33.) that in the matter of Ordination,
this is of scriptural divine institution, that a Minister be ordained by a
plurality of Presbyters, but that he be ordained by such a number, officiating
in such a bounds, the Scripture has not determined: Whence they infer, that in
case a Presbytery conspire to hold-out one who is lawfully called, and rightly
qualified, it is no breach upon the being and essentials of the Government, if
he receive his Ordination and Admission from a neighboring Presbytery,
especially when the conspiracy is general, and no remedy can be had by a
superior Judicatorie.

Answ. Not to insist upon the falsehood of this Assertion, That there is a
conspiracy in any Presbytery, far less a general conspiracy to hold out a
godly man, lawfully called and rightly qualified, because he is not of our
judgment (though it were no declining from truth in him to be so) We must say
it, that whatever may be said in defense of Ordination by Presbyters only, in a
Church not constituted; Yet it is new and strange Divinity to set up and
maintain that practice in a Church constituted and settled in her Judicatories,
and particularly in this Church, where the like assertion or practice was never
heard of before since the Reformation of Religion, and that notwithstanding all
the tyrannical conspiracies of the Prelates to hold out godly men from the
Ministry: But it would have been judged (as indeed it is) an utter subverting
of Church Government as it has been exercised (not only now, but) ever since
we had Judicatories, that a Presbytery, or Ministers of diverse Presbyteries
(which indeed is the case, though in effect a Presbytery are but so many
Presbyters to all those who are not under their jurisdiction, or whose scandals
fall not to be cognosced by them, as to any Ecclesiastical power they can
exercise over them) should intrude themselves within the bounds of another
Presbytery, and there do the work of that Presbytery in a Congregation
subordinate to them, without, yea, against their consent: And that the supposed
faults of Presbyteries should be redressed by others who have no jurisdiction
over them, and not by their respective superior Judicatories only. We find the
Scripture gives the power of Ordination to the Presbytery, 1 Timothy 4.14. which
is more than the plurality of Presbyters only. And Mr. George Gillespie in his
Assertion of the Government of the Church of Scotland, part. 2. chap. 3. page
132. does reject Sutlivius his gloss upon the word, who by the Presbytery
understands only the Ministers of the Word, Non juris vinculo, sed utcunque
collectos, i. e. gathered and conveened together, not by virtue of any legal
bond or association, but, as it may be, occasionally and accidentally for such
a business: Which is as like the way of our Brethren in this particular as one
thing can be like another. To this may be added, that the second Book of
Discipline (to which they profess to adhere, page 13.) does restrict the
exercise of the power of Presbyteries (then called particular Elderships) to
the bounds committed to their charge, or where they govern: This, or the
equivalent restriction, is four times repeated, chap. 7. page 80, 81. and
thrice in that Act of Parliament, establishing Presbyteriall Government,
prefixed to the Books of Discipline, page 20. As for their distinction betwixt
what is of Scripturall institution, and what not; or, (as they have it, page
33.) of positive humane institution, to be regulated by that great end of
Edification, and altered accordingly: Mr. Gillespie in the foresaid Treatise,
part. 2. chap. 6 page 160, 161, 162, 163. has abundantly cleared, that the
determination of the several sorts of Ecclesiastical Assemblies, are left to
be particularly determined by the Church, conform to the light of nature and
general rules of Gods Word, and that these particular kinds of Assemblies,
appointed by the Church according to the light and rules foresaid, do fall
within the compass of these things which are Divino-Ecclesiastica, mixed,
though not mere divine Ordinances: Which also concludes strongly for the
bounding of these Assemblies to be of the same nature. For, the Word of God
having appointed so many Pastors and Elders as can with convenience ordinarily
meet together, out of the Congregations in a convenient circuit, to make up a
common Presbytery, which has power and authority to govern these
Congregations, as is held out in the said Treatise, part. 2. chap. 3. page 146,
147. And the Church having now determined (according to these common rules)
these several meetings to be common Presbyteries in their respective bounds; If
we hold these meetings, so bounded to be only of positive humane institution,
we desire to know wherein Presbyterial Government is an Ordinance of Christ,
more than is in any reformed Church, where there are a plurality of Presbyters,
but no Judicatories erected? It is true, the circuit of their jurisdiction has
been fixed by the Judicatories with an eye to that great end of Edification,
viz. by having respect to the convenience of their meeting for doing their work
to edification, and accordingly, Assemblies have found it for edification to
erect new Presbyteries for the better accommodation of Ministers and People;
all which being done according to the light of nature and general rules of the
Word, they become, so constituted, divine Ordinances. But that they are so
alterable in subserviency to edification (in these Witnesses sense and the way
defended by them) as that when persons under the jurisdiction of a Presbytery
do judge that they act not to edification, they may turn their back upon them
and all other established Judicatories, and betake themselves to any plurality
of Presbyters, who will act these things which they judge to be to edification:
And that other Ministers, who have no power over that Presbytery, may come in
upon their work and act authoritatively in, and over the Congregations
committed to their charge; We believe it will be judged a paradox by all those
who understand any thing of Church Government. And it needs not be thought
strange that those Brethren do refuse submission to their own respective
Judicatories, so long as they maintain that they may usurp upon the power
committed to others when they please. This assertion of the divine authority of
Presbyteries, as they are bounded according to the light of nature and general
rules of the Word, may be further confirmed from the testimony of the Author
of the Course of Conformity, who, page 129. makes use of the same notion of
mixed Ordinances, and does so prosecute the same, page 135, 136, 137, etc. as
does demonstratively conclude that no Gospel-Ordinance, administrated by this
or that man, in this or that place, no Prayer consisting of such and such
petitions only and not others, no Sacrament administered in these individual
elements, and many the like particulars, are divine Ordinances, unless we
allow these to be divine Ordinances, which are determined in the general by
the Word, and in their particular circumstances (not needful, nor possible or
convenient to be determined in the Word) by the light of nature and general
rules of the Word. We may also appeal to the judgment of the Reverend Assembly
of Divines, in their Answer to the Reasons of the Dissenting Brethren, Edit.
Edinb. 1648. page 231. Where, though they profess not to plead an express
institution, that such Synods must be necessarily thus and thus bounded, etc.
(as neither Independents nor they can plead for the number and bounds of
particular Congregations) yet they do affirm, that Synods, thus bounded, are
agreeable to, and warranted by the Word of God. And again, page 237 they make
the same parallel betwixt the bounding of Synods and Congregations, as being to
be regulated by the general rules of the Word, and particular circumstances of
times, places and persons. But leaving these to be further pondered by them who
shall read these Treatises themselves, We desire further, that all discerning
Readers will take notice of these few (of many) absurdities which will be found
to follow upon this principle, as it is asserted and put in practice by them.
1. Whereas it has been the work of all friends to Presbyteriall Government, to
prove that it brings not Congregations under any foreign jurisdiction (as
Prelates subjected all to themselves and their Cathedral Churches) seeing all
the Congregations within the bounds of a Presbytery are ruled in common by
their own Pastors and Elders assembled together; This does indeed bring-in a
foreign jurisdiction both upon Presbyteries and People, when a company of
Presbyters (who are neither Synod nor General Assembly set over them by Christ,
nay, nor any Ecclesiastical Court at all) shall take upon them to judge of the
Call given by a People, of the qualifications of him who is to be their
Minister, and of the Presbyteries carriage and judging in that matter, and so
shall proceed to the ordination of the Minister. 2. By what divine warrant a
plurality of Presbyters may act authoritatively in things belonging to a
neighboring Presbytery, they may by the same warrant act in Presbyteries
never so remote, at least within the National Church; And by what warrant they
may judge of the Call and Qualifications of a man for the Ministry, and
accordingly ordain him Minister of a Congregation within the bounds of another
Presbytery, if they judge the Presbytery conspireth to hold him out, by the
same warrant they may also depose a Minister, or Ministers, in Presbyteries, if
they judge their respective Presbyteries conspire to hold them in: (for, we
believe the power of Ministers in both these, is of a like extent) and so a few
Presbyters may plant all the vacant Congregations, and depose never so many
Ministers throughout a National Church in despite of all the standing
Judicatories, who are hereby made but so many ciphers to signify nothing; Yea,
by this principle, may not some number of Presbyters, perhaps erroneous and
heretical, plant all the Congregations in a National Church, upon the Call of
some few of their own mind; and yet violate nothing that is divine in
Presbyteriall Government? 3. By this principle no man is bound to look upon a
Presbytery ruling the Congregations in such a circuit, as a divine scripturall
Ordinance, more than any company of Presbyters met together; Seeing all wherein
the one differs from the other is but of humane institution, as they say. 4.
No person within the bounds of a Presbytery shall be bound to own their own
Presbytery, as an Ordinance of God, to which they ought to submit and give an
account of their actions: But they may as well betake themselves to any other
Presbyters nearer or further off; and if they satisfy them, they may reckon
they have done enough for obeying any divine Ordinance in this matter. 5. May
not people also within a Congregation, upon the same account, refuse submission
to their own Minister, and betake themselves to any other? And may not
Ministers intrude upon the Congregations of their Brethren without the
transgression of any Ordinance of God, Seeing the bounding of Congregations is
of human institution, as well as that of Presbyteries, as the Assembly of
Divines do urge against Independents, in the passages before cited, and of
which we may read a witty discourse of Mr. Samuel Hieron in the Pulpits
patronage, by Thomas Ball, part. 3. chapter 4. arg. 9. where he compares such
Overturners of these settled bounds, to a fellow who told him he cut timber out
of other men's hedges, because God never made hedges. These and many the like
considerations do make it evident, that these Witnesses in stead of wyping off,
have added new jealousies of their way; and that while they make it their work
to advance their party, they little consider into what inconveniences they
thrust themselves, nor what a door of confusion they open to all Innovators.

Thirdly, They labor to clear themselves in this matter by recrimination;
telling us (page 22.23.) That we have intruded men upon their settled Ministers;
have divided and separated from the body of Presbyteries, being but a small
part thereof; have counteracted and caused people counteract Determinations of
Presbyteries and Synods; That Synods have taken things out of the hands of
Presbyteries, where there was neither reference nor appeal, nor
mal-administration; have refused to acknowledge Ministers for members, though
duly called, tried and ordained; and that some Synods have taken upon them the
power of a General Assembly.

Answ. Were all these true charges and unquestionable faults, yet we know they
have better skill than to think they can justify their fault by our committing
of another. But in so far as we can understand these general challenges (and we
wish they had made them out more distinctly) we doubt not sufficiently to clear
our selves, not only as to the matter, but to the observation of Order in them.
And, 1. If after a Minister is orderly called, and upon his trials before the
Presbytery in order to his admission, some of them in the mean time in a few
days huddle up the trials of another, who is desired by some of their party in
the Congregation, and do thrust him in over the belly of People, Presbytery,
and the person who is already called; We trust none will count it a crime, that
the Presbytery proceed in their orderly way to set over the People the man
whom they have called, and to whom they do still adhere. Or, suppose they in
their precipitant way, (as they use not in these cases to observe the
prescribed Order) do take the start of Presbytery and People, and thrust-in a
man; we do not believe that any will condemn the Presbytery, if they hearken
unto a People, and set a Minister over them according to the appointed Order,
seeing they cannot in conscience submit to such an Intruder, and are rather
willing to maintain another (if the legal maintenance be otherwise disposed
of) than be brought into such bondage: To do otherwise were not only to
approve of their usurpations, but to wrong the liberty of the People, and
subject them to an intolerable slavery; though otherwise we have forborne to
meddle with such as they have thrust-in, where the People do not make a
grievance of it. 2. It has been often denied that the guilt of separation and
dividing of Presbyteries lies at the door of those who adhere to the
Judicatories of the Church, and would they submit the matter to the trial of
any competent Judge, it would appear to be so. But they have now taken-up a way
of being both Judge and Party in their own cause, and so are sure not to lose.
And were it for edification to search the Country for stories of fact, and
trouble the world in print with them, it were an easy thing to make the
injustice of this charge appear. This we assert, that all they can say in this
matter in places which we know, is, That because the Brethren of a Presbytery
would not own, nor sit with such as were deposed by the General Assembly (who,
with possibly one or two of their adherents, would presbyterially condemn all
the proceedings of the Assemblies) but did meet together apart to do the work
of the Lord incumbent to them, therefore they must be accounted dividers from
their Presbytery. And in another Presbytery, which in time of the troubles
had not met for a year, some Protesters (at the instigation of some of their
Leaders) having called the Brethren together occasionally, without conveening
Moderator and Clerk, did approve of the Protestation against the Assembly at
St. Andrews and Dundee, which when some Brethren, who met with them, perceived,
they deserted that meeting, and did acquaint the Moderator therewith, who (as
it was proper to him) appointed time and place for the meeting of all the
Presbytery: But these Protesters, who had formerly met, would never meet with
them any more, but kept their own adjournments and meetings to this day,
notwithstanding all the endeavors of the Synod to unite them. All which being
duly considered, will leave the division at their door, seeing they would not
conveen at the Call of the Moderator, whose office it was to call them
together, after so long an intermission, at least it ought to have been first
desired of him. Nor did the Presbytery conveen, secluding them, but they were
called with the rest, and when they refused to come, were earnestly followed by
their Brethren; and it was a long time after, before the Synod (having much and
often dealt with them to unite) did proceed to declare these to be the
Presbytery they would own, who should meet together at a time and place fixed
by them. Which they could not forbear to do any longer, unless they would leave
all the affairs within these bounds in a confusion. 3. For our causing people
counteract the Determinations of their own Synods, it is a thing we profess
ignorance of, and do take it for a calumny unless they make it out. But that
People or Ministers have been warranted to counteract the Determinations of
Presbyteries, when their superior Judicatories have condemned these their
Determinations, and reponed the parties injured to their right, we hope is
agreeable to the Rules of Government; and what else they can mean by that
general challenge, we confess we cannot divine. 4. That Synods have found
mal-administrations in Presbyteries, and so have taken matters out of their
hands (according to the Order) when yet these Presbyteries did not find any
mal-administration in their own actings, we believe is true enough; But we hope
this will be found no crime, unless we make Presbyteries their own Judges, to
determine when they are right and when wrong, and disallow that Synods take any
thing from them, either upon appeal or mal-administration, except they will
first be pleased to be convinced they have been in the wrong. 5. That Synods
(though they have forborne to quarrel men's exercise of their Ministry in
Congregations where they have been disorderly planted, when the Congregation
makes no opposition to them, as it falls out in some few places; Yet) will
not own these as members of their Synods who are thus admitted, either by
Ministers without the bounds of the Presbytery, or by Ministers within the
bounds, who make themselves a Presbytery, and will neither unite with their
Brethren, nor be subordinate to the Synod, is, we hope, the most sober and fair
testimony can be given against their encroachments and usurpation, and will be
condemned by none but those who would have us (as they elsewhere phrase it)
stoop like Asses, and bear all their irregularities, and approve all they do.
6. That a Synod, yea, and Presbyteries of their judgment, take upon them the
power of a General Assembly, is but too notour, in their judicial condemning
the authority and constitution of General Assemblies: But wherein this crime of
Synods taking that power on them can be charged upon us, we know not, unless
it be on this account, That now when General Assemblies do not meet yearly as
they were wont to do, Synods do take-off the Censures of some Ministers,
according to the Order observed by General Assemblies themselves when they did
open the mouths of any. And this we believe will not be condemned, but any
unbyassed person will judge it unreasonable, that men being in a capacity to be
employed in the work of the Lord, should be kept back because a General
Assembly (who used to reserve such cases to themselves) cannot meet to give
them liberty. We believe that in the want of General Assemblies (as in Holland)
they will not judge that Synods may not do more in things within their own
bounds, than if they had them yearly. And (to use their own argument here) we
think they should not quarrel this, who not only wait neither for Presbyteries
nor Synods, but do themselves take-off their own Censures inflicted by General
Assemblies; but their extrajudicial meetings do transact and conclude things of
most important and general concernment to the Church.

III. To the complaint of their slandering of us, they make a large return,
page 24 -- 31. And,

First, They begin with recrimination, making mention of a Latin Piece lately
published, which they father on a dead man, reflecting also on our Preachings
and Prayers, and other Pamphlets, as they call them. Ans. To add nothing to
what is formerly said of their inhumanity toward the dead, we shall only
embrace their own Overture, and shall be obliged to any of them who shall be at
the pains to turn that Piece in English, and let it plead for it self. And for
our Preachings and Prayers, though we love not to justify our selves, or
cry-up our abilities and abundance of matter for that work; for, who is
sufficient for these things? Yet we make conscience to speak nothing in public
but Truths of God, and such things as are suitable to the present condition of
our hearers; and who so reproacheth us in these things, we must leave it at our
Masters feet in whose Name we speak. However, we have learned not to credit all
the news they give us of the acceptance of our Ministry, either with these of
our or their own judgment, being, we hope, approven not only to God, but even
in the consciences of our hearers. And we may also say, there was never more
forbearance given, in a constituted Church, to irregularities in preaching,
than has been given to theirs, though they be so unparalleled; and all out of
love to peace. Whatever we say or write against their cause and actings
therein, yet we use not to slander their persons in things extrinsick to the
cause as they do to us; nor did we publish any thing of that kind, till they
by printing and writing had defamed us at home and abroad, which necessitated
us to say something for our selves and the Cause of God in our hands.

Secondly, They justify these their actings by showing that they were
necessarily drawn thereunto in their own defense, wishing us to have patience,
if these be slanders, till God clear our innocence and discover their malice
and treachery: But if there be truth in them, they may lawfully plead with
their Mother for good ends. Answ. 1. Though we indeed confess it our duty to
walk submissively before God, under most unjust aspersions; yet we believe that
does not hinder us to vindicate our own integrity, and the integrity of a
National Church, far less does it warrant them who put us to this exercise
thus to insult over us with such Ironick counsels, as they account them; we
forbear to declare whom they imitate in these pranks, and are truly sorry that
their pertinacious adhering to such divisive and destructive courses,
notwithstanding all the sad fruits which they may daily perceive to flow from
them, does discover them so much to all impartial observers. 2. Our
controversy being with them about the Public Resolutions, and admitting of
persons to employment in a Civil State and Army, and about the constitution of
a General Assembly, we see not what could cast them upon the necessity of this
defense of traducing all the Ministry in that cause; seeing they were standing
Ministers in the Church before, not declared incapable of being in a Genesis
Assembly; And sure they fell not within the compass of the Question of the
Public Resolutions; and therefore they might well have debated these points
without reflecting upon the Ministry, save in so far as they pleased to
quarrel so many of them as were upon the Commission and Assembly, for their
approving the Public Resolutions, wherein they have been sufficiently answered
already, and those who are concerned, are still ready to defend and justify
themselves. The truth is, after these debates about the Resolutions and
Assemblies were become threed-bare and invidious to all sober spirits, that
they should keep up a rent because of them, they fell to a new clamor about
purging, of which they here speak, and in which we did not controvert with
them, neither before nor in the time of their rent, yea, nor since, save in so
far as we have still complained, that their disturbing of Church-unity and
order, made it ineffectuall in many respects. What their design is in it, may
clearly appear from this Pamphlet, wherein oftener than once they insinuat and
declare, that they hold our Judicatories corrupt, and would not join in a
General Assembly so long as men, who (as they allege) have made a defection,
by approving the Public Resolutions, are the plurality in them. So that to
have themselves again in power, and others out, they make this clamor against
us, which is unjustly said to be in their own defense, but rather in
prosecution of their design to overturn the Church-judicatories as now
constituted, that so they may get all the power in their own hands, as was told
them in the Declaration. 3. It cannot be accounted an act of defense for them
to divulge men's supposed faults, in stead of seeking to have them judicially
tried and censured, and when none was pursuing them, to blaze them abroad in
another Nation and Church, to make way for their obtaining of power to
themselves over their Brethren. 4. Albeit we should be silent as to the truth
of their charge, yet that passage, Hos. 2.2. will not justify their way of
proceeding. We hope they will not make the state of this Church parallel to the
state of Israel at that time when this command was given to the Godly, which
they now pretend to imitate. For then they must conclude this Church not to be
Gods wife, but an harlot; and though she have corrupted neither Doctrine,
Worship nor Government, yet she must be put in the same class with vile
Idolaters. Withal, if even when a Church is not Gods wife, but idolatrous, yet
her children are bound (by that command) to plead with her as a Mother, before
she get an actual bill of divorce; Then certainly a true Church, keeping the
purity of Religion, should not have her nakedness discovered to the world, by
divulging the faultiness of some of her Members or Teachers, without dealing
with her self to take course therewith. And it has been long since told them
in the Observations, page 17. that Mr. Buroughs was of another spirit, who
advises that we should plead with a Church orderly, in so far as may be, and
by her Judicatories and Ministers, which are her mouth: and peaceably, sitting
down when we have discharged our consciences. But they have observed no such
rule nor moderation.

Thirdly, But to make out the truth of their charge, they make a long deduction
of a story, That the body of the Ministry had been corrupt under Prelates,
that the General Assemblies had acknowledged this remaining corruption, and
therefore judging that Presbyteries and Synods were not able or willing to
purge themselves, they found it necessary for several years to appoint
Commissions to try and censure Ministers and Elders, as was accordingly done:
That these Visitations again appointed in the year, 1650. were not kept by
reason of the war: And that since that time few or none have been purged-out by
Presbyteries and Synods, but many of those who were formerly purged-out, are
taken-in without sufficient evidences of their repentance. Answ. As we are very
unwillingly brought upon the necessity of vindicating our own and others
integrity, when we believe the Lord is calling us, and our Brethren also, to be
rather lamenting after Him, and confessing before Him our failings and
miscarriages, for which He is contending with us: So we hope we may without
vanity say what has been openly avowed by some of their own side, that
(whatever failings are among us) we have generally as well qualified a
Ministry as any other reformed Church they know. We are sure this long story
is a very poor proof of their charge, and they had better made it out by
proving, (or offering to prove it at least) against the particular persons in
their respective Judicatories. For, 1. it is a very unconcludent proof against
the present Ministry of this Church, that many of them were corrupt and
prelaticall before the year, 1638. and that the General Assemblies did then
and after complain of it: For now, in so far as we know of this Church, few of
them are alive or unpurged-out, by the Commissions they speak of and other
Church-judicatories who were corrupted under Prelacie (and no wonder if twenty
years make a great change of the Ministry of a Land) and generally the
Ministry does now consist either of those who were opposite to Prelacie, or who
have been since planted. And if some few of these be in the Ministry, who were
led away in the time of Prelates, as we believe they have proportionably their
own share of those on their side; So those whom we know of them adhering to the
Judicatories of the Church, may hold up their faces against all malice and
detracters, for their sincere renouncing of that course, their ability to serve
God in the Gospel of His Son, and their blameless and Godly conversation, and
we believe many of their opposers would be ashamed to compare with them in any
Reformed Church. 2. Though we judge it great presumption in them to assert the
inability, far more the unwillingnesse of Presbyteries and Synods to purge
themselves, because the General Assemblies did appoint Visitations: Seeing the
Assemblies themselves did give no such reason of their deed, and they might
well take their own ways of visiting and taking notice of the affairs of this
Church, to the good liking of the Respective Judicatories, and without any such
imputation upon them. Yet had it been so as they assert in the time when they
made complaints of the corruption of the Ministry, who did only in an
external way renounce Prelacy, the case must needs now be altered, when (as is
said) these men are generally gone. 3. Because the Assembly, 1650. did appoint
Visitations for trial and censure, which did not meet, must we therefore
conclude the body of the Ministry corrupt? Sure their Commission was to try
before they censured; and may it not as well be supposed they might have tried
and yet found nothing like the clamor these men raise? And would not the
ensuing Assembly have approven them if they had used diligence, unless also
they had cast out the generality of the Ministers (as this charge must bear it)
where they visited? This seems to us strange arguing, that because an
Assembly appointed men first to try, and then to censure as they found men
guilty, (which imports at most but a presumption that some guilty persons
might be found where they visited, for we remember not that either information
or accusation against any person or persons within these bounds, gave a rise to
most of these Visitations) therefore the plurality in those bounds must be
corrupt, and these Visitators could not have given a faithful account unless
they had cast them out; and that if Synods and Presbyteries have not purged out
many since (for even the purging of a few will not suffice them) therefore they
are cooled in their zeal. We seriously profess, that as we do not omit to
search out the faults of Ministers, by inquiry at Visitations Presbyteriall or
Synodicall, as need requires, or otherwise by formal Process, when either
there is a scandal raised on them, or information or accusation given-in
against them: And we durst appeal to the Consciences of these our Brethren
joined with us in that work, whether we have not been most exact, not only in
continuing them under Process, were it for years, so long as there was any
probability to prove any thing against them, but in censuring the least thing
that we found (which yet has oftentimes been very little after some years
toil) according to the strictest Rules of Discipline: So that we know no cause
these Witnesses have to complain of us, but that we will not thrust-out men,
whether we can find them guilty by an orderly way of trial or not. If we took
pleasure to recriminate, we could easily make it appear that they have done
less these years bygone for purging-out those of their own judgment, in places
where they have power, than has been done by us in reference to those of our
judgment. For, albeit it be not our way to make such clamours of the
corruptions and insufficiency of men of their judgment, as they do of us; yet
it is known that diverse of them are suspected of insufficiency, and diverse
reports of gross scandals have been vented of others of them, of which they
have taken little or no notice. 4. As for the reponing of some men to the
Ministry who were formerly deposed, we believe that these seven years past
there have been fewer reponed by far, than used to be reponed by Assemblies and
other inferior Judicatories in so long time before. And as the particular
Judicatories, who reponed them, are ready to answer to their Judge competent
for their deed, and to give in the meantime a satisfactory account to any
unbyassed person; So, were the matter as gross as they can make it, yet the
number of those who are reponed, are not so many, nor in so many Synods (for
they insist chiefly on one) as to prove this general corruption of the Church.
And if any favor has been showed to some, who are deposed simply for their
being silent in the matter of the Engagement, 1648. (who yet did acknowledge
much sin in that complex course before they had liberty to Preach) as (to our
best remembrance) it was not the deed of those of our judgment only, but some
of our Brethren did join in that matter; So we believe, that were the men
known, it would be judged no corrupting of a Church to enjoy such Laborers;
and we have credible information, that those of their Congregations, who
sometime opposed them upon our Brethrens principles, do judge so of them.

Fourthly, They close the confirmation of the truth of this charge with the
testimony of the Godly, bewailing the same things with them; declaring also,
that Malignants who were formerly enemies to Reformation, and to the Government
and Judicatories of the Kirk, do now cry-up the Judicatories and Ministers who
are opposite to the Protesters; And that now the weapons of Kirk-government are
employed against the Godly, which are appointed of God for their defense and
comfort. Answ. We have been so long acquainted with their arrogating the title
of the generality of the Godly to their party, and with arguing from men's
testimonies in this cause, that they cannot have much weight with us; only it
would be thought a strange paradox with them if we should assert (as truly we
may) that many precious and godly persons, both Ministers and others, are
deeply afflicted for their irregular and divisive courses, and that they will
never give over contending, nor join with their Brethren in the Lords work, and
that they are too lavish in their charity, in crying-up of all who join with
them, while they spare not to load, even the best of those who are opposite to
them, with calumnies: But as to the business in hand, we think it not strange
that their party be ready to cry-out of the Ministry of the Land, seeing that
has been their Leaders work these years bygone, to traduce the generality of
the Ministry in their Preachings, and on all occasions, and to possess people
with prejudices against them, that so they might fix them to themselves. And
when we find some of their Scholars such proficients, as after they had
brought them to abhor the body of the Ministry, they came at length to
renounce themselves, yea, and all Ministry, at least a Ministry of the
Church of Scotland; and others have not feared to assert, and that to some of
our selves, That they would not have the Apostle Paul to be their Minister,
were he not of their judgment, and that they would count it good service to
Christ to stone some of the most godly and able Ministers not of their
judgment, whose praise in the Gospel is throughout the Churches of Christ; When
(we say) some have made such proficiencie, it is no wonder they have prevailed
with the generality of them to be dissatisfied with the body of the
Ministry. They have (if they would consider it) an heavy account to make for
their mis-guiding of people in this particular, and for mis-employing their
zeal and affection, (which should be taken up mainly about their own condition)
upon these controversies and debates, and by teaching them to reject their
Teachers who are neither erroneous, insufficient, nor scandalous, have learned
them (we fear) to run too wild in this particular, and even to weary of those
whom they account good men, upon an apprehension that comparatively they are
not so good as others. Whereas diversity of gifts has always been in the
Church, and men ought not therefore to be contemned because they cannot equal
others (though really it were so) since Christ appointed His weak Disciples to
be heard in the days of His own Ministry, and the Apostles did appoint
ordinary Ministers to be heard in their own days. And as to what they say of
Malignants, we are often in this Piece cried out upon as huggers of the
Malignants, countenances of, and countenanced by them. And yet the world sees
that some of our Brethren are the great Courtiers with diverse of them, even of
these whose receiving by the public Resolutions is their great quarrel. For
our part, as we have learned neither to love nor loath a cause because of
persons owning or opposing of it, but as it shall be found to agree or disagree
with the Rule; So we bless Him from whom we have received mercy not to
countenance or approve of Malignancie, profanity or error, though we hold our
selves bound to become all things to all men that we any gain some, and not to
give even the worst just occasion to reject or take a prejudice at our
Ministry, if so be we may draw them to Christ, which is the great end of the
Gospel committed to our trust. If men who have been, or yet are Malignants, do
approve a truth or a good course, we cannot therefore reject it, but do rather
see cause to bless God, that any do own the truth of God, and respect this
poor Church, when they are so busy to ruin it. We hope they will not judge
the cause of Anabaptists, Quakers, Antiscripturists, and the like Sectaries, a
whit the better, that they can object that profane men do countenance their
opposers, and the Truth's oppugned by them. And take the case as they state it;
let themselves be as good and holy, and others as bad as they call them, and
all that can be inferred from it, is, that they have so much the more cause to
mourn that they should let such men outstrip them in a good turn, and be
founder in their principles and way than they are. We suppose it was no small
aggravation of David's fault in numbering the People, that he was so violent in
the matter, when even a bloody Joab is opposite thereunto, and did not only
witness against it, but it is abominable unto him, 1 Chronicles. 21.3, 4, 6. We do
also acknowledge, that Government and Discipline are appointed for the defense
and comfort of godly men, following the way of holiness: But we do not think
it is appointed for the defense and comfort even of godly men in every course
they take in hand, save in so far as it is appointed as Gods own medicine to
cure them when in a distemper, and His rod to reclaim them when they are
wandering: And therefore when they are wrong, were it employed against their
evil courses (though we know nothing done but the naked testimonies of
Judicatories against them) they ought not to repine.

IV. As to their vindication of their endeavors to set up extra-judiciall
Committees of equal numbers, for managing of the affairs of this Church; to
which they speak, page 31. -- 39. We cannot but observe a notable piece of
nimblenesse in their managing of this defense: For they bring-in this
challenge, mentioned in the Declaration, only as it is complained of, that the
not granting of that Overture of extrajudiciall Committees of equal numbers of
both judgments, to be chosen by the respective parties, was a cause of
breaking-up the Conference for Union: without mentioning that other part of the
complaint, that they endeavored and with much eagerness prosecuted that
design (employing all their credit with all sort of persons for that effect) to
have the same imposed upon us when they were at London. Only they huddle-up
what is said of that as a resuming and prosecuting that same point: As if the
Authors of the Declaration were complaining in both places of their breaking
off the Conference only upon this matter. And so all-along, they hold us to the
Article as propounded to us; Only they give an hint of an Overture, the same
for substance as it was propounded to us, without speaking to what an Overture
it was, and when or how given-in. This is indeed an handsome (or rather
unhandsom) conveyance or shifting of what they had no will to meet with: For,
to say no more, any unbyassed person will see a vast difference betwixt a
desire to have an extraordinary Overture take place in a Church, by the common
consent of those who are concerned; and some private persons endeavoring (and
that after other designs, to the great prejudice, if not ruin of this Church,
had miscarried in their hand) to have such things imposed upon the Church by
the Civil Power, when they had no Commission from the Church for that effect,
and knew it was dessented from in a former Conference, by the Ministers of the
Church, upon whom they would have it imposed. This is an usurpation upon a
Church and her Government, which we believe no sound Presbyterian will
justify, nor any others who are not Erastians, as was judged by godly
Presbyterians upon the place when these Proposals were made, to whom the
Churches of Christ owe thanks for their testimony to the Truth against such
projects.

But to consider what they say, (leaving that distinction betwixt the
essentials and circumstantials of Government. page 33, 34. to which we have
spoken before) They confess it is an Overture out of the common road of
ordinary procedure, page 37. and therefore they are but in petitorio with it,
and had need to make their arguments for persuading us to run out of the way
(which we believe to be of God) very pungent and pressing, before we can yield
to their desire. We conceive their discourse on this subject may be reduced to
these heads.

First, That the decaying and distempered estate of the Church calls for and
allows such an Overture, otherwise they profess they would be as far from
pressing it as any other, page 32, 33. Which is, upon the matter, (as we may
hear more fully afterward) that were they once the plurality and in power, they
would be loath to let it out of their hands, or let any such Committee be set
over them, or any party presume to nominate an equal half of these Committees.
This we do very easily believe; but now so long as they are out, and cannot be
content of their lot and share in Government, as their number in Judicatories
allows, all must be corrupt. and all the Judicatories cast loose and trod
upon, as unwilling and unable to do a good turn. But to the matter, As we know
no other distemper nor unpeaceableness of this Church but what themselves have
made and continued, and therefore may cure it whenever they please to weary of
these courses; So, for the supposed corruption thereof, we have already
considered how they have made it out. Only we bless God, they will find no
unsound Doctrine or Worship, nor scandals in conversation approven in this
Church, nor yet that this Church is upon the declining hand since our
differences, as to the planting of able and honest Ministers: And we do again
assert, That whatever corruption there be in Members of this Church, yet this
remedy once admitted, of turning the Government out of the channel which we
believe to be of God, would be far worse than the disease, and a preparative of
most dangerous consequence, whenever any party should be pleased to make use of
the same. Yea, if upon the supposall of our corruption, they infer the
necessity of extrajudicial Commitees, may not others gather much more from such
premises? Were it even a separation from us, or a prelacy (as their Commitees
are in effect) in some honest hands to control us in our actings. They again
inculcate, page 33. That General Assemblies conceived extraordinary visitations
needful; when the Church was in a better condition than now, and when not a
few in Presbyteries and Synods did say it was a foundation for an imputation
upon Synods and Presbyteries. Answ. But (to repeat nothing of what has been
said of the present case of this Church) any body with half an eye may see a
difference betwixt a General Assembly the Supreme National Church-judicatory,
their appointing their own Delegats, chosen without respect to factions, by
plurality of Suffrages, for going about a work, and this extrajudicial
Committee, chosen by parties to do the affairs of Presbyteries and Synods. Must
it not be strange arguing, That because General Assemblies appointed
Visitations to try and censure, therefore they should conclude guilt is found
on the plurality of Ministers; whereas themselves have found it otherwise where
they have power and made trial of men, and where they made as great a clamor
of the corruption of men of our judgment, as now they raise of them in other
places? And therefore also either must they, who are a dividing party, have
matters tried in an extrajudiciall way without order, otherwise they will do
what they can to overturn the Church. They retort, page 37, 38. That though
they have not the same power the General Assembly had so to do, yet the
Assemblies ground and reason moving them to appoint these Visitations, does yet
remain, viz. that Presbyteries and Synods were not so healthy as to do these
things of themselves, which is much more true now when malignant men are got
above hatches, and sundry of them set to the helm. Answ. But, 1. Is it not
great presumption to parallel Visitations appointed by Assemblies, and chosen
by themselves according to Order, and these Committees chosen by parties? Did
Synods choose such Visitations according to Order (as they do upon occasion)
within their own bounds, who would condemn it? but for parties to impose a
Nomination on a Synod, is another matter. 2. Is it not as great presumption in
them to judge that to have been the Assemblies moving cause in appointing
Visitations, which they have not given-out themselves, but only of some few
Presbyteries here and there, especially in the remotest corners; as if they
could appoint none but where their Delegats must find guilt, whether it be or
not. Might they not well enough appoint Visitations to try and know the estate
of the Church in several corners, and to censure where they found ought amiss,
without concluding that Synods and Presbyteries were unhealthy to do their
work? We can instruct they appointed places to be visited where our Brethren
themselves would be loath to say, Judicatories were not able nor willing either
to do that work themselves; yea, their mentioning the miscarriages only of some
Presbyteries, as the cause why they appoint them to be visited, does clearly
assoil other places appointed also to be visited, where there is no mention of
any such thing, as may be seen from the Commissions themselves. But to clear
this matter a little, it seems these Witnesses have a faculty of forgetting any
thing that is not to their purpose: For others who were at the Assembly, 1648.
(at which time these Visitations first began, those of the Isles and Highlands
only excepted) and the Assemblies following do very well remember, that albeit
the enormities of some few Presbyteries did call-for such Visitations, and
albeit all these Commissions were drawn up in the general and ordinary form,
giving power to try and censure any faults that should be found, and that (in
some of them) in any Presbytery within a Province as well as another; Yet the
Assemblies were moved to appoint most of these Visitations, neither upon the
account of the general corruption or aversness of the greater part of the
Presbyteries, to do that work; nor yet mainly for cognoscing upon other
scandals; But chiefly for the trial and censure of such as had accession to the
sinful courses and defections of the time, to the prejudice of the work of
Reformation; Wherein the Judicatories were like to meet with difficulties from
persons within the several bounds, who were either actually carrying-on, or
censured for these courses, and not as yet reconciled to the Church. And
therefore the Assemblies did fall upon that way as the most effectual in that
exigent for carrying-on the work, notwithstanding these difficulties, and did
choose rather to take that matter into the hands of their own Delegats, than
let Presbyteries wrestle therein, with much disadvantage in several places.
Which being well remembered, will commend much the prudence of the Assemblies,
but not at all reflect upon the Presbyteries. 3. We have already cleared that
there is no cause to assert that this Church is in a worse condition now, than
when many of these were in, who are now purged out, or that there is any
malignant faction among us, except they will call them so, who do oppose their
irregularities; and therefore they would first prove that there is a faction
standing in opposition to the work of Reformation, before they so often cast it
upon us. 4. As we are not bound to maintain the language of any particular
persons against the proceedings of Assemblies, who, it may be, were afterward
for just causes put to the door; nor yet to believe all that they assert of
this kind; So that they dare not fasten this upon any Presbyteries or Synods,
(though they are pleased to speak of not a few in them) is to us a proof, that
Presbyteries and Synods were not unwilling to have that work done, as they
allege. And withal, the carpings of some men at the regular and orderly
proceedings of their superior Judicatories (who, had they been in these times,
might have learned not to submit to them, since they judged not their Sentences
just) should not stop our mouths from challenging the usurpations of others.
They tell us also, page 38, 39. that, to avoid this Overture, they did offer
that the Commission and Visitations of the Assembly, 1650. might sit, if not by
Authority derived from that Assembly, yet by the mutual condescendencie and
approbation of Presbyteries, whereby also they might have power to compose
differences. Ans. But they having before that time approven their own
Protestations, and condemned two General Assemblies, and upon that account
sitten in that Commission, (without so much as a copy of their Commission) as
a Judicatory to continue so long as they were pleased to protest against any
subsequent General Assemblies, and to manage all the public affairs of the
Church; In that case it was not lawful for us to accord the Overture of
setting up Courts, whose Commissions were long ago expired, and some of which
they had striven to keep up upon the ruins of the Assemblies. Nor do we see
that Presbyteries (except conveened in a General Assembly and by giving a new
Commission) could authorize men to act in so universal and large a capacity,
where themselves had no jurisdiction, or authorize men in no other Provinces to
exercise jurisdiction over themselves.

Secondly, That our exceptions against this extrajudiciall Committee are
irrelevant. To this purpose they speak several things, page 34, 35, 36* 37.
whereof we give this brief account, 1. They tell us that they desire none to be
in these Visitations, but members of the respective Synods. Answ. But then sure
the Committee in whole (being of equal numbers) will be but a small number, if
any at all, in some Synods, where few, or none of their judgment are. 2. They
tell us that no power is desired to be given them, but what is Ecclesiastical,
and that they are not to proceed by any rule but by the Word of God and Acts of
uncontroverted Assemblies; (where we must at all occasions lay by other
Assemblies, because they are pleased to controvert and question them) Answ. But
they should first have cleared to us that such a Court so chosen, is a Court of
Christ's institution, and that to be equally divided of different judgments,
and these chosen, not by the Synods, but the respective parties, are
Scripturall qualifications of a Church-judicatory. 3. They tell us that they
desire not their power to be derived from any fountain, but from the Synod it
self. Answ. But yet they endeavored to have it imposed upon the Synods, that
they should give them that power, and the Synods may justly question if they be
bound by the Word of God to give their power to persons, whom they have not the
credit to choice, whose election, qualifications, (that they be of both
judgments in equal numbers) work, and way of their calling them to an account,
are all imposed upon them and prescribed to their hand. 4. They tell us the
nomination is made by no forinsick persons, party or power, but by intrinsic
members of the Synod it self. Answ. But they well know that this is not the way
of Church Government, where nominations go by the suffrages of the
Judicatories. 5. They tell us we wrong them in saying that they are not to be
subordinate, and that Synods cannot call them to an account, seeing in the
Overture, as propounded to us; the contrary is expressly provided. Ans. But
hereby they give us occasion to put them in mind that the same Overture
concerning particular Visitations, as it was proposed elsewhere at London, has
no such express provision: And if the plurality of them were of the same
judgment with these Witnesses concerning Subordination, it were a pretty
complement given the Synods, to tell them that they are subordinat, and so
countable to them, only so far as they give them no cause to think they give an
unjust sentence against them, according to their Doctrine in this Pamphlet. We
think Synods will be tender to whom they give their power when Subordination is
so described. But this may seem yet more strange that because of the corruption
of Synods, therefore they cannot be trusted with the nomination of the persons,
nor with the doing of their own work but in this extrajudiciall way; and yet it
must import no small honesty, that these Delegates will be subordinate and
countable to them for their actings, as these Witnesses would persuade us:
Would not this soon make all their labor vain, by the Synods (who are so
corrupt, as they say) reversing all they do? But, 6. When we allege that the
clause of not reversing any thing done by these Committees without the previous
advice and consent of a general Committee of Delegates, Does bind up the
Synods hands: They tell us that they may take an account of their proceedings,
may admonish and rebuke them, yea, and take away their Commission and Power in
the case of mal-administration, and give it to others of their number nominated
as aforesaid. Answ. But sure this is a notable Subordination: The Synods may be
angry if they please, and lay by these Delegats, but they have no power to
reverse their actings, nor rectify their mal-administrations, till some others
give them leave, and till they not only wait until these general Delegats be
conveened from the several parts of the Land, and they have sought their
advice; but even till the Delegats conveened be pleased to give an advice to
them, which it may be their party (being the equal half) will never suffer to
be given; far less may they resume their power into their own hands, or be at
their own liberty in choosing fitter Committees than these wrangling equal
numbers, but they must over again renounce their credit with their own consent,
and let others impose their new Delegats upon them. And yet we know not if
their Overture will bear so much power to be left to Synods as this poor
pittance will amount to, unless these Witnesses know more of the mind of the
projecters of these things, than we could read in their Papers: And withal, if
it come to a new nomination, their number in the most of Synods will hardly (if
at all) admit thereof, unless they will choose these same men over again who
have already forefaulted their credit. 7. They tell us they can see no such
thing in their Overtures, as that the Synods should set up a jurisdiction above
themselves, as is asserted in the Declaration; But only a power of advice upon
the part of these Delegats, (they mean the general Delegats) and a brotherly
condescension in the Synods, etc. Answ. But they take quid for quo, and do not
tell the whole tale: For albeit this be slavery enough upon Synods, that they
may not meddle with affairs entrusted to them by Christ, without the previous
advice, yea, and consent also of these general Delegats to whom Christ has
not subordinat them, (and how far this falls short of a material exercise of
jurisdiction over them, and a negative voice, let any judge) Yet the Authors of
the Declaration did also include here these Committees of Delegats in every
Synod, who if they be not set over Synods with jurisdiction in the matter of
purging and planting Ministers and Elders, and composing present and future
divisions in Congregations and Presbyteries within the whole bounds of the
Synod, we know not what they are: And if they have not a negative voice, being
sheltered under the wings of the general Committee, it is because they have
more. Sure we are, their half in these Committees have a negative voice in all
these things. 8. They tell us a negative voice does not infer a superior
jurisdiction and power, but at most a coordinate power. Answ. And neither does
the Declaration prove their superior jurisdiction, by their having a negative
voice, but only assert that it was a jurisdiction over the Synods, and that
with a negative voice. It is enough that a negative voice does so far set them
over the Synods, that they may neither act in these particulars, but by the
particular Committees; nor cognosce upon what these Committees do, but by the
general Committee, and this is more than is due to any party over a
Church-judicatory: Yea, it is greater jurisdiction over Synods, than any Synod
can exercise over a Presbytery, by these Witnesses way of urging the
cumulative and not privative power of Synods; for thereby the inferior
Judicatories may act, and not be hindered by the superior; but here the Synod
is so far at under, that it can neither act first, nor last, but by these. 9.
They tell us that this negative voice extends not to all cases, nor all the
actings of Synods. Answ. And when the one Committee takes from them, and
Presbyteries also, the matter of purging and planting Ministers and Elders, and
of meddling in all present differences, and whatsoever they or any others shall
be pleased to make a future difference; and the other takes from them liberty,
till they please, to reverse any thing they find done amiss; We will be
obliged to them to tell what they have left the Synod beside, that is worth
their pains and meeting, unless it be to approve simply what these Delegats
have done; or else (as the Witnesses a little before gave them leave) be angry
at them and show their teeth, and possibly stoup down to accept of such another
nomination from parties (which they have found by experience to be so useless
a way) without any power to help oppressed men and Presbyteries and
Congregations. But they assure us, that a Synod is free by the Overture to
ratify the proceedings of these Committees, not only without but against the
advice and consent of the General Delegats, if they please. Answ. It seems
they have not been afraid, but their equal number of Champions would be stiff
and clamorous enough (as none that knows some of them will blame them of
insufficiency in these particulars) as if not to draw some of the other side
to yield to their determinations, yet to keep them from concluding any thing
which they will fear to hazard upon the approbation of a corrupt Synod: But why
should they not also have power to reverse any ill that is done, without
needing to call for a meeting of Delegats from all the parts of the Country,
and waiting their leisure to advise and consent, while in the mean time their
Committees may put the matter past remedy one way or other: And how can a Synod
out the ratification of their proceedings to the question, If the not
ratification of them be not the other member of the Question? And if not
ratification import a reversing, do not the Synods make too bold with their
Masters and Tutors, to hazard that upon a Question? Or, if it import not a
reversing, then we must learn this new principle of Government, that a Synod
may not only refuse to ratify, but by a judicial sentence pronounce the
non-ratification of the determination of a Committee subordinate and countable
to them, and yet these determinations stand unreversed. But they assure us
further, that not only is the Synod free to ratify, but they are not simply
tied by the Overture to follow the advice of these Delegats, in case of their
advising them to reverse the deeds of these Committees. Answ. But we are sure
they are so tied by the Overture, that suppose they themselves judge the most
part, yea, all of their Committees deeds to be not only simply worthy to be
reversed, but most horrid and blasphemous; yet they may not without the consent
foresaid, reverse any of them. And if they will allow the corrupt Synods so
much as a liberty not to hearken to their Tutors advising them to reverse what
they think amiss, why will they not also allow them as much on the other hand,
as liberty to reverse what themselves think amiss, though their Counselors
differ from them in that also? The truth is, we hardly think that indeed they
do allow them any such liberty, and that there may be a safe gloss (were the
matter once practicable) put upon the Synods not being simply tied by the
Overture, which would teach them better manners, than to slight the advice of
their betters. But we profess we are weary and grieved to see men so ludere in
re seria, and think to please judicious and conscientious men with complements.
10. They tell us further that we wrong them in saying this Overture was
propounded as a perpetual standing way, always to be followed, to perpetuate
difference and contentions. Answ. And yet they have not answered the argument
which was propounded in the Declaration for proof of this, viz. that yoking of
parties of equal numbers together in debates (as must be in these Committees)
will rather widen a breach than heal it, seeing they will not probably cede to
other: Sure we are, we may lose hope of some of them, who in our Judicatories
can by no reasoning be drawn to quit the conclusion which they had (in all
appearance) instilled into them before they came in. Withal, they had done
well to answer another argument insinuated for proving this, viz. that their
power continuing till the present differences be healed, the composing whereof
(with all future divisions) is put in their hands, and not at all to be meddled
with by the Judicatories; Are not all the Judicatories then at their mercy to
continue them short or long, yea, perpetually if they please? It is true, they
make an alternative of another better way to be ministered in providence for
settling peace, upon which their power is to expire. But the Judicatories are
at a loss about that also, being sure our Brethren or their Delegats have a
negative voice whether that be a better way indeed or not. And we are so much
the more afraid of this better way, since in case this present way shall not
please them, they give us no hope of recurring to Christ's own Institutions, but
they will have us look for some better way to be ministered in providence for
settling peace; which for ought we know may be ten times worse. This also being
hinted in that short Declaration, with other considerations against those
Proposals, we leave to others to judge why they lost it, with other two above
repeated, in their so large Answer to a short Paper, wherein but a few
prejudices of many were-mentioned, as might be easily made-out by a large
addition, were it needful.

V. As to our challenging of the Order procured by some of them, putting the
power of giving testimony to Intrants (which is due to Presbyteries only) in
the hands of some select persons of their own choosing: They say ( page 61, 62.)
1. That they wonder this should be mentioned, seeing the Protesting Party did
not embrace nor make use of that Order. Answ. But if they did not embrace nor
make use of it, because it was prejudicial to the right of Church-judicatories,
then they confirm all that is said of it, viz. That it was an endeavor of some
of their party to enervate the power of Church-judicatories, though it pleased
the Lord to break that snare; For their making use of it is not spoken to in
the Declaration. Yet we must add, that some will tell them, That even those
who pretended not to embrace that Order, yet dealt with others, who were for
it, to let them have the benefit of it in their particulars, which will hardly
amount to a serious testimony and opposition. 2. They say, that he who is
blamed in this matter did but give his advice in that matter, being required,
and when he saw the Order was not accepted, he laid it aside and did not
prosecute it any further. Answ. But who authorized him, or others, (if any
others of them did join with him in it) to give advice in matters concerning
the whole Kirk, without the consent of, or Commission from the Kirk, which was
the crime laid of old in the Prelates dish, as a breach of these Caveats,
whereby their power was at first restrained, after they had crept into this
Church? What warrant had he to lay aside the Presbyteries in that matter, as
not worthy to be entrusted with testifying concerning those whom they are
authorized by Christ to try and ordain, and put it in the hand of a Juncto? Was
it to teach those in power to slight Church-judicatories? With what face can
they assert, that he thought it fit, Certificates should be granted by a select
number of both judgments, as if this had been a Committee of equal numbers,
when the quite contrary is clear from that Order? For therein, Scotland being
divided in five Circuits or Provinces, and no Intrant being to have maintenance
without the Testimony of four (at least) of these persons authorized for that
effect in the respective Provinces: The matter is so conveyed, as in no one
Circuit there are a competent number to give a Certificate named of our
judgment, as there is of theirs in every one of them, and only here one and
there another of ours added; and yet there are a sufficient number of
Independents named for one of these Provinces, which contains so much bounds
as made up formerly five Diocesses of our Prelates: Further, if he but gave his
simple opinion upon demand in this matter (and was not a projecter and procurer
of it) what needed any opposition to make him lay it aside, and not prosecute
it any further? And how will he, or they either, convince knowing men, that it
flowed from his condescendence, that that Order was laid aside, when it was the
deed of these in power here, who, perceiving the inexpediencie thereof and the
prejudice redounding to many Ministers thereby, procured the annulling thereof?
This also we may say further, It was no sooner laid aside, but they were upon
new projects prejudicial to the Church, as is asserted in the Declaration. 3.
They say, that we have done worse our selves for bringing the Ministry into
bondage, by clandestine capitulations about Intrants to the Ministry. Answ. We
wish they had spoken out what they think needless to mention; and if they had
spoken truth, it would have appeared how falsely they have charged us with any
such clandestine capitulation, and how much more falsely they have charged us
with bringing the Ministry under bondage. In the mean time, for our part, we
deny that there was any such thing. And Mr. Rutherfurd, who in his late Preface
to his Survey, charge this on a meeting of Correspondents from Synods, has
given in print as much under his hand as that Engagement he speaks of amounts
to; so that if the rest be of his mind, they quarrel not the thing it self, but
that they have not the credit to do it alone.

VI. In answer to what is said of their design in their three Proposals at
London, they give us an account (and that in a different character) of what we
say of the first, concerning their seeking a Commission for Plantation of
Churches, page 62. and in more than three pages following, speak highly to our
observations thereupon: but never a word of the other two Proposals, which the
Authors of the Declaration laid most stresse upon for proving their Conclusion,
and therefore subjoyned them to the former in a different character, that they
might be taken notice of. These Witnesses foreseeing how truly all these three
together might prove the charge, did therefore shufle in these (as was said
before) with the business of the Conference where these same things were
debated; That so they might set their thumb upon them, as if there were nothing
of them here, and then cry, How weakly is it argued to conclude their
attempting the ruin of this Church, etc, because they desired a Commission of
Plantation, having power of disposing of the legal maintenance of Ministers? As
if because one of them (and possibly the weakest of the three) do not conclude
it, therefore all the three together will not: And as if to endeavor the
imposing upon Ecclesiasticall-judicatories in Ecclesiastic affairs, by the
Civil Power, were but a peccadillo not worth the noticing by men who are
writing Apologeticks of their respect to the Government, and answering
Calumnies (as they call them) cast upon them in that matter, and when that is
one of the particular and weighty charges laid at their door. We believe it is
no incivility to desiderate ingenuity and candor here, and to suspect that this
tergiversation speaks no excess of honesty in this particular. And they know
that if all the circumstances of their carriage and way in prosecuting these
Proposals and other projects at London, tending to the same end, were laid open
to the world, it would give such a character of their respect to Presbyterial
Government as would be little pleasing to them.

But what do they say even as to that Proposal, 1. They tell us, that they
finding the inconvenience of putting the disposing of the legal maintenance of
Ministers, into the hands of a peculiar Court, and then of the Council, they
did supplicate to have all that way altered, and that Ministers might have full
access to their stipends, without Bonds or Engagements, etc. And that there
might be a Commission for Plantation of Churches, who might also do the duty of
the Civil Magistrate anent Ecclesiastic matters, etc. Answ. We have never
heard more of the first part of their Supplication (which we heartily wish were
granted) that they are pleased to tell us here, and therefore fides penes
Authors; and if they have done good service in preserving the Liberties of
this Church (as they are pleased to take a good Testimony to themselves, with a
reflection upon their neighbors) unbyassed men do perceive, their Proposals do
witness, and one day, which neither they nor we can get declined, will declare.
But why do they huddle-up so darkly the matter, concerning the power of
disposing the Legal Maintenance of Ministers to be given to that Commission,
under these generals, that they might do the duty of the Civil Magistrate anent
Ecclesiastical matters? which are the terms they give us of their
Supplication; Or, why do they make only a supposition of their desiring it,
when it is in terminis in their Proposal? We shall wish them more candor than
thus to deal with us and the world in print, speaking so to the thing upon
supposition, as if it were in doubt whether they had done it or not. And if
their Supplication was so general, there have been more injuries than one in it,
to desire that all the duties of the Civil Magistrate in reference to
Ecclesiastic affairs should be laid upon the shoulders of that one Commission:
For such a power, taken in its latitude, might not only include the late Order
(to which we spoke last) in a new dress, and all the power which the Prelates
had by virtue of their High Commission, but all the power which Civil Courts or
any Magistrate did exercise in Ecclesiasticis. 2. They tell us it was no fault
to endeavor to translate the exercise of that Power from one subject to
another, the Council being otherwise necessarily diverted that they cannot
conveniently attend it. Answ. But, upon supposal of the resolution of the Civil
Powers not to alter the former way of disposing of the Legal Maintenance, which
they had not only accounted inconvenient, but even now, ( page 62.) had taxed
it as a bondage upon the Ministry by our Capitulations: It had been more
honesty for them not to condemn themselves in what they allow, than thus to
meddle to involve more in the guilt of drawing Ministers into such bondage. The
Council is beholden to them for caring for their ease, though few Ministers are
wearied with long attendance in that matter; But we know these Witnesses
better, than to believe they would be so officious as to go to London and
prosecute this Proposal so vigorously only, for the Councils ease, if they had
not their own interest wrapped in it. 3. They say, that suppose their design in
that Proposal, had been to call the Authority of these late Assemblies in
question (as is charged on them in the Declaration) yet not only that, but the
pronouncing them null, would not bring utter ruin to the Church and those that
plead for them; Nor do they see any inconsistencie betwixt that Commissions
exercising their power, and the standing of the Authority of these Assemblies.
Answ. We must tell them again, that had they taken-in all the Proposals here,
the Consequence had not been so dark; And yet even that of their pronouncing
the late Assemblies null, has given a sorer stroke to the Church than they
will know well how to answer for, (as we have said, and elsewhere cleared) and
keeps men who plead for these Assemblies under the imputation of a defection
and tyrannical usurpation of the power of a Genesis Assembly in this Church; And
this they will have still kept on foot, were it but in such a matter as this,
till they be at leisure or have power to call them to an account for it. And
though we make no question but that Commission, or any other Civil Court, might
exercise their lawful power, without any prejudice to the authority of these
Assemblies, or from the standing thereof: yet any who please may see that their
desire concerning the rule and way of that Commissions exercise of their power,
does conclude them controverted Assemblies. 4. In answer to that charge, that
the design was to have the maintenance put in the hands of men to their mind,
that so they might discourage all from the Ministry who are opposite to
themselves* They are pleased to recriminate upon the Acts of the late
Assemblies; to which we have answered already, and may meet with it again
hereafter: For they are afraid we forget it, and therefore we are so often told
of it, to make the volumn the bigger. In the mean time, we cannot but tell
them, That had the Church made use of those Acts, (as they did not) yet the
comparison is odious betwixt a Church taking course with those who renounce her
Authority, and are opposite to her just Determinations; and a parties
endeavoring to crush their Mother Church, and such as adhere to Truth in her,
that they may promote themselves. They tell us again, that though they cannot
say they are so self-denied, as not to have wished it so, (which we as easily
believe, as we are sure de jure they ought not to have wished it so) yet they
never expected nor proposed that there might be such a Commission as might
wholly consist of men to their mind. Answ. Neither did any charge that upon
them: for, sure the Maintenance might have been put into the hands of men to
their mind, although that Commission did not wholly consist of such. It might
have sufficed for securing that, if they had kept but such a proportion as men
to their mind keep in that Order, of which we spoke in the last Section. And
though they put us off with this handsome shift, yet we are sure they did not
labor so hard in it to play an uncertain game to themselves, by admitting an
equality of parties, or any thing like it, in that Commission. But they say
further, that though the Commission had consisted mostly or wholly of such,
there would have been room and encouragement for men of our judgment both to
continue and enter into the Ministry. Answ. Why they mention our continuance
in the Ministry here, (not to insist how much it would encroach upon the just
power of Congregations and Presbyteries, if our room to enter into the
Ministry did depend upon such a Commission) we know not, unless it be to put
us in mind to tell them that there was a project also to meddle with the
Maintenance of settled Ministers, and to have the Stipends of all the Ministers,
admitted since the year, 1650. sequestrate, till they should come before such a
Commission. And though we do think, than there were sober-minded men of their
judgment let alone by such as these Witnesses, and taught to meddle more with
what concerned their eternal salvation, and not to imbark themselves in
controversies of this kind, we needed not doubt of receiving all kindness from
them; Yet so long as they make it their trade to stir-up all who will give them
any credit, to traduce even the best of those who are opposite to them, we will
be sparing of setting our seal to their assertion, unless there be an
ambiguity intended here in the matter of encouragement, which honest Ministers
will never want in the work of the Lord, even though Maintenance were withheld
from them.

Having considered what they speak to this head, of their own Vindication
(except what they say here to the matter of Subordination, which we leave to
come in with the rest that follows on that subject) we shall briefly consider
how they remove two other prejudices before they come to the Overtures of Union.

I. Whereas it was laid to their charge, that they began a needless rent in
the Church upon a question so extrinsick to our Doctrine, Worship and
Government, and that it is a tossing of a debate now so far removed out of our
way, meaning the debate about the Public Resolutions: To this they give
several Answers, page 67, 68, 69, 70, 71. And first, They tell us we began the
Rent, in that some of the Commissioners of the General Assembly, without
giving timous warning to others, did in the year, 1651. suddenly take these
Resolutions, when the whole Church of Scotland was in possession of, and by
Covenants and Vows engaged to the Truths to which these Resolutions are
contrary and destructive. Answ. As to the proceeding of the Commissioners in
taking these Resolutions, as they needed not go into corners with that
Question, (it being well known, that though all of their judgment had been
present, they would not have made any considerable part of that Commission, for
stopping their procedure to any such conclusion) so they are able to justify
that there was no surreptitious dealing in that matter; But that, before that
Question came to be debated, that party had deserted their trust in the
Commission, in that time of strait, and would not come to it. But as to the
matter it self, though their having truth on their side would not justify them
from being the makers of the Rent, if it were not relevant, or tanti, as to
bear all the sad consequents of a Schism: Yet, we are content the Rent be laid
to their charge who shall be found in the error in this debate. And we must
again tell them, that it is not fair dealing, to stuff so many Pages on all
occasions with loud outcries against these Resolutions, without so much as one
Argument to make good their Assertion, or any endeavor to answer what is
written against them in this matter. Let them make it good that there is an
error in these Resolutions, That they are condemned either in our Covenants,
or in the solemn Engagement, (concerning which it has already been told them,
that that Paper was so contrived of purpose as it might not precondemn these
Resolutions, if ever it should be needful to take them) Or, that the Church of
Scotland did ever since the Reformation from Popery, oppose these Resolutions
(as they tell us afterward in the second branch of their Answer) or own any
Doctrine contrary to these Resolutions, and did not rather practice them and
print Declarations conform to them. And let them answer what is said to all
these particulars, in the printed Papers formerly mentioned, before they so
magisterially tread under-foot both the truth and us. 2. They tell us that it
is not a question so extrinsick as we would make it, but involves a portion of
the precious Truths of God revealed in His Word, and is a truth holden forth by
the Kirk of Scotland as containing what is necessary for preserving the rest of
the Doctrine, Worship and Government from the pollutions which ill men use to
bring in or give way unto, whereof they give an instance in the desires of the
Commission of the Assembly 1648. concerning qualifications of Instruments in
the unlawful Engagement; And they desire us to remember, of what spirit that
man would have been judged, who in the Assembly 1650. (it seems by what follows
it should be 1648.) would have pleaded this to be a question much extrinsick to
our Doctrine, Worship and Government. Answ. Whatever was said concerning the
nature of that question; Yet it was never our mind to assert, that there is not
a matter of truth and error in it, to be determined by the Word of God; nor
yet will we deny, but (where the case is practicable in any Nation under
heaven) their opinion in this matter is of sovereign bad consequence to the
State and Nation, as not only exposing the Nation to unavoidable ruin, but
even exposing the Doctrine, Worship and Government to the mercy of Turks and
Pagans, or Papists, if they please to invade it, rather than they will trust
fellow subjects to defend themselves and the common Interest of the Nation, and
that because they may bring in or give way to corruptions, as there they
express it. Only we have still judged, that when the Church of Scotland is no
way concerned nor put to it to determine that Question, who may be employed in
State and Armies; And seeing this question is not determined nor debated in our
Confession of Faith, and we may very well Preach Christ and the Gospel, and
what concerns the practice of the people of God, without dipping upon that
Question, yea, and may observe the Directory for Worship, and keep up
Presbyteriall Government without it; Therefore it has been thought strange, we
might not lay such a Question aside, and join our selves in the work of the
Lord which is presently put in our hand. But since those Witnesses will have it
of such importance still, we do again put them in mind of their work, to make
out their assertion in this controversy. Mean time, lest their state of the
Question be as lax as that concerning Subordination is here, We must put them
in mind of these few particulars, (1.) That they must state the Question more
accurately, than to make it amount only to this (as they hold it out, page 67.)
Whether we should entrust known wicked malignant men, enemies to Truth and
Godliness, with the Interests of the Lords Work and People? For we will easily
reply, that this state of the Question would be found faulty in diverse
respects, as to that case. It will not be granted them, nay, their own
Consciences dare not assert, that all of these then in question, were known
wicked Malignant men, enemies to Truth and Godliness, but rather that many of
them were forward in the defense of the Truth and cause of God from the
beginning, though they were led away in the matter of the Engagement. Neither
will it be granted, that men Ecclesiastically purged from what accession they
had to evil courses, must still be accounted what they were before the
profession of their repentance, and while they were going on in their wicked
courses. And they must also remember, that the Question will take-in more than
the Interests of the Lords work and People, as they are pleased to take those
in a restricted sense. For, the common interests and safety of the Nation, and
of every particular person and family therein, are supposed to be concerned in
the question betwixt us, and consequently will allow more to be engaged than in
a quarrel purely religious. Yea, in such a case of common hazard and
combustion, they will hardly persuade rational Christians, but that fowl water
may very lawfully be made use of to quench fire. (2.) That they must bring
better proofs than that of the Commissions desire, 1648. to prove their
assertion. For, there the Engagement was unlawful, and the War was offensive,
and an Invasion of another Nation; (to say nothing of the different condition
and posture of the Supreme Magistrate in these two cases) And if they will
grant that the unlawfulness of that Engagement consisted only in the employing
of persons wanting the qualifications in the Commissions desire, and that it
had been lawful, if put in the hands of Confidents, they say somewhat:
Otherwise, it will be found wild reasoning, that because a Church being
jealous of the States intentions in an offensive War, otherwise unlawful,
desired this, as one mean of removing their fears, that confident persons might
be entrusted with the management of the War; Therefore in a defensive war,
which none of the parties questioned to be lawful, and wherein the whole
Nation in general, and every person in particular, are concerned as much as
they are worth, no other persons may be employed. (3.) Whether they mean the
year, 1648. or, 1650. we know not what strange thing it would have been thought
to maintain this Thesis; But we are sure that the Commission shortly after the
Assembly, 1648. did, upon the debate, word the solemn Engagement so, as it
might not precondemn that Thesis, as is said before, and is elsewhere cleared;
And the Commission of the Assembly, 1650. did shortly after that Assembly take
these Resolutions, and that when it consisted generally of men who were most
eminent friends to Reformation. 3. They retort this consideration upon our
selves, enquiring why we are so tenacious of the Determinations of our
Assemblies about this Question, which we judge so extrinsick, and will not, for
the peace of the Church, take course that these Determinations be not looked on
as the definitive judgment of this Kirk, or any of the Judicatories thereof,
and why we make and keep up Acts against those who submit not to these
Determinations? Why also we sometime place the standing or falling of this
Church therein? Some of this stuff is laid in our dish again with vehemence
enough, Page 85. But we answ, If we look to what is past, and the Question were
put, Why the Assemblies did define and determine in these matters, and make
these Acts? Our Reply would be, because the things determined and defined are
lawful and just, and they were required by the Civil Magistrate in a time of
extreme exigencie to give their judgment therein; And because public opposers
of these Determinations, when practicable and necessary, are turbulent men and
drawers on of the ruin of any Nation where they live. But if we turn to our
present case, had the Question been, Why do we not lay aside these debats, and
take away these Acts for peace? And why do we not forbear to impose these
Determinations upon their consciences, that they should approve them as the
definitive sentence of this Kirk; yea, why do not we promise that they should
never be urged against them as the definitive sentence of this Kirk? Our Answer
is as easy, That all this is offered to them, in our Conference for Union, and
rejected by them: But as to their Question, we say, That therefore we do not
take course that they be not looked on as the difinitive judgment of this
Kirk, because we are persuaded in our consciences they were lawful Assemblies
who did take cognition of these matters; And we know that de facto they did
define and determine in them, and therefore we can not lie against our
consciences and knowledge to say the contrary; nor can we, being private men,
annul these Determinations simply, which is only competent to another General
Assembly, if they find just cause so to do. And if they can instruct, that ever
private men did repeal the Acts of Civil or Ecclesiastic Judicatories
(especially which they held in their consciences to be lawful Judicatories)
and declare them not to be the definitive judgment of these Judicatories (as
it seems they would have us believe, page 85. and is the thing they seek of
us) Let them produce their evidences. But we believe they will succumb in their
probation, and that it will be found a practice intolerable either in a State
or Church. And as to the weight they say we sometime lay upon this matter; We
do indeed judge that Question about the Resolutions very weighty, where a
Nation is put to practice them. But they do here alter the Question from what
they are upon in this Section, and turn-in upon the Assemblies and their
Determination therein. For we do not think (nor ever did we say) that the
laying aside the Debate concerning the Resolutions, would be the falling of
this Church: Only we assert, that their questioning the Authority of these
Assemblies, upon the grounds produced, and our consenting to them herein, were
in effect to expose the Church to ruin, by granting a liberty to private men to
overturn National Church-judicatories at their pleasure, and so to repeal their
Determinations, as to declare they had no lawful Authority therein; And yet
this does nothing contradict our Assertion, that the Question about the
Resolutions is so extrinsick to our Doctrine, Worship and Government, as they
need not hold up perpetual debates about it, which is the Assertion they are
now refuting. 4. They assert, that the subject matter of this Debate
continues, in respect of the sin and guilt thereof, not taken with nor
repented of, and in regard of the Synodicall approbation and tie, the Acts of
Censure, public Warnings, Declarations and Remonstrances against the opposers
thereof, the authoritative approbation thereof by Synods and Presbyteries, in
regard of the execution of these Acts against some, the taking-in of malignant
men to have Ecclesiastic privileges and trust, and to be Elders; and in
regard of many sad fruits and evidences of defection following thereupon, which
they long ago represented to the several Synods. Answ. We leave them in what
they have given-in to Synods, to the Returns given them by the Synods, since
they pass it here in a general, Only we say this, whatever were their faults
in what they gave in to Synods themselves; It had been more tolerable if they
had sisted there, and had not cast-off tenderness and shame, in aspersing the
Judicatories and Servants of Christ in this Church, among strangers, by their
Papers spread at London, containing manifest untruths, as the particular Synods
concerned are able to instruct. But for what they express here, as many of
these particulars have been answered before when they laid these things to our
charge; So for these which they refer to their considerations upon the
Overtures of Union, page 71. We shall remit them thither also to see if they
will be able to make out (as we are sure they will not) that any of these
things they complain of were to continue upon an Union (which is the case in
hand) further than in so far as might reserve the freedom of our own judgment
concerning the matter of these Resolutions, and the lawfulness of these
Assemblies; Or, if any thing was required of them which might either continue
them under censures or censurablenesse, or import their approbation of these
things in their judgment. And as to the matter of Repentance, we trust we have
obtained mercy, not to decline the taking with, or repenting of real guilt,
when it is made out unto us, though we dare not sin against our souls to repent
of our duty, and of owning the Truth of God, as we believe we do in this
particular, whatever they say here to the contrary. We shall not insist to
regrate how little there is indeed of repentance for faults among us, nor shall
we offer to do any thing like recrimination in so serious a business; yet we
must tell them, that as all of us have need of more repentance before the Lord,
So though (we believe) it is their duty to repent their opposition to the Truth
in this particular, and their violent prosecution thereof to the running-down
of their Mother Church, Yet we never did urge this as a thing without which an
Union might not be: Yea, we think it strange Divinity, that there can be no
Peace or Union in a Church unless every man will renounce and repent of every
thing wherein he differs from another in judgment. We think God has set other
limits of mutual forbearance for avoiding of a Schism.

II. Whereas it was alleged, that their courses did speak them men affecting
pre-eminence, and to set up a domination of their Party in the Church and over
their Brethren: They begin with an acknowledgement of that bitter root of pride
and ambition common to them with all men; but they deny that charge, though
they grant they would wish all to be of that judgment in these points of
difference, because they judge it to be of the Lord: So, page 71, 72. Answ. As
we shall wish them (and our selves both) more sense of that bitter root, and of
the breaking out evidences thereof, according as their guilt is; and we are
sure some of them will not get many compurgators of that very crime: So we
leave it to the judicious to consider how they acquit themselves of the charge
in the matters in debate, in their unreasonable demands of, and endeavored
impositions upon their Brethren, and in their endeavors to overturn and reject
all Judicatories, where they are not the plurality, that they may have, at
least, an equal hand in all things by their Committees of equal numbers, as is
frequent in this Pamphlet. In the mean time, they ought, first, to prove their
way to be sound, before they be so industrious to make so many proselytes.
Next, they purge themselves of the crime, partly, in that, though the
Commission of the Assembly, 1650. be in their judgment still in force; yet,
after these of their judgment, who are Members thereof, had sitten in that
capacity, only till they had (with the advice of other Brethren of their
judgment) published Causes of Gods controversy against the Land, they have
not since acted in that capacity: And partly, that having offered that we by
our selves, and without them, would purge the house of God, and we doing
nothing, but rather polluting it; it was no affecting of domination to take
some other course, wherein yet they were content we should have more than
equal share with themselves, page 72. Answ. 1. Though they boast also of this
their condescendence about the Commission, page 38. Yet, as it was the highest
of domination in a National Church, That a party should judge of the nullity of
her supreme Church-Judicatory, and thereupon continue themselves in a power
which was extinct by the meeting of that Judicatory, and which upon the same
grounds they might perpetuate over the whole Church so long as they pleased:
That they should also usurp upon their Brethren who were joined in that
Commission with them by the Assembly, 1650. in conveening and meeting
themselves without calling to them to meet with them: That they should meet
without their Commission, or a copy of it, whereby they should know their
Members and the Quorum of the Commission, and the power and work committed to
them, and without which they were in mala fide to act: And, that they should
obtrude upon a whole Church and the several Synods, such things to be Causes of
Gods controversy as were approven duties, and had been owned as such by the
former Assemblies of this Church: (as has been already made out in former
printed Papers) As (we say) those pranks did speak the highest of usurpation
that has readily been heard of in a R. formed Church; So it is well known,
that after they had published those Causes of Wrath, they have adjourned the
meeting of that Commission from time to time, and at last did vote in their
meetings to set it up again, and act in that capacity; and had done so, if the
Council (whom they supplicated for that end) would have owned them in it: So
that their ceasing to act since in that capacity, is to us no evidence of their
coming down in their spirits: As may further also appear from the other courses
they have since taken up, as more compendious for attaining their ends, than
the way of that Commission. For beside (as is said) that they have no copy of
their Commission, nor do know the tenor of it, and the number which make a
Quorum, they are but a very small number of the Members of that Commission; And
if they could make a Quorum, yet few more, so that they behoved to be constant
Prelates attending on this thing. Withal, had that Commission right to meet,
they know if he who was Moderator thereof, would conveen all the members, they
would not signify much in that meeting, and therefore it speaks no great want
of a desire of Domination, not to insist on that. 2. As to the matter of
Purging, and the means they have projected for making it effectual, we have
spoken thereto before, and it will come in afterward. Only we shall leave to
unbyassed men, from what has been said, to judge whether their means savor of
ambition or not; and whether the Church-judicatories and their Brethren have
the credit of an equal share, let alone more than an equal share as they affirm
(which indeed is to us a mystery) in managing these trusts. And as to the
occasion putting them on these courses, we owe them thanks indeed that they
desired us to purge by our selves, when they, by their irregularities, and
dividing from us, have made it scarce practicable, yea, and altogether of none
effect, did others follow their principles and example. But we desire to know
where we neglected to try any upon any scandal; wherever we did forbear to
censure condignly when any thing was found, and wherein this Church has been
polluted by admitting so many, or so vicious men, as should put them upon these
extraordinary remedies? Would they (as is said before) have as purge whether we
find guilt or not, or else they will fall upon some odd courses? Sure, where
themselves have power and made trial of men of our judgment, they have not
found so much as to need all this noise. And we think it were safest for them
to content themselves that they deliver their own souls, in their respective
stations, in these matters, without stretching themselves so far without their
line. In the last place, They shut up this Apology, with a remark that it is
one of Satan's policies, when he cannot find faults in the outward carriage of
men in a good work, to charge them with inward abominations and mischievous
designs, which cannot so easily be refuted as justly denied, page 73. Answ. But
as to our case in hand, there is no need of secret or inward search to find
these things which are engraven upon the skirts of their actings: And if the
things themselves do not make-out our charge to all unbyassed discerning men,
we shall pass from our compearance.

Having considered what they say for their own Vindication from alleged
aspersions, we proceed, in the second place, to take a view of their thoughts
concerning the Overtures for Union held-out in the Declaration, passing their
challenge against the Narrative premitted to it, as being spoken to in the
entry. Here, we may be the more brief, partly, because somewhat has been
spoken to this purpose in the Representation, where an account is given of the
Conference for Union, and the breaking it off. Partly, because the things
quarrelled and spoken-to here, have (many of them) occured often before. Yet we
shall give an account of the whole matter in these particulars.

1. This is in general a brief and sad account of it, that our terms of Union
are rejected, and no other offers made by them, but what we may gather from
their exceptions made against what we offered. They profess indeed, page 118.
that our divisions are among the deepest wounds and greatest afflictions to
their souls, and that they would redeem a sinlesse Union at any rate, that
might not pollute their consciences, and widen the breach with God; And yet,
why do they leave it to us to make better offers, page 9? And why would they
not here publish to the world what they would be at in order to Peace which
they so much desire, that either we might embrace it, or be inexcusable before
the world, if we rejected it, or urged any thing upon them which might entrench
upon their consciences, and widen the breach with God? The truth is, whatever
charity we have of the Protesting Brethren (of whom they speak, page 118.) that
many of them are grieved with these divisions, and would be at an Union, were
they let alone: Yet we have not the charity that these Witnesses are any of
that number, but the very fomenters of the flame.

2. Because it is declared that we will not accord to their Proposals of
extrajudicial Committees (of which we have spoken before) nor recede from the
established Government, nor go out of the common road of the Judicatories (to
the corruption whereof we have also spoken, and will speak to Subordination
thereunto afterward) Therefore they count Union very hopeless, page 73, 74.
Which is in effect, as their arguing afterward clears, to call it desperate.
So that it is now come to this, No Peace, not only except the Resolutions and
Assemblies be laid aside, but except also the other Judicatories be laid aside,
and men be allowed to submit to no more of their Sentences than they think
just: A good and safe bargain for the Church of Scotland indeed! But we are yet
resolved not to quit the Judicatories God has given us, specially, since we
have no hope of better to be raised out of the rubbish of these.

3. Because the Declaration made mention only of these Overtures for Union
which were most material, upon the according whereof, other things in the
Conference might easily be settled; They are pleased to question, page 74, 75,
76. whether we adhere yet to all the condescensions and offers made by us in
the Conference: And yet the very words of the Declaration, cited by themselves,
do expressly say so much. But where men have no good liking of things, it is
easy to fish faults at them.

4. Because our judgment is asserted concerning the Acts of Assemblies relating
to our present differences; Therefore they allege we obstruct Union, and (
page 76, 77.) a great noise is made of our receding, upon politic grounds,
from things wherein we pretend to conscience, justice and necessity, only
because the times are changed: And withal they tell us over again the
injustice of these Acts, about things we account so extrinsick, and which they
account contrary to the Covenant. Answ. And yet all this needed not as to the
matter of Union; but that they would needs let a fling at us: for however we
think them just, yet it was never required of them to think them just in order
to an Union; yea, it was promised they should never be troubled with them: But
when they have spoken here with as much vehemence against them, if not more
than we have done for them: We are both free, when all is done, to agree not to
impose upon one another judgment about them, and to lay them aside. We shall
add no more to what we have said of the justice of these things about which
the Acts are; for till they prove them to be open breaches of Covenant and
Engagement, they remain to us Truths of God: Nor shall we make any further
enquiry who they are that change with times, and do bring the Ministry in
contempt, for that is too well known, and is no pleasing subject whoever have
hand in it. But for the thing it self, we see no such change in our selves as
they would give out. We judge the thing it self contained in these Acts, being
considered simply, to be just and true at all times; That persons obstructing
the defense of their Country going to ruin, and overturning a supreme
Church-judicatory, do deserve Censure; and that it is necessary it be inflicted
when it may reach the end, to prevent, or render ineffectuall their
oppositions: And yet not only prudentiall grounds, but even conscience tells
us that it is neither expedient nor necessary to make such Acts, where the
matter about which men controvert is not practicable, nor to keep them in
force, when by laying them aside we may obtain the Union of a broken Church. In
a word, we hold it no paradox in Divinity, that practical conclusions, relating
to the public State of a Nation, do alter much with times, altering the face
of affairs; And that in some times, things may justly, and ought necessarily to
be done, which at another time, conscience teaches men ought not to be done.
And as for the future, we have offered sufficiently to secure them (so far as
we can) against the hazard of these Acts, and that upon the same grounds of
conscience, which teach us now to lay aside Acts about a Question that is
extinct; though we cannot be surety that the Church in the like case of a
foreign Invasion, and being interrogate by the Civil Power, shall never
determine concerning these Resolutions as they have done, and concerning any,
who shall make the like opposition they have done. Yea, we are persuaded, would
themselves but essay their hand with their wonted principles and practices now,
it would soon be seen how it would be rellished. We shall only add further,
that as to what they insinuate of change of times, it would be more like kindly
children for them to be the more peaceable and respective of their Mother, that
they think the times allow them a liberty to do otherwise. It is no great
magnanimity to take advantage of her low condition.

5. As to what is said, by way of Answer to their outcries, [that though some
very few Presbyteries have required of Intrants of whatsoever judgment, that
they promise not to trouble the peace of the Church with these debates; Yet
none of these Acts have been, de facto, a bar to hold out godly men lawfully
and orderly called and tried: Though they be industrious to thrust in men of
their own judgment, and crush Godly and able men who do not agree with them:]
They tell us, 1. Of much and many wrongs done by these Acts, page 78. Which we
entreat they may verify and instruct (as they say they can) before we can
answer. For whereas they appeal to our knowledge, We do declare we know Elders
of their judgment kept in, and brought-in in Judicatories where we are the
plurality, though in some places they have cast out of their Elderships all who
differed from them in judgment, and have never since made another Election,
though usually before they did yearly change. We know also Expectants of their
judgment, not only admitted among us to trial in order to a liberty to
preach, but (being lawfully called and tried) admitted to the Ministry where we
have power, We fear many young men who went to other Presbyteries to pass
their trialls, went not upon the account of their judgment, but that they
might shun the more accurat trials used in Universities and Presbyteries where
more learned men are. 2. They are pleased indeed to jest, by saying that we
love to jest in our speaking of what some Presbyteries required of men of
whatsoever judgment, enquiring if they laid bonds on men of their own
judgment, that they should not debate for the Protestation? and who gave them
power to lay bonds on men of their own judgment, seeing the Assemblies Act
speaks only of men of the other judgment? To which we shall only answer with
silence, (seeing the matter is plain enough to themselves when they are pleased
to come to it at last, and Presbyteries might do all that, had there been no
Act of Assemblies in these matters) confessing that indeed this is no matter of
sport, and if we be very merry, we have not so much cause as some of our
neighbors, if we reckon by outward advantages. 3. They break high upon us,
That some Presbyteries should impose silence upon men of their own judgment,
and yet we give them so ill example in our Representation and Declaration, page
79. And what does all this amount to, but that we would be peaceable, but they
would not let us, but either we must let them run all down, or say somewhat for
our own defense? And yet the scope of all that is said in these Papers, is, to
draw them, and with them our selves, to lay by the debate. 4. As to what they
deny of their activity for strengthening their Party, and do insinuate of a
reflection upon the Expectants of our judgment; The particulars being so
notoure through the Church, both what they have done, and what many of these
Expectants of our judgment are, we shall rest confident that such assertions
as these will gain them but little credit, where the truth of things is known.

6. They take it ill that any thing is said in behalf of the Assemblies
proceeding to censure any of their number (which yet they cannot condemn till
they make good their charge against these Resolutions and Assemblies) and that
we should lay any weight upon their Non-submission: Seeing we are not to thank
that they did not submit; they having suffered so many things at our hands, and
with our connivance: But it proceeded only from the conscience of their own
innocence, and the iniquity and nullity of these Sentences, page 80, 81. Answ.
But as we are sure many others do not judge of these Sentences as they do, nor
it may be will they so look upon them themselves, when they are brought to
think seriously of making an account for their carriage, both before and since
these Censures: So it is true, notwithstanding all they say, that they have not
submitted. And it is no great wonder if their not submitting, and not
hearkening to terms of Peace, have bred themselves and us both some trouble;
or that many in the Land do look upon them as turbulent and implacable men: Yet
all they can truly complain of, amounts to no more but this, That a Synod did
(not to refuse to admit, but) take time to deliberate if they should admit one
of them for a Correspondent, seeing it would import their condemning of a
Sentence inflicted by a lawful Judicatory, though his spirit could neither
submit to such delay, nor suffer him to go away without such a carriage toward
a Judicatory of Christ, as we believe himself may find cause to be ashamed of;
That Judicatories, of which some of them formerly were members, could not own
them as Ministers, who had been deposed by a lawful General Assembly, but did
intimate their Sentence, when they found they would not hearken to terms of
Union; And that some of their Congregations, who could not own them for their
Ministers, when they could not be rid of them, did seek to themselves a lawful
Pastor to whom they might submit. And for what has been between some of their
Congregations and them, we believe their pursuing of their people criminally
(though they were assoiled in Law, and it was found they had pursued them
unjustly) will speak who exposes others to suffer most. However, all these
inconveniences might easily be helped by an Union, if they had not the humor
to force themselves upon the consciences of Ministers and People, whether they
will or not.

7. Albeit (whatever might be said of these Sentences) we were content they
should be taken-off in such a way as might not bind upon them the
acknowledgement of the two late Assemblies, or of the lawfulness and justice of
these Censures: Yet that does not please them, seeing the Censures are not to be
declared void and null; Which (as themselves interpret the meaning, page 81,
and 82.) imports that they should be declared not only unjust Sentences upon
the matter, but no real Sentences, as proceeding from those who had no
Authority. And if this be an equal mean of Union, without imposing upon our
judgments to condemn that Authority, let indifferent men judge.

8. Albeit it was offered to them, as to the Acts concerning the Public
Resolutions, that they shall be rendered of none effect as to Censure, and that
they shall never be alleged against them, as the definitive judgment of this
Kirk to any effect: And albeit it was offered as to the constitution of the two
late Assemblies, That (though we, for a salvo of our judgment asserted, that
no unwarrantable prelimitations were put upon the election of Commissioners to
these Assemblies) no unwarrantable prelimitations should be put upon future
Elections, but that these matters should be carried-on as in former Assemblies
proceeding our differences: Yet this does not satisfy them, page 82, 83, 84,
85. They count it insufficient that there be a cessation from executing Acts
relating to Censure till they be made void and null by the next General
Assembly. Answ. And yet we know no Judicatories (far less private Ministers) who
have power to repeal their Acts but themselves. They count it a mock-remedy
that the Question concerning the Public Resolutions be remitted to the
Determination of a General Assembly. Answ. And yet they are the only competent
Judges in that matter. But they allege it is a mock-remedy, because by the
Acts they are secluded from being members. Answ. And yet it is expressly
provided in the Overtures for Union at our Conference, That none of the
particulars of our late differences shall be alleged, on either part, against
the sitting of persons as Commissioners in ensuing General Assemblies. They
allege further, that it is a mock-remedy, because we will be the plurality in
an Assembly. Answ. And we desire a remedy for this, unless they will have us
renounce our judgment, or cast the constitution of the Church as corrupt, and
gather a new one out of the rubbish; And yet it is offered and assured in the
Conference, that upon an Union, we shall in our judicial actings abstract from
these bygone differences. They think it strange we should judge it a quitting
of our judgment to condescend that the Public Resolutions should not be
looked-on as the public definitive judgment of this Kirk: And that seeing we
agree to repeal Acts concerning Censures, without quitting our own judgment, we
may as well repeal these Acts that declare these Resolutions to be the
definitive judgment of the Kirk, without altering our judgment concerning the
things themselves. Answ. But as we know no such Acts declaratory, that the
Resolutions are the definitive judgment of this Kirk, save only the Act of
Assembly approving them as sound and orthodox* So there is no such need of
piercing judgments to take up a difference betwixt what we concede, and what we
cannot yield: For, an ordinary capacity will discern that particular
Conclusions concerning Censures may well be repealed, and declared of none
effect as to execution, without encroaching upon men's judgments concerning the
lawfulness thereof, or of the Authority establishing the same: And yet a
dogmatick Conclusion determined in an Assembly, cannot be declared not to be
the definitive judgment of a Church in her representative Judicatory, unless
men will either lie against their knowledge, and say it was not determined
there, or against their light, and say it was not a lawful Authority or
Representative that did determine it. There is but too much Sophistry in
asserting we may take off the Synodicall eye, without quitting or altering our
judgments concerning the things themselves: For who Questions but men may be
of such an opinion, had the matter never been determined, or should the
contrary be determined? but they know this was never urged as the reason or our
refusal of that desire, but only that we could not condemn the Authority that
determined in these matters. And however they are pleased to twit us again with
our holding these things to be extrinsecall to our Doctrine, etc. Yet we hope,
were they of never so small moment, they will not have us lie or condemn our
own judgments in them. And as to their apprehensions concerning our designs,
(which we know not why they repeat so often) As we do not readily expect that
this or any Reformed Church will be put to the resolution of any such case: So
we nothing doubt, that wherever there is occasion, their judgment will be
condemned by all but themselves, and we are sure themselves will not allow of
it in all cases.

9. They make a great noise of the insufficiency of our Overtures concerning
purging, page 86, 87, 88. (though we have better cause to complain that this
being no cause of the Rent, should therefore not keep up the quarrel)
Asserting, 1. That for all our good words, yet we have purged few these seven
years bygone. Answ. But, (not to insist on what is said before, how few of
their own judgment they have either censured, or so much as put to a trial,
notwithstanding clamours and flagrant scandals upon diverse of them, and how
much their division and irregularities obstruct that work in our hands) we
thought the Question had been, not how few, or how many we had removed, but how
diligent or negligent we had been? since we must not put out men whether we
find cause or not. We say it as before the Lord, that (for any thing we know)
if there has been any excess in this matter, it has rather been in laying
aside men upon small causes, than in sparing Delinquents. 2. They assert, that
in one Synod more have been brought-in who were formerly censured, than have
been put out by us all, beside these who (having been formerly twice deposed)
are connived at to Preach and Administer the Ordinances. Answ. It seems they
have been unwilling their Pamphlet should want bulk, and therefore when they
have told us this already (where we have considered it) they must now tell us
it over again; yea, we look for it the third time in a new dress, where we
shall take a new look of it. In the mean time, if these proceedings of that one
Synod (which is the sum of all they can say, though they will not be so
ingenuous, but leave the matter so, as if possibly the like were done in every
Synod) have been according to Order, and they are ready to give an account to
their Judge competent; what further can be said of them, but that they have
done what was the constant practice of this Chutch since the late Reformation?
And as to these they say are connived at, we hope it cannot be charged on us as
guilt, that deposed men having the countenance of the Civil power, do intrude
upon Congregations, against our heart. 3. They assert we are become so backward
and slow in this business, that in the Processes of some, we exercise our wits
to raise notionall debates to hinder their purging out. Ans. As to this charge,
we are content to take their own course of committing the matter to God, who
knows who they are that are faulty in this matter of employing their wits for
such ends, and who do bend their wits to cast iniquity upon some men, while
they are no less industrious to obstruct the trial of others. As we dare say,
that we are not conscious to our selves of any such sinistrous courses taken by
us, to obstruct the trial of persons brought upon the Stage; So we can truly
affirm, and they cannot deny it, that they have very much exercised their wits
in such notionall debates, when some of their judgment were brought to trial.
We are content our whole procedour, in these particulars they reflect upon,
were laid open to the world, that they might see what our carriage was in
admitting of Witnesses, and judging of their depositions. And we dare yet again
confidently assert, that it is a malicious calumny, that any of these are kept
in against whom any gross scandals (under which they say some lie) are proven,
or that we have neglected to try scandals under which they lie, were it even to
continue them under Process for several years, and to examine so many scores
of Witnesses. And for the issue of any Processes we know of, in suspending of
some, and removing of others from their present station, we know nothing done,
but what these of their judgment joining with us did approve of.

10. Whereas, (from the experience we had of their endless contentions in
taking waves to prosecute some Ministers, which when the case came to befall
some of their judgment, they said it was out of the way of judicial Processes)
it was offered that they should agree upon the strictest rules of purging could
be desired in justice, provided they be binding to all, and to which all will
submit; This they reject, page 88, 89, 90. 1. Because we do not adhere to, nor
practice rules already agreed upon; and (say they) why then should new rules be
agreed upon? This (which is as easily denied as asserted) they offer to
make-out; partly in that Synodical Visitations formerly agreed upon, are now
out of use, save in very few Synods; partly, that now we dissent from the
Kirk-judicatories their trying of Ministers by way of Inquisition, and without
a Libell, yea, and an Accuser too; and partly, that many of us do now so
extenuate the faults of drunkenness, swearing, etc. as not to censure men for
them with Suspension and Deposition, as formerly, unless the habits, or many
continued reiterated Acts of these things can be proven. Answ. All these
quarrellings might easily be ended by reviving and renewing whatsoever of these
has been formerly agreed on; and put it to trial if either Judicatories, or
many of our judgment, (whatever be the thoughts of some particular person,
which yet they have not made-out) will not be content to engage to observe them
on the terms offered. For present, we answer, (1.) That Visitations have been
kept, not only by Presbyteries, as is the usual practice, but by some of our
Synods, they deny not; and we are ready to renew and continue them, as either
matters come to Synods by Reference or Appeals, or Presbyteries are found
negligent, which yet must not be holden as proven, because these Witnesses say
so. (2.) Albeit we think it a very hard case, for Ministers or others, to have
Libels and Informations given in against them under-boord, possibly by them who
sit as their Judges, and that any should give-in a Libell openly against them,
and yet incur no Censure if he succumb in his Probation; or that any, and
particularly a Minister, should be suddenly put upon the Stage as a Delinquent,
where there is no probability of making-out any thing, and he is sure to be a
loser thereby: Yet they know, that the way of trial (which they are pleased to
call Inquisition) practiced in this Church, is still in force and practice, and
that Presbyteries (beside their private trials one of another, before the
meeting of the Synod, twice every year) do usually once a year visit
Congregations, where the Eldership are put in mind of their Oath to declare if
they know any thing against their Minister; and the Congregation are likewise
called to for the same effect, where, if any thing be informed, it is put to
trial and probation: And in case there be any fama clamosa of a scandal,
extraordinary Visitations are kept by Presbyteries or Synods, and enquiry made
into that matter. And what other Inquisition they would have, we know not,
except it be the Spanish Inquisition, or super inquirendis. (3.) As to the
matter of drunkenness and swearing, and what else they are pleased to
comprehend under that, etc. we trust never to be left to our selves to approve
or connive at such ills, especially in Ministers. We hope through the mercy of
God, we have a witness in heaven of our detestation of, and sincerity of zeal
against such abominations. And we wish the Lord may lay it indeed to the
Conscience, but not to the charge of these Witnesses, that they suggest such
foul aspersions to defame us. Nor shall we dip into an enquiry what has been
the pract^ce of this Church, in censuring these faults in all the kinds and
degrees thereof, and considered in all their circumstances, which will not be
found, we are sure, to amount to what they say: nor yet shall we need to debate
upon the particular opinions of any, concerning the Censure of one rash oath,
(or rather a minced oath, as it is commonly termed, which is the thing they
make so much noise of) or some degree of excess in a man, not known to be
given to such evils, and that Admonition is a Church-censure to be sisted at in
some faults and in some cases: Only for the Judicatories part, we can instruct
where some of these faults have been censured, by us, with Suspension, where
there were not many continued reiterated Acts proven. 2. They except against
this Overture, upon this account, that these rules must be applied by us who
are the plurality, from whom they expect no purging. To this we have already
spoken, as also to that of our being the plurality: Only this puts us in mind,
that a new Question is often hinted to us, whether the Church of Scotland be
furnished with Judicatories worthy to be entrusted with the managing of Christ's
affairs? Wherein we wish they would give (...) some more convincing light that
we may all quit it, and put them in who are the honest men, if we take their
own testimony.

11. They profess they cannot accord to these Overtures, because it is not
provided that the plurality shall be laid aside in Congregations, in the matter
of calling of Ministers, page 90. Which is in effect to lay by the body of the
People as incapable of Church Priviledges (when yet they are admitted to
Church-ordinances) and put them in the hands of some few: And is not this a
fine way to draw in to Congregations of an Independent Constitution? Though we
know Independents themselves will not deny the liberty of giving a Call to them
who are their Church Members, and partake of the Ordinances with them: For our
part, we offered, and do offer to observe the Acts of this Church in that
matter, and particularly, the Act of the Assembly, 1649. and are content to
have a special respect to the most Judicious and Godly in that matter, though
not to prejudge others of their privilege.

12. They make it another obstruction to Union, that there is no remedy
provided for putting out of those Ministers, Expectants and Schoolmasters,
who, being deposed, have intruded themselves, or are reponed again since our
Differences, page 90, 91. Answ. And yet, were all they say of them true (which
has been spoken to before) they are not so many, as to cause men keep up a
Rent because of them: And withal, it was offered in the Conference for Union,
that since a General Assembly did not meet, an account should be given of
these matters by those who had acted therein, to Correspondents of neighboring
Synods or Presbyteries respective: who, if they find any thing done amiss by
these Synods and Presbyteries, they shall labor with them to rectify the
same. As also that we shall do our endeavors that Intruders be censured and
removed.

13. They complain also, that nothing is offered about the way of calling a
General Assembly, the electing of Commissioners thereto, and handling of
matters therein, page 91. Answ. And are not here Prelimitations enough sought to
be upon a future General Assembly? seeing they are not content that we promised
to follow the ordinary Rules in these matters, observed before our Differences,
and are content it be so called by a meeting of Correspondents, as may not
involve them in the approbation of the two last Assemblies. The truth is, these
things do justly stumble us, that they have raised such a confusion about
alleged Prelimitations in the election of Members of the two late Assemblies
(which in effect were not) and yet will not hear of another Assembly (if God
grant the opportunity) without both Prelimitations and Preingagements, as to
the way of Elections and handling of matters in it.

14. They are pleased to allege further, ( page 91.) That it is an impediment
to Union, that no mutual evidence and assurance is given in matters concerning
our Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government, and the enemies of Truth and
Godliness, and the work of Reformation, for adhering to these Articles of our
Covenants, our Engagement, and Acts of uncontroverted Assemblies relating
thereunto, in the literal and genuine sense and meaning thereof, as they
desired in the Conference. Answ. But if by what they foist-in here (beside what
was propounded in that Conference, as they set it down, page 40.) they mean we
should engage to condemn the Public Resolutions, as Contrary to our Covenants,
Engagements, or Acts of Assemblies, we think they will not soon obtain that.
But as to the matter of our adherence to the Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government of this Kirk, to which we are tied by Covenants and Engagements, and
was the thing required in the Conference; Such satisfaction has been offered
therein, in the Conference, according to their explication of their own desire,
as we wonder with what confidence they call it (as they do, page 40.) a shy
answer; Or, how they can expect that the world, who knows them and us, will
believe that they are the men adhering to these things and the principles of
this Kirk concerning them, while we are giving cause of jealousy that we do
not, or will not stand firm.

15. They would make the world believe we impose upon their judgments in the
matter of their Protestations, page 91, 92, 93. When yet we neither bid them
renounce them, nor acknowledge the lawfulness of the Assemblies against which
they were. Only we desired they should not in any Judicatory of this Kirk make
use thereof to call in question and annul the Constitution and Authority of
these Assemblies. Withal declaring, that this did not import their passing
from them as standing Testimonies of their judgment, nor hinder them to make
use thereof as a legal defense, if the Constitution and Acts of these
Assemblies were urged against them: Yea, nor to make use of them in so far as
they related to the Public Resolutions, if they think fit to offer their
Reasons against them in an Assembly, though we judge they would succumb in that
cause. Is not this far from imposing on their judgments in this matter? To make
this Assertion out (beside their constant clamor against Subordination, which
is to be considered in due time) they offer, 1. That this were a passing from
these Protestations as a remedy against the corrupt constitution of these two
Assemblies. Answ And do they not by our concession stand as a testimony of
their judgment against them? And what other remedy would they have, unless to
draw us to condemn these Assemblies? 2. That it should make way for the future
Constitution and Authority of these two Assemblies. Ans. If they mean the
Constitution of future Assemblies as these were, to this (whatever our own
judgments be) there is a sufficient remedy provided in our Offers concerning
the future Constitution of Assemblies above mentioned: If they mean the future
approbation of the Constitution and Authority of these Assemblies in a
subsequent Assembly, It is also provided that they are free to make use of
their Protestations as a legal defense, if any such thing be urged against
them. 3. That it is unequal to submit these things to a General Assembly
where we will be the plurality, and are many ways engaged for the Resolutions
which are contrary to the Covenant, and Acts and Declarations of uncontroverted
Assemblies? Answ. That these Resolutions are contrary to the Covenant, etc. is
oftener said than proven; and though they say it has been already declared,
yet we have not seen it proven, nor (we believe) any body else. But this is
plain language, that they will refer nothing to a Church-judicatory, either
where we are the plurality, or are engaged for the Resolutions, and is not this
an imposing on our judgments ere there be an Union? And is it not fine language
for a party, because their Mother Church is not of their judgment, in what she
believes and is able to prove to be an error, therefore they will submit
nothing to her Determination? When Prelates excepted this against the General
Assembly, 1638. they had their Answer, and we believe they would not bear this
of us, were they the plurality; Nor did it relish from the Remonstrants at the
Synod of Dort. Nay, upon this account, it is impossible for any Church ever to
compose a difference, unless they will cede to every party that pleases to
contradict them. And yet we must add, that all this is an unjust clamor, as
to the matter of Union, seeing (as has been often told) all rational
satisfaction and security is offered that they shall not be troubled with those
bygone Questions.

16. They shut-up their thoughts in these things, with a sad reflection, page
93, 94. That it smells rankly of a carnal politic spirit, to half and
divide the things of God for making peace among men; though we do not come up
to our own professions in that matter, of offering equal conditions. Answ. This
we do very easily understand, by what they give out of our condescensions among
their followers, That we are men who do not adhere to these things out of
conscience, otherwise we would not concede so much. We leave so rigid a frame
of spirit before Him who knows what we are put to suffer, in desiring to heal
the breaches of a sinking Church. And as none but men of Donatus's temper will
judge it an halfing of the things of God, to lay aside debates concerning
things removed out of our way, and to forbear the execution of some Acts of
Discipline, if thereby we may bind-up the breaches of a bleeding Church: So,
this gives us a compendious account of all this debate about Union, viz. That
they will neither halve nor abate an ace of these things they hold, for peaces
sake. And indeed upon a serious review of all their Overtures, however to
allure us to quit the way of administering the affairs of Christ by His own
Courts, they will allow us an equal number in their extrajudicial Committees,
whereas now we are granted to be the plurality, and however they have of late
not acted in the capacity of a Commission, 1650. upon the reasons formerly
mentioned; though we have no assurance how soon they may usurp it again, if
they find it may serve their turn: Yet it will be found, they never recede a
jot, not only from their judgments, but even from any of their actings in
reference to the Resolutions and their Protestations. And so we leave the case
of this poor Church in His hands, who knows how to prove a Physician to her.

Having now gone through these toilsome passages, which cannot but be
unpleasant to judicious Readers, as it has been indeed to us, to dwell so much
on stories and bitter reflections. We proceed, in the last place, to take a
view of their judgment in a very material Question, concerning Subordination
to Judicatories, and Submission to the Sentences thereof; wherewith, from the
very title to the close, they stuff this Pamphlet, and do more largely insist
on it, both in their vindicating themselves from the charge of their small
respect to the Government, page 40, to 61. and do dispute it as a reason why
they will not accept the Overtures of Union, seeing Subordination is required in
them, page 94. to the end. In this debate they do not only argue against the
thing it self, but do express their prejudices against us, because of our
urging Subordination in the Conference for Union with them. They tell us, page
10. that there could not have been a more unhappy assertion concerning the
Government of the Kirk fallen upon and published in these times, and that both
in order to the peace we pretended (as they are pleased in their charity to
speak of us) and because of the bad use prelaticall men and Independents may
make of it. And, page 41. They put us in mind of what return they gave to that
Overture in the Conference, viz. that they conceived it inexpedient to start
and debate such Questions at that time, etc. But as we concur with them in
asserting the inexpediency (to say no more) of bringing that into debate, which
formerly had been held as a foundation in the Government of this Church; And we
shall (God willing) consider in its own place, whether their be any (far less
a superlative) unhappiness in our assertion upon this Question: So our
propounding of that matter of Subordination to them (not as a ball of
contention, but) as an overture and mean of solid Union, was most rational and
seasonable. For, several of their judgment having, by their irregular
practices, counteractings, and not submitting to the Sentences of their
respective Judicatories, overturned that basis of Government, and opened a door
to licentiousness and disorder, We rationally conceived, that no agreement in
other matters of our differences could make a solid and lasting Union, so long
as that backdoor were left open to them, at which they might run-out again at
their pleasure, and until both we and they (as was offered in the Conference)
should give assurance in that matter. And now others may find, as well as we,
that their new doctrine here published, does more than vindicate us in this
particular, and pleads for the necessity of our propounding that Overture to
them. We have often read the Writings of Presbyterians, pleading for
Subordination and Submission of Congregations and their Elderships to superior
Judicatories, against the Independents; But this is the first, (except what
has dropped from Mr. Rutherfurds pen in his late Preface) and we hope shall be
the last, that is found to be written by professed Presbyterians, plead^ng
against Subordination to Judicatories of Christ's own Institution, in any Church
where this Government is set up. We do not read of any (Remonstrants at Dort or
others) who have ever refused or declined it in the Reformed Churches abroad,
but their name is unsavory; nor know we of any, save one, since the Prelates
t^me in this Church, who ever essayed it, till our late Differences, wherein
some of our Brethren have brought it in fashion, and now have published their
doctrine of it to the world in print. Had this principle been but started some
years before, when several Ministers were deposed for simple silence in the
matter of the Engagement, and for other the like causes, what would these
Disputers have judged of it? Certainly they would have been with the first to
excommunicate such stubborn children; And yet these men might as soon have said
the Sentences were then unjust, as they take upon them to say it now. This is
the true rise of all this dispute, that these men being but too apprehensive of
an imagined hazard, if they should submit, have but little considered the evils
of Non-submission, That their refusing to do it, reproacheth our Church in the
view of all her adversaries, and their doctrine about it, opens the door to a
few Heretics to continue themselves in a capacity to infect a whole Church,
let the Judicatories do what they will, if so be these Heretics count their
Sentences to be unjust. Beza (Epist. 1.) takes notice of it as a special proof
of Gods kindness to the Church of France and Geneva, that no opposition of
Adversaries had shaken loose their Church Discipline, no not in times of
confusion and war. But, were he now alive, and among us, he would find that
loose times had ministered opportunity, even to pretended friends, to make great
breaches in that hedge; which, being once broken-down, does expose all the
precious Interests of Christ to manifest hazard, as there, and frequently
elsewhere he inculc^ts. Were King James now alive, and found this principle and
practice in fashion, he would soon revoke his former testimony, That
Presbyterial Government was the most invincible Bulwark against error, for now
a breach is made in this Bulwark. Our first Reformers, who, in the Second Book
of Discipline, chapter 7. page 81. do reckon Schism and Rebellion against the Kirk
among these evils which do deserve Deposition (which also is the judgment of
the Churches of the Low Countries, Harm. Synod. Belg. Sive Canones Regim.
Eccles. etc. per S. R. Cap. 14. Art. 14. and of all Reformed Churches we know)
might now wonder, were they alive, to find Rebellion against the Churches
Sentences owned by these men who pretend to adhere so closely to their
principles. Worthy Mr. Henderson of precious memory, might likewise revoke his
Testimony given to the Government of the Church of Scotland upon this very
account of Subordination, in that Treatise printed Anno 1641. Of the Government
and Order of the Church of Scotland, page 60. 61. Yea, this principle and
practice is inconsistent with any Government Civil or Ecclesiastical under
Heaven. For the very light of nature holds forth the inconsistencie of
Government with the want of Subjection: For where Subjection is not, there must
either be Anarchy and Confusion, and every man become his own supreme Judge, or
else the Non-submitters must turn-out their Governors to set up themselves:
And so, by parity of reason, where inferior Judicatories are not in subjection
to the superior.

But before we enter upon their dispute in this matter, we will first premit
some general Considerations of the business, which may somewhat prepare our
way to a more particular handling of the Question; And,

I. It is to be considered, that the Overture given in by us to them in our
Conference [viz. That all the Members of this Kirk, Ministers and People shall
submit themselves to their Presbyteries and Synods respective: And if any be
grieved with the Determination of a Presbytery, they may appeal to the Synods:
And if any be grieved with the Determination of a Synod, they may appeal to a
General Assembly: But that in the mean time, the Sentences of Presbyteries and
Synods are to be acquiesced unto, until the Determination of the respective
superior Judicatories thereupon] does not only hold out the constant practice
of this Church, but is the very thing wherein the Learned before us do hold the
being of Presbyterial Government to consist; and which they press as the duty
of all who live under that Government. This might be confirmed by many
instances of particular Divines writing on this subject. Such as Beza in diverse
of his Epistles, which come afterward to be spoken unto. Also Zepperus, De
Polit. Eccles. Lib. 3. cap. 6. where he asserteth, That no man, though he think
he have just causes, ought to alter any thing of established Order, before the
Determination of a Synod. Likewise Mr. Edwards of late, who in his Antapologia,
page 153, 154. puts this as the main difference betwixt Subordination in the
Classical Government, and that which Independents profess to be due unto Synods
by particular Congregations, That in the first there is such Subordination and
dependence, such stated and fixed meetings, that if men should escape one, they
do not escape all. But in the other, they only submit to hearing and counsel
upon it, but not to determinations, unless it like them: In the one, they are
bound and must do, in the other they may do or not do. The whole passage is
worth the Readers perusal in the Author himself: But we shall pass these and
many others, and at this time shall content our selves with two Testimonies,
which may be in stead of many. One is, that of the Reformed Church of France,
who in their Ecclesiastic Discipline, printed in French, do not only urge the
keeping up of Ecclesiastic Assemblies, as the bonds and props of their union
and concord against Schisms, Heresies, and all other inconvenients, Chap 6.
Art. 5. But, Chap. 5. Art. 28. where (as may be seen at length in the Article
it self) speaking of referring debates, betwixt any of the People and inferior
Judicatories, to a superior Assembly, they do expressly provide, That the
inferior Judicatory, who refer that matter, do first cause the Contradicters
to make promises, express and upon record, that they shall not in any manner
of way whatsoever, sow any thing of their opinions, but wait for the meeting of
the superior Judicatories, under pain of being censured as Schismatics. And
if they refuse to make these promises, they shall be censured as Rebels,
according to the Discipline. And, Art. 29. they determine, That a Pastor or
Elder, breaking the Unity of the Church, and refusing to submit to that which
the Colloque has determined, shall be suspen^ed from his Charge, to be further
proceeded with at the Provincial or National Synod. As this testimony is most
clear for the Submission pleaded-for; So, the next is no less evident, which
is that of the learned Cartwright and other Presbyterians in Queen Elizabeth's
days, who in their subscribed Book of Discipline (as not only it is cited by
Bancroft in his Survey of the pretended Holy Discipline, chap. 26. page 305.
but printed it self, Anno, 1644. according to the Copy found in Mr.
Cartwrights own Study, in the Head of the Assemblies of the Church, Sect. last)
having granted liberty (unless it be a plain act, and manifest to all) to
parties who think themselves injured by a lesser meeting, or Judicatory, to
appeal to a greater, till they come to a general Council, so that they ascend
orderly from the lesser to the next greater: They expressly add, But it is to be
understood, that the Sentence of the Assemblies is to be holden firm, until it
be otherwise judged by an Assembly of greater Authority Here is our very
Overture in substance, and almost in terminis, which vindicateth us from any
Novelty, or receding from the received principles of Presbyteriall Government
in this matter. It will be to little purpose for them to bring in their
Praecognitum, or Praesuppositum here, of which they make use to elude all the
Acts of our Assemblies in this matter, page 52, 53. And to say these Divines
meant of just Sentences, which (say they) is a thing presupposed of all these
who require obedience to Laws, that they mean of just Laws: For if they had
meant only of just Sentences, they had ordained them simply to hold them firm,
without giving liberty of appealing from them; Yea, the very liberty of appeals
(for they do not allow liberty of an appeal, if it be a plain Act, and manifest
to all that the Sentence is just) and the supposition of the matters being
otherwise judged by an higher Assembly, does presuppose a possibility of the
injustice of the Sentences, and the Appellants deed of appeal proves that he
actually judges it to be so, and yet they appoint the Sentence to be holden
firm till it be discussed and judged.

II. As our Overture is agreeable to the ancient principles of Presbyterian
Government, held forth by the Learned abroad: So we declared also that in this
we required no other Submission, than what has not only been the constant
practice of this Church, till our differences, but established also by Acts of
Assemblies: So that we required no new thing, but what this Church had been in
possession of by practice and Law. As for the practice, themselves deny it not,
(only we must except one, of whom we will speak afterward) And as for the Acts
of General Assemblies, The first time they had occasion to give a dogmatick
determination in this point, was in the Assembly, 1647. where, the seventh head
of Doctrine they approve in the CXI. Propositions tendered to their
consideration, is, That the lesser and inferior Ecclesiastic Assemblies ought
to be subordinate and subject unto the greater and superior Assemblies. Which
how far it ought to have place in the matter of Submission to Sentences, in the
judgment of this Kirk, is manifest (notwithstanding their glosses on this Act)
from the judgment of the next Assembly, Anno 1648. Arg. 5. Sess. 30. Where it
is expressly ordered, That whosoever, after the Sentence of Deposition
pronounced against them, do either exercise any part of the Ministerial Calling
in the places they formerly served in, or elsewhere, or do possess, meddle, or
intromet with the Stipend -- they shall be proceeded against with
Excommunication. And if any suspended Minister, during his Suspension, either
exercise any part of the Ministerial Calling, or intromet with the Stipend,
that he be deposed: and after Deposition, continuing in either of these faults,
that he be processed with Excommunication. These are so clear testimonies of
the judgment of this Kirk, that we think it strange any should deny it. But
these Witnesses think to end all these testimonies, by saying, that the
Submission formerly practiced in this Church, was to just Sentences, and
consequently due to them, and that it will be time for them to bring instances
of Nonsubmission and counteracting, when we bring instances of unjust Sentences
then pronounced, So page 56. and, that these Acts, (as also Ministers
engagements to be subject to the Church-judicatories at their entry) are to be
understood only of Submission to lawful and just Sentences, which is to be
understood as a Presuppositum, or Praecognitum, of all those who require
obedience to Laws, though it be not expressed. So page 52, 53, 56, 57, 59, 60.
We are not yet entered upon the debate with them, but shall refer it till
afterward: nor shall we insist to show that, as to the practice of this Kirk,
themselves know that many did think their Sentences unjust (else they would not
so often tell us that some of them have not yet confessed all the particulars in
their Sentence) who yet submitted to lose their Ministry, rather than to
disturb the quiet of a well Reformed Church, and open a door to all confusion.
We might also tell them, that whatever we may suppose of the injustice of a
Sentence in the following debate, yet we are confident, they will never be able
to make-out the injustice of any Sentence hitherto pronounced, as a just cause
for them to start this debate, unless themselves be both Judge and Party. But
to leave this to its own place, let us see the judgment of this Church, even of
Submission to some unjust Sentences. God did indeed so singularly bless this
Church formerly, with unity and mutual Submission, that it is a wonder there
was ever occasion to speak any thing distinctly to this ease: Yet providence
would have one instance of it for clearing the mind of this Church concerning
such after-debates as these. And that was the case of Mr. James Morison and the
Presbytery of Kirkwall, which was determined in the Assembly, 1646. This case
these Witnesses do very boldly read without Book, as to what is in Question,
page 53, 54. which we shall help from the very Act of the Assembly. The case
was this, Mr. James Morison (as they truly report that part) being Suspended by
his Presbytery, did appeal to the General Assembly, and go on in his
Ministerial function: for which the Presbytery did depose him, yet he
adhering to his appeal, went on and preached. The matter coming before the
Assembly, they find that the Presbytery of Kirkwall has not upon sufficient
grounds suspended the said Mr. James Morison: And yet that the said Mr. James
was contumacious, in that he did not give obedience to the Presbytery, in
forbearing to preach during the time of his Suspension, or until the matter
should be tried by the Assembly to whom he had appealed; As also in preaching
after his Deposition: Therefore for the present (referring the further trial
of all particulars concerning his Suspension and Deposition, with the final
decision thereof, to a Commission; seeing themselves had not received sufficient
Information, so as to give full and final determination therein) the Assembly
thinks the Presbytery deserves rebuke for the said suspension, and desires Mr.
Walter Stuart (their Commissioner at the Assembly) to give notice to them
hereof: and siclike, that the said Mr. James deserves a very sharp rebuke for
his contempt and disobedience aforesaid: and that the Moderator accordingly
reprehend him sharply in face of the Assembly, and ordains him to humble
himself to his Presbytery, and acknowledge humbly before them his offense
aforesaid, and his sorrow for the same. And in the mean time (till the
Commission abovementioned try and give a final decision in the matter) repon^s
the said Mr. James against the Sentences both of Suspension and Deposition, and
to the full exercise and benefit of his Ministry, sicklike as if they had
never been pronounced. And ordains the said Presbytery so soon as the said Mr.
James shall in all humility acknowledge his fault, to accept of him as a
Minister and Brother of their number, and to possess him again in the exercise
of his Ministry. This account expressed in the very formal words of the Act,
as it shows how bold these men are, before they want an answer, to say any
thing: so it holds out several true principles of this Church point blank
opposite to the Dictates in this Pamphlet. 1. A Sentence is not only judged by
the Party, but found by the Assembly to be unjust, as wanting sufficient
grounds, and for the inflicting whereof, the Presbytery deserve rebuke, and are
rebuked accordingly, and the Assembly takes it off; And yet the party so
censured is declared contumacious, for Non-submission, thereunto, but
counter-acting, and that he deserves a very sharp rebuke for his contempt and
disobedience, and is accordingly reprehended sharply in face of the Assembly,
and is ordained to humble himself before his Presbytery and acknowledge that
offense and his sorrow for the same, before they accept of him, or repossesse
him in the exercise of his Ministry. 2. In their judgment, an appeal, (though
it keep a door open for the judicial hearing of a cause again; yet) does not
warrant an Appellant not to submit to the Sentence of a Judicatory, but to go
on enjoying his former privileges taken from him by that Sentence: for he is
declared contumacious, etc. as aforesaid, for not giving obedience to the
Sentence, in forbearing to Preach, until the matter should be tried by the
Assembly, unto whom he had appealed, And upon the same account, for preaching
after his Deposition. 3. We find the Presbytery judged to deserve rebuke for
the Sentence of Suspension; but not at all charged for Deposing him for his
Non-submission to the Sentence of Suspension: Which in a judicial Sentence
cognoscing upon their whole proceedings, imports an approbation thereof, as
just, though it was needless formally to ratify it: seeing both Sentences were
presently to be taken off, the Suspension, because pronounced not upon
sufficient grounds, and the Deposition, upon his humbling himself to the
Assemblies rebuke, and his readiness to humble himself to his Presbytery for
his contumacie, which was the ground of the Sentence. These and the like
principles, as they evidence this Church to have been far from allowing
Judicatories to do things, pro arbitrio and imperio, (as this Pamphlet often
asperseth this opinion) so also to have been as far from allowing men, because
they suffered somewhat unjustly, to overturn the very foundations of Order and
Government.

III. Whereas these principles of this Church, are branded by these Witnesses,
as giving great advantage to Prelates and Independents, and favoring of Popery
and Tyranny: they do bewray what their respect to their Mother is, in borrowing
the dirt out of her adversaries hands, to throw it upon her themselves. To this
purpose they tell us, (with reflection tart enough.) page 10. That this
assertion will more than probably make men of a Prelaticall spirit take hold of
it, and press it on, to re-introduce their way, and that Independents will
make use of it to render Presbyteriall Government hateful. And as to the
imputation of Popish-tyrany, their very Title imports, that they hold such a
Presbytery to be a Papacy. And, page 45. they insinuate that this Doctrine
might justify Mr. Sterry's raving comparisons betwixt the Northern Presbytery
and Roman Papacy. Yea, page 47. when this Subordination is urged as a mean to
continue unity and order in the Kirk, without which it cannot be long kept;
They tell us, that this is the very argument and language of the Advocats of
the Sea of Rome, and the thing that set up the Man of Sin to sit in the Temple
of God, as God, etc. So, page 112. arg. 14. They call it a Tenet purely Popish
and Antichristian, and cite a sentence of Duvallius concerning the duty of an
Excommunicate man, albeit innocent, to abstain from holy things. And, page 111.
arg. 13. They urge the Canon of Prelates ordaining Non-submitters to the
Sentences of Suspension or Deposition, to be Excommunicate. And generally
throughout this Pamphlet, they traduce it as an absolute, arbitrary, unlimitted
Submission that is required, and a tyrannical Imposition. Of all which it
concerns them to see how they (if they be kindly children) will clear the
Doctrine of their Mother Church above expressed. But to give a more particular
answer (so far as is necessary at this time) to these things. 1. It is indeed
too true, and sadly felt, that the schismatic and turbulent carriage of such
as the Authors of this Pamphlet has given but too great advantage to all the
enemies of truth, and of Presbyteriall Government in particular; while Popish
Seminary Priests take advantage to persuade people to the obedience of Rome,
since we cannot agree among our selves; while prelates and their faction have
occasion to boast, that shortly after they were outed, we run all into
confusion; and while Independents see no such beauty, unity, and order, in a
National Church, as was given out to be under Presbyteriall Government; and
while they hear them traduce one of the best Reformed Churches, as corrupt both
in the generality of her Church Members and Ministers. But that this assertion
can be a stumbling to any, is to us incredible. For, (2.) If we look upon all
Governments, Civil or Ecelesiasticall, under heaven, albeit there be different
judgments concerning the subject of the Authority (as in a State, whether the
Government should be Democraticall, and the Auhority in the body of the People,
or Aristrocraticall, in the Nobles, and better part, or Monarchical in one
person, or mixed and made up of two or all of these. So in a Church, whether
the Authority should be in a Congregation, or Congregationall Eldership, in
Presbyteries and Synods, in Bishops, or Popes of Rome?) Yet all agree that
Subordination and Submission is due to the Authority, in their persons whom
they hold ought to be invested with it. And particularly, as for Independents,
we assert with Mr. Rutherfurd (Peac. Plea, page 246.) that we require no other
subjection than they do; For they make ten to be subject to five hundredth in an
Independent Congregation. In so much that either these ten must submit to the
determinations of the rest (let them judge them never so sinful) if they
cannot persuade the rest to be of their mind, or else they must resolve to be
cast out by Excommunication, or to go out and renounce communion with that
Society, and make up a Church of their own; But abiding in that Society, the
Submission is unavoidable. So Mr. George Gillespie in the Assert. of the
Govern. of the Church of Scotland, part. 2. chap. 4. page 152, 153. in answer
to that Objection [That it is contrary to Christian liberty, and the use of the
private judgment of discretion, to inflict Censures upon any who profess
that, after examination of the decrees, they cannot be persuaded of the
lawfulness of the same] among other things, says, This Objection does militat
no less against Ecclesiastical Censures in a particular Congregation, than in
a National Synod, And they who do at all approve of Church Censures to be
inflicted upon the contemptuous and obstinate, shall put in our mouths an
Answer to Objections of this kind. Yea, our Writers against the Independents,
and particularly the Assembly of Divines in their Answer to the Reasons of the
Dissenting Brethren, page 253, 254, 255. follow the charge so home, that the
charge of Tyranny, or Injurious Independency, laid by Independents at the door
of National Assemblies, where there is not the remedy of a General Council, is
most justly retorted upon themselves, who take upon them to inflict the highest
Censure of Excommunication, without any remedy under Heaven to any grieved
person, it not being reversible by any on Earth but by themselves. Whereas in
this Government, after a grieved person has followed-up his Appeal even to a
National Assembly, there is yet a further possible help by a well constituted
Occumencal Assembly, if it may be had. By all all which it appears, that
Independents need not take advantage of this Assertion, though we and they
differ about the Subject invested with the Authority. The words subjoyned by
these Reverend Divines, page 255. are worthy to be marked to our purpose: But
(say they) If a person conceiving himself to be injured in a National Assembly,
cannot obtain redress either from another succeeding National Assembly, or from
a superior Assembly, he must commit his cause to God, (as having indeed
exonered his own Conscience, and pursued a remedy in the use of all lawful
means) And so must he that may conceive himself wronged by Classical or
Provincial Assemblies, if he cannot have the opportunity of appealing further:
in like manner, as he that thinks himself civilly injured by the Parliament
or Supreme Power in a State, and has no other way to obtain redress. As these
are expressions beseeming the piety, wisdom and moderation of men of God,
lovers of true Order and Government in Christ's House: So they clearly
homologate the opinion of the worthy Presbyterians in England before them, and
the judgment of this Church, expressed in the former Articles; and do fully
evince, that in their judgment, a party, though conceiving himself injured,
(and possibly, really injured, as is supposed in his liberty of appealing, as
was cleared before) ought yet to submit to the Sentence, not only till his
Appeal be discussed, but after also, if his Appeal be decided against him, even
as private men do submit to injuries from the Supreme Power in a State. To which
purpose also we have the testimony of Mr. Henderson in his Government and Order
of the Church of Scotland, page 34, 35. where (agreeable to the Doctrine of
ancient Presbyterians) he asserteth it lawful for a person wronged by an
inferior Assembly, to seek relief of the greater, providing it be done in an
humble and peaceable way. So also Beza, Epist. 68. One may appeal, if he do it
without tumult and public scandal. 3. As to the imputation of Popery and
Prelacy cast upon us in this, They are not ignorant that many before them have
charged this on Presbyterial Government, and have been as often answered: Had
they consulted with what our Divines say in this matter, and among the rest,
with Mr. Rutherfurd, in the place before cited, ( Peac. Plea, page 246.)
concerning the many differences betwixt our, and the Popish and Prelatical
Synods; they might have forborne all this obloquy. In the mean time, they know
we not only differ from them concerning the subject invested with
Ecclesiastical Authority, but in many other weighty circumstances as to the
manner of Administration, to be cleared hereafter: Though yet all Governments
do agree in some common principles and rules, among which this Submission for
which we plead, is one. This will evidently appear (to go no further) if we
will but compare that Act of the Assembly, 1648. above repeated, with this very
Canon of the Prelates, which they bring in to prove our Opinion Prelatical, page
111. for, the Assembly judges the common principle of Submission, to be a
sound Maxim of Government in a true Church, (though they condemned the power
of Prelates, and their sentencing men for not corrupting of Worship and
Government) and therefore do express the substance of that Canon in their Act,
as fit to be observed in Presbyterial Government. Yea, and without mentioning
that they must be lawful Sentences (whereof these Witnesses make so much noise
that it is to be understood) which yet is expressed in that Canon. And as to
that of Duvalius, which we believe is a Maxim of their Canon Law, (as the
Schoolmen do generally dispute that Head of Excommunication and other Censures
out of the Canon Law) Albeit we leave his consequences to himself, hoping to
make some other thing appear out of our opinion; and albeit we disclaim his
Pope and Church too, (whether alleged to act as Christ's Instrument, or not) as
no Church-ruler, or Judicatory invested with power from Christ, and
consequently not to be submitted unto: Yet we know some of these Witnesses are
not so ignorant as to reject all their Maxims of Government, being exercised by
a true and orthodox Church. Otherwise, they may as well reject the Baptism of
Infants, all Deposition of Ministers, Excommunication of Members, and
innumerable other things, as matters purely Popish and Antichristian, because
(forsooth) they are observed in the Romish Church. We know that methods
observed in Appeals, Processes, and the like Ecclesiastical Procedures in
Assemblies, are not rejected as tenets purely Popish, because recorded in their
Canon Law, and practiced in their Courts; they being in themselves agreeable to
sound reason and the light of nature: As this Maxim also is, of Submission even
to some unjust Sentence, when it is pronounced in a rightly constituted Church,
sound and orthodox in Doctrine, Worship and Government, and only mistaking in
this or the like particular case, in applying Rules to persons and cases. And
albeit Protestant Divines do dispute against that particular Hypothesis, that
the Pope's Sentence is to be obeyed, because the Pope has (in their judgment,
and that according to truth) no power, and would have them cast out of all
Church-society, and submitting thereunto, because they forsake him and his
errors and idolatries: Yet they never dispute that Question in Thesi, that in
a true Reformed Church, as is above described, Submission is not due.

Having premitted these Considerations, and being to fall about a more
particular discussion of the Question; We cannot but in the entry complain,
That upon the Overture propounded in the Conference about this matter, they
have not only all along given this sense of the Controversy, that it is an
arbitrary, absolute, and an unlimited Submission to the will and lusts of men,
which we crave; and do aver, page 41. that in the Conference, we did, upon the
matter, require an absolute and unlimited Submission: But in their very dispute
they give so lax a state of the Question, and do so ramble through all the
places of Invention to heap-up Arguments against our Assertion (which yet may
be reduced to a very few) as might make the world believe we were not a
Reformed Church, but a crew of Papists and Arians, opening the door to all
abominations by our opinion, and to the overturning of all Christ's precious
Interests. Whereas any unbyassed person might perceive, and themselves knew by
the Conference, and from these very Answers given to their Queries, upon which
they build their Assertion, page 41. that our desire of Submission was relative
to the present state of this Church, as it is now* through mercy, settled in the
matter of Doctrine, Worship and Government, and that such a Submission only was
desired, as had been established, and constantly in practice in this Church,
till our late Differences; And was required of them (and mutually offered by
us) together with an agreement in all matters of difference which might
possibly minister occasion of jealousy and diffidence: Yea, the Declaration it
self which here they take to task, speaks of no other Submission than that to
which they and we were solemnly engaged at our Admission to the Ministry, page
5. and so could not be fairly declined by them: and again, page 8, 9. there is
a Submission required only according to the lawful known principles wherein we
have walked formerly; and page 10. the Submission constantly observed in
practice, until the times of our late differences. This their way as it has
been very unhandsom and not fair, so it necessitateth us to take a new method
in clearing this Controversy, and not to follow them in their discourses and
arguments (which almost at every step would put us to a repetition of the state
of the Question) but to sum-up the state of the Controversy, with the
difficulties therein, in some Articles, where we shall, as it may come in, meet
with any thing that has sinnews in their discourse and reasonings, which has
not been spoken to in the foregoing Considerations, and tither discover the
impertinency thereof, as to our case, or the invalidity thereof to impugn our
Assertion. And,

I. As to the fountain and ri^e of this Submission; We do not derive it from,
nor do we urge it as a due to any Church Officer or Judicatory, upon the
account of their infallibility, and that we must receive their Conclusions, as
Articles of Faith, or binding the Conscience, eo ipso, because dictated by
them. This, being well considered, puts a vast difference betwixt us and the
Popish principles and way wherewith they so often brand us, and may tell them
they might well have spared their pains in many of these things premitted to
their Arguments, page 95, 96, 97. Seeing we acknowledge all men to be fallible
and liars, to have no privilege or authority to do wrong, and that their
Sentences are regulae regulatae, and do not oblige the conscience, save in so
far as they are conform to the Word. And upon the same account, we do heartily
subscribe also, to what they cite out of the Jus Divinum, written by the
Ministers of London, and Mr. Gillespies Assertion, page 116, 117, 118. and out
of the CXI* Propositions, page 56, 57. Though yet we must tell them that these
passages relate only to the matter of active obedience, as is clear from the
very words of Mr. Gillespie in his Assertion, citing the Prelates tenet to that
effect: and consequently, do not speak to the case of passive submission, which
is the matter in debate betwixt us, and for which we hope to give relevant
grounds, these principles being all granted.

II. As to the persons or Judicatories to whom this Submission is due; We do
not urge Subordination or Submission to any Judge incompetent, or which is not
Ecclesiastical; Nor to any Ecclesiastcal Officer or Judicatory that is not of
Christ's institution: Nor to any corrupt society, calling themselves a Church or
Judicatory of Christ, while they are a Synagogue of Satan, standing in
opposition to the Doctrine of Christ. But we plead for Subordination and
Submission in a true Church, and to Christ's own Courts and Officers in her,
such as we hold the Church of Scotland now constituted to be. For further
clearing their mistakes in this matter, we shall branch-out this Assertion in
these,

1. We plead not for Submission to an incompetent Judicatorie, or a Judicatory
not Ecclesiastical; Upon this account, (among other reasons to be after
mentioned) as they might have spared Amos his not submitting to Amaziah, page
100. who was not his Judge, and the Apostles not submitting to the Council at
Jerusalem, page 101. which was no Judge-competent to any Officer of the Church
of the New Testament, (there being other Courts appointed for the Government
thereof, as they conveened a Synod, for judging of Doctrine and censuring of
Offenders, Act. 15.) So all their instances of Non-submission of
Church Officers, in the matters of their Office, to Civil Authority in the
first instance, fall to the ground: For we hope it is agreed that Erastianism
is contrary to the Word of God, and condemned in this Church. Though as to this
matter we know not what to say of the judgment of these Witnesses: For on the
one hand, they seem to magnify Osianders observation (though none of the most
Orthodox Divines, nor yet the most moderate of his party) concerning the
liberty of fleeing to the Magistrate, page 58, 59. and yet, page 100. they put
Civil and Ecclesiastical Authority in one Class, as to the matter of
Submission. We are sure, whatever has been their practice of application to
the Civil Power, it has not been to preserve them from persecution, but that
they might obtain power to persecute. And if they will turn Erastians, we can
say no further, but the more wrongs the worse, and omne Schisma parit Errorem,
as we have too much proof of their many new principles. Though indeed, whatever
their pretenses be for their own ends, they are known to be alike respective
both of Civil and Ecclesiastical Authority, and that the overturning of either
or both is alike to them, before they reach not their ends.

2. We plead not for Submission to Officers and Judicatories not of Christ's own
institution; such as, not only Popes, but Prelates who drew all things in
subjection to their Cathedral Church, (as is cleared by Divines destinguishing
betwixt Presbyterial and Episcopal Government and Synods) and were no lawful
Church Officers. So that here their arguments conclude not, taken from the
practice of Ministers not submitting to the Sentences of Prelates in this
Church, page 55. For, 1, It is not clear to us that they did not submit to the
Censures inflicted. We do find the contrary supposed in the Writings of these
times, both of one side and other, that upon these Sentences they were to be
put out of their places, as is insinuated in a Treatise published anno, 1620.
by an opposer of Conformity, bearing the Title of A Dialogue betwixt
Cosmophilus and Theophilus. As also in Mr. Struthers Letter to the Earl of
Airth, in the year 1630. printed 1635. It is true, some of them preached after
their Sentences; But it is to be remembered that whatever was the
after-strictnesse of Prelates in their Canons, published anno 1636. of which
mention is made by these Witnesses, page 111. Yet at their first dealling with
honest men, so far as they can remember who suffered by them, they did not
depose them simpliciter from the Ministry, but only desposed or removed them
from their Ministry at the Kirk where they served, and from the Benefice: And
this they all submitted unto (having by their Protestations and Declinators,
born testimony against them as incompetent Judges) though they preached
elsewhere. And this is the more probable to us, in that never any of these
sufferers were pursued (so far as we can remember) with any Censure by them for
their preaching after the Sentence: and in that when some of them were
permitted to return to their charges, there was not any readmission of them
thereunto, (which had been necessary if they had been simpliciter deposed) but
a simple returning to their work. 2. But suppose they did not submit, and let
it be yielded also that their Non-submission was nothing the weaker that the
cause for which they were Sentenced was unjust, as they urge, page 55, 56. and
particularly, that they were Sentenced for not conforming to Popish Innovations
introduced in the Church, or not acknowledging Prelatical Authority; (which is
far from our case, as we shall after hear) yet they laid the weight of their
Non-submission upon their Judges being no Officers appointed by Christ to rule
His House; which, some, if not all, of them witnessed by their Declinatures in
the time of their being Sentenced. For they can bring no instance of any one of
them Sentenced by Presbyteries only and they not submitting. And however they
allege ( page 55.) that the Prelates did sometime associate to themselves the
Ministry of those bounds where the supposed Delinquent served, that is, the
Presbytery whereof he was a member, which was a lawful Authority: Yet we
cannot learn, that de facto they did associat these unto them in censuring such
as did not submit, (whatever was their practice in censuring some others for
gross scandals) but did proceed in these in their High Commission Court; Nor
do we think these Witnesses believe they did associate or call these unto them,
that they might act authoritatively with them as a Presbytery, but they did
all by their own Authority. 3. Withal, it is to be remarked, that however some
Ministers did not give Submission to the Sentences of Prelates in this Church,
where Prelacy was but in introducing, and was not fully settled, to the
divesting of Presbyteries of their power; Yet the practice of Non-conformists
in England, where that had been the only Government from the beginning of
Reformation, was different, where they not only submitted to the unjust
Sentences of Prelates, yea, of their Commissaries and Officials, but being
quarrelled therefore by the Brownists, they wrote a Treatise in defense of the
Church of England and themselves, (since published by Mr. Rathband, anno 1644.
under the tittle of A most grave and modest Confutation of the Brownists)
wherein they assert, That the Church of England being a true Church, and
Episcopal Government the only Church Government established by Authority,
though disallowed by them, they held it their duty rather to submit to their
unjust Sentences, than to rent the Church; as may be seen throughout the whole
Treatise, and especially, page 39, 40, 41, 42. Some passages whereof, we will
have occasion to cite afterward. In the mean time, these principles and
practices of theirs may give a sad check to the miscarriage of these Witnesses
toward Christ's own Courts and Officers. To this we shall add a testimony of
Beza (no novice in the point of Church Government) in his Epistle directed to
some Englishes, who wrote to him for resolution in some matters of
Church Government, Epist. 12. Page 105. Where, hoping some other course would
be taken with learned and godly men in England, by the Queen and others, than
that either they should be put to do that which is evil, against their
consciences, or be forced to quit their Ministry: He adds, Tertium enim
illud, etc. For as to that third course (which it seems they had propounded to
him,) viz. That they should exerce their Ministry against the Queen and
Bishops will, we abhor it yet more, and that for such causes as may be easily
understood, though we hold our peace. Who so will read these Epistles, may find
very much to this purpose, and of the necessity of Order, for preservation of
Doctrine; particularly, Epist. 14. and 24. and 59. and diverse others, wherein
he speaks to our case, as if he were alive and consulted in it, and
vindicateth the Government from the aspersion of Tyranny then also cast upon it.

3. While we plead not for Submission to a corrupt Society, calling themselves
a Church or Judicatory of Christ, but in a true Church, and to Christ's own
Courts and Officers; Such as we hold Ministers of the Gospel and Elders,
assembled in a Session, Presbytery, Synod, or National Assembly, to be; They
might well have spared all their parallels with the Popish Church, formerly
mentioned, which we account Babylon and not Zion; And that example of
Athanasius, page 57, 58. 106. who, though he quarrelled not the constitution of
Synods as they were made up of Bishops, yet he saw well enough they were but a
company of Arians, not worshipping nor acknowledging the Son of God, and
therefore not worthy to be accounted one of His Courts. But of this more
afterward; Only as to the matter in hand, we desire it may be remembered how
much stresse Protestant Divines lay, in this Question, upon this, that the
Churches are true Churches to which Submission is required. Beza writing to a
Church-disturber ( Epist. 5.) rejects all his pretenses of zeal or love in
that matter; affirming, that having acquainted his lawful Pastors, or delated
the matter, with which he was dissatisfied, to the Synod, he had sufficiently
exonered himself, as to his duty: For otherwise (says he) What can be
established in a Church (I speak of TRUE CHURCHES, such as we affirm all our
Churches through grace to be) though never so rightly or holily, but the
pretense of zeal and love may overturn it? and closes that discourse with that
passage of the Apostle against contentious men, 1 Cor. 11.16. When the
Remonstrants at Dort gave in their Declinator against that Synod, as a Court
they ought not to submit unto; How sharply did the Divines tax them upon this
very account of their declining to submit to a Judicatory consisting of
Officers of true Reformed Churches, lawfully called and authorized to be a
Court of Christ? The Synod of South-Holland, met at Delph, had told them
before, that if they would not submit to the judgment, of the Reformed
Churches, they could not be acknowledged for Ministers of the Reformed
Churches; As their Judgment recorded in the Acts of the Synod of Dort, page 88,
89. (Edit. in folio) does more fully clear. The Divines of Hassia tell them,
that their Declinator did openly proclaim, that they held not themselves
members of these Churches, but had gone out and made a separation from them.
The Divines of Geneva, having answered their exception, that Protestants
refused to submit to Popish Councils, they press the necessity of Order and
Submission to Judicatories in true Churches, according to the Rule of Christ,
Matthew. 18.17. And close all with this, That the Remonstrants adhering to their
Declinator, do thereby declare that they renounce Union with the Reformed
Churches of the Nether-lands; In which case, they conceive it is incumbent to
the Supreme Magistrate to consider what ought to be done. And the Divines of
Breme look upon their practice as opening a door to all confusion, as
overturning all Church-judgment and authority, to which Christ Himself did
remit us, and making way for a perpetual disturbance of the Church by
contentious men.

4. While we assert, that in this case, we require Submission in a true Church
of Christ in Scotland, and to His own lawful Courts and Officers in her (in
which case we think Submission is due by all who account them such) we are to
consider,

1. That these Witnesses have drawn this Question to a further extent than it
was at the beginning. For, at first, when four of their number refused
Submission to the Sentences of the Assembly at Saint Andrews and Dundee, the
reason given out was, because they had protested against that Assembly as no
lawful Court, nor having any Authority to inflict Censures, and so they were
not obliged to submit. But now they make it the question, not only, whether
they may refuse Submission to an Assembly which is protested against, and
which, (consisting of elected Members out of other Judicatories) may be
corrupted by prelimitations upon elections, or otherwise, and so have no
lawful Authority? But, whether submission be due to the standing and ordinary
Courts of a Church, how lawful soever in their Constitution (as consisting of
the ordinary Ministers and Elders in such a bounds) if so be their Sentence be
wrong upon the matter? which reaches yet a sadder blow to a Church Government,
while they stand Courts clothed with Christ's Authority, even themselves being
Judges, and yet Submission is denied unto them.

2. That it is a Question worth our inquiry in this matter, whether they do
indeed acknowledge the Judicatories of this Church to be lawful Courts, or
whether they do not judge them so corrupt, as upon that very account, they are
not to be submitted unto? Their joining with us in the Judicatories, without
any protestation against their Constitution, as corrupt; and their other
carriage in reference to our Judicatories, which they mention, page 13. gave us
some ground not to suspect any such thing of them, But now this Pamphlet
affords us other thoughts; for, all along they not only decline to join in a
General Assembly as a lawful Judicatory, where we are the plurality of the
constituent Members (who yet are the standing Officers of this Church) So, page
84, 93. and elsewhere it is put as a stop to all Overtures of Union, so long as
the execution thereof is put in the hands of Presbyteries and Synods, where we
are the plurality, and many of us not so fit as we ought to be: So, page 39,
90, 93. and frequently in this Pamphlet; yea, it is clear all along, that they
lay a great part of the stresse of their Non-submission upon our corruption, as
may appear from the places even now cited; and else where they assert, that
Submission cannot be yielded, especially there being, to their sense and
apprehension, so much corruption in the plurality of Presbyteries and Synods,
page 42. And they (at least) insinuate, that we are not Judicatories modelled
according to the pattern showed in the mount, page 47. And, page 116. they
expressly assert the Church of Scotland not to be sound in the plurality of her
Judicatories, as not improving the Ordinances of God, but abusing them to carry
on a course of defection and persecution. So that to us it is a great question,
Whether (notwithstanding all their other arguments against Submission) the
great stresse lies not rather here, that we are corrupt Courts? For, as we had
occasion formerly to remark their own assertion concerning their Overture for
extrajudiciall Committees, page 32, 33. viz. that if the Church were sound and
peaceable, there were no need of any such Overture, and they would be in that
case, as far from pressing it as any; which is in effect (as is clear from the
whole tenor of the Pamphlet) that were they the plurality, and had matters in
their guiding (as it is usual with them still to propose such distempers in
Church and State, and such causes of Gods wrath against them, as only their
being set at the helm can remedy) they would admit no such extra-judiciall
courses: So we take hold here of their assertion, page 115, 116. That if the
case were only of particular persons, and in things of more private interest,
and personal concernment, and of Judicatories employing their power to
edification, in the current of their actings, they would not much contend about
it. As to their other limitations, here set down, we shall take them in
afterward: But to the matter now in hand, if we understand (as we must do, if
they be ingenuous, and not scorning the world, in their assertions) the case
here, of this matter of Submission, which they denied to yield in the
Conference, and now do so hotly dispute against, and their not much contending
about it, to import their ceding and yielding; then their concession must
amount to this, That were the Judicatories not corrupt, but employing their
power to edification in the current of their actings, then they would submit to
their Sentences concerning themselves, however they might err in them. And
have they not then taken a very strange course, to dispute a Question so hotly,
when all their Arguments may be answered by this, make them the plurality, who
will employ their power to edification in the current of their actings, as
others do not, and then they will not debate much about Submission, even to
unjust Sentences, in things concerning particular persons. And so they might
have spared their pains in all these Arguments, and betaken themselves to that
where the stresse of the controversy lies, to prove that we are corrupt
Judicatories, which alone can have weight to prove their conclusion, by this
their concession. And so much the rather do we urge this, when we remember,
that at our Conference with them, one of them, after much debate, being put to
it to declare whether if they had the Judicatories constituted to their mind
(or, as they were pleased to phrase it, as before our Differences) they would
require such a Submission as we pressed; His answer was, It is another case
now, in statu Ecclesiae perturbato and corrupto.

However, here is a new Controversy started in the by, concerning the
corruption of the Judicatories of this Church, though not as to the nature and
kind of them, yet as to the members constituent: wherein we have been all along
telling them that they are better at assertions than probations. And though we
have, as occasion offered, wiped off this imputation in the preceding
discourse, and will speak more to it, as it relates to this Question, upon the
third Article following; And we might here also insist to tell them how the
Reverend Assembly of Divines did relish this exception, of the corruption of
the greater part of the Clergy, from the Independents; Namely, as proving
Parliaments to be corrupt, as well as Synods, (seeing the greater part of these
who choose them may be supposed to be the worse, as well as the greater part of
Ministers) and so striking at the root of all Government, yea, and not only
blasting (so much as they can) the authority and power of Synods, but the
office and work of the Ministry. Answers to the Reasons of the Dissenting
Brethren, p. 291, 292, 293. Edit. Edinb. 1648. Yet, for present, we only offer
these things to their consideration, 1. As to what they cite, p. 52. from the
Assembly, 1647. their Exhortation to England, concerning the not entrusting of
men with the Government, who are not purged from their old profaneness, or from
the prelaticall principles and practices; They know it is directed by the
Assembly to the Church of England, a Church not constituted in point of
Government, and where many did avow and adhere to their old principles and
practices. And so is not to be made use of against this Church already settled
in that matter, and where never Minister, not under Process or Censure, was
declared incapable of being a member of a Church-judicatory, nor are any
allowed to be in the Ministry, who can be found guilty of any profaneness,
or who has not both in profession and practice renounced Prelacie and their
ways. In which case, that very Exhortation, a few lines thereafter, allows
the right hand of fellowship to be given men. 2. However, they may condescend
that they would submit to a Presbytery so and so constituted, possibly in
Vtopia; yet, by this their tenet, they have defamed their Mother Church and the
Judicatories thereof, and so do abundantly serve the interest of all Sectaries
in their opposition thereunto, and to all the Reformed Churches through her
sides. 3. If they lay the stresse of our unsoundnesse mainly (as they do, page
116.) upon the Public Resolutions, they must take more pains (as has been
said) to satisfy the world of the sin of these, before they can draw such
consequences from them, and persuade the world that they are not erroneous and
turbulent in their opposition thereunto. 4. We desire they may make it out,
that Members, Officers and Judicatories in a constituted Church, though they be
corrupt, ought not to enjoy all their privileges, till they be formally
cast-out from them, or, at least, processed for their corruptnesse: Since very
Independents do allow this in their Churches; and consequently, the
Judicatories and Officers of the Church of Scotland, ought to enjoy the
privileges due to Christ's Courts and Servants, so long as they are not
formally declared incapable thereof. 5. We desire also they will make it appear
to rational men, how Submission can be denied to Judicatories upon the account
of their corruption, whom they not only do not desert as corrupt, but do sit
and join in them as Courts of Christ, without any Protestation against their
constitution: yea, and do offer and submit themselves and their ways and
ministerial actings, to be tried by them as their competent and lawful
Judges; and yet when it comes to a Sentence upon what they submit to be
cognosced upon, they refuse to submit to it, because they are corrupt in the
current of their actings? These we believe will be found very inconsistent by
any but themselves; for if they will not submit at last, deserting of them, and
Declinators in the entry, are the only fit premises from whence to draw their
conclusion. For, as we heard before from the Divines at Dort, such
Non-submission is in effect a secession. And Mr. Gee, in his late Treatise of
the Civil Magistrate, page 178. lays it as a foundation of all Order, that
the minor part of a Community, must either submit to the major part, or else
they must make a secession from them, and erect a new Society. And therefore if
our Judicatories be thrones of iniquity that have no fellowship with God, as
they would insinuate, page 48. it were fit they spoke it out, and it should
seem more congruous they should have no fellowship with them either.

III. As to the matters wherein we require Submission: We do not urge a
Submission, in this Question betwixt us, in matters of Doctrine, or Articles of
Faith, in Worship, Government, nay nor Rules of Discipline; for in all these we
are agreed, and through mercy they are established among us. We only plead,
that in the matter of applying agreed-unto Rules of Discipline to particular
persons and cases, there be a Subordination and Submission observed: And that
in the matter of inflicting of Censures on Officers or Members, or of judging
of the Call of Ministers, according to these agreed Rules, and in the like
cases incident in the Judicatories of Reformed and settled Churches: there be a
sisting of Contentions, and an avoiding of Schisms and Confusions, by the
Submission of persons to Judicatories, and of inferior Judicatories to
superior.

To clear and branch out this Assertion more distinctly, Consider,

1. While we do thus limit this Question; Our purpose is not to retrench the
just power, Dogmatick and Diatactick, of Christ's Courts: nor to insinuate any
thing prejudicial to the Submission due to them in these respects; and given to
them both at home and abroad. But our scope is only to discover to the world
how the case stands between these Disputants and this Kirk. We have not only a
Confession of Faith, Directory of Worship and of Government, but also settled
Rules of Discipline in matters that fall under the Critical power of
Judicatories: So that nothing remains in debate, but whether in application of
these Rules, the Sentence and Judgment of Judicatories ought to be acquiesced
unto without further contention.

2. This being the true case between us; we think their instance of Athanasius
not submitting to Arians deposing him for his asserting the Divinity of the Son
of God; And that Arg. 11. making a supposition of our enacting the Mass, and
all the Heresies of Rome, do shoot short of the conclusion and mark. For when
Church-judicatories deny homage to the Son of God, and return to Rome, we shall
not debate the point of Non-submission only with them, but shall run from them
as from Synagogues of Satan. Likewise, they might have spared their Argument
about the Subscriptions taken by Prelates, page 110, 111. Arg. 13, For not only
is there active obedience imported in these engagements; whereas we are only
speaking of passive Submission: But they did also tie men to approve
corruptions in the point of Church Government, and in the matters of Gods
Worship, which falls not within our Question. This also might tell them, that
that instance, page 50, 51. of our Confession, anno 1567. concerning Articles
of Faith, or Constitutions repugning to the Word of God, was needless: As also
that great noise they make of all the precious Truths of God, and interests of
Christ, at the stake, page 49. And that there is no Ecclesiastical remedy in
case of a general defection, Arg. 15. page 113. And that salt allusion to the
crucifying of Christ, page 99. and their citation of Gal. 1.8. page 108. Arg.
8. These and many the like big assertions, whereby they endeavor to render us
odious, have no place in this Question. And it was well told them to this
purpose in the Conference for Union, where they started these same
difficulties, That our confidence is, that such cases shall not fall out in
this Kirk, we being united in one Confession of Faith, form of Worship,
Discipline and Government; and that it is contrary to prudence, and
inconsistent with any well ordered Government, upon the supposing of a case
which can but rarely (and we hope, through grace, never shall) fall out in this
Kirk, to enervate a general rule, and make an open door for Schisms,
contrary-actings in subordinate Judicatories, and Divisions upon Divisions,
upon every occasion.

3. This then being the true state of the Question, may we not again resume
their assertion, page 115* 116. and take them at their word? That if the case
were only of particular persons, in things of more private interest and
personal concernment, and of Judicatories employing their power to edification
in the current of their actings, they would not much contend about it. As to
the first, this case concerns only particular persons, and that only in such
private and personal concernments as fall within the compass of
Church Discipline, while the work of God stands entire in the Church; and
this hazard may be of very few, yea, through grace, of none at all who may
suffer injury, and for them in particular, sufficient remedies were offered in
the Conference for their security. And as to the second, however they are
pleased to play upon Submission upon the account of soundness, page 114, 115.
yet we assert, that as to our principles, we are sound in Doctrine, Worship,
Discipline and Government; As to our qualifications, we approve not of, nor do
we tolerate any manifested and proven iniquity in any of our Members; and as to
the current of our actings, we forbear to censure none who can be found guilty,
nor to try any of whom there is any suspicion or presumption. And we are so far
from any crushing and bearing down of Piety, that no man is obnoxious in the
Church of Scotland to any hazard, either for profession or practice of
Godliness, but it is a part of our constant trial to find out mockers of
Piety. Men may follow all the duties of holiness and righteousness, and the
duties of edification, according to the Word of God and the established
Constitutions of this Church, not only without hazard from, but under the
protection and favorable aspect of Church-judicatories. And all the while this
Kirk has declared her dissatisfaction with our Brethren, who (either being
Godly, or under the pretense of it) have brought in such confusions and
disorders, they cannot give one instance to infringe the truth of this our
Declaration. Now matters being thus, we think their own assertion may bind them
to Submission in these matters, where the greatest hazard is of men's personal
suffering only, without any prejudice to the interests of Christ.

4. But whether they adhere to their own assertion or not, yet this Submission
so qualified as to the matter wherein it is required, is to us beyond all
controversy, that it is due in such a Church, and to such Judicatories: And
Submission to Sentences in these matters, whether just, or supposed unjust by
the parties suffering, taking it generally (for we shall speak more distinctly
afterward to what they insist so much upon, concerning unjust Sentences) may be
proven by all the Arguments whereby Divines do prove Subordination. Christ's own
Rule, Matthew. 18, 17. does to us demonstratively conclude it, where the last
Church-remedy in the matter of offenses, is, Tell the Church. There is an
express Precept for it, Heb. 13.17. Obey them that have the rule over you, and
submit your selves. And that Order established, 1 Cor. 14.29, 32. that the
Prophets should judge of one another, and the spirit of the Prophets be subject
to the Prophets, does hold out this Submission most clearly, as may further
appear from the reason subjoyned, verse. 33. that God is not the author of
confusion, (which cannot be avoided if we follow the Doctrine of these
Witnesses in this matter) but of peace. And accordingly it is urged by the
Synod of Delph against the Remonstrants, Act. Synod. Dordr. page 87. The very
light of nature (from which the Ministers of London in their Jus Divinum, and
Mr. Gillespie in his Assertion, do argue in this case) does strongly evince,
that in no Society in the world it will be allowed, that particular persons and
Societies should not submit but counteract to the whole; and that Government
cannot stand where there is not a Submission, at least passive if not active,
and that it is a ruled case, that rather one than unity should suffer; Let it
be but applied to civil Societies and Authority, and the case will soon speak
for it self. The pattern of the Jewish Church, (from which they likewise argue
in this case) does also evince it. For, no doubt, as (they are pleased often to
tell us, particularly, Arg. 1. p. 89.) their Judges and Priests were bound to
judge according to the Law, and yet it is not to be supposed, that if parties
judged their Sentence unjust, they might not submit but contra-act. Suppose the
Priest had pronounced a man leprous, (as was his office to determine in these
cases) and yet the man judged the Priest had erred in his determination (as it
was possible in these cases wherein he consulted not with Vrim and Thummim, he
might) but could not get the Priest persuaded it was so; Is it probable he
would either stay, or get leave to stay within the Camp, for all that? Yea,
this assertion is of so universal verity, that the very ends of Government
(for preserving unity, and being an hedge about Doctrine and Worship in a
Church) are overturned thereby. For once cast loose this Submission in a sound
and well constituted Church, and then how shall Government reach its end? or,
cui bono shall Judicatories meet to Sentence any? seeing they will get no
Submission, but as the parties please to think they are right: yea, not only
parties censured, but even such of the Judges as vote against the Sentence, are
free to slight and contra-act. By this priciple also, we must either establish
a Toleration, or else keep up Judicatories to clash perpetually with parties,
either before or after the Sentence. It were far more prudentiall to declare
Judicatories only consultative meetings, (as indeed they are by this opinion.
For what they attribute unto them, ( page 46.) of binding us by virtue of their
Authority, is not denied to Synods by very Independents. Cotton's Keys, page
25. And yet Mr. Edwards tells us, in the place before cited, that indeed they
are to them but as Arbitratours for hearing and counsel, the parties being
still their own Judges, as it is here also) than under the notion of juridicall
Authority, to overturn all order and peace, by the clashings of them and the
parties conveened before them. For (as Mr. Rutherfurd asserteth in his late
Piece against Hooker, page 465.) every appeal, whatever unjust prejudice be in
it, must not stop the actings of Christ's visible Kingdom and called Pastors.
Now, if persons censured, be not allowed to submit, but to contra-act, when
they judge the Sentence wrong, and yet cannot convince their Judges that it is
so, what must Judicatories do? They look upon themselves as entrusted with the
Government of Christ's House, and do judge the contra-actors to sin dangerously,
and must they stand still and look on, while their party, pretending a call
from God, goes on in his contempt? were they only consultative meetings, they
had delivered their souls by giving their advice, without raising any further
stir; but now they cannot be answerable to their trust, to let men go on and
sin. And on the other hand, the party cannot obey men rather than God, (as
these Witnesses argue) and so they must clash till they ruin all. Further, By
denying of this Submission, things must either come to this issue, That in case
a man cannot get his will in Church-judicatories, he must turn Erastian and
bring the matter to the civil Magistrate (as Poppius Boorsma did in Frizland,
with deserved bad success) or when he thinks his Judge wrong, he must
endeavor to put him out of the Chair, and set himself there to guide better,
and when he is set, another must serve him in the like kind, and so in
infinitum, Judicatories shall be pulled down, set up, and tumbled down again:
Or he must resolve to be his own Judge and ruled by none, though all the
Judicatories of a National Church determine against him: And the Judicatories
must either take off his Censures, though in their consciences inflicted upon
just causes and truly proven, or let him, and as many as please to follow him,
go on to counteract their Sentences, till they be left Beacons on an hill, and
none to submit to their Authority. Whereby also it may soon come to pass, that
some few Heretics may continue themselves in a ministerial capacity, to
propagate their errors, in despite of all that the Judicatories can do; And a
Church be exposed to all the confusions which our Writers charge upon the
Independent Government.

These few Considerations may suffice to clear how necessary it is, that
Subordination and Submission be observed, especially in an orthodox and well
constituted Church, and how the contrary practice will bring confusion upon all
Societies, Civil and Ecclesiastical, on earth.

5. But to consider what they offer against this distinction and state of the
Question, as to the matter of Submission: And, 1. we find them arguing, Arg. 5.
page 103, 104, 105. That if Submission be due in matters of Discipline and
Government, then also in matters of Doctrine and Worship, unless God has
either put a greater respect on the first, than those last, or has given
greater latitude in the one than the other. Answ. To say nothing here of the
Submission due in matters of Doctrine and Worship, as not lying in our way, (as
was said before) seeing passive obedience, which is the matter in debate betwixt
us, is relative only to the Critical power of Judicatories; We can soon give
them another ground of difference in these, than what they are pleased to find
out for us, viz. That however God has not put a greater respect on Discipline
than on Doctrine and Worship, nor has allowed men to take a greater latitude
in the one than the other, (though yet in many things of Discipline and
Government, God has left us to be directed by the light of nature and rules of
prudence, common in like cases in all Courts, as He has not done in Doctrine
and Worship; and consequently, the multitude of Counselors, in a Judicatorie,
are more to be respected than one who is loadened with a prejudice of passion
and interest in his own particular) Yet to submit in the matter of Discipline,
where the hazard is only personal and of a man's suffering, is not tanti to
disturb a well settled National Church, where Doctrine and Worship are in their
integrity: whereas the case is of greater moment when a National Church, in her
Judicatories, introduces false Doctrine, and corrupt Worship, to be imposed
upon a Church. 2. They argue, Arg. 6. page 105. 106. That Submission to the
Critic power or exercise of Discipline, will infer Submission in matters of
Doctrine, for which they instance the ratification of, and Censures ordained to
be inflicted upon the matter of the Public Resolutions, and the matter of
Athanasius, of which before. Answ. We see no cogency in this Argument, that
because a Church may censure Heretics, who submit not to their Dogmatick
determinations, (which none of us ever doubted of) therefore our Question with
them is not about matters of Discipline only, when we are settled in all other
points, and do profess our adherence thereunto. But as to the matter of the
Resolutions. 1. As we wonder with what face they can conclude all these men,
taken in, to be sons of Belial, if it were for no more but upon the account of
their own professed respects to many of them: (To say nothing of the good
parts, yea, and real piety of (at least) some of them, who failed in an hour of
trial) So they must first prove these Resolutions to be an error, before they
can make the Sentences concerning them unjust. This we are forced to tell them
often, because they have the good manners so often to say much, and prove nothing
at all. 2. This Question being extrinsick to our Doctrine, Worship and
Government, (as has been said) men may well be enjoined silence in it, without
entrinching upon the matter of Doctrine, or men's opinions: we are sure it is
maintained by the Learned, that men having declared their judgments concerning
some truths of an inferior nature, they may be silent for peaces sake. And so
contending Divines have been enjoined silence by Church-Judicatories. And if
any would but have a touch of the necessity and equity of these proceedings of
the Judicatories, against the opposers of these Resolutions, let them but take
a view of these men's ways; and let these Witnesses but re-act a few of their
former pranks. Let them but oppose any of these public Resolutions, of
conjunction of Forces with either Malignants or very Papists, that may be in
practice in these Nations: Let them refuse to act, or enjoy their public
Offices, under an Authority owning and putting in practice these Resolutions;
let them not only write and preach against them, as a defection and sin against
God, but let them protest against Judicatories, as not lawful, who own them;
Let them draw a faction and keep up a Rent, till they be repented of, or at
least made void, and assurance given against them for the future: Let them (we
say) but show forth a little of this their wonted spirit, and we hope others
will see what they are, as well as this Church and Nation has felt it. And if
they be true to their principles, they must do so still, in all times and
cases, in these confederate Nations; Otherwise men will have just cause to
suspect them of little conscience in the things they have done. But, (3.) This
instance has nothing to do with our Question; for, in our Overtures, wherein
Subordination was required, it was also offered, that all debates and
censurableness about these matters should be laid aside and made void. And so,
had they accepted the Union, that would have had nothing to do with the
Subordination required for the future.

IV. As to the persons of whom Submission is required; Two things come to be
considered, which may further clear the Question.

1. That Submission is required of ordinary Officers and Church Members only:
So that their Arguments from the practice of the Apostles and Prophets, page
47. and Arg. 2. page 100, 101. might well have been spared. For, (to omit what
further may be said afterward to the instance of the Apostles) their Calling
being neither of man, as to the Office it self, nor by man, as to their call to
it, but being immediately called by Christ Himself, without the interveening
Ministerial Power of Church-judicatories: We assert they were not subject to
any Church-judicatory on earth, as to their continuance or non-continuance in
the exercise of their Ministry. But ordinary Ministers as they have their Call
mediatly by the Church, without whose authoritative Mission no inward Call can
warrant them to thrust-out themselves; So, in their continuance in that Office,
which they have from the Church. they are subject to the Church. And if they
will assert a warrant for their continuance in the Ministry, whether the
Church will or not: Tub preachers may as well improve it to thrust themselves
in over the Churches belly. And here we may take notice of what is said by the
Authors of that Treatise, published by Mr. Rathband, formerly mentioned, who,
speaking of their yielding to Suspensions and Deprivations, by Bishops and
their Courts, page 41. they tell us, that it lies in them to depose, who may
ordain, and they may shut that may open; and afterward, and page 42. They
answer that very Objection from the Answer of the Apostles, Act. 4.19, 20.
urged by the Brownists against their Submission, by showing the differences
betwixt the Apostles case and theirs, 1. That they who inhibited the Apostles,
were known and professed enemies of the Gospel. 2. The Apostles were charged
not to teach in the Name of Christ, nor to publish any part of the Doctrine of
the Gospel, which (say they) was more hard than their case under Bishops, who,
though they cannot endure the truth concerning Government and Reformation of
the Church, yet are content the Gospel should be preached, and preach it
themselves. They add, 3. The Apostles received not their Calling and Authority
from men, nor by the hands of men, but immediately from God Himself, and
therefore al^o might not be restrained or deposed by men, whereas we, though we
exercise a function, whereof God is the Author, yet we are called and ordained
by the ministry of men, and may therefore by men be also deposed and
restrained from the exercise of our Ministry. Where, as their first and second
difference speak clearly to the second and third branches of our Question: So
this last does fully speak our mind in this. As to what they (and Mr.
Rutherfurd before them, in his Preface to his Survey) say of private persons
being Excommunicated, their Non-submission to abstain from public Ordinances;
As Excommunication is rarely pronounced in this Church, except in the case of
obstinacy, and therefore may easily be prevented: So we cannot understand how
they can avoid Non-submission, unless either they will forcibly obtrude
themselves on Ordinances till they be thrust-out, and so must come to
Non-submission at last; Or, unless they get Ministers who will admit of them,
and so refuse to submit to the Judicatories, which will at last fall in with
the former case. Though we, in the mean time, would have such a person
seriously to consider, whether his edification by these particular Ordinances,
from which he is debarred by the Sentence (means simply necessary to salvation
not being taken from him, and the want of the rest being but his affliction,
not his sin, take the matter in his own sense) ought to be laid in the balance
with the breach made on Order in a Church constitute and settled as is said,
with the contempt and scandal put upon the Judicatories, who yet stand
invested with power to rule in Christ's House; yea, and with the stumbling of
the whole Congregation upon whom he obtrudeth himself, who (perhaps) judge his
Sentence to be as just, as he counts it unjust.

2. As to the Submission of inferior Judicatories to superior, concerning
which they argue, Arg. 7. page 107. And again, Arg. 15. page 113, 114. We grant
indeed that the power of the superior Judicatory is cumulative, and not
privative to the inferior Judicatories, yet it must be understood in a right
sense: for, 1. It is granted on all hands betwixt us, that, by the
Constitutions of this Kirk, every Church-judicatory may not meddle with all
things, but with things that are of particular concernment within their bounds,
leaving things of more general concernment to the Church, to superior Courts:
yea, within their own bounds, Congregationall Elderships do not meddle with the
matter of Adultery, Excommunication, and Ordination of Ministers, but these
things come before the Presbytery. 2. Albeit inferior Judicatories have
intrinsic power given them by Christ, and may exercise it independently where
providence affords them no superior Judicatorie; yet in a National Church,
it is the will of Christ, they exercise that intrinsicall power with a
Subordination to the superior Courts, so that (so long as they hold the
Subordination, and do not renounce the Judicatories as Heretical and corrupt)
they may indeed do all they have right to do, yet so as they must be
accountable to others in the case of Appeals, or mal-administration, who may
lay as great claim to that promise, Matthew. 18. as they can. And if the
superior Judicatories judge their proceedings to have been wrong, in the case
now before us, it is no more lawful for them, than for private persons, to
make a Rupture by Non-submission, or not suffering and being passive; which
will prove a remedy worse than the disease. Nor does this Subordination prove
that these inferior Judicatories must be fenced in name of the superior;
Seeing they know, that even inferior Civil Courts are not fenced in the name of
a Parliament, to whom they are subordinate. And if this hold not, it shall be
to no purpose for superior Judicatories to meet, unless either to approve all
that is done, or else it please inferior Judicatories to be convinced by them.
And indeed, now it is no strange thing to see one private Presbytery not only
reverse and declare null the Conclusions of a General Assembly, but judicially
declare the Assembly it self null: far contrary to the Book of Discipline,
where it is expressly provided, that Elderships, or Presbyteries, must alter no
Rules made by General or Provincial Assemblies, Book 2. chap. 7. page 81. and
no less contrary to the opinion of Beza, Epist. 44. page 244. who judges it
iniquissimum and intolerabile, etc. most injust and intolerable, that things
concluded in a General Synod should be rescinded by the Authority of one
Consistory, unless the party pass from his right, or things be agreed among
parties, without any detriment to Ecclesiastical Discipline.

V. As to the nature of this Submission, or manner of performance thereof, two
things are worthy our consideration, for further clearing the truth in this
particular.

1. That in pleading for Submission in matters of Sentences, as is above
qualified, we do not urge that men in conscience should approve of all and
every of these Sentences as just, (however we do not therefore grant they are
unjust, as we shall after hear) But only that (what ever their judgment be)
they submit and suffer, or be passive (having done duty and exonered
themselves) without counteracting. And that because, 1. However they count them
unjust, yet they (looking through the prospect of passion and interest) may be
deceived. The Judge thinks them just, and it may be many others, yea, all
except the parties concerned. 2. However it be, yet it is better one or a few
persons suffer somewhat, than that a Schism be made in an Orthodox and well
settled Church.

This being the true state of the Question, and indeed a safe remedy appointed
by God, that when men in a Church cannot in Conscience obey a command, then
they may with a good Conscience submit and suffer: (for, the Lord's commanding
us to submit, and our engaging thereunto, does import there may be cases
wherein we cannot give active obedience) It is a miserable mistake all along in
the most part of this debate, that Obedience is confounded with Submission and
Suffering. That because a Church ought not in duty to domineer over the Flock,
page 52. therefore none of the Flock may lawfully suffer an injury, (or
supposed so) rather than do a greater injury, by renting the Flock. That
because Prelates taught falsely, that the Sentence of Superiors is a warrant
sufficient to men's Consciences to give active obedience to their constitutions,
and that the Law must be the rule of men's Consciences, and did bind men to give
obedience to their ceremonies upon pain of deprivation, (as they tell us, Arg.
13. page 110, 111.) Therefore there can be no ground for a Conscience to suffer
when they cannot obey: That because it must be a praecognitum in every law to
be actively obeyed, that it be just, therefore men are never called of God to
suffer, even unjustly: Because it is asserted, that Conscience is not left
unbound, by retaining the freedom of our judgments concerning the things which
yet we act and do, Arg. 3. page 102. therefore the conscience, does not retain
its just freedom concerning an unjust Sentence, because a man suffers under it:
As if our suffering under any thing did import an approbation thereof in our
Consciences: Because men may not tyrannize over Consciences, page 48. Therefore
Consciences cannot bear witness lawfully against what they count evil, even by
suffering: And because Protestant Divines do say, that the judgment of
discretion makes a man judge of his own actions, and what he should do, page
97. Therefore it warranteth him also to suffer nothing, but rather to confound
and overturn a Church ere he do so. These and many the like flowers of
discourse and fallacious argumentations are scattered through this Pamphlet,
which the judicious Reader will find to be clear non-sequitur's and very far
from the scope of the Scriptures and sense of the Writers which they cite here
and there, which we need not hunt after, seeing de similibus idem est judicium.

2. That we urge no such Submission to Sentences of inferior Courts, As
secludeth either Dissents, for men's own exoneration and keeping pure in what
they think wrong, (which we conceive is the Scripture-duty in such cases, 1 Timothy 5.22.) or Appeals from one Judicatory to another, till they come to the
highest can be had. Which speaks much to the justice of the Government, that
a man is not presently concluded irrecoverably under a Sentence by every
inferior Court, as it is in the Independent Government, but has a door left
open to get his cause heard again, till he come either to a National Assembly
with it, or (if that cannot be had) to a Synod. Yea, though one General
Assembly do not satisfy his desire, he may make his address by supplication
to another after that; So that a man has fair room to follow forth variety of
lawful means, and to have his cause heard before variety of Judicatories, for
righting any thing that is supposed to be amiss. Who, if they do right him, it
is well, if not, he has done his duty, and may sit down in peace, as having
neglected no lawful means of defense, and consequently may commit his cause to
God, as we heard before from the Reverend Assembly of Divines.

As to the matter of Submission till the Appeal be discussed, whatever the
practice of some of them be, in counter-acting upon their Appeal, before it be
heard before the Judge competent: yea, and upon their Appeal to a General
Assembly, (whereof we have wanted possession these years bygone, and know not
when it may be had) they take liberty, in the meantime, to do what they will
with the Sentences of Presbyteries and Synods: Yet we find them shy (to use
their own language) to own any such thing in this Pamphlet; But they lay the
stresse of their Non-submission upon their succumbing before the Judge to whom
they have appealed, page 48, 49. So also, page 99. they say nothing to
Submission till a man's Appeal be discussed. But to us it is clear, that as
Submission is due to the Sentence till the Appeal be discussed, by the Acts of
this Kirk, and judgment of Divines writing on this subject, as we heard before;
And as it were to no purpose to appeal, if men did not submit but went on,
seeing they have no benefit to recover by their Appeal if they submit not,
especially if they will not submit to the superior either; Yea, and it will be
most absurd to say they will not submit in some cases, when the Judicatory, who
may right them, is to conveen within a week, or very short time, and yet they
will not have patience even for so long: So Submission, till the Appeal be
discussed, will strongly conclude Submission after that also. And we think it
must be a strange thing, if a Minister, having offered to maintain his
Ministry before all the Judicatories of a National Church, and all of them
reject it, yet he will obtrude it upon them, nill they will they, and will make
schisms and factions never so many, ere he be not a Minister. We may say it,
though we account our Ministry (through grace) dearer than our life; yet so
long as there were service to do to Christ in any part of the Christian world,
we would be loath to use a Reformed Church so; yea, the loss of our life would
not be so bitter to us, as to be accessory to the confusions attending such a
practice.

VI. As to the nature of the Sentences, to which Submission is required, and
the justice or iniquity supposed to be in them, we do heartily agree with them,
that all Sentences pronounced by Judicatories ought to be just Sentences: yet
we offer these Considerations, which may further clear this debate.

1. Whereas it is taken for granted, all along, that the Sentence, to which
Submission is required, is an unjust Sentence: Yet (notwithstanding what has
been, or may be supposed) this is sufficient to answer all their Arguments,
that they but beg the Question in them: For it is not granted them that the
Sentences are unjust. And (though we dispute the matter further with them, yet)
this is indeed the true state of the Controversy betwixt us; Not, whether
unjust Sentences, that are so indeed, ought to be submitted unto; But, whether
parties are free not to submit to Sentences, though never so just, if they
count them unjust? Or, whether in case of a difference in judgment betwixt the
Judge and Party, concerning the nature of a Sentence pronounced, and neither of
them being able to convince the other; The judgment of the Judge ought to
carry it, as to the Parties passive obedience, and Submission thereunto? Ex.
gr. When a Judicatory judges a Minister insufficient for the work, and he
thinks himself able enough; Whether he be bound to submit to them, and forbear
Preaching, or not? If we speak of the case betwixt them and us, we never urged
any Sentences that were unjust to be submitted to by them (though for peace we
have offered to wave that debate) nor do the Judicatories purpose, in the power
of the Lords grace, to pronounce any unjust Sentence, but that they will judge
according to known rules. Yea, let this matter come in Question betwixt
Judicatories and Parties, and it will be laid to the charge of Parties, that
they submit not to just Sentences. It is true, they call them unjust, but, to
whom, are they so? The Judge pronouncing a Sentence counts it just, it may be
so do all others, but the Party: He will not submit to his Judges Verdict, Can
he then find any Arbitrators to whom he is rather bound to submit, than to his
Judge; Or, must all return to his own private judgment of discretion, not only
as to what he will approve or do, but what he will suffer? And yet was it ever
almost found but that Parties Sentenced were grieved and dissatisfied
therewith; And might not these Heretics who were Censured, Act. 15. have urged
the same plea? And did not the Arminians at Dort, and do not Heretics at all
occasions, condemn the Sentences of their Judges, and yet their Judges did not
yield the Question to them? If a comparison be instituted betwixt the Judges
and the Party; The Judges may safely allege, that it is not so probable they
are in an error as the Party, as being a multitude of Counselors, wherein is
safety: as being less blinded with passion and personal concernments in the
cause, than the Party is, and having a more express promise (though they
pretend not to infallibility) for direction and assistance in judgment, Matthew.
18.19, 20. Thus Beza, (Epist. 59.) pleading the Cause of Christ's Courts against
some disturber, wills him to consider, that though they consist not of
sinlesse men, yet it is probable that many should be wiser than one. If we
speak to their procedure, they are ready to offer all rational satisfaction:
These Witnesses say, that it is a Praecognitum in all Sentences to be
pronounced by Judges, and obeyed by Parties, that they be just Sentences, page
52, 53. That Ministers ought to be subject only to lawful admonitions, That
Suspension and Deposition should be for lawful causes, page 51. That Intrants
are engaged to submit themselves to Admonitions and Censures, only when they
slide and offend, page 60. And the Judges say their Sentence is just, for
lawful causes, and upon real sliding, though they cannot persuade the party
that it is so. If they allege that even in the matter of Transportations, the
Judicatories are bound to give reasons for the expediency of the same, much
more should they deal meekly in Sentences, page 51, 52. The Judge declineth not
so to do, they are ready to give solid reasons for their deed, though they
cannot persuade the party to see them; Yea, they are ready to hear what the
party can offer against the Sentence, though they cannot convince him that his
reasons have no force. They will grant him that his private judgment of
discretion makes him a judge of his own actions (though yet but a subordinate
judge) as to what he should do, page 97. but cannot allow it should hinder and
bind them up from censuring what is wrong, or warrant him not to submit in the
point of suffering. When we enquire what remedy is there to avoid a Schism, and
preserve Unity and Order, if they submit not: They tell us, page 49. If the
Sentence be unjust, it ought to be recognized and repealed: If it be just, and
of an inferior nature, (that is, a lesser degree of Censure) if the persons
will not submit, they are, after due procedure, to be cast out as those that
will not hear the Church, etc. And what is this but the very constant practice
of the Judicatories, though parties will not see that they judge justly? And
what shall the Judge do, if after the Sentence of Excommunication is
pronounced, the party still refuse to submit? They offer us no remedy, in that
case, for preserving of Order and avoiding of Schism. So that, in a word, the
case comes to this, Not if they ought to submit to an unjust Sentence, But,
whether, let all the Judicatories, even from an Eldership to an Oecumenick
Council, proceed never so justly and conscientiously, yet the party censured is
still supreme judge on earth of all their proceedings, and his own actings and
behavior in reference to whatsoever of their Sentences; So that till he be
convinced, he must suffer nothing, but counteract at his pleasure? And if this
be a sound principle, all sober Christians will judge. And when they cry-out so
much, that we do not purge; we desire to know how by this principle we can
purge any at all; Or, if others be not free to make use of it as well as they?
We shall shut-up this part of the discourse with some account of the judgment
of others in this very matter, The Commissioners of the General Assembly of the
Church of Scotland, then at London (Sir Archibald Johnston of Wariston, and Mr.
Rutherfurd being of that number) in their Reformation of Church Government in
Scotland cleared from some mistakes and prejudices, page 17. do assert, that,
To limit the censure of Excommunication (the like may be said of Suspension and
Deposition of Ministers, and other Censures) in matter of opinion, to the
common and uncontroverted principles; and in the matter of manners, to the
common and universal practices of Christianity; and in both, to the parties
KNOWN LIGHT, is the dangerous doctrine of the Arminians and Socinians, etc. To
this we add a further Consideration of that Objection mentioned before: [How
Judicatories can, without wronging Christian Liberty, inflict Censures, or put
men to suffer, who profess, that, after examination of the Decrees or
Constitutions, they cannot be persuaded of the lawfulness of the same?] To
this (beside what is before marked) further answer is given by Mr. Gillespie
(in his Assertion, part. 2. chap. 4. page 152, 153.) 1. That our Divines by
these Tenets (of Christian liberty and the allowance of a private judgment of
discretion) do not mean to open a door to disobedience and contempt of the
Ordinances of a Synod: but only to oppugn the Popish error concerning the
binding power of Ecclesiastical Laws by the sole will and naked authority of
the Lawmakers, and that Christian People ought not to seek any further reason
or motive of obedience: And we are so far from this, that we not only offer
reasons of Laws to be actively obeyed (of which he here speaks) but even of
Sentences to be submitted unto, though the contemners and disobeyers will not
see them. 2. A Synod must ever put a difference betwixt those, who out of a
real scruple of conscience, in a modest and peaceable way, refuse obedience,
(understand active obedience, to which he is speaking) to their Ordinances,
still using the means of their better information: and those who contemptuously
or factiously disobey the same, laboring with all their might to strengthen
themselves in their error, and to persuade others to be of their mind. How
applicable this distinction is to the carriage of these Witnesses, in the
matters of our late differences, we leave even to themselves to judge. The same
Mr. Gillespie, in his Miscellanie Questions, chap. 16. page 207. says, It is
no tyranny over men's consciences, to punish a great and scandalous sin (such as
the refusing and opposing of the Covenant, or a dividing from it) although the
Offender in his conscience believe it to be no sin, Yea, peradventure believe
it to be a duty. Otherwise it had been tyranny over the conscience to punish
those who killed the Apostles, because they thought they were doing God good
service, Joh. 16.2.

2. But seeing all men, and even Church-judicatories, are fallible, let it be
supposed, that a Sentence is unjust, (and be it still remembered, that it is but
supposed, and not yielded. For, as it can hardly be imagined that a Judge will
pronounce a Sentence which he accounts unjust, So we desire that our
supposing the injustice of their Sentence, be understood without any prejudice
to Judicatories right, in maintaining the justice of their own Sentences) And
let the Question be of a Church so constituted, and sound and orthodox, as is
before expressed, and of Sentences, such as we have qualified for the matter of
them; And we do hold that they ought to be submitted unto, and suffered under,
without counteracting: and that the former considerations, pressing Submission
in general, do take place, even in this case. This we might easily confirm
from the general practice of the Godly in all ages, and particularly of the
Non-conformists, who, as they put a vast difference between subjection and
obedience, so in their practice, they did cheerfully suffer under unjust
Sentences, and did vindicate the aspersions cast upon their non-obedience, by
their readiness to submit and suffer. Who so will be pleased to peruse Parker
on the Cross, Chap. 4. Sect. 12, 14, 15. will find they were so far from
owning Non-submission to these unjust Sentences of Bishops for their
nonconformity, that they did own Submission, and vindicate their practice in
submitting, from the aspersions cast upon them for it, and did encourage
themselves and the Church, by believing that the loss of their Ministry should
be the Lords gain and the Churches. It is the positive judgment of Beza (as we
heard before from his Epist. 12.) that godly men in England should not continue
to preach, against the Queen and Bishops will; where he adds, that having in
these cases, attested their own innocence, and essayed all remedies in the
fear of the Lord, they should yield to manifest violence. The Provincial
Assembly of South-holland, met at Delph, go a further length against the
Remonstrants, Act. Synod. Dordr. page 86, 87. where, having spoken several
things in answer to the Arminians argument against a Synod and their Submission
thereunto, because the Members thereof are all fallible men; and having
asserted, that there is ground of confidence, that Christ, according to His
promise, will be present and direct a lawful Synod, gathered together in His
fear, to judge in matters according to the Word of God, that nothing shall be
decreed therein to the prejudice of His Truth and Kingdom: They expressly add,
Sed fac aliquid ejusmodi decretum iri, etc. But let it be supposed, that some
such thing be decreed, yet truth will not therefore still be kept at under, but
will in due time break forth again. But, in the mean time, order, quietness
and peace ought to be kept in the Church of Christ. For God is not the God of
confusion or disorder, but of peace; and therefore will have all things to be
done in His Church, orderly, peaceably and quietly. Now there can be no order
nor peace in the Church of God, if every man be permitted to teach what he
will, and be not obliged to give an account of his Doctrine, nor submit himself
to the judgment of any Synod, according to the precept of the Apostle, 1 Cor.
14.29.32. Another instance in stead of many, is the judgment and practice of
these Authors of the Treatise formerly mentioned against the Brownists,
suffering for the cause of Nonconformity. They being challenged by the
Brownists for going to the Bishops Courts, for standing and falling at their
commandment, or yielding to their suspensions and deprivations; After they have
given their reasons for their going to these Courts, and reverencing and
yielding to their Censures according to the Law of the Land, which did
establish conformity: They add, ( page 41.) If it be said, That the Church is
not to be obeyed when it su^pendeth and depriveth us for such causes as we in
our consciences know to be insufficient: We answer, That it lies in them to
Depose, that may Ordain; and they may shut that may open. And that as he may
with a good conscience execute a Ministry by the Ordinance and calling of the
Church, who is privy to himself of some u^fitnesse, (if the Church will press
him to it) so may he, who is privy to himself of no fault that deserves
Deprivation, cease from the execution of his Ministry, when he is pressed
thereunto by the Church. And if a guiltless person put out of his charge by
the Churches Authority, may yet continue in it; What proceedings can there be
against guilty persons, who in their own conceit are always guiltless, or
will at least pretend to be so; Seeing they also will be ready always to object
against the Churches judgment, that they are called of God, and may not
therefore give over the execution of their Ministry at the will of man. By
which it evidently appears, that the judgment and practice of these ancient
Worthies and suffering Presbyterians has been point blank opposite to the
Doctrine of these new Teachers and modellers of Government, and that the
strength of the Arguments in this Pamphlet were not unknown to them when they
thus determined and practiced, as may appear from the very last words above
cited, and from what we have elsewhere cited of their Answer to the Objection
taken from Act. 4.19, 20.

But that we may make this truth appear more distinctly, we premit these
general considerations. 1. That the wise Lord has been pleased to entrust the
Government of His House into the hands of fallible men, who not only may, but
sometime actually do err. 2. That no judge either Civil or Ecclesiastical,
has any Commission or Authority from God, to sin, or enact an unjust Sentence.
And that this is not to be restricted to Church-judicatories only, cannot be
doubted by any Christian who holds the Magistrates Authority and Commission to
be from God, who does not authorize any to sin. For, as power is given to the
Church, to edification, and not to destruction; So Magistrates ought not to be
a terror to good works, but to the evil, Romans 13.3. 3. That every particular
wrong act or acts do not divest a Judge of his Authority (though it be granted
he has no Commission or Authority to do these acts, as they assert, p. 96.
praecog. 5.) but he remains the Judge and lawful Authority of the Church or
Nation, as is clear in right reason, and by Scripture Rules. For if it be
asserted, that an unjust Sentence, one or more, do make void the Authority of
the Judge, this will overthrow all Government, Ecclesiastical, Civil, or
Oeconomicall. Mr. Gee in his Treatise of the Civil Magistrate, page 36, 37.
urges, that indeed lawful powers are bound to use it lawfully, but yet
asserteth it as yielded by all, that this is not simply necessary to the being
of a lawful power; but a power that is unlawful only as to exercise, may be
for its habit, and being, included in the Text, (Romans 13.) and its irregular
actings only discarded from it. 4. That by the Word of God, Submission or
passive obedience is required and commended in some cases, and that of a
different nature from the suffering of guilty persons, Matthew. 5.10, 11. 1 Pet.
4.15, 16. And that in some cases, the People of God are called to suffer
without resisting, as has been the frequent practice of Saints, and asserted
by all Orthodox Divines, writing upon Subjection as contradistinct to
Obedience. 5. That as Schism is an evil disapproven, and never warranted of
God; So a man may be guilty of Schism, who not only makes a Rent and causes
disorder upon a cause destitute of truth, but also upon a cause not weighty and
relevant, though true in it self. This is so obvious to all who are anything
acquainted with the Scriptures, and with the Writings of the Ancients, or
latter Divines upon the nature and evil of Schism, that it is needless to
insist on the probation of it. Whosoever pleases to peruse Mr. Baxter in his
Explication of the Agreement of the Ministers of Worcestershire, page 119.
will find much to this purpose in few words. And, among others, these
passages, If the Scripture were conscionably observed, men would take
Church-division for a greater sin than Adultery or Theft. Mutinies and
Divisions do more infallibly destroy an Army than almost any other fault or
weakness: And therefore all Generals punish Mutineers with death, as well as
flat Traitors. And a little after, Commonly they that divide for the bringing
in of any inferior truth or practice, do but destroy that truth and piety that
was there before.

We might upon these grounds multiply Arguments, as they have taken pleasure,
it seems, that way, to make a show of many, which may be reduced to very few;
But we shall content our selves with these. 1. If there be a Submission and
passive Obedience due by Christians in any case to the Sentence of a
Judicatory, and commended of God, as has been presupposed, and cannot without
contradicting the principles of Christianity be denied; Then certainly it must
be due to unjust Sentences. For unto just Sentences, requiring a duty under
pain of Censure, active obedience and not passive is due by the Word of God.
And as for Sentences inflicting Censures, it is true, Submission to such just
Sentences is due by the Word of God, but that is not the passive obedience
required, and so much commended in Saints, in the Word, but only that suffering
which is contra-distinct to suffering as evil doers, or for just causes, as is
clear from 1 Pet. 2.18, 19, 20. and 4.14, 15, 16, 19. So that unless they will
banish a command to suffer according to the will of God, or cleanly suffering
with a good conscience, out of the Bible, they cannot avoid this. 2. As it is
granted, that Authority and Submission are correlative, page 45. And that in
just Sentences, beside the obligation of the matter, there is a formal
obligation by its coming from such an Authority, page 46. So in an unjust
Sentence, albeit Judges have no authority nor warrant from God to do that act,
and it is null before Him; nor does it oblige the conscience by virtue of the
matter of it: Yet so long as they continue the standing Authority of a Church,
somewhat is due to them relative to that Authority, and that is Submission. If
they could make them simpliciter no Judges, because they err in a particular
fact, they would say somewhat: but seeing they are still lawful Judges, even
when they pronounce that Sentence, though they fail in it* It must be held as
of general verity, that while persons continue invested with lawful Authority,
Obedience, or (if obedience cannot with a good conscience be given) Submission
is due to their actings by private persons: For, if Submission and passive
obedience, or cleanly suffering, be due in any case, and that not to just but
to unjust Sentences, and if the Submission be due not by virtue of any warrant
given by God to pronounce that Sentence, (for there is none) Then certainly
there is a Submission due to the standing Authority of a Judge or Court, as
they continue still Gods Ordinance, though they err in that particular. This
consequence is not only owned and urged by Mr. Durham on the Revelation, page
100. That submitting unto Church Power is a necessary and concerning duty, and
that without this Submission, there could be no Government nor exercise of
Power. But their own very concession (formerly mentioned) page 45, 46. does put
it beyond all controversy. For, if Authority and Submission be correlative,
and the one cannot subsist without the other, more than one relative can
actually subsist without its correlative; Then we hope it is no slander to say,
that Submission is essential to Presbyterial Government, seeing Logicians have
taught us, and they grant it, that take away a relative, and the correlative
cease to be. And therefore also either must the Authority of Judicatories,
when they pronounce some unjust Sentence, be totally annulled, or Submission
must be paid as due to that Authority, as has been said. This may (3.) be
further confirmed a pari: Magistrates are bounded by the Word of God, that they
may not, by their Commission, judge unjustly, nor pronounce an unjust Sentence,
more than Church-judicatories: And yet albeit Magistrates do decree an
unrighteous Sentence, they may not be resisted, but must be submitted unto by
private persons, unless they would resist the Ordinance of God, though coming
short of the Rule in that particular act. Now, if this be granted to the
standing Authority of Magistrates, erring in a particular fact (and granted it
must be, unless men will blow the Trumpet of Rebellion to every private person,
and condemn Saints in former ages, in their suffering under the unjust
Sentences, even of wicked Magistrates) it cannot be denied either to the
standing Authority of Church-judicatories: Seeing the case is alike as to the
Authority of both to do evil, and Subjection is due only in the Lord to the one
as to the other. And here we desire the Reader to take notice of a passage of
Mr. Buroughs, in his Lectures on Hosea, chap. 1. ver. 10. page 111. cited by
Mr. Gee, Treatise of the Magist. page 257, 258. where, having denied that
Submission, active or passive, is due to the Commands of men till it be brought
to a Law, and they be a Power; He subjoyneth, When things are brought into a
Law, (understand a lawful Authority established according to the Agreements
and Covenants of the place where we live, as the following words are) and then
suppose this Authority be abused, and there be an ill law made, then (I
confess) if the law be of force, we must either quit our selves of the
Country, or else submit or suffer. When then it comes to be a power, to be a
law, it is Authority though abused, and we must yield obedience to it, either
actively or passively. If it be said, that men submit to the force, not to the
Authority, of the civil Magistrate, in these cases. Ans. Not to insist that
they know the Church also uses all the force they have, and so the case is
alike; It would be considered, That to submit only to the force of a Magistrate
pronouncing and executing an unjust Sentence, is only that Submission out of
prudence, and for preventing other disturbances, which Mr. Buroughs (in the
forecited place) grants may be yielded to unlawful powers: But it is not
that Submission out of conscience which he holds to be due to lawful Authority
and their laws, even when Authority is abused in making them. For it is a
Scripture Rule, that we are to be subject not only for wrath, but for
conscience sake, Romans 13.5. Which Mr. Gee (page 112.) expounds, a subjection
of conscience, as the principle of conscience is contra-distinct from terror
and compulsory punishment. And it is known, sufferers use not to wait for force
to make them submit, but do it in submission to Authority. Condemned persons
wait not till they be drawn to the place of execution, but go on their own
feet, and banished persons will depart upon the charge of a Magistrate. Yea,
where men unjustly Sentenced have been in a capacity to resist force, (as
Christians were in the Armies of Pagan Emperors) yet they have submitted to
Authority and suffered. 4. That which takes away all use of Appeals,
instituted by Christ in the case of mal-administration, cannot be of God; for
one Ordinance of God does not make another of no effect. Now this Doctrine of
Non-submission and counter-acting does make void all use of Appeals; For (as
has been cleared before) the Appeal from an unjust Sentence, supposes
submission to it in the mean time: for, let it be holden, that such a Sentence
is null and not to be submitted unto, and let a Church own that principle, and
there needs no Appeal. 5. That also which involveth a man in the guilt of
Schism, cannot be of God: But a man not submitting to some unjust Sentence, is
involved in the guilt of Schism, because though he have right on his side, yet
his personal suffering is not tanti, as to be laid in the balance with the
confusion and open contempt of lawful Authority, and other inconveniences
attending upon his Non-submission. And albeit his Judge must answer to Christ
for his unjust Sentence, yet he must answer for his Schism, if he suffer not
patiently. 6. To this may be added, That it should rub an imputation upon the
wisdom of God, who has put this trust in fallible men's hands, who may and do
err, if Submission were not a safe medium to be acquiesced in, betwixt the
rocks of sinful obedience, and schismatic contra-acting in a Church, or
rebellion in a State. For the governing of us not being entrusted to men who
cannot err, without this medium men can hardly walk under the dispensations of
providence toward them, but either they must split on one hand or other;
Whereas now by yielding suffering to be commanded of God, and a duty laid upon
us in such cases, we wipe off all imputations cast on Him, and may walk in
peace of mind, though with some personal prejudice.

VII. As to the Arguments which they muster up against this Submission, if we
hold them at their word, page 115, 116. that in some cases they would not much
contend about it, (of which we have also spoken before) we might leave it at
their own door to answer them, and to clear how, in any case, they would not
contend about what they plead so much against as sinful. For sin, in any case,
and in any matter, is sinful, and so not to be yielded unto. And if they can
bring sufficient reasons why, in the cases they mention in the forecited
passage, they may submit to an unjust Sentence, They will save us a labor in
vindicating our selves, and answering their Arguments, against the Submission
we plead for. But for further satisfaction, As we have already in this debate
met with many of their reasons and particular branches of them, and either
answered them, or laid them aside as impertinent to our Question, which we
shall not now repeat; So we do offer a brief return to what is (or seems to
be) further material in their reasonings, in these particulars.

1. Their scope in a great part of their discourse and Arguments, is, to
evince, That because Judges have no Commission or Authority from Christ to
pronounce an unjust Sentence, Therefore they are not to be submitted unto,
unless men will take their will and arbitriment for a law to their
Consciences. But this is a great fallacy and confounding of things that are
very different; Namely, of the Rule whereby Judges ought to walk in their
administrations, and the rule whereby the Lords people ought to walk under
these dispensations of providence toward them, whereof humane Judges in their
administrations, are the interveening Instruments. We yield, that Judicatories
are limited by their Commission, that they may do no unjust act; and if they
do, they must answer to God for it: We yield also, that the rule of their
Commission, does regulate also those who are under them, as to their approving
or giving active obedience to their injunctions. But when it comes to the
matter of suffering, and being passive after we have exonered our selves, we do
not look to their will as our rule or ground of our Submission, but to a
peculiar Command of God enjoining Submission in such cases, to prevent schism
and confusion. This may easily take off the most of their reasonings. They urge
Acts of Assemblies, page 51. that Ministers ought to be censured for lawful
and just causes; and take much pains to prove that Judicatories are bound to
judge according to the Word, Arg. 1. and elsewhere; And when they do otherwise,
that they act that for which they have no Commission nor power, page 96. All
which we grant to be true of Ecclesiastical Judges, as it is also alike true
of Civil Powers, that none of them have a power to judge unjustly, and that God
who commands us to be subject unto them, commands them to judge justly: And
therefore in the case of unrighteous judgment, we neither approve nor give
active obedience: yea, we are free, for the liberation of our own souls, to
contradict even an Oecumenick Council, Angels, Prophets, and Apostles, if they
determine contrary to the Word of God, as they have it, Arg. 8. (yea, and to do
more also, if they bring in another Doctrine of the Gospel, to which the
Scripture there cited speaks, Gal. 1.6, 7, 8.) And so shall deny them also
any power over our Consciences, nor shall we set them on Christ's Throne (which
they charge upon our opinion, Arg. 3.) as to the acknowledgement of their
Sentences to be just, or any approbation, in our practice and active obedience,
of what in our Consciences we disallow, (which is all can be inferred from the
principles of Non-conformists, concerning the freedom of Conscience, mentioned
also, Arg. 3.) Yet it cannot from all these be inferred, that there is not a
command of God oblieging us, in Conscience, to suffer unjustly, rather than
make a Schism, and pour contempt upon standing lawful Authority. Nor is it
soundly argued, that because they do not their duty in their station (for which
they must give an account to God) therefore we are not bound to suffer what we
are called to, in our stations, Or, that suppose men should play the Popes in
pronouncing an unjust Sentence (such as is above qualified) against a man, as
they have it, Arg. 14. Therefore the sufferer may lawfully sin too. This
opinion is so far from dethroning, that it does exalt Christ, and does deny to
men what is not due to them, and yet gives to Christ what is due to Him.
Likewise, when they urge so much, Arg. 9, and 10. that it argues the
Scriptures of imperfection, gives what is due to them to Judicatories, and
must infer the infallibility of Judicatories, that they must not be
contradicted, nor contra- acted, but their will must be a law, as they
elsewhere tell us; There is all along a great mistake in the case: For, not
only is that of not contradicting put in without cause, seeing men may
contradict, as to the declaration of their judgment, when yet they submit; But
we never asserted a Judicatory might be contra-acted in no case (as we cleared
before in laying aside their eleventh Argument, and other reasonings) we are
only now debating about Submission to Sentences qualified as is above
expressed: And what submission we pay in these, we are so far from setting up
men's infallibility, or from derogating from the Scriptures, as to their
perfection, and sole Authority over our Consciences, that it is not out of
conscience of the justice of the Sentence, but in obedience to the sole command
of God, bidding us respect lawful Authority and suffer in such cases, that we
pay it. And it is upon the supposition of the Judges fallibility, yea, and
their erring actually, that we press this Submission, as contra-distinct to
active obedience. So also as to the Scriptures which they cite, Arg. 2. That we
should not be the servants of men, but stand fast in our Christian liberty, and
obey God rather than men; They have borrowed these weapons from Independents,
who (as Mr. Rutherfurd tells us, Peac. Plea, page 193.) borrowed them from
Anabaptists and Socinians, arguing against the places of Kings, Judges and
Magistrates. But the argument is easily answered, that we obey God and not men,
and are His servants and not theirs, in this Submission; And that the people of
God are free, as to the enslaving of their Conscience with the approbation, or
their practice with doing of any thing that is unjust; yet they have not an
immunity from stouping to suffer when God calls them to it. And let the case be
but instanced in a Magistrates unjust Sentence against particular persons, and
it will say for it self, whether their Christian liberty will reach a
Non-submission or not. Likewise, when they urge, Arg. 12. that unjust Sentences
are null in themselves, and therefore cannot bind to Submission and subjection:
We grant that in foro interno, it is a null Sentence, not oblieging the
Conscience to any approbation thereof; Yet in foro externo, it is so far
valide, as a man cannot deny submission thereunto without sinning against God,
in contemning the standing lawful Authority of a Church, in making a Schism,
and declining to suffer when God calls him to it. And in this the very
Independents agree, though they differ about the subject invested with the
power of the keys; for they tell us, in their Defense of the nine Positions,
page 210. That a Minister derives all his authority from Christ, by the Church
indeed, applying that Office to him, to which the authority is annexed by the
institution of Christ; Hence being the Minister of Christ to them, if they
without Christ depose him, they hinder the exercise of his Office, but his
right remains.

2. While they urge, that Ministers are over us in the Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12.
Arg. 1. And that we are to be subordinate to Church Power only in the Lord,
page 95, 96. That is so far from warranting Non-submission, and contra-acting
in the Question betwixt us, that it does strongly assert it. For (to omit many
other things which the Learned find imported in this) to be subject in the
Lord, as it imports, 1. An acknowledgment in our Consciences of their lawful
Authority, And, 2. active obedience to what they command in the Lord: So, 3. in
the case of an unjust Sentence, it requires such submission and passive
obedience, as He has enjoined us in His Word in such cases; (which what it is,
has been spoken to before) and so it confirms our Assertion. That this is
not a forced Interpretation, may appear, were it but from this one
consideration, That this qualification of Submission and Obedience in the Lord,
is not required in reference to Chruch-judicatories only, but of children also
in reference to their Parents, and consequently of all inferiors paying
subjection to their Superiors in their several stations, as is clear from Ephesians.
6.1. Col. 3.18. and elsewhere. Now, it is not to be supposed that the Apostle
warranteth children, servants, or subjects to resist and counteract all the
unjust corrections and Sentences of their Masters and Superiors, but that they
should submit and suffer rather. For we find in Scripture, that it is the
commendable duty of children to submit to their parents, even when they chasten
them for their pleasure only, Heb. 12.9, 10. As also of christian servants to
suffer unjustly under their bad Masters, 1 Pet. 2.18, 19, 20. and generally of
all Christians to suffer under their persecuting Magistrates, 1 Pet. 3.14, 15,
16, 17. and, 4.12, 13, 14.15, 16. and frequently throughout the Scriptures. And
this, together with what has formerly been produced, may satisfy that part of
Arg. 1. wherein they call for a precept or precedent in Scripture to clear this
matter. For here we find there is Scripture-warrant for this Submission, to
which we may add, That the practice of the suffering People of God in all
generations, is a clearer Commentary to these Texts, than all the glosses
(tending but to sedition, schism and confusion of human society) they can
fasten upon them.

3. While they urge, ( Arg. 15. page 113, 114.) That this brings in a Tyranny
in the Church, and by parity of reason condemns defensive Arms, which are
judged lawful against State-tyranny: We are so far from allowing Tyranny or
Injustice in the least, that we maintain, that all Judicatories are bound to
judge righteous judgment at their peril. And if they proceed to ruin all
Religion (as this Argument carries it with vehemence enough, to say no more)
we have already cleared what the People of God may lawfully do in such a case;
yea, in unjust Sentences of lesser moment, not only inferior Judicatories, but
even particular persons in their stations, may do more than whisper once
against them (as they are pleased to phrase it) and yet submit when they have
done. But as to the Question betwixt us and this Church, they will find their
Argument from defensive Arms to fail them. For (not to dip any further in that
Question) no learned man ever allowed even the body of a Nation, or their
Representatives in Parliament, to rise against a Prince (far less a party
only, be they persons, or some inferior Judicatories, against the Supreme
Magistrate, or a National Church and her Representatives, which is our case)
upon the account only of the unjust sufferings of particular persons, while yet
the affairs of Church and State were well ordered, That would soon make more
unjust sufferers than would be under lawful Authority not resisted, possibly
in many ages. And we believe it is without precept or precedent, that private
subjects or inferior Courts, should rise in Arms against their Prince or
Parliaments, only because they inflict some unjust Sentences on themselves or
some private subjects, while yet they adhere unto, and overturn none of the
righteous things concluded in a Nation. And therefore this Church being through
mercy settled in the matter of Doctrine, Worship and Government, they may spare
this Argument, till they prove this Church to be overturning all or any of
these.

4. That wherein they seem to place no small confidence in this matter (as
appears by their frequent repeating and expatiating thereupon) is, that
reason of the Apostles for their Non-submission to the Council at Jerusalem,
Acts. 5.29. It is better to obey God than men, together with these Commands of
God, enjoining Ministers to preach the Word, and Christians to partake of the
Sacrament, in remembrance of Christ, 2 Timothy 4.2. 1 Cor. 11.24. These they
propound, Arg. 2. p. 99. and the most of their reasoning thereupon is again
recapitulate in short, Arg. 4. That these duties being commanded by God, they
cannot omit them without sin, upon that non-relevant reason, of the mere will
of men, unjustly sentencing them with Deposition and Excommunication. This they
urge further Arg. 2. page 100, 101. from the instances (not only of the
Apostles, and Jeremiah, and Amos, to which we have spoken before, but) of
Daniel, counteracting the Decree of Darius, Dan. 6. and of the man's confessing
Christ, though cast-out by the Jews for it, Joh. 9. But (to say nothing that
this last instance will not prove that Non-submission to the Sentence of
Excommunication, which they there speak of, unless they make it appear that
the man did not only confess Christ still, but obtrude himself also upon the
Jews in their Church-societie) The Answer to this is easy, if we take notice
of a twofold distinction, 1. We would distinguish humane prohibitions of duties
commanded by God. For, some prohibitions are not only restraints put upon some
persons as to the exercise of these duties, upon the account of these persons
incapacity (real or supposed) to go about the same; But are in effect and
chiefly a condemning of these duties in their very nature and kind, as not to
be observed by any person whatsoever: and so do not touch upon the incapacity
of the persons who are prohibited, but upon the things themselves, considered
as such moral performances, which are prohibited. Such a prohibition was that
of Darius, which was a political Decree prohibiting the very duty of Prayer
unto God, and that to all men universally, not to Daniel or some others only,
upon any personal incapacity in them. So the Decree of the Jews was against the
very duty of confessing Christ, and not a restraint upon some persons only,
that they should not be the performers of that duty. And their Decree against
the Apostles preaching, was a Law and dogmatick Determination against the whole
Doctrine of the Gospel and the publishing thereof to the world, and not a
restraint put upon the Apostles only, while they allowed others to do it. For,
it may appear from their own words, Act. 4.17. and 5.2. that their quarrel was
not against the Apostles preaching, but against the Doctrine which they
preached, in this Name. They offered not to silence them from publishing
Doctrine simpliciter, but from publishing this Doctrine. Again, There are some
prohibitions which are mere disciplinary Sentences, restraining persons from
such duties of an office, or the use of such privileges as they not only allow
of in their nature and kind, but do allow others in the practice and enjoyment
of them, and do only restrain others therefrom upon the account of their
personal incapacity, real or supposed Ex. gr. when a Church-judicatory deposes
a Minister from preaching of Christ, upon the account of insufficiency or
scandal, or debarreth a Member from participation of public Ordinances;
suppose they do err in the particular, yet they are so far from condemning of
these duties, of preaching of Christ and partaking of the Ordinances, that they
provide another to preach in the room of him whom they have put out, and do see
to the dispensing of the Ordinances daily, and to the inviting of the rest of
the Congregation to join in the participation thereof. That there is a vast
difference betwixt these two sorts of prohibitions, may appear further in this
(beside what is said) that prohibitions of the first sort, are simply and in
their nature and kind unlawful, nor can any such Decree be lawfully made at
any time: But disciplinary Sentences are not unlawful in their nature and
kind, but may, in some cases, lawfully be pronounced and executed, as is
confessed by all. And as to the application of the distinction to the case in
hand; We need not meddle with it in the matter of prayer and confessing Christ,
seeing (as we shall hear upon the second distinction) these fall not within the
compass of Disciplinary Sentences. But as to the matter of preaching and
participation of public Ordinances, which are the things in debate betwixt us,
we may hence take a clear solution of the difficulty. For, let once a
Church-judicatory grow so corrupt, as to condemn the duties of preaching Christ
and participation of public Ordinances, in their very nature and kind, and as
to all sorts of persons universally: (which is the true case held out in their
Instances; for even the false Priest at Bethel, and the Rulers at Jerusalem did
condemn the Doctrine preached by Amos and Jeremiah, and did not quarrel only
their preaching of it while they did allow it in others) And in that case, we
should without scruple (as was said before) conclude them no true Courts of
Christ; and consequently, not to be submitted unto. Yea, in case such decrees
were published, we should hold it a case of Confession for Ministers to preach,
and people to frequent Ordinances, so long as they had liberty or opportunity.
And so, though neither the Apostles nor Prophets had been extraordinarily
called, nor clothed with a Commission unrepealable (as has been said) by any
on earth, their warrant was sufficiently clear in that case to hold up the
oppressed truth of the Gospel, against the sworn enemies of Christ and the
Gospel, who would neither preach Christ nor suffer Him to be preached by any
other; as we heard from these worthy Non-conformists, Authors of the Treatise
against the Brownists formerly mentioned. But on the other hand, When a Church
does own all the Truths of the Gospel, and all the Ordinances of Christ, and
does no sooner put out one from preaching of Christ, but they provide another
to make up that want, and do dispense the Ordinances in purity to the people of
God; In such a case, (which, through mercy, is the case of this Church, as we
have heard) Suppose they do err in discharging one to Preach, and another to
come to the Ordinances: It is not the will of God that persons so suffering
should make a Schism by their Non-submission and counteracting, upon the
account of their personal suffering, or prejudice, as the preceding Arguments
do abundantly prove: But, having used all lawful means of redress, by Appeals
to superior Judicatories, they ought to acquiesce, and submit to the will of
God calling them to suffer, rather than run upon the many inconveniences
formerly mentioned. But to clear this further, (2.) We would distinguish duties
commanded us by God, wherein we may be restrained by men. For, there are some
moral duties incumbent to Christians simply and absolutely as they are
Christians, and which are simply in their own power, by themselves and
independently from others, and enjoined them without any respect to their
Subordination or relation to others in the Church; So that to their performance
of them, they neither need a call impowering them thereunto, nor are dependent
upon the concurrence of any others, in or to the same: Such as prayer to God,
and confessing of Christ, which are of moral natural right: And there are
other duties of moral positive institution, which are not in men's own power
severally and by themselves, and independently from others in the Church, but
some way in the power of others beside themselves; and are incumbent to men as
they stand in relation or Subordination to others; And are either duties to be
performed by men as they stand clothed with an Office, received by the
interveening Ministry of the Church; such as the ordinary Ministerial
preaching of the Word, and the administration of other public Ordinances: Or
privileges which they do enjoy by the Ministry of others, who are to dispense
them unto them, or also by the joint concurrence of others with them therein;
Such as the participation of Sacraments, public Assembly-praying and praising.
The difference here is very considerable, Both as to the power of Disciplinary
Sentences, about them (for Sentences of Church Censures are not conversant
about performance of duties of the first sort, but only of the second; nor can
there ever in any case, a restraint be lawfully put upon men in the matter of
praying and worshipping God, or confessing of Christ, as there lawfully may be,
in some cases, in the second sort of duties) And, as to the matter of
Submission to Sentences restraining men from, and forbearing of the performance
of them. For, the first sort are so entirely in our own power, that we neither
need a call from any, warranting us to go about them, nor the concurrent acting
of any other for our enjoying the liberty thereof. And they are so absolutely
commanded, without respect to any dependence upon any other; and are so
absolutely necessary, necessitate medii, for a man's glorifying of God, and his
own eternal salvation, That it must be a sin not to observe them constantly, as
affirmative precepts ought to be observed; yea, a double sin not to adhere to
them in a case of Confession, as it is when these duties are prohibited by men.
But as for the second sort of duties, Albeit (as has been said) there can be
no submitting to forbear them upon any decree of men prohibiting them in their
very nature and kind; Yet, being duties that are not absolutely necessary,
necessitate medii, and being, as to the exercise thereof, not wholly in our own
power, of and by our selves, but some way dependent upon others also, So that
we cannot go about them, without a call and warrant from others, nor enjoy the
exercise of them by our selves; Therefore in case the Church, who calls and
ordains a Minister, will not suffer him to preach, Or a Minister (who has the
trust of dispensing Ordinances) will not dispense the Sacrament to a member,
the sufferer breaks no command in suffering that injury, after he has essayed
all lawful means of redress. Seeing his forbearance is not a voluntary and
elective omission of the duty he is restrained from, but a patient suffering of
an injury, under a necessity whereof providence has brought him, unless he
would commit a moral evil which he is obliged not to do by natural right,
viz. make a Schism in a true Church, and bring contempt on lawful Authority.
It is his affliction, and not his sin, nor is it the violation of any
commandment, but only a cessation from a duty commanded, when he cannot do it
without the violation of another command of more universal and necessary
obligation. Neither is he by this cessation deprived of the exercise of any
duty absolutely necessary to the honoring of God, enjoying of fellowship with
Christ, and saving his own soul. And if they deny these things, they must yield
also, that in some cases (beside that of an erring Conscience, which is yielded
by all) a man may be concluded under a necessity of sinning on all hands; As
that a Minister must either sin by forbearing to preach, or sin in making a
Schism by continuing to preach, when he is deposed by a lawful Authority in a
true Church, though erring in that particular. As such a case and snare upon
men is held by the Learned to be repugnant to the infinite Holiness and Wisdom
of God the Lawgiver; So we find godly sufferers before us, very far from
judging their Submission and suffering to be any violation of Gods command
calling them to their work. Parker, on the Cross, Chap. 4. Sect. 14. clears
that sufferers in the cause of Nonconformity did not voluntarily, wilfully, or
sinfully give-over their Ministry, adding, It is not the leaving of the
Ministry that is a sin, but the causes why, the end wherefore, and the
circumstances wherein, that makes the leaving of it sinful. To wit, (as he
expresses both before and after in that Section) when men leave it for their
gain and ease, etc. as Prelates and their creatures did: and not when these
sufferers left it to keep a good conscience, and by leaving thereof, did
perform that duty of suffering, and left their Ministry to keep their flock,
by their example, from the wolf, and from all liking of his fair shows, and not
as the careless shepherd, who leaves them to the claws of the wolf; Yea, these
sufferers did teach them by their example of suffering, when they were not
suffered to do it by doctrine -- but did willingly submit to the providence of
the Lord; who for the present called them from it. Much more to this purpose
may be read in the Author at large, in the Section cited, as also Sect. 15.
Whereas it is said, that it is an omission of a duty upon a non-relevant
reason, of the mere will of men, which they so often repeat; and in the close
of Arg. 3. page 102, 103. tell us that these duties cannot cease to be obliging
to such a person, hic and nunc, upon that reason, unless we prefer the
commandments of men to the Commandments of God, and say, It is better to obey
men than God. Answ. It is true that the unjust Sentence is the object of the
man's suffering, and from it is the rise of his forbearance; but the reason why
he suffers and forbears, is most relevant, as being in obedience to the Command
of God, requiring us to suffer in a matter which is our privilege and comfort,
rather than make a Schism. But this is their grand mistake, that they look only
to men as their party, and to the injustice of their procedure; But do not
remember, that God by that dispensation of His providence, in suffering lawful
Authority to do them wrong, is calling them to suffer. And that when they
submit thereunto, it is not to men, but to God also, and to the Order
established by Him.

5. Whereas they make it a great exception in the matter of Submission, that we
are the plurality; and page 10. they allege there must be no good intention,
when the stronger party does press the Submission of the weaker. Answ. We do
believe indeed, that this has not the least weight with them in this debate;
for they have made it apparent throughout the Pamphlet, that were they the
plurality, they would not admit of it as a relevant exception against them; nor
do we believe was this ever an exception before in any true Church. But to the
thing it self; As by the Conference for Union, there was sufficient provision
offered for securing them in matters of our bypast differences: So men of our
judgment have yielded the same Submission we require, where they are the
plurality. And when a Presbytery, (wherein the plurality was of their
judgment) did depose one of our judgment for not submitting to their Sentence
of Suspension, the Synod did ratify the Sentence of Deposition, though the
Synod, as they well know, were of a different judgment from them, and were not
satisfied with their procedure in his Suspension.

Having now brought this debate to a close, (wherein, though we have not
followed their method, yet we trust we have not shifted or passed-by any thing
of weight in all their arguings) And having also spoken our mind, so far as is
necessary, to the whole Pamphlet, We shall only, for a close of all, add a
word to the Reader, and especially to those Ministers and Professors who differ
from us upon the matter of our late debates. And, 1. though we have been
necessitated to speak somewhat home to this Piece, and what is contained in it,
in our own and the Churches defense; yet we entreat and obtest it may not be
understood as spoken to all that Party, but only to the guilty, and chiefly to
the Authors of this Pamphlet, to whom this Church and all Reformed Presbyterian
Churches do owe little thanks, for their contributing so much to the
advancement of all Sectarian Designs, and their strength^ning the hands of all
licentious persons, who live under their inspection and jurisdiction. We have
made conscience to forbear railing, and have spoken many things (the Lord
knows) in the grief of our heart of their way, which we wish had never been,
or were buried in perpetual silence. And if any thing of that kind be found
which any will dis-relish as, we desire that charity which Scripture allows
unto men under much oppression, and do request that our Reasons may be weighed
impartially; So we entreat that none will suspect that these things do beget
any heart-alienation in us from our Brethren, with whom our soul desires to be
united in the Lord, and who (we trust) will return these Agents little thanks
for their service. 2. Though the importunate clamours of these men have drawn
us out (in our necessary defense as is said before) upon the debate of the late
Resolutions, Acts of Judicatories, and Censures inflicted by them, which those
of our Judgment have so often offered to remove, for their part, out of the
way, that they impede not an Union: Yet let none think that we have receded
from these our Purposes and Overtures, whereby all these debates may be buried.
We hold our selves bound to Declare, that in these things we are where we were,
notwithstanding these Contests; and do heartily request our Brethren that there
may be a condescendence on their part. And though we be reflected upon as
carnal politic men in these our endeavors and offers; Yet we trust it shall
be no grief of heart to us one day to be found lovers of Truth and Peace, and
such as seek Peace and pursue it.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 29, line 31. read were deposed p. 55. l. 3. for that, r. than. p. 56. l.
1. r, vigorously, only for. p 64. l. 6. for that r. their. Ibid. l. 10. r. es
there is guilt. p. 70. l. 5. r. Assembly. Ibid. l. 12. for would r. will. p.
107. l. 21. r. 98.


