Contemplations UPON THE REMARKABLE PASSAGES IN THE LIFE OF THE HOLY JESUS.

By JOSEPH HALL, late Lord Bishop of EXCESTER.

LONDON, Printed by E. Flesher, and are to be sold by Jacob Tonson, at the
Judge's Head in Chancery Lane, near Fleet Street. 1679.

THE CONTENTS.
THE Angel and Zachary. Page 1 The Annunciation of CHRIST. Page 11 The Birth of
CHRIST. Page 19 The Sages and the Star. Page 25 The Purification. Page 32 Herod
and the Infants. Page 38 CHRIST among the Doctors. Page 46 CHRIST's Baptism.
Page 54 CHRIST Tempted. Page 61 Simon called. Page 76 The Marriage in Cana.
Page 82 The good Centurion. Page 89 The Widow's Son raised. Page 97 The Ruler's
Son cured. Page 102 The Dumb Devil ejected. Page 107 Matthew called. Page 117
CHRIST among the Gergesens; or, Legion, and the Gadarene Herd. Page 123 The
faithful Canaanite. Page 145 The Deaf and Dumb man cured. Page 158 Zacchaeus.
Page 165 John Baptist beheaded. Page 184 The five Loaves and two Fishes. Page
202 The Walk upon the Waters. Page 216 The Bloody issue healed. Page 231 Jairus
and his Daughter. Page 243 The Motion of the two fiery Disciples repelled. Page
248 The Ten Lepers. Page 256 The Pool of Bethesda. Page 267 The Transfiguration
of CHRIST. Page 280, 291 The Prosecution of the Transfiguration. Page 305 The
Woman taken in Adultery. Page 309 The Thankful Penitent. Page 321 Martha and
Mary. Page 336 The Beggar that was born blind, cured. Page 344 The stubborn
Devil ejected. Page 353 The Widow's Mites. Page 361 The Ambition of the two
Sons of Zebedee. Page 364 The Tribute-money paid. Page 373 Lazarus Dead. Page
377 Lazarus Raised. Page 388 CHRIST's Procession to the Temple. Page 403 The
Fig Tree cursed. Page 413 CHRIST Betrayed. Page 417 The Agony. Page 426 Peter
and Malchus: or, CHRIST Apprehended. Page 432 CHRIST before Caiaphas. Page 438
CHRIST before Pilate. Page 444 The Crucifixion. Page 457 The Resurrection. Page
476 The Ascension. Page 500
Contemplations Upon the NEW TESTAMENT.
I. The Angel and Zachary.
WHen things are at worst, then God begins a Change. The state of the Jewish
Church was extremely corrupted immediately before the news of the Gospel; yet,
as bad as it was, not only the Priesthood, but the Courses of attendence
continued, even from David's time till Christ's. It is a desperately-depraved
condition of a Church, where no good Orders are left. Judaea passed many
Troubles, many Alterations, yet this orderly Combination endured about eleven
hundred years. A settled Good will not easily be defeated, but in the change of
persons will remain unchanged; and if it be forced to give way, leaves
memorable footsteps behind it. If David foresaw the perpetuation of this holy
Ordinance, how much did he rejoice in the knowledge of it? Who would not be
glad to do good, on condition that it may so long outlive him?

The successive Turns of the Legal ministration held on in a Line never
interrupted. Even in a forlorn and miserable Church there may be a personal
Succession. How little were the Jews better for this, when they had lost the
Urim and Thummim, Sincerity of Doctrine and Manners? This stayed with them even
whilst they and their Sons crucified Christ. What is more ordinary, then wicked
Sons of holy Parents? It is the Succession of Truth and Holiness that makes or
institutes a Church, whatever becomes of the Persons. Never times were so
barren, as not to yield some good: The greatest Dearth affords some few good
Ears to the Gleaners. Christ would not have come into the World, but he would
have some faithful to entertain him: He, that had the disposing of all Times
and Men, would cast some Holy ones into his own Times: There had been no
equality, that all should either overrun, or follow him, and none attend him.
Zachary and Elizabeth are just, both of Aaron's Blood, and John Baptist of
theirs. Whence should an holy Seed spring, if not of the Loins of Levi? It is
not in the power of Parents to traduce Holiness to their Children: It is the
blessing of God that feoffs them in the Virtues of their Parents, as they
feoffe them in their Sins. There is no certainty, but there is likelihood, of
an holy Generation, when the Parents are such. Elizabeth was just as well as
Zachary, that the Forerunner of a Savior might be holy on both sides. If the
Stock and the Graffe be not both good, there is much danger of the Fruit. It is
an happy Match, when the Husband and the Wife are one, not only in themselves,
but in God; not more in flesh, then in the spirit. Grace makes no difference of
Sexes: rather the weaker carries away the more honor, because it has had less
helps. It is easy to observe, that the New Testament affords more store of
good Women then the Old. Elizabeth led the ring of this mercy, whose Barrenness
ended in a miraculous Fruit both of her body and of her time.

This religious pair made no less progress in Virtue then in Age; and yet their
Virtue could not make their best Age fruitful. Elizabeth was barren. A just
soul and a barren womb may well agree together. Amongst the Jews Barrenness was
not a defect only, but a reproach: yet while this good woman was fruitful of
holy Obedience, she was barren of Children. As John, who was miraculously
conceived by man, was a fit Forerunner of him that was conceived by the Holy
Ghost; so a barren Matron was meet to make way for a Virgin.

None but a son of Aaron might offer Incense to God in the Temple: and not
every son of Aaron; and not any one at all seasons. God is a God of Order, and
hates Confusion no less then Irreligion. Albeit he has not so straightened
himself under the Gospel, as to tie his service to Persons or Places; yet his
choice is now no less curious, because it is more large: He allows none but the
authorized; he authorizeth none but the worthy. The Incense does ever smell of
the hand that offers it. I doubt not but that Perfume was sweeter which
ascended up from the hand of a just Zachary. The sacrifice of the wicked is
abomination to God. There were Courses of ministration in the Legal services.
God never purposed to burden any of his creatures with Devotion. How vain is
the ambition of any soul, that would load it self with the universal charge of
all men? How thankless is their labor, that do wilfully over-spend themselves
in their ordinary vocations? As Zachary had a Course in God's House, so he
carefully observed it: The favor of these respites doubled his diligence. The
more high and sacred our Calling is, the more dangerous is Neglect. It is our
honor, that we may be allowed to wait upon the God of heaven in these
immediate services. Woe be to us, if we slacken those Duties wherein God
honors us more then we can honor him.

Many sons of Aaron, yea of the same Family, served at once in the Temple,
according to the variety of employments. To avoid all difference, they agreed
by lot to assign themselves to the several offices of each day. The lot of
this day called Zachary to offer Incense in the outer Temple. I do not find any
prescription they had from God of this particular manner of designment. Matters
of good Order in holy affairs may be ruled by the wise institution of men
according to reason and expediency.

It fell out well that Zachary was chosen by lot to this ministration, that
God's immediate hand might be seen in all the passages that concerned his great
Prophet; that as the Person, so the Occasion might be of God's own choosing. In
Lots, and their seeming casual disposition, God can give a reason, though we
can give none. Morning and Evening, twice a day, their Law called them to offer
Incense to God, that both parts of the Day might be consecrate to the Maker of
Time. The outer Temple was the figure of the whole Church upon earth, like as
the Holy of holiest represented Heaven. Nothing can better resemble our
faithful Prayers, then sweet Perfume: These God looks that we should (all his
Church over) send up unto him Morning and Evening. The Elevations of our Hearts
should be perpetual: but if twice in the day we do not present God with our
solemn Invocations, we make the Gospel less officious then the Law.

That the resemblance of Prayers and Incense might be apparent; whilst the
Priest sends up his Incense within the Temple, the people must send up their
Prayers without. Their Breath and that Incense, though remote in the first
rising, met e're they went up to Heaven. The people might no more go into the
Holy place to offer up the incense of Prayers unto God, then Zachary might go
into the Holy of holies. Whilst the partition wall stood betwixt Jews and
Gentiles, there were also partitions betwixt the Jews themselves. Now every man
is a Priest unto God; every man (since the veil was rent) prays within the
Temple. What are we the better for our greater freedom of access to God under
the Gospel, if we do not make use of our privilege?

Whilst they were praying to God, he sees an Angel of God. As Gideon's Angel
went up in the smoke of the sacrifice, so did Zachary's Angel (as it were) come
down in the fragrant smoke of his incense. It was ever great news to see an
Angel of God; but now more, because God had long withdrawn from them all the
means of his supernatural Revelations. As this wicked people were strangers to
their God in their Conversation, so was God grown a stranger to them in his
Apparitions: yet now that the season of the Gospel approached, he visited them
with his Angels, before he visited them by his Son. He sends his Angel to men
in the form of man, before he sends his Son to take humane form. The Presence
of Angels is no novelty, but their Apparition: they are always with us, but
rarely seen; that we may awfully respect their messages when they are seen. In
the mean time our faith may see them, though our senses do not. Their assumed
shapes do not make them more present, but visible.

There is an Order in that heavenly Hierarchy, though we know it not. This
Angel that appeared to Zachary was not with him in the ordinary course of his
attendences, but was purposely sent from God with this message. Why was an
Angel sent? and why this Angel? It had been easy for him to have raised up the
prophetical spirit of some Simeon to this prediction: the same Holy Ghost
which revealed to that just man that he should not see death, e're he had seen
the Messiah; might have as easily revealed unto him the Birth of the Forerunner
of Christ, and by him to Zachary. But God would have this Voice, which should
go before his Son, come with a noise: He would have it appear to the world,
that the Harbinger of the Messiah should be conceived by the mavelous power
of that God, whose coming he proclaimed. It was fit the first Herald of the
Gospel should begin in wonder. The same Angel that came to the Blessed Virgin
with the news of Christ's Conception, came to Zachary with the news of John's,
for the honor of him that was the greatest of them which were born of women,
and for his better resemblance to him which was the Seed of the woman. Both had
the Gospel for their errand, one as the Messenger of it, the other as the
Author: Both are foretold by the same mouth.

When could it be more fit for the Angel to appear unto Zachary, then when
Prayers and Incense were offered by him? Where could he more fitly appear then
in the Temple? in what part of the Temple more fitly then at the Altar of
Incense? and whereabouts rather then on the right side of the Altar? Those
glorious spirits as they are always with us, so most in our Devotions; and as
in all places, so most of all in God's House. They rejoice to be with us,
whilst we are with God; as contrarily, they turn their faces from us, when we
go about our Sins.

He that had wont to live and serve in the presence of the Master, was now
astonished at the presence of the Servant. So much difference there is betwixt
our Faith, and our Senses, that the apprehension of the presence of the God of
Spirits by faith goes down sweetly with us, whereas the sensible apprehension
of an Angel dismays us. Holy Zachary, that had wont to live by Faith, thought
he should die when his Sense began to be set on work. It was the weakness of
him, that served at the Altar without horror, to be daunted with the face of
his Fellow Servants. In vain do we look for such Ministers of God as are without
infirmities, when just Zachary was troubled in his Devotions with that
wherewith he should have been comforted. It was partly the suddenness, and
partly the glory of the Apparition that affrighted him. The good Angel was both
apprehensive and compassionate of Zachary's weakness, and presently incourages
him with a cheerful excitation; Fear not, Zacharias. The blessed Spirits,
though they do not often vocally express it, do pity our humane frailties, and
secretly suggest comfort unto us, when we perceive it not. Good and evil
Angels, as they are contrary in estate, so also in disposition: The good desire
to take away Fear, the evil to bring it. It is a fruit of that deadly enmity
which is betwixt Satan and us, that he would, if he might, kill us with
terror: whereas the good Spirits, affecting our relief and happiness, take no
pleasure in terrifying us, but labor altogether for our tranquillity and
cheerfulness.

There was not more Fear in the face, then Comfort in the speech; Thy prayer is
heard. No Angel could have told him better news. Our desires are uttered in our
Prayers: What can we wish but to have what we would? Many good suits had
Zachary made, and amongst the rest for a Son. Doubtless it was now some space
of years since he made that request; for he was now stricken in age, and had
ceased to hope: yet had God laid it up all the while, and when he thinks not of
it, brings it forth to effect. Thus does the mercy of our God deal with his
patient and faithful Suppliants: In the fervor of their expectation he many
times holds them off; and when they least think of it, and have forgotten their
own suits, he graciously condescends. Delay of effect may not discourage our
Faith: It may be God has long granted, e're we shall know of his grant. Many a
Father repents him of his fruitfulness, and has such Sons as he wishes unborn:
but to have so gracious and happy a Son as the Angel foretold, could not be
less comfort then honor to the age of Zachary. The proof of Children makes
them either the Blessings or Crosses of their Parents. To hear what his Son
should be before he was; to hear that he should have such a Son, a Son whose
birth should concern the joy of many, a Son that should be great in the sight
of the Lord, a Son that should be sacred to God, filled with God, beneficial
to man, an Harbinger to him that was God and Man; was news enough to prevent
the Angel, and to take away that Tongue with Amazement, which was after lost
with Incredulity.

The speech was so good, that it found not a sudden belief: This good news
surprised Zachary. If the intelligence had taken leisure, that his thoughts
might have had time to debate the matter, he had easily apprehended the
infinite power of him that had promised; the Pattern of Abraham and Sara; and
would soon have concluded the appearance of the Angel more miraculous then his
prediction. Whereas now, like a man masked with the strangeness of that he saw
and heard, he misdoubts the message, and asks, How shall I know? Nature was on
his side, and alleged the impossibility of the event, both from Age and
Barrenness. Supernatural tidings at the first hearing astonish the heart, and
are entertained with Doubts by those, who upon farther acquaintance give them
the best Welcome.

The weak apprehensions of our imperfect Faith are not so much to be censured,
as pitied. It is a sure way for the heart, to be prevented with the assurance
of the omnipotent power of God, to whom nothing is impossible: so shall the
hardest points of Faith go down easily with us. If the Eye of our mind look
upward, it shall meet with nothing to avert or interrupt it; but if right
forward, or downward, or round about, every thing is a block in our way.

There is a difference betwixt Desire of assurance, and Unbelief. We cannot be
too careful to raise up our selves arguments to settle our Faith; although it
should be no Faith, if it had no feet to stand upon but discursive. In matters
of Faith, if reasons may be brought for the conviction of the gainsayers, it is
well; if they be helps, they cannot be grounds of our Belief. In the most
faithful heart there are some sparks of infidelity: So to believe, that we
should have no doubt at all, is scarce incident unto flesh and blood. It is a
great perfection, if we have attained to overcome our Doubts. What did mis-lead
Zachary, but that which uses to guide others, Reason? I am old, and my wife is
of great age. As if years and dry loins could be any let to him, who is able
of very stones to raise up children unto Abraham. Faith and Reason have their
limits; where Reason ends, Faith begins: and if Reason will be encroaching upon
the bounds of Faith, she is straight taken captive by Infidelity. We are not
fit to follow Christ, if we have not denied our selves; and the chief piece of
our selves is our Reason. We must yield God able to do that which we cannot
comprehend; and we must comprehend that by our Faith which is disclaimed by
Reason. Hagar must be driven out of doors, that Sara may rule alone.

The authority of the Reporter makes way for belief in things which are
otherwise hard to pass: although in the matters of God, we should not so much
care who speaks, as what is spoken, and from whom. The Angel tells his name,
place, office, unasked; that Zachary might not think any news impossible that
was brought him by an Heavenly Messenger. Even where there is no use of
language, the Spirits are distinguished by names, and each knows his own
appellation, and others. He that gave leave unto Man, his Image, to give names
unto all his visible and inferior creatures, did himself put names unto the
spiritual: and as their name is, so are they mighty and glorious. But lest
Zachary should no less doubt of the style of the Messenger, then of the Errand
it self, he is at once both confirmed, and punished with Dumbness. That Tongue
which moved the Doubt must be tied up: He shall ask no more questions for forty
weeks, because he asked this one distrustfully.

Neither did Zachary lose only his Tongue for the time, but his Ears also; he
was not only mute, but deaf: For otherwise, when they came to ask his
allowance for the name of his Son, they needed not to have demanded it by
signs, but by words. God will not pass over slight offenses, and those which
may plead the most colorable pretenses, in his best children, without a
sensible check. It is not our holy entireness with God that can bear us out in
the least sin; yea rather, the more acquaintance we have with his Majesty, the
more sure we are of correction when we offend. This may procure us more favor
in our well-doing, not less justice in evil.

Zachary stayed, and the people waited. Whether some longer discourse betwixt
the Angel and him then needed to be recorded, or whether astonishment at the
apparition and news withheld him, I inquire not. The multitude thought him
long; yet though they could but see afar off, they would not depart till he
returned to bless them. Their patient attendence without shames us, that are
hardly persuaded to attend within, whilst both our Senses are employed in our
Divine services, and we are admitted to be Co-agents with our Ministers.

At last Zachary comes out speechless, and more amazes them with his presence
then with his delay. The eyes of the multitude, that were not worthy to see his
Vision, yet see the signs of his Vision; that the world might be put into the
expectation of some extraordinary sequel. God makes way for his Voice by
Silence: His Speech could not have said so much as his Dumbness. Zachary would
fain have spoken, and could not: with us, too many are dumb, and need not.
Negligence, Fear, Partiality stop the mouths of many, which shall once say, Woe
to me, because I held my peace. His Hand speaks that which he cannot with his
Tongue, and he makes them by signs to understand that which they might read in
his Face. Those powers we have we must use. But though he have ceased to speak,
yet he ceased not to minister. He takes not this Dumbness for a Dismission, but
stays out the eight days of his Course, as one that knew the Eyes and Hands and
Heart would be accepted of that God which had bereaved him of his Tongue. We
may not straight take occasions of withdrawing our selves from the public
Services of our God, much less under the Gospel. The Law, which stood much
upon Bodily perfection, dispensed with Age for attendence: The Gospel, which
is all for the Soul, regards those inward powers, which whilst they are
vigorous, exclude all excuses of our ministration.

II. The Annunciation of CHRIST.
THe Spirit of God was never so accurate in any description, as that which
concerns the Incarnation of GOD. It was fit no circumstance should be omitted
in that Story, whereon the Faith and Salvation of all the World depends. We
cannot so much as doubt of this truth, and be saved. No, not the number of the
Month, not the Name of the Angel is concealed. Every particle imports not more
certainty, then excellence. The time is the sixth month after John's
Conception, the prime of the Spring. Christ was conceived in the Spring, born
in the Solstice. He in whom the World received a new Life, receives Life in the
same season wherein the World received its first Life from him; and he which
stretches out the days of his Church, and lengthens them to Eternity, appears
after all the short and dim light of the Law, and enlightens the World with his
Glory. The Messenger is an Angel. A Man was too mean to carry the news of the
Conception of God. Never any business was conceived in Heaven that did so much
concern the Earth, as the Conception of the God of Heaven in the Womb of Earth.
No less then an Archangel was worthy to bear these tidings; never any Angel
received a greater honor, then of this Embassage.

It was fit our Reparation should answer our Fall. An evil Angel was the first
Motioner of the one to Eve, a Virgin, then espoused to Adam, in the Garden of
Eden: A good Angel is the first Reporter of the other to Mary, a Virgin,
espoused to Joseph, in that place which (as the Garden of Galilee) had a name
from Flourishing. No good Angel could be the Author of our Restoration, as
that evil Angel was of our Ruin. But that which those glorious Spirits could
not do themselves, they are glad to report as done by the God of Spirits. Good
news rejoices the bearer. With what joy did this holy Angel bring the news of
that Savior, in whom we are redeemed to Life, himself established in Life and
Glory? The first Preacher of the Gospel was an Angel: that Office must needs
be glorious that derives it self from such a Predecessor. God appointed his
Angel to be the first Preacher, and has since called his Preachers Angels. The
Message is well suited. An Angel comes to a Virgin, Gabriel to Mary; he that
was by signification the strength of God, to her that was by signification
exalted by God, to the conceiving of him that was the God of strength. To a
Maid, but espoused: a Maid, for the honor of Virginity; espoused, for the
honor of Marriage. The Marriage was in a sort made, not consummate, through
the instinct of him that meant to make her not an Example, but a Miracle of
women. In this whole work God would have nothing ordinary. It was fit that she
should be a married Virgin, which should be a Virgin Mother. He that meant to
take Man's nature without man's corruption, would be the Son of man without
man's seed, would be the Seed of the Woman without Man; and amongst all Women,
of a pure Virgin; but amongst Virgins, of one espoused, that there might be at
once a Witness and a Guardian of her fruitful Virginity. If the same God had
not been the author of Virginity and Marriage, he had never countenanced
Virginity by Marriage.

Whither does this glorious Angel come to find the Mother of him that was God,
but to obscure Galilee? A part which even the Jews themselves despised, as
forsaken of their privileges: Out of Galilee arises no Prophet. Behold, an
Angel comes to that Galilee out of which no Prophet comes; and the God of
Prophets and Angels descends to be conceived in that Galilee out of which no
Prophet arises. He that fills all places makes no difference of places. It
is the Person which gives honor and privilege to the place, not the Place to
the person: as the Presence of God makes the Heaven, the Heaven does not make
the Owner glorious. No blind corner of Nazareth can hide the Blessed Virgin
from the Angel. The Favors of God will find out his Children wheresoever they
are withdrawn.

It is the fashion of God to seek out the most despised, on whom to bestow his
Honors. We cannot run away, as from the Judgments, so from the Mercies of our
God. The Cottages of Galilee are preferred by God to the famous Palaces of
Jerusalem: he cares not how homely he converses with his own. Why should we be
transported with the outward glory of Places, whilst our God regards it not? We
are not of the Angel's diet, if we had not rather be with the Blessed Virgin at
Nazareth, then with the proud Dames in the Court of Jerusalem. It is a great
vanity to respect any thing above Goodness, and to disesteem Goodness for any
want. The Angel salutes the Virgin, he prays not to her: He salutes her as a
Saint, he prays not to her as a Goddess. For us to salute her as he did, were
gross Presumption: For neither are we as he was, neither is she as she was. If
he that was a Spirit saluted her that was Flesh and blood here on earth, it is
not for us, that are Flesh and blood, to salute her, which is a glorious Spirit
in Heaven. For us to pray to her in the Angel's Salutation, were to abuse the
Virgin, the Angel, the Salutation.

But how gladly do we second the Angel in the praise of her, who was more ours
then his? How justly do we bless her, whom the Angel pronounces blessed? How
worthily is she honored of men, whom the Angel proclaims beloved of God? O
Blessed Mary, he cannot bless thee, he cannot honor thee too much, that
deifies thee not. That which the Angel said of thee, thou have prophesied of
thy self; we believe the Angel, and thee: All Generations shall call thee
blessed, by the fruit of whose womb all Generations are blessed. If Zachary
were amazed with the sight of this Angel, much more the Virgin. That very Sex
had more disadvantage of Fear. If it had been but a Man that had come to her in
that secrecy and suddenness, she could not but have been troubled; how much
more when the shining Glory of the Person doubled the Astonishment?

The Troubles of Holy minds end ever in Comfort. Joy was the errand of the
Angel, and not Terror. Fear (as all Passions) disquiets the heart, and makes
it for the time unfit to receive the messages of God. Soon has the Angel
cleared these troublesome mists of Passions, and sent out the beams of heavenly
Consolation into the remotest corner of her Soul by the glad news of her
Savior. How can Joy but enter into her heart, out of whose womb shall come
Salvation? What room can Fear find in that breast that is assured of Favor?
Fear not, Mary; for thou have found favor with God. Let those fear who know
they are in displeasure, or know not they are gracious: Thine happy estate
calls for Confidence, and that Confidence for Joy. What should, what can they
fear, who are favored of him at whom the Devils tremble? Not the Presence of
the good Angels, but the Temptations of the evil strike many terrors into our
weakness: we could not be dismayed with them, if we did not forget our
condition. We have not received the spirit of bondage to fear again, but the
spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father. If that Spirit (O God)
witness with our spirits that we are thine, how can we fear any of those
spiritual wickednesses? Give us assurance of thy Favor, and let the powers of
Hell do their worst.

It was no ordinary favor that the Virgin found in Heaven. No mortal Creature
was ever thus graced, that he should take part of her nature that was the God
of Nature; that he, who made all things, should make his humane Body of hers;
that her Womb should yield that Flesh which was personally united to the
Godhead; that she should bear him that upholds the World. Lo, thou shall
conceive and bear a Son, and shall call his name JESUS. It is a question,
whether there be more wonder in the Conception, or in the Fruit; the Conception
of the Virgin, or Jesus conceived: Both are mavelous; but the former does not
more exceed all other Wonders, then the latter exceeds it. For the child of a
Virgin is the improvement of that power which created the world: but that God
should be incarnate of a Virgin, was an abasement of his Majesty, and an
exaltation of the Creature beyond all example. Well was that Child worthy to
make the Mother blessed. Here was a double Conception; one in the womb of her
Body, the other of the Soul. If that were more miraculous, this was more
beneficial: that was her Privilege, this was her Happiness. If that were
singular to her, this is common to all his chosen: There is no renewed Heart
wherein thou, O Savior, art not formed again. Blessed be thou that have herein
made us blessed. For what womb can conceive thee, and not partake of thee? who
can partake of thee, and not be happy?

Doubtless the Virgin understood the Angel as he meant, of a present
Conception, which made her so much more inquisitive into the manner and means
of this event: How shall this be, since I know not a man? That she should
conceive a Son by the knowledge of Man after her Marriage consummate, could
have been no wonder: But how then should that Son of hers be the Son of God?
This demand was higher. How her present Virginity should be instantly
fruitful, might be well worthy of admiration, of inquiry. Here was desire of
information, not doubts of infidelity: yea rather, this question argues Faith;
it takes for granted that which an unbelieving heart would have stuck at. She
says not, Who and whence art thou? what Kingdom is this? where and when shall
it be erected? but smoothly supposing all those strange things would be done,
she insists only in that which did necessarily require a farther intimation,
and does not distrust, but demand: neither does she say, This cannot be, nor,
How can this be? but, How shall this be? So does the Angel answer, as one that
knew he needed not to satisfy Curiosity, but to inform Judgment, and uphold
Faith. He does not therefore tell her of the manner, but of the Author of this
act; The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Most high shall
over-shadow thee. It is enough to know who is the Undertaker, and what he will
do. O God, what do we seek a clear Light, where thou will have a Shadow? No
Mother knows the manner of her natural Conception: what presumption shall it
be for flesh and blood, to search how the Son of God took flesh and blood of
his Creature? It is for none but the Almighty to know those works which he
does immediately concerning himself: those that concern us he has revealed.
Secrets to God, things revealed to us.

The Answer was not so full, but that a thousand difficulties might arise out
of the particularities of so strange a Message: yet after the Angel's Solution,
we hear of no more Objections, no more Interrogations. The faithful Heart,
when it once understands the good pleasure of God, argues no more, but sweetly
rests it self in a quiet expectation. Behold the Servant of the Lord, be it to
me according to thy Word. There is not a more noble proof of our Faith, then to
captivate all the powers of our Understanding and Will to our Creator, and
without all sciscitations to go blindfold whither he will lead us. All
Disputations with God (after his will known) arise from Infidelity. Great is
the Mystery of Godliness; and if we will give Nature leave to cavil, we cannot
be Christians. O God, thou art faithful, thou art powerful: It is enough that
thou have said it; in the humility of our obedience we resign our selves over
to thee. Behold the Servants of the Lord, be it unto us according to thy word.

How fit was her Womb to conceive the Flesh of the Son of God by the power of
the Spirit of God, whose Breast had so soon by the power of the same Spirit
conceived an assent to the will of God? And now of an Handmaid of God, she is
advanced to the Mother of God. No sooner has she said, Be it done, then it is
done; the Holy Ghost overshadows her, and forms her Savior in her own Body.
This very Angel, that talks with the Blessed Virgin, could scarce have been
able to express the Joy of her heart in the sense of this Divine Burden. Never
any mortal creature had so much cause of Exultation. How could she, that was
full of God, be other then full of Joy in that God? Grief grows greater by
concealing, Joy by expression. The Holy Virgin had understood by the Angel, how
her Cousin Elizabeth was no less of kin to her in condition; the fruitfulness
of whose Age did somewhat suit the fruitfulness of her Virginity. Happiness
communicated doubles it self. Here is no straining of courtesy: The Blessed
Maid, whom vigor of Age had more fitted for the way, hastens her journey into
the Hill-country, to visit that gracious Matron, whom God had made a sign of
her miraculous Conception. Only the meeting of Saints in Heaven can parallel
the meeting of these two Cousins: the two Wonders of the World are met under
one roof, and congratulate their mutual Happiness. When we have Christ
spiritually conceived in us, we cannot be quiet till we have imparted our Joy.
Elizabeth, that holy Matron, did no sooner welcome her Blessed Cousin, then her
Babe welcomes his Savior: Both in the retired Closets of their Mother's Womb
are sensible of each other's presence; the one by his Omniscience, the other by
Instinct. He did not more forerun Christ, then overrun Nature. How should our
hearts leap within us, when the Son of God vouchsafes to come into the secret
of our Souls, not to visit us, but to dwell with us, to dwell in us?

III. The Birth of CHRIST.
AS all the actions of men, so especially the public actions of public men
are ordered by God to other ends then their own. This Edict went not so much
out from Augustus, as from the Court of Heaven. What did Caesar know Joseph and
Mary? His charge was universal, to a world of Subjects, through all the Roman
Empire: God intended this Cension only for the Blessed Virgin and her Son,
that Christ might be born where he should. Caesar meant to fill his Coffers,
God meant to fulfill his Prophecies; and so to fulfill them, that those whom it
concerned might not feel the Accomplishment. If God had directly commanded the
Virgin to go up to Bethlehem, she had seen the intention, and expected the
issue: But that wise Moderatour of all things, that works his will in us, loves
so to do it, as may be least with our foresight and acquaintance, and would
have us fall under his Decrees unawares, that we may so much the more adore the
depths of his Providence. Every Creature walks blindfold; only He that dwells
in light sees whither they go.

Doubtless, Blessed Mary meant to have been delivered of her Divine burden at
home, and little thought of changing the place of Conception for another of her
Birth. That house was honored by the Angel, yea, by the over-shadowing of the
Holy Ghost: none could equally satisfy her hopes or desires. It was fit that
He, who made choice of the Womb wherein his Son should be conceived, should
make choice of the place where his Son should be born. As the Work is all his,
so will he alone contrive all the Circumstances to his own ends. O the infinite
Wisdom of God in casting all his designs! There needs no other proof of
Christ, then Caesar and Bethlehem; and of Caesar's, then Augustus: his
Government, his Edict pleads the truth of the Messiah. His Government: Now was
the deep Peace of all the world under that quiet Scepter, which made way for
him who was the Prince of Peace. If Wars be a sign of the time of his second
Coming, Peace was a sign of his first. His Edict: Now was the Scepter departed
from Juda; it was the time for Shilo to come: no power was left in the Jews,
but to obey. Augustus is the Emperor of the World; under him Herod is the King
of Judaea; Cyrenius is President of Syria: Jewrie has nothing of her own. For
Herod, if he were a King, yet he was no Jew; and if he had been a Jew, yet he
was no otherwise a King then tributary and titular. The Edict came out from
Augustus, was executed by Cyrenius; Herod is no actour in this service. Gain
and glory are the ends of this Taxation: each man professed himself a Subject,
and paid for the privilege of his Servitude. Now their very Heads were not
their own, but must be paid for to the Head of a foreign State: They which
before stood upon the terms of their Immunity, stoop at the last. The proud
suggestions of Judas the Galilaean might shed their blood, and swell their
stomachs, but could not ease their yoke: neither was it the meaning of God,
that Holiness (if they had been as they pretended) should shelter them from
Subjection. A Tribute is imposed upon God's free people. This act of Bondage
brings them Liberty: Now when they seemed most neglected of God, they are
blessed with a Redeemer; when they are most pressed with foreign Sovereignty,
God sends them a King of their own, to whom Caesar himself must be a Subject.
The goodness of our God picks out the most needful times for our relief and
comfort: Our extremities give him the most glory. Whither must Joseph and Mary
come to be taxed, but unto Bethlehem, David's City? The very Place proves their
Descent. He that succeeded David in his Throne, must succeed him in the place
of his Birth. So clearly was Bethlehem designed to this honor by the Prophets,
that even the Priests and the Scribes could point Herod unto it, and assured
him, the King of the Jews could be nowhere else born. Bethlehem justly the
House of Bread; the Bread that came down from Heaven is there given to the
world. Whence should we have the Bread of life, but from the House of bread? O
holy David, was this the Well of Bethlehem whereof thou did so thirst to
drink of old, when thou said, Oh that one would give me drink of the water of
the Well of Bethlehem? Surely that other Water, when it was brought thee by thy
Worthies, thou pouredst it on the ground, and would not drink of it: This was
that living Water for which thy soul longed, whereof thou said elsewhere, As
the Heart brayeth after the waterbrooks, so longs my soul after thee, O God:
My soul thirsts for God, for the living God.

It was no less then four days journey from Nazareth to Bethlehem: How just an
excuse might the Blessed Virgin have pleaded for her absence? What woman did
ever undertake such a journey so near her delivery? And doubtless Joseph, who
was now taught of God to love and honor her, was loath to draw forth a dear
Wife, in so unwieldy a case, into so manifest hazard. But the Charge was
peremptory, the Obedience exemplary: The desire of an inoffensive observance
even of Heathenish authority digests all difficulties. We may not take easy
occasions to withdraw our Obedience to supreme commands. Yea, how did thou,
(O Savior) by whom Augustus reigned, in the womb of thy Mother yield this
Homage to Augustus? The first Lesson that ever thy Example taught us was
Obedience.

After many steps are Joseph and Mary come to Bethlehem. The plight wherein she
was would not allow any speed, and the forced leisure of the journey causes
disappointment: the end was worse then the way; there was no rest in the way,
there was no room in the Inn. It could not be, but that there were many of the
kindred of Joseph and Mary at that time in Bethlehem; for both there were their
Ancestors born, if not themselves; and thither came up all the Cousins of
their blood: yet there and then does the Holy Virgin want room to lay either
her head, or her burden. If the House of David had not lost all mercy and good
nature, a Daughter of David could not so near the time of her travail have been
destitute of lodging in the City of David. Little did the Bethlehemites think
what a Guest they refused; else they would gladly have opened their doors to
him, who was able to open the gates of Heaven to them. Now their Inhospitality
is punishment enough to it self: They have lost the honor and happiness of
being Host to their God. Even still, O Blessed Savior, thou stand at our
doors and knockest; every motion of thy good Spirit tells us thou art there:
Now thou come in thine own name, and there thou stand, whilst thy head is
full of dew, and thy locks wet with the drops of the night. If we suffer carnal
desires and worldly thoughts to take up the lodging of our Heart, and revell
within us, whilst thou waitest upon our admission, surely our judgment shall
be so much the greater, by how much better we know whom we have excluded. What
do we cry shame on the Bethlehemites, whilst we are wilfully more churlish,
more unthankful? There is no room in my heart for the wonder at this Humility.
He, for whom Heaven is too straight, whom the Heaven of heavens cannot contain,
lies in the straight cabin of the womb, and when he would enlarge himself for
the world, is not allowed the room of an Inn. The many mansions of Heaven were
at his disposing; the Earth was his, and the fullness of it: yet he suffers
himself to be refused of a base Cottage, and complains not. What measure
should discontent us wretched men, when thou (O God) farest thus from thy
creatures? How should we learn both to want and abound, from thee, who,
abounding with the glory and riches of Heaven, would want a lodging in thy
first welcome to the earth? Thou came to thine own, and thy own received thee
not. How can it trouble us to be rejected of the world, which is not ours? What
wonder is it if thy servants wandered abroad in sheepskins and goat skins,
destitute and afflicted, when their Lord is denied harbor? How should all the
world blush at this indignity of Bethlehem? He that came to save Men, is sent
for his first lodging to the Beasts: The Stable is become his Inn, the Cratch
his Bed. O strange Cradle of that great King, which Heaven it self may envy! O
Savior, thou that were both the Maker and Owner of Heaven, of Earth, could
have made thee a Palace without hands, could have commanded thee an empty
room in those houses which thy creatures had made. When thou did but bid the
Angels avoid their first place, they fell down from Heaven like lightning; and
when in thy humbled estate thou did but say, I am he, who was able to stand
before thee? How easy had it been for thee, to have made place for thy self in
the throngs of the stateliest Courts? Why would thou be thus homely, but
that, by contemning worldly Glories, thou might teach us to contemn them?
that thou mightest-sanctify Poverty to them whom thou calledst unto want? that
since thou, who had the choice of all earthly conditions, would be born
poor and despised, those which must want out of necessity might not think their
Poverty grievous. Here was neither friend to entertain, nor servant to attend,
nor place wherein to be attended; only the poor Beasts gave way to the God of
all the world. It is the great mystery of godliness, that God was manifested in
the flesh, and seen of Angels: but here, which was the top of all wonders, the
very Beasts might see their Maker. For those Spirits to see God in the flesh,
it was not so strange, as for the brute creatures to see him who was the God of
spirits. He, that would be led into the wilderness amongst wild beasts to be
tempted, would come into the house of beasts to be born, that from the height
of his Divine Glory his Humiliation might be the greater. How can we be abased
low enough for thee, (O Savior) that have thus neglected thy self for us? That
the visitation might be answerable to the homeliness of the place, attendents,
provision, who shall come to congratulate his birth but poor Shepherds? The
Kings of the earth rest at home, and have no summons to attend him by whom they
reign: God has chosen the weak things of the world to confound the mighty. In
an obscure time (the night) unto obscure men (Shepherds) does God manifest the
light of his Son by glorious Angels. It is not our meanness (O God) that can
exclude us from the best of thy mercies: yea, thus far do thou respect
persons, that thou have put down the mighty, and exalted them of low degree. If
these Shepherds had been snorting in their beds, they had no more seen Angels,
nor heard news of their Savior, then their neighbors: Their vigilance is
honored with this heavenly Vision. Those who are industrious in any calling
are capable of farther Blessings; whereas the Idle are fit for nothing but
Temptation. No less then a whole Chore of Angels are worthy to sing the Hymn of
Glory to God, for the Incarnation of his Son. What joy is enough for us, whose
nature he took, and whom he came to restore by his Incarnation? If we had the
tongues of Angels, we could not raise this note high enough to the praise of
our glorious Redeemer. No sooner do the Shepherds hear the news of a Savior,
then they run to Bethlehem to seek him: Those that left their beds to tend
their flocks, leave their flocks to enquire after their Savior. No earthly
thing is too dear to be forsaken for Christ. If we suffer any worldly occasion
to stay us from Bethlehem, we care more for our sheep then our souls. It is not
possible that a faithful heart should hear where Christ is, and not labor to
the sight, to the fruition of him. Where art thou, O Savior, but at home in
thine own house, in the assembly of thy Saints? Where art thou to be found but
in thy Word and Sacraments? Yea, there thou seek for us: if there we haste
not to seek for thee, we are worthy to want thee, worthy that our want of thee
here should make us want the presence of thy face for ever.

IV. The Sages and the Star.
THE Shepherds and the Cratch accorded well; yet even they saw nothing which
they might not contemn: neither was there any of those Shepherds that seemed
not more like a King, then that King whom they came to see. But O the Divine
Majesty that shined in this Baseness! There lies the Babe in the Stable,
crying in the Manger, whom the Angels came down from Heaven to proclaim, whom
the Sages come from the East to adore, whom an heavenly Star notifies to the
world; that now men might see, that Heaven and Earth serves him that neglected
himself. Those Lights that hang low are not far seen, but those that are high
placed are equally seen in the remotest distances. Thy light, O Savior, was no
less then heavenly. The East saw that which Bethlehem might have seen.
Oft-times those which are nearest in place are farthest off in affection. Large
objects, when they are too close to the eye, do so over-fill the sense, that
they are not discerned. What a shame is this to Bethlehem? the Sages came out
of the East to worship him, whom that village refused. The Bethlehemites were
Jews, the Wise men Gentiles. This first entertainment of Christ was a presage
of the sequel: The Gentiles shall come from far to adore Christ, whilst the
Jews reject him. Those Easterlings were great searchers of the depths of
nature, professed Philosophers; them has God singled out to the honor of the
manifestation of Christ. Humane Learning well improved makes us capable of
Divine. There is no Knowledge whereof God is not the Author: he would never
have bestowed any gift that should lead us away from himself. It is an ignorant
conceit, that inquiry into Nature should make men Atheous. No man is so apt to
see the Star of Christ as a diligent disciple of Philosophy. Doubtless this
light was visible unto more; only they followed it, who knew it had more then
nature. He is truly wise, that is wise for his own Soul. If these Wise men had
been acquainted with all the other stars of heaven, and had not seen the Star
of Christ, they had had but light enough to lead them into utter darkness.
Philosophy without this Star is but the wisp of error. These Sages were in a
mean between the Angels and the Shepherds. God would in all the ranks of
intelligent Creatures have some to be witnesses of his Son. The Angels direct
the Shepherds, the Star guides the Sages: the duller capacity has the more
clear and powerful helps. The wisdom of our good God proportions the means
unto the disposition of the persons. Their Astronomy had taught them, this Star
was not ordinary, whether in sight, or in brightness, or in motion. The eyes
of Nature might well see, that some strange news was portended to the world by
it: but that this Star designed the Birth of the Messiah, there needed yet
another light. If the Star had not besides had the commentary of a revelation
from God, it could have led the Wise men only into a fruitless wonder. Give
them to be the offspring of Balaam, yet the true Prediction of that false
Prophet was not enough warrant. If he told them, the Messiah should arise as a
Star out of Jacob, he did not tell them that a Star should arise far from the
posterity of Jacob at the birth of the Messiah. He that did put that Prophecy
into the mouth of Balaam, did also put this Illumination into the heart of the
Sages. The Spirit of God is free to breathe where he lists. Many shall come
from the East and the West to seek Christ, when the Children of the Kingdom
shall be shut out. Even then God did not so confine his election to the pale of
the Church, as that he did not sometimes look out for special instruments of
his glory. Whither do these Sages come, but to Jerusalem? where should they
hope to hear of the new King, but in the Mother-city of the Kingdom? The
conduct of the Star was first only general to Judaea; the rest is for a time
left to inquiry. They were not brought thither for their own sakes, but for
Jewrie's, for the world's; that they might help to make the Jews inexcusable,
and the world faithful. That their tongues therefore might blazon the birth of
Christ, they are brought to the Head-citie of Judaea, to report and inquire.
Their wisdom could not teach them to imagine, that a King could be born to
Judaea of that note and magnificence, that a Star from Heaven should publish
him to the earth, and that his subjects should not know it: and therefore, as
presupposing a common notice, they say, Where is he that is born King of the
Jews? There is much deceit in probabilities, especially when we meddle with
spiritual matters. For God uses still to go a way by himself.

If we judge according to reason and appearance, who is so likely to understand
heavenly Truths as the profound Doctors of the world? These God passes over,
and reveals his will to babes. Had these Sages met with the Shepherds of the
villages near Bethlehem, they had received that intelligence of Christ which
they did vainly seek from the learned Scribes of Jerusalem. The greatest Clerks
are not always the wisest in the affairs of God: these things go not by
discourse, but by revelation.

No sooner has the Star brought them within the noise of Jerusalem, then it is
vanished out of sight. God would have their eyes lead them so far, as till
their tongues might be set on work to win the vocal attestation of the chief
Priests and Scribes to the fore-appointed place of our Savior's Nativity. If
the Star had carried them directly to Bethlehem, the learned Jews had never
searched the truth of those Prophecies wherewith they are since justly
convinced. God never withdraws our helps, but for a farther advantage. However
our hopes seem crossed, where his Name may gain, we cannot complain of loss.

Little did the Sages think this Question would have troubled Herod: they had
(I fear) concealed their message, if they had suspected this event. Sure, they
thought, it might be some Son or Grandchild of him which then held the Throne;
so as this might win favor from Herod, rather then an unwelcome fear of
rivality. Doubtless they went first to the Court; where else should they ask
for a King? The more pleasing this news had been if it had fallen upon Herod's
own loins, the more grievous it was to light upon a Stranger. If Herod had not
overmuch affected Greatness, he had not upon those indirect terms aspired to
the Crown of Jewry: so much the more therefore did it trouble him to hear the
rumor of a Successor, and that not of his own. Settled Greatness cannot abide
either change, or partnership. If any of his Subjects had moved this question,
I fear his head had answered it. It is well that the name of forreiners could
excuse these Sages. Herod could not be brought up among the Jews, and not have
heard many and confident reports of a Messiah, that should ere long arise out
of Israel: and now when he hears the fame of a King born, whom a Star from
Heaven signifies and attends, he is nettled with the news. Every thing
affrights the guilty. Usurpation is full of jealousies and fear, no less full
of projects and imaginations: it makes us think every bush a man, and every man
a thief.

Why art thou troubled, O Herod? A King is born, but such a King, as whose
Scepter may ever concur with lawful Sovereignty; yea such a King, as by whom
Kings do hold their Scepters, not lose them. If the Wise men tell thee of a
King, the Star tells thee he his Heavenly. Here is good cause of security, none
of fear. The most general enmities and oppositions to good arise from
mistakings. If men could but know how much safety and sweetness there is in all
Divine truth, it could receive nothing from them but welcomes and gratulations.
Misconceits have been still guilty of all wrongs* and persecutions. But if
Herod were troubled, (as Tyranny is still suspicious,) why was all Jerusalem
troubled with him? Jerusalem, which now might hope for a relaxation of her
bonds, for a recovery of her liberty and right? Jerusalem, which now only had
cause to lift up her drooping head in the joy and happiness of a Redeemer? Yet
not only Herod's Court, but even Jerusalem was troubled. So had this miserable
City been over-toiled with change, that now they were settled in a condition
quietly evil, they are troubled with the news of better. They had now got a
habit of Servility, and now they are so acquainted with the yoke, that the very
noise of Liberty (which they supposed would not come with ease) began to be
unwelcome.

To turn the causes of joy into sorrow, argues extreme dejectedness, and a
distemper of judgment no less then desperate. Fear puts on a visour of
Devotion. Herod calls his learned counsel, and, as not doubting whether the
Messiah should be born, he asks where he shall be born. In the disparition of
that other light, there is a perpetually-fixed Star shining in the writings of
the Prophets, that guides the chief Priests and Scribes directly unto
Bethlehem. As yet envy and prejudice had not blinded the eyes and perverted the
hearts of the Jewish Teachers; so as now they clearly justify that Christ,
whom they afterward condemn, and by thus justifying him condemn themselves in
rejecting him. The water that is untroubled yields the visage perfectly. If God
had no more witness but from his enemies, we have ground enough of our faith.

Herod feared, but dissembled his fear, as thinking it a shame that strangers
should see there could any power arise under him worthy of his respect or awe.
Out of an unwillingness therefore to discover the impotency of his passion, he
makes little ado of the matter, but only, after a privy inquisition into the
time, imploys the informers in the search of the person; Go, and search
diligently for the Babe, etc. It was no great journey from Jerusalem to
Bethlehem; how easily might Herod's cruelty have secretly suborned some of his
bloody Courtiers to this inquiry and execution? If God had not meant to mock
him, before he found himself mocked of the Wise men, he had rather sent before
their journey, then after their disappointment. But that God in whose hands all
hearts are did purposely besot him, that he might not find the way to so
horrible a mischief.

There is no Villainy so great, but it will mask it self under a show of Piety:
Herod will also worship the Babe. The courtesy of a false Tyrant is death. A
crafty Hypocrite never means so ill, as when he speaks fairest. The Wise men
are upon their way full of expectation, full of desire: I see no man either of
the City or Court to accompany them. Whether distrust or fear hindered them, I
inquire not: but of so many thousand Jews, no one stirs his foot to see that
King of theirs, which Strangers came so far to visit. Yet were not these
resolute Sages discouraged with this solitariness and small respect, nor drawn
to repent of their journey, as thinking, What do we come so far to honor a
King whom no man will acknowledge? what mean we to travel so many hundred miles
to see that which the inhabitants will not look out to behold? but cheerfully
renew their journey to that place which the ancient light of Prophecy had
designed. And now behold, God encourages their holy forwardness from Heaven, by
sending them their first Guide; as if he had said, What need ye care for the
neglect of men, when ye see Heaven honors the King whom ye seek? What joy
these Sages conceived when their eyes first beheld the re-appearance of that
happy Star, they only can tell, that, after a long and sad night of
Temptation, have seen the loving countenance of God shining forth upon their
Souls. If with obedience and courage we can follow the calling of God in
difficult enterprises, we shall not want supplies of comfort. Let not us be
wanting to God, we shall be sure he cannot be wanting to us.

He that led Israel by a Pillar of fire into the Land of Promise, leads the
Wise men by a Star to the Promised seed. All his directions partake of that
Light which is in him; for God is Light. This Star moves both slowly and low,
as might be fittest for the pace, for the purpose of these Pilgrims. It is the
goodness of God, that in those means wherein we cannot reach him, he descends
unto us. Surely, when the Wise men saw the Star stand still, they looked about
to see what Palace there might be near unto that station, fit for the birth of
a King; neither could they think that sorry Shed was it which the Star meant to
point out: but finding their guide settled over that base roof, they go in to
see what guest it held. They enter, and, O God! what a King do they find? how
poor? how contemptible? wrapped in clouts, laid in straw, cradled in the manger,
attended with beasts? What a sight was this, after all the glorious promises of
that Star, after the Predictions of Prophets, after the magnificence of their
expectation?

All their way afforded nothing so despicable as that Babe whom they came to
worship. But as those which could not have been wise men, unless they had known
that the greatest glories have arisen from mean beginnings, they fall down, and
worship that hidden Majesty. This Baseness has bred wonder in them, not
contempt: they well knew the Star could not lie. They which saw his Star afar
off in the East, when he lay swaddled in Bethlehem, do also see his Royalty
farther off, in the despised estate of his infancy: a Royalty more then humane.
They well knew that Stars did not use to attend earthly Kings; and if their aim
had not been higher, what was a Jewish King to Persian Strangers? Answerable
therefore hereunto was their adoration. Neither did they lift up empty hands to
him whom they worshipped, but presented him with the most precious commodities of
their Country, Gold, Incense, Myrrh; not as thinking to enrich him with these,
but by way of homage acknowledging him the Lord of these. If these Sages had
been Kings, and had offered a Princely weight of Gold, the Blessed Virgin had
not needed in her Purification to have offered two young Pigeons, as the sign
of her penury. As God loves not empty hands, so he measures fullness by the
affection. Let it be Gold, or Incense, or Myrrh, that we offer him, it cannot
but please him, who does not use to ask how much, but how good.

V. The Purification.
THere could be no impurity in the Son of God; and if the best substance of a
pure Virgin carried in it any taint of Adam, that was scoured away by
sanctification in the womb; and yet the Son would be circumcised, and the
Mother purified. He that came to be sin for us, would in our persons be legally
unclean, that, by satisfying the Law, he might take away our uncleanness.
Though he were exempted from the common condition of our birth, yet he would
not deliver himself from those ordinary rites that implied the weakness and
blemishes of Humanity. He would fulfill one Law to abrogate it, another to
satisfy it. He that was above the Law, would come under the Law, to free us
from the Law. Not a day would be changed, either in the Circumcision of Christ,
or the Purification of Mary. Here was neither convenience of place, nor of
necessaries for so painful a work, in the Stable of Bethlehem: yet he that
made and gave the Law, will rather keep it with difficulty, then transgress it
with ease.

Why would thou, O Blessed Savior, suffer that sacred Foreskin to be cut
off, but that, by the power of thy Circumcision, the same might be done to our
Souls that was done to thy Body? We cannot be therefore thine, if our hearts be
uncircumcised. Do thou that in us which was done to thee for us; cut off the
superfluity of our maliciousness, that we may be holy in and by thee, which
for us were content to be legally impure.

There was shame in thy Birth, there was pain in thy Circumcision. After a
contemptible welcome into the world, that a sharp Rasour should pass through
thy skin for our sakes, (which can hardly endure to bleed for our own,) it was
the praise of thy wonderful mercy, in so early Humiliation. What pain or
contempt should we refuse for thee, that have made no spare of thy self for us?
Now is Bethlehem left with too much honor; there is Christ born, adored,
circumcised. No sooner is the Blessed Virgin either able or allowed to walk
then she travels to Jerusalem, to perform her holy Rites for her self, for her
Son; to purify her self, to present her Son. She goes not to her own house at
Nazareth, she goes to God's House at Jerusalem. If Purifying were a shadow, yet
Thanksgiving is a substance. Those whom God has blessed with fruit of body,
and safety of deliverance, if they make not their first journey to the Temple
of God, they partake more of the Unthankfullnesse of Eve, then Marie's Devotion.

Her forty days therefore were no sooner out, then Mary comes up to the holy
City. The rumor of a new King born at Bethlehem was yet fresh at Jerusalem
since the report of the Wise men: and what good news had this been for any
pick-thank to carry to the Court, Here is the Babe whom the Star signified,
whom the Sages inquired for, whom the Angels proclaimed, whom the Shepherds
talked of, whom the Scribes and High priests notified, whom Herod seeks after?
Yet unto that Jerusalem, which was troubled at the report of his Birth, is
Christ come, and all tongues are so locked up, that he which sent from Jerusalem
to Bethlehem to seek him finds him not, who (as to countermine Herod) is come
from Bethlehem to Jerusalem. Dangers that are aloof off, and but possible, may
not hinder us from the duty of our Devotion. God saw it not yet time to let
loose the fury of his adversaries, whom he holds up like some eager mastives,
and then only lets go, when they shall most shame themselves, and glorify
him.

Well might the Blessed Virgin have wrangled with the Law, and challenged an
immunity from all ceremonies of Purification. What should I need purging, which
did not conceive in sin? This is for those mothers whose births are unclean;
mine is from God, which is purity it self. The Law of Moses reaches only to
those women which have conceived seed; I conceived not this seed, but the Holy
Ghost in me. The Law extends to the mothers of those sons which are under the
Law; mine is above it. But, as one that cared more for her peace then her
privilege, and more desired to be free from offense then from labor and
charge, she dutifully fulfills the Law of that God whom she carried in her womb
and in her arms: like the Mother of him, who, though he knew the children of
the Kingdom free, yet would pay tribute unto Caesar: like the Mother of him,
whom it behoved to fulfill all righteousness. And if she were so officious in
Ceremonies, as not to admit of any excuse in the very Circumstance of her
Obedience, how much more strict was she in the main Duties of morality? That
Soul is fit for the Spiritual conception of Christ, that is conscioanbly
scrupulous in observing all God's Commandments; whereas he hates all alliance
to a negligent or froward Heart.

The Law of Purification proclaims our Uncleanness: The mother is not allowed
after her childbirth to come unto the Sanctuary, or to touch any hallowed
thing, till her set time be expired. What are we, whose very birth infects the
mother that bears us? At last she comes to the Temple; but with Sacrifices,
either a Lamb and a Pigeon or Turtle, or (in the meaner estate) two
Turtle-doves or young Pigeons; whereof one is for a Burnt-offering, the other
for a Sin-offering; the one for Thanksgiving, the other for Expiation; for
expiation of a double sin, of the mother that conceived, of the child that was
conceived. We are all born sinners, and it is a just question, whether we do
more infect the world, or the world us. They are gross flatterers of nature
that tell her she is clean. If our lives had no sin, we bring enough with us:
the very infant, that lives not to sin as Adam, yet sinned in Adam, and is
sinful in himself. But oh the unspeakable mercy of our God! we provide the
Sin, he provides the Remedy. Behold an Expiation well-near as early as our Sin:
the blood of a young Lamb or Dove, yea rather the blood of Him whose innocence
was represented by both, cleanses us presently from our filthiness. First
went Circumcision, then came the Sacrifice; that, by two holy acts, that which
was naturally unholy might be hallowed unto God. Under the Gospel our Baptism
has the force of both: it does away our corruption by the Water of the Spirit;
it applies to us the Sacrifice of Christ's Blood, whereby we are cleansed. Oh
that we could magnify this goodness of our God, which has not left our very
infancy without redress, but has provided helps whereby we may be delivered
from the danger of our hereditary evils.

Such is the favorable respect of our wise God, that he would not have us
undo our selves with Devotion: the service he requires of us is ruled by our
abilities. Every poor mother was not able to bring a Lamb for her offering:
there was none so poor but might procure a pair of Turtles or Pigeons. These
does God both prescribe, and accept from poorer hands, no less then the beasts
of a thousand mountains: He looks for somewhat of every one, not of every one
alike. Since it is he that makes differences of abilities, (to whom it were as
easy to make all rich,) his mercy will make no difference in the acceptance.
The truth and heartiness of Obedience is that which he will crown in his
meanest servants. A Mite from the poor widow is more worth to him then the
Talents of the wealthy.

After all the presents of those Eastern Worshippers, (who intended rather
homage then ditation,) the Blessed Virgin comes in the form of poverty with her
two Doves unto God. She could not without some charge lie all this while at
Bethlehem, she could not without charge travel from Bethlehem to Jerusalem.
Her offering confesses her Penury. The best are not ever the wealthiest. Who
can despise any one for want, when the Mother of Christ was not rich enough to
bring a Lamb for her purification? We may be as happy in russet, as in tissue.

While the Blessed Virgin brought her Son into the Temple with that pair of
Doves, here were more Doves then a pair: They for whose sake that Offering was
brought, were more Doves, then the Doves that were brought for that Offering.
Her Son, for whom she brought that Dove to be sacrificed, was that Sacrifice
which the Dove represented. There was nothing in him but perfection of
innocence, and the oblation of him is that whereby all mothers and sons are
fully purified. Since in our selves we cannot be innocent, happy are we, if we
can have the spotless Dove sacrificed for us, to make us innocent in him.

The Blessed Virgin had more business in the Temple then her own; she came, as
to purify her self, so to present her Son. Every male that first opened the
womb was holy unto the Lord. He that was the Son of God by eternal generation
before times, and by miraculous conception in time, was also by common course
of nature consecrate unto God. It is fit the Holy Mother should present God
with his own: Her firstborn was the firstborn of all creatures. It was he,
whose Temple it was that he was presented in, to whom all the firstborn of all
creatures were consecrated, by whom they were accepted; and now is he brought
in his mother's arms to his own House, and as Man is presented to himself as
God. If Moses had never written a Law of God's special propriety in the
firstborn, this Son of God's Essence and Love had taken possession of the
Temple; his right had been a perfect Law to himself: Now his obedience to that
Law, which himself had given, does no less call him thither, then the challenge
of his peculiar interest.

He that was the Lord of all creatures, ever since he struck the firstborn of
the Egyptians, requires the first male of all creatures, both man and beast, to
be dedicated to him: wherein God caused a miraculous event to second nature,
which seems to challenge the first and best for the Maker. By this rule, God
should have had his service done only by the Heirs of Israel: But since God,
for the honor and remuneration of Levi, had chosen out that Tribe to minister
unto him, now the firstborn of all Israel must be presented to God as his due,
but by allowance redeemed to their parents. As for Beasts, the first male of
the clean beasts must be sacrificed, of unclean exchanged for a price. So much
morality is there in this constitution of God, that the best of all kinds is
fit to be consecrated to the Lord of all. Every thing we have is too good for
us, if we think any thing we have too good for him.

How glorious did the Temple now seem, that the Owner was within the walls of
it? Now was the hour and guest come, in regard whereof the second Temple should
surpass the first: this was his House built for him, dedicated to him; there
had he dwelt long in his spiritual Presence, in his typical. There was nothing
either placed or done within those walls whereby he was not resembled; and now
the Body of those Shadows is come, and presents himself where he had been ever
represented. Jerusalem is now everywhere: There is no Church, no Christian
heart, which is not a Temple of the living God: There is no Temple of God
wherein Christ is not presented to his Father. Look upon him (O God) in whom
thou art well pleased, and in him and for him be well pleased with us.

Under the Gospel we are all firstborn, all heirs; every Soul is to be holy
unto the Lord; we are a Royal generation, an holy Priesthood. Our Baptism, as
it is our Circumcision, and our sacrifice of Purification, so is it also our
Presentation unto God. Nothing can become us but Holiness. O God, to whom we
are devoted, serve thy self of us, glorify thy self by us, till we shall by
thee be glorified with thee.

VI. Herod and the Infants.
WEll might these Wise men have suspected Herod's Secrecy: If he had meant
well, what needed that whispering? That which they published in the streets, he
asks in his privy-chamber: yet they, not misdoubting his intention, purpose to
fulfill his charge. It could not in their apprehension but be much honor to
them to make their success known, that now both King and people might see, it
was not Fancy that led them, but an assured Revelation. That God which brought
them thither diverted them, and caused their eyes to shut, to guide them the
best way home.

These Sages made a happy voyage, for now they grew into farther acquaintance
with God: They are honored with a second Messenger from Heaven: They saw the
Star in the way, the Angel in their bed. The Star guided their journey unto
Christ, the Angel directed their return. They saw the Star by day, a Vision by
night. God spoke to their eyes by the Star, he speaks to their heart by a
Dream. No doubt, they had left much noise of Christ behind them: they that did
so publish his Birth by their inquiry at Jerusalem, could not be silent when
they found him at Bethlehem. If they had returned by Herod, I fear they had
come short home. He that meant death to the Babe for the name of a King, could
mean no other to those that honored and proclaimed a new King, and erected a
throne besides his. They had done what they came for; and now that God whose
business they came about takes order at once for his Son's safety, and for
theirs. God, who is Perfection it self, never begins any business, but he makes
an end, and ends happily. When our ways are his, there is no danger of
miscarriage.

Well did these Wise men know the difference, as of Stars, so of Dreams; they
had learned to distinguish between the natural and divine: and once
apprehending God in their sleep, they follow him waking, and return another
way. They were no Subjects to Herod, his command pressed them so much the less:
or if the being within his dominions had been no less bond then native
subjection, yet where God did countermand Herod, there could be no question
whom to obey. They say not, We are in a strange Country, Herod may meet with
us, it can be no less then death to mock him in his own territories; but
cheerfully put themselves upon the way, and trust God with the success. When
men command with God, we must obey men for God, and God in men; when against
him, the best obedience is to deny obedience, and to turn our backs upon Herod.

The Wise men are safely arrived in the East, and fill the world full of
expectation, as themselves are full of wonder: Joseph and Mary are returned
with the Babe to that Jerusalem where the Wise men had inquired for his Birth.
The City was doubtless still full of that rumor, and little thinks, that he
whom they talk of was so near them. From thence they are at least in their way
to Nazareth, where they purpose their abode. God prevents them by his Angel,
and sends them for safety into Egypt. Joseph was not wont to be so full of
Visions: It was not long since the Angel appeared unto him to justify the
innocence of the Mother, and the Deity of the Son; now he appears for the
preservation of both, and a preservation by flight. Could Joseph now choose but
think, Is this the King that must save Israel, that needs to be saved by me? If
he be the Son of God, how is he subject to the violence of men? How is he
Almighty, that must save himself by flight? or how must he fly to save himself
out of that land, which he comes to save? But faithful Joseph having been once
tutoured by the Angel, and having heard what the Wise men said of the Star,
what Simeon and Anna said in the Temple, labors not so much to reconcile his
thoughts, as to subject them; and, as one that knew it safer to suppress doubts
then to assoil them, can believe what he understands not, and can wonder where
he cannot comprehend.

Oh strange condition of the King of all the world! He could not be born in a
baser estate, yet even this he cannot enjoy with safety. There was no room for
him in Bethlehem, there will be no room for him in Judaea. He is no sooner come
to his own, then he must fly from them; that he may save them, he must avoid
them. Had it not been easy for thee (O Savior) to have acquit thy self from
Herod a thousand ways? What could an arm of flesh have done against the God of
spirits? What had it been for thee to have sent Herod five years sooner unto
his place? what to have commanded fire from heaven on those that should have
come to apprehend thee? or to have bidden the earth to receive them alive, whom
she meant to swallow dead? We suffer misery, because we must; thou, because
thou would. The same will that brought thee from Heaven into earth, sends
thee from Jewry to Egypt. As thou would be born mean and miserable, so thou
would live subject to humane vexations; that thou, who have taught us how
good it is to bear the yoke even in our youth, might sanctify to us early
afflictions. Or whether, O Father, since it was the purpose of thy wisdom to
manifest thy Son by degrees unto the world, was it thy will thus to hide him
for a time under our infirmity? And what other is our condition? we are no
sooner born thine, then we are persecuted. If the Church travail, and bring
forth a male, she is in danger of the Dragons streams. What do the Members
complain of the same measure which was offered to the Head? Both our Births are
accompanied with Tears.

Even of those whose mature age is full of trouble, yet the infancy is commonly
quiet: but here life and toil began together. O Blessed Virgin, even already
did the sword begin to pierce thy Soul. Thou which were forced to bear thy Son
in thy womb from Nazareth to Bethlehem, must now bear him in thy arms from
Jewry into Egypt. Yet could thou not complain of the way, whilst thy Savior
was with thee: His presence alone was able to make the Stable a Temple, Egypt a
Paradise, the way more pleasing then rest. But whither then, O whither do
thou carry that blessed burden, by which thy self and the world are upholden?
To Egypt, the Slaughterhouse of God's people, the Furnace of Israel's ancient
affliction, the Sink of the world: Out of Egypt have I called my Son, says
God. That thou calledst thy Son out of Egypt, O God, is no marvel. It is a
marvel that thou calledst him into Egypt; but that we know, all earths are
thine, and all places and men are like figures upon a table, such as thy
disposition makes them. What a change is here? Israel, the firstborn of God,
flies out of Egypt into the promised Land of Judaea. Christ, the firstborn of
all creatures, flies from Judaea into Egypt. Egypt is become the Sanctuary,
Judaea the Inquisition-house of the Son of God. He, that is every where the
same, makes all places alike to his: He makes the fiery Furnace a Gallery of
pleasure, the Lions den an house of defense, the Whales belly a
lodging-chamber, Egypt an harbor.

He flees, that was able to preserve himself from danger; to teach us, how
lawfully we may flee from those dangers we cannot avoid otherwise. It is a
thankless fortitude, to offer our throat unto the knife. He that came to die
for us fled for his own preservation, and has bid us follow him; When they
persecute you in one City, flee into another. We have but the use of our lives,
and we are bound to husband them to the best advantage of God and his Church.
God has made us, not as Butts to be perpetually shot at, but as the marks of
Rovers movable, as the wind and sun may best serve.

It was warrant enough for Joseph and Mary, that God commands them to flee; yet
so familiar is God grown with his approved servants, that he gives them the
reason of his commanded flight: For Herod will seek the young child, to destroy
him. What wicked men will do, what they would do, is known unto God
beforehand. He that is so infinitely wise to know the designs of his enemies
before they are, could as easily prevent them, that they might not be: but he
lets them run on in their own courses, that he may fetch glory to himself out
of their wickedness.

Good Joseph, having this charge in the night, stays not till the morning: no
sooner had God said, Arise, then he starts up and sets forward. It was not
diffidence, but obedience, that did so hasten his departure. The charge was
direct, the business important. He dares not linger for the light, but breaks
his rest for the journey, and taking advantage of the dark, departs toward
Egypt. How knew he this occasion would abide any delay? We cannot be too speedy
in the execution of Gods commands, we may be too late. Here was no treasure to
hide, no hangings to take down, no lands to secure: The poor Carpenter needs do
no more but lock the doors, and away. He goes lightly that wants a load. If
there be more pleasure in abundance, there is more security in a mean estate.
The Bustard or the Ostridge, when he is pursued, can hardly get upon his wings;
whereas the Lark mounts with ease. The rich has not so much advantage of the
poor in enjoying, as the poor has of the rich in leaving.

Now is Joseph come down into Egypt. Egypt was beholden to the Name, as that
whereto it did owe no less then their universal preservation. Well might it
repay this act of Hospitality to that Name and Blood. The goging down into
Egypt had not so much difficulty as the staying there. Their absence from their
Country was little better then a Banishment. But what was this other, then to
serve a Prentiship in the house of bondage? To be any-were save at home was
irksome: but to be in Egypt so many years amongst idolatrous Pagans, must needs
be painful to religious hearts. The Command of their God, and the Presence of
Christ makes amends for all. How long should they have thought it to see the
Temple of God, if they had not had the God of the Temple with them? how long to
present their Sacrifices at the Altar of God, if they had not had him with them
who made all Sacrifices accepted, and who did accept the Sacrifice of their
Hearts?

Herod was subtle in mocking the Wise men, whiles he promised to worship him
whom he meant to kill. Now God makes the Wise men to mock him, in disappointing
his expectation. It is just with God, to punish those which would beguile
others with illusion. Great spirits are so much more impatient of disgrace. How
did Herod now rage and fret, and vainly wish to have met with those false
spies, and tell with what torments he would revenge their treachery, and curse
himself for trusting Strangers in so important a business?

The Tyrants suspicion would not let him rest long: Ere many days he sends to
inquire of them, whom he sent to inquire of Christ. The notice of their secret
departure increases his jealousy; and now his anger runs mad, and his fear
proves desperate. All the Infants of Bethlehem, shall bleed for this one. And
(that he may make sure work) he cuts out to himself large measures both of time
and place. It was but very lately that the Star appeared, that the Wise men
re-appeared not: They asked for him that was born, they did not name when he
was born: Herod, for more security, over-reaches their time, and fetches into
the slaughter all the Children of two years age. The Priests and Scribes had
told him, the Town of Bethlehem must be the place of the Messiah's nativity: He
fetches in all the Children of the coasts adjoining; yea, his own shall for the
time be a Bethlehemite. A tyrannous guiltiness never thinks it self safe, but
ever seeks to assure it self in the excess of cruelty. Doubtless he, who so
privily inquired for Christ, did as secretly brew this Massacre. The Mothers
were set with their Children on their laps, feeding them with the breast, or
talking to them in the familiar language of their love, when suddenly the
Executioner rushes in, and snatches them from their arms; and at once pulling
forth his Commission and his Knife, without regard to shrieks or tears,
murders the innocent Babe, and leaves the passionate Mother in a mean between
madness and death. What cursing of Herod? what wringing of hands? what
condoling? what exclaiming was now in the streets of Bethlehem?

O bloody Herod, that could sacrifice so many harmless lives to thine
Ambition! What could those Infants have done? If it were thy person whereof
thou were afraid, what likelihood was it thou could live till those Sucklings
might endanger thee? This news might affect thy Successors, it could not
concern thee, if the heat of an impotent and furious envy had not made thee
thirsty of blood. It is not long that thou shall enjoy this cruelty: After a
few hateful years thy soul shall feel the weight of so many Innocents, of so
many just Curses. He, for whose sake thou killedst so many, shall strike thee
with death; and then what would thou have given to have been as one of those
Infants whom thou murtheredst? In the mean time, when thine Executioners
returned, and told thee of their unpartial dispatch, thou smiledst to think how
thou had defeated thy Rival, and beguiled the Star, and eluded the
Prophecies; whiles God in Heaven and his Son on earth laugh thee to scorn, and
make thy rage an occasion of farther glory to him whom thou meantest to
suppress.

He that could take away the lives of others cannot protract his own. Herod is
now sent home. The coast is clear for the return of that Holy Family. Now God
calls them from their Exile. Christ and his Mother had not stayed so long out
of the confines of the reputed visible Church, but to teach us continuance
under the Cross. Sometimes God sees it good for us, not to sip of the cup of
Affliction, but to make a diet-drink of it, for constant and common use. If he
allows us no other liquour for many years, we must take it off cheerfully, and
know that it is but the measure of our betters.

Joseph and Mary stir not without a Command; their Departure, Stay, Removal is
ordered by the voice of God. If Egypt had been more tedious unto them, they
durst not move their foot till they were bidden. It is good in our own business
to follow Reason or Custom: but in God's business, if we have any other guide
but himself, we presume, and cannot expect a blessing.

O the wonderful dispensation of God in concealing of himself from men! Christ
was now some five years old: he bears himself as an Infant, and, knowing all
things, neither takes nor gives notice of ought concerning his removal and
disposing, but appoints that to be done by his Angel, which the Angel could not
have done but by him. Since he would take our nature, he would be a perfect
child, suppressing the manifestation and exercise of that Godhead whereto that
Infant nature was conjoined. Even so, O Savior, the Humility of thine Infancy
was answerable to that of thy Birth. The more thou hidest and abasest thy self
for us, the more should we magnify thee, the more should we deject our selves
for thee. Unto thee with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be all honor and
glory, now and for ever. Amen.

VII. Christ among the Doctors.
EVen the Spring shows us what we may hope for of the tree in Summer. In his
Nonage therefore would our Savior give us a taste of his future proof, lest if
his perfection should have showed it self without warning to the world, it
should have been entertained with more wonder then belief; now this act of his
Childhood shall prepare the faith of men by fore-expectation. Notwithstanding
all this early demonstration of his Divine graces, the incredulous Jews could
afterward say, Whence has this man his wisdom and great works? What would
they have said, if he had suddenly leapt forth into the clear light of the
world? The Sun would dazzle all eyes, if he should break forth at his first
rising into his full strength: now he has both the Day Star to go before him,
and to bid men look for that glorious body, and the lively colors of the Day,
to publish his approach; the eye is comforted, not hurt by his appearance.

The Parents of Christ went up yearly to Jerusalem at the feast of the
Passover; the Law was only for the males. I do not find the Blessed Virgin
bound to this voyage; the weaker sex received indulgence from God: yet she,
knowing the spiritual profit of that journey, takes pains voluntarily to
measure that long way every year. Piety regards not any distinction of sexes or
degrees, neither yet does God's acceptance: rather does it please the mercy of
the Highest, more to reward that service which, though he like in all, yet out
of favor he will not impose upon all. It could not be but that she whom the
Holy Ghost overshadowed should be zealous of God's service. Those that will go
no farther then they are dragged in their religious exercises, are no whit of
kin to her whom all generations shall call blessed.

The Child Jesus in the minority of his age went up with his Parents to the
holy Solemnity, not this year only, but in all likelihood others also. He in
the power of whose Godhead, and by the motion of whose Spirit, all others
ascended thither, would not himself stay at home. In all his Examples he meant
our instruction: this pious act of his Nonage intended to lead our first years
into timely Devotion. The first liquor seasons the vessel for a long time
after. It is every way good for a man to bear God's yoke even from his infancy:
it is the policy of the Devil to discourage early Holiness. He that goes out
betimes in the morning, is more like to dispatch his journey, then he that
lingers till the day be spent. This blessed Family came not to look at the
feast and be gone; but they duly staid out all the appointed days of unlevened
bread. They and the rest of Israel could not want houshold-businesses at home:
those secular affairs could not either keep them from repairing to Jerusalem,
or send them away immaturely. Worldly cares must give place to sacred. Except
we will depart unblessed, we must attend God's services till we may receive his
dismission.

It was the fashion of those times and places, that they went up, (and so
returned,) by troops to those set meetings of their holy Festivals. The whole
Parish of Nazareth went and came together. Good fellowship does no way so well
as in the passage to Heaven: much comfort is added by society to that journey,
which is of it self pleasant. It is an happy word, Come, let us go up to the
house of the Lord. Mutual encouragement is none of the least benefits of our
holy Assemblies. Many sticks laid together make a good fire, which if they lie
single, lose both their light and heat.

The Feast ended, what should they do but return to Nazareth? God's services
may not be so attended, as that we should neglect our particular callings.
Himself calls us from his own house to ours, and takes pleasure to see a
painful Client. They are foully mistaken, that think God cares for no other
trade but Devotion. Piety and Diligence must keep meet changes with each other:
neither does God less accept of our return to Nazareth, then our going up to
Jerusalem.

I cannot think that the Blessed Virgin, or good Joseph, could be so negligent
of their Divine charge, as not to call the Child Jesus to their setting forth
from Jerusalem. But their back was no sooner turned upon the Temple, then his
face was toward it: He had business in that place, when theirs was ended:
there he was both worshipped, and represented. He, in whom the Godhead dwelt
bodily, could do nothing without God: His true Father led him away from his
supposed. Sometimes the affairs of our ordinary vocation may not grudge to
yield unto spiritual occasions. The Parents of Christ knew him well to be of a
disposition, nor strange, nor sullen and Stoical, but sweet and sociable: and
therefore they supposed he had spent the time and the way in company of their
friends and neighbors. They do not suspect him wandered into the solitary
fields: but when evening came, they go to seek him among their kinsfolk and
acquaintance. If he had not wonted to converse formerly with them, he had not
now been sought amongst them. Neither as God, nor Man, does he take pleasure in
a stern froward austerity, and wild retiredness; but in a mild affableness, and
amiable conversation.

But, O Blessed Virgin, who can express the sorrows of thy perplexed soul, wben
all that evening-search could afford thee no news of thy Son Jesus? Was not
this one of those Swords of Simeon, which should pierce through thy tender
breast? How did thou chide thy credulous neglect, in not observing so
precious a charge, and blame thine eyes, for once looking beside this object of
thy love? How did thou, with thy careful Husband spend that restless night
in mutual expostulations, and bemoanings of your loss? How many suspicious
imaginations did that while rack thy grieved spirit? Perhaps thou migtest
doubt, lest they which laid for him, by Herod's command, at his birth, had now
by the secret instigation of Archelaus surprised him in his childhood. Or it
may be thou thoughtest thy Divine Son had now withdrawn himself from the earth,
and returned to his Heavenly Glory, without warning. Or peradventure thou
studiedst with thy self, whether any carelessness on thy behalf had not given
occasion to this absence.

O dear Savior, who can miss, and not mourn for thee? Never any soul conceived
thee by faith, that was less afflicted with the sense of thy desertion, then
comforted with the joy of thy presence. Just is that sorrow, and those tears
seasonable, that are bestowed upon thy loss. What comfort are we capable of,
whiles we want thee? What relish is there in these earthly delights without
thee? What is there to mitigate our passionate discomforts, if not from thee?
Let thy self loose, O my soul, to the fullness of sorrow, when thou find thy
self bereaved of him, in whose presence is the fullness of joy; and deny to
receive comfort from any thing save from his return.

In vain is Christ sought among his kindred according to the flesh. So far are
they still from giving us their aid to find the true Messiah, that they lead us
from him. Back again therefore are Joseph and Mary gone to seek him at
Jerusalem. She goes about in the City, by the steets and by the open places,
and seeks him whom her soul loves: she sought him for the time, and found him
not. Do we think she spared her search? The evening of her return she hastes to
the Inn where she had left him; where missing him, she inquires of every one
she met, Have you not seen him whom my soul loves? At last, the third day, she
finds him in the Temple. One day was spent in the journey toward Galilee,
another in the return to Jerusalem; the third day recovers him. He, who would
rise again the third day, and be found amongst the living, now also would the
third day be found of his Parents, after the sorrow of his absence. But where
were thou, O Blessed Jesu, for the space of these three days? where did thou
bestow thy self, or who tended thee, whilst thou were thus alone at Jerusalem?
I know, if Jerusalem should have been as unkind to thee as Bethlehem, thou
could have commanded the Heavens to harbor thee; and if men did not minister
to thee, thou could have commanded the service of Angels. But since the form
of a servant called thee to a voluntary homeliness, whether it pleased thee to
exercise thy self thus early with the difficulties of a stranger, or to provide
miraculously for thy self, I inquire not, since thou revealest not; only this
I know, that hereby thou intendedst to teach thy Parents, that thou could
live without them; and that not of any indigency, but out of a gracious
dispensation, thou would ordinarily depend upon their care.

In the mean time, thy Divine wisdom could not but foreknow all these
corroding thoughts wherewith the heart of thy dear Mother must needs bleed,
through this sudden dereliction; yet would thou leave her for the time to her
sorrow. Even so, O Savior, thou thoughtest fit to visit her that bore thee
with this early affliction. Never any loved thee, whom thou do not sometimes
exercise with the grief of missing thee; that both we may be more careful to
hold thee, and more joyful in recovering thee. Thou have said, and can not
lie, I am with you to the end of the world: but even whiles thou art really
present, thou think good to be absent unto our apprehensions. Yet if thou
leave us, thou will not forsake us; if thou leave us for our humiliation, thou will not forsake us to our final discomfort: thou may for three days hide
thy self, but then we shall find thee in the Temple. None ever sought thee with
a sincere desire of whom thou were not found. Thou will not be either so little
absent, as not to whet our appetites, nor so long, as to fainten the heart.
After three days we shall find thee: and where should we rather hope to find
thee then in the Temple? There is the habitation for the God of Israel, there
is thy resting place for ever. Oh all ye that are grieved with the want of your
Savior, see where you must seek him. In vain shall ye hope to find him in the
streets, in the Taverns, in the Theaters: seek him in his holy Temple. Seek him
with piety, seek him with faith, there shall ye meet him, there shall ye
recover him. Whilst Children of that age were playing in the streets, Christ
was found sitting in the Temple; not to gaze on the outward glory of that
House, or on the golden Candlesticks or Tables, but to hear and appose the
Doctors. He who, as God, gave them all the wisdom they had, as the Son of
man hearkens to the wisdom he had given them. He, who sat in their Hearts, as
the Author of all learning and knowledge, sits in the midst of their School as
an humble Disciple: that by learning of them, he might teach all the younger
sort humility, and due attendance upon their Instructors. He could at the first
have taught the great Rabbis of Israel the deep mysteries of God: but because
he was not yet called by his Father to the public function of a Teacher, he
contents himself to hear with diligence, and to ask with modesty, and to teach
only by insinuation. Let those consider this, who will needs run as soon as
they can go; and when they find ability, think they need not stay for a farther
vocation of God or men. Open your eyes, ye rathe-ripe invaders of God's Chair;
and see your Savior in his younger years, not sitting in the eminent pulpits
of the Doctors, but in the lowly floors of the Auditors. See him, that could
have taught the Angels, listening in his minority to the voice of men. Who can
think much to learn of the Ancients, when he looks upon the Son of God sitting
at the feet of the Doctors of Israel? First he hears, then he asks. How much
more does it concern us to be Hearers ere we offer to be Teachers of others? He
gathers that hears, he spends that teaches. If we spend before we gather, we
shall soon prove bankrupts.

When he has heard, he asks, and after that he answers. Doubtless those very
Questions were Instruction, and meant to teach more then to learn. Never had
these great Rabbis heard the voice of such a Tutor; in whom they might see the
wisdom of God so concealing it self, that yet it would be known to be there.
No marvel then if they all wondered at his understanding and answers. Their eyes
saw nothing but humane weakness, their ears heard Divine sublimity of matter:
betwixt what they saw and what they heard, they could not but be distracted
with a doubting admiration. And why did ye not (O ye Jewish Teachers) remember,
That to us a Child is born, and unto us a Son is given, and the government is
upon his shoulder, and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, the
mighty God; the everlasting Father, the Prince of peace? Why did ye not now
bethink your selves what the Star, the Sages, the Angels, the Shepherds,
Zachary, Simeon, Anna, had premonished you? Fruitless is the wonder that ends
not in faith. No Light is sufficient, where the eyes are held through unbelief
or prejudice.

The Doctors were not more amazed to hear so profound a Childhood, then the
Parents of Christ were to see him among the Doctors: the joy of finding him
did strive with the astonishment of finding him thus. And now, not Joseph, (he
knew how little right he had to that Divine Son) but Mary breaks forth into a
loving expostulation, Son, why have thou dealt so with us? That she might not
seem to take upon her as an imperious Mother, it is like she reserved this
question till she had him alone: wherein she meant rather to express grief then
correption. Only herein the Blessed Virgin offended, that her inconsideration
did not suppose, (as it was,) that some higher respects then could be due to
flesh and blood called away the Son of God from her that was the daughter of
Man. She, that was but the mother of Humanity, should not have thought that the
business of God must for her sake be neglected. We are all partial to our
selves naturally, and prone to the regard of our own rights. Questionless this
gracious Saint would not for all the world have willingly preferred her own
attendence to that of her God: through heedlesness she does so. Her Son and
Savior is her monitour, out of his Divine love reforming her natural: How is
it that ye sought me? Know ye not that I must go about my Fathers business?
Immediately before the Blessed Virgin had said, Thy Father and I sought thee
with heavy hearts: Wherein, both, according to the supposition of the world,
she calls Joseph the Father of Christ, and, according to the fashion of a
dutiful wife, she names her Joseph before her self. She well knew that Joseph
had nothing but a name in this business, she knew how God had dignified her
beyond him; yet she says, Thy Father and I sought thee. The Son of God stands
not upon contradiction to his mother, but leading her thoughts from his
supposed Father to his true, from earth to heaven, he answers; Knew ye not that
I must go about my Fathers business? It was honor enough to her, that he had
vouchsafed to take flesh of her. It was his eternal Honor, that he was God of
God, the everlasting Son of the heavenly Father: Good reason therefore was it,
that the respects to flesh should give place to the God of Spirits. How well
contented was Holy Mary with so just an answer? how does she now again in her
heart renew her answer to the Angel, Behold the servant of the Lord, be it
according to thy word.

We are all the Sons of God in another kind, Nature and the World think we
should attend them. We are not worthy to say we have a Father in Heaven, if we
cannot steal away from these earthly distractions, and employ our selves in the
services of our God.

VIII. Christ's Baptism.
JOhn did every way forerun Christ, not so much in the time of his Birth, as in
his Office: neither was there more unlikeliness in their disposition and
carriage, then similitude in their function. Both did preach and baptize: only
John baptized by himself, our Savior by his Disciples. Our Savior wrought
miracles by himself, by his Disciples; John wrought none by either. Wherein
Christ meant to show himself a Lord, and John a Servant; and John meant to
approve himself a true Servant to him whose Harbinger he was. He that leapt in
the womb of his mother when his Savior (then newly conceived) came in
presence, bestir'd himself when he was brought forth into the light of the
Church, to the honor and service of his Savior. He did the same before
Christ, which Christ charged his Disciples to do after him, preach and
baptize. The Gospel ran always in one tenor, and was never but like it self.
So it became the Word of him, in whom there is no shadow by turning, and whose
Word it is, I am Jehova, I change not.

It was fit that he which had the Prophets, the Star, the Angel to foretell his
coming into the world, should have his Usher to go before him, when he would
notify himself to the world. John was the Voice of a Crier; Christ was the
Word of his Father. It was fit this Voice should make a noise to the world, ere
the Word of the Father should speak to it. John's note was still, Repentance,
the Axe to the root, the Fan to the floor, the Chafe to the fire: as his
Raiment was rough, so was his Tongue; and if his Food were wild Honey, his
Speech was stinging Locusts. Thus must the way be made for Christ in every
heart. Plausibility is no fit preface to Regeneration. If the heart of man had
continued upright, God might have been entertained without contradiction: but
now violence must be offered to our corruption, ere we can have room for Grace.
If the great Way-maker do not cast down hills, and raise up valleys in the
bosoms of men, there is no passage for Christ. Never will Christ come into
that Soul, where the Herald of Repentance has not been before him.

That Savior of ours, who from eternity lay hid in the Counsel of God, who in
the fullness of time so came, that he lay hid in the womb of his mother for the
space of forty weeks, after he was come thought fit to lie hid in Nazareth for
the space of thirty years, now at last begins to show himself to the world, and
comes from Galilee to Jordan. He that was God always, and might have been
perfect Man in an instant, would by degrees rise to the perfection both of his
Manhood, and execution of his Mediatourship; to teach us the necessity of
leisure in spiritual proceedings; that many Suns, and successions of seasons,
and means must be stayed for, ere we can attain our maturity; and that when we
are ripe for the employments of God, we should no less willingly leave our
obscurity, then we took the benefit of it for our preparation. He that was
formerly circumcised would now be baptized. What is Baptism but an Evangelical
Circumcision? What was Circumcision but a legal Baptism? One both supplied and
succeeded the other; yet the Author of both will undergo both. He would be
circumcised, to sanctify his Church that was; and baptized, to sanctify his
Church that should be; that so in both Testaments he might open a way into
Heaven. There was in him neither filthiness, nor foreskin of corruption, that
should need either knife or water. He came not to be a Savior for himself, but
for us. We are all uncleanness and uncircumcision. He would therefore have that
done to his most pure Body, which should be of force to clear our impure Souls:
thus making himself sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God
in him.

His Baptism gives virtue to ours. His last action (or rather passion) was his
Baptizing with blood; his first was his Baptization with water: both of them
wash the world from their sins. Yea, this latter did not only wash the souls
of men, but washes that very water by which we are washed: from hence is that
made both clean and holy, and can both cleanse and hallow us. And if the very
Handkerchief which touched his Apostles had power of cure, how much more that
Water which the sacred body of Christ touched? Christ comes far to seek his
Baptism; to teach us (for whose sake he was baptized) to wait upon the
Ordinances of God, and to sue for the favor of spiritual blessings. They are
worthless commodities that are not worth seeking for. It is rarely seen, that
God is found of any man unsought for. That desire which only makes us capable
of good things, cannot stand with neglect.

John durst not baptize unbidden; his Master sent him to do this service; and
behold, the Master comes to his Servant, to call for the participation of that
privilege which he himself had instituted and enjoined. How willingly should
we come to our spiritual Superious, for our part in those mysteries which God
has left in their keeping? yea, how gladly should we come to that Christ who
gives us these blessings, who is given to us in them?

This seemed too great an honor for the modesty of John to receive. If his
mother could say, when her Blessed Cousin the Virgin Mary came to visit her,
Whence is this to me, that the Mother of my Lord should come to me? how much
more might he say so, when the Divine Son of that mother came to call for a
favor from him? I have need to be baptized of thee, and come thou to me? O
holy Baptist, if there were not a greater born of woman than thou, yet thou
could not be born of a woman, and not need to be baptized of thy Savior. He
baptized with fire, thou with water. Little would thy water have availed thee
without his fire. If he had not baptized thee, how were thou sanctified from
the womb? There can be no flesh without filthiness. Neither thy supernatural
conception, nor thy austere life could exempt thee from the need of Baptism.
Even those that have not lived to sin after the similitude of Adam, yet are
they so tainted with Adam, that, unless the Second Adam cleanse them by his
Baptism, they are hopeless. There is no less use of Baptism unto all, then
there is certainty of the need of Baptism. John baptized without, Christ
within. The more holy a man is, the more sensible he is of his unholiness. No
carnal man could have said, I have need to be baptized of thee, neither can he
find what he is the better for a little Font-water. The sense of our
wretchedness, and the valuation of our spiritual helps, is the best trial of
our Regeneration. Our Savior does not deny, that either John has need to be
baptized of him, or that it is strange that he should come to be baptized of
John; but he will needs thus far both honor John, and disparage himself, to be
baptized of his Messenger. He that would take flesh of the Virgin, education
from his Parents, sustenance from his creatures, will take Baptism from John.
It is the praise of his mercy, that he will stoop so low as to be beholden to
his creatures, which from him receive their being and power, both to take and
give.

Yet not so much respect to John, as obedience to his Father, drew him to this
point of Humiliation; Thus it behooves us to fulfill all righteousness. The
Counsels and Appointments of God are Righteousness it self. There needs no
other motive either to the Servant or the Son, then the knowledge of those
righteous purposes. This was enough to lead a faithful man through all
difficulties and inconveniences; neither will it admit of any reply, or any
demur. John yields to this honor which his Savior puts upon him, in giving
Baptism to the Author of it. He baptized others to the remission of their
sins: now he baptizes him by whom they are remitted, both to the Baptizer and
to others.

No sooner is Christ baptized, then he comes forth of the water. The element is
of force but during the use; it turns common, when that is past. Neither is the
water sooner poured on his head, then the Heavens are opened, and the Holy
Ghost descends upon that head which was baptized. The Heavens are never shut
whiles either of the Sacraments is duly administered and received: Neither do
the Heavens ever thus open, without the descent of the Holy Ghost. But now that
the God of Heaven is baptized, they open unto him, which are opened to all the
faithful by him; and that Holy Ghost which proceeded from him, together with
the Father, joins with the Father in a sensible testimony of him: that now the
world might see what interest he had in the Heavens, in the Father, in the Holy
Spirit, and might expect nothing but divine from the entrance of such a
Mediator.

IX. Christ Tempted.
NO sooner is Christ come out of the water of Baptism, then he enters into the
fire of Temptation. No sooner is the Holy Spirit descended upon his head in the
form of a Dove, then he is led by the Spirit to be tempted. No sooner does God
say, This is my Son, then Satan says, If thou be the Son of God. It is not in
the power either of the gift or seals of Grace, to deliver us from the assaults
of Satan. They may have the force to repel evil suggestions, they have none to
prevent them. Yea, the more we are engaged unto God by our public vows, and
his pledges of favor, so much more busy and violent is the rage of that Evil
one to encounter us. We are no sooner stepped forth into the field of God, then
he labors to wrest our weapons out of our hands, or to turn them against us.

The voice from Heaven acknowledged Christ to be the Son of God: this Divine
Testimony did not allay the malice of Satan, but exasperate it. Now that
venomous Serpent swells with inward poison, and hasts to assail him whom God
has honored from Heaven. O God, how should I look to escape the suggestions
of that Wicked one, when the Son of thy love cannot be free? when even Grace it
self draws on enmity? That enmity that spared not to strike at the head, will
it forbear the weakest and remotest limb? Arm thou me therefore with an
expectation of that evil I cannot avoid. Make thou me as strong as he is
malicious. Say to my soul also, Thou art my Son, and let Satan do his worst.

All the time of our Savior's obscurity I do not find him set upon. Now that
he looks forth to the public execution of his Divine Office, Satan bends his
forces against him. Our privacy, perhaps, may sit down in peace; but never man
did endeavor a common good without opposition. It is a sign that both the Work
is holy, and the Agent faithful, when we meet with strong affronts.

We have reason to be comforted with nothing so much as with resistance. If we
were not in a way to do good, we should find no rubs: Satan has no cause to
molest his own, and that whilst they go about his own service. He desires
nothing more, then to make us smooth paths to sin: but when we would turn our
feet to holiness, he blocks up the way with Temptations.

Who can wonder enough at the sawciness of that bold Spirit, that dares to set
upon the Son of the everliving God? Who can wonder enough at thy meekness and
patience, O Savior, that would be tempted? He wanted not malice and
presumption to assault thee? thou wantedst not humility to endure those
assaults. I should stand amazed at this voluntary dispensation of thine, but
that I see the susception of our humane nature lays thee open to this
condition. It is necessarily incident to manhood to be liable to Temptations.
Thou would not have put on Flesh, if thou had meant utterly to put off
this consequence of our infirmity. If the state of innocence could have been
any defense against evil motions, the First Adam had not been tempted, much
less the Second. It is not the presenting of Temptations that can hurt us, but
their entertainment. Ill counsel is the fault of the Giver, not of the Refuser.
We cannot forbid lewd eyes to look in at our windows, we may shut our doors
against their entrance. It is no less our praise to have resisted, then Satan's
blame to suggest evil. Yea, O Blessed Savior, how glorious was it for thee,
how happy for us, that thou were tempted? Had not Satan tempted thee, how
should thou have overcome? Without blows there can be no victory, no triumph.
How had thy power been manifested, if no adversary had tried thee? The First
Adam was tempted and vanquished; the Second Adam, to repay and repair that
foil, does vanquish in being tempted. Now have we not a Savior, and High
Priest, that cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities; but such an
one as was in all things tempted in like sort, yet without sin. How boldly
therefore may we go unto the Throne of grace, that we may receive mercy, and
find grace of help in time of need? Yea, this Duel was for us: Now we see by
this conflict of our Almighty Champion, what manner of Adversary we have, how
he fights, how he is resisted, how overcome. Now our very Temptation affords us
comfort, in that we see, the dearer we are unto God, the more obnoxious we are
to this trial. Neither can we be discouraged by the hainousness of those evils
whereto we are moved, since we see the Son of God solicited to Infidelity,
Covetousness, Idolatry. How glorious therefore was it for thee, O Savior, how
happy for us, that thou were tempted?

Where then wast thou tempted, O Blessed Jesu? or whither wentest thou to meet
with our great Adversary? I do not see thee led into the marketplace, or any
other part of the City, or thy home-stead of Nazareth; but into the vast
wilderness, the habitation of beasts; a place that carries in it both horror
and opportunity. Why would thou thus retire thy self from men? But as
confident Champions are wont to give advantage of ground or weapon to their
Antagonist, that the glory of their victory may be the greater: so would
thou, O Savior, in this conflict with our common Enemy, yield him his own
terms for circumstances, that thine honor and his foil may be the more.
Solitariness is no small help to the speed of a Temptation. Woe to him that is
alone: for if he fall, there is not a second to lift him up. Those that out of
an affectation of Holiness seek for solitude in rocks and caves of the deserts,
do no other then run into the mouth of the danger of Temptation, whilst they
think to avoid it. It was enough for thee, to whose Divine power the gates of
hell were weakness, thus to challenge the Prince of darkness. Our care must be
always to eschew all occasions of spiritual danger, and (what we may) to get us
out of the reach of Temptations.

But, O the depth of the Wisdom of God! How came thou, O Savior, to be
thus tempted? That Spirit whereby thou wast conceived as Man, and which was one
with thee and the Father as God, led thee into the wilderness to be tempted of
Satan. Whilst thou taughtest us to pray to thy Father, Lead us not into
temptation, thou meantest to instruct us, that if the same Spirit led us not
into this perilous way, we go not into it. We have still the same conduct: Let
the path be what it will, how can we miscarry in the hand of a Father? Now may
we say to Satan, as thou did unto Pilate, Thou could have no power over me,
except it were given thee from above. The Spirit led thee, it did not drive
thee. Here was a sweet invitation, no compulsion of violence. So absolutely
conformable was thy will to thy Deity, as if both thy Natures had but one
Volition. In this first draught of thy bitter potion, thy soul said in a real
subjection, Not my will, but thy will be done. We imitate thee, O Savior,
though we cannot reach to thee: All thine are led by thy Spirit. O teach us to
forget that we have wills of our own. The Spirit led thee; thine invincible
strength did not animate thee into this combat uncalled. What do we weaklings
so far presume upon our abilities or success, as that we dare thrust our selves
upon Temptations unbidden, unwarranted? Who can pity the shipwreck of those
Mariners, who will needs put forth and hoise sails in a tempest?

Forty days did our Savior spend in the wilderness, fasting and solitary, all
which time was worn out in Temptation; however the last brunt, because it was
most violent, is only expressed. Now could not the Adversary complain or
disadvantage, whilst he had the full scope both of time and place to do his
worst. And why did it please thee, O Savior, to fast forty days and forty
nights: unless, as Moses fasted forty days at the delivery of the Law, and
Elias at the restitution of the Law; so thou thoughtest fit at the
accomplishment of the Law, and the promulgation of the Gospel, to fulfill the
time of both these Types of thine; wherein thou intendest our wonder, not our
imitation; not our imitation of the time, though of the act. Here were no
faulty desires of the flesh in thee, to be tamed, no possibility of a freer and
more easy assent of the soul to God, that could be affected of thee, who wast
perfectly united unto God: but, as for us thou would suffer death, so for us
thou would suffer hunger, that we might learn by fasting to prepare our
selves for Temptations. In fasting so long, thou intendedst the manifestation
of thy Power; in fasting no longer, the truth of thy Manhood. Moses and Elias,
through the miraculous sustentation of God, fasted so long, without any
question made of the truth of their bodies. So long therefore thou thoughtest
good to fast, as by the reason of these precedents might be without prejudice
of thine Humanity; which if it should have pleased thee to support, as thou
could, without means, thy very power might have opened the mouth of cavils
against the verity of thine Humane nature. That thou might therefore well
approve, that there was no difference betwixt thee and us but sin, thou that
could have fasted without hunger, and lived without meat, would both feed,
and fast, and hunger.

Who can be discouraged with the scantiness of friends or bodily provisions,
when he sees his Savior thus long destitute of all earthly comforts, both of
society and sustenance? Oh the policy and malice of that old Serpent, When he
sees Christ bewray some infirmity of nature in being hungry, then he lays
sorest at him by Temptations. His eye was never off from our Savior all the
time of his sequestration; and now that he thinks he espies any one part to lie
open, he drives at it with all his might. We have to do with an Adversary no
less vigilant then malicious, who will be sure to watch all opportunities of
our mischief, and where he sees any advantage of weakness, will not neglect it.
How should we stand upon our guard for prevention, both that we may not give
him occasions of our hurt, nor take hurt by those we have given?

When our Savior was hungry, Satan tempts him in matter of Food; not then of
Wealth or Glory. He well knows both what baits to fish withal, and when, and
how to lay them. How safe and happy shall we be, if we shall bend our greatest
care where we discern the most danger.

In every Temptation there is an appearance of good, whether of the body, mind,
or estate. The first is the lust of the flesh, in any carnal desire; the second
the pride of heart and life; the third the lust of the eyes. To all these the
First Adam is tempted, and in all miscarried; the Second Adam is tempted to
them all, and overcomes. The first man was tempted to carnal appetite, by the
forbidden fruit; to pride, by the suggestion of being as God; to covetousness,
in the ambitious desire of knowing good and evil. Satan having found all the
motions so successful with the First Adam in his innocent estate, will now
tread the same steps in his Temptations of the Second. The stones must be made
bread, there is the motion to a carnal appetite. The guard and attendence of
Angels must be presumed on, there is a motion to pride. The Kingdoms of the
earth and the glory of them must be offered, there to covetousness and ambition.

Satan could not but have heard God say, This is my wel-beloved Son; he had
heard the Message and the Caroll of the Angels; he saw the Star, and the
Journey and Offerings of the Sages; he could not but take notice of the
gratulations of Zachary, Simeon, Anna; he well knew the Predictions of the
Prophets: yet now that he saw Christ fainting with hunger, as not comprehending
how infirmities could consist with a Godhead, he can say, If thou be the Son of
God. Had not Satan known that the Son of God was to come into the World, he had
never said, If thou be the Son of God. His very supposition convinces him: The
ground of his temptation answers it self. If therefore Christ seemed to be a
mere Man, because after forty days he was hungry, why was he not confessed more
then a Man, in that for forty days he hungered not? The motive of the temptation
is worse then the motion, If thou be the Son of God. Satan could not choose
another suggestion of so great importance. All the work of our Redemption, of
our Salvation, depends upon this one Truth, Christ is the Son of God. How
should he else have ransomed the World? how should he have done, how should he
have suffered that which was satisfactory to his Father's wrath? How should his
actions or passion have been valuable to the sins of all the World? What
marvel is it if we, that are sons by Adoption, be assaulted with the doubts of
our interest in God, when the natural Son, the Son of his Essence, is thus
tempted? Since all our comfort consists in this point, here must needs be laid
the chief battery; and here must be placed our strongest defense.

To turn Stones into Bread, had been no more faulty in it self, then to turn
Water into Wine: But to do this in a distrust of his Father's Providence, to
abuse his power and liberty in doing it, to work a miracle of Satan's choice,
had been disagreeable to the Son of God. There is nothing more ordinary with
our spiritual Enemy, then by occasion of want to move us to unwarrantable
courses: Thou art poor, steal; Thou can not rise by honest means, use
indirect. How easy had it been for our Savior, to have confounded Satan by
the power of his Godhead? But he rather chooses to vanquish him by the Sword of
the Spirit, that he might teach us how to resist and overcome the powers of
darkness. If he had subdued Satan by the Almighty power of the Deity, we might
have had what to wonder at, not what to imitate: now he uses that weapon which
may be familiar unto us, that he may teach our weakness how to be victorious.
Nothing in heaven or earth can beat the forces of Hell, but the Word of God.
How carefully should we furnish our selves with this powerful munition? how
should our hearts and mouths be full of it? Teach me, 0 Lord, the way of thy
Statutes: O take not from me the words of Truth. Let them be my Songs in the
house of my pilgrimage; so shall I make answer to my Blasphemers. What needed
Christ to have answered Satan at all, if it had not been to teach us, that
Temptations must not have their way, but must be answered by resistance, and
resisted by the Word?

I do not hear our Savior aver himself to be a God, against the blasphemous
insinuation of Satan; neither do I see him working this miraculous Conversion,
to prove himself the Son of God: but most wisely he takes away the ground of
the Temptation. Satan had taken it for granted, that man cannot be sustained
without bread; and therefore infers the necessity of making bread of stones.
Our Savior shows him from an infallible Word, that he had mislayed his
suggestion; That man lives not by usual food only, but by every word that
proceeds from the mouth of God. He can either sustain without bread, as he
did Moses and Elias; or with a miraculous bread, as the Israelites with Manna;
or send ordinary means miraculously, as food to his Prophet by the Ravens; or
miraculously multiply ordinary means, as the Meal and Oil to the Sareptan
Widow. All things are sustained by his Almighty Word. Indeed we live by food,
but not by any virtue that is without God; without the concurrence of whose
Providence, bread would rather choke then nourish us. Let him withdraw his hand
from his creatures, in their greatest abundance we perish. Why do we therefore
bend our eyes on the means, and not look up to the hand that gives the blessing?

What so necessary dependence has the blessing upon the creature, if our
Prayers hold them not together? As we may not neglect the means, so we may not
neglect the procurement of a blessing upon the means, nor be unthankful to the
hand that has given the blessing.

In the first assault Satan moves Christ to doubt of his Father's Providence,
and to use unlawful means to help himself: in the next he moves him to presume
upon his Father's protection, and the service of his blessed Angels. He grounds
the first upon a conceit of want, the next of abundance. If he be in extremes,
it is all to one end, to mislead unto evil. If we cannot be driven down to
Despair, he labors to lift us up to Presumption. It is not one foil that can
put this bold Spirit out of countenance. Temptations, like waves, break one in
the neck of another. Whilst we are in this warfare, we must make account, that
the repulse of one Temptation does but invite to another.

That Blessed Savior of ours that was content to be led from Jordan into the
Wilderness, for the advantage of the first Temptation, yields to be led from
the Wilderness to Jerusalem, for the advantage of the second. The Place does
not a little avail to the Act. The Wilderness was fit for a Temptation arising
from want, it was not fit for a Temptation moving to vainglory: The populous
City was the fittest for such a motion. Jerusalem was the glory of the World,
the Temple was the glory of Jerusalem, the Pinnacle the highest piece of the
Pinnacle: there is Christ content to be set for the opportunity of Temptation. O
Savior of men, how can we wonder enough at this humility of thine, that thou
would so far abase thy self, as to suffer thy pure and sacred Body to be
transported by the presumptuous and malicious hand of that unclean Spirit? It
was not his power, it was thy patience that deserves our admiration. Neither
can this seem over-strange to us, when we consider, that if Satan be the Head
of wicked men, wicked men are the Members of Satan. What was Pilate, or the
Jews that persecuted thine innocence, but lims of this Devil? And why are we
then amazed, to see thee touched and locally transported by the Head, when we
see thee yielding thy self over to be crucified by the Members? If Satan did
the worse and greater mediately by their hands, no marvel if he do the less
and easier immediately by his own; yet neither of them without thy voluntary
dispensation. He could not have looked at thee without thee. And if the Son of
God did thus suffer his own holy and precious Body to be carried by Satan; what
wonder is it, if that Enemy have sometimes power given him over the sinful
bodies of the adopted sons of God? It is not the strength of Faith that can
secure us from the outward violences of that Evil one. This difference I find
betwixt his spiritual and bodily assaults: those are beaten back by the shield
of Faith, these admit not of such repulse. As the best man may be lame, blind,
diseased; so, through the permission of God, he may be bodily vexed by the old
Manslayer. Grace was never given us for a Target against external Afflictions.

Methinks I see Christ hoised upon the highest Battlements of the Temple, whose
very roof was an hundred and thirty cubits high; and Satan standing by him,
with this speech in his mouth: Well then, since in the matter of nourishment
thou will needs depend upon thy Father's Providence, that he can without means
sustain thee, take now farther trial of that Providence in thy miraculous
preservation; Cast thy self down from this height. Behold, thou art here in
Jerusalem, the famous and holy City of the World; here thou art on the top of
the Pinnacle of that Temple which is dedicated to thy Father, and, if thou be
God, to thy self; the eyes of all men are now fixed upon thee: there cannot be
devised a more ready way to spread thy glory, and to proclaim thy Deity, then
by casting thy self headlong to the Earth. All the World will say, there is
more in thee then a Man; and for danger, there can be none: What can hurt him
that is the Son of God? And wherefore serves that glorious Guard of Angels,
which have by Divine Commission taken upon them the charge of thine Humanity?
Since therefore in one act thou may be both safe and celebrated, trust thy
Father and those thy serviceable Spirits with thine assured preservation; Cast
thy self down. And why did thou not, O thou malignant Spirit, endeavor to
cast down my Savior by those same presumptuous hands that brought him up,
since the descent is more easy then the raising up? Was it because it had not
been so great an advantage to thee that he should fall by thy means, as by his
own? Falling into sin was more then to fall from the pinnacle. Still thy care
and suit is, to make us authors to our selves of evil. Thou gainest nothing by
our bodily hurt, if the Soul be safe. Or was it rather for that thou could
not? I doubt not but thy malice could as well have served to have offered this
measure to himself, as to his holy Apostle soon after: but he that bounded thy
power tethers thee shorter. Thou could not; thou can not do what thou
would. He that would permit thee to carry him up, binds thy hands from
casting him down. And woe were it for us, if thou were not ever stinted.

Why did Satan carry up Christ so high, but on purpose that his fall might be
the more deadly? So deals he still with us, he exalts us, that we may be
dangerously abased: He puffs men up with swelling thoughts of their own
worthiness, that they may be vile in the eyes of God, and fall into
condemnation. It is the manner of God, to cast down, that he may raise, to
abase, that he may exalt: contrarily Satan raises up, that he may throw down,
and intends nothing but our dejection in our advancement.

Height of place gives opportunity of Temptation. Thus busy is that Wicked one
in working against the members of Christ. If any of them be in eminence above
others, those he labors most to ruinate. They had need to stand fast, that
stand high: Both there is more danger of their falling, and more hurt in their
fall.

He that had presumed thus far to tempt the Lord of Life, would fain now dare
him also to presume upon his Deity: If thou be the Son of God, cast thy self
down. There is not a more tried shaft in all his quiver then this, a persuasion
to men to bear themselves too bold upon the favor of God. Thou art the Elect
and Redeemed of God; sin, because Grace has abounded; sin, that it may abound.
Thou art safe enough though thou offend; be not too much an adversary to thy
own liberty. False Spirit, it is no liberty to sin, but servitude rather; there
is no liberty but in the freedom from sin. Every one of us that has the hope
of Sons must purge himself, even as he is pure that has redeemed us. We are
bought with a price, therefore must we glorify God in our body and spirits,
for they are God's. Our Sonship teaches us awe and obedience; and therefore,
because we are Sons, we will not cast our selves down into sin.

How idly do Satan and wicked men measure God by the crooked line of their
own misconceit? I wiss Christ cannot be the Son of God, unless he cast himself
down from the Pinnacle, unless he come down from the Cross. God is not
merciful, unless he humor them in all their desires; not just, unless he take
speedy vengeance where they require it. But when they have spent their folly
upon these vain imaginations, Christ is the Son of God, though he stay on the
top of the Temple: God will be merciful, though we miscarry, and just, though
sinners seem lawless. Neither will he be any other then he is, or measured by
any rule but himself.

But what is this I see? Satan himself with a Bible under his arm, with a Text
in his mouth, It is written, He shall give his Angels charge over thee? How
still in that Wicked one does Subtlety strive with Presumption? Who could not
but over-wonder at this, if he did not consider, that since the Devil dares to
touch the sacred Body of Christ with his hand, he may well touch the Scriptures
of God with his tongue? Let no man henceforth marvel to hear Heretics or
Hypocrites quote Scriptures, when Satan himself has not spared to cite them.
What are they the worse for this, more then that holy Body which is
transported? Some have been poisoned by their meats and drinks; yet either
these nourish us, or nothing. It is not the Letter of the Scripture that can
carry it, but the Sense: if we divide these two, we profane and abuse that Word
we allege. And wherefore does this foul Spirit urge a Text, but for imitation,
for prevention, and for success? Christ had alleged a Scripture unto him, he
re-alledges Scripture unto Christ. At leastwise he will counterfeit an
imitation of the Son of God. Neither is it in this alone; what one act ever
passed the hand of God, which Satan did not apishly attempt to second? If we
follow Christ in the outward action with contrary intentions, we follow Satan
in following Christ. Or, perhaps, Satan meant to make Christ hereby weary of
this weapon: As we see fashions, when they are taken up of the unworthy, are
cast off by the Great. It was, doubtless, one cause why Christ afterward forbad
the Devil even to confess the Truth, because his mouth was a Slander. But
chiefly does he this for a better color of his Temptation: He gilds over this
false metal with Scripture, that it may pass current. Even now is Satan
transformed into an Angel of light, and will seem godly for a mischief. If
Hypocrites make a fair show to deceive with a glorious luster of holiness, we
see whence they borrowed it. How many thousand souls are betrayed by the abuse
of that Word, whose use is sovereign and saving. No Devil is so dangerous as
the religious Devil. If good meat turn to the nourishment, not of nature, but
of the disease, we may not forbear to feed, but endeavor to purge the body of
those evil humors which cause the stomach to work against it self. O God, thou
that have given us light, give us clear and sound eyes, that we may take
comfort of that light thou have given us. Thy Word is holy; make our Hearts so,
and then shall they find that Word not more true then cordial. Let not this
Divine Table of thine be made a snare to our souls.

What can be a better act then to speak Scripture? It were a wonder if Satan
should do a good thing well. He cites Scripture then, but with mutilation and
distortion: it comes not out of his mouth, but maimed and perverted: one piece
is left, all misapplied. Those that wrest or mangle Scripture for their own
turn, it is easy to see from what School they come. Let us take the Word from
the Author, not from the Usurper. David would not doubt to eat that sheep
which he pulled out of the mouth of the Bear or Lion. He shall give his Angels
charge over thee. O comfortable assurance of our protection! God's Children
never go unattended: Like unto great Princes we walk ever in the midst of our
Guard, though invisible, yet true, careful, powerful. What creatures are so
glorious as the Angels of heaven? yet their Maker has set them to serve us.
Our Adoption makes us at once great and safe. We may be contemptible and
ignominious in the eyes of the world; but the Angels of God observe us the
while, and scorn not to wait upon us in our homeliest occasions. The Sun or the
Light may we keep out of our houses, the Air we cannot; much less these
Spirits, that are more simple and immaterial. No walls, no bolts can sever them
from our sides: they accompany us in dungeons, they go with us into our exile.
How can we either fear danger, or complain of solitariness, whilst we have so
unseparable, so glorious Companions?

Is our Savior distasted with Scripture because Satan mis-lays it in his dish?
Does he not rather snatch this sword out of that impure hand, and beat Satan
with the weapon which he abuses? It is written, Thou shall not tempt the Lord
thy God. The Scripture is one, as that God whose it is. Where it carries an
appearance of difficulty or inconvenience, it needs no light to clear it, but
that which it has in it self. All doubts that may arise from it are fully
answered by collation. It is true that God has taken this care, and given this
charge of his own: He will have them kept, not in their sins: they may trust
him, they may not tempt him: he meant to encourage their Faith, not their
Presumption. To cast our selves upon any immediate Providence when means fail
not, is to disobey, in stead of believing God. We may challenge God on his
word, we may not strain him beyond it: We may make account of what he promised,
we may not subject his promises to unjust examinations; and where no need is,
make trial of his Power, Justice, Mercy, by devices of our own. All the Devils
in Hell could not elude the force of this Divine answer: and now Satan sees how
vainly he tempts Christ to tempt God.

Yet again for all this do I see him setting upon the Son of God. Satan is not
foiled, when he is resisted. Neither Diffidence nor Presumption can fasten upon
Christ; he shall be tried with Honor. As some expert Fencer that challenges at
all weapons, so does his great Enemy. In vain shall we plead our skill in some,
if we fail in any. It must be our wisdom to be prepared for all kind of
Assaults. As those that hold Towns and Forts do not only defend themselves
from Incursions, but from the Cannon and the Pioneer. Still does that subtle
Serpent traverse his ground for an advantage. The Temple is not high enough for
his next Temptation; he therefore carries up Christ to the top of an exceeding
high Mountain. All enemies in pitched fields strive for the benefit of the Hill,
or River, or Wind, or Sun. That which his servant Balak did by his instigation,
himself does now immediately, change places in hope of prevailing. If the
obscure Country will not move us, he tries what the Court can do; if not our
Home, the Tavern; if not the Field, our Closet. As no place is left free by his
malice, so no place must be made prejudicial by our carelessness: and as we
should always watch over our selves, so then most when the opportunity carries
cause of suspicion.

Wherefore is Christ carried up so high but for prospect? If the Kingdoms of
the earth and their glory were only to be presented to his Imagination, the
Valley would have served; if to the outward Sense, no Hill could suffice.
Circular bodies, though small, cannot be seen at once. This show was made to
both: diverse Kingdoms lying round about Judaea were represented to the Eye; the
glory of them to the Imagination. Satan meant the Eye could tempt the Fancy, no
less then the Fancy could tempt the Will. How many thousand souls have died of
the wound of the Eye? If we do not let in sin at the window of the Eye, or the
door of the Ear, it cannot enter into our Hearts.

If there be any pomp, majesty, pleasure, bravery in the world, where should it
be but in the Courts of Princes, whom God has made his Images, his Deputies on
earth? There is soft raiment, sumptuous feasts, rich jewels, honorable
attendence, glorious triumphs, royal state. These Satan lays out to the fairest
show. But oh the craft of that old Serpent! Many a Care attends Greatness: No
Crown is without Thorns: High seats are never but uneasy. All those infinite
discontentments which are the shadow of earthly Sovereignty he hides out of the
way; nothing may be seen but what may both please and allure. Satan is still
and ever like himself. If Temptations might be but turned about and shown on
both sides, the Kingdom of darkness would not be so populous. Now whenever
the Tempter sets upon any poor Soul, all sting of conscience, wrath, judgment,
torment is concealed, as if they were not. Nothing may appear to the eye but
pleasure, profit, and a seeming happiness in the enjoying our desires. Those
other woeful objects are reserved for the farewell of sin; that our misery may
be seen and felt at once. When we are once sure, Satan is a Tyrant; till then,
he is a Parasite. There can be no safety, if we do not view as well the back as
the face of Temptations.

But oh presumption and impudence that Hell it self may be ashamed of! The
Devil dares say to Christ, All these will I give thee, if thou will fall down
and worship me. That beggarly Spirit, that has not an inch of Earth, can offer
the whole World to the Maker, to the Owner of it. The Slave of God would be
adored of his Creator. How can we hope he should be sparing of false boasts,
and of unreasonable promises unto us, when he dares offer Kingdoms to him by
whom Kings reign?

Temptations on the right hand are most dangerous. How many that have been
hardened with Fear, have melted with Honor? There is no doubt of that Soul that
will not bite at the golden hook.

False Liars and vainglorious Boasters see the top of their pedigree: if I may
not rather say, that Satan does borrow the use of their tongues for a time.
Whereas faithful is he that has promised, who will also do it. Fidelity and
Truth is the issue of Heaven.

If Idolatry were not a dear sin to Satan, he would not be so importunate to
compass it. It is miserable to see how he draws the world insensibly into this
sin, which they profess to detest. Those that would rather hazard the furnace
then worship Gold in a Statue, yet do adore it in the stamp, and find no fault
with themselves. If our hearts be drawn to stoop unto an over-high respect of
any creature, we are Idolaters. O God, it is no marvel if thy jealousy be
kindled at the admission of any of thine own works into a competition of honor
with their Creator.

Never did our Savior say, Avoid, Satan, till now. It is a just indignation
that is conceived at the motion of a rivality with God. Neither yet did Christ
exercise his Divine power in this command, but by the necessary force of
Scripture drives away that impure Tempter; It is written, Thou shall worship
the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. The rest of our Savior's
answers were more full and direct then that they could admit of a reply; but
this was so flat and absolute, that it utterly daunted the courage of Satan,
and put him to a shameful flight, and made him for the time weary of his trade.

The way to be rid of the troublesome solicitations of that Wicked one is
continued resistance. He that forcibly drove the Tempter from himself, takes
him off from us, and will not abide his assaults perpetual. It is our exercise
and trial that he intends, not our confusion.

X. Simon called.
AS the Sun in his first rising draws all eyes to it; so did this Sun of
righteousness, when he first shone forth into the world. His miraculous Cures
drew Patients, his Divine Doctrine drew Auditors, both together drew the
admiring multitude by troops after him. And why do we not still follow thee, O
Savior, through deserts and mountains, over land and seas, that we may be both
healed and taught? It was thy word, that when thou were lift up, thou would
draw all men unto thee: Behold, thou art lift up long since, both to the Tree
of shame, and to the Throne of heavenly Glory, Draw us, and we shall run after
thee. Thy Word is still the same, though proclaimed by men; thy Virtue is still
the same, though exercised upon the spirits of men. Oh give us to hunger after
both, that by both our souls may be satisfied.

I see the people not only following Christ, but pressing upon him. Even very
Unmannerliness finds here both excuse and acceptance. They did not keep their
distances in an awe to the Majesty of the Speaker, whilst they were ravished
with the power of the Speech: yet did not our Savior check their unreverent
thronging, but rather incourages their forwardness. We cannot offend thee, O
God, with the importunity of our desires. It likes thee well, that the Kingdom
of heaven should suffer violence. Our slackness does ever displease thee, never
our vehemence.

The throng of Auditors forced Christ to leave the shore, and to make Peter's
Ship his Pulpit. Never were there such nets cast out of that fisher-boat
before. Whilst he was upon the land, he healed the sick bodies by his touch:
now that he was upon the Sea, he cured the sick souls by his doctrine; and is
purposely severed from the multitude, that he may unite them to him. He that
made both Sea and Land, causes both of them to conspire to the opportunities
of doing good.

Simon was busy washing his nets. Even those nets that caught nothing must be
washed, no less then if they had sped well. The night's toil does not excuse
his day's work. Little did Simon think of leaving those nets which he so
carefully washed; and now Christ interrupts him with the favor and blessing of
his gracious presence. Labor in our calling (how homely soever) makes us
capable of Divine benediction. The honest Fisherman, when he saw the people
flock after Christ, and heard him speak with such power, could not but conceive
a general and confuse apprehension of some excellent worth in such a Teacher,
and therefore is glad to honor his Ship with such a Guest; and is first
Christ's Host by Sea, ere he is his Disciple by land. An humble and serviceable
entertainment of a Prophet of God was a good foundation of his future honor.
He that would so easily lend Christ his hand and his Ship, was likely soon
after to bestow himself upon his Savior.

Simon has no sooner done this service to Christ, then Christ is preparing for
his reward: when the Sermon is ended, the Ship-room shall be paid for
abundantly: neither shall the Host expect any other Play Master then himself.
Lanch forth into the deep, and let down your Nets to make a draught. That ship
which lent Christ an opportunity of catching men upon the shore, shall be
requited with a plentiful draught of fish in the deep. It had been as easy
for our Savior to have brought the fish to Peter's ship, close to the shore;
yet, as choosing rather to have the ship carried to the shole of fish, he bids,
Lanch forth into the deep. In his Miracles, he loves ever to meet Nature in her
bounds; and when she has done her best, to supply the rest by his overruling
power. The same power therefore that could have caused the fishes to leap upon
dry land, or to leave themselves forsaken of the waters upon the sands of the
Lake, will rather find them, in a place natural to their abiding. Lanch out
into the deep.

Rather in a desire to gratify and obey his Guest, then to pleasure himself,
will Simon bestow one cast of his Net. Had Christ enjoined him an harder task,
he had not refused. Yet not without an allegation of the unlikelihood of
success; Master, we have travailed all night, and caught nothing; yet at thy
word I will let down the Net. The night was the fittest time for the hopes of
their trade; not unjustly might Simon mis-doubt his speed by day, when he had
worn out the night in unprofitable labor. Sometimes God crosses the fairest
of our expectations, and gives a blessing to those times and means whereof we
despair. That pains cannot be cast away, which we resolve to lose for Christ. O
God, how many do I see casting out their Nets in the great Lake of the world,
which in the whole night of their life have caught nothing? They conceive
mischief, and bring forth iniquity: They hatch Cockatrices eggs, and weave the
Spider's web: he that eats of their eggs dies, and that which is trodden upon
breaks out into a Serpent. Their webs shall be no garment, neither shall they
cover themselves with their labors.

O ye sons of men, how long will ye love vanity, and follow after lies? Yet if
we have thus vainly misspent the time of our darkness, let us at the command
of Christ cast out our new-washen nets; our humble and penitent obedience shall
come home laden with blessings. And when they had so done, they enclosed a
great multitude of fishes, so that their Net brake. What a difference there is
betwixt our own voluntary acts, and those that are done upon command; not more
in the grounds of them, then in the issue? Those are oft-times fruitless, these
ever successful. Never man threw out his Net at the word of his Savior, and
drew it back empty. Who would not obey thee, O Christ, since thou do so
bountifully requite our weakest services? It was not mere retribution that was
intended in this event, but instruction also: This act was not without a
mystery. He that should be made a Fisher of men, shall in this draught foresee
his success. The Kingdom of Heaven is like a drawnet cast into the Sea, which,
when it is full, men draw to land. The very first draught that Peter made after
the complement of his Apostleship enclosed no less then three thousand souls. O
powerful Gospel, that can fetch sinful men from out of the depths of natural
corruption! O happy souls, that from the blind and muddy cells of our wicked
nature are drawn forth to the glorious liberty of the Sons of God! Simon's Net
breaks with the store. Abundance is sometimes no less troublesome then want.
The Net should have held, if Christ had not meant to over-charge Simon both
with blessing and admiration. How happily is that Net broken, whose rupture
draws the Fisher to Christ? Though the Net brake, yet the fish escaped not. He
that brought them thither to be taken, held them there till they were taken.
They beckened to their partners in the other ship, that they should come and
help them. There are other ships in partnership with Peter, he does not fish
all the Lake alone. There cannot be a better improvement of society, then to
help us gain, to relieve us in our profitable labors, to draw up the spiritual
draught into the vessel of Christ and his Church. Wherefore has God given us
partners, but that we should becken to them for their aid in our necessary
occasions? Neither does Simon slacken his hand, because he had assistents. What
shall we say to those lazy Fishers, who can set others to the Drag, whilst
themselves look on at ease; caring only to feed themselves with the Fish, not
willing to wet their hands with the Net? What shall we say to this excess of
gain? The Nets break, the ships sink with their burden. O happy complaint of
too large a capture! O Savior, if those Apostolical vessels of thy first
rigging were thus over-laid, ours flote and totter with a balasted lightness.
Thou, who art no less present in these bottoms of ours, lade them with an equal
fraught of converted souls, and let us praise thee for thus sinking.

Simon was a skillful Fisher, and knew well the depth of his trade; and now
perceiving more then Art or Nature in this draught, he falls down at the knees
of Jesus, saying, Lord, go from me, for I am a sinful man. Himself is caught
in this Net. He does not greedily fall upon so unexpected and profitable a
booty, but he turns his eyes from the draught to himself, from the act to the
Author, acknowledging vileness in the one, in the other Majesty: Go from me,
Lord, for I am a sinful man.

It had been pity the honest Fisherman should have been taken at his word. O
Simon, thy Savior is come into thine own ship to call thee, to call others by
thee unto Blessedness, and do thou say, Lord, go from me? As if the Patient
should say to the Physician, Depart from me, for I am sick. It was the voice of
Astonishment, not of Dislike; the voice of Humility, not of Coffeehouse.
Yea, because thou art a sinful man, therefore has thy Savior need to come to
thee, to stay with thee; and because thou art humble in the acknowledgment of
thy sinfulness, therefore Christ delights to abide with thee, and will call
thee to abide with him. No man ever fared the worse for abasing himself to his
God. Christ has left many a soul for froward and unkind usage; never any for
the disparagement of it self, and entreaties of humility. Simon could not
devise how to hold Christ faster, then by thus suing to him to be gone, then by
thus pleading his Unworthiness.

O my soul, be not weary of complaining of thine own wretchedness; disgrace thy
self to him that knows thy vileness; be astonished at those mercies which have
shamed thine ill deservings. Thy Savior has no power to go away from a
prostrate heart. He that resists the proud, heartens the lowly. Fear not, for I
will make thee henceforth a Fisher of men. Lo, this Humility is rewarded with
an Apostleship. What had the Earth ever more glorious then a Legacy from
Heaven? He that bade Christ go from him, shall have the honor to go first on
this happy errand. This was a Trade that Simon had no skill of: it could not
but be enough to him, that Christ said, I will make thee: the Miracle showed
him able to make good his word. He that has power to command the Fishes to be
taken, can easily enable the hands to take them.

What is this Divine Trade of ours then but a spiritual Piscation? The World is
a Sea, Souls like Fishes swim at liberty in this Deep, the Nets of wholesome
Doctrine draw up some to the shore of Grace and Glory. How much skill, and
toil, and patience is requisite in this Art? Who is sufficient for these
things? This Sea, these Nets, the Fishers, the Fish, the Vessels, are all
thine, O God; do what thou will in us, and by us. Give us ability and grace to
take; give men will and grace to be taken; and take thou Glory by that which
thou have given.

XI. The Marriage in Cana.
WAS this then thy first Miracle, O Savior, that thou wroughtest in Cana of
Galilee? And could there be a greater Miracle then this, that having, been
thirty years upon earth, thou did no Miracle till now? that thy Divinity did
hide it self thus long in Flesh? that so long thou would lie obscure in a
corner of Galilee, unknown to that World thou came to redeem? that so long
thou would strain the patient expectation of those who, ever since thy Star,
waited upon the revelation of a Messiah? We silly wretches, if we have but a
dram of Virtue, are ready to set it out to the best show: Thou, who receivedst
not the Spirit by measure, would content thy self with a willing obscurity,
and concealedst that Power that made the World, in the roof of an Humane
breast, in a Cottage of Nazareth. O Savior, none of thy Miracles is more
worthy of astonishment, then thy not doing of Miracles. What thou did in
private, thy wisdom thought fit for secrecy: but if thy Blessed Mother had not
been acquainted with some domestical Wonders, she had not now expected a
Miracle abroad. The Stars are not seen by day; the Sun it self is not seen by
night. As it is no small art to hide Art, so is it no small glory to conceal
Glory. Thy first public Miracle graceth a Marriage. It is an ancient and
laudable institution, that the Rites of Matrimony should not want a solemn
celebration. When are Feasts in season, if not at the recovery of our lost Rib?
if not at this main change of our estate, wherein the joy of obtaining meets
with the hope of farther comforts? The Son of the Virgin and the Mother of that
Son are both at a Wedding. It was in all likelihood some of their Kindred to
whose nuptial feast they were invited so far: yet was it more the honor of
the act, then of the person, that Christ intended. He that made the first
Marriage in Paradise, bestows his first Miracle upon a Galilaean Marriage. He
that was the Author of Matrimony and sanctified it, does by his Holy presence
honor the resemblance of his eternal union with his Church. How boldly may we
spit in the faces of all the impure Adversaries of Wedlock, when the Son of God
pleases to honor it?

The glorious Bridegroom of the Church knew well how ready men would be to
place shame even in the most lawful conjunctions; and therefore his first work
shall be to countenance his own Ordinance. Happy is that Wedding where Christ
is a Guest. O Savior, those that marry in thee cannot marry without thee.
There is no holy Marriage whereat thou art not (however invisible, yet) truly
present, by thy Spirit, by thy gracious Benediction. Thou make Marriages in
Heaven, thou blessest them from Heaven. O thou that have betrothed us to thy
self in Truth and Righteousness, do thou consummate that happy Marriage of ours
in the highest Heavens. It was no rich or sumptuous Bridal to which Christ with
his Mother and Disciples vouchsafed to come from the farther parts of Galilee.
I find him not at the magnificent feasts or triumphs of the Great: The proud
pomp of the World did not agree with the state of a Servant. This poor needy
Bridegroom wants drink for his guests. The Blessed Virgin, (though a stranger
to the house,) out of a charitable compassion, and a friendly desire to
maintain the decency of an hospital entertainment, inquires into the wants of
her Host, pities them, bemoans them, where there was power of redress. When the
wine failed, the mother of Jesus said unto him, They have no wine. How well
does it beseem the eyes of piety and Christian love, to look into the
necessities of others? She that conceived the God of mercies both in her heart
and in her womb, does not fix her eyes upon her own Trencher, but searches
into the penury of a poor Israelite, and feels those wants whereof he complains
not. They are made for themselves, whose thoughts are only taken up with their
own store or indigence.

There was wine enough for a meal, though not for a feast; and if there were
not wine enough, there was enough water: yet the Holy Virgin complains of the
want of wine, and is troubled with the very lack of superfluity. The bounty of
our God reaches not to our life only, but to our contentment; neither has he
thought good to allow us only the bread of sufficiency, but sometimes of
pleasure. One while that is but necessary, which some other time were
superfluous. It is a scrupulous injustice, to scant our selves, where God has
been liberal.

To whom should we complain of any want, but to the Maker and Giver of all
things? The Blessed Virgin knew to whom she sued. She had good reason to know
the Divine nature and power of her Son. Perhaps the Bridegroom was not so
needy, but, if not by his purse, yet by his credit he might have supplied that
want, or, it were hard if some of the neighbour-guests (had they been duly
solicited) might not have furnished him with so much wine as might suffice for
the last service of a dinner: But Blessed Mary knew a nearer way; she did not
think best to lade at the shallow Chanel, but runs rather to the Wellhead,
where she may dip and fill the Firkins at once with ease. It may be she saw
that the Train of Christ (which unbidden followed unto that Feast, and
unexpectedly added to the number of the guests) might help forward that defect;
and therefore she justly solicits her Son Jesus for a supply. Whether we want
Bread, or Water, or Wine, Necessaries or Comforts, whither should we run, O
Savior, but to that infinite munificence of thine, which neither denies, nor
upbraideth any thing? We cannot want, we cannot abound, but from thee. Give us
what thou will, so thou give us Contentment with what thou give.

But what is this I hear? A sharp answer to the suit of a Mother: O woman, what
have I to do with thee? He whose sweet mildness and mercy never sent away any
suppliant discontented, does he only frown upon her that bare him? He that
commands us to honor Father and Mother, does he disdain her whose flesh he
took? God forbid: Love and Duty does not exempt Parents from due admonition.
She solicited Christ as a Mother, he answers her as a Woman. If she were the
Mother of his Flesh, his Deity was eternal. She might not so remember her self
to be a Mother, that she should forget she was a Woman; nor so look upon him as
a Son, that she should not regard him as a God. He was so obedient to her as a
Mother, that withal she must obey him as her God. That part which he took from
her shall observe her: She must observe that nature which came from above, and
made her both a Woman and a Mother. Matter of miracle concerned the Godhead
only; Supernatural things were above the sphere of fleshly relation. If now
the Blessed Virgin will be prescribing either time or form unto Divine acts, O
woman, what have I to do with thee, my hour is not come? In all bodily actions
his style was, O Mother: in spiritual and heavenly, O Woman. Neither is it for
us in the holy affairs of God to know any faces; yea, if we have known Christ
heretofore according to the flesh, henceforth know we him so no more.

O Blessed Virgin, if in that heavenly Glory wherein thou art thou can take
notice of these earthly things, with what indignation do thou look upon the
presumptuous Superstition of vain men, whose suits make thee more then a
Solicitour of Divine Favors? Thy Humanity is not lost in thy Motherhood, nor
in thy Glory: The respects of Nature reach not so high as Heaven. It is far
from thee to abide that Honor which is stolen from thy Redeemer.

There is a Marriage whereto we are invited, yea, wherein we are already
interessed, not as the Guests only, but as the Bride; in which there shall be
no want of the Wine of gladness. It is marvel, if in these earthly Banquets
there be not some lack. In thy presence, O Savior, there is fullness of joy,
and at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore. Blessed are they that are
called to the Marriage-supper of the Lamb.

Even in that rough Answer does the Blessed Virgin descry cause of hope. If his
hour were not yet come, it was therefore coming: When the expectation of the
guests and the necessity of the occasion had made fit room for the Miracle, it
shall come forth, and challenge their wonder. Faithfully therefore and
observantly does she turn her speech from her Son to the Waiters: Whatsoever he
says unto you, do it. How well does it beseem the Mother of Christ to agree
with his Father in Heaven, whose voice from Heaven said, This is my wel-beloved
Son, hear him? She that said of her self, Be it unto me according to thy word,
says unto others, Whatsoever he says unto you, do it. This is the way to have
Miracles wrought in us, Obedience to his Word. The power of Christ did not
stand upon their Officiousness; he could have wrought wonders in spite of them:
but their perverse refusal of his commands might have made them incapable of
the favor of a miraculous action. He that can (when he will) convince the
obstinate, will not grace the disobedient. He that could work without us, or
against us, will not work for us, but by us.

This very poor House was furnished with many and large Vessels for outward
purification. As if Sin had dwelt upon the skin, that superstitious people
sought holiness in frequent Washings. Even this rinsing fouled them with the
uncleanness of a traditional will worship. It is the Soul which needs scowring;
and nothing can wash that, but the Blood which they desperately wished upon
themselves and their children, for guilt, not for expiation. Purge thou us, O
Lord, with hyssop, and we shall be clean; wash us, and we shall be whiter then
snow.

The Waiters could not but think strange of so unseasonable a command, Fill the
water-pots. It is Wine that we want, what do we go to fetch Water? Does this
Holy man mean thus to quench our feast, and cool our stomachs? If there be no
remedy, we could have sought this supply unbidden. Yet so far has the charge
of Christ's Mother prevailed, that, in stead of carrying flagons of Wine to the
Table, they go to fetch pails-full of Water from the Cisterns. It is no
pleading of unlikelihoods against the command of an Almighty power.

He that could have created Wine immediately in those vessels, will rather turn
Water into Wine. In all the course of his Miracles, I do never find him making
ought of nothing; all his great works are grounded upon former existences: He
multiplied the Bread, he changed the Water, he restored the withered Lims, he
raised the Dead, and still wrought upon that which was, and did not make that
which was not. What does he in the ordinary way of nature, but turn the watery
juice that arises up from the root into wine? He will only do this now
suddenly and at once, which he does usually by sensible degrees. It is ever
duly observed by the Son of God, not to do more Miracles then he needs.

How liberal are the provisions of Christ? If he had turned but one of those
vessels, it had been a just proof of his power; and perhaps that quantity had
served the present necessity: now he furnishes them with so much wine as would
have served an hundred and fifty guests for an entire feast. Even the measure
magnifies at once both his power and mercy. The munificent hand of God regards
not our need only, but our honest affluence. It is our sin and our shame, if
we turn his favor into wantonness. There must be first a filling ere there be
a drawing out. Thus, in our vessels, the first care must be of our receipt; the
next, of our expense: God would have us Cisterns, not Channels. Our Savior
would not be his own taster, but he sends the first draught to the Governor of
the feast. He knew his own power, they did not. Neither would he bear witness
of himself, but fetch it out of others mouths. They that knew not the original
of that wine, yet praised the taste: Every man at the beginning does set forth
good wine, and when men have well drunk, then that which is worse; but thou
have kept the good wine until now. The same bounty that expressed it self in
the quantity of the wine, shows it self no less in the excellence. Nothing can
fall from that Divine hand not exquisite. That liberality hated to provide
Crab-wine for his guests. It was fit that the miraculous effects of Christ
(which came from his immediate hand) should be more perfect then the natural. O
Blessed Savior, how delicate is that new Wine which we shall one day drink
with thee, in thy Father's Kingdom! Thou shall turn this Water of our earthly
affliction into that Wine of gladness, wherewith our souls shall be satiate for
ever. Make haste, O my Beloved, and be thou like to a Roe, or to a young Heart
upon the mountain of spices.

XII. The good Centurion.
EVen the bloody trade of War yielded worthy Clients to Christ. This Roman
Captain had learned to believe in that Jesus whom many Jews despised. No
Nation, no Trade can shut out a good heart from God. If he were a forreiner for
birth, yet he was a domestic in heart: He could not change his blood, he could
overruled his affections. He loved that Nation which was chosen of God; and if
he were not of the Synagogue, yet he built a Synagogue: where he might not be a
party, he would be a Benefactour. Next to being good, is a favoring of
Goodness. We could not love Religion, if we utterly wanted it. How many true
Jews were not so zealous? Either will or ability lacked in them, whom duty more
obliged. Good affections do many times more then supply nature. Neither does
God regard whence, but what we are. I do not see this Centurion come to Christ
as the Israelitish Captain came to Elias in Carmel, but with his cap in his
hand, with much suit, much submission, by others, by himself. He sends first
the Elders of the Jews, whom he might hope their Nation and Place might make
gracious: then, left the employment of others might argue neglect, he seconds
them in person. Cold and fruitless are the motions of friends, where we do
wilfully shut up our own lips. Importunity cannot but speed well in both. Could
we but speak for our selves, as this Captain did for his servant, what could we
possibly want? What marvel is it if God be not forward to give, where we care
not to ask, or ask as if we cared not to receive? Shall we yet call this a
suit, or a complaint? I hear no one word of entreaty. The less is said, the
more is concealed: It is enough to lay open his want. He knew well, that he had
to deal with so wise and merciful a Physician, as that the opening of the
malady was a craving of cure. If our spiritual miseries be but confessed,
they cannot fail of redress.

Great variety of Suitours resorted to Christ. One comes to him for a Son,
another comes for a Daughter, a third for Himself: I see none come for his
Servant, but this one Centurion. Neither was he a better man then a Master. His
Servant is sick; he does not drive him out of doors, but lays him at home:
neither does he stand gazing by his bedside, but seeks forth. He seeks forth,
not to Witches or Charmers, but to Christ: He seeks to Christ, not with a
fashionable relation, but with a vehement aggravation of the disease. Had the
Master been sick, the faithfullest Servant could have done no more. He is
unworthy to be well served, that will not sometimes wait upon his followers.
Conceits of inferiority may not breed in us a neglect of charitable offices. So
must we look down upon our Servants here on earth, as that we must still look
up to our Master which is in Heaven.

But why did thou not, O Centurion, rather bring thy Servant to Christ for
cure, then sue for him absent? There was a Paralytick whom Faith and Charity
brought to our Savior, and let down through the uncovered roof in his Bed: why
was not thine so carried, so presented? Was it out of the strength of thy
Faith, which assured thee thou neededst not show thy Servant to him who saw all
things? One and the same grace may yield contrary effects. They, because they
believed, brought the Patient to Christ: thou broughtest not thine to him,
because thou believedst. Their act argued no less desire, thine more
confidence. Thy labor was less, because thy faith was more. Oh that I could
come thus to my Savior, and make such moan to him for my self, Lord, my Soul
is sick of Unbelief, sick of Self-love, sick of inordinate Desires! I should
not need to say more. Thy mercy, O Savior, would not then stay by for my suit,
but would prevent me (as here) with a gracious engagement, I will come and heal
thee. I do not hear the Centurion say, Either come, or heal him: The one he
meant, though he said it not; the other he neither said nor meant. Christ
over-gives both his words and intentions. It is the manner of that Divine
munificence, where he meets with a faithful Suitour, to give more then is
requested; to give when he is not requested. The very insinuations of our
necessities are no less violent then successful. We think the measure of
humane bounty runs over, when we obtain but what we ask with importunity: that
infinite Goodness keeps within bounds, when it overflows the desires of our
hearts.

As he said, so he did. The word of Christ either is his act, or concurs with
it. He did not stand still when he said, I will come, but he went as he spoke.
When the Ruler entreated him for his Son, Come down ere he die, our Savior
stirred not a foot: The Centurion did but complain of the sickness of his
Servant, and Christ unasked says, I will come and heal him. That he might be
far from so much as seeming to honor wealth, and despise meanness, he that
came in the shape of a Servant, would go down to the sick Servant's Pallet,
would not go to the Bed of the rich Ruler's Son. It is the basest motive of
respect, that arises merely from outward Greatness. Either more Grace, or more
need, may justly challenge our favorable regards, no less then private
Obligations.

Even so, O Savior, that which thou offeredst to do for the Centurion's
Servant, have thou done for us. We were sick unto death; so far had the dead
palsy of Sin overtaken us, that there was no life of Grace left in us: when
thou were not content to sit still in Heaven, and say, I will cure them; but
addedst also, I will come and cure them. Thy self came down accordingly to
this miserable World, and have personally healed us; so as now we shall not
die, but live, and declare thy works, O Lord. And oh that we could enough
praise that love and mercy which has so graciously abated thee, and could be
but so low dejected before thee, as thou have stooped low unto us; that we
could be but as lowly subjects of thy Goodness, as we are unworthy!

O admirable return of humility! Christ will go down to visit the sick
Servant: The Master of that Servant says, Lord, I am not worthy that thou
should come under my roof. The Jewish Elders, that went before to mediate for
him, could say, He is worthy that thou should do this for him: but the
Centurion, when he comes to speak for himself, I am not worthy. They said, he
was worthy of Christ's Miracle: he says, he is unworthy of Christ's Presence.
There is great difference betwixt others valuations, and our own. Sometimes the
world under-rates him that finds reason to set an high price upon himself:
Sometimes again it over-values a man that knows just cause of his own
humiliation. If others mistake us, this can be no warrant for our error. We
cannot be wise, unless we receive the knowledge of our selves by direct beams,
not by reflection, unless we have learned to contemn unjust applauses, and,
scorning the flattery of the World, to frown upon our own vileness. Lord, I am
not worthy.

Many a one, if he had been in the Centurion's coat, would have thought well of
it. A Captain, a man of good ability and command, a founder of a Synagogue, a
Patron of Religion; yet he overlooks all these, and when he casts his eye upon
the Divine worth of Christ, and his own weakness, he says, I am not worthy:
Alas! Lord, I am a Gentile, an Alien, a man of blood; thou art Holy, thou art
Omnipotent. True Humility will teach us to find out the best of another, and
the worst piece of our selves. Pride contrarily shows us nothing but matter of
admiration in our selves, in others of contempt. Whilst he confessed himself
unworthy of any favor, he approved himself worthy of all. Had not Christ been
before in his heart, he could not have thought himself unworthy to entertain
that Guest within his house. Under the low roof of an humble breast does God
ever delight to dwell. The state of his Palace may not be measured by the
height, but by the depth. Brags and bold faces do ofttimes carry it away with
men; nothing prevails with God but our voluntary dejections.

It is fit the foundation should be laid deep, where the building is high. The
Centurion's Humility was not more low then his Faith was lofty: That reaches up
into Heaven, and in the face of humane weakness descries Omnipotence: Only say
the word, and my Servant shall be whole.

Had the Centurion's roof been Heaven it self, it could not have been worthy to
be come under of him whose Word was Almighty, and who was the Almighty Word of
his Father. Such is Christ confessed by him that says, Only say the word. None
but a Divine power is unlimited: neither has Faith any other bounds then God
himself. There needs no footing to remove Mountains, or Devils, but a word. Do
but say the word, O Savior, my Sin shall be remitted, my Soul shall be healed,
my Body shall be raised from dust; both Soul and Body shall be glorious.

Whereupon then was the steady confidence of the good Centurion? He saw how
powerful his own word was with those that were under his command, (though
himself were under the command of another,) the force whereof extended even to
absent performances: well therefore might he argue, that a free and unbounded
power might give infallible commands, and that the most obstinate Disease must
therefore needs yield to the beck of the God of Nature. Weakness may show us
what is in strength: By one drop of water we may see what is in the main Ocean.
I marvel not if the Centurion were kind to his Servants, for they were
dutiful to him: he can but say, Do this, and it is done. These mutual
respects draw on each other: Cheerful and diligent service in the one, calls
for a due and favorable care in the other. They that neglect to please, cannot
complain to be neglected. Oh that I could be but such a Servant to mine
heavenly Master! Alas! every of his Commands says, Do this, and I do it not:
every of his Inhibitions says, Do it not, and I do it. He says, Go from the
World; I run to it: he says, Come to me; I run from him. Woe is me! this is not
service, but enmity. How can I look for favor, whilst I return rebellion? It
is a gracious Master whom we serve; there can be no Duty of ours that he sees
not, that he acknowledges not, that he crowns not. We could not but be happy,
if we could be officious.

What can be more mavelous then to see Christ marvel? All marvelling
supposes an ignorance going before, and a knowledge following some accident
unexpected. Now who wrought this Faith in the Centurion, but he that wondered at
it? He knew well what he wrought, because he wrought what he would; yet he
wondered at what he both wrought and knew; to teach us, much more to admire that
which he at once knows and holds admirable. He wrought this Faith as God, he
wondered at it as Man: God wrought, and Man admired: he that was both did both,
to teach us where to bestow our wonder. I never find Christ wondering at gold or
silver, at the costly and curious works of humane skill or industry: yea, when
the Disciples wondered at the magnificence of the Temple, he rebuked them
rather. I find him not wondering at the frame of Heaven and Earth, nor at the
orderly disposition of all creatures and events: the familiarity of these
things intercepts the admiration. But when he sees the grace or acts of Faith,
he so approves them, that he is ravished with wonder. He that rejoiced in the
view of his Creation, to see that of nothing he had made all things good,
rejoices no less in the reformation of his Creature, to see that he had made
good of evil. Behold, thou art fair, my Love, behold, thou art fair, and there
is no spot in thee. My Sister, my Spouse, thou have wounded my heart, thou have
wounded my heart with one of thine eyes.

Our Wealth, Beauty, Wit, Learning, Honor, may make us accepted of men, but it
is our Faith only that shall make God in love with us. And why are we of any
other save God's diet, to be more affected with the least measure of Grace in
any man, then with all the outward glories of the World? There are Great men
whom we justly pity; we can admire none but the Gracious.

Neither was that plant more worthy of wonder in it self, then that it grew in
such a soil, with so little help of rain and Sun. The weakness of means adds
to the praise and acceptance of our proficiency. To do good upon a little is
the commendation of thrift: it is small thank to be full-handed in a large
estate. As contrarily, the strength of means doubles the revenge of our
neglect. It is not more the shame of Israel, then the glory of the Centurion,
that our Savior says, I have not found so great faith in Israel. Had Israel
yielded any equal faith, it could not have been unespied of these All-seeing
eyes: yet though their Helps were so much greater, their Faith was less: and
God never gives more then he requires. Where we have laid our Tillage and
Compost and Seed, who would not look for a Crop? but if the uncultured Fallow
yield more, how justly is that unanswerable ground near to a curse?

Our Savior did not mutter this censorious testimony to himself, not whisper
it to his Disciples, but he turned him about to the people, and spoke it in
their ears, that he might at once work their shame and emulation. In all other
things, except spiritual, our self-love makes us impatient of equals; much
less can we endure to be out-stripped by those who are our professed
inferiors. It is well if any thing can kindle in us holy ambitions. Dull and
base are the spirits of that man, that can abide to see another overtake him in
the way, and outrun him to Heaven.

He that both wrought this Faith, and wondered at it, does now reward it. Go thy
ways, and as thou have believed, so be it unto thee. Never was any Faith unseen
of Christ, never was any seen without allowance, never was any allowed without
remuneration. The measure of our receipts in the matter of favor is the
proportion of our belief. The infinite Mercy of God (which is ever like it
self) follows but one rule in his gift to us, the Faith that he gives us. Give
us, O God, to believe, and be it to us as thou will, it shall be to us above
that we will.

The Centurion sues for his Servant, and Christ says, So be it unto thee. The
Servant's health is the benefit of the Master; and the Master's Faith is the
health of the Servant. And if the Prayers of an earthly Master prevailed so
much with the Son of God for the recovery of a Servant, how shall the
intercession of the Son of God prevail with his Father in Heaven for us that
are his impotent Children and Servants upon Earth? What can we want, O Savior,
whilst thou suest for us? He that has given thee for us can deny thee nothing
for us, can deny us nothing for thee. In thee we are happy, and shall be
glorious. To thee, O thou mighty Redeemer of Israel, with thine Eternal Father,
together with thy Blessed Spirit, one God infinite and incomprehensible, be
given all Praise, Honor and Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

XIII. The Widow's Son raised.
THE favors of our beneficent Savior were at the least contiguous: No sooner
has he raised the Centurion's Servant from his Bed, then he raises the Widow's
Son from his Bier.

The fruitful clouds are not ordained to fall all in one field: Nain must
partake of the bounty of Christ as well as Cana or Capernaum. And if this Sun
were fixed in one Orb, yet it diffuseth heat and light to all the world. It is
not for any place to ingross the Messengers of the Gospel, whose errand is
universal: This immortal Seed may not fall all in one furrow.

The little City of Nain stood under the hill of Hermon, near unto Tabor: but
now it is watered with better dews from above, the Doctrine and Miracles of a
Savior.

Not for state, but for the more evidence of the work, is our Savior attended
with a large train; so entering into the gate of that walled City, as if he
meant to besiege their Faith by his Power, and to take it. His providence has
so contrived his journey, that he meets with the sad pomp of a Funeral. A
woeful Widow attended with her weeping neighbors is following her only Son to
the grave. There was nothing in this spectacle that did not command compassion.

A young man in the flower, in the strength of his age swallowed up by death.
Our decrepit age both expects death, and solicits it; but vigorous youth looks
strangely upon that grim Sergeant of God. Those mellow apples that fall alone
from the tree we gather up with contentment; we chide to have the unripe
unseasonably beaten down with cudgels.

But more, a young man, the only Son, the only Child of his mother. No
condition can make it other then grievous for a well-natur'd mother to part
with her own bowels; yet surely store is some mitigation of loss. Amongst many
children one may be more easily missed; for still we hope the surviving may
supply the comforts of the dead. But when all our hopes and joys must either
live or die in one, the loss of that one admits of no consolation.

When God would describe the most passionate expression of sorrow that can fall
into the miserable, he can but say, O daughter of my people, gird thee with
sackcloath, and wallow thy self in ashes, make lamentation and bitter mourning,
as for thine only Son. Such was the loss, such was the sorrow of this
disconsolate mother: neither words nor tears can suffice to discover it.

Yet more, had she been aided by the counsel and supportation of a loving
Yoke Fellow, this burden might have seemed less intolerable. A good Husband
may make amends for the loss of a Son. Had the Root been left to her entire,
she might better have spared the Branch: now both are cut up, all the stay of
her life is gone, and she seems abandoned to a perfect misery. And now when she
gave her self up for a forlorn mourner, past all capacity of redress, the God
of comfort meets her, pities her, relieves her. Here was no Solicitour but his
own Compassion: In other occasions he was sought and sued to. The Centurion
comes to him for a Servant, the Ruler for a Son, Jairus for a Daughter, the
neighbors for the Paralytick: here he seeks the Patient, and offers the Cure
unrequested. Whilst we have to do with the Father of mercies, our Afflictions
are the most powerful suitours: No tears, no prayers can move him so much as
his own commiseration. O God, none of our secret sorrows can be either hid from
thine eyes, or kept from thine heart: and when we are past all our hopes, all
possibilities of help, then art thou nearest to us for deliverance.

Here was a conspiration of all parts to mercy. The Heart had compassion, the
Mouth said, Weep not, the Feet went to the Bier, the Hand touched the Coffin,
the power of the Deity raised the dead. What the Heart felt was secret to it
self, the Tongue therefore expresses it in words of comfort, Weep not. Alas!
what are words to so strong and just passions? To bid her not to weep that had
lost her only Son, was to persuade her to be miserable, and not feel it; to
feel, and not regard it; to regard, and yet to smother it. Concealment does not
remedy, but aggravate sorrow. That with the counsel of not weeping therefore
she might see cause of not weeping, his Hand seconds his Tongue: He arrests the
Coffin, and frees the Prisoner; Young man, I say unto thee, Arise: the Lord of
life and death speaks with command. No finite power could have said so without
presumption, or with success. That is the voice that shall one day call up our
vanished bodies from those elements into which they are resolved, and raise
them out of their dust. Neither sea, nor death, nor hell can offer to detain
their dead, when he charges them to be delivered. Incredulous nature, what do
thou shrink at the possibility of a Resurrection, when the God of nature
undertakes it? It is no more hard for that Almighty Word which gave being unto
all things, to say, Let them be repaired, then, Let them be made.

I do not see our Savior stretching himself upon the dead corpse, as Elias and
Elisha upon the Sons of the Sunamite and Sareptan; nor kneeling down, and
praying by the Bier, as Peter did to Dorcas: but I hear him so speaking to the
dead as if he were alive, and so speaking to the dead, that by the word he
makes him alive; I say unto thee, Arise. Death has no power to bid that man
lie still, whom the Son of God bids Arise. Immediately he that was dead sat up.
So at the sound of the last Trumpet, by the power of the same voice, we shall
arise out of the dust, and stand up glorious; this mortal shall put on
immortality, this corruptible incorruption. This body shall not be buried, but
sown; and at our day shall therefore spring up with a plentiful increase of
glory. How comfortless, how desperate should be our lying down, if it were not
for this assurance of rising? And now, behold, lest our weak faith should
stagger at the assent to so great a difficulty, he has already, by what he
has done, given us tastes of what he will do. The power that can raise one man
can raise a thousand, a million, a world. No power can raise one man but that
which is infinite; and that which is infinite admits of no limitation. Under
the Old Testament God raised one by Elias, another by Elisha living, a third by
Elisha dead: By the hand of the Mediator of the New Testament he raised here
the son of the Widow, the daughter of Jairus, Lazarus, and, in attendence of
his own Resurrection, he made a Jail-deliver of holy Prisoners at Jerusalem.
He raises the daughter of Jairus from her Bed, this Widow's son from his
Coffin, Lazarus from his Grave, the dead Saints of Jerusalem from their
Rottenness; that it might appear, no degree of death can hinder the efficacy of
his overruling command. He that keeps the keys of death cannot only make way
for himself through the common Hall and outer rooms, but through the inwardest
and most reserved closets of darkness.

Methinks I see this young man, who was thus miraculously awaked from his
deadly sleep, wiping and rubbing those eyes that had been shut up in death, and
descending from the Bier, wrapping his winding sheet about his loins, cast
himself down in a passionate thankfulness at the feet of his Almighty Restorer,
adoring that Divine power which had commanded his soul back again to her
forsaken lodging: and though I hear not what he said, yet I dare say they were
words of praise and wonder which his returned soul first uttered. It was the
Mother whom our Savior pitied in this act, not the Son, (who now forced from
his quiet rest must twice pass through the gates of death.) As for her sake
therefore he was raised, so to her hands was he delivered; that she might
acknowledge that soul given to her, not to the possessour. Who cannot feel the
amazement and ecstasie of joy that was in this revived mother, when her son now
salutes her from out of another world, and both receives and gives gratulations
of his new life? How suddenly were all the tears of that mournful train dried
up with a joyful astonishment? How soon is that Funeral-banquet turned into a
new Birth-day-feast? What striving was here to salute the late carcass of their
returned neighbor? What awful and admiring looks were cast upon that Lord of
life, who seeming homely, was approved Omnipotent? How gladly did every tongue
celebrate both the work and the author? A great Prophet is raised up amongst
us, and, God has visited his people. A Prophet was the highest name they could
find for him, whom they saw like themselves in shape, above themselves in
power. They were not yet acquainted with God manifested in the flesh. This
Miracle might well have assured them of more then a Prophet: but he that raised
the dead man from the Bier would not suddenly raise these dead hearts from the
grave of Infidelity. They shall see reason enough to know, that the Prophet who
was raised up to them was the God that now visited them, and at last should do
as much for them as he had done for the young man, raise them from death to
life, from dust to glory.

XIV. The Ruler's Son cured.
THE Bounty of God so exceeds man's, that there is a contrariety in the
exercise of it. We shut our hands because we opened them; God therefore opens
his because he has opened them. God's mercies are as comfortable in their
issue, as in themselves. Seldom ever do blessings go alone: Where our Savior
supplied the Bride-groom's Wine, there he heals the Ruler's Son. He had not in
all these coasts of Galilee done any Miracle but here. To him that has shall
be given.

We do not find Christ often attended with Nobility; here he is. It was some
great Peer, or some noted Courtier, that was now a suitour to him for his dying
Son. Earthly Greatness is no defense against Afflictions. We men forbear the
mighty: Disease and Death know no faces of Lords or Monarchs. Could these be
bribed, they would be too rich. Why should we grudge not to be privileged, when
we see there is no spare of the Greatest?

This noble Ruler listens after Christ's return into Galilee. The most eminent
amongst men will be glad to hearken after Christ in their necessity. Happy was
it for him that his Son was sick; he had not else been acquainted with his
Savior, his Soul had continued sick of ignorance and unbelief. Why else does
our good God send us pain, losses, opposition, but that he may be sought to?
Are we afflicted, whither should we go but to Cana, to seek Christ? whither but
to the Cana of Heaven, where our water of sorrow is turned to the wine of
gladness, to that Omnipotent Physician who heals all our infirmities? that we
may once say, It is good for me that I was afflicted.

It was about a day's journey from Capernaum to Cana: Thence hither did this
Courtier come for the cure of his Son's Fever. What pains even the greatest can
be content to take for bodily health? No way is long, no labor tedious to the
desirous. Our Souls are sick of a spiritual fever, laboring under the cold fit
of Infidelity, and the hot fit of Self-love; and we sit still at home, and see
them languish unto death.

This Ruler was neither faithless, nor faithful. Had he been quite faithless,
he had not taken such pains to come to Christ. Had he been faithful, he had
not made this suit to Christ when he was come, Come down, and heal my son, ere
he die.

Come down; as if Christ could not have cured him absent: Ere he die; as if
that power could not have raised him being dead. How much difference was here
betwixt the Centurion and the Ruler? That came for his Servant, this for his
Son. This Son was not more above the Servant, then the Faith which sued for the
Servant surpassed that which sued for the Son. The one can say, Master, come
not under my roof, for I am not worthy; only speak the word, and my servant
shall be whole: The other can say, Master, either come under my roof, or my Son
cannot be whole. Heal my son, had been a good suit; for Christ is the only
Physician for all diseases: but, Come down and heal him, was to teach God how
to work.

It is good reason that he should challenge the right of prescribing to us, who
are every way his own: it is presumption in us to stint him unto our forms. An
expert workman cannot abide to be taught by a novice: how much less shall the
All-wise God endure to be directed by his creature? This is more then if the
Patient should take upon him to give a Recipe to the Physician. That God would
give us Grace, is a beseeming suit: but to say, Give it me by prosperity, is a
saucy motion.

As there is faithfulness in desiring the end, so modesty and patience in
referring the means to the author. In spiritual things God has acquainted us
with the means whereby he will work, even his own Sacred Ordinances. Upon
these, because they have his own promise, we may call absolutely for a
blessing: In all others, there is no reason that beggars should be chusers. He
who does whatsoever he will, must do it how he will. It is for us to receive,
not to appoint.

He who came to complain of his Son's sickness, hears of his own: Except ye see
signs and wonders, ye will not believe. This Nobleman was (as is like) of
Capernaum. There had Christ often preached, there was one of his chief
residencies. Either this man had heard our Savior often, or might have done: yet
because Christ's Miaracles came to him only by hearsay, (for as yet we find
none at all wrought where he preached most,) therefore the man believes not
enough; but so speaks to Christ as to some ordinary Physician, Come down, and
heal. It was the common disease of the Jews, Incredulity, which no Receipt could
heal but Wonders. A wicked and adulterous generation seeks signs. Had they not
been wilfully graceless, there was already proof enough of the Messiah; the
miraculous conception and life of the Forerunner, Zachary's dumbness, the
attestation of Angels, the apparition of the Star, the journey of the Sages,
the vision of the Shepherds, the testimonies of Anna and Simeon, the Prophecies
fulfilled, the Voice from Heaven at his Baptism, the Divine words that he
spoke: and yet they must have all made up with Miracles; which though he be not
unwilling to give at his own times, yet he thinks much to be tied unto at
theirs. Not to believe without Signs, was a sign of stubborn hearts.

It was a foul fault, and a dangerous one: Ye will not believe. What is it that
shall condemn the world but Unbelief? what can condemn us without it? No Sin
can condemn the Repentant. Repentance is a fruit of Faith: where true Faith is
then, there can be no condemnation; as there can be nothing but condemnation
without it. How much more foul in a noble Capernaite, that had heard the
Sermons of so Divine a Teacher? The greater light we have, the more shame it is
for us to stumble.

Oh what shall become of us, that reel and fall in the clearest Sunshine that
ever looked forth upon any Church? Be merciful to our sins, O God, and say any
thing of us, rather then, Ye will not believe.

Our Savior tells him of his Unbelief; he feels not himself sick of that
disease: all his mind is on his dying Son. As easily do we complain of bodily
griefs, as we are hardly affected with spiritual. O the meekness and mercy of
this Lamb of God! When we would have looked that he should have punished this
Suitour for not believing, he condescends to him that he may believe: Go thy
way, thy son lives. If we should measure our hopes by our own worthiness,
there were no expectation of blessings: but if we shall measure them by his
bounty and compassion, there can be no doubt of prevailing. As some tender
mother that gives the breast to her unquiet child in stead of the rod, so deals
he with our perverseness.

How God differences men according to no other conditions then of their Faith!
The Centurion's Servant was sick, the Ruler's Son. The Centurion does not sue
unto Christ to come, only says, My servant is sick of a palsy: Christ answers
him, I will come and heal him. The Ruler sues unto Christ, that he would come,
and heal his Son: Christ will not go, only says, Go thy way, thy son lives.
Outward things carry no respect with God. The image of that Divine Majesty
shining inwardly in the Graces of the Soul is that which wins love from him in
the meanest estate. The Centurion's Faith therefore could do more then the
Ruler's Greatness; and that faithful man's Servant has more regard then this
great man's Son.

The Ruler's request was, Come and heal: Christ's answer was, Go thy way, thy
son lives. Our merciful Savior meets those in the end, whom he crosses in
the way. How sweetly does he correct our prayers, and whilst he does not give
us what we ask, gives us better then we asked?

Justly does he forbear to go down with this Ruler, lest he should confirm him
in an opinion of measuring his power by conceits of locality and distance: but
he does that in absence, for which his presence was required with a repulse,
Thy son lives; giving a greater demonstration of his Omnipotency then was
craved. How often does he not hear to our will, that he may hear us to our
advantage? The chosen vessel would be rid of Temptations, he hears of a supply
of Grace. The sick man asks release, receives patience; life, and receives
glory. Let us ask what we think best, let him give what he knows best.

With one word does Christ heal two Patients, the Son, and the Father; the
Son's Fever, the Father's Unbelief. That operative word of our Savior was not
without the intention of a trial. Had not the Ruler gone home satisfied with
that intimation of his Son's life and recovery, neither of them had been
blessed with success. Now the news of performance meets him one half of the
way: and he that believed somewhat ere he came, and more when he went, grew to
more Faith in the way; and when he came home, enlarged his Faith to all the
skirts of his Family. A weak Faith may be true, but a true Faith is growing. He
that boasts of a full stature in the first moment of his assent, may presume,
but does not believe.

Great men cannot want clients, their example sways some, their authority more;
they cannot go to either of the other worlds alone. In vain do they pretend
power over others, who labor not to draw their families unto God.

XV. The Dumb Devil ejected.
THat the Prince of our Peace might approve his victories perfect, wheresoever
he met with the Prince of darkness he foiled him, he ejected him. He found him
in Heaven; thence did he throw him headlong, and verified his Prophet, I have
cast thee out of mine holy mountain. And if the Devils left their first
habitation, it was because (being Devils) they could not keep it. Their estate
indeed they might have kept, and did not; their habitation they would have
kept, and might not. How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer? He found him in
the Heart of man, (for in that closet of God did the evil Spirit after his
exile from Heaven shroud himself; Sin gave him possession, which he kept with a
willing violence;) thence he casts him by his Word and Spirit. He found him
tyrannizing in the Bodies of some possessed men, and with power commands the
unclean Spirits to depart.

This act is for no hand but his. When a strong man keeps possession, none but
a stronger can remove it. In voluntary things the strongest may yield to the
weakest, Sampson to a Dalilah; but in violent, ever the mightiest carries it. A
spiritual nature must needs be in rank above a bodily; neither can any power
be above a Spirit, but the God of Spirits.

No otherwise is it in the mental possession. Where ever Sin is, there Satan
is: As on the contrary, whosoever is born of God, the seed of God remains in
him. That Evil one not only is, but rules in the sons of disobedience: in
vain shall we try to eject him, but by the Divine power of the Redeemer. For
this cause the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of
the Devil. Do we find our selves haunted with the familiar Devils of Pride,
Self-love, Sensual desires, Unbelief? None but thou, O Son of the ever-living
God, can free our bosoms of these hellish guests. O cleanse thou me from my
secret sins, and keep me that presumptuous sins prevail not over me. O Savior,
it is no Paradox to say that thou castest out more Devils now then thou did
whilst thou were upon earth. It was thy word, When I am lifted up, I will draw
all men unto me. Satan weighs down at the feet, thou pullest at the head, yea
at the heart. In every conversion which thou workest, there is a dispossession.
Convert me, O Lord, and I shall be converted. I know thy means are now no other
then ordinary: If we expect to be dispossessed by miracle, it would be a
miracle if ever we were dispossessed. O let thy Gospel have the perfect work
in me, so only shall I be delivered from the powers of darkness.

Nothing can be said to be dumb but what naturally speaks; nothing can speak
naturally but what has the instruments of speech; which because spirits want,
they can no otherwise speak vocally, then as they take voices to themselves in
taking bodies. This Devil was not therefore dumb in his nature, but in his
effect: The man was dumb by the operation of that Devil which possessed him;
and now the action is attributed to the spirit, which was subjectively in the
man. It is not you that speak, says our Savior, but the Spirit of your Father
that speaks in you.

As it is in bodily diseases, that they do not infect us alike, some seize upon
the humors, others upon the spirits; some assault the brain, others the heart
or lungs: so in bodily and spiritual possessions; in some the evil spirit
takes away their senses, in some their lims, in some their inward faculties;
like as spiritually they affect to move us unto several sins, one to Lust,
another to Covetousness or Ambition, another to Cruelty: and their names have
distinguished them according to these various effects. This was a dumb Devil,
which yet had possessed not the tongue only of this man, but his ear; nor that
only, but (as it seems) his eyes too.

O subtle and tyrannous spirit, that obstructs all ways to the Soul, that keeps
out all means of grace both from the door and windows of the Heart; yea, that
stops up all passages, whether of ingress, or egress; of ingress at the Eye, or
Ear, of egress at the Mouth; that there might be no capacity of redress!

What holy use is there of our Tongue but to praise our Maker, to confess our
sins, to inform our brethren? How rise is this dumb Devil everywhere, whilst
he stops the mouths of Christians from these useful and necessary duties?

For what end has man those two privileges above his fellow creatures, Reason,
and Speech, but that, as by the one he may conceive of the great works of his
Maker, which the rest cannot, so by the other he may express what he conceives
to the honor of the Creator both of them and himself? And why are all other
creatures said to praise God, and bidden to praise him, but because they do it
by the apprehension, by the expression of man? If the heavens declare the glory
of God; how do they it but to the eyes and by the tongue of that man for whom
they were made? It is no small honor whereof the envious Spirit shall rob his
Maker, if he can close up the mouth of his only rational and vocal creature,
and turn the best of his workmanship into a dumb Idol, that has a mouth and
speaks not. Lord, open thou my lips, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise.

Praise is not more necessary then complaint; praise of God, then complaint of
our selves, whether to God or men. The only amends we can make to God, when we
have not had the grace to avoid sin, is to confess the sin we have not avoided:
This is the sponge that wipes out all the blots and blurs of our lives. If we
confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to
cleanse us from all unrighteousness.

That cunning Manslayer knows there is no way to purge the sick soul but
upward, by casting out the vicious humor wherewith it is clogged; and
therefore holds the lips close, that the heart may not dis-burthen it self by
so wholesome evacuation. When I kept silence, my bones consumed: For day and
night thy hand, O Lord, was heavy upon me; my moisture is turned into the
drought of summer. O let me confess against my self my wickedness unto thee,
that thou may forgive the punishment of my sin.

We have a Tongue for God, when we praise him; for our selves, when we pray and
confess; for our brethren, when we speak the truth for their information; which
if we hold back in unrighteousness, we yield unto that dumb Devil. Where do we
not see that accursed Spirit? He is on the Bench, when the mute or partial
Judge speaks not for truth and innocence: He is in the Pulpit, when the
Prophets of God smother, or halve, or adulterate the message of their Master:
He is at the Bar, when irreligious Jurours dare lend an oath to fear, to hope,
to gain: He is in the Market, when godless Chapmen for their penny sell the
truth and their soul: He is in the common conversation of men, when the tongue
belies the heart, flatters the guilty, balketh reproofs even in the foulest
crimes. O Thou who only art stronger then that strong one, cast him out of the
hearts and mouths of men. It is time for thee, Lord, to work, for they have
destroyed thy Law.

That it might well appear this impediment was not natural, so soon as the man
is freed from the spirit, his tongue is free to his speech. The effects of
spirits as they are wrought, so they cease at once. If the Son of God do but
remove our spiritual possession, we shall presently break forth into the praise
of God, into the confession of our vileness, into the profession of truth.

But what strange variety do I see in the spectatours of his Miracle, some
wondering, others censuring, a third sort tempting, a fourth applauding? There
was never man or action but was subject to variety of constructions. What man
could be so holy as he that was God? what act could be more worthy then the
dispossession of an evil spirit? Yet this man, this act passes these
differences of interpretation. What can we do to undergo but one opinion? If
we give alms, and fast, some will magnify our charity and devotion, others
will tax our hypocrisy: if we give not, some will condemn our
hard-heartedness, others will allow our care of justice. If we preach plainly,
to some it will savor of a careless slubbering, to others of a mortified
sincerity: elaborately, some will tax our affectation, others will applaud our
diligence in dressing the delicate viands of God. What marvel is it if it be
thus with our imperfection, when it fared not otherwise with him that was
purity and righteousness it self? The austere Forerunner of Christ came
neither eating nor drinking; they say, He has a Devil: The Son of man came
eating and drinking; they say, This man is a glutton, a friend of Publicans and
sinners. And here one of his holy acts carries away at once wonder, censure,
doubt, celebration. There is no way safe for a man, but to square his actions
by the right rule of justice, of charity; and then let the world have leave to
spend their glosses at pleasure. It was an heroical resolution of the chosen
Vessel, I pass very little to be judged of you, or of man's day.

I marvel not if the people marvelled, for here were four wonders in one; the
blind saw, the deaf heard, the dumb spoke, the Demoniack is delivered. Wonder
was due to so rare and powerful a work, and, if not this, nothing. We can cast
away admiration upon the poor devices or activities of men; how much more upon
the extraordinary works of Omnipotency? Whosoever knows the frame of Heaven and
Earth, shall not much be affected with the imperfect effects of frail humanity;
but shall with no less ravishment of soul acknowledge the miraculous works of
the same Almighty hand. Neither is the spiritual ejection worthy of any meaner
entertainment. Rarity and Difficulty are wont to cause wonder. There are many
things which have wonder in their worth, and lose it in their frequency: there
are some which have it in their strangeness, and lose it in their facility:
Both meet in this. To see men haunted, yea possessed with a dumb Devil, is so
frequent, that it is a just wonder to find a man free: but to find the dumb
spirit cast out of a man, and to hear him praising God, confessing his sins,
teaching others the sweet experiments of mercy, deserves just admiration. If
the Cynick sought in the market for a Man amongst men, well may we seek amongst
men for a Convert. Neither is the difficulty less then the rareness. The strong
man has the possession, all passages are blocked up, all helps barred, by the
treachery of our nature. If any soul be rescued from these spiritual
wickednesses, it is the praise of him that does wonders alone.

But whom do I see wondering? The multitude. The unlearned beholders follow
that act with wonder, which the learned Scribes entertain with obloquy. God
has revealed those things to babes, which he has hid from the wise and
prudent. With what scorn did those great Rabbis speak of these sons of the
earth, This people that knows not the Law is accursed? Yet the mercy of God
makes an advantage of their simplicity; in that they are therefore less subject
to cavillation and incredulity: As contrarily, his justice causes the proud
knowledge of others to lie as a block in their way to the ready assent unto the
Divine power of the Messiah. Let the pride of glorious adversaries disdain the
poverty of the clients of the Gospel; it shall not repent us to go to Heaven
with the vulgar, whilst their great ones go in state to Perdition.

The multitude wondered. Who censured, but Scribes, great Doctors of the Law,
of the divinity of the Jews? what Scribes, but those of Jerusalem, the most
eminent Academy of Judaea? These were the men who, out of their deep reputed
judgment, cast these foul aspersions upon Christ. Great wits oft-times mis-lead
both the owners and followers. How many shall once wish they had been born
dullards, yea idiots, when they shall find their wit to have barred them out of
Heaven? Where is the Scribe? where is the disputer of this world? Has not God
made the wisdom of the world foolishness? Say the world what it will, a dram
of Holiness is worth a pound of Wit. Let others censure, with the Scribes; let
me wonder, with the multitude.

What could malice say worse, He casts out Devils through Beelzebub the
Prince of Devils? The Jews well knew that the Gods of the heathen were no other
then Devils; amongst whom, for that the Lord of Flies (so called, whether for
the concourse of flies to the abundance of his sacrifices, or for his aid
implored against the infestation of those swarms) was held the chief, therefore
they style him, The Prince of Devils. There is a subordination of Spirits, some
higher in degree, some inferior to others. Our Savior himself tells us of the
Devil, and his Angels: Messengers are inferior to those that send them. The
seven Devils that entered into the swept and garnished house were worse then
the former. Neither can Principalities, and Powers, and Governors, and Princes
of the darkness of this World, design other then several ranks of evil Angels.
There can be no being without some kind of order, there can be no order in
parity. If we look up into Heaven, there is the King of Gods, the Lord of
Lords, higher then the highest. If to the Earth, there are Monarchs, Kings,
Princes, Peers, People. If we look down to Hell, there is the Prince of Devils.
They labor for confusion that call for parity. What should the Church do with
such a form as is not exemplified in Heaven, in Earth, in Hell?

One Devil (according to their supposition) may be used to cast out another.
How far the command of one spirit over another may extend, it is a secret of
infernal state, too deep for the inquiry of men. The thing it self is apparent;
upon compact, and precontracted composition, one gives way to other for the
common advantage. As we see in the Commonwealth of Cheaters and Cutpurses, one
does the fact, another is feed to bring it out, and to procure restitution:
both are of the trade, both conspire to the fraud; the actour falls not out
with the revealer, but divides with him that cunning spoil.

One malicious miscreant sets the Devil on work to the inflicting of disease or
death; another upon agreement, for a farther spiritual gain, takes him off:
There is a Devil in both: And if there seem more bodily favor, there is no
less spiritual danger in the latter: In the one Satan wins the agent, the
suitour in the other. It will be no cause of discord in Hell, that one Devil
gives ease to the body which another tormented, that both may triumph in the
gain of a soul. Oh God, that any creature which bears thine Image should not
abhor to be beholden to the powers of hell for aid, for advice! Is it not
because there is not a God in Israel, that men go to inquire of the God of
Ekron? Can men be so sottish, to think that the vowed enemy of their souls can
offer them a bait without an hook? What evil is there in the City which the
Lord has not done? what is there which he cannot as easily redress? He wounds,
he heals again: And if he will not, it is the Lord, let him do what seems good
in his eyes. If he do not deliver us, he will crown our faithfulness in a
patient perseverance. The wounds of God are better then are the salves of Satan.

Was it possible that the wit of Envy could devise so high a Slander? Beelzebub
was a God of the heathen; therefore herein they accuse him for an Idolater:
Beelzebub was a Devil to the Jews; therefore they accuse him for a Conjurer:
Beelzebub was the chief of Devils; therefore they accuse him for an
Arch-exorcist, for the worst kind of Magician. Some professors of this black
Art, though their work be devilish, yet they pretend to do it in the name of
Jesus; and will presumptuously seem to do that by command, which is secretly
transacted by agreement. The Scribes accuse Christ of a direct compact with the
Devil, and suppose both a league and familiarity, which by the Law of Moses (in
the very hand of a Saul) was no other then deadly. Yea, so deep does this wound
reach, that our Savior searching it to the bottom, finds no less in it then
the sin against the Holy Ghost; inferring hereupon that dreadful sentence of
the irremissibleness of that sin unto death. And if this horrible crimination
were cast upon thee, O Savior, in whom the Prince of this world found nothing,
what wonder is it if we thy sinful Servants be branded on all sides with evil
tongues?

Yea, (which is yet more) how plain is it that these men forced their tongue to
speak this slander against their own heart? Else this Blasphemy had been only
against the Son of man, not against the Holy Ghost: but now that the Searcher
of hearts finds it to be no less then against the Blessed Spirit of God, the
spite must needs be obstinate; their malice does wilfully cross their
conscience. Envy never regards how true, but how mischievous: So it may gall or
kill, it cares little whether with truth or falsehood. For us; Blessed are we
when men revile us, and say all manner of evil of us, for the name of Christ.
For them; What reward shall be given to thee, thou false tongue? Even sharp
arrows with hot burning coals; yea those very coals of hell from which thou
were enkindled.

There was yet a third sort that went a mid way betwixt wonder and censure.
These were not so malicious as to impute the Miracle to a Satanical operation:
they confess it good, but not enough, and therefore urge Christ to a farther
proof. Though thou have cast out this dumb Devil, yet this is no sufficient
argument of thy Divine power: We have yet seen nothing from thee like those
ancient Miracles of the times of our forefathers. Joshua caused the Sun to
stand still; Elias brought fire down from heaven; Samuel astonished the people
with thunder and rain in the midst of harvest: If thou would command our
belief, do somewhat like to these. The casting out of a Devil shows thee to
have some power over Hell; show us now that thou have no less power over
Heaven. There is a kind of unreasonableness of desire and insatiableness in
Infidelity; it never knows when it has evidence enough. This which the Jews
over-looked was a more irrefragable demonstration of Divinity, then that which
they desired. A Devil was more then a Meteor, or a parcel of an element: to
cast out a Devil by command, more then to command fire from heaven. Infidelity
ever loves to be her own carver.

No son can be more like a father, then these Jews to their progenitors in the
desert. That there might be no fear of degenerating into good, they also of old
tempted God in the Wilderness. First, they are weary of the Egyptian bondage,
and are ready to fall out with God and Moses for their stay in those furnaces.
By ten miraculous Plagues they are freed; and going out of those confines the
Egyptians follow them, the Sea is before them: now they are more afflicted with
their liberty then their servitude. The Sea yields way, the Egyptians are
drowned: and now that they are safe on the other shore, they tempt the
providence of God for water. The Rock yields it them; then, no less for bread
and meat. God sends them Manna and Quails: they cry out of the food of Angels.
Their present enemies in the way are vanquished; they whine at the men of
measures in the heart of Canaan. Nothing from God but mercy; nothing from them
but temptations.

Their true brood both in nature and in sin had abundant proofs of the Messiah;
if curing the blind, lame, diseased, deaf, dumb, ejecting Devils, overruling
the elements, raising the dead, could have been sufficient: yet still they must
have a sign from Heaven, and shut up in the style of the Tempter, If thou be
the Christ. The gracious heart is credulous: Even where it sees not, it
believes; and where it sees but a little, it believes a great deal. Neither
does it presume to prescribe unto God what and how he shall work; but takes
what it finds, and unmovably rests in what it takes. Any miracle, no miracle
serves enough for their assent, who have built their faith upon the Gospel of
the Lord Jesus.

XVI. Matthew called.
THE number of the Apostles was not yet full; one room is left void for a
future occupant: who can but expect that it is reserved for some eminent
person? and behold, Matthew the Publican is the man. O the strange election of
Christ! Those other Disciples, whose calling is recorded, were from the
Fisher-boat, this from the Toll-booth: They were unlettered, this infamous. The
condition was not in it self sinful, but as the Taxes which the Romans imposed
on God's free people were odious, so the Collectours, the Farmers of them
abominable. Besides that it was hard to hold that seat without oppression,
without exaction. One that best knew it, branded it with poling and sycophancy:
and now, behold a griping Publican called to the Family, to the Apostleship, to
the Secretaryship of God. Who can despair in the conscience of his
unworthiness, when he sees this pattern of the free bounty of him that calls
us? Merits do not carry it in the gracious election of God, but his mere
favor. There sat Matthew the Publican busy in his Counting House, reckoning
up the sums of his Rentals, taking up his Arrerages, and wrangling for denied
Duties; and did so little think of a Savior, that he did not so much as look
at his passage; but, Jesus, as he passed by, saw a man sitting at the receipt of
custom, named Matthew. As if this prospect had been sudden and casual, Jesus
saw him in passing by. O Savior, before the world was, thou saw that man
sitting there, thou saw thine own passage, thou saw his call in thy
passage; and now thou go purposely that way that thou might see and call.
Nothing can be hid from that piercing eye, one glance whereof has discerned a
Disciple in the clothes of a Publican: That habit, that shop of extortion
cannot conceal from thee a vessel of election. In all forms thou know thine
own; and in thine own time shall fetch them out of the disguises of their foul
sins, or unfit conditions. What saw thou, O Savior, in that Publican, that
might either allure thine eye, or not offend it? what but an hateful trade, an
evil eye, a gripple hand, bloody tables, heaps of spoil? Yet now thou said,
Follow me. Thou that said once to Jerusalem, Thy birth and nativity is of the
land of Canaan; thy father was an Amorite, thy mother an Hittite: Thy navel was
not cut, neither were thou washed in water, to supple thee; thou wast not
salted at all, thou wast not swaddled at all: None eye pitied thee, but thou
wast cast out in the open fields, to the loathing of thy person, in the day
that thou wast born: And when I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted in thine
own blood, I said unto thee, Live, yea, I said unto thee when thou wast in thy
blood, Live: now also, when thou passedst by, and saw Matthew sitting at the
receipt of custom, said to him, Follow me. The life of this Publican was so
much worse then the birth of that forlorn Amorite, as, Follow me, was more
then, Live. What can thou see in us, O God, but ugly deformities, horrible
sins, despicable miseries? yet does it please thy mercy to say unto us both,
Live, and, Follow me.

The just man is the first accuser of himself. Whom do we hear to blazon the
shame of Matthew, but his own mouth? Matthew the Evangelist tells us of Matthew
the Publican. His fellows call him Levi, as willing to lay their finger upon
the spot of his unpleasing profession: himself will not smother nor blanch it a
whit, but publishes it to all the world, in a thankful recognition of the
mercy that called him; as liking well that his baseness should serve for a fit
foil to set off the glorious luster of his grace by whom he was elected. What
matters it how vile we are, O God, so thy glory may arise in our abasement?

That word was enough, Follow me; spoken by the same tongue that said to the
corpse at Nain, Young man, I say to thee, Arise. He that said at first, Let
there be light, says now, Follow me. That power sweetly inclines which could
forcibly command: the force is not more unresistible then the inclination. When
the Sun shines upon the Iceicles, can they choose but melt, and fall? when it
looks into a dungeon, can the place choose but be enlightened? Do we see the Jet
drawing up straws to it, the Lodestone iron, and do we marvel if the
Omnipotent Savior, by the influence of his grace, attract the heart of a
Publican? He arose, and followed him. We are all naturally averse from thee, O
God: do thou but bid us follow thee, draw us by thy powerful word, and we
shall run after thee. Alas! thou speak, and we sit still; thou speak by
thine outward Word to our ear, and we stir not: Speak thou by the secret and
effectual Word of thy Spirit to our heart; the World cannot hold us down, Satan
cannot stop our way, we shall arise, and follow thee.

It was not a more busy then gainful trade that Matthew abandoned to follow
Christ into poverty: and now he cast away his Counters, and struck his Tallies,
and crossed his Books, and contemned his heaps of Cash in comparison of that
better Treasure which he foresaw lie open in that happy attendence. If any
commodity be valued of us too dear to be parted with for Christ, we are more
fit to be Publicans then Disciples. Our Savior invites Matthew to a
Discipleship; Matthew invites him to a Feast. The joy of his Call makes him
begin his abdication of the world in a Banquet.

Here was not a more cheerful thankfulness in the Inviter, then a gracious
humility in the Guest. The new Servant bids his Master, the Publican his
Savior, and is honored with so blessed a presence. I do not find where Jesus
was ever bidden to any table, and refused: If a Pharisee, if a Publican invited
him, he made not dainty to go: Not for the pleasure of the dishes, what was
that to him, who began his work in a whole Lent of days? But (as it was his
meat and drinks to do the will of his Father) for the benefit of so winning a
conversation. If he sat with Sinners, he converted them; if with Converts, he
confirmed and instructed them; if with the Poor, he fed them; if with the Rich
in substance, he made them richer in grace. At whose board did he ever sit, and
left not his host a gainer? The poor Bridegroom entertains him, and has his
waterpots filled with Wine: Simon the Pharisee entertains him, and has his
table honored with the public remission of a penitent sinner, with the
heavenly doctrine of remission: Zacchaeus entertains him, salvation came that
day to his house with the Author of it. That presence made the Publican a son
of Abraham: Matthew is recompensed for his feast with an Apostleship: Martha
and Mary entertain him, and besides Divine instruction receive their brother
from the dead. O Savior, whether thou feast us, or we feast thee, in both of
them is blessedness.

Where a Publican is the Feast-master, it is no marvel if the guests be
Publicans and Sinners. Whether they came alone, out of the hope of that mercy
which they saw their fellow had found; or whether Matthew invited them, to be
partners of that plentiful grace whereof he had tasted; I inquire not.
Publicans and Sinners will flock together; the one hateful for their trade,
the other for their vicious life. Common contempt has wrought them to an
unanimity, and sends them to seek mutual comfort in that society, which all
others held loathsome and contagious. Moderate correction humbles and shameth
the offender: whereas a cruel severity makes men desperate, and drives them to
those courses whereby they are more dangerously infected. How many have gone
into the prison faulty, and returned flagitious? If Publicans were not Sinners,
they were no whit beholden to their neighbors.

What a table-full was here? The Son of God beset with Publicans and Sinners. O
happy Publicans and Sinners, that had found out their Savior! O merciful
Savior, that disdained not Publicans and Sinners!

What sinner can fear to kneel before thee, when he sees Publicans and Sinners
sit with thee? Who can fear to be despised of thy meekness and mercy, which
did not abhor to converse with the outcasts of men? Thou did not despise
the Thief confessing upon the Cross, nor the Sinner weeping upon thy feet, nor
the Canaanite crying to thee in the way, nor the blushing Adulteress, nor the
odious Publican, nor the forswearing Disciple, nor the persecutour of
Disciples, nor thine own Executioners. How can we be unwelcome to thee, if we
come with tears in our eyes, faith in our hearts, restitution in our hands? O
Savior, our breasts are too often shut upon thee, thy bosom is ever open to us.
We are as great sinners as the consorts of these Publicans, why should we
despair of a room at thy Table?

The squint-eyed Pharisees look across at all the actions of Christ: where
they should have admired his mercy, they cavil at his holiness; They said to
his Disciples, Why eats your Master with Publicans and Sinners? They durst
not say thus to the Master, whose answer (they knew) would soon have convinced
them: This wind (they hoped) might shake the weak faith of the Disciples: They
speak where they may be most likely to hurt. All the crew of Satanical
instruments have learnt this craft of their old Tutour in Paradise. We cannot
reverence that man whom we think unholy. Christ had lost the hearts of his
followers, if they had entertained the least suspicion of his impurity, which
the murmur of these envious Pharisees would fain insinuate; He cannot be worthy
to be followed that is unclean; He cannot but be unclean that eats with
Publicans and Sinners. Proud and foolish Pharisees! Ye fast whilst Christ
eats; ye fast in your houses, whilst Christ eats in other men's; ye fast
with your own, whilst Christ feasts with sinners: But if ye fast in pride,
whilst Christ eats in humility; if ye fast at home for merit or popularity,
whilst Christ feasts with sinners for compassion, for edification, for
conversion; your fast is unclean, his feast is holy; ye shall have your portion
with hypocrites, when those Publicans and Sinners shall be glorious.

When these censurers thought the Disciples had offended, they speak not to
them, but to their Master, Why do thy Disciples that which is not lawful?
now, when they thought Christ offended, they speak not to him, but to the
Disciples. Thus, like true make-bates, they go about to make a breach in the
family of Christ, by setting off the one from the other. The quick eye of our
Savior has soon espied the pack of their fraud, and therefore he takes the
words out of the mouths of his Disciples into his own. They had spoke of Christ
to the Disciples; Christ answers for the Disciples concerning himself, The
whole need not the Physician, but the sick. According to the two qualities of
pride, scorn and overweening, these insolent Pharisees over-rated their own
holiness, contemned the noted unholiness of others: as if themselves were not
tainted with secret sins, as if others could not be cleansed by repentance. The
searcher of hearts meets with their arrogance, and finds those Justiciaries
sinful, those Sinners just. The spiritual Physician finds the sickness of
those Sinners wholesome, the health of those Pharisees desperate: that wholesome,
because it calls for the help of the Physician; this desperate, because it
needs not. Every soul is sick; those most that feel it not. Those that feel it
complain; those that complain have cure: those that feel it not shall find
themselves dying ere they can with to recover. O blessed Physician, by whose
stripes we are healed, by whose death we live, happy are they that are under
thy hands, sick, as of sin, so of sorrow for sin. It is as unpossible they
should die, as it is unpossible for thee to want either skill, or power, or
mercy. Sin has made us sick unto death: make thou us but as sick of our sins,
we are as safe as thou art gracious.

XVII. Christ among the Gergesens; or, Legion, and the Gadarene Herd.
I Do not any-where find so furious a Demoniack as amongst the Gergesens. Satan
is most tyrannous where he is obeyed most. Christ no sooner sailed over the
lake, then he was met by two possessed Gadarenes. The extreme rage of the one
has drowned the mention of the other. Yet in the midst of all that cruelty of
the evil Spirit, there was sometimes a remission, if not an intermission, of
vexation. If oft-times Satan caught him, then sometimes, in the same violence,
he caught him not. It was no thank to that malignant one, who, as he was
indefatigable in his executions, so unmeasurable in his malice; but to the
merciful overruling of God, who, in a gracious respect to the weakness of his
poor creatures, limits the spightfull attempts of that immortal Enemy, and
takes off this Mastive whilst we may take breath. He, who in his justice gives
way to some onsets of Satan, in his mercy restrains them: so regarding our
deservings, that withal he regards our strength. If way should be given to
that malicious spirit, we could not subsist; no violent thing can endure: and
if Satan might have his will, we should no moment be free. He can be no more
weary of doing evil to us, then God is of doing good. Are we therefore
preserved from the malignity of these powers of darkness, Blessed be our strong
helper, that has not given us over to be a prey unto their teeth. Or if some
scope have been given to that envious one to afflict us, has it been with
favorable limitations, it is thine only mercy, O God, that has chained and
muzzled up this band-dog, so as that he may scratch us with his paws, but
cannot pierce us with his fangs. Far, far is this from our deserts, who had too
well merited a just abdication from thy favor and protection, and an
interminable seizure by Satan, both in soul and body.

Neither do I here see more matter of thanks to our God, for our immunity from
the external injuries of Satan, then occasion of serious inquiry into his power
over us for the spiritual. I see some that think themselves safe from this
ghostly tyranny, because they sometimes find themselves in good moods, free
from the suggestions of gross sins, much more from the commission. Vain men,
that feed themselves with so false and frivolous comforts! will they not see
Satan, through the just permission of God, the same to the Soul in mental
possessions that he is to the Body in corporal? The worst Demoniack has his
lightsome respites; not ever tortured, not ever furious: betwixt whiles he
might look soberly, talk sensibly, move regularly. It is a woeful comfort that
we sin not always. There is no Master so barbarous as to require of his Slave a
perpetual unintermitted toil: yet, though he sometimes eat, sleep, rest, he is
a vassal still. If that Wicked one have drawn us to a customary perpetration of
evil, and have wrought us to a frequent iteration of the same sin, this is gage
enough for our servitude, matter enough for his tyranny and insultation. He
that would be our Tormentour always, cares only to be sometimes our Tempter.

The possessed is bound, as with the invisible fetters of Satan, so with the
material chains of the inhabitants. What can bodily force prevail against a
spirit? Yet they endeavor this restraint of the man, whether out of charity,
or justice: charity, that he might not hurt himself; justice, that he might not
hurt others. None do so much befriend the Demoniack as those that bind him.
Neither may the spiritually possessed be otherwise handled: for though this act
of the enemy be plausible, and to appearance pleasant; yet there is more danger
in this dear and smiling tyranny. Two sorts of chains are fit for outrageous
sinners; good Laws, unpartial Executions; that they may not hurt, that they may
not be hurt to eternal death.

These iron chains are no sooner fast then broken. There was more then an
humane power in this disruption. It is not hard to conceive the utmost of
nature in this kind of actions. Sampson does not break the cords and ropes like
a thread of tow, but God by Sampson: The man does not break these chains, but
the Spirit. How strong is the arm of these evil angels? how far transcending
the ordinary course of nature? They are not called Powers for nothing. What
flesh and blood could but tremble at the palpable inequality of this match, if
herein the merciful protection of our God did not the rather magnify it self,
that so much strength met with so much malice has not prevailed against us? In
spite of both we are in safe hands. He that so easily brake the iron fetters,
can never break the adamantine chain of our Faith. In vain do the chafing
billows of Hell beat upon that Rock whereon we are built. And though these
brittle chains of earthly metal be easily broken by him, yet the sure tempered
chain of God's eternal Decree he can never break. That Almighty Arbiter of
Heaven, and Earth, and Hell, has chained him up in the bottomless pit, and
has so restrained his malice, that (but for our good) we cannot be tempted; we
cannot be foiled, but for a glorious victory.

Alas! it is no otherwise with the spiritually possessed. The chains of
restraint are commonly broken by the fury of wickedness. What are the respects
of civility, fear of God, fear of men, wholesome laws, careful executions, to
the desperately licentious, but as cobwebs to an hornet? Let these wild
Demoniacks know, that God has provided chains for them that will hold, even
everlasting chains under darkness. These are such as must hold the Devils
themselves (their Masters) unto the judgment of the great Day; how much more
those impotent Vassals? Oh that men would suffer themselves to be bound to
their good behavior by the sweet and easy recognizances of their duty to
their God, and the care of their own souls, that so they might rather be bound
up in the bundle of life.

It was not for rest that these chains were torn off, but for more motion. This
prisoner runs away from his friends, he cannot run away from his Jaolour. He is
now carried into the Wilderness, not by mere external force, but by internal
impulsion; carried by the same power that unbound him, for the opportunity of
his tyranny, for the horror of the place, for the affamishment of his body,
for the avoidance of all means of resistance. Solitary Deserts are the delights
of Satan. It is an unwise zeal that moves us to do that to our selves, in an
opinion of merit and holiness, which the Devil wishes to do to us for a
punishment, and convenience of temptation. The evil Spirit is for solitariness,
God is for society: He dwells in the assembly of his Saints, yea, there he has
a delight to dwell. Why should not we account it our happiness, that we may
have leave to dwell where the Author of all happiness loves to dwell?

There cannot be any misery incident unto us whereof our gracious Redeemer is
not both conscious and sensible. Without any entreaty therefore of the
miserable Demoniack, or suit of any friend, the God of spirits takes pity of
his distress; and from no motion but his own, commands the evil Spirit to come
out of the man. O admirable precedent of mercy, preventing our requests,
exceeding our thoughts, forcing favors upon our impotence, doing that for us
which we should, and yet cannot desire! If men upon our instant solicitations
would give us their best aid, it were a just praise of their bounty: but it
well became thee, O God of mercy, to go without force, to give without suit.
And do we think thy goodness is impaired by thy glory? If thou were thus
commiserative upon earth, art thou less in Heaven? How do thou now take
notice of all our complaints, of all our infirmities? how does thine infinite
pity take order to redress them? What evil can befall us which thou know
not, feel not, relievest not? How safe are we that have such a Guardian,
such a Mediator in Heaven?

Not long before had our Savior commanded the winds and waters, and they could
not but obey him: now he speaks in the same language to the evil Spirit; he
entreats not, he persuades not, he commands. Command argues superiority. He
only is infinitely stronger then the strong one in possession. Else where
powers are matched, though with some inequality, they tug for the victory, and
without a resistance yield nothing. There are no fewer sorts of dealing with
Satan then with men. Some have dealt with him by suit, as the old Satanian
Heretics, and the present Indian Savages, sacrificing to him, that he hurt
not: others by covenant, conditioning their service upon his assistence, as
Witches and Magicians: others by insinuation of implicit compact, as Charmers
and Figure-casters: others by adjuration, as the sons of Scaeva and modern
Exorcists, unwarrantably charging him by an higher name then their own. None
ever offered to deal with Satan by a direct and primary command, but the God of
Spirits. The great Archangel, when the strife was about the body of Moses,
commanded not, but imprecated rather, The Lord rebuke thee, Satan. It is only
the God that made this Spirit an Angel of light that can command him, now that
he has made himself the Prince of darkness. If any created power dare to usurp
a word of command, he laughs at their presumption, and knows them his Vassals,
whom he dissembles to fear as his Lords. It is thou only, O Savior, at whose
beck those stubborn Principalities of hell yield and tremble. No wicked man can
be so much a slave to Satan, as Satan is to thee: the interposition of thy
grace may defeat that dominion of Satan: thy rule is absolute, and capable of
no let. What need we to fear, whilst we are under so omnipotent a Commander?
The waves of the deep rage horribly, yet the Lord is stronger then they. Let
those Principalities and Powers do their worst: Those mighty adversaries are
under the command of him who loved us so well as to bleed for us. What can we
now doubt of? his power, or his will? How can we profess him a God, and doubt
of his power? How can we profess him a Savior, and doubt of his will? He both
can and will command those infernal powers. We are no less safe then they are
malicious.

The Devil saw Jesus by the eyes of the Demoniack: For the same saw that
spoke; but it was the ill Spirit that said, I beseech thee torment me not. It
was sore against his will that he saw so dreadful an object. The overruling
power of Christ dragged the foul Spirit into his presence. Guiltiness would
fain keep out of sight. The Lims of so woeful an Head shall once call on the
Hills and Rocks to hide them from the face of the Lamb; such Lion-like terror
is in that mild face when it looks upon wickedness. Neither shall it be one day
the least part of the torment of the damned, to see the most lovely spectacle
that Heaven can afford. He from whom they fled in his offers of grace shall be
so much more terrible, as he was and is more gracious. I marvel not therefore
that the Devil, when he saw Jesus, cried out: I could marvel that he fell
down, that he worshipped him. That which the proud Spirit would have had Christ
to have done to him in his great Duel, the same he now does unto Christ,
fearfully, servilely, forcedly. Who shall henceforth brag of the external
homage he performs to the Son of God, when he sees Satan himself fall down and
worship? What comfort can there be in that which is common to us with Devils,
who, as they believe and tremble, so they tremble and worship? The outward
bowing is the body of the action, the disposition of the Soul is the soul of
it: therein lies the difference from the counterfeit stoopings of wicked men
and spirits. The religious heart serves the Lord in fear, and rejoices in him
with trembling. What it does is in way of service: in service to his Lord,
whose sovereignty is his comfort and protection; in the fear of a son, not of a
slave; in fear tempered with joy; in a joy, but allayed with trembling. Whereas
the prostration of wicked men and Devils is only an act of form, or of force;
as to their Judge, as to their Tormentour, not as to their Lord; in mere
servility, not in reverence; in an uncomfortable dullness, without all delight;
in a perfect horror, without capacity of joy. These worship without thanks,
because they fall down without the true affections of worship.

Whosoever marvels to see the Devil upon his knees, would much more marvel to hear
what came from his mouth, Jesus, the Son of the Most high God. A confession,
which if we should hear without the name of the Author, we should ask from
what Saint it came. Behold the same name given to Christ by the Devil, which
was formerly given him by the Angel, Thou shall call his name JESUS. That
awful Name, whereat every knee shall bow, in heaven, in earth, and under the
earth, is called upon by this prostrate Devil. And lest that should not import
enough, (since others have been honored by this name in Type,) he adds for
full distinction, the Son of the Most high God. The good Syrophoenician and
blind Bartimaeus could say, the Son of David: it was well to acknowledge the
true descent of his pedigree according to the flesh: But this infernal Spirit
looks aloft, and fetches his line out of the highest Heavens, the Son of the
Most high God. The famous confession of the prime Apostle (which honored him
with a new name to immortality) was no other then, Thou art the Christ, the Son
of the living God: and what other do I hear from the lips of a Fiend? No more
Divine words could fall from the highest Saint. Nothing hinders but that the
veriest miscreant on earth, yea the foulest Devil in Hell, may speak holily. It
is no passing of judgment upon loose sentences. So Peter should have been cast
for a Satan, in denying, forswearing, cursing; and the Devil should have been
set up for a Saint, in confessing, Jesus, the Son of the Most high God. Fond
hypocrite, that please thy self in talking well, hear this Devil; and when
thou can speak better then he, look to fare better: but in the mean time
know, that a smooth tongue and a foul heart carry away double judgments.

Let curious heads dispute whether the Devil knew Christ to be God: In this I
dare believe himself, though in nothing else. He knew what he believed, what he
believed that he confessed, Jesus, the Son of the Most high God. To the
confusion of those Semi-Christians, that have either held doubtfully, or
ignorantly mis-known, or blasphemously denied what the very Devils have
professed. How little can a bare speculation avail us in these cases of
Divinity? So far this Devil has attained, to no ease, no comfort. Knowledge
alone does but puff up: it is our Love that edifies. If there be not a sense
of our sure interest in this Jesus, a power to apply his merits and obedience,
we are no whit the safer, no whit the better; only we are so much the wiser,
to understand who shall condemn us.

This piece of the clause was spoken like a Saint, Jesus, the Son of the Most
high God: the other piece like a Devil, What have I to do with thee? If the
disclamation were universal, the latter words would impugn the former: for
whilst he confesses Jesus to be the Son of the Most high God, he withal
confesses his own inevitable subjection. Wherefore would he beseech, if he were
not obnoxious? He cannot, he dare not say, What have thou to do with me? but,
What have I to do with thee? Others indeed I have vexed, thee I fear: in
respect then of any violence, of any personal provocation, What have I to do
with thee? And do thou ask, O thou evil Spirit, what have thou to do with
Christ, whilst thou vexest a Servant of Christ? Have thou thy name from
Knowledge, and yet so mistakest him whom thou confessest, as if nothing could
be done to him but what immediately concerns his own person? Hear that great
and just Judge sentencing upon his dreadful Tribunal; Inasmuch as thou did
it unto one of these little ones, thou did it unto me: It is an idle
misprision, to sever the sense of an injury done to any of the Members from the
Head.

He that had humility enough to kneel to the Son of God, has boldness enough
to expostulate; Art thou come to torment us before our time? Whether it were
that Satan, who uses to enjoy the torment of sinners, whose music it is to
hear our shrieks and gnashings, held it no small piece of his torment, to be
restrained in the exercise of his tyranny: Or whether the very presence of
Christ were his rack; For the guilty spirit projecteth terrible things, and
cannot behold the Judge or the executioner without a renovation of horror: Or
whether that (as himself professes) he were now in a fearful expectation of
being commanded down into the deep, for a farther degree of actual torment,
which he thus deprecates.

There are Tortures appointed to the very spiritual natures of evil Angels.
Men, that are led by sense, have easily granted the Body subject to torment,
who yet have not so readily conceived this incident to a Spiritual substance.
The Holy Ghost has not thought it fit to acquaint us with the particular
manner of these invisible acts, rather willing that we should herein fear then
enquire: but as all matters of faith, though they cannot be proved by reason,
(for that they are in a higher sphere,) yet afford an answer able to stop the
mouth of all reason that dares bark against them, (since truth cannot be
opposite to it self;) so this of the sufferings of Spirits. There is therefore
both an intentional torment incident to Spirits, and a real. For, as in
Blessedness the good Spirits find themselves joined unto the chief good, and
hereupon feel a perfect love of God, and unspeakable joy in him, and rest in
themselves: so contrarily, the evil Spirits perceive themselves eternally
excluded from the presence of God, and see themselves settled in a woeful
darkness; and from the sense of this separation arises an horror not to be
expressed, not to be conceived. How many men have we known to torment
themselves with their own thoughts? There needs no other gibbet then that which
their troubled spirit has erected in their own heart. And if some pains begin
at the Body, and from thence afflict the Soul in a copartnership of grief; yet
others arise immediately from the Soul, and draw the Body into a participation
of misery. Why may we not therefore conceive mere and separate Spirits capable
of such an inward excruciation?

Besides which, I hear the Judge of men and Angels say, Go, ye cursed, into
everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels: I hear the Prophet
say, Tophet is prepared of old. If with fear and without curiosity we may look
upon those flames, why may we not attribute a spiritual nature to that more
then natural fire? In the end of the world the elements shall be dissolved by
fire: and if the pure quintessential matter of the sky, and the element of fire
it self, shall be dissolved by fire, then that last fire shall be of another
nature then that which it consumes. What hinders then but that the Omnipotent
God has from eternity created a fire of another nature, proportionable even to
spiritual essences? Or why may we not distinguish of fire, as it is it self a
bodily creature, and as it is an instrument of God's justice, so working not by
any material virtue or power of its own, but by a certain height of
supernatural efficacy, to which it is exalted by the Omnipotence of that
Supreme and Righteous Judge? Or, lastly, why may we not conceive that, though
Spirits have nothing material in their nature which that fire should work upon,
yet by the judgment of the Almighty Arbiter of the world, justly willing their
torment, they may be made most sensible of pain, and, by the obedible
submission of their created nature, wrought upon immediately by their appointed
tortures; besides the very horror which arises from the place whereto they
are everlastingly confined? For if the incorporeal spirits of living men may be
held in a loathed or painful body, and conceive sorrow to be so imprisoned;
why may we not as easily yield that the evil spirits of Angels, or men, may be
held in those direful flames, and much more abhor therein to continue for
ever? Tremble rather, O my soul, at the thought of this woeful condition of the
evil Angels, who, for one only act of Apostasy from God, are thus perpetually
tormented; whereas we sinful wretches multiply many and presumptuous offenses
against the Majesty of our God: And withal admire and magnify that infinite
mercy to the miserable generation of man, which, after this holy severity of
justice to the revolted Angels, so graciously forbears our heinous iniquities,
and both suffers us to be free for the time from these hellish torments, and
gives us opportunity of a perfect freedom from them for ever. Praise the Lord,
O my soul, and all that is within me praise his holy Name, Who forgiveth all
thy sins, and heals all thine infirmities; who redeemeth thy life from
destruction, and crowns thee with mercy and compassions.

There is no time wherein the evil Spirits are not tormented: there is a time
wherein they expect to be tormented yet more. Art thou come to torment us
before our time? They knew that the last Assizes are the prefixed term of their
full execution; which they also understood to be not yet come. For though they
knew not when the Day of Judgment should be, (a point concealed from the
glorious Angels of heaven,) yet they knew when it should not be; and therefore
they say, before the time. Even the very evil spirits confess, and fearfully
attend, a set day of universal Sessions. They believe less then Devils, that
either doubt of, or deny that Day of final retribution.

O the wonderful mercy of our God, that both to wicked men and Spirits
respites the utmost of their torment! He might upon the first instant of the
fall of Angels have inflicted on them the highest extremity of his vengeance;
he might upon the first sins of our youth (yea of our nature) have swept us
away, and given us our portion in that fiery lake: He stays a time for both;
though with this difference of mercy to us men, that here not only is a delay,
but may be an utter prevention of punishment; which to the evil Spirits is
altogether impossible. They do suffer, they must suffer: and though they have
now deserved to suffer all they must, yet they must once suffer more then they
do.

Yet so does this evil Spirit expostulate, that he sues, I beseech thee,
torment me not. The world is well changed since Satan's first onset upon
Christ. Then he could say, If thou be the Son of God; now, Jesus, the Son of
the Most high God: then, All these will I give thee, if thou will fall down and
worship me; now, I beseech thee, torment me not. The same power, when he lists,
can change the note of the Tempter to us. How happy are we that have such a
Redeemer as can command the Devils to their chains? O consider this, ye lawless
sinners, that have said, Let us break his bands, and cast his cords from us.
However the Almighty suffers you for a judgment to have free scope to evil, and
ye can now impotently resist the revealed will of your Creator; yet the time
shall come, when ye shall see the very masters whom ye have served (the powers
of darkness) unable to avoid the revenges of God. How much less shall man
strive with his Maker; Man, whose breath is in his nostrils, whose house is
clay, whose foundation is the dust?

Nature teaches every creature to wish a freedom from pain. The foulest
Spirits cannot but love themselves; and this love must needs produce a
deprecation of evil. Yet what a thing is this, to hear the Devil at his
prayers? I beseech thee, torment me not. Devotion is not guilty of this, but
fear. There is no grace in the suit of Devils, but nature; no respect of glory
to their Creator, but their own ease; they cannot pray against sin, but
against torment for sin. What news is it now to hear the profanest mouth, in
extremity, imploring the Sacred Name of God, when the Devils do so? The worst
of all creatures hates punishment, and can say, Lead me not into pain; only
the good heart can say, Lead me not into temptation. If we can as heartily pray
against sin, for the avoiding of displeasure, as against punishment, when we
have displeased, there is true Grace in the soul. Indeed, if we could fervently
pray against sin, we should not need to pray against punishment, which is no
other then the inseparable shadow of that body: but if we have not labored
against our sins, in vain do we pray against punishment. God must be just; and
the wages of sin is death.

It pleased our Holy Savior, not only to let fall words of command upon this
Spirit, but to interchange some speeches with him. All Christ's actions are not
for example. It was the error of our Grandmother to hold chat with Satan. That
God who knows the craft of that old Serpent, and our weak simplicity, has
charged us not to enquire of an evil Spirit. Surely if the Disciples returning
to Jacob's Well wondered to see Christ talk with a woman, well may we wonder to
see him talking with an unclean Spirit. Let it be no presumption, O Savior, to
ask upon what grounds thou did this wherein we may not follow thee. We know
that sin was excepted in thy conformity of thy self to us; we know there was no
guile found in thy mouth, no possibility of taint in thy nature, in thine
actions. Neither is it hard to conceive how the same thing may be done by thee
without sin, which we cannot but sin in doing. There is a vast difference in
the Intention, in the Agent. For, as on the one side, thou did not ask the
name of the Spirit, as one that knew not, and would learn by enquiring; but
that by the confession of that mischief which thou pleasedst to suffer the
grace of the cure might be the more conspicuous, the more glorious: so, on the
other, God and Man might do that safely, which mere Man cannot do without
danger. Thou might touch the leprosy, and not be legally unclean, because
thou touchedst it to heal it, did not touch it with possibility of infection.
So might thou, who, by reason of the perfection of thy Divine nature, were
incapable of any stain by the interlocution with Satan, safely confer with him,
whom corrupt Man, predisposed to the danger of such a parley, may not meddle
with without sin, because not without peril. It is for none but God to hold
discourse with Satan. Our surest way is, to have as little to do with that
Evil one as we may; and if he shall offer to maintain conference with us by his
secret temptations, to turn our speech unto our God, with the Archangel, The
Lord rebuke thee, Satan.

It was the presupposition of him that knew it, that not only men but Spirits
have names. This then he asks, not out of an ignorance, or curiosity; nothing
could be hid from him who calls the Stars and all the hoasts of Heaven by
their names: but out of a just respect to the glory of the Miracle he was
working, whereto the notice of the name would not a little avail. For if
without inquiry, or confession, our Savior had ejected this evil Spirit, it
had passed for the single dispossession of one only Devil: whereas now it
appears there was a combination and hellish champarty in these powers of
darkness, which were all forced to vail unto that almighty command.

Before the Devil had spoken singularly of himself, What have I to do with
thee? and, I beseech thee, torment me not: yet our Savior, knowing that there
was a multitude of Devils lurking in that breast, who dissembled their
presence, wrests it out of the Spirit by this interrogation, What is thy name?
Now can those wicked ones no longer hide themselves. He that asked the
question, forced the answer: My name is Legion. The author of discord has
borrowed a name of war: from that military order of discipline by which the
Jews were subdued does the Devil fetch his denomination. They were many, yet
they say, My name, not, Our name: though many, they speak as one, they act as
one, in this possession. There is a mavelous accordance even betwixt evil
Spirits: That Kingdom is not divided, for then it could not stand. I wonder
not that wicked men do so conspire in evil, that there is such unanimity in the
broachers and abetters of errors, when I see those Devils which are many in
substance are one in name, action, habitation. Who can too much brag of unity,
when it is incident unto wicked Spirits? All the praise of concord is in the
subject: if that be holy, the consent is Angelical; if sinful, devilish.

What a fearful advantage have our spiritual enemies against us? If armed
troops come against single stragglers, what hope is there of life, of victory?
How much does it concern us to band our hearts together in a communion of
Saints? Our enemies come upon us like a torrent: O let us not run asunder like
drops in the dust. All our united forces will be little enough to make head
against this league of destruction.

Legion imports Order, Number, Conflict. Order, in that there is a distinction
of regiment, a subordination of Officers. Though in Hell there be confusion of
faces, yet not confusion of degrees.

Number: Those that have reckoned a Legion at the lowest, have counted it six
thousand; others have more then doubled it: though here it is not strict, but
figurative, yet the letter of it implies multitude. How fearful is the
consideration of the number of Apostate Angels? And if a Legion can attend one
man, how many must we needs think are they who, all the world over, are at hand
to the punishment of the wicked, the exercise of the good, the temptation of
both? It cannot be hoped there can be any place or time wherein we may be
secure from the onsets of these enemies. Be sure, ye lewd men, ye shall want no
furtherance to evil, no torment for evil: Be sure, ye godly, ye shall not want
combatants to try your strength and skill: Awaken your courages to resist, and
stir up your hearts, make sure the means of your safety. There are more with us
then against us. The God of heaven is with us, if we be with him; and our
Angels behold the face of God. If every Devil were a Legion, we are safe:
Though we walk through the valley of the shadow of death, we shall fear no
evil. Thou, O Lord, shall stretch forth thine hand against the wrath of our
enemies, and thy right hand shall save us.

Conflict: All this Number is not for sight, for rest; but for motion, for
action: Neither was there ever hour since the first blow given to our first
Parents, wherein there was so much as a truce betwixt these adversaries. As
therefore strong Frontier-towns, when there is a Peace concluded on both parts,
break up their garrison, open their gates, neglect their Bulwarks; but when
they hear of the enemy mustering his forces in great and unequal numbers, then
they double their guard, keep sentinel, repair their Sconces: so must we, upon
the certain knowledge of our numerous and deadly enemies in continual array
against us, address our selves always to a wary and strong resistance. I do not
observe the most to think of this ghostly hostility. Either they do not find
there are Temptations, or those Temptations hurtful; they see no worse then
themselves; and if they feel motions of evil arising in them, they impute it to
fancy, or unreasonable appetite, to no power but Nature's; and those motions
they follow, without sensible hurt; neither see they what harm it is to sin. Is
it any marvel that carnal eyes cannot discern spiritual objects? that the
World, who is the friend, the vassal of Satan, is in no war with him? Elisha's
servant, when his eyes were opened, saw troops of spiritual soldiers, which
before he discerned not. If the eyes of our Souls be once enlightened by
supernatural knowledge, and the clear beams of Faith, we shall as plainly
descry the invisible powers of wickedness, as now our bodily eyes see Heaven
and Earth. They are, though we see them not: we cannot be sa^^ from them, if we
do not acknowledge, not oppose them.

The Devils are now become great suitours to Christ; that he would not command
them into the deep, that he would permit their entrance into the Swine. What is
this deep but Hell, both for the utter separation from the face of God, and for
the impossibility of passage to the region of rest and glory? The very evil
Spirits then fear, and expect a farther degree of torment; they know themselves
reserved in those chains of darkness for the judgment of the great day. There
is the same wages due to their sins, and to ours; neither are the wages paid
till the work be done. They tempting men to sin must needs sin grievously in
tempting, as with us men those that mislead into sin offend more then the
actours: not till the upshot therefore of their wickedness shall they receive
the full measure of their condemnation. This Day, this Deep they tremble at:
what shall I say of those men that fear it not? It is hard for men to believe
their own Unbelief. If they were persuaded of this fiery dungeon, this
bottomless deep, wherein every sin shall receive an horrible portion with the
damned, durst they stretch forth their hands to wickedness? No man will put his
hand into a fiery crucible to fetch gold thence, because he knows it will burn
him. Did we as truly believe the everlasting burning of that infernal fire, we
durst not offer to fetch pleasures or profits out of the midst of those flames.

This degree of torment they grant in Christ's power to command. They knew his
power unresistible: had he therefore but said, Back to Hell whence ye came,
they could no more have staid upon earth, then they can now climb into heaven.
O the wonderful dispensation of the Almighty, who, though he could command all
the evil Spirits down to their dungeons in an instant, so as they should have
no more opportunity of temptation, yet thinks fit to retain them upon earth! It
is not out of weakness or improvidence of that Divine hand, that wicked Spirits
tyrannize here upon earth, but out of the most wise and most holy ordination of
God, who knows how to turn evil into good, how to fetch good out of evil, and
by the worst instruments to bring about his most just decrees. Oh that we could
adore that awful and infinite power, and cheerfully cast our selves upon that
Providence which keeps the Keys even of Hell it self, and either lets out, or
returns the Devils to their places.

Their other suit has some marvel in moving it, more in the grant; that they
might be suffered to enter into the Herd of swine. It was their ambition of
some mischief that brought forth this desire; that since they might not vex the
Body of man, they might yet afflict men in their Goods. The malice of these
envious Spirits reaches from us to ours: It is sore against their wills, if we
be not every way miserable. If the Swine were legally unclean for the use of
the table, yet they were naturally good. Had not Satan known them useful for
man, he had never desired their ruin. But as Fencers will seem to fetch a blow
at the leg, when they intend it at the head; so does this Devil, whilst he
drives at the Swine, he aims at the Souls of these Gadarens. By this means he
hoped well (and his hope was not vain) to work in these Gergesens a
coffeehouse at Christ, an unwillingness to entertain him, a desire of his
absence: he meant to turn them into Swine, by the loss of their Swine. It was
not the rafters or stones of the house of Job's children that he bore the
grudge to, but to the owners; nor to the lives of the Children so much as the
Soul of their Father. There is no affliction wherein he does not strike at the
Heart; which whilst it holds free, all other damages are light: but a wounded
spirit (whether with sin or sorrow) who can bear? Whatever becomes of goods or
lims, happy are we if (like wise soldiers) we guard the vital parts. Whilst
the Soul is kept sound from impatience, from distrust, our Enemy may afflict
us, he cannot hurt us.

They sue for a sufferance; not daring other then to grant, that, without the
permission of Christ, they could not hurt a very Swine. If it be fearful to
think how great things evil Spirits can do with permission; it is comfortable
to think how nothing they can do without permission. We know they want not
malice to destroy the whole frame of God's work; but of all, Man; of all men,
Christians. But if without leave they cannot set upon an Hog, what can they do
to the living Images of their Creator? They cannot offer us so much as a
suggestion, without the permission of our Savior: And can he, that would give
his own most precious blood for us, to save us from evil, wilfully give us over
to evil?

It is no news, that wicked spirits wish to do mischief; it is news, that they
are allowed it. If the Owner of all things should stand upon his absolute
command, who can challenge him for what he thinks fit to do with his creature?
The first Fool of the Ass is commanded, under the Law, to have his neck broken:
what is that to us? The creatures do that they were made for, if they may
serve any way to the glory of their Maker. But seldom ever does God leave his
actions unfurnished with such reasons as our weakness may reach unto. There
were Sects amongst these Jews that denied Spirits; they could not be more
evidently, more powerfully convinced then by this event. Now shall the Gadarens
see from what a multitude of Devils they were delivered; and how easy it had
been for the same power to have allowed these Spirits to seize upon their
Persons, as well as on their Swine. Neither did God this without a just purpose
of their castigation: His Judgments are righteous, where they are most secret.
Though we cannot accuse these inhabitants of ought, yet he could, and thought
good thus to mulct them. And if they had not wanted grace to acknowledge it, it
was no small favor of God, that he would punish them in their Swine, for that
which he might have avenged upon their Bodies and Souls. Our Goods are farthest
off us: If but in these we smart, we must confess we find mercy.

Sometimes it pleases God to grant the suits of wicked men and spirits, in no
favor to the suitours. He grants an ill suit, and withholds a good: He grants
an ill suit in judgment, and holds back a good one in mercy. The Israelites ask
meat; he gives Quails to their mouths, and leanness to their souls. The chosen
Vessel wishes Satan taken off, and hears only, My grace is sufficient for
thee. We may not evermore measure favors by condescent. These Devils doubtless
receive more punishment for that harmfull act wherein they are heard. If we ask
what is either unfit to receive, or unlawful to beg, it is a great favor of
our God to be denied.

Those Spirits which would go into the Swine by permission, go out of the Man
by command; they had stayed long, and are ejected suddenly. The immediate works
of God are perfect in an instant, and do not require the aid of time for their
maturation.

No sooner are they cast out of the Man, then they are in the Swine: They will
lose no time, but pass without intermission from one mischief to another. If
they hold it a pain not to be doing evil, why is it not our delight to be ever
doing good? The impetuousness was no less then the speed. The Herd was carried
with violence from a steep-down place into the lake, and was choked. It is no
small force that could do this; but if the Swine had been so many mountains,
these Spirits, upon God's permission, had thus transported them. How easily can
they carry those Souls which are under their power to destruction? Unclean
beasts that wallow in the mire of sensuality, brutish drunkards transforming
themselves by excess, even they are the Swine whom the Legion carries headlong
to the pit of perdition.

The wicked Spirits have their wish; the Swine are choked in the waves: What
ease is this to them? Good God, that there should be any creature that seeks
contentment in destroying, in tormenting the good creatures of his Maker! This
is the diet of Hell: Those Fiends feed upon spite toward Man, so much more as
he does more resemble his Creator; toward all other living substances, so
much more as they may be more useful to man. The Swine ran down violently;
what marvel is it if their Keepers fled? That miraculous work, which should
have drawn them to Christ, drives them from him. They run with the news; the
country comes in with clamor: The whole multitude of the country about
besought him to depart. The multitude is a beast of many heads; every head has
a several mouth, and every mouth a several tongue, and every tongue a several
accent: every head has a several brain, and every brain thoughts of their own.
So as it is hard to find a multitude without some division at least. Seldom
ever has a good motion found a perfect accordance: it is not so infrequent for
a multitude to conspire in evil. Generality of assent is no warrant for any
act. Common error carries away many, who inquire not into the reason of ought,
but the practice. The way to Hell is a beaten road through the many feet that
tread it. When Vice grows into fashion, Singularity is a Virtue.

There was not a Gadaren found that either dehorted their fellows, or opposed
the motion. It is a sign of people given up to judgment, when no man makes head
against projects of evil. Alas! what can one strong man do against a whole
throng of wickedness? Yet this good comes of an unprevailing resistance, that
God forbears to plague where he finds but a sprinkling of Faith. Happy are they
who (like unto the celestial bodies, which being carried about with the sway of
the highest sphere, yet creep on their own ways) keep on the courses of their
own holiness, against the swindge of common corruptions: They shall both
deliver their own souls, and help to withhold judgment from others.

The Gadarens sue to Christ for his departure. It is too much favor to
attribute this to their modesty, as if they held themselves unworthy of so
Divine a guest. Why then did they fall upon this suit in a time of their loss?
Why did they not tax themselves, and intimate a secret desire of that which
they durst not beg? It is too much rigor to attribute it to the love of their
Hogs, and an anger at their loss; then, they had not entreated, but expelled
him. It was their fear that moved this harsh suit; a servile fear of danger to
their persons, to their goods; lest he, that could so absolutely command the
Devils, should have set these tormentours upon them; lest their other
Demoniacks should be dispossessed with like loss. I cannot blame these Gadarens
that they feared: this power was worthy of trembling at. Their fear was unjust.
They should have argued, This man has power over men, beasts, devils; it is
good having him to our friend; his presence is our safety and protection: Now
they contrarily mis-inferre, Thus powerful is he, it is good he were farther
off. What miserable and pernicious misconstructions do men make of God, of
Divine attributes and actions! God is omnipotent, able to take infinite
vengeance of sin; Oh that he were not: He is provident; I may be careless: He
is merciful; I may sin: He is holy; let him depart from me, for I am a sinful
man. How witty sophisters are natural men to deceive their own souls, to rob
themselves of a God? O Savior, how worthy are they to want thee that wish to
be rid of thee? Thou have just cause to be weary of us, even whilst we sue to
hold thee: but when once our wretched unthankfulness grows weary of thee, who
can pity us to be punished with thy departure? Who can say it is other then
righteous, that thou should retort one day upon us, Depart from me, ye wicked?

XVIII. The faithful Canaanite.
IT was our Savior's trade to do good; therefore he came down from heaven to
earth, therefore he changed one station of earth for another. Nothing more
commends goodness then generality and diffusion; whereas reservedness and
close-handed restraint blemish the glory of it. The Sun stands not still in one
point of heaven, but walks his daily round, that all the inferior world may
share of his influences both in heat and light. Thy bounty, O Savior, did not
affect the praise of fixedness, but motion. One while I find thee at Jerusalem,
then at Capernaum, soon after in the utmost verge of Galilee; never but doing
good.

But as the Sun, though he daily compass the world, yet never walks from under
his line, never goes beyond the turning points of the longest and shortest day:
so neither did thou, O Savior, pass the bounds of thine own peculiar people;
thou would move, but not wildly, not out of thine own sphere. Wherein thy
glorified estate exceeds thine humbled, as far as Heaven is above Earth. Now
thou art lift up, thou drawest all men unto thee: there are now no lists, no
limits of thy gracious visitations; but as the whole Earth is equidistant from
Heaven, so all the nations of the world lie equally open to thy bounty.

Neither yet did thou want outward occasions of thy removal: Perhaps the
very importunity of the Scribes and Pharisees, in obtruding their Traditions,
drove thee thence; perhaps their unjust offense at thy Doctrine. There is no
readier way to lose Christ, then to clog him with humane Ordinances, then to
spurn at his heavenly Instructions. He does not always subduce his Spirit with
his visible presence; but his very outward withdrawing is worthy of our sighs,
worthy of our tears. Many a one may say, Lord, if thou had been here, my Soul
had not died. Thou art now with us, O Savior, thou art with us in a free and
plentiful fashion; how long, thou know; we know our deservings and fear. O
teach us how happy we are in such a Guest, and give us grace to keep thee.
Had thou walked within the Phoenician borders, we could have told how to have
made glad constructions of thy mercy in turning to the Gentiles; thou that
could touch the Lepers without uncleanness, could not be defiled with
aliens: but we know the partition wall was not yet broken down; and thou that
did charge thy Disciples not to walk into the way of the Gentiles, would
not transgress thine own rule. Once, we are sure, thou came to the utmost
point of the bounds of Galilee; as not ever confined to the heart of Jewry,
thou would sometimes bless the outer skirts with thy presence. No angle is
too obscure for the Gospel: The land of Zabulon and the land of Napthali, by
the way of the Sea, beyond Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles, the people which
sat in darkness saw great light. The Sun is not scornful, but looks with the
same face upon every plot of earth: not only the stately palaces and pleasant
gardens are visited by his beams, but mean cottages, but neglected bogs and
moors. God's Word is like himself, no accepter of persons; the wild Kern, the
rude Scythian, the savage Indian are alike to it. The mercy of God will be sure
to find out those that belong to his election in the most secret corners of the
world, like as his judgments will fetch his enemies from under the hills and
rocks. The good Shepherd walks the wilderness to seek one sheep strayed from
many. If there be but one Syrophoenician Soul to be gained to the Church,
Christ goes to the coasts of Tire and Sidon to fetch her. Why are we weary to
do good, when our Savior underwent this perpetual toil in healing Bodies, and
winning Souls? There is no life happy but that which is spent in a continual
drudging for edification.

It is long since we heard of the name or nation of Canaanites; all the country
was once so styled; that people was now forgotten: yet because this woman was
of the blood of those Phoenicians which were anciently ejected out of Canaan,
that title is revived to her. God keeps account of pedigrees after our
oblivion; that he may magnify his mercies, by continuing them to thousands of
the generations of the just, and by renewing favors upon the unjust. No nation
carried such brands and scars of a Curse as Canaan. To the shame of those
careless Jews, even a faithful Canaanite is a suppliant to Christ, whilst they
neglect so great salvation. She does not speak, but cry; need and desire have
raised her voice to an importunate clamor. The God of mercy is light of
hearing, yet he loves a loud and vehement solicitation; not to make himself
inclinable to grant, but to make us capable to receive blessings. They are
words, and not prayers, which fall from careless lips. If we felt our want, or
wanted not desire, we could speak to God in no tune but cries. If we would
prevail with God, we must wrestle, and if we would wrestle happily with God, we
must wrestle first with our own dullness. Nothing but cries can pierce Heaven.
Neither does her vehemence so much argue her Faith, as does her compellation, O
Lord, thou Son of David. What Proselyte, what Disciple could have said more? O
blessed Syrophoenician, who taught thee this abstract of Divinity? What can we
Christians confess more then the Deity, the Humanity, and the Messiahship of
our glorious Savior? his Deity, as Lord; his Humanity, as a Son; his
Messiahship, as the Son of David? Of all the famous progenitors of Christ, two
are singled out by an eminence, David and Abraham; a King, a Patriarch: And
though the Patriarch were first in time, yet the King is first in place; not so
much for the dignity of the person, as the excellence of the promise, which as
it was both later and fresher in memory, so more honorable. To Abraham was
promised multitude and blessing of seed: to David perpetuity of dominion. So as
when God promises not to destroy his people, it is for Abraham's sake; when,
not to extinguish the Kingdom, it is for David's sake. Had she said, the Son
of Abraham, she had not come home to this acknowledgment. Abraham is the father
of the faithful, David of the Kings of Juda and Israel: There are many
faithful, there is but one King. So as in this title she does proclaim him the
perpetual King of his Church, the Rod or Flower which should come from the root
of Jesse, the true and only Savior of the world. Whosoever would come unto Christ
to purpose, must come in the right style; apprehending a true God, a true Man,
a true God and Man: any of these severed from other makes Christ an Idol, and
our prayers sin. Being thus acknowledged, what suit is so fit for him as mercy:
Have mercy on me. It was her Daughter that was tormented, yet she says, Have
mercy on me. Perhaps her possessed child was senseless of her misery; the
parent feels both her sorrow, and her own. As she was a good woman, so a good
mother. Grace and good nature have taught her to appropriate the afflictions of
this divided part of her own flesh. It is not in the power of another skin, to
sever the interest of our own loins or womb. We find some Fowls that burn
themselves, whilst they endeavor to blow out the fire from their young: And
even Serpents can receive their brood into their mouth, to shield them from
danger. No creature is so unnatural, as the reasonable that has put off
affection.

On me, therefore, in mine: for my daughter is grievously vexed with a Devil.
It was this that sent her to Christ: It was this that must incline Christ to
her. I doubt whether she had inquired after Christ, if she had not been vexed
with her Daughter's spirit. Our afflictions are as Benhadad's best
counselors, that sent him with a cord about his neck to the merciful King of
Israel. These are the files and whetstones that set an edge on our Devotions,
without which they grow dull and ineffectual. Neither are they stronger motives
to our suit, then to Christ's mercy. We cannot have a better spokesman unto God
then our own misery; that alone sues and pleads and importunes for us. This
which sets off men, whose compassion is finite, attracts God to us. Who can
plead discouragements in his access to the throne of grace, when our wants are
our forcible advocates? All our worthiness is in a capable misery.

All Israel could not example the faith of this Canaanite; yet she was thus
tormented in her Daughter. It is not the truth or strength of our Faith that
can secure us from the outward and bodily vexations of Satan: against the
inward and spiritual that can and will prevail. It is no more antidote against
the other, then against fevers and dropsies. How should it, when as it may fall
out that these sufferings may be profitable? and why should we expect that the
love of our God shall yield to fore-lay any benefit to the Soul? He is an ill
patient that cannot distinguish betwixt an affliction, and the evil of
affliction. When the messenger of Satan buffets us, it is enough that God has
said, My grace is sufficient for thee.

Millions were in Tire and Sidon, whose persons, whose children were untouched
with that tormenting hand: I hear none but this faithful Woman say, My
daughter is grievously vexed of the Devil. The worst of bodily afflictions are
an insufficient proof of Divine displeasure. She that has most grace complains
of most discomfort.

Who would now expect any other then a kind answer to so pious and faithful a
petition? And behold, he answered her not a word. O Holy Savior, we have often
found cause to wonder at thy words, never till now at thy silence. A miserable
suppliant cries and sues, whilst the God of mercies is speechless. He that
comforts the afflicted, adds affliction to the comfortless by a willing
disrespect. What shall we say then? is the fountain of mercy dried up? O
Savior, could thou but hear? She did not murmur, not whisper, but cry out:
could thou but pity, but regard her that was as good as she was miserable? If
thy ears were open, could thy bowels be shut? Certainly it was thou that did
put it into the heart, into the mouth of this woman to ask, and to ask thus of
thy self: She could never have said, O Lord, thou Son of David, but from thee,
but by thee: None calls Jesus the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost. Much more
therefore did thou hear the words of thine own making; and well were thou
pleased to hear what thou thoughtest good to forbear to answer. It was thine
own grace that sealed up thy lips. Whether for the trial of her patience and
perseverance: for silence carried a semblance of neglect; and a willing neglect
lays strong siege to the best fort of the Soul. Even calm tempers, when they
have been stirred, have bewrayed impetuousness of passion. If there be any
dregs in the bottom of the glass, when the water is shaken, they will be soon
seen. Or whether for the more sharpning of her desires, and raising of her
zealous importunity. Our holy longings are increased with delays: It whets our
appetite to be held fasting. Or whether for the more sweetning of the blessing
by the difficulty or stay of obtaining. The benefit that comes with ease is
easily contemned: Long and eager pursuit endears any favor. Or whether for the
engaging of his Disciples in so charitable a suit. Or whether for the wise
avoidance of exception from the captious Jews. Or, lastly, for the drawing on
of an holy and imitable pattern of faithful perseverance; and to teach us not
to measure God's hearing of our suit by his present answer, or his present
answer by our own sense. Whilst our weakness expects thy words, thy wisdom
resolves upon thy silence. Never were thou better pleased to hear the
acclamation of Angels, then to hear this woman say, O Lord, thou Son of David:
yet silence is thy answer. When we have made our prayers, it is an happy thing
to hear the report of them back from Heaven: but if we always do not so, it is
not for us to be dejected, and to accuse either our infidelity, or thy neglect;
since we find here a faithful suitour met with a gracious Savior, and yet he
answered her not a word. If we be poor in spirit, God is rich in mercy; he
cannot send us away empty: yet he will not always let us feel his condescent;
crossing us in our will, that he may advance our benefit.

It was no small fruit of Christ's silence, that the Disciples were hereupon
moved to pray for her. Not for a mere dismission: It had been no favor to have
required this, but a punishment: for, if to be held in suspense be miserable,
to be sent away with a repulse is more. But for a merciful grant. They saw
much passion in the woman, much cause of passion: they saw great discouragement
on Christ's part, great constancy on hers. Upon all these they feel her misery,
and become suitours for her, unrequested. It is our duty, in case of necessity,
to intercede for each other; and by how much more familiar we are with Christ,
so much more to improve our interest for the relief of the distressed. We are
bidden to say, Our Father, not, mine. Yea, being members of one body, we pray
for our selves in others. If the Foot be pricked, the Back bends, the Head bows
down, the Eyes look, the Hands stir, the Tongue calls for aid; the whole man is
in pain, and labors for redress. He cannot pray or be heard for himself, that
is no man's friend but his own. No Prayer without Faith, no Faith without
Charity, no Charity without mutual Intercession.

That which urged them to speak for her, is urged to Christ by them for her
obtaining; She cries after us. Prayer is as an Arrow: if it be drawn up but a
little, it goes not far; but if it be pulled up to the head, it flies strongly,
and pierces deep. If it be but dribbled forth of careless lips, it falls down
at our foot: the strength of our ejaculation sends it up into Heaven, and
fetches down a blessing. The child has escaped many a stripe by his loud
crying; and the very unjust Judge cannot endure the widow's clamor. Heartless
motions do but teach us to deny; fervent suits offer violence both to earth and
heaven.

Christ would not answer the Woman, but does answer the Disciples. Those that
have a familiarity with God shall receive answers, when strangers shall stand
out. Yea even of domestics some are more entire. He that lay in Jesus his
bosom could receive that intelligence which was concealed from the rest. But
who can tell whether that silence or this answer be more grievous? I am not
sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. What is this answer but a
defense of that silence and seeming neglect? Whilst he said nothing, his
forbearance might have been supposed to proceed from the necessity of some
greater thoughts: but now his answer professes that silence to have proceeded
from a willing resolution not to answer: and therefore he does not vouchsafe so
much as to give to her the answer, but to her solicitours; that they might
return his denial from him to her, who had undertaken to derive her suit to
him. I am not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. Like a
faithful Ambassador, Christ has an eye to his commission: that may not be
violated, though to an apparent advantage: whither he is not sent, he may not
go. As he, so all his have their fixed marks set; at these they aim, and think
it not safe to shoot at rovers. In matter of morality it is not for us to stand
only upon inhibitions, avoiding what is forbidden, but upon commands,
endeavoring only what is enjoined. We need no other rule of our life, then
the intention of our several stations. And if he that was God would take no
farther scope to himself then the limits of his commission, how much does it
concern us frail men to keep within compass? or what shall become of our
lawlesness, that live in a direct contrariety to the will of him that sent us?

Israel was Jacob's name, from him derived to his posterity; till the division
of the Tribes under Jeroboam all that nation was Israel: then the Father's name
went to the most, which were ten Tribes; the name of the Son Juda to the best,
which were two. Christ takes no notice of this unhappy division; he remembers
the ancient name which he gave to that faithful wrastler. It was this Christ
with whom Jacob strove; it was he that wrencht his hip, and changed his name,
and dismissed him with a blessing: and now he cannot forget his old mercy to the
house of Israel; to that only does he profess himself sent. Their first brood
were Shepherds, now they are Sheep; and those not guarded; not empastured, but
strayed and lost. O Savior, we see thy charge; the house of Israel, not of
Esau; sheep, not goats, not wolves; lost sheep, not securely impaled in the
confidence of their safe condition. Woe were to us if thou were not sent to us.
He is not a Jew which is one without. Every Israelite is not a true one. We are
not of thy fold, if we be not sheep: thou will not reduce us to thy fold, if we
be not lost in our own apprehensions. O Lord, thou have put a fleece upon our
backs, we have lost our selves enough: make us so sensible of our own
wanderings, that we may find thee sent unto us, and may be happily found of thee.

Has not this poor woman yet done? Can neither the silence of Christ nor his
denial silence her? Is it possible she should have any glimps of hope after so
resolute repulses? Yet still, as if she saw no argument of discouragement, she
comes, and worships, and cries, Lord, help me. She which could not in the house
get a word of Christ, she that saw her solicitours (though Christ's own
Disciples) repelled, yet she comes. Before she followed, now she overtakes him:
before she sued aloof, now she comes close to him: no contempt can cast her
off. Faith is an undaunted grace; it has a strong heart, and a bold forehead.
Even very denials cannot dismay it, much less delays. She came not to face, not
to expostulate, but to prostrate her self at his feet. Her tongue worshipped him
before, now her knee. The eye of her Faith saw that Divinity in Christ which
bowed her to his earth. There cannot be a fitter gesture of man to God then
Adoration.

Her first suit was for mercy, now for help. There is no use of mercy but in
helpfulness. To be pitied without aid, is but an addition to misery. Who can
blame us, if we care not for an unprofitable compassion?

The very suit was gracious. She says not, Lord, if thou can, help me, as
the father of the Lunatic; but professes the power whilst she begs the act,
and gives glory where she would have relief.

Who now can expect other then a fair and yielding answer to so humble, so
faithful, so patient a suppliant? What can speed well, if a prayer of faith
from the knees of humility succeed not? And yet, behold, the farther she goes,
the worse she fares: her discouragement is doubled with her suit. It is not
good to take the childrens bread, and to cast it to dogs. First, his silence
implied a contempt; then, his answer defended his silence; now, his speech
expresses and defends his contempt. Lo, he has turned her from a woman to a
dog, and (as it were) spurns her from his feet with an harsh repulse. What
shall we say? is the Lamb of God turned Lion? does that clear fountain of mercy
run blood? O Savior, did ever so hard a word fall from those mild lips? Thou
calledst Herod Fox, most worthily; he was crafty and wicked: the Scribes and
Pharisees a generation of vipers; they were venomous and cruel: Judas a Devil;
he was both covetous and treacherous. But here was a Woman in distress, and
distress challenges mercy: a good woman, a faithful suppliant, a Canaanitish
disciple, a Christian Canaanite; yet rated, and whipped out for a dog, by thee
who were all goodness and mercy. How different are thy ways from ours? Even thy
severity argues favor. The trial had not been so sharp, if thou had not
found the faith so strong, if thou had not meant the issue so happy. Thou
had not driven her away as a Dog, if thou had not intended to admit her for
a Saint; and to advance her so much for a pattern of Faith, as thou depressedst
her for a spectacle of contempt.

The time was when the Jews were Children, and the Gentiles Dogs: now the case
is happily altered; the Jews are the Dogs, (so their dear and Divine countryman
calls the Concision,) we Gentiles are the Children. What certainty is there in
an external profession, that gives us only to seem, not to be? at least the
being that it gives is doubtful and temporary: we may be Children to day, and
Dogs to morrow. The true assurance of our condition is in the Decree and
Covenant of God, on his part; in our Faith and Obedience, on ours. How they of
Children became Dogs, it is not hard to say; their presumption, their unbelief
transformed them; and (to perfect their brutishness) they set their fangs upon
the Lord of life. How we of Dogs become Children, I know no reason but, Oh the
depth! That which at the first singled them out from the nations of the world,
has at last singled us out from the world and them. It is not in him that
wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that has mercy. Lord, how should
we bless thy goodness, that we of Dogs are Children? how should we fear thy
justice, since they of Children are Dogs? O let not us be high-minded, but
tremble. If they were cut off who crucified thee in thine humbled estate, what
may we expect who crucify thee daily in thy glory?

Now what ordinary patience would not have been overstrained with so
contemptuous a repulse? How few but would have fallen into intemperate passions,
into passionate expostulations? Art thou the Prophet of God, that so
disdainfully entertainest poor suppliants? Is this the comfort that thou
dealest to the distressed? Is this the fruit of my humble adoration, of my
faithful profession? Did I snarl or bark at thee, when I called thee the Son
of David? Did I fly upon thee otherwise then with my prayers and tears? And if
this term were fit for my vileness, yet does it become thy lips? Is it not
sorrow enough to me that I am afflicted with my Daughter's misery, but that
thou (of whom I hoped for relief) must add to mine affliction in an unkind
reproach? But here is none of all this: Contrarily, her humility grants all,
her patience overcomes all, and she meekly answers, Truth, Lord, yet the dogs
eat of the crumbs which fall from their master's table. The reply is not more
witty then faithful. O Lord, thou art Truth it self, thy words can be no other
then truth; thou have called me a Dog, and a Dog I am: give me therefore the
favor and privilege of a Dog, that I may gather up some crumbs of mercy from
under that table whereat thy Children sit. This blessing (though great to me,
yet) to the infiniteness of thy power and mercy is but as a crum to a feast. I
presume not to press to the board, but to creep under it: deny me not those
small offalls which else would be swept away in the dust. After this stripe,
give me but a crum, and I shall fawn upon thee, and depart satisfied. O woman,
(say I) great is thine humility, great is thy patience: but, O woman, (says my
Savior) great is thy faith. He sees the root, we the stock. Nothing but Faith
could thus temper the heart, thus strengthen the soul, thus charm the tongue. O
precious Faith! O acceptable Perseverance! It is no marvel if that chiding end
in favor: Be it to thee even as thou will. Never did such grace go away
uncrowned. The beneficence had been straight, if thou had not carried away
more then thou suedst for. Lo, thou that came a Dog, go away a Child: thou
that would but creep under the Childrens feet, art set at their elbow: thou
that would have taken up with a crum, art feasted with full dishes. The way
to speed well at God's hand is, to be humbled in his eyes, and in our own. It
is quite otherwise with God, and with men. With men, we are so accounted of as
we account of our selves: he shall be sure to be vile in the sight of others,
which is vile in his own. With God, nothing is got by vain ostentation, nothing
is lost by abasement. O God, when we look down to our own weakness, and cast up
our eyes to thine infiniteness, thine omnipotence, what poor things we are? but
when we look down upon our sins and wickedness, how shall we express our shame?
None of all thy creatures (except Devils) are capable of so foul a quality. As
we have thus made our selves worse then beasts, so let us, in a sincere
humbleness of mind acknowledge it to thee, who can pity, forgive, redress it.
So setting our selves down at the lower end of the table of thy creatures,
thou, the great Master of the Feast, may be pleased to advance us to the
height of glory.

XIX. The Deaf and Dumb man cured.
OUR Savior's entrance into the coasts of Tire and Sidon was not without a
Miracle, neither was his regress; as the Sun neither rises nor sets without
light. In his entrance, he delivers the Daughter of the faithful
Syrophoenician: in his egress, he cures the Deaf and Dumb. He can no more want
work, then that work can want success. Whether the Patient were naturally deaf,
and perfectly dumb, or imperfectly dumb, and accidentally deaf, I labor not.
Sure I am that he was so deaf that he could not hear of Christ, so dumb that he
could not speak for himself: good neighbors supply his ears, his tongue; they
bring him to Christ. Behold a Miracle led in by charity, acted by power, led
out by modesty.

It was a true office of love, to speak thus in the cause of the dumb, to lend
senses to him that wanted. Poor man! he had nothing to entreat for him but his
impotence; here was neither ear to inform, nor tongue to crave: his friends are
sensible of his infirmity, and unasked bring him to cure. This spiritual
service we owe to each other. It is true, we should be quick of hearing to the
things of God and of our peace, quick of tongue to call for our helps: but,
alas! we are naturally deaf and dumb to good, we have ear and tongue enough for
the world; if that do but whisper, we hear it; if that do but draw back, we cry
after it: we have neither for God. Ever since our ear was lent to the Serpent
in Paradise, it has been spiritually deaf; ever since we set our tooth in the
forbidden fruit, our tongue has been speechless to God: and that which was
faulty in the root, is worse in the branches. Every soul is more deafned and
bedumbed by increasing corruptions, by actual sins. Some ears the infinite
mercy of God has bored, some tongues he has untied by the power of
regeneration: these are wanting to their holy faculties, if they do not improve
themselves in bringing the deaf and dumb unto Christ.

There are some deaf and dumb upon necessity, some others upon affectation.
Those, such as live either out of the pale of the Church, or under a spiritual
tyranny within the Church: we have no help for them but our prayers, our pity
can reach farther then our aid. These, such as may hear of a Christ, and sue to
him, but will not; a condition so much more fearful, as it is more voluntary.
This kind is full of woeful variety, whilst some are deaf by an outward
obturation, whether by the prejudice of the teacher, or by secular occasions
and distractions; others, by the inwardly apostemating tumors of pride, by the
ill vapors of carnal affections, of froward resolutions: all of them like the
deaf adder have their ears shut to the Divine charmer. O miserable condition of
foolish men, so peevishly averse from their own salvation; so much more worthy
of our commiseration, as it is more incapable of their own! These are the men
whose cure we must labor, whom we must bring to Christ by admonitions, by
threats, by authority, and (if need be) by wholesome compulsions.

They do not only lend their hand to the deaf and dumb, but their tongue also;
they say for him that which he could not wish to say for himself. Doubtless
they had made signs to him of what they intended, and finding him forward in
his desires, now they speak to Christ for him. Every man lightly has a tongue
to speak for himself; happy is he that keeps a tongue for other men. We are
charged not with supplications only, but with intercessions. Herein is both
the largest improvement of our love, and most effectual. No distance can hinder
this fruit of our devotion; thus we may oblige those that we shall never see,
those that can never thank us. This beneficence cannot impoverish us; the more
we give, we have still the more; it is a safe and happy store that cannot be
impaired by our bounty. What was their suit, but that Christ would put his hand
upon the Patient? Not that they would prescribe the means, or imply a necessity
of his touch; but for that they saw this was the ordinary course both of
Christ, and his Disciples, by touching to heal. Our prayers must be directed to
the usual proceedings of God: his actions must be the rule of our prayers, our
prayers may not prescribe his actions.

That gracious Savior, who is wont to exceed our desires, does more then they
sue for. Not only does he touch the party, but takes him by the hand, and
leads him from the multitude.

He that would be healed of his spiritual Infirmities must be sequestered from
the throng of the world. There is a good use, in due times, of solitariness.
That soul can never enjoy God that is not sometimes retired: the modest
Bridegroom of the Church will not impart himself to his Spouse before company.
Or perhaps this secession was for our example, of a willing and careful
avoidance of vainglory in our actions: whence also it is that our Savior
gives an after-charge of secrecy. He that could say, He that does evil hates
the light, eschueth the light even in good. To seek our own glory is not glory.
Although besides this bashful desire of obscurity, here is a meet regard of
opportunity in the carriage of our actions. The envy of the Scribes and
Pharisees might trouble the passage of his Divine ministry; their exasperation
is wisely declined by this retiring. He in whose hands time is, knows how to
make his best choice of seasons. Neither was it our Savior's meaning to have
this Miracle buried, but hid. Wisdom has no better improvement then in
distinguishing times, and discreetly marshalling the circumstances of our
actions; which whosoever neglects, shall be sure to shame his work, and mar
his hopes.

Is there a spiritual Patient to be cured? aside with him: to undertake him
before the face of the multitude, is to wound, not to heal him.

Reproof and good counsel must be like our Alms, in secret, so as (if possible)
one ear or hand might not be conscious to the other. As in some cases
Confession, so our Reprehension must be auricular. The discreet Surgeon that
would cure a modest patient, whose secret complaint has in it more shame then
pain, shuts out all eyes save his own. It is enough for the God of Justice to
say, Thou did it secretly, but I will do it before all Israel, and before
this Sun. Our limited and imperfect wisdom must teach us to apply private
redresses to private maladies. It is the best remedy that is least seen, and
most felt.

What means this variety of Ceremony? O Savior, how many parts of thee are
here active? Thy finger is put into the ear, thy spittle touches the tongue,
thine eyes look up, thy lungs sigh, thy lips move to an Epphatha. Thy word
alone, thy beck alone, thy wish alone, yea the least act of velleity from thee
might have wrought this cure: why would thou employ so much of thy self in
this work? Was it to show thy liberty in not always equally exercising the
power of thy Deity? in that one while thine only command shall raise the dead,
and eject Devils; another while thou would accommodate thy self to the mean
and homely fashions of natural Agents, and, condescending to our senses and
customs, take those ways which may carry some more near respect to the cure
intended. Or was it to teach us how well thou likest that there should be a
ceremonious carriage of thy solemn actions, which thou please to produce
clothed with such circumstantial forms?

It did not content thee to put one finger into one ear, but into either ear
would thou put a finger: both ears equally needed cure, thou would apply
the means of cure to both. The Spirit of God is the finger of God: then do
thou, O Savior, put thy finger into our ear, when thy Spirit inables us to
hear effectually. If we thrust our own fingers into our ears, using such humane
persuasions to our selves as arise from worldly grounds, we labor in vain;
yea, these stoppells musts needs hinder our hearing the voice of God. Hence,
the great Philosophers of the ancient world, the learned Rabbis of the
Synagogue, the great Doctors of a false faith, are deaf to spiritual things.
It is only that finger of thy Spirit, O Blessed Jesu, that can open our ears,
and make passage through our ears into our hearts. Let that finger of thine be
put into our ears, so shall our deafness be removed, and we shall hear, not the
loud thunders of the Law, but the gentle whisperings of thy gracious motions to
our souls.

We hear for our selves, but we speak for others. Our Savior was not content
to open the ears only, but to untie the tongue. With the ear we hear, with the
mouth we confess. The same hand is applied to the tongue, not with a dry touch,
but with spittle; in allusion doubtless to the removal of the natural
impediment of speech: moisture, we know, glibs the tongue, and makes it apt to
motion; how much more from that sacred mouth?

There are those whose ears are open, but their mouths are still shut to God;
they understand, but do not utter the wonderful things of God: there is but
half a cure wrought upon these men; their ear is but open to hear their own
judgment, except their mouth be open to confess their Maker and Redeemer. O
God, do thou so moisten my tongue with the (...), that it may run smoothly (as
the pen of a ready writer) to the praise of thy name. Whilst the finger of our
Savior was on the tongue, in the ear of the Patient, his eye was in Heaven.
Never man had so much cause to look up to Heaven as he; there was his home,
there was his throne; he only was from heaven, heavenly. Each of us has a
good mind homeward, though we meet with better sights abroad; how much more
when our home is so glorious above the region of our peregrination? but thou, O
Savior, had not only thy dwelling there, but thy seat of majesty; there the
greatest Angels adored thee: it is a wonder that thine eye could be ever
any-where but there. What does thine eye in this, but teach ours where to be
fixed? Every good gift and every perfect giving come down from above: how can
we look off from that place whence we receive all good? Thou did not teach us
to say, O infinite God, which art everywhere; but, O our Father, which art in
heaven: there let us look up to thee. O let not our eyes or hearts grovell upon
this earth, but let us fasten them above the hills whence comes our salvation;
thence let us acknowledge all the good we receive; thence let us expect all the
good we want.

Why our Savior looked up to Heaven (though he had Heaven in himself) we can
see reason enough: but why did he sigh? Surely not for need; the least motion
of a thought was in him impetratory. How could he choose but be heard of his
Father, who was one with the Father? Not for any fear of distrust. But partly
for compassion, partly for example. For compassion of those manifold
infirmities into which sin had plunged mankind; a pitiful instance whereof was
here presented unto him. For example, to fetch sighs from us for the miseries
of others; sighs of sorrow for them, sighs of desire for their redress. This is
not the first time that our Savior spent sighs, yea tears, upon humane
distresses. We are not bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh, if we so feel
not the smart of our brethren, that the fire of our passion break forth into
the smoke of sighs. Who is weak, and I am not weak? who is offended, and I burn
not?

Christ was not silent whilst he cured the Dumb; his Epphatha gave life to all
these his other actions. His sighing, his spitting, his looking up to heaven,
were the acts of a man: but his command of the ear and mouth to open was the
act of God. He could not command that which he made not. His word is
imperative, ours supplicatory. He does what he will with us, we do by him
what he thinks good to impart. In this mouth the word cannot be severed from
the success: our Savior's lips are no sooner opened in his Epphatha, then the
mouth of the Dumb and the ears of the Deaf are opened at once. Behold here
celerity and perfection. Natural agents work by leisure, by degrees; nothing
is done in an instant; by many steps is every thing carried from the entrance
to the consummation: Omnipotency knows no rules; no imperfect work can proceed
from a cause absolutely perfect. The man hears now more lightly then if he had
never been deaf, and speaks more plainly then if he had never been tongue-ty'd.
And can we blame him if he bestowed the handsel of his speech upon the power
that restored it? if the first improvement of his tongue were the praise of the
giver, of the maker of it? Or can we expect other then that our Savior should
say, Thy tongue is free, use it to the praise of him that made it so; thy ears
are open, hear him that bids thee proclaim thy cure upon the housetop? But now
behold, contrarily, he that opens this man's mouth by his powerful word, by
the same word shuts it again; charging silence by the same breath wherewith he
gave speech: Tell no man.

Those tongues which interceded for his Cure, are charmed for the concealment
of it. O Savior, thou know the grounds of thine own commands; it is not for
us to enquire, but to obey: we may not honor thee with a forbidden
celebration. Good meanings have ofttimes proved injurious. Those men whose
charity employed their tongues to speak for the dumb man, do now employ the
same tongues to speak of his cure, when they should have been dumb. This charge
(they imagine) proceeds from an humble modesty in Christ; which the respect to
his honor bids them violate. I know not how we itch after those forbidden
acts, which if left to our liberty we willingly neglect. This prohibition
increases the rumor; every tongue is busied about this one. What can we make
of this but a well-meant disobedience? O God, I should more gladly publish thy
Name at thy command. I know thou can not bid me to dishonor thee; there is
no danger of such an injunction: but if thou should bid me to hide the
profession of thy Name and wondrous works, I should fulfill thy words, and not
examine thine intentions. Thou know how to win more honor by our silence,
then by our promulgation. A forbidden good differs little from evil. What makes
our actions to be sin but thy prohibitions? our judgment avails nothing. If
thou forbid us that which we think good, it becomes as faulty to thee-ward as
that which is originally evil. Take thou charge of thy glory, give me grace to
take charge of thy precepts.

XX. Zacchaeus.
NOW was our Savior walking toward his Passion: his last journey had most
wonders. Jericho was in his way from Galilee to Jerusalem: he balks it not,
though it were outwardly cursed; but, as the first Joshua saved a Rahab there,
so there the second saves a Zacchaeus; that an Harlot, this a Publican. The
traveller was wounded as he was going from Jerusalem to Jericho: this man was
taken from his Jericho to the true Jerusalem, and was healed. Not as a
passenger did Christ walk this way, but as a visiter; not to punish, but to
heal. With us, the sick man is glad to send far for the Physician; here the
Physician comes to seek Patients, and calls at our door for work. Had not this
good Shepherd left the ninety nine, and searched the desert, the lost sheep had
never recovered the fold: had not his gracious frugality sought the lost groat,
it had been swept up with the rushes, and thrown out in the dust. Still, O
Savior, do thou walk through our Jericho: what would become of us, if thou
should stay till we seek thee alone? Even when thou have found us, how hardly
do we follow thee? The work must be all thine: we shall not seek thee, if thou
find us not; we shall not follow thee, if thou draw us not.

Never did thou, O Savior, set one step in vain; wheresoever thou art
walking, there is some Zacchaeus to be wone: as in a drought, when we see some
weighty cloud hovering over us, we say there is rain for some grounds,
wheresoever it falls. The Ordinances of God bode good to some Souls, and happy
are they on whom it lights.

How justly is Zacchaeus brought in with a note of wonder? It is both great and
good news to hear of a Convert. To see men perverted from God to the world,
from truth to heresy, from piety to profaneness, is as common, as lamentable;
every night such stars fall: but to see a sinner come home to God, is both
happy, and wondrous to men and Angels. I cannot blame that Philosopher who,
undertaking to write of the hidden miracles of nature, spends most of his
discourse upon the generation and formation of Man; surely we are fearfully and
wonderfully made: but how much greater is the miracle of our spiritual
generation; that a son of wrath, a child of Satan should be transformed into
the son and heir of the ever-living God? O God, thou workest both: but in the
one our spirit animates us, in the other thine own.

Yet some things which have wonder in them for their worth, lose it for their
frequence; this has no less rarity in it then excellence. How many painful
Peter's have complained to fish all night, and catch nothing? Many Professors
and few Converts has been ever the lot of the Gospel. God's house, as the
streets of Jericho, may be thronged, and yet but one Zacchaeus. As therefore in
the Lottery, when the great prize comes, the trumpet sounds before it; so the
news of a Convert is proclaimed with, Behold Zacchaeus. Any Penitent had been
worthy of a shout, but this man by an eminence; a Publican, a chief of the
Publicans, rich.

No name under heaven was so odious as this of a Publican, especially to this
Nation, that stood so high upon their freedom, that every impeachment of it
seemed no less then damnable: insomuch as they ask not, Is it fit, or needful,
but, Is it lawful, to pay tribute unto Caesar? Any office of exaction must
needs be heinous to a people so impatient of the yoke. And yet, not so much the
trade, as the extortion drew hatred upon this profession; out of both they are
deeply infamous: one while they are matched with Heathens, another while with
Harlots, always with Sinners. And behold, Zacchaeus a Publican. We are all
naturally strangers from God, the best is indisposed to grace: yet some there
are whose very calling gives them better advantages. But this catch-poleship of
Zacchaeus carried extortion in the face, and in a sort bad defiance to his
conversion: yet behold, from this Toll-booth is called both Zacchaeus to be a
Disciple, and Matthew to be an Apostle. We are in the hand of a cunning
workman, that of the knottiest and crookedst timber can make rafts and cieling
for his own house; that can square the marble, or flint, as well as the freest
stone. Who can now plead the disadvantage of his place, when he sees a Publican
come to Christ? No calling can prejudice God's gracious election.

To excel in evil must needs be worse: if to be a Publican be ill, surely to
be an Arch-publican is more. What talk we of the chief of Publicans, when he
that professed himself the chief of sinners is now among the chief of Saints?
Who can despair of mercy, when he sees one Jericho send both an Harlot and a
Publican to Heaven?

The trade of Zacchaeus was not a greater rub in his way, then his wealth. He
that sent word to John for great news, that the poor receive the Gospel, said
also, How hard is it for a rich man to enter into heaven? This bunch of the
Camel keeps him from passing the needle's eye; although not by any malignity
that is in the creature it self, (Riches are the gift of God,) but by reason of
those three pernicious hang-byes, Cares, Pleasures, Pride, which too commonly
attend upon wealth. Separate these, Riches are a blessing: If we can so possess
them, that they possess not us, there can be no danger, much benefit in
abundance. All the good or ill of wealth, or poverty, is in the mind, in the
use. He that has a free and lowly heart in riches, is poor; he that has a
proud heart under rags, is rich. If the rich man do good and distribute, and
the poor man steal, the rich has put off his woe to the poor. Zacchaeus had
never been so famous a Convert, if he had been poor; nor so liberal a Convert,
if he had not been rich. If more difficulty, yet more glory was in the
conversion of rich Zacchaeus.

It is well that wealthy Zacchaeus was desirous to see Christ. Little do too
many rich men care too see that sight: the face of Caesar in their coin is more
pleasing. This man leaves his bags, to bless his eyes with this prospect. Yet
can I not praise him for this too much; it was not (I fear) out of Faith, but
Curiosity. He that had heard great fame of the man, of his Miracles, would
gladly see his face: even an Herod longed for this, and was never the better.
Only this I find, that this curiosity of the eye, through the mercy of God,
gave occasion to the belief of the heart. He that desires to see Jesus is in
the way to enjoy him: there is not so much as a remote possibility in the man
that cares not to behold him. The eye were ill bestowed, if it were only to
betray our Souls: there are no less beneficial glaunces of it. We are not
worthy of this useful casement of the heart, if we do not thence send forth
beams of holy desires, and thereby re-convey profitable and saving objects.

I cannot marvel if Zacchaeus were desirous to see Jesus: all the world was
not worth this sight. Old Simeon thought it best to have his eyes closed up
with this spectacle, as if he held it pity and disparagement to see ought after
it. The father of the faithful rejoiced to see him, though at nineteen hundred
years distance: and the great Doctor of the Gentiles stands upon this as his
highest stair, Have I not seen the Lord Jesus? And yet, O Savior, many a one
saw thee here, that shall never see thy face above; yea, that shall call to the
hills to hide them from thy sight. And if we had once known thee according to
the flesh, henceforth know we thee so no more. What an happiness shall it be,
so to see thee glorious, that in seeing thee we shall partake of thy glory? O
blessed vision, to which all others are but penal and despicable! Let me go
into the Mint-house, and see heaps of gold, I am never the richer: let me go to
the Picturers, I see goodly faces, and am never the fairer: let me go to the
Court, I see state and magnificence, and am never the greater. But, O Savior,
I cannot see thee, and not be blessed. I can see thee here, though in a glass:
If the eye of my Faith be dim, yet it is sure. O let me be unquiet till I do
now see thee through the veil of Heaven, ere I shall see thee as I am seen.

Fain would Zacchaeus see Jesus, but he could not. It were strange if a man
should not find some let in good desires; somewhat will be still in the way
betwixt us and Christ. Here are two hindrances met, the one internal, the
other external; the stature of the man, the press of the multitude; the
greatness of the press, the smalness of the stature. There was great thronging
in the streets of Jericho to see Jesus; the doors, the windows the bulks were
all full: Here are many beholders, few disciples. If gazing, if profession were
godliness, Christ could not want clients: now amongst all these wonderers there
is but one Zacchaeus. In vain should we boast of our forwardness to see and
hear Christ in our streets, if we receive him not into our hearts.

This crowd hides Christ from Zacchaeus. Alas! how common a thing is it, by the
interposition of the throng of the world to be kept from the sight of our
Jesus? Here, a carnal Fashionist says, Away with this austere scrupulousness,
let me do as the most. The throng keeps this man from Christ. There, a
superstitious Mis-believer says, What tell you me of an handful of reformed.
The whole world is ours. This man is kept from Christ by the throng. The
covetous Mammonist says, Let them that have leisure be devout, my employments
are many, my affairs great. This man cannot see Christ for the throng. There is
no perfect view of Christ, but in an holy secession. The Spouse found not her
Beloved till she was past the company, then she found him whom her soul loved.
Whosoever never seeks Christ but in the crowd, shall never find comfort in finding
him: the benefit of our public view must be enjoyed in retiredness. If in a
press we see a man's face, that is all; when we have him alone, every lim may
be viewed. O Savior, I would be loath not to see thee in thine Assemblies, but
I would be more loath not to see thee in my Closet. Yet had Zacchaeus been but
of the common pitch, he might perhaps have seen Christ's face over his fellows
shoulders: now, his stature adds to the disadvantage; his body did not answer
to his mind; his desires were high, whilst his body was low. The best is,
however smalness of stature was disadvantageous in a level, yet it is not so at
height. A little man, if his eye be clear, may look as high (though not as far)
as the tallest. The least Pigmy may from the lowest valley see the Sun or Stars
as fully as a Giant upon the highest mountain. O Savior, thou art now in
Heaven, the smalness of our person or of our condition cannot let us from
beholding thee. The Soul has no stature, neither is Heaven to be had with
reaching: Only clear thou the eyes of my Faith, and I am high enough.

I regard not the Body, the Soul is the man: It is to small purpose that the
Body is a Giant, if the Soul be a Dwarf. We have to do with a God that
measures us by our desires, and not by our statures. All the streets of Jericho
(however he seemed to the eye) had not so tall a man as Zacchaeus.

The witty Publican easily finds both his hindrances, and the ways of their
redress. His remedy for the press, is to run before the multitude; his remedy
for his stature, is to climb up into the Sycomore: he imploys his feet in the
one, his hands and feet in the other. In vain shall he hope to see Christ, that
does not out-goe the common throng of the world. The multitude is clustred
together, and moves too close to move fast: we must be nimbler then they, if
ever we desire or expect to see Christ. It is the charge of God, Thou shall not
follow a multitude to do evil: we do evil if we lag in good. It is held
commonly both wit and state for a man to keep his pace: and that man escapes
not censure, who would be forwarder then his fellows. Indeed for a man to run
alone in ways of indifferency, or to set an hypocritical face of out-running
all others in a zealous profession, when the heart lingers behind, both these
are justly hateful: but in an holy emulation to strive truly and really to
outstrip others in degrees of Grace, and a conscionable care of obedience,
this is truly Christian, and worthy of him that would hope to be blessed with
the sight of a Savior.

Tell me, ye fashionable Christians, that stand upon terms of equality, and
will not go a foot before your neighbors in holy zeal and aidfull charity, in
conscionable sincerity; tell me, who has made other men's progress a measure
for yours? Which of you says, I will be no richer, no greater, no fairer, no
wiser, no happier then my fellows? Why should you then say, I will be no
holier? Our life is but a Race; every good End that a man proposes to himself
is a several Goal. Did ever any man that ran for a prize say, I will keep up
with the rest? Does he not know that if he be not foremost, he loses? We had
as good to have sat still, as not so to run that we may obtain. We obtain not,
if we outrun not the multitude.

So far did Zacchaeus overrun the stream of the people, that he might have
space to climb the Sycomore ere Jesus could pass by. I examine not the kind,
the nature, the quality of this Plant: what Tree soever it had been, Zacchaeus
would have tried to scale it, for the advantage of this prospect. He has found
out this help for his stature, and takes pains to use it. It is the best
improvement of our wit, to seek out the aptest furtherances for our Souls. Do
you see a weak and studious Christian, that being unable to inform himself in
the matters of God, goes to the cabinet of Heaven, the Priests lips, which
shall preserve knowledge? there is Zacchaeus in the Sycomore. It is the truest
wisdom that helps forward our Salvation. How witty we are to supply all the
deficiencies of Nature? If we be low, we can add cubits to our stature; if
ill-coloured, we can borrow complexion; if hairless, perukes; if dim-sighted,
glasses; if lame, crutches: and shall we be conscious of our spiritual wants,
and be wilfully regardless of the remedy? Surely, had Zacchaeus stood still on
the ground, he had never seen Christ; had he not climbed the Sycomore, he had
never climbed into Heaven. O Savior, I have not height enough of my own to see
thee: give me what Sycomore thou will; give me grace to use it, give me an
happy use of that grace.

The more I look at the mercy of Christ, the more cause I see of astonishment.
Zacchaeus climbes up into the Sycomore to see Jesus: Jesus first sees him,
preventing his eyes with a former view. Little did Zacchaeus look that Jesus
would have cast up his eyes to him. Well might he think the boys in the street
would spy him out, and shout at his stature, trade, ambition: but that Jesus
should throw up his eyes into the Sycomore, and take notice of that small
despised morsel of flesh, ere Zacchaeus could find space to distinguish His
face from the rest, was utterly beyond his thought or expectation. All his hope
is to see; and now he is seen. To be seen and acknowledged is much more then to
see. Upon any solemn occasion many thousands see the Prince, whom he sees not;
and if he please to single out any one, whether by his eye or by his tongue,
amongst the press, it passes for an high favor. Zacchaeus would have thought
it too much boldness to have asked what was given him. As Jonathan did to
David, so does God to us, he shoots beyond us. Did he not prevent us with
mercy, we might climb into the Sycomore in vain. If he give Grace to him that
does his best, it is the praise of the giver, not the earning of the receiver.
How can we do or will without him? If he sees us first, we live; and if we
desire to see him, we shall be seen of him. Who ever took pains to climb the
Sycomore, and came down disappointed? O Lord, what was there in Zacchaeus, that
thou should look up at him? a Publican, a Sinner, an Arch-extortioner; a
Dwarf in stature, but a Giant in oppression; a little man, but a great
Sycophant; if rich in coin, more rich in sins and treasures of wrath. Yet it is
enough that he desires to see thee: all these disadvantages cannot hide him
from thee. Be we never so sinful, if our desires toward thee be hearty and
fervent, all the broad leaves of the Sycomore cannot keep off thine eye from
us. If we look at thee with the eye of Faith, thou will look at us with the eye
of mercy. The eye of the Lord is upon the just; and he is just that would be
so; if not in himself, yet in thee. O Savior, when Zacchaeus was above, and
thou were below, thou did look up at him: now thou art above, and we below,
thou look down upon us: thy mercy turns thine eyes every way toward our
necessities. Look down upon us, that are not worthy to look up unto thee; and
find us out, that we may seek thee.

It was much to note Zacchaeus, it was more to name him. Methinks I see how
Zacchaeus startled at this, to hear the sound of his own name from the mouth of
Christ: neither can he but think, Does Jesus know me? Is it his voice, or some
other's in the throng? Lo, this is the first blink that ever I had of him. I
have heard the fame of his wonderful works, and held it happiness enough for
me to have seen his face; and does he take notice of my person, of my name?
Surely the more that Zacchaeus knew himself, the more does he wonder that
Christ should know him. It was slander enough for a man to be a friend to a
Publican; yet Christ gives this friendly compellation to the chief of
Publicans, and honors him with this argument of a sudden intireness. The
favor is great, but not singular: Every elect of God is thus graced. The
Father knows the child's name: as he calls the stars of heaven by their names,
so does he his Saints, the stars on earth; and it is his own rule to his
Israel, I have called thee by thy name, thou art mine. As God's children do not
content themselves with a confused knowledge of him, but aspire to a particular
appprehension and sensible application; so does God again to them: it is not
enough that he knows them as in the crowd, wherein we see many persons, none
distinctly; but he takes single and several knowledge of their qualities,
conditions, motions, events. What care we that our names are obscure or
contemned amongst men, whilst they are regarded by God? that they are raked up
in the dust of Earth, whilst they are recorded in Heaven?

Had our Savior said no more but, Zacchaeus, come down, the poor man would
have thought himself taxed for his boldness and curiosity: it were better to be
unknown, then noted for miscarriage. But now the next words comfort him; For I
must this day abide at thine house. What a sweet familiarity was here? as if
Christ had been many years acquainted with Zacchaeus, whom he now first saw.
Besides our use, the Host is invited by the Guest, and called to an unexpected
entertainment. Well did our Savior hear Zacchaeus his heart inviting him,
though his mouth did not. Desires are the language of the Soul; those are heard
by him that is the God of spirits.

We dare not do thus to each other, save where we have eaten much salt; we
scarce go where we are invited: though the face be friendly, and the
entertainment great, yet the heart may be hollow. But here, he that saw the
heart, and foreknew his welcome, can boldly say, I must this day abide at thine
house. What a pleasant kind of entire familiarity there is betwixt Christ and a
good heart? If any man open, I will come in, and sup with him. It is much for
the King of Glory to come into a cottage, and sup there: yet thus he may do,
and take some state upon him in sitting alone. No, I will so sup with him, that
he shall sup with me. Earthly state consists in strangeness, and affects a
stern kind of majesty aloof. Betwixt God and us, though there be infinite more
distance, yet there is a gracious affability and familiar intireness of
conversation. O Savior, what do thou else every day but invite thy self to
us in thy Word, in thy Sacraments? who are we that we should entertain thee, or
thou us, dwarfs in grace, great in nothing but unworthiness? Thy praise is
worthy to be so much the more, as our worth is less. Thou that biddest thy self
to us, bid us be fit to receive thee, and in receiving thee, happy.

How graciously does Jesus still prevent the Publican, as in his sight, notice,
compellation, so in his invitation too? That other Publican, Levi, bade Christ
to his house, but it was after Christ had bidden him to his Discipleship:
Christ had never been called to his feast, if Levi had not been called into his
family. He loved us first, he must first call us; for he calls us out of love.
As in the general calling of Christianity, if he did not say, Seek ye my face,
we could never say, Thy face, Lord, will I seek: so in the specialties of our
main benefits or employments, Christ must begin to us. If we invite our selves
to him before he invite himself to us, the undertaking is presumptuous, the
success unhappy.

If Nathanael, when Christ named him, and gave him the memorial-token of his
being under the fig tree, could say, Thou art the Son of God; how could
Zacchaeus do less in hearing himself upon this wild fig tree named by the same
lips? How must he needs think, If he knew not all things, he could not know me;
and if he knew not the hearts of men, he could not have known my secret desires
to entertain him: He is a God that knows me, and a merciful God that invites
himself to me? No marvel therefore, if upon this thought Zacchaeus come down in
haste. Our Savior said not, Take thy leisure, Zacchaeus; but, I will abide at
thine house to day. Neither did Zacchaeus upon this intimation sit still and
say, When the press is over, when I have done some errands of my office; but he
hasts down to receive Jesus. The notice of such a Guest would have quickened his
speed without a command. God loves not slack and lazy executions. The Angels of
God are described with wings: and we pray to do his will with their
forwardness. Yea even to Judas Christ says, What thou do, do quickly. O
Savior, there is no day wherein thou do not call us by the voice of thy
Gospel: what do we still lingering in the Sycomore? How unkindly must thou
needs take the delays of our Conversion? Certainly, had Zacchaeus staid still
in the Tree, thou had balked his house as unworthy of thee. What construction
can thou make of our wilful dilations, but as a stubborn contempt? How can
thou but come to us in vengeance, if we come not down to entertain thee in a
thankful obedience?

Yet do I not hear thee say, Zacchaeus, cast thy self down for haste; this was
the counsel of the Tempter to thee; but, Come down in haste. And he did
accordingly. There must be no more haste then good speed in our performances:
we may offend as well in our heady acceleration, as in our delay. Moses ran so
fast down the hill that he stumbled spiritually, and brake the Tables of God.
We may so fast follow after Justice, that we outrun Charity. It is an unsafe
obedience that is not discreetly and leisurely speedfull.

The speed of his descent was not more then the alacrity of his entertainment.
He made haste, and came down, and received him joyfully. The life of
hospitality is cheerfulness. Let our cheer be never so great, if we do not
read our welcome in our friend's face as well as in his dishes, we take no
pleasure in it.

Can we marvel that Zacchaeus received Christ joyfully? Who would not have
been glad to have his house, yea himself, made happy with such a Guest? Had we
been in the stead of this Publican, how would our hearts have leapt within us
for joy of such a presence? How many thousand miles are measured by some devout
Christians, only to see the place where his feet stood? How much happier must
he needs think himself that owns the roof that receives him? But O the
incomparable happiness then of that man whose heart receives him, not for a
day, not for years of days, not for millions of years, but for eternity! This
may be our condition, if we be not straightened in our own bowels. O Savior, do
thou welcome thy self to these houses of clay, that we may receive a joyful
welcome to thee in those everlasting habitations.

Zacchaeus was not more glad of Christ then the Jews were discontented. Four
vices met here at once, Envy, Scrupulousness, Ignorance, Pride. Their eye was
evil because Christ's was good. I do not hear any of them invite Christ to his
home; yet they snarl at the honor of this unworthy Host: they thought it too
much happiness for a Sinner, which themselves willingly neglected to sue for.
Wretched men! they cannot see the Mercy of Christ, for being bleared with the
Happiness of Zacchaeus: yea, that very Mercy which they see, torments them. If
that viper be the deadliest which feeds the sweetest, how poisonous must this
disposition needs be that feeds upon Grace?

What a contrariety there is betwixt good Angels and evil Men? The Angels
rejoice at that whereat men pout and stomach: Men are ready to cry and burst
for anger at that which makes music in Heaven. O wicked and foolish elder
brother, that feeds on hunger and his own heart without doors, because his
younger brother is feasting on the fat calf within!

Besides Envy they stand scrupulously upon the terms of Traditions. These sons
of the earth might not be conversed with; their threshold was unclean; Touch me
not, for I am holier then thou. That he therefore, who went for a Prophet,
should go to the house of a Publican and Sinner, must needs be a great
eyesore. They that might not go in to a Sinner, cared not what sins entered
into themselves: the true cousins of those Hypocrites, who held it a pollution
to go into the Judgment-hall, no pollution to murder the Lord of life. There
cannot be a greater argument of a false heart, then to stumble at these straws,
and to leap over the blocks of gross impiety. Well did our Savior know how
hainously offensive it would be to turn in to this Publican: he knows, and
regards it not. A Soul is to be wone, what cares he for idle misconstruction?
Morally good actions must not be suspended upon danger of causeless scandal. In
things indifferent and arbitrary, it is fit to be overruled by fear of
offense: but if men will stumble in the plain ground of good, let them fall
without our regard, not without their own peril. I know not if it were not
David's weakness to abstain from good words, whilst the wicked were in place.
Let Justice be done in spite of the world; and in spite of Hell, Mercy.

Ignorance was in part guilty of these scruples: they thought Christ either too
holy to go to a Sinner, or in going made unholy. Foolish men! to whom came he?
to you righteous? Let himself speak: I came not to call the righteous, but
sinners to repentance. Whither should the Physician go but to the sick? the
whole need him not. Love is the best attractive of us; and he to whom much is
forgiven, loves much.

O Savior, the glittering palaces of proud Justiciaries are not for thee; thou
love the lowly and ragged cottage of a contrite heart. Neither could here be
any danger of thy pollution. Thy Sun could cast his beams upon the impurest
dunghill, and not be tainted. It was free and safe for the Leper and
Bloudy-fluxed to touch thee; thou could heal them, they could not infect
thee. Neither is it otherwise in this moral contagion. We who are obnoxious to
evil, may be insensibly defiled: thy Purity was enough to remedy that which
might mar a world. Thou can help us; we cannot hurt thee. O let thy
presence ever bless us; and let us ever bless thee for thy presence.

Pride was an attendent of this Ignorance: so did they note Zacchaeus for a
Sinner, as if themselves had been none. His sins were written in his forehead,
theirs in their breast. The presumption of their secrecy makes them insult upon
his notoriousness. The smoke of pride flies still upward, and in the mounting
vanishes; Contrition beats it down, and fetches tears from the tender eyes.
There are stage-sins, and there are closet sins. These may not upbraid the
other: they may be more heinous, though less manifest. It is a dangerous vanity
to look outward at other men's sins with scorn, when we have more need to cast
our eyes inward to see our own with humiliation.

Thus they stumbled and fell; but Zacchaeus stood. All their malicious murmur
could not dishearten his Piety and joy in the entertaining of Christ. Before
Zacchaeus lay down as a Sinner, now he stands up as a Convert: sinning is
falling, continuance in sin is lying down, Repentance is rising and standing
up. Yet perhaps this standing was not so much the site of his constancy or of
his Conversion, as of his reverence. Christ's affability has not made him
unmannerly: Zacchaeus stood. And what if the desire of more audibleness raised
him to his feet? In that smalness of stature it was not fit he should lose
ought of his height. It was meet so noble a proclamation should want no
advantage of hearing. Never was our Savior better welcomed. The penitent
Publican makes his Will, and makes Christ his supervisor. His Will consists of
Legacies given, of Debts paid: gifts to the poor, payments to the injured.
There is Liberality in the former, in the latter Justice; in both the
proportions are large: Half to the poor; fourfold to the wronged.

This hand sowed not sparingly. Here must needs be much of his own that was
well gotten, whether left by patrimony, or saved by parsimony, or gained by
honest improvement. For when he had restored fourfold to every one whom he had
oppressed, yet there remained a whole half for pious uses: and this he so
distributes, that every word commends his bounty. I give; and what is more free
then gift? In Alms we may neither sell, nor return, nor cast away. We sell, if
we part with them for importunity, for vainglory, for retribution: we return
them, if we give with respect to former offices; this is to pay, not to bestow:
we cast away, if in our beneficence we neither regard order nor discretion.
Zacchaeus did neither cast away, nor return, nor sell, but give. I do give;
not, I will. The prorogation of good makes it thankless. The alms that smell of
the hand lose the praise. It is twice given that is given quickly. Those that
defer their gifts till their deathbed do as good as say, Lord, I will give
thee something when I can keep it no longer. Happy is the man that is his own
executor. I give my goods; not another's. It is a thankless vanity to be
liberal of another man's purse. Whosoever gives of that which he has taken away
from the owner, does more wrong in giving then in stealing. God expects our
gifts, not our spoils. I fear there is too many a School and Hospital, every
stone whereof may be challenged. Had Zacchaeus meant to give of his extortions,
he had not been so careful of his restitution: now he restores to others, that
he may give of his own; I give half my goods. The Publican's heart was as large
as his estate; he was not more rich in goods then in bounty. Were this example
binding, who should be rich to give? who should be poor to receive? In the
straight beginnings of the Church those beneficences were requisite, which
afterward in the larger elbow-room thereof would have caused much confusion.
If the first Christians laid down all at the Apostles feet, yet ere long it was
enough for the believing Corinthians, every first day of the week to lay aside
some pittance for charitable purposes. We are no Disciples, if we do not
imitate Zacchaeus so far as to give liberally, according to the proportion of
our estate.

Giving is sowing: the larger seeding, the greater crop. Giving to the poor is
foeneration to God: the greater bank, the more interest. Who can fear to be too
wealthy? Time was when men faulted in excess: Proclamations were fain to
restrain the Jews; Statutes were fain to restrain our Ancestors. Now there
needs none of this: Men know how to shut their hands alone. Charity is in more
danger of freezing then of burning. How happy were it for the Church, if men
were only close-handed to hold, and not lime-fingered to take.

To the poor; not to rich heirs. God gives to him that has; we to him that
wants. Some want because they would, whether out of prodigality or idleness;
some want because they must: these are the fit Subjects of our beneficence, not
those other. A poverty of our own making deserves no pity. He that sustains the
lewd, feeds not his belly, but his vice. So then this living Legacy of
Zacchaeus is free, I give; present, I do give; just, my goods; large, half my
goods; fit, to the poor.

Neither is he more bountiful in his gift, then just in his restitution: If I
have taken ought from any man by false accusation, I restore it fourfold.

It was proper for a Publican to pill and pole the subject, by devising
complaints, and raising causeless vexations, that his mouth might be stopped with
fees, either for silence or composition. This had Zacchaeus often done. Neither
is this [ If] a note of doubt, but of assertion. He is sure of the fact, he is
not sure of the persons: their challenge must help to further his justice. The
true penitence of this holy Convert expresses it self in Confession, in
Satisfaction. His Confession is free, full, open. What cares he to shame
himself, that he may give glory to God? Woe be to that bashfulness that ends in
confusion of face. O God, let me blush before men, rather then be confounded
before Thee, thy Saints and Angels.

His Satisfaction is no less liberal then his gift. Had not Zacchaeus been
careful to pay the debts of his fraud, all had gone to the poor. He would have
done that voluntarily, which the Young man in the Gospel was bidden to do, and
refusing went away sorrowful. Now he knew that his misgotten gain was not for
God's Corban; therefore he spares half, not to keep, but to restore. This was
the best dish in Zacchaeus his good cheer. In vain had he feasted Christ, given
to the poor, confessed his extortions, if he had not made restitution. Woe is
me for the paucity of true Converts. There is much stolen goods; little brought
home. Men's hands are like the fisher's Flue, yea like Hell it self, which
admits of no return. O God, we can never satisfy thee; our score is too great,
our abilities too little: but if we make not even with men, in vain shall we
look for mercy from thee. To each his own had been well; but four for one was
munificent. In our transactions of commerce, we do well to beat the bargain to
the lowest; but in cases of moral or spiritual payments to God or men, now
there must be a measure, pressed, shaken, running over. In good offices and due
retributions we may not be pinching and niggardly. It argues an earthly and
ignoble mind, where we have apparently wronged, to higgle and dodge in the
amends.

O mercy and justice well repaid! This day is salvation come to thine house.
Lo, Zacchaeus, that which thou give to the poor, is nothing to that which thy
Savior gives to thee. If thou restorest four for one, here is more then
thousands of millions for nothing: were every of thy pence a world, they could
hold no comparison with this bounty. It is but dross that thou give, it is
Salvation that thou receivest. Thou gave in present, thou do not receive in
hope; but, This day is Salvation come to thine house. Thine ill-gotten metalls
were a strong bar to bolt Heaven-gates against thee: now that they are
dissolved by a seasonable beneficence and restitution, those gates of glory fly
open to thy Soul. Where is that man that can challenge God to be in his debt?
Who can ever say, Lord, this favor I did to the least of thine unrequited?
Thrice happy Publican, that have climbed from thy Sycomore to Heaven; and by a
few worthless bags of unrighteous Mammon, have purchased to thy self a Kingdom
uncorruptible, undefi^ed, and that fades not away.

XXI. John Baptist beheaded.
THree of the Evangelists have (with one pen) recorded the death of the great
Harbinger of Christ, as most remarkable and useful. He was the Forerunner of
Christ, as into the world, so out of it: yea, he that made way for Christ into
the world, made way for the name of Christ into the Court of Herod. This Herod
Antipas was son to that Herod who was, and is ever infamous for the massacre at
Bethlehem. Cruelty runs in a blood. The murderer of John, the forerunner of
Christ, is well descended of him who would have murdered Christ, and, for his
sake, murdered the Infants. It was late ere this Herod heard the fame of
Jesus; not till he had taken off the head of John Baptist. The father of this
Herod inquired for Christ too soon; this too late. Great men should have the
best intelligence. If they improve it to all other uses of either frivolous or
civil affairs, with neglect of spiritual, their judgment shall be so much more
as their helps and means were greater. Whether this Herod were taken up with
his Arabian wars against Arethas his father in law, or whether he were employed
in his journey to Rome, I inquire not: but if he were at home, I must wonder
how he could be so long without the noise of Christ. Certainly, it was a sign
he had a very irreligious Court, that none of his Followers did so much as
report to him the Miracles of our Savior; who doubtless told him many a vain
tale the while. One tells him of his brother Philip's coffeehouse; another
relates the news of the Roman Court; another, the angry threats of Arethas;
another flatters him with the admiration of his new Mistress, and disparagement
of the old: no man so much as says, Sir, there is a Prophet in your Kingdom
that does wonders. There was not a man in his country that had not been
astonished with the same of Jesus; yea all Syria and the adjoining regions rung
of it: only Herod's Court hears nothing. Miserable is that Greatness which
keeps men from the notice of Christ. How plain is it from hence, that our
Savior kept aloof from the Court? The austere and eremiticall Harbinger of
Christ, it seems, preached there often, and was heard gladly; though, at last, to
his cost: whilst our Savior, who was more sociable, came not there. He sent a
message to that Fox, whose den he would not approach. Whether it were that he
purposely forbore, lest he should give that Tyrant occasion to revive and
pursue his father's suspicion; or whether for that he would not so much honor
a place so infamously graceless and disordered; or whether by his example to
teach us the avoidance of outward pomp and glory. Surely Herod saw him not till
his death; heard not of him till the death of John Baptist. And now his
un-intelligence was not more strange then his misconstruction; This is John
Baptist, whom I beheaded. First, he doubted, then he resolved: he doubted upon
others suggestions; upon his own apprehensions he resolved thus. And though he
thought good to set a face on it to strangers, unto whom it was not safe to
bewray his fear; yet to his domestics he freely discovered his thoughts; This
is John Baptist. The troubled Conscience will many a time open that to
familiars, which it hides from the eyes of others. Shame and fear meet together
in guiltiness. How could he imagine this to be John? That common conceit of
Transanimation could have no place here; there could be no transmigration of
Souls into a grown and well-statur'd body. That received fancy of the Jews held
only in the case of conception and birth, not of full age. What need we scan
this point, when Herod himself professes, He is risen from the dead? He that
was a Jew by profession, and knew the story of Elisha's bones, of the
Sareptan's and Shunamite's sons, and in all likelihood had now heard of our
Savior's miraculous resuscitation of others, might think this power reflected
upon himself. Even Herod, as bad as he was, believed a Resurrection. Lewdness
of life and practice may stand with orthodoxy in some main points of Religion.
Who can doubt of this, when the Devils believe and tremble? Where shall those
men appear, whose faces are Christian, but their hearts Sadducees?

Oh the terrors and tortures of a guilty heart! Herod's Conscience told him he
had offered an unjust and cruel violence to an innocent; and now he thinks that
John's ghost haunts him. Had it not been for this guilt of his bosom, why might
he not as well have thought that the same God, whose hand is not shortened, had
conferred this power of Miracles upon some other? Now, it could be no body but
John that does these wonders: and how can it be (thinks he) but that this
revived Prophet, who does these strange things, will be revenged on me for his
head? He that could give himself life, can more easily take mine: how can I
escape the hands of a now-immortal and impassible avenger?

A wicked man needs no other tormentour (especially for the sins of blood) then
his own heart. Revell, O Herod, and feast, and frolic; and please thy self
with dances, and triumphs, and pastimes: thy sin shall be as some Fury that
shall invisibly follow thee, and scourge thy guilty heart with secret lashes,
and upon all occasions shall begin thine Hell within thee. He wanted not other
sins, that yet cried, Deliver me from bloud-guiltiness, O God.

What an honor was done to John in this misprision? While that man lived, the
world was apt to think that John was the Christ: now that John is dead, Herod
thinks Christ to be John. God gives to his poor conscionable servants a kind of
reverence and high respect, even from those men that malign them most; so as
they cannot but venerate whom they hate. Contrarily, no wit or power can shield
a lewd man from contempt.

John did no Miracle in his life, yet now Herod thinks he did miracles in his
Resurrection; as supposing that a new supernatural life brought with it a
supernatural power. Who can but wonder at the stupid partiality of Herod and
these Jews? They can imagine and yield John risen from the dead, that never did
miracle, and arose not; whereas Christ, who did infinite miracles, and arose
from the dead by his almighty power, is not yielded by them to have risen.
Their over-bountifull misconceit of the Servant, is not so injurious as their
niggardly infidelity to the Master. Both of them shall convince and confound
them before the face of God. But, O yet more blockish Herod! Thy Conscience
affrights thee with John's resurrection, and flies in thy face for the cruel
murder of so great a Saint; yet where is thy repentance for so foul a fact?
Who would not have expected that thou should hereupon have humbled thy self
for thy sin, and have labored to make thy peace with God and him? The greater
the fame and power was of him whom thou supposedst recovered from thy
slaughter, the more should have been thy penitence. Impiety is wont to besot
men, and turn them senseless of their own safety and welfare. One would have
thought that our first Grand-sire Adam, when he found his heart to strike him
for his disobedience, should have run to meet God upon his knees, and have sued
for pardon of his offense: In stead of that, he runs to hide his head among the
bushes. The case is still ours; we inherit both his sin and his senselesness.
Besides the infinite displeasure of God, wickedness makes the heart incapable
of Grace, and impregnable to the means of Conversion.

Even the very first act of Herod's cruelty was heinous. He was foul enough
with other sins; he added this above all, that he shut up John in prison. The
violence offered to God's messengers is branded for notorious. The Sanctity and
austere carriage of the man wone him honor justly from the multitude, and
aggravated the sin: but whatever his person had been, his mission was sacred, (
He shall send his messenger;) the wrong redounds to the God that sent him. It
is the charge of God, Touch not mine anointed, nor do my Prophets any harm.
The precept is perhaps one, for even Prophets were anointed; but at least next
to violation of Majesty, is the wrong to a Prophet. But what? do I not hear the
Evangelist say that Herod heard John gladly? How is it then? Did John take the
ear and heart of Herod, and does Herod bind the hands and feet of John? Does he
wilfully imprison whom he gladly heard? How inconstant is a carnal heart to
good resolutions? How little trust is to be given to the good motions of
unregenerate persons? We have known when even mad dogs have fawned upon their
master, yet he has been too wise to trust them but in chains. As a true friend
loves always, so a gracious heart always affects good: neither can be altered
with change of occurrences. But the carnal man, like an hollow Parasite or a
fawning Spaniel, flatters only for his own turn; if that be once either served
or crossed, like a churlish curre, he is ready to snatch us by the fingers. Is
there a worldly-minded man that lives in some known sin, yet makes much of the
Preacher, frequents the Church, talks godly, looks demurely, carries fair?
trust him not; he will prove, after his pious fits, like some resty horse,
which goes on some paces readily and eagerly, but anon either stands still, or
falls to flinging and plunging, and never leaves till he have cast his rider.

What then might be the cause of John's bonds, and Herod's displeasure? For
Herodias sake his brother Philip's wife. That woman was the subject of Herod's
lust, and the exciter of his revenge. This light huswife ran away with her
Husband's brother; and now doting upon her incestuous lover, and finding John
to be a rub in the way of her licentious adultery, is impatient of his liberty,
and will not rest till his restraint. Resolved sinners are mad upon their lewd
courses, and run furiously upon their gainsayers. A Bear robbed of her whelps
is less impetuous. Indeed, those that have determined to love their sins more
then their Souls, whom can they care for? Though Herod was wicked enough, yet
had it not been upon Herodias's instigation, he had never imprisoned John.

Importunity of lewd solicitours may be of dangerous consequence, and many
times draws Greatness into those ways which it either would not have thought
of, or abhorred. In the remotion of the wicked is the establishment of the
throne.

Yet still is this Dame called the wife of Philip. She had utterly left his
bed, and was solemnly coupled to Herod; but all the ritual Ceremonies of her
new Nuptials cannot make her other then Philip's wife. It is a sure rule, That
which is originally faulty can never be rectified. The ordination of Marriage
is one for one; They twain shall be one flesh. There cannot be two heads to one
body, nor two bodies to one head. Herod was her Adulterer, he was not her
Husband; she was Herod's Harlot, Philip's Wife. Yet how does Herod dote on her,
that for her sake he loads John with irons? Whether will not the fury of
inordinate Lust transport a man? Certainly John was of late in Herod's favor.
That rough-hewn Preacher was for a Wilderness, not for a Court: Herod's
invitation drew him thither, his reverence and respects encouraged him there.
Now the love of his Lust has carried him into an hate of God's Messenger. That
man can have no hold of himself or care of others, who has given the reins to
his unruly Concupiscence. He that has once fixed his heart upon the face of an
Harlot, and has beslaved himself to a bewitching Beauty, casts off at once all
fear of God, respect to Laws, shame of the world, regard of his estate, care of
wife, children, friends, reputation, patrimony, body, Soul. So violent is this
beastly passion where it takes; neither ever leaves till it has hurried him
into the chambers of death.

Herodias her self had first plotted to kill the Baptist; her murderers were
suborned, her ambushes laid. The success failed, and now she works with Herod
for his durance. O mavelous hand of the Almighty! John was a mean man for
estate, solitary, guardless, unarmed, impotent: Herodias a Queen, so great that
she swayed Herod himself; and not more great then subtle; and not more great or
subtle then malicious: yet Herodias laid to kill John, and could not. What an
invisible, and yet sure, guard there is about the poor servants of God, that
seem helpless and despicable in themselves? There is over them an hand of
Divine protection, which can be no more opposed then seen. Malice is not so
strong in the hand, as in the heart. The Devil is stronger then a world of men,
a legion of Devils stronger then fewer spirits; yet a legion of Devils cannot
hurt one Swine without a permission. What can bands of enemies or gates of Hell
do against God's secret ones? It is better to trust in the Lord, then to trust
in Princes.

It is not more clear who was the Author, then what was the motive of this
imprisonment, the free reproof of Herod's Incest; It is not lawful, etc. Both
the offenders were nettled with this bold reprehension. Herod knew the
reputation that John carried; his Conscience could not but suggest the foulness
of his own fact: neither could he but see how odious it would seem to persecute
a Prophet for so just a reproof. For the color therefore of so tyrannical an
act, he brands John with Sedition: these presumptuous taxations are a disgrace
and disparagement to Authority. It is no news with wicked Tyrants, to cloak
their Cruelty with pretenses of Justice. Never was it other then the lot of
God's faithful servants, to be loaded with unjust reproaches in the
conscionable performance of their duties. They should speed too well in the
opinion of men, if they might but appear in their true shape.

The fact of Herod was horrible and prodigious; to rob his own Brother of the
partner of his bed; to tear away part of his flesh, yea his body from his head.
So as here was at once in one act, Adultery, Incest, Violence. Adultery, that
he took another's wife: Incest, that he took his Brother's: Violence, that he
thus took her, in spite of her Husband. Justly therefore might John say, It is
not lawful for thee. He balked not one of Herod's sins, but reproved him of
all the evils that he had done; though more eminently of this, as that which
more filled the eye of the world. It was not the Crown or awful Scepter of
Herod that could daunt the homely, but faithful, messenger of God: as one that
came in the spirit of Elias, he fears no faces, spares no wickedness. There
must meet in God's ministers Courage and Impartiality. Impartiality, not to
make difference of persons; Courage, not to make spare of the sins of the
greatest. It is an hard condition that the necessity of our Calling casts upon
us, in some cases to run upon the pikes of displeasure. Prophecies were no
Burdens, if they did not expose us to these dangers. We must connive at no
evil: Every sin unreproved becomes ours.

Hatred is the daughter of Truth. Herod is inwardly vexed with so peremptory a
reprehension: and now he seeks to kill the author. And why did he not? He
feared the people. The time was when he feared John no less then now he hates
him: he once reverenced him as a just and holy man, whom now he heart-burns as
an enemy; neither was it any counterfeit respect, sure the man was then in
earnest. What shall we say then? was it that his inconstant heart was now
fetched off by Herodias, and wrought to a disaffection? or was it with Herod as
with Salomon's Sluggard, that at once would and would not? His thoughts are
distracted with a mixed voluntary contradiction of purposes: as an holy man and
honored of the people, he would not kill John; he would kill him, as an enemy
to his Lust. The worse part prevails; Appetite oversways Reason and
Conscience: and now, were it not for fear of the people, John should be
murdered. What a self-conflicting and prodigious creature is a wicked man left
over to his own thoughts? whilst on the one side he is urged by his Conscience,
on the other by his lustful desires and by the importunity of Satan. There is
no peace, says my God, to the wicked: and after all his inward broils, he
falls upon the worst; so as his yieldance is worse then his fight. When God
sees fit, Herod's tyranny shall effect that which the wise Providence of the
Almighty has decreed for his Servant's glory. In the mean while, rubs shall be
cast in his way; and this for one, He feared the people. What an absurd and
sottish thing is Hypocrisy? Herod fears the people, he fears not God. Tell me
then, Herod, what could the people do at the worst? Perhaps, mutiny against
thee, raise arms and tumults, disturb the Government, it may be, shake it off.

What could God do? yea, what not? stir up all his creatures to plague thee,
and when he has done, tumble thee down to Hell, and there torment thee
everlastingly. O fond Herod, that fear where no fear was, and fear not
where there is nothing but terror!

How God fits lewd men with restraints? If they be so godless as to regard his
creature above himself, he has external buggs to affright them withal; if
bashful, he has shame; if covetous, losses; if proud, disgrace: and by this
means the most wise Providence keeps the world in order. We cannot better judge
of our hearts, then by what we most fear.

No man is so great as to be utterly exempted from fear. The Jews feared Herod;
Herod feared the Jews: the healthful fear sickness; the free, servitude: the
people fear a Tyrant's oppression and cruelty; the Tyrant fears the people's
mutiny and insurrection. If there have been some so great as to be above the
reach of the power and machinations of inferiors, yet never any that have been
free from their fears and suspicions. Happy is he that fears nothing but what
he should, God.

Why did Herod fear the people? They held John for a Prophet. And this opinion
was both common and constant: even the Scribes and Pharisees durst not say, his
Baptism was from men. It is the wisdom and goodness of God, ever to give his
children favor somewhere. If Jezebel hate Elias, Ahab shall for the time
honor him: and if Herod hate the Baptist, and would kill him, yet the people
reverence him. Herod's malice would make him away; the people's reputation
keeps him alive. As wise Princes have been content to maintain a faction in
their Court or State for their own purposes; so here did the God of Heaven
contrive and order differences of judgment and affection betwixt Herod and his
Subjects for his own holy ends. Else certainly, if all wicked men should
conspire in evil, there could be no being upon earth; as contrarily, if evil
spirits did not accord, Hell could not stand. Oh the unjust and fond partiality
of this people! They all generally applaud John for a Prophet, yet they receive
not his message. Whose Prophet was John, but of the Highest? what was his
errand, but to be the way-maker unto Christ? what was he but the Voice of that
Eternal Word of his Father? what was the sound of that Voice but, Behold the
Lamb of God: He that comes after me is greater then I, whose shoe-latchet I am
not worthy to unlose? Yet they honor the Servant, and reject the Master: they
contemn that Prince whose Ambassador they reverence. How could they but argue,
John is a Prophet; he speaks from God; his words must be true; he tells us this
is the Lamb of God, the Messiah that should come to redeem the World: this must
then needs be he; we will look for no other? Yet this perverse people receives
John, and rejects Jesus. There is ever an absurdity in unbelief, whilst it
separates those relations and respects which can never in nature be disjoined.
Thus it readily apprehends God as merciful in pardoning, not as just in
punishing; Christ as a Savior, not as a Judge. Thus we ordinarily (in a
contrariety to these Jews) profess to receive the Master, and contemn the
Servants: whilst he has said that will make it good, He that despises you,
despises me.

That which Herod in policy durst not, in wine he dares do: And that which God
had restrained till his own time, now in his own time he permits to be done.
The day was, as one of the Evangelists styles it, convenient: if for the
purpose of Herodias, I am sure for God's; who, having determined to glorify
himself by John's martyrdom, will cast it upon a time when it may be most
notified, Herod's birthday. All the Peers of the Country, perhaps of the
neighbor Nations, are now assembled. Herodias could not have found out a time
more fit to blazon her own shame and cruelty then in such a confluence. The
wise Providence of God many times pays us with our own choice; so as when we
think to have brought about our own Ends to our best content, we bring about
his purposes to our own confusion.

Herod's Birthday is kept; and so was Pharaoh's: both of them with blood.
These personal stains cannot make the practice unlawful. Where the man is
good, the Birth is memorable.

What blessing have we, if Life be none? and if our life be a blessing, why
should it not be celebrated? Excess and disorder may blemish any Solemnity; but
that cleaves to the act, not to the institution.

Herod's birthday was kept with a Feast, and this Feast was a Supper. It was
fit to be a night-work: this Festivity was spent in works of darkness, not of
the light; it was a child of darkness that was then born, not of the day.

Those that are drunken, are drunk in the night. There is a kind of shame in
Sin, even where it is committed with the stiffest resolution: at least there
was wont to be: if now Sin be grown impudent, and Justice grown bashful, woe be
to us.

That there might be perfect revells at Herod's Birthday, besides the Feast,
there is music and dancing, and that by Salome the daughter of Herodias. A
meet Daughter for such a Mother, bred according to the disposition of so
immodest a Parent. Dancing in it self, as it is a set, regular, harmonious
motion of the body, cannot be unlawful, more then walking or running;
Circumstances may make it sinful. The wanton gesticulations of a Virgin in a
wild assembly of Gallants warmed with Wine, could be no other then riggish and
unmaidenly. It is not so frequently seen that the Child follows the good
qualities of the Parent; it is seldom seen that it follows not the evil.
Nature is the soil; good and ill Qualities are the herbs and weeds: the soil
bears the weeds naturally, the herbs not without culture. What with traduction,
what with education, it were strange if we should miss any of our Parents
mis-dispositions.

Herodias and Salome have what they desired. The dance pleased Herod well:
those indecent motions that would have displeased any modest eye, (though what
should a modest eye do at Herod's Feast?) over-pleased Herod. Well did
Herodias know how to fit the tooth of her Paramour, and had therefore purposely
so composed the carriage and gesture of her Daughter, as it might take best:
although doubtless the same action could not have so pleased from another.
Herod saw in Salome's face and fashion the image of her whom he doated on; so
did she look, so did she move: besides that his lavish cups had predisposed him
to wantonness: and now he cannot but like well that which so pleasingly suited
his inordinate desire. All humors love to be fed; especially the vicious, so
much more, as they are more eager and stirring. There cannot be a better glass
wherein to discern the face of our hearts, then our pleasures: such as they
are, such are we, whether vain, or holy.

What a strange transportation was this? Whatsoever thou shall ask: half a
Kingdom for a dance? Herod, this pastime is over-pay'd for; there is no
proportion in this remuneration: this is not bounty, it is prodigence. Neither
does this pass under a bare Promise only, but under an Oath, and that solemn
and (as it might be in wine) serious. How largely do sensual men both profer
and give for a little momentany and vain contentment? How many censure Herod's
gross impotence, and yet second it with a worse, giving away their precious
Souls for a short pleasure of sin? What is half a Kingdom, yea a whole World,
to a Soul? So much therefore is their madness greater, as their loss is more.

So large a boon was worthy of a deliberation. Salome consults with her Mother
upon so ample and ratified a promise. Yet so much good nature and filial
respect was in this wanton Damsel, that she would not carve her self of her
option, but takes her Mother with her. If Herodias were infamously lewd, yet
she was her Parent, and must direct her choice. Children should have no will of
their own; as their flesh is their Parents, so should their will be. They do
justly unchild themselves, that in main elections dispose of themselves without
the consent of those which gave them being. It is both unmannerly and unnatural
in the Child to run before, without, against the will of the Parent.

Oh that we could be so officious to our good and Heavenly Father, as she was
to an earthly and wicked Mother; not to ask, not to undertake ought without his
allowance, without his directions: that when the world shall offer us
whatsoever our heart desires, we could run to the Oracles of God for our
resolution; not daring to accept what he does not both license and warrant.

Oh the wonderful strength of malice! Salome was offered no less then half the
Kingdom of Herod, yet chooses to ask the head of a poor Preacher. Nothing is so
sweet to a corrupt heart as revenge; especially when it may bring with it a
full scope to a dear sin. All worldlings are of this diet: they had rather sin
freely for a while and die, then refrain and live happily, eternally.

What a suit was this, Give me here in a Charger the head of John Baptist? It
is not enough for her to say, Let John's head be cut off; but, Give me it in a
Charger. What a service was here to be brought into a Feast, especially to a
Woman? a dead man's head swimming in blood. How cruel is a wicked heart, that
can take pleasure in those things which have most horror?

Oh the importunity of a galled conscience! Herodias could never think her self
safe till John was dead; she could never think him dead till his head were off;
she could not think his head was off till she had it brought her in a platter:
a guilty heart never thinks it has made sure enough. Yea, even after the head
was thus brought, they thought him alive again. Guiltiness and Security could
never lodge together in one bosom.

Herod was sorry, and no doubt in earnest, in the midst of his cups and
pleasance. I should rather think his jollity counterfeited then his grief. It
is true, Herod was a Fox; but that subtle beast dissembles not always: when he
runs away from the dogs, he means as he does. And if he were formerly willing
to have killed John, yet he was unwillingly willing; and so far as he was
unwilling to kill him as a Prophet, as a just man, so far was he sorry that he
must be killed. Had Herod been wise, he had not been perplexed. Had he been so
wise as to have engaged himself lawfully and within due limits, he had not now
been so entangled as to have needed sorrow. The folly of Sinners is guilty of
their pain, and draws upon them a late and unprofitable repentance.

But here the act was not past, though the word were past. It was his
misconceived intanglement that caused this sorrow; which might have been
remedied by flying off. A threefold cord tied him to the performance; the
conscience of his Oath, the respect to his Guests, a lothness to discontent
Herodias and her daughter. Herod had so much religion as to make scruple of an
Oath; not so much as to make scruple of a Murder. No man casts off all justice
and piety at once; but whilst he gives himself over to some sins, he sticks at
others. It is no thank to lewd men that they are not universally vicious. All
God's several Laws cannot be violated at once: there are Sins contrary to each
other; there are Sins disagreeing from the leudest dispositions. There are
Oppressors that hate Drunkenness; there are Unclean persons which abhor
Murder; there are Drunkards which hate Cruelty. One sin is enough to damn the
Soul, one leak to drown the Vessel.

But, O fond Herod, what needed this unjust scrupulousness? Well and safely
might thou have shifted the bond of thine Oath with a double evasion. One,
That this generality of thy promise was only to be construed of lawful acts
and motions: That only can we do, which we can justly do; Unlawfulness is in
the nature of Impossibility. The other, That had this engagement been so meant,
yet might it be as lawfully rescinded as it was unlawfully made. A sinful
Promise is ill made, worse performed. Thus thou might, thou should have
come off fair; where now, holding thy self by an irreligious religion tied to
thy foolish and wicked Oath, thou only go away with this mitigation, that
thou art a scrupulous Murderer.

In the mean while, if an Herod made such conscience of keeping an unlawful
Oath, how shall he in the day of judgment condemn those Christians which make
no conscience of Oaths lawful, just, necessary? Woe is me, one sells an Oath
for a bribe, another lends an Oath for favor, another casts it away for
malice. I fear to think it may be a question whether there be more Oaths
broken, or kept. O God, I marvel not, if being implored as a witness, as an
avenger of falsehood, thou hold him not guiltless that thus dares take thy Name
in vain.

Next to his Oath is the respect to his Honor. His Guests heard his deep
engagement, and now he cannot fall off with reputation. It would argue levity
and rashness to say and not to do, and what would the world say? The
misconceits of the points of Honor have cost millions of Souls. As many a one
does good only to be seen of men, so many a one does evil only to satisfy
the humor and opinion of others. It is a damnable plausibility so to regard
the vain approbation or censure of the beholders, as in the mean time to
neglect the allowance or judgment of God. But how ill guests were these? how
well worthy of an Herod's table? Had they had but common civility, finding
Herod perplexed, they had acquitted him by their disswasions, and would have
disclaimed the expectation of so bloody a performance: but they rather (to
gratify Herodias) make way for so slight and easy a condescent. Even godly
Princes have complained of the iniquity of their heels: how much more must they
needs be ill attended, that give encouragements and examples of leudness?

Neither was it the least motive, that he was loath to displease his Mistress.
The Damsel had pleased him in her dance; he would not discontent her in
breaking his word. He saw Herodias in Salome: the suit, he knew, was the
mother's, though in the daughter's lips: both would be displeased in falling
off; both would be gratified in yielding. O vain and wicked Herod! He cares not
to offend God, to offend his Conscience; he cares to offend a wanton Mistress.
This is one means to fill Hell, lothness to displease.

A good heart will rather fall out with all the world then with God, then with
his Conscience.

The mis-grounded sorrow of worldly hearts does not withhold them from their
intended sins. It is enough to vex, not enough to restrain them. Herod was
sorry, but he sends the Executioner for John's head. One act has made Herod a
Tyrant, and John a Martyr. Herod a Tyrant, in that without all legal
proceedings, without so much as false witnesses, he takes off the head of a
man, of a Prophet. It was Lust that carried Herod into Murder. The proceedings
of sin are more hardly avoided then the entrance. Whosoever gives himself leave to
be wicked, knows not where he shall stay.

John a Martyr, in dying for bearing witness to the Truth; Truth in life, in
judgment, in doctrine. It was the holy purpose of God, that he which had
baptized with water should now be baptized with blood. Never did God mean that
his best children should dwell always upon earth: should they stay here,
wherefore has he provided Glory above? Now would God have John delivered from
a double prison; of his own, of Herod's; and placed in the glorious liberty of
his sons. His head shall be taken off, that it may be crowned with glory.
Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints.

O happy birthday (not of Herod, but) of the Baptist! Now does John enter into
his joy; and in his name is this day ever celebrated of the Church. This
blessed Forerunner of Christ said of himself, I must decrease. He is decreased
indeed, and now grown shorter by the head; but he is not so much decreased in
stature, as increased in glory. For one minute's pain he is possessed of
endless joy; and as he came before his Savior into the world, so is he gone
before him into Heaven.

The Head is brought in a Charger. What a dish was here for a Feast? How
prodigiously insatiable is the cruelty of a wicked heart! O blessed service fit
for the table of Heaven! It is not for thee, O wicked Herod, nor for thee,
malicious and wanton Herodias; it is a dish precious and pleasing to the God of
Heaven, to the blessed Angels, who looked upon that Head with more delight in
his constant fidelity, then the beholders saw it with horror, and Herodias
with contentment of revenge.

It is brought to Salome as the reward of her dance; she presents it to her
Mother as the dainty she had longed for. Methinks I see how that chaste and holy
countenance was tossed by impure and filthy hands; that true and faithful
tongue, those sacred lips, those pure eyes, those mortified cheeks are now
insultingly handled by an incestuous Harlot, and made a scorn to the drunken
eyes of Herod's guests.

Oh the wondrous judgments and incomprehensible dispositions of the holy, wise,
Almighty God! He that was sanctified in the womb, born and conceived with so
much note and miracle, (What manner of child shall this be?) lived with so much
reverence and observation, is now, at midnight, obscurely murdered in a close
prison, and his head brought forth to the insultation and irrision of Harlots
and Ruffians. O God, thou know what thou have to do with thine own. Thus
thou suffer thine to be misused and slaughtered here below, that thou may
crown them above. It should not be thus, if thou did not mean that their
glory should be answerable to their depression.

XXII. The five Loaves and two Fishes.
WHat flocking there was after Christ which way soever he went? How did the
Kingdom of Heaven suffer an holy violence in these his followers? Their
importunity drove him from the land to the sea. When he was upon the sea of
Tiberias, they followed him with their eyes; and when they saw which way he
bent, they followed him so fast on foot that they prevented his landing.
Whether it were that our Savior staid some while upon the water, (as that
which yielded him more quietness, and freedom of respiration,) or whether the
foot-passage (as it often falls out) were the shorter cut, by reason of the
compasses of the water and the many elbows of the land, I inquire not: sure I
am, the wind did not so swiftly drive on the ship, as desire and zeal drove on
these eager clients. Well did Christ see them all the way; well did he know
their steps, and guided them: and now he purposely goes to meet them, whom he
seemed to fly. Nothing can please God more then our importunity in seeking him:
when he withdraws himself, it is that he may be more earnestly inquired for.
Now then he comes to find them whom he made show to decline: and seeing a great
multitude, he passes from the ship to the shore. That which brought him from
Heaven to earth, brought him also from the sea to land; his compassion on their
Souls, that he might teach them; compassion on their Bodies, that he might heal
and feed them.

Judaea was not large, but populous: it could not be but there must be amongst
so many men many diseased: it is no marvel if the report of so miraculous and
universal sanations drew customers. They found three advantages of cure above
the power and performance of any earthly Physician, Certainty, Bounty, Ease.
Certainty, in that all comers were cured without fail: Bounty, in that they
were cured without charge: Ease, in that they were cured without pain. Far be
it from us, O Savior, to think that thy Glory has abated of thy Mercy: still
and ever thou art our assured, bountiful, and perfect Physician, who healest
all our diseases, and take away all our infirmities. O that we could have our
faithful recourse to thee in all our spiritual maladies: it were as impossible
we should want help, as that thou should want power and mercy.

That our Savior might approve himself every way beneficent, he that had
filled the Souls of his Auditors with spiritual repast, will now fill their
Bodies with temporal: and he that had approved himself the universal Physician
of his Church, will now be known to be the great householder of the world, by
whose liberal provision mankind is maintained. He did not more miraculously
heal, then he feeds miraculously.

The Disciples having well noted the diligent and importune attendence of the
multitude, now toward evening come to their Master in a care of their repast
and discharge. This is a desert place, and the time is now past: Send the
multitude away, that they may go into the villages and buy themselves victuals.
How well it becomes even spiritual guides to regard the bodily necessities of
God's people? This is not directly in our charge, neither may we leave our
sacred ministration to serve Tables. But yet, as the bodily father must take
care for the Soul of his child; so must the spiritual have respect to the Body.
This is all that the world commonly looks after, measuring their Pastors more
by their dishes then by their doctrine or conversation; as if they had the
charge of their Bellies, not of their Souls: if they have open Cellars, it
matters not whether their Mouths be open. If they be sociable in their
carriage, favorable and indulgent to their recreations, full in their cheer,
how easily does the world dispense with either their negligence or enormities?
As if the Souls of these men lay in their weasand, in their gut. But surely
they have reason to expect from their Teachers a due proportion of Hospitality.
An unmeet parsimony is here not more odious then it is sinful: And where
ability wants, yet care may not be wanting. Those Preachers which are so intent
upon their spiritual work, that in the mean time they over-strain the
weaknesses of their people, holding them in their Devotions longer then humane
frailty will permit, forget not themselves more then their pattern; and must be
sent to school to these compassionate Disciples, who, when evening was come,
sue to Christ for the people's dismission.

The place was desert; the time, evening. Doubtless our Savior made choice of
both these, that there might be both more use and more note of his Miracle. Had
it been in the morning, their stomach had not been up, their feeding had been
unnecessary. Had it been in the Village, provision either might have been made,
or at least would have seemed made by themselves. But now that it was both
desert and evening, there was good ground for the Disciples to move, and for
Christ to work their sustentation. Then only may we expect and crave help from
God, when we find our need. Superfluous aid can neither be heartily desired,
nor earnestly looked for, nor thankfully received from the hands of mercy. Cast
thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall sustain thee. If it be not a burden,
it is no casting it upon God. Hence it is that Divine aid comes ever in the
very upshot and exigence of our trialls; when we have been exercised, and
almost tired with long hopes, yea with despairs of success: that it may be both
more longed for ere it come, and when it comes more welcome.

Oh the Faith and Zeal of these clients of Christ! They not only follow him
from the City into the Desert, from delicacy to want, from frequence to
solitude; but forget their Bodies in pursuit of the food of their Souls.

Nothing is more hard for an healthful man to forget then his belly; within
few hours this will be sure to solicit him, and will take no denials. Yet such
sweetness did these hearers find in the spiritual repast, that they thought not
on the bodily: the Disciples pitied them, they had no mercy on themselves. By
how much more a man's mind is taken up with Heavenly things, so much less shall
he care for earthly. What shall Earth be to us, when we are all Spirit? And in
the mean time, according to the degrees of our intellectual elevations, shall
be our neglect of bodily contentments.

The Disciples think they move well: Send them away that they may buy victuals.
Here was a strong Charity, but a weak Faith. A strong Charity, in that they
would have the people relieved; a weak Faith, in that they supposed they could
not otherwise be so well relieved. As a man when he sees many ways lie before
him, takes that which he thinks both fairest and nearest; so do they: this way
of relief lay openest to their view, and promised most. Well might they have
thought, It is as easy for our Master to feed them as to heal them; there is
an equal facility in all things to a supernatural power: yet they say, Send
them away. In all our projects and suits we are still ready to move for that
which is most obvious, most likely, when sometimes that is less agreeable to
the will of God.

The All-wise and Almighty Arbiter of all things has a thousand secret means
to honor himself in his proceedings with us. It is not for us to carve boldly
for our selves; but we must humbly depend on the disposal of his Wisdom and
Mercy.

Our Savior's answer gives a strange check to their motion; They need not
depart. Not need? They had no victuals; they must have; there was none to be
had. What more need could be? He knew the supply which he intended, though they
knew it not. His command was therefore more strange then his assertion, Give ye
them to eat. Nothing gives what it has not. Had they had victuals, they had
not called for a dismission; and not having, how should they give? It was thy
wisdom, O Savior, thus to prepare thy Disciples for the intended Miracle:
Thou would not do it abruptly, without an intimation both of the purpose of
it and the necessity. And how modestly do thou undertake it, without noise,
without ostentation? I hear thee not say, I will give them to eat; no, but,
Give ye: as if it should be their act, not thine. Thus sometimes it pleases
thee to require of us what we are not able to perform; either that thou may
show us what we cannot do, and so humble us; or that thou may erect us to a
dependence upon thee, which can do it for us. As when the Mother bids the
Infant come to her, which has not yet the steady use of his legs, it is that
he may cling the faster to her hand or coat for supportation.

Thou bidst us, impotent wretches, to keep thy royal Law. Alas! what can we
Sinners do? there is not one letter of those thy Ten words that we are able to
keep. This charge of thine intends to show us not our strength, but our
weakness. Thus thou would turn our eyes both back to what we might have done,
to what we could have done; and upwards to thee in whom we have done it, in
whom we can do it. He wrongs thy Goodness and Justice that misconstrues these
thy commands, as if they were of the same nature with those of the Egyptian
taskmasters, requiring the brick, and not giving the straw. But in bidding us
do what we cannot, thou inablest us to do what the ^^^dest. Thy Precepts
under the Gospel have not (...) of our duty, but an habilitation of (...) when
thou badest the Disciples to give to the multitude, thou meantest to supply
unto them what thou commandedst to give.

Our Savior has what he would, an acknowledgement of their insufficiency: We
have here but five loaves and two fishes. A poor provision for the family of
the Lord of the whole earth: Five loaves, and those barley; two fishes, and
those little ones. We well know, O Savior, that the beasts were thine on a
thousand mountains, all the corn thine that covered the whole surface of the
earth, all the fowls of the air thine; it was thou that providedst those drifts
of Quails that fell among the tents of thy rebellious Israelites, that rainedst
down those showrs of Manna round about their camp: and do thou take up (for
thy self and thy meiny) with five barley loaves, and two little fishes?
Certainly this was thy will, not thy need: to teach us, that this body must be
fed, not pampered. Our belly may not be our master, much less our God; or if it
be, the next word is, whose glory is their shame, whose end damnation. It is
noted as the crime of the rich glutton, that he fared deliciously every day. I
never find that Christ entertained any guests but twice; and that was only
with loaves and fishes. I find him sometimes feasted by others more liberally.
But his domestical fare how simple, how homely it is? The end of food is to
sustain Nature. Meat was ordained for the belly, the belly for the body, the
body for the Soul, the Soul for God: we must still look through the subordinate
Ends to the highest. To rest in the pleasure of the meat, is for those
creatures which have no Souls. Oh the extreme delicacy of these times! What
conquisition is here of all sorts of curious dishes from the farthest seas and
lands, to make up one hour's meal? what broken cookery? what devised mixtures?
what nice sauces? what feasting not of the taste only, but of the sent? Are we
the Disciples of him that took up with the loaves and fishes; or the scholars
of a Philoxenus, or an Apitius, or Vitellius, or those other monsters of the
palate? the true sons of those first Parents that killed themselves with their
teeth?

Neither was the quality of these victuals more course, then the quantity
small. They make a But of five loaves and two fishes; and well they might, in
respect of so many thousand mouths. A little food to an hungry stomach does
rather stir up appetite then satisfy it: as a little rain upon a droughty soil
does rather help to scorch then refresh it. When we look with the eye of Sense
or Reason upon any Object, we shall see an impossibility of those effects which
Faith can easily apprehend, and Divine power more easily produce. Carnal minds
are ready to measure all our hopes by humane possibilities; and when they fail,
to despair of success: where true Faith measures them by Divine power, and
therefore can never be disheartened. This Grace is for things not seen, and
whether beyond hope, or against it.

The virtue is not in the means, but in the agent. Bring them hither to me. How
much more easy had it been for our Savior to fetch the loaves to him, then to
multiply them? The hands of the Disciples shall bring them, that they might
more fully witness both the Author and manner of the instant Miracle. Had the
loaves and fishes been multiplied without this bringing, perhaps they might
have seemed to have come by the secret provision of the guests: now there can
be no question either of the act, or of the agent. As God takes pleasure in
doing wonders for men, so he loves to be acknowledged in the great works that
he does. He has no reason to part with his own glory; that is too precious
for him to lose, or for his creature to embezell. And how justly did thou, O
Savior, in this mean to teach thy Disciples, that it was thou only who
feedest the world; and upon whom both themselves and all their fellow creatures
must depend for their nourishment and provision; and that if it came not
through thy hands, it could not come to theirs?

There need no more words. I do not hear the Disciples stand upon the terms of
their own necessity; Alas! Sir, it is too little for our selves; whence shall
we then relieve our own hunger? Give leave to our Charity to begin at home. But
they willingly yield to the command of their Master, and put themselves upon
his Providence for the sequel. When we have a charge from God, it is not for us
to stand upon self-respects; in this case there is no such sure liberty as in a
self-contempt. O God, when thou call to us for our five loaves, we must
forget our own interest: otherwise, if we be more thrifty then obedient, our
good turns evil; and much better had it been for us to have wanted that which
we withhold from the owner.

He that is the Master of the Feast marshals the guests; He commanded the
multitude to sit down on the grass. They obey, and expect. O mavelous Faith!
So many thousands sit down, and address themselves to a meal, when they saw
nothing but five poor barley loaves and two small fishes. None of them say, Sit
down? to what? Here are the mouths, but where is the meat? We can soon be set,
but whence shall we be served? Ere we draw our knives, let us see our cheer.
But they meekly and obediently dispose themselves to their places, and look up
to Christ for a miraculous purveyance. It is for all that would be Christ's
followers, to lead the life of Faith; and, even where means appear not, to wait
upon that merciful hand. Nothing is more easy then to trust God when our barns
and coffers are full; and to say, Give us our daily bread, when we have it in
our cupboard. But when we have nothing, when we know not how or whence to get
any thing, then to depend upon an invisible bounty, this is a true and noble
act of Faith. To cast away our own, that we may immediately live upon Divine
Providence, I know no warrant. But when the necessity is of God's making, we
see our refuge; and happy are we if our confidence can fly to it, and rest in
it. Yea fullness should be a Curse, if it should debar us from this dependence:
at our best we must look up to this great householder of the world, and cannot
but need his provision. If we have meat, perhaps not appetite; if appetite, it
may be not digestion; or if that, not health, and freedom from pain; or if
that, perhaps (from other occurrents) not life.

The guests are set full of expectation. He that could have multiplied the
bread in absence, in silence takes it and blesses it; that he might at once
show them the Author and the means of this increase. It is thy blessing, O
God, that makes rich. What a difference do we see in men's estates? Some
languish under great means, and enjoy not either their substance or themselves;
others are cheerful and happy in a little. Second causes may not be denied
their work; but the overruling power is above. The subordinateness of the
Creature does not take away from the right, from the thank of the First Mover.

He could as well have multiplied the loaves whole; why would he rather do it
in the breaking? Was it to teach us that in the distribution of our goods we
should expect his blessing, not in their intireness and reservation? There is
that scatters, and yet increases, says Solomon: Yea, there is no man but
increases by scattering. It is the grain thrown into the several furrows of
the earth which yields the rich interest unto the Husbandman: that which is
tied up in his sack, or heaped in his granary, decreaseth by keeping. He that
sows liberally shall reap liberally.

Away with our weak distrust. If Wealth came by us, giving were the way to
want: now that God gives to the giver, nothing can so sure enrich us as our
beneficence. He multiplied the bread not to keep, but to give; He gave it to
the Disciples. And why not rather by his own hand to the multitude, that so the
Miracle and thank might have been more immediate? Wherefore was this, O
Savior, but that thou might win respect to thy Disciples from the people?
As great Princes, when they would ingratiate a Favorite, pass no suits but
through his hands. What an honor was this to thy servants, that as thou were
Mediator betwixt thy Father and Man, so thou would have them in some
beneficial occasion mediate betwixt men and thee? How fit a type is this of
thy spiritual provision, that thou who could have fed the world by thine
immediate word, would by the hands of thy Ministers divide the bread of life
to all hearers? Like as it was with the Law: well did the Israelites see and
hear that thou could deliver that dreadful message with thine own mouth; yet
in favor of their weakness thou would treat with them by a Moses. Use of
means derogates nothing from the efficacy of the principal Agent, yea adds to
it. It is a strange weakness of our spiritual eyes, if we can look but to the
next hand. How absurd had these guests been, if they had termined the thanks in
the servitours, and had said, We have it from you, whence ye had it is no part
of our care: we owe this favor to you; if you owe it to your Master,
acknowledge your obligations to him, as we do unto you? But since they well
knew that the Disciples might have handled this bread long enough ere any such
effect could have followed, they easily find to whom they are beholden. Our
Christian wisdom must teach us, whosoever be the means, to reserve our main
thanks for the Author of our good.

He gave the bread then to his Disciples, not to eat, not to keep, but to
distribute. It was not their particular benefit he regarded in this gift, but
the good of many.

In every Feast each servitour takes up his dish, not to carry it aside into a
corner for his own private repast; but to set it before the guests, for the
honor of his Master: when they have done, his cheer begins. What shall we say
to those injurious waiters, who fatten themselves with those concealed messes
which are meant to others? Their table is made their snare; and these stolen
morsels cannot but end in bitterness.

Accordingly the Disciples set this fare before the guests. I do not see so
much as Judas reserve a share to himself, whether out of hunger or distrust.
Had not our Savior commanded so free a distribution, their self-love would
easily have taught them where to begin. Nature says, First thy self, then thy
friends: either extremity or particular charge gives Grace occasion to alter
the case. Far be it from us to think we have any claim in that which the owner
gives us merely to bestow.

I know not now whether more to wonder at the miraculous eating, or the
miraculous leaving. Here were a whole host of guests, five thousand men; and
in all likelihood no fewer women and children. Perhaps some of these only
looked on. Nay, they did all eat. Perhaps every man a crum, or a bit. Nay, they
did eat to satiety; all were satisfied. So many must needs make clean work; of
so little there could be left nothing. Yea, there were fragments remaining.
Perhaps some crumbs or crusts, hardly to be discerned, much less gathered. Nay,
twelve baskets full: more remained then was first set down. Had they eaten
nothing, it was a just Miracle that so much should be left; had nothing
remained, it was no less Miracle that so many had eaten, and so many satisfied:
but now that so many bellies and so many baskets were filled, the Miracle was
doubled. O work of a boundless Omnipotency! Whether this were done by creation
or by conversion, uses to be questioned, but needs not. Whilst Christ
multiplies the bread, it is not for us to multiply his Miracles. To make ought
of nothing, is more then to add much unto something. It was therefore rather
by turning of a former matter into these substances, then by making these
substances of nothing.

Howsoever, here is a mavelous provision made, a mavelous bounty of that
provision, a no less mavelous extent of that bounty.

Those that depend upon God, and busy themselves in his work, shall not want a
due purveyance in the very desert. Our straight and confined beneficence
reaches so far as to provide for our own; those of our Domestics which labor
in our service do but justly expect and challenge their diet; whereas
day-labourers are oft-times at their own finding. How much more will that God,
who is infinite in mercy and power, take order for the livelihood of those that
attend him? We see the birds of the air provided for by him; how rarely have we
found any of them dead of hunger? yet what do they but what they are carried
unto by natural instinct? How much more where, besides propriety, there is a
rational and willing service? Shall the Israelites be fed with Manna, Eliah by
the Ravens, the Widow by her multiplied meal and oil, Christ's clients in the
wilderness with loaves and fishes? O God, whilst thou do thus promerit us by
thy Providence, let not us wrong thee by distrust.

God's undertakings cannot but be exquisite: those whom he professes to feed,
must needs have enough. The measure of his bounty cannot but run over. Does he
take upon him to prepare a table for his Israel in the desert? the bread shall
be the food of Angels, the flesh shall be the delicates of Princes, Manna and
Quails. Does he take upon him to make wine for the marriage feast of Cana?
there shall be both store and choice; the vintage yields poor stuff to this.
Will he feast his Auditors in the wilderness? if they have not dainties, they
shall have plenty; They were all satisfied. Neither yet, O Savior, is thy hand
closed. What abundance of heavenly doctrine do thou set before us? how are we
feasted, yea pampered with thy celestial delicacies? Not according to our
meanness, but according to thy state, are we fed. Thrifty and niggardly
collations are not for Princes. We are full of thy goodness; O let our hearts
run over with thanks.

I do gladly wonder at this Miracle of thine, O Savior; yet so as that I
forget not mine own condition. Whence is it that we have our continual
provision? One and the same munificent hand does all. If the Israelites were
fed with Manna in the desert, and with corn in Canaan, both were done by the
same power and bounty. If the Disciples were fed by the loaves multiplied, and
we by the grain multiplied, both are the act of one Omnipotence. What is this
but a perpetual Miracle, O God, which thou workest for our preservation?
Without thee, there is no more power in the grain to multiply then in the loaf:
it is thou that give it a body at thy pleasure, even to every seed his own
body; it is thou that give fullness of bread and cleanness of teeth. It is no
reason thy goodness should be less magnified because it is universal.

One or two baskets could have held the five loaves and two fishes; not less
then twelve can hold the remainders. The Divine munificence provides not for
our necessity only, but for our abundance, yea superfluity. Envy and
ignorance, whilst they make God the author of enough, are ready to impute the
surplusage to another cause; as we commonly say of Wine, that the liquour is
God's, the excess Satan's.

Thy Table, O Savior, convinces them, which had more taken away then set on:
thy Blessing makes an estate not competent only, but rich. I hear of barns
full of plenty, and presses bursting out with new wine, as the rewards of those
that honor thee with their substance. I hear of heads anointed with oil, and
cups running over. O God, as thou have a free hand to give, so let us have a
free heart to return thee the praise of thy Bounty.

Those fragments were left behind. I do not see the people, when they had
filled their bellies, cramming their pockets, or stuffing their wallets; yet
the place was desert, and some of them doubtless had far home.

It becomes true Disciples to be content with the present, not too solicitous
for the future. O Savior, thou did not bid us beg bread for to morrow, but
for to day: not that we should refuse thy bounty when thou please to give;
but that we should not distrust thy Providence for the need we may have.

Even these fragments (though but of barley loaves and fish-bones) may not be
left in the desert, for the compost of that earth whereon they were increased;
but by our Savior's holy and just command are gathered up. The liberal
housekeeper of the world will not allow the loss of his orts: the childrens
bread may not be given to dogs: and if the crumbs fall to their share, it is
because their smalness admits not of a collection. If those who out of
obedience or due thrift have thought to gather up crumbs, have found them
pearls, I wonder not: Surely both are alike, the good creatures of the same
Maker; and both of them may prove equally costly to us in their wilful
mis-spending. But oh, what shall we say, that not crusts and crumbs, not loaves
and dishes and cups, but whole patrimonies are idly lavisht away; not merely
lost, (this were more easy) but ill spent in a wicked riot upon dice, drabs,
drunkards? Oh the fearful account of these unthrifty Bailifs, which shall once
be given in to our great Lord and Master, when he shall call us to a strict
reckoning of all our talents! He was condemned that increased not the sum
concredited to him: what shall become of him that lawlesly impairs it?

Who gathered up these fragments but the twelve Apostles, every one his
basket-full? They were the servitours that set on this banquet at the command
of Christ, they waited on the Tables, they took away.

It was our Savior's just care that those offalls should not perish: but he
well knew that a greater loss depended upon those scraps; a loss of glory to
the omnipotent Worker of that Miracle. The feeding of the multitude was but the
one half of the work, the other half was in the remnant. Of all other it most
concerns the successors of the Apostles to take care that the mavelous works
of their God and Savior may be improved to the best; they may not suffer a
crust or crum to be lost that may yield any glory to that Almighty Agent.

Here was not any morsel or bone that was not worthy to be a relic, every the
least parcel whereof was no other then miraculous. All the ancient monuments of
God's supernatural power and mercy were in the keeping of Aaron and his sons.
There is no Servant in the Family but should be thriftily careful for his
Master's profit; but most of all the Steward, who is particularly charged with
this oversight. Woe be to us if we care only to gather up our own scraps, with
neglect of the precious morsels of our Maker and Redeemer.

XXIII. The Walk upon the Waters.
ALL Elements are alike to their Maker. He that had well approved his power on
the Land, will now show it in the Air and the Waters; he that had preserved the
multitude from the peril of hunger in the Desert, will now preserve his
Disciples from the peril of the tempest in the Sea.

Where do we ever else find any compulsion offered by Christ to his Disciples?
He was like the good Centurion; he said to one, Go, and he goes. When he did
but call them from their nets they came; and when he sent them by pairs into
the Cities and Country of Judaea to preach the Gospel, they went. There was
never errand whereon they went unwillingly: only now he constrained them to
depart. We may easily conceive how loath they were to leave him; whether out of
love, or of common civility. Peter's tongue did but (when it was) speak the
heart of the rest; Master, thou know that I love thee. Who could choose but
be in love with such a Master? And who can willingly part from what he loves?
But had the respects been only common and ordinary, how unfit might it seem to
leave a Master now toward night, in a wild place, amongst strangers,
unprovided of the means of his passage? Where otherwise therefore he needed but
to bid, now he constrains. O Savior, it was ever thy manner to call all men
unto thee; Come to me, all that labor and are heavy laden. When did thou
ever drive any one from thee? Neither had it been so now, but to draw them
closer unto thee, whom thou seemedst for the time to abdicate. In the mean
while, I know not whether more to excuse their unwillingness, or to applaud
their obedience. As it shall be fully above, so it was proportionally here
below; In thy presence (O Savior) is the fullness of joy. Once, when thou
askedst these thy Domestics whether they also would depart, it was answered
thee by one tongue for all, Master, whither should we go from thee? thou have
the words of eternal life. What a death was it then to them to be compelled to
leave thee? Sometimes it pleases the Divine goodness to lay upon his servants
such commands as savor of harshness and discomfort; which yet both in his
intention and in the event are no other then gracious and sovereign. The more
difficulty was in the charge, the more praise was in the obedience. I do not
hear them stand upon the terms of capitulation with their Master, nor pleading
importunately for their stay; but instantly upon the command they yield and go.
We are never perfect Disciples, till we can depart from our reason, from our
will; yea, O Savior, when thou biddest us, from thy self.

Neither will the multitude be gone without a dismission. They had followed him
whilst they were hungry, they will not leave him now they are fed. Fain would
they put that honor upon him, which to avoid he is fain to avoid them: gladly
would they pay a Kingdom to him as their shot for their late banquet; he shuns
both it and them. O Savior, when the hour of thy Passion was now come, thou
could offer thy self readily to thine apprehenders; and now when the glory of
the world presses upon thee, thou runnest away from a crown. Was it to teach us
that there is less danger in suffering then in outward prosperity? What do we
dote upon that worldly honor, which thou heldst worthy of avoidance and
contempt?

Besides this reservedness, it was devotion that drew Jesus aside. He went
alone up to the mountain to pray. Lo, thou, to whom the greatest throng was a
solitude in respect of the fruition of thy Father, thou who were incapable of
distraction from him with whom thou were one, would yet so much act man as to
retire for the opportunity of prayer: to teach us, who are nothing but wild
thoughts and giddy distractedness, to go aside when we would speak with God.
How happy is it for us that thou prayedst? O Savior, thou prayedst for us, who
have not grace enough to pray for our selves, nor worth enough to be accepted
when we do pray. Thy prayers, which were most perfect and impetrative, are they
by which our weak and unworthy prayers receive both life and favor. And now
how assiduous should we be in our supplications, who are empty of grace, full
of wants; when thou, who were a God of all power, praiedst for that which thou
could command? Therefore do we pray, because thou praiedst: therefore do we
expect to be graciously answered in our prayers, because thou did pray for us
here on earth, and now intercedest for us in Heaven.

The evening was come; the Disciples looked long for their Master, and loath
they were to have stirred without him: but his command is more then the
strongest wind to fill their sails, and they are now gone. Their expectation
made not the evening seem so long as our Savior's devotion made it seem short
to him. He is on the mount, they on the sea: yet whilst he was in the mount
praying, and lifting up his eyes to his Father, he fails not to cast them about
upon his Disciples tossed on the waves. Those all-seeing eyes admit of no
limits. At once he sees the highest Heavens, and the midst of the Sea; the
glory of his Father, and the misery of his Disciples. Whatever prospects
present themselves to his view, the distress of his Followers is ever most
noted.

How much more do thou now, O Savior, from the height of thy glorious
advancement behold us thy wretched servants tossed on the unquiet sea of this
World, and beaten with the troublesome and threatening billows of Affliction?
Thou foresawest their toil and danger ere thou dismissedst them, and purposedly
sendest them away that they might be tossed. Thou that could prevent our
sufferings by thy power, wilt permit them in thy wisdom, that thou may
glorify thy mercy in our deliverance, and confirm our Faith by the issue of
our distresses.

How do all things now seem to conspire to the vexing of the poor Disciples?
The night was sullen and dark, their Master was absent, the sea was boistrous,
the winds were high and contrary. Had their Master been with them, howsoever
the elements had raged, they had been secure. Had their Master been away, yet
if the sea had been quiet or the winds fair, the passage might have been
endured. Now both season, and sea, and wind, and their Master's desertion had
agreed to render them perfectly miserable. Sometimes the Providence of God has
thought good so to order it, that to his best servants there appears no
glimpse of comfort; but so absolute vexation, as if Heaven and earth had
plotted their full affliction. Yea, O Savior, what a dead night, what a
fearful tempest, what an astonishing dereliction was that, wherein thou thy
self criedst out in the bitterness of thine anguished Soul, My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me? Yet in all these extremities of misery, our gracious God
intends nothing but his greater glory and ours; the triumph of our Faith, the
crown of our Victory.

All that lonesome and tempestuous night must the Disciples wear out in danger
and horror, as given over to the winds and waves; but in the fourth watch of
the night, when they were wearied out with toils and fears, comes deliverance.

At their entrance into the ship, at the arising of the tempest, at the
shutting in of the evening, there was no news of Christ: but when they have
been all the night long beaten, not so much with storms and waves as with their
own thoughts, now in the fourth watch (which was near to the morning) Jesus
came unto them, and purposely not till then; that he might exercise their
patience; that he might inure them to wait upon Divine Providence in cases of
extremity; that their Devotions might be more whetted by delay; that they might
give gladder welcome to their deliverance. O God, thus thou think fit to do
still. We are by turns in our sea, the winds bluster, the billows swell, the
night and thy absence heighten our discomfort: thy time and ours is set; as yet
it is but midnight with us; can we but hold out patiently till the fourth
watch, thou will surely come and rescue us. Oh let us not faint under our
sorrows, but wear out our three watches of tribulation with undaunted patience
and holy resolution.

O Savior, our extremities are the seasons of thine aid. Thou came at last;
but yet so, as that there was more dread then joy in thy presence. Thy coming
was both miraculous and frightfull.

Thou God of Elements passedst through the air, walkedst upon the waters.
Whether thou meantest to terminate this Miracle in thy Body, or in the waves
which thou trodest upon, whether so lightning the one, that it should make no
impression in the liquid waters, or whether so consolidating the other, that
the pavemented waves yielded a firm causey to thy sacred feet to walk on, I
neither determine nor inquire; thy silence rules mine: thy power was in either
miraculous; neither know I in whether to adore it more. But withal give me
leave to wonder more at thy passage then at thy coming. Wherefore came thou
but to comfort them? and wherefore then would thou pass by them, as if thou
had intended nothing but their dismay? Thine absence could not be so grievous
as thy preterition: that might seem justly occasioned, this could not but seem
willingly neglective. Our last conflicts have wont ever to be the forest: as
when after some dripping rain it pours down most vehemently, we think the
weather is changing to serenity.

O Savior, we may not always measure thy meaning by thy semblance: sometimes
what thou most intendest, thou show least. In our Afflictions thou turnest
thy back upon us, and hidest thy face from us, when thou most mindest our
distresses. So Jonathan shot the arrows beyond David, when he meant them to
him. So Joseph calls for Benjamin into bonds, when his heart was bound to him
in the strongest affection. So the tender mother makes as if she would give
away her crying child, whom she hugs so much closer in her bosom.

If thou pass by us whilst we are struggling with the tempest, we know it is
not for want of mercy. Thou can not neglect us; O let not us distrust thee.

What Object should have been so pleasing to the eyes of the Disciples as their
Master; and so much the more as he showed his Divine power in this miraculous
walk? But lo, contrarily, they are troubled; not with his presence, but with
this form of presence.

The supernatural works of God, when we look upon them with our own eyes, are
subject to a dangerous misprision. The very Sunbeams to whom we are beholden
for our sight, if we eye them directly, blind us. Miserable men! we are ready
to suspect Truths, to run away from our safety, to be afraid of our comforts,
to mis-know our best friends.

And why are they thus troubled? They had thought they had seen a Spirit. That
there have been such apparitions of Spirits, both good and evil, has ever been
a Truth undoubtedly received of Pagans, Jews, Christians; although in the blind
times of Superstition there was much collusion mixed with some verities: Crafty
men and lying spirits agreed to abuse the credulous world. But even where there
was not Truth, yet there was Horror. The very Good Angels were not seen
without much fear; their sight was construed to bode Death: how much more the
Evil, which in their very nature are harmfull and pernicious? We see not a
Snake or a Toad without some recoiling of blood and sensible reluctation,
although those creatures run away from us: how much more must our hairs stand
upright and our senses boggle at the sight of a Spirit, whose both nature and
will is contrary to ours, and professedly bent to our hurt?

But say it had been what they mistook it for, a Spirit; why should they fear?
Had they well considered, they had soon found that evil spirits are never the
less present, when they are not seen; and never the less harmfull or malicious,
when they are present unseen. Visibility adds nothing to their spite or
mischief. And could their eyes have been opened, they had, with Elisha's
servant, seen more with them then against them; a sure, though invisible, guard
of more powerful Spirits, and themselves under the protection of the God of
Spirits: so as they might have bidden a bold defiance to all the powers of
darkness. But, partly their Faith was yet but in the bud; and partly the
presentation of this dreadful Object was sudden, and without the respite of a
recollection and settlement of their thoughts.

Oh the weakness of our frail Nature, who, in the want of Faith, are affrighted
with the visible appearance of those adversaries whom we profess daily to
resist and vanquish, and with whom we know the Decree of God has matched us in
an everlasting conflict! Are not these they that ejected Devils by their
command? Are not these of them that could say, Master, the evil spirits are
subdued to us? Yet now when they see but an imagined Spirit, they fear. What
power there is in the eye to betray the heart!

Whilst Goliath was mingled with the rest of the Philistin host, Israel camped
boldly against them; but when that Giant stalks out single between the two
armies, and fills and amazes their eyes with his hideous stature, now they run
away for fear. Behold, we are committed with Legions of Evil spirits, and
complain not: Let but one of them give us some visible token of his presence,
we shreek and tremble, and are not our selves.

Neither is our weakness more conspicuous then thy mercy, O God, in restraining
these spiritual enemies from these dreadful and ghastly representations of
themselves to our eyes. Might those infernal Spirits have liberty to appear how
and when and to whom they would, certainly not many would be left in their
wits, or in their lives. It is thy power and goodness to frail mankind that
they are kept in their chains, and reserved in the darkness of their own
spiritual being, that we may both oppugn and subdue them unseen.

But oh the deplorable condition of reprobate souls! If but the imagined sight
of one of these spirits of darkness can so daunt the heart of those which are
free from their power, what a terror shall it be to live perpetually in the
sight, yea under the torture, of thousands, of legions, of millions of Devils?
Oh the madness of wilful sinners, that will needs run themselves headily into
so dreadful a damnation!

It was high time for our Savior to speak: What with the Tempest, what with
the Apparition, the Disciples were almost lost with fear. How seasonable are
his gracious redresses? Till they were thus affrighted, he would not speak;
when they were thus affrighted, he would not hold his peace. If his presence
were fearful, yet his word was comfortable; Be of good cheer, it is I: yea it
is his word only which must make his presence both known and comfortable. He
was present before; they mistook him, and feared: there needs no other erection
of their drooping hearts but, It is I. It is cordial enough to us in the worst
of our afflictions, to be assured of Christ's presence with us. Say but, It is
I, O Savior, and let evils do their worst; thou need not say any more. Thy
voice was evidence enough; so well were the Disciples acquainted with the
tongue of thee their Master, that, It is I, was as much as an hundred names.
Thou art the good Shepherd; we are not of thy Flock, if we know thee not by thy
voice from a thousand. Even this one is a great word, yea an ample style, It is
I. The same tongue that said to Moses, I am has sent thee, says now to the
Disciples, It is I; I your Lord and Master, I the Commander of winds and
waters, I the sovereign Lord of Heaven and earth, I the God of Spirits. Let
Heaven be but as one scroll, and let it be written all over with titles, they
cannot express more then, It is I. Oh sweet and seasonable word of a gracious
Savior, able to calm all tempests, able to revive all hearts! Say but so to my
Soul, and, in spite of Hell, I am safe.

No sooner has Jesus said, I, then Peter answers, Master. He can instantly
name him that did not name himself. Every little hint is enough to Faith. The
Church sees her Beloved as well through the Lattice, as through the open
Window. Which of all the Followers of Christ gave so pregnant testimonies upon
all occasions of his Faith, of his Love to his Master, as Peter? The rest were
silent, whilst he both owned his Master, and craved access to him in that
liquid way. Yet what a sensible mixture is here of Faith and Distrust? It is
Faith that said, Master; it was Distrust (as some have construed it) that said,
If it be thou. It was Faith that said, Bid me come to thee; (implying that his
word could as well enable as command;) it was Faith that durst step down upon
that watery pavement: it was Distrust that upon the sight of a mighty wind
feared. It was Faith, that he walked; it was Distrust, that he sunk; it was
Faith that said, Lord, save me. Oh the imperfect composition of the best Saint
upon earth; as far from pure Faith, as from mere Infidelity! If there be pure
earth in the center, all upward is mixed with the other elements: contrarily,
pure Grace is above in the glorified Spirits; all below is mixed with
infirmity, with corruption. Our best is but as the Air; which never was, never
can be at once fully enlightened: neither is there in the same Region one
constant state of light. It shall once be noon with us, when we shall have
nothing but bright beams of Glory; now it is but the dawning, wherein it is
hard to say whether there be more light then darkness. We are now fair as the
Moon, which has some spots in her greatest beauty; we shall be pure as the
Sun, whose face is all bright and glorious. Ever since the time that Adam set
his tooth in the Apple, till our mouth be full of mould, it never was, it never
can be other with us. Far be it from us to settle willingly upon the dregs of
our Infidelity; far be it from us to be disheartened with the sense of our
defects and imperfections: We believe; Lord, help our unbelief.

Whilst I find some disputing the lawfulness of Peter's suit; others
quarrelling his, If it be thou: let me be taken up with the wonder at the
Faith, the fervor, the Heroical valor of this prime Apostle, that durst say,
Bid me come to thee upon the waters. He might have suspected that the Voice of
his Master might have been as easily imitated by that imagined Spirit as his
Person; he might have feared the blustering tempest, the threatening billows,
the yielding nature of that devouring element: but, as despising all these
thoughts of misdoubt, such is his desire to be near his Master, that he says,
Bid me come to thee upon the waters. He says not, Come thou to me: this had
been Christ's act, and not his. Neither does he say, Let me come to thee: this
had been his act, and not Christ's. Neither does he say, Pray that I may come
to thee, as if this act had been out of the power of either. But, Bid me come
to thee. I know thou can command both the waves and me: me to be so light
that I shall not bruise the moist surface of the waves; the waves to be so
solid that they shall not yield to my weight. All things obey thee: Bid me come
to thee upon the waters.

It was a bold spirit that could wish it, more bold that could act it. No
sooner has our Savior said, Come, then he sets his foot upon the unquiet Sea;
not fearing either the softness or the roughness of that uncouth passage. We
are wont to wonder at the courage of that daring man who first committed
himself to the Sea in a frail Bark, though he had the strength of an oaken
planck to secure him: how valiant must we needs grant him to be, that durst set
his foot upon the bare sea and shift his paces? Well did Peter know that he who
bade him could uphold him; and therefore he both sues to be bidden, and
ventures to be upholden. True Faith tasks it self with difficulties; neither
can it be dismayed with the conceits of ordinary impossibilities. It is not the
scattering of straws, or casting of molehills, whereby the virtue of it is
described, but removing of mountains. Like some courageous Leader, it desires
the honor of a danger, and sues for the first onset: whereas the worldly heart
freezes in a lazy or cowardly fear, and only casts for safety and ease.

Peter sues, Jesus bids. Rather will he work Miracles, then disappoint the suit
of a faithful man. How easily might our Savior have turned over this strange
request of his bold Disciple, and have said, What my Omnipotence can do is no
rule for thy Weakness: It is no less then presumption in a mere man, to hope to
imitate the miraculous works of God and man. Stay thou in the ship, and wonder;
contenting thy self in this, that thou have a Master to whom the land and water
is alike. Yet I hear not a Check, but a Call; Come. The suit of Ambition is
suddenly quashed in the Mother of the Zebedees. The suits of Revenge prove no
better in the mouth of the two fiery Disciples. But a suit of Faith, though
high and seemingly unfit for us, he has no power to deny. How much less, O
Savior, will thou stick at those things which lie in the very road of our
Christianity? Never man said, Bid me to come to thee in the way of thy
commandments, whom thou did not both bid and enable to come.

True Faith rests not in great and good desires, but acts and executes
accordingly. Peter does not wish to go, and yet stand still: but his foot
answers his tongue, and instantly chops down upon the waters. To sit still and
wish, is for sluggish and cowardly spirits.

Formal volitions, yea velleities of good, whilst we will not so much as step
out of the ship of our Nature to walk unto Christ, are but the faint motions of
vain Hypocrisy. It will be long enough ere the gale of good wishes can carry
us to our Heaven. Ease slays the foolish. O Savior, we have thy command to
come to thee out of the ship of our natural corruption: Let no Sea affray us,
let no Tempest of Temptation withhold us. No way can be but safe, when thou art
the End.

Lo, Peter is walking upon the waves: two hands uphold him; the hand of
Christ's Power, the hand of his own Faith; neither of them would do it alone.
The hand of Christ's Power laid hold on him; the hand of his Faith laid hold on
the power of Christ commanding. Had not Christ's hand been powerful, that
Faith had been in vain: Had not that Faith of his strongly fixed upon Christ,
that Power had not been effectual to his preservation. Whilst we are here in
the world, we walk upon the waters; still the same hands bear us up. If he let
go his hold of us, we drown; if we let go our hold of him, we sink and shreek
as Peter did here, who, when he saw the wind boistrous, was afraid, and,
beginning to sink, cried, saying, Lord, save me.

When he wished to be bidden to walk unto Christ, he thought of the waters; Bid
me to come to thee on the waters: he thought not on the winds which raged on
those waters; or if he thought of a stiff gale, yet that tempestuous and sudden
gust was out of his account and expectation. Those evils that we are prepared
for, have not such power over us as those that surprise us. A good water-man
sees a dangerous billow coming toward him, and cuts it, and mounts over it
with ease; the unheedy is overwhelmed. O Savior, let my haste to thee be
zealous, but not improvident; ere I set my foot out of the ship, let me foresee
the Tempest: when I have cast the worst, I cannot either miscarry or complain.

So soon as he began to fear, he began to sink: whilst he believed, the Sea was
brass; when once he began to distrust, those waves were water. He cannot sink,
whilst he trusts the power of his Master; he cannot but sink when he misdoubts
it. Our Faith gives us, as courage and boldness, so success too: our Infidelity
lays us open to all dangers, to all mischiefs.

It was Peter's improvidence not to foresee; it was his weakness to fear; it
was the effect of his fear to sink: it was his Faith that recollects it self,
and breaks through his Infidelity, and in sinking could say, Lord, save me. His
foot could not be so swift in sinking, as his heart in imploring: he knew who
could uphold him from sinking, and being sunk deliver him; and therefore he
says, Lord, save me.

It is a notable both sign and effect of true Faith, in sudden extremities to
ejaculate holy desires; and with the wings of our first thoughts to fly up
instantly to the throne of Grace for present succor. Upon deliberation it is
possible for a man that has been careless and profane, by good means to be
drawn to holy dispositions: but on the sudden a man will appear as he is;
whatever is most rife in the heart will come forth at the mouth. It is good to
observe how our surprisals find us: the rest is but forced; this is natural.
Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. O Savior, no evil can be
swifter then my thought: my thought shall be upon thee, ere I can be seized
upon by the speediest mischief: at least, if I overrun not evils, I shall
overtake them.

It was Christ his Lord whom Peter had offended in distrusting; it is Christ
his Lord to whom he sues for deliverance. His weakness does not discourage him
from his refuge. O God, when we have displeased thee, when we have sunk in thy
displeasure, whither should we fly for aid but to thee whom we have provoked?
Against thee only is our sin; in thee only is our help. In vain shall all the
powers of Heaven and Earth conspire to relieve us, if thou withhold from our
succor. As we offend thy Justice daily by our sins, so let us continually rely
upon thy Mercy by the strength of our Faith. Lord, save us.

The mercy of Christ is at once sought and found; Immediately Jesus stretched
forth his hand, and caught him. He does not say, Had thou trusted me, I would
have safely preserved thee; but since thou will needs wrong my power and care
with a cowardly diffidence, sink and drown: but rather, as pitying the
infirmity of his fearful Disciple, he puts out the hand for his relief. That
hand has been stretched forth for the aid of many a one that has never asked
it; never any asked it, to whose succor it has not been stretched. With what
speed, with what confidence should we fly to that sovereign bounty, from which
never any suitour was sent away empty?

Jesus gave Peter his hand; but withal he gave him a check: O thou of little
faith, why doubtedst thou? As Peter's Faith was not pure, but mixed with some
distrust; so our Savior's help was not clear and absolute, but mixed with some
reproof. A reproof, wherein there was both a censure and an expostulation; a
censure of his Faith, an expostulation for his Doubt: both of them sore and
heavy.

By how much more excellent and useful a grace Faith is, by so much more
shameful is the defect of it; and by how much more reason here was of
confidence, by so much more blameworthy was the Doubt. Now Peter had a double
reason of his confidence; the command of Christ, the power of Christ: the one
in bidding him to come; the other in sustaining him whilst he came. To misdoubt
him whose will he knew, whose power he felt, was well worth a reprehension.

When I saw Peter stepping forth upon the waters, I could not but wonder at his
great Faith; yet behold, ere he can have measured many paces, the Judge of
hearts taxes him for little Faith. Our mountains are but moats to God. Would my
heart have served me to dare the doing of this that Peter did? Durst I have set
my foot where he did? O Savior, if thou foundest cause to censure the weakness
and poverty of his Faith, what may thou well say to mine? They mistake that
think thou will take up with any thing. Thou look for firmitude and vigor
in those Graces which thou will allow in thy best Disciples, no less then truth.

The first steps were confident, there was fear in the next. Oh the sudden
alteration of our affections, of our dispositions! One pace varies our
spiritual condition. What hold is there of so fickle creatures, if we be left
never so little to our selves? As this lower world wherein we are is the region
of mutability; so are we (the living pieces of it) subject to a perpetual
change. It is for the blessed Saints and Angels above to be fixed in good:
Whilst we are here, there can be no constancy expected from us, but in
variableness.

As well as our Savior loves Peter, yet he chides him. It is the fruit of his
favor and mercy that we escape judgment, not that we escape reproof. Had not
Peter found grace with his Master, he had been suffered to sink in silence; now
he is saved with a check. There may be more love in frowns then in smiles: Whom
he loves he chastises. What is chiding but a verbal castigation? and what is
chastisement but a real chiding? Correct me, O Lord, yet in thy judgment, not
in thy fury. O let the righteous God smite me (when I offend) with his gracious
reproofs; these shall be a precious oil that shall not break my head.

XXIV. The Bloody issue healed.
THE time was, O Savior, when a worthy woman offered to touch thee, and was
forbidden: now a meaner touches thee with approbation and ^ncouragement. Yet as
there was much difference in that body of thine which was the Object of that
touch, (being now mortal and passible, then impassible and immortal,) so there
was in the Agents; this a stranger, that a familiar; this obscure, that famous.

The same actions vary with time and other circumstances; and accordingly
receive their dislike or allowance.

Doubtless thou had herein no small respect to the faith of Jairus, unto
whose house thou were going. That good man had but one only Daughter, which
lay sick in the beginning of his suit, ere the end, lay dead. Whilst she lived,
his hope lived; her death disheartened it. It was a great work that thou
meantest to do for him; it was a great word that thou said to him, Fear not;
believe, and she shall be made whole. To make this good, by the touch of the
verge of thy garment thou revivedst one from the verge of death. How must
Jairus needs now think, He who by the virtue of his garment can pull this woman
out of the paws of death which has been twelve years dying, can as well by the
power of his word pull my daughter (who has been twelve years living) out of
the jaws of death which has newly seized on her? It was fit the good Ruler
should be raised up with this handsell of thy Divine power, whom he came to
solicit.

That thou might lose no time, thou curedst in thy passage. The Sun stands
not still to give his influences, but diffuses them in his ordinary motion. How
shall we imitate thee, if we suffer our hands to be out of ure with good? Our
life goes away with our time: we lose that which we improve not.

The Patient labored of an Issue of blood; a Disease that had not more pain
then shame, nor more natural infirmity then Legal impurity. Time added to her
grief; twelve long years had she languished under this woeful complaint.
Besides the tediousness, diseases must needs get head by continuance; and so
much more both weaken Nature and strengthen themselves, by how much longer they
afflict us. So it is in the Soul, so in the State; Vices, which are the
Sicknesses of both, when they grow inveterate, have a strong plea for their
abode and uncontrolableness.

Yet more, to mend the matter, Poverty (which is another disease) was
superadded to her sickness: She had spent all she had upon Physicians. Whilst
she had wherewith to make much of her self, and to procure good tendance,
choice diet, and all the succors of a distressed languishment, she could not
but find some mitigation of her sorrow: but now want began to pinch her no less
then her distemper, and helped to make her perfectly miserable.

Yet could she have parted from her substance with ease, her complaint had been
the less. Could the Physicians have given her, if not health, yet relaxation
and painlesness, her means had not been mis-bestowed: but now, she suffered
many things from them; many an unpleasing potion, many tormenting incisions and
divulsions did she endure from their hands: the Remedy was equal in trouble to
the Disease.

Yet had the cost and pain been never so great, could she have hereby purchased
health, the match had been happy; all the world were no price for this
commodity: but alas! her estate was the worse, her body not the better; her
money was wasted, not her disease. Art could give her neither cure nor hope. It
were injurious to blame that noble Science, for that it always speeds not.
Notwithstanding all those sovereign remedies, men must (in their times) sicken
and die. Even the miraculous Gifts of healing could not preserve the owners
from disease and dissolution.

It were pity but that this woman should have been thus sick; the nature, the
durableness, cost, pain, incurableness of her disease both sent her to seek
Christ, and moved Christ to her cure. Our extremities drive us to our Savior;
his love draws him to be most present and helpful to our extremities. When we
are forsaken of all succors and hopes, we are fittest for his redress. Never
are we nearer to help, then when we despair of help. There is no fear, no
danger, but in our own insensibleness.

This woman was a stranger to Christ; it seems she had never seen him. The
report of his Miracles had lifted her up to such a confidence of his power and
mercy, as that she said in her self, If I may but touch the hem of his garment,
I shall be whole. The shame of her Disease stopped her mouth from any verbal
suit. Had she been acknown of her infirmity, she had been shunned and abhorred,
and disdainfully put back of all the beholders, (as doubtless where she was
known, the Law forced her to live apart.) Now she conceals both her grief, and
her desire, and her Faith; and only speaks (where she may be bold) within her
self: If I may but touch the hem of his garment, I shall be whole.

I seek not mysteries in the virtue of the hem rather then of the garment.
Indeed, it was God's command to Israel, that they should be marked, not only
in their skin, but in their clothes too: those fringes and ribbands upon the
borders of their garments were for holy memorials of their duty, and God's Law.
But that hence she supposed to find more virtue and sanctity in the touch of
the hem then of the coat, I neither dispute nor believe. It was the site, not
the signification, that she intimated; not as of the best part, but the utmost.
In all likelihood, if there could have been virtue in the garment, the nearer
to the body, the more. Here was then the praise of this woman's Faith, that she
promises her self cure by the touch of the utmost hem. Whosoever would look to
receive any benefit from Christ, must come in Faith: It is that only which
makes us capable of any favor. Satan, the common ape of the Almighty, imitates
him also in this point: All his charms and spells are ineffectual without the
Faith of the user, of the receiver.

Yea the endeavor and issue of all, both humane and spiritual, things depends
upon our Faith. Who would commit a plant or a seed to the earth, if he did not
believe to have it nursed in that kindly bosom? What Merchant would put
himself upon the guard of an inch-board in a furious Sea, if he did not trust
to the faithful custody of that planck? Who would trade, or travel, or war,
or marry, if he did not therein surely trust he should speed well? What benefit
can we look to carry from a Divine exhortation, if we do not believe it will
edify us? from a Sacramental banquet, (the food of Angels) if we do not believe
it will nourish our Souls? from our best Devotions, if we do not persuade our
selves they will fetch down blessings? Oh our vain and heartless services, if
we do not say, May I drink but one drop of that heavenly Nectar, may I taste but
one crum of that Bread of life, may I hear but one word from the mouth of
Christ, may I send up but one hearty sigh or ejaculation of an holy desire to
my God, I shall be whole!

According to her resolution is her practice. She touched, but she came behind
to touch; whether for humility, or her secrecy rather, as desiring to steal a
cure unseen, unnoted. She was a Jewess, and therefore well knew that her touch
was (in this case) no better then a pollution; as hers, perhaps, but not of
him. For on the one side, Necessity is under no positive law; on the other, the
Son of God was not capable of impurity. Those may be defiled with a touch that
cannot heal with a touch: he that was above Law is not comprised in the Law. Be
we never so unclean, he may heal us; we cannot infect him. O Savior, my Soul
is sick and foul enough with the Spiritual impurities of sin: let me by the
hand of Faith lay hold but upon the hem of thy garment, (thy Righteousness is
thy garment) it shall be both clean and whole.

Who would not think but a man might lade up a dish of water out of the Sea
unmissed? Yet that water (though much) is finite; those drops are within
number: that Art which has reckoned how many corns of sand would make up a
World, could more easily compute how many drops of water would make up an
Ocean. Whereas the mercies of God are absolutely infinite, and beyond all
possibility of proportion: And yet this bashful soul cannot steal one drop of
mercy from this endless, boundless, bottomless Sea of Divine bounty, but it is
felt and questioned. And Jesus said, Who touched me?

Who can now say that he is a poor man that reckons his store, when that God,
who is rich in mercy, does so? He knows all his own Blessings, and keeps just
tallies of our receipts; delivered so much Honor to this man, to that so much
Wealth; so much Knowledge to one, to another so much Strength. How carefully
frugal should we be in the notice, account, usage of God's several favors,
since his bounty sets all his gifts upon the file? Even the worst servant in
the Gospel confessed his Talents, though he employed them not. We are worse then
the worst, if either we misknow, or dissemble, or forget them.

Who now can forbear the Disciples reply? Who touched thee, O Lord? the
multitude. Do thou ask of one; when thou art pressed by many? In the midst of
a throng, do thou ask, Who touched me?

Yea but yet some one touched me: All thronged me; but one touched me. How
riddle-like soever it may seem to sound, they that thronged me touched me not;
she only touched me that thronged me not, yea that touched me not. Even so, O
Savior, others touched thy body with theirs; she touched thy hem with her
hand, thy Divine power with her Soul.

Those two parts whereof we consist (the bodily, the spiritual) do in a sort
partake of each other. The Soul is the Man, and has those parts, senses,
actions which are challenged as proper to the Body. This spiritual part has
both an hand, and a touch; it is by the hand of Faith that the Soul touches:
yea this alone both is, and acts all the spiritual senses of that immaterial
and Divine part; this sees, hears, tastes, touches God; and without this the
Soul does none of these. All the multitude then pressed Christ: he took not
that for a touch, since Faith was away; only she touched him that believed to
receive virtue by his touch. Outward fashionableness comes into no account with
God; that is only done which the Soul does. It is no hoping that virtue
should go forth from Christ to us, when no hearty desires go forth from us to
him. He that is a Spirit, looks to the deportment of that part which resembles
himself: as without it the body is dead, so without the actions thereof bodily
Devotions are but carcasses.

What reason had our Savior to challenge this touch? Some body touched me. The
multitude (in one extreme) denied any touch at all: Peter (in another extreme)
affirmed an over-touching of the multitude. Betwixt both, he who felt it can
say, Some body touched me. Not all, as Peter; not none, as the multitude; but
some body. How then, O Savior, how does it appear that some body touched thee?
For I perceive virtue is gone out from me. The effect proves the act; virtue
gone out evinces the touch. These two are in thee convertible: virtue cannot go
out of thee but by a touch; and no touch can be of thee without virtue going
out from thee. That which is a Rule in Nature, That every Agent works by a
contact, holds spiritually too: Then do thou, O God, work upon our Souls,
when thou touchest our hearts by thy Spirit; then do we re-act upon thee, when
we touch thee by the hand of our Faith and confidence in thee: and in both
these virtue goes out from thee to us. Yet goes not so out, as that there is
less in thee. In all bodily emanations, whose powers are but finite, it must
needs follow, that the more is sent forth, the less is reserved: but as it is
in the Sun, which gives us light, yet loses none ever the more, (the
luminosity of it being no whit impaired by that perpetual emission of lightsome
beams;) so much more is it in thee, the Father of lights. Virtue could not go
out of thee without thy knowledge, without thy sending. Neither was it in a
dislike, or in a grudging exprobration, that thou said, Virtue is gone out
from me. Nothing could please thee better, then to feel virtue fetched out from
thee by the Faith of the receiver. It is the nature and praise of good to be
communicative: none of us would be other then liberal of our little, if we did
not fear it would be lessened by imparting. Thou that know thy store so
infinite, that participation does only glorify and not diminish it, can not
but be more willing to give then we to receive. If we take but one drop of
water from the Sea, or one corn of sand from the shore, there is so much
(though insensibly) less: but were we capable of Worlds of virtue and
benediction from that munificent hand, our enriching could no whit impoverish
thee. Thou which were wont to hold it much better to give then to receive,
can not but give gladly. Fear not, O my Soul, to lade plentifully at this
Well, this Ocean of Mercy, which, the more thou take, overflows the more.

But why then, O Savior, why did thou thus inquire, thus expostulate? Was it
for thy own sake; that the glory of the Miracle might thus come to light, which
otherwise had been smothered in silence? Was it for Jairus his sake; that his
depressed heart might be raised to a confidence in thee, whose mighty Power he
saw proved by this Cure, whose Omniscience he saw proved by the knowledge of
the Cure? Or was it chiefly for the Woman's sake; for the praise of her Faith,
for the securing of her Conscience?

It was within her self that she said, If I may but touch: none could hear this
voice of the heart, but he that made it. It was within her self that the Cure
was wrought: none of the beholders knew her complaint, much less her recovery;
none noted her touch, none knew the occasion of her touch. What a pattern of
powerful Faith had we lost, if our Savior had not called this act to trial?
As her modesty hid her disease, so it would have hid her virtue. Christ will
not suffer this secrecy. Oh the mavelous, but free, dispensation of Christ!
One while he injoyns a silence to his cured Patients, and is troubled with
their divulgation of his favor; another while (as here) he will not lose the
honor of a secret mercy, but fetches it out by his Inquisition, by his
profession; Who has touched me? for I perceive virtue is gone out from me. As
we see in the great work of his Creation, he has placed some Stars in the
midst of Heaven, where they may be most conspicuous; others he has set in the
Southern obscurity, obvious to but few eyes: in the Earth, he has planted some
flowers and trees in the famous gardens of the World; others, no less
beautiful, in untracked Woods or wild Deserts, where they are either not seen,
or not regarded.

O God, if thou have intended to glorify thy self by thy Graces in us, thou will find means to fetch them forth into the notice of the World; otherwise our
very privacy shall content us, and praise thee.

Yet even this great Faith wanted not some weakness. It was a poor conceit in
this Woman, that she thought she might receive so sovereign a remedy from
Christ without his heed, without his knowledge. Now that she might see she had
trusted to a power which was not more bountiful then sensible, and whose
goodness did not exceed his apprehension, but one that knew what he parted
with, and willingly parted with that which he knew beneficial to so faithful a
receiver, he can say, Some body has touched me, for I perceive virtue is gone
out from me. As there was an error in her thought, so in our Savior's words
there was a correction. His mercy will not let her run away with that secret
offense. It is a great favor of God to take us in the manner, and to shame our
closeness. We scour off the rust from a Weapon that we esteem, and prune the
Vine we care for. O God, do thou ever find me out in my Sin; and do not pass
over my least infirmities without a feeling controlment.

Neither doubt I but that herein, O Savior, thou did graciously forecast the
securing of the Conscience of this faithful (though over-seen) Patient; which
might well have afterward raised some just scruples, for the filching of a
Cure, for Unthahkfulness to the Author of her Cure; the continuance whereof
she might have good reason to misdoubt, being surreptitiously gotten,
ingratefully concealed. For prevention of all these dangers, and the full
quieting of her troubled heart, how fitly, how mercifully did thou bring
forth this close business to the light, and clear it to the bottom? It is thy
great mercy to foresee our perils, and to remove them ere we can apprehend the
fear of them: as some skillful Physician, who perceiving a Fever or Phrensy
coming, which the distempered Patient little misdoubts, by seasonable
applications anticipates that grievous malady; so as the sick man knows his
safety ere he can suspect his danger.

Well might the Woman think, He who can thus cure, and thus know his cure, can
as well know my name, and descry my person, and shame and punish my
ingratitude. With a pale face therefore and a trembling foot she comes, and
falls down before him, and humbly acknowledges what she had done, what she had
obtained. But the Woman, finding she was not hid, etc.

Could she have perceived that she might have slily gone away with the Cure,
she had not confessed it: So had she made God a loser of Glory, and her self an
unthankful receiver of so great a Benefit.

Might we have our own wills, we should be injurious both to God and our
selves. Nature lays such plots as would be sure to befool us; and is witty in
nothing but deceiving her self. The only way to bring us home, is to find we
are found, and to be convinced of the discovery of all our evasions: As some
unskilful Thief, that finds the owner's eye was upon him in his pilfering,
lays down his stolen commodity with shame. Contrarily, when a man is possessed
with a conceit of secrecy and cleanly escape, he is emboldened in his leudness.
The Adulterer chooses the twilight, and says, No eye shall see me; and joys in
the sweetness of his stolen waters. O God, in the deepest darkness, in my most
inward retiredness, when none sees me, when I see not my self, yet let me then
see thine all-seeing eye upon me: and if ever mine eyes shall be shut, or held
with a prevailing Temptation, check me with a speedy reproof, that, with this
abashed Patient, I may come in, and confess my error, and implore thy mercy.

It is no unusual thing for kindness to look sternly for the time, that it may
indear it self more when it lists to be discovered. With a severe countenance
did our Savior look about him, and ask, Who touched me? When the woman comes
in trembling, and confessing both her act and success, he clears up his brows,
and speaks comfortably to her; Daughter, be of good cheer, thy faith has made
thee whole; go in peace. O sweet and seasonable word, fit for those merciful
and Divine lips; able to secure any heart, to dispell any fears! Still, O
Savior, thou do thus to us: when we fall down before thee in an awful
dejectedness, thou rearest us up with a cheerful and compassionate
encouragement; when thou find us bold and presumptuous, thou love to take
us down; when humbled, it is enough to have prostrated us. Like as that Lion of
Bethel worries the disobedient Prophet, guards the poor Ass that stood quaking
before him: Or like some mighty wind, that bears over a tall Elm or Cedar with
the same breath that it raises a stooping Reed: Or like some good Physician,
who, finding the body obstructed and surcharged with ill humors, evacuates it,
and when it is sufficiently pulled down, raises it up with sovereign Cordials.

And still do thou so to my Soul; if at any time thou perceivest me stiff and
rebellious, ready to face out my sin against thee, spare me not; let me smart,
till I relent. But a broken and contrite heart thou will not, O Lord, O Lord,
do not reject.

It is only thy Word which gives what it requires, comfort and confidence. Had
any other shaken her by the shoulder, and cheared her up against those
oppressive passions, it had been but waste wind. No voice but his who has
power to remit sin can secure the heart from the conscience of sin, from the
pangs of Conscience. In the midst of the sorrows of my heart, thy comforts, O
Lord, thy comforts only have power to refresh my soul. Her cure was Christ's
act, yet he gives the praise of it to her; Thy faith has made thee whole. He
had said before, Virtue is gone out from me; now he acknowledges a virtue
inherent in her. It was his virtue that cured her, yet he graciously casts this
work upon her Faith. Not that her Faith did it by way of merit, by way of
efficiency, but by way of impetration. So much did our Savior regard that
Faith which he had wrought in her, that he will honor it with the success of
her Cure. Such and the same is still the remedy of our spiritual diseases, our
sins. By faith we are justified, by faith we are saved. Thou only, O Savior,
can heal us; thou will not heal us but by our Faith: not as it issues from
us, but as it appropriates thee. The sickness is ours, the remedy is ours: the
sickness is our own by nature, the remedy ours by thy grace both working and
accepting it. Our Faith is no less from thee then thy Cure is from our Faith.

O happy dismission, Go in peace! How unquiet had this poor Soul formerly been?
She had no outward peace with her Neighbors; they shunned and abhorred her
presence in this condition; yea they must do so. She had no peace in Body;
that was pained and vexed with so long and foul a disease. Much less had she
peace in her Mind, which was grievously disquieted with sorrow for her
sickness, with anger and coffeehouse at her torturing Physicians, with fear
of the continuance of so bad a guest. Her Soul (for the present) had no peace,
from the sense of her guiltiness in the carriage of this business; from the
conceived displeasure of him to whom she came for comfort and redress. At once
now does our Savior calm all these storms; and in one word and act restores to
her peace with her Neighbors, peace in her Self; peace in Body, in Mind, in
Soul. Go in peace. Even so, Lord, it was for thee only, who art the Prince of
Peace, to bestow thy peace where thou please. Our body, mind, Soul, estate is
thine, whether to afflict, or ease. It is a wonder if all of us do not ail
somewhat. In vain shall we speak peace to our selves, in vain shall the world
speak peace to us, except thou say to us, as thou did to this distressed
soul, Go in peace.

XXV. Jairus and his Daughter.
HOW troublesome did the people's importunity seem to Jairus? That great man
came to sue unto Jesus for his dying Daughter; the throng of the multitude
intercepted him. Every man is most sensible of his own necessity. It is no
straining courtesy in the challenge of our interest in Christ: there is no
unmannerliness in our strife for the greatest share in his presence and
benediction.

That only Child of this Ruler lay a dying when he came to solicit Christ's
aid, and was dead whilst he solicited it. There was hope in her sickness; in
her extremity there was fear; in her death despair and impossibility (as they
thought) of help. Thy daughter is dead, trouble not the Master. When we have to
do with a mere finite power, this word were but just. He was a Prophet no less
then a King that said, Whilst the child was yet alive, I fasted and wept; for I
said, Who can tell whether God will be gracious to me that the child may live?
But now he is dead, wherefore should I fast? Can I bring him back again? I
shall go to him, but he shall not return to me. But since thou have to do
with an omnipotent agent, know now, O thou faithless messenger, that death can
be no bar to his power. How well would it have become thee to have said, Thy
daughter is dead; but who can tell whether thy God and Savior will not be
gracious to thee that the child may revive? Cannot he, in whose hands are the
issues of death, bring her back again?

Here were more Manners then Faith; Trouble not the Master. Infidelity is all
for ease, and thinks every good work tedious. That which Nature accounts
troublesome, is pleasing and delightful to Grace. Is it any pain for an hungry
man to eat? O Savior, it was thy meat and drink to do thy Father's will; and
his will was that thou should bear our griefs and take away our sorrows. It
cannot be thy trouble which is our happiness, that we may still sue to thee.

The messenger could not so whisper his ill news, but Jesus heard it. Jairus
hears that he feared, and was now heartless with so sad tidings. He that
resolved not to trouble the Master, meant to take so much more trouble to
himself, and would now yield to a hopeless sorrow. He whose work it is to
comfort the afflicted, rouzeth up the dejected heart of that pensive father;
Fear not, believe only, and she shall be made whole. The word was not more
cheerful then difficult. Fear not? Who can be insensible of so great an evil?
Where death has once seized, who can but doubt he will keep his hold? No less
hard was it not to grieve for the loss of an only Child, then not to fear the
continuance of the cause of that grief.

In a perfect Faith there is no Fear: by how much more we fear, by so much less
we believe. Well are these two then coupled, Fear not, believe only. O
Savior, if thou did not command us somewhat beyond Nature, it were no thank
to us to obey thee. While the Child was alive, to believe that it might
recover, it was no hard task; but now that she was fully dead, to believe she
should live again, was a work not easy for Jairus to apprehend, though easy for
thee to effect: yet must that be believed, else there is no capacity of so
great a Mercy. As Love, so Faith is stronger then death; making those bonds no
other then (as Sampson did his withes) like threads of tow. How much natural
impossibility is there in the return of these Bodies from the dust of their
Earth, into which through many degrees of corruption they are at the last
mouldred? Fear not, O my Soul; believe only: it must, it shall be done.

The sum of Jairus his first suit was for the Health, not for the Resuscitation
of his Daughter: now that she was dead, he would, if he durst, have been glad
to have asked her Life. And now, behold, our Savior bids him expect both her
Life and her Health; Thy daughter shall be made whole: alive from her death,
whole from her disease.

Thou did not, O Jairus, thou daredst not ask so much as thou receivest. How
glad would thou have been, since this last news, to have had thy Daughter
alive, though weak and sickly? Now thou shall receive her not living only, but
sound and vigorous. Thou do not, O Savior, measure thy gifts by our
petitions, but by our wants and thine own mercies.

This work might have been as easily done by an absent command; the Power of
Christ was there whilst himself was away: but he will go personally to the
place, that he might be confessed the Author of so great a Miracle. O Savior,
thou love to go to the house of mourning; thy chief pleasure is the comfort
of the afflicted. What a confusion there is in worldly sorrow? The mother
shreeks, the servants cry out, the people make lamentation, the minstrells howl
and strike dolefully, so as the ear might question whether the Ditty or the
Instrument were more heavy. If ever expressions of sorrow sound well, it is
when Death leads the quire. Soon does our Savior charm this noise, and turns
these unseasonable mourners (whether formal or serious) out of doors. Not that
he dislikes Music, whether to condole or comfort; but that he had life in his
eye, and would have them know that he held these Funeral ceremonies to be too
early and long before their time. Give place, for the maid is not dead, but
sleeps. Had she been dead, she had but slept; now she was not dead, but
asleep, because he meant this nap of death should be so short, and her
awakening so speedy. Death and Sleep are alike to him, who can cast whom he
will into the sleep of Death, and awake when and whom he pleases out of that
deadly sleep.

Before the people and domestics of Jairus held Jesus for a Prophet; now they
took him for a Dreamer. Not dead, but asleep? They that came to mourn cannot
now forbear to laugh. Have we piped at so many Funerals, and seen and lamented
so many Corpses, and cannot we distinguish betwixt Sleep and Death? The eyes
are set, the breath is gone, the lims are stiff and cold. Who ever died, if she
do but sleep? How easily may our Reason or Sense befool us in Divine matters?
Those that are competent Judges in natural things, are ready to laugh God to
scorn when he speaks beyond their compass; and are by him justly laughed to
scorn for their unbelief. Vain and faithless men! as if that unlimited power of
the Almighty could not make good his own word; and turn either Sleep into
Death, or Death into Sleep, at pleasure. Ere many minutes they shall be ashamed
of their error and incredulity.

There were witnesses enough of her death, there shall not be many of her
restoring. Three choice Disciples and the two Parents are only admitted to the
view and testimony of this miraculous work. The eyes of those incredulous
scoffers were not worthy of this honor. Our infidelity makes us incapable of
the secret favors and the highest counsels of the Almighty.

What did these scorners think and say, when they saw him putting the minstrels
and people out of doors? Doubtless the maid is but asleep; the man fears lest
the noise shall awake her; we must speak and tread softly that we disquiet her
not: What will he and his Disciples do the while? Is it not to be feared they
will startle her out of her rest? Those that are shut out from the
participation of God's counsels, think all his words and projects no better
then foolishness. But art thou, O Savior, ever the more discouraged by the
derision and censure of these scornful unbelievers? Because fools jear thee,
do thou forbear thy work? Surely I do not perceive that thou heedest them,
save for contempt; or carest more for their words then their silence. It is
enough that thine act shall soon honor thee, and convince them. He took her by
the hand, and called, saying, Maid, arise; and her spirit came again, and she
arose straightway.

How could that touch, that Call be other then effectual? He who made that
hand, touched it; and he who shall once say, Arise, ye dead, said now, Maid,
arise. Death cannot but obey him who is the Lord of life. The Soul is ever
equally in his hand who is the God of Spirits: it cannot but go and come at his
command. When he says, Maid, arise, the now-dissolved spirit knows his office,
his place, and instantly re-assumes that room which by his appointment it had
left.

O Savior, if thou do but bid my Soul to arise from the death of Sin, it
cannot lie still; if thou bid my Body to arise from the grave, my Soul cannot
but glance down from her Heaven, and animate it. In vain shall my sin or my
grave offer to withhold me from thee.

The Maid revives: not now to languish for a time upon her sickbed, and by
some faint degrees to gather an insensible strength; but at once she arises
from her death and from her couch; at once she puts off her fever with her
dissolution; she finds her life and her feet at once; at once she finds her
feet and her stomach. He commanded to give her meat. Omnipotency does not use
to go the pace of Nature. All God's immediate works are (like himself) perfect.
He that raised her supernaturally, could have so fed her. It was never the
purpose of his Power, to put ordinary Means out of office.

XXVI. The Motion of the two fiery Disciples repelled.
THE time drew now on wherein Jesus must be received up. He must take death in
his way. Calvary is in his passage to mount Olivet. He must be lift up to the
Cross, thence to climb into his Heaven. Yet this comes not into mention; as if
all the thought of Death were swallowed up in this Victory over Death. Neither,
O Savior, is it otherwise with us, the weak members of thy mystical body: We
must die, we shall be glorified. What if Death stand before us? we look beyond
him at that transcendent Glory. How should we be dismayed with that pain which
is attended with a blessed Immortality?

The strongest receipt against Death is the happy estate that follows it; next
to that is the fore-expectation of it and resolution against it. He steadfastly
set his face to go to Jerusalem: Jerusalem the nest of his enemies, the
Amphitheater of his conflicts, the fatal place of his death. Well did he know
the plots and ambushes that were there laid for him, and the bloody issue of
those designs: yet he will go, and goes resolved for the worst. It is a sure
and wise way to send our thoughts before us, to grapple with those evils which
we know must be incountred. The enemy is half overcome that is well prepared
for. The strongest mischief may be outfaced with a seasonable fore-resolution.

There can be no greater disadvantage then the suddenness of a surprisall. O
God, what I have not the power to avoid, let me have the wisdom to expect.

The way from Galilee to Judaea lay through the Region of Samaria, if not
through the City. Christ now toward the end of his Preaching could not but be
attended with a multitude of followers: It was necessary there should be
purveyours and harbingers to procure lodgings and provision for so large a
troup. Some of his own retinue are addressed to this service: they seek not for
palaces and delicates, but for house-room and victuals. It was He whose the
earth was and the fullness thereof, whose the Heavens are and the mansions
therein; yet He, who could have commanded Angels, sues to Samaritans: He that
filled and comprehended Heaven, sends for shelter in a Samaritan Cottage. It
was thy choice, O Savior, to take upon thee the shape, not of a Prince, but of
a Servant. How can we either neglect means, or despise homeliness, when thou
the God of all the World would stoop to the suit of so poor a provision?

We know well in what terms the Samaritans stood with the Jews; so much more
hostile as they did more symbolize in matter of Religion: no Nations were
mutually so hateful to each other. A Samaritan's bread was no better then
Swines-flesh; their very fire and water was not more grudged then infectious.
The looking toward Jerusalem was here cause enough of repulse. No enmity is so
desperate as that which arises from matter of Religion. Agreement in some
points, when there are differences in the main, does but advance hatred the
more.

It is not more strange to hear the Son of God sue for a lodging, then to hear
him repelled. Upon so churlish a denial, the two angry Disciples return to
their Master on a fiery errand; Lord, will thou that we command fire to come
down from Heaven and consume them, as Elias did?

The Sons of Thunder would be lightning straight; their zeal, whether as
kinsmen or Disciples, could not brook so harsh a refusal. As they were
naturally more hot then their fellows, so now they thought their Piety bade
them be impatient.

Yet they dare not but begin with leave, Master, will thou? His will must lead
theirs; their choler cannot drive their wills before his: all their motion is
from him only. True Disciples are like those artificial engines which go no
otherwise then they are set; or like little Children, that speak nothing but
what they are taught. O Savior, if we have wills of our own, we are not thine.
Do thou set me as thou would have me go; do thou teach me what thou would
have me say or do.

A mannerly preface leads in a faulty suit; Master, will thou that we command
fire to come down from Heaven and consume them? Faulty, both in presumption,
and in desire of private revenge. I do not hear them say, Master, will it
please thee, who art the sole Lord of the Heavens and the Elements, to command
fire from Heaven upon these men? but, Will thou that we command? As if, because
they had power given them over diseases and unclean spirits, therefore Heaven
and Earth were in their managing. How easily might they be mistaken? Their
large commission had the just limits. Subjects that have munificent grants from
their Princes can challenge nothing beyond the words of their Patent. And if
the fetching down fire from Heaven were less then the dispossessing of Devils,
(since the Devil shall enable the Beast to do thus much,) yet how possible is
it to do the greater and stick at the less, where both depend upon a delegated
power? The Magicians of Egypt could bring forth Frogs and Blood; they could
not bring Lice: ordinary Corruption can do that which they could not.

It is the fashion of our bold Nature, upon an inch given, to challenge an ell;
and where we find our selves graced with some abilities, to flatter our selves
with the faculty of more.

I grant, Faith has done as great things as ever Presumption undertook; but
there is great difference in the enterprises of both. The one has a warrant,
either by instinct, or express command; the other none at all. Indeed, had
these two Disciples either meant, or said, Master, if it be thy pleasure to
command us to call down fire from Heaven, we know thy word shall enable us to
do what thou requirest; if the words be ours, the power shall be thine; this
had been but holy, modest, faithful: but if they supposed there needed nothing
save a leave only, and that (might they be but let loose) they could go alone,
they presumed, they offended.

Yet had they thus overshot themselves in some pious and charitable motion, the
fault had been the less: now the act had in it both cruelty, and private
revenge. Their zeal was not worthy of more praise, then their fury of censure.
That fire should fall down from Heaven upon men, is a fearful thing to think
of, and that which has not been often done. It was done in the case of Sodom,
when those five unclean Cities burned with the unnatural fire of hellish Lust:
it was done two several times at the suit of Elijah: it was done (in an height
of trial) to that great pattern of Patience. I find it no more, and tremble at
these I find.

But besides the dreadfulness of the judgment it self, who can but quake at the
thought of the suddenness of this destruction, which sweeps away both Body and
Soul in a state of unpreparation, of unrepentance; so as this fire should but
begin a worse, this Heavenly flame should but kindle that of Hell?

Thus unconceivably heavy was the revenge: but what was the offense? We have
learned not to think any indignity light that is offered to the Son of God; but
we know these spiritual affronts are capable of degrees. Had these Samaritans
reviled Christ and his train, had they violently assaulted him, had they
followed him with stones in their hands and blasphemies in their mouths, it had
been a just provocation of so horrible a vengeance: Now the wrong was only
negative, they received him not: And that, not out of any particular quarrel or
dislike of his Person, but of his Nation only; the men had been welcome, had
not their Country distasted. All the charge that I hear our Savior give to his
Disciples in case of their rejection is, If they receive you not, shake off the
dust of your feet. Yet this was amongst their own, and when they went on that
sacred errand of publishing the Gospel of Peace. These were strangers from the
commonwealth of Israel. This measure was not to Preachers, but to Travelers;
only a mere inhospitality to misliked guests. Yet no less revenge will serve
them then fire from Heaven.

I dare say for you, ye holy sons of Zebedee, it was not your spleen, but your
zeal, that was guilty of so bloody a suggestion: your indignation could not but
be stirred to see the great Prophet and Savior of the world so unkindly
repelled: yet all this will not excuse you from a rash Cruelty, from an
inordinate Rage.

Even the best heart may easily be miscarried with a well-meant Zeal. No
affection is either more necessary, or better accepted. Love to any Object
cannot be severed from hatred of the contrary: whence it is that all creatures
which have the concupiscible part, have also the irascible adjoined unto it.
Anger and displeasure is not so much an enemy, as a guardian and champion of
Love. Whoever therefore is rightly affected to his Savior, cannot but find
much regret at his wrongs. O gracious and divine Zeal, the kindly warmth and
vital temper of Piety, whither have thou withdrawn thy self from the cold
hearts of men? Or is this according to the just constitution of the old and
decrepit age of the world, into which we are fallen? How many are there that
think there is no wisdom but in a dull indifferency; and choose rather to
freeze then burn? How quick and apprehensive are men in cases of their own
indignities? how insensible of their Savior's?

But there is nothing so ill as the corruption of the best. Rectified zeal is
not more commendable and useful, then inordinate and misguided is hateful and
dangerous. Fire is a necessary and beneficial element; but if it be once
misplaced, and have caught upon the beams of our houses or stacks of our corn,
nothing can be more direful.

Thus sometimes Zeal turns Murder, (They that kill you shall think they do
God service,) sometimes Frenzy, sometimes rude Indiscretion. Wholesome and
blessed is that Zeal that is well grounded and well governed: grounded upon the
word of Truth, not upon unstable fancies; governed by Wisdom and Charity:
Wisdom, to avoid rashness and excess; Charity, to avoid just offense.

No motion can want a pretense. Elias did so; why not we? He was an holy
Prophet: the occasion, the place abludes not much: there wrong was offered to a
servant, here to his Master; there to a man, here to a God and man. If Elias
then did it, why not we? There is nothing more perilous then to draw all the
actions of Holy men into examples: For as the best men have their weaknesses,
so they are not privileged from letting fall unjustifiable actions. Besides
that, they may have had perhaps peculiar warrants signed from Heaven, whether
by instinct, or special command, which we shall expect in vain. There must be
much caution used in our imitation of the best patterns, (whether in respect of
the persons, or things;) else we shall make our selves Apes, and our acts
sinful absurdities.

It is a rare thing for our Savior to find fault with the errors of zeal,
even where have appeared sensible weaknesses. If Moses in a sacred rage and
indignation brake the Tables written with God's own hand, I find him not
checked. Here our meek Savior turns back, and frowns upon his furious
suitours, and takes them up roundly; Ye know not of what spirit ye are. The
faults of uncharitableness cannot be swallowed up in zeal. If there were any
color to hide the blemishes of this misdisposition, it should be this crimson
die. But he that needs not our Lie, will let us know he needs not our Injury;
and hates to have a good cause supported by the violation of our Charity. We
have no reason to disclaim our Passions: Even the Son of God chides sometimes,
yea where he loves. It offends not that our Affections are moved, but that they
are inordinate.

It was a sharp word, Ye know not of what spirit ye are. Another man would not
perhaps have felt it; a Disciple does. Tender hearts are galled with that which
the carnal mind slighteth. The spirit of Elias was that which they meant to
assume and imitate: they shall now know their mark was mistaken. How would they
have hated to think that any other but God's Spirit had stirred them up to this
passionate motion? now they shall know it was wrought by that ill spirit whom
they professed to hate.

It is far from the good Spirit of God to stir up any man to private revenge or
thirst of blood. Not an Eagle, but a Dove, was the shape wherein he chose to
appear. Neither would thou, O God, be in the whirlwind, or in the fire, but
in the soft voice. O Savior, what do we seek for any precedent but thine,
whose name we challenge? Thou came to thine own, thine own received thee not.
Did thou call for fire from Heaven upon them? did thou not rather send down
water from thy compassionate eyes, and weep for them by whom thou must bleed?
Better had it been for us never to have had any spirit, then any but thine. We
can be no other then wicked, if our mercies be cruelty.

But is it the name of Elias (O ye Zelots) which ye pretend for a color of
your impotent desire? Ye do not consider the difference betwixt his Spirit and
yours. His was extraordinary and heroical, besides the instinct or secret
command of God for this act of his; far otherwise is it with you, who by a
carnal distemper are moved to this furious suggestion. Those that would imitate
God's Saints in singular actions must see they go upon the same grounds.
Without the same Spirit and the same warrant it is either a mockery or a sin to
make them our Copies. Elias is no fit pattern for Disciples, but their Master.
The Son of man came not to destroy men's lives, but to save them.

Then are our actions and intentions warrantable and praiseworthy, when they
accord with his. O Savior, when we look into those sacred Acts and monuments
of thine, we find many a life which thou preservedst from perishing, some that
had perished by thee recalled; never any by thee destroyed. Only one poor
fig tree (as the real Emblem of thy severity to the unfruitful) was blasted
and withered by thy curse. But to man, how ever favorable and indulgent were
thou? So repelled as thou were, so reviled, so persecuted, laid for, sold,
betrayed, apprehended, arraigned, condemned, crucified; yet what one man did
thou strike dead for these heinous indignities? Yea, when one of thine enemies
lost but an ear in that ill quarrel, thou gave that ear to him who came to
take life from thee. I find some whom thou did scourge and correct, as the
sacrilegious money changers; none whom thou killedst. Not that thou either
love not, or requirest not the duly severe execution of justice. Whose sword
is it that Princes bear but thine? Offenders must smart and bleed. This is a
just sequel, but not the intention of thy coming; thy will, not thy drift.

Good Princes make wholesome Laws for the well-ordering of their people: there
is no authority without due coercion. The violation of these good Laws is
followed with death, whose end was preservation, life, order: and this not so
much for revenge of an offense past, as for prevention of future mischief.

How can we then enough love and praise thy mercy, O thou preserver of men? How
should we imitate thy saving and beneficent disposition toward mankind, as
knowing, the more we can help to save, the nearer we come to thee that came
to save all; and the more destructive we are, the more we resemble him who is
Abaddon, a murderer from the beginning?

XXVII. The Ten Lepers.
THE Samaritans were tainted, not with Schism, but Heresy, but Paganism; our
Savior yet balks them not, but makes use of the way as it lies, and bestows
upon them the courtesy of some Miracles. Some kind of commerce is lawful even
with those without. Terms of intireness and leagues of inward amity are here
unfit, unwarrantable, dangerous; but civil respects, and wise uses of them for
our convenience or necessity, need not, must not be forborne.

Ten Lepers are here met: those that are excluded from all other society seek
the company of each other. Fellowship is that we all naturally affect, though
even in Leprosy. Ever Lepers will flock to their fellows: where shall we find
one spiritual Leper alone? Drunkards, Profane persons, Heretics will be sure
to consort with their matches. Why should not God's Saints delight in an holy
communion? Why is it not our chief joy to assemble in good?

Jews and Samaritans could not abide one another, yet here in Leprosy they
accord; here was one Samaritan Leper with the Jewish: community of passion has
made them friends, whom even Religion disjoined. What virtue there is in
misery, that can unite even the most estranged hearts?

I seek not mystery in the number. These Ten are met together, and all meet
Christ: not casually, but upon due deliberation; they purposely waited for this
opportunity. No marvel if they thought no attendence long to be delivered from
so loathsome and miserable a disease. Great Naaman could be glad to come from
Syria to Judaea, in hope of leaving that hateful guest behind him. We are all
sensible enough of our bodily infirmities. Oh that we could be equally weary of
the sicknesses and deformities of our better part. Surely our spiritual
maladies are no less then mortal, if they be not healed; neither can they heal
alone. These men had died Lepers if they had not met with Christ.

O Savior, give us grace to seek thee, and patience to wait for thee; and then
we know thou will find us, and we remedy.

Where do these Lepers attend for Christ but in a village: and that, not in the
street of it, but in the entrance, in the passage to it? The Cities, the Towns
were not for them; the Law of God had shut them out from all frequence, from
all conversation. Care of safety and fear of infection was motive enough to
make their neighbors observant of this piece of the Law. It is not the body
only that is herein respected by the God of Spirits. Those that are
spiritually contagious must be still and ever avoided; they must be separated
from us, we must be separated from them: they from us, by just censures; or (if
that be neglected) we from them, by a voluntary declination of their familiar
conversation. Besides the benefit of our safety, wickedness would soon be
ashamed of it self, if it were not for the encouragement of companions.
Solitariness is the fittest antidote for spiritual infection. It were happy for
the wicked man, if he could be separated from himself.

These Lepers that came to seek Christ, yet finding him, they stand afar off;
whether for reverence, or for security. God had enacted this distance. It was
their charge, if they were occasioned to pass through the streets, to cry out,
I am unclean. It was no less then their duty to proclaim their own
infectiousness: there was not danger only, but sin in their approach.

How happy were it, if in those wherein there is more peril, there were more
remoteness, less silence? O God, we are all Lepers to thee, overspred with the
loathsome scurf of our own corruptions: It becomes us well, in the conscience
of our shame and vileness, to stand afar off. We cannot be too awful of thee,
too much ashamed of our selves.

Yet these men, though they be far off in the distance of place, yet they are
near in respect of the acceptance of their Prayer.

The Lord is near unto all that call upon him in truth. O Savior, whilst we
are far off from thee, thou art near unto us. Never do thou come so close to
us, as when in an holy bashfulness we stand farthest off. Justly do thou
expect we should be at once bold and bashful. How boldly should we come to the
throne of Grace, in respect of the grace of that throne? how fearfully, in
respect of the awfulness of the Majesty of that throne, and that unworthiness
which we bring with us into that dreadful presence?

He that stands near may whisper; but he that stands afar off must cry aloud:
so did these Lepers. Yet not so much distance as passion strained their
throats. That which can give voice to the Dumb, can much more give loudness to
the Vocal.

All cried together: these ten voices were united in one sound, that their
conjoined forces might expugn that Gracious ear. Had every man spoken singly
for himself, this had made no noise, neither yet any show of a fervent
importunity: Now, as they were all affected with one common disease, so they
all set out their throats together, and (though Jews and Samaritans) agree in
one joint supplication. Even where there are ten tongues, the word is but one;
that the condescent may be universal. When we would obtain common favors, we
may not content our selves with private and solitary Devotions, but must join
our spiritual forces together, and set upon God by troops. Two are better then
one; because they have a good reward for their labor. No faithful Prayer goes
away unrecompensed: but where many good hearts meet, the retribution must be
needs answerable to the number of the petitioners. O holy and happy violence
that is thus offered to Heaven! How can we want Blessings, when so many cords
draw them down upon our heads?

It was not the sound, but the matter, that carried it with Christ: if the
sound were shrill, the matter was faithful; Jesu Master, have mercy upon us.
No word can better become the mouth of the miserable. I see not where we can
meet with fitter patterns. Surely, they were not verier Lepers then we: why do
we not imitate them in their actions, who are too like them in our condition?
Whither should we seek but to our Jesus? How should we stand aloof in regard of
our own wretchedness? how should we lift up our voice in the fervor of our
supplications? what should we rather sue for then mercy? Jesu Master, have
mercy upon us.

O gracious prevention of mercy, both had and given ere it can be asked! Jesus,
when he saw them, said, Go show your selves to the Priests. Their disease is
cured ere it can be complained of; their showing to the Priest presupposes them
whole; whole in his grant, though not in their own apprehension. That single
Leper that came to Christ before ( Matt. 8. Luke 5.) was first cured in his own
sense; and then was bid to go to the Priest for approbation of the Cure. It
was not so with these, who are sent to the Judges of Leprosy, with an intention
they shall in the way find themselves healed. There was a different purpose in
both these: In the one, that the perfection of the Cure might be convinced, and
seconded with a due sacrifice; in the other, that the Faith of the Patients
might be tried in the way; which if it had not held as strong in the
prosecution of their suit as in the beginning, had (I doubt) failed of the
effect. How easily might these Lepers think, Alas! to what purpose is this?
Show our selves to the Priests? What can their eyes do? They can judge whether
it be cured, (which we see yet it is not) they cannot cure it. This is not now
to do: We have been seen enough, and loathed. What can their eyes see more
then our own? We had well hoped that Jesus would have vouchsafed to call us to
him, and to lay his hands upon us, and to have healed us. These thoughts had
kept them Lepers still. Now shall their Faith and Obedience be proved by their
submission both to this sudden command, and that Divine ordination.

That former Leper was charged to show himself to the chief Priest, these to
the Priests; either would serve: the original command runs, either to Aaron, or
to one of his Sons. But why to them? Leprosy was a bodily sickness; what is
this to spiritual persons? Wherefore serve Physicians, if the Priests must
meddle with diseases? We never shall find those Sacred persons to pass their
judgment upon Fevers, Dropsies, Palsies, or any other bodily distemper:
neither should they on this, were it not that this affection of the body is
joined with a Legal uncleanness. Not as a sickness, but as an impurity must it
come under their cognizance: neither this, without a farther implication. Who
but the successors of the Legal Priesthood are proper to judge of the
uncleanness of the Soul? Whether an act be sinful, or in what degree it is
such; what grounds are sufficient for the comfortable assurance of Repentance,
of forgiveness; what courses are fittest to avoid the danger of relapses, who
is so like to know, so meet to judge, as our Teachers? Would we in these cases
consult ofter with our spiritual Guides, and depend upon their faithful
advices and well-grounded absolutions, it were safer, it were happier for us.
Oh the dangerous extremity of our wisdom! Our hood-winked Progenitors would
have no eyes but in the heads of their ghostly Fathers: We think our selves so
quick-sighted, that we pity the blindness of our able Teachers; none but our
selves are fit to judge of our own Leprosy.

Neither was it only the peculiar judgment of the Priest that was here
intended, but the thankfulness of the Patient: that by the sacrifice which he
should bring with him, he might give God the glory of his sanation. O God,
whomsoever thou curest of this spiritual Leprosy, it is reason he should
present thee with the true Evangelical sacrifices, not of his praises only,
but of himself, which are reasonable and living. We are still leprous if we do
not first see our selves foul, and then find our selves thankfully serviceable.

The Lepers did not, would not go of themselves, but are sent by Christ: Go
and show your selves. And why sent by him? Was it in obedience to the Law? was
it out of respect to the Priesthood? was it for prevention of cavills? was it
for conviction of gainsayers? or was it for confirmation of the Miracle?
Christ that was above the Law would not transgress it; he knew this was his
charge by Moses. How justly might he have dispensed with his own? but he will
not: though the Law does not bind the Maker, he will voluntarily bind himself.
He was within the ken of his Consummatum est; yet would not anticipate that
approaching end, but holds the Law on foot till his last pace. This was but a
branch of the Ceremonial; yet would he not slight it, but in his own person
gives example of a studious observation.

How carefully should we submit our selves to the Royal laws of our Creator,
to the wholesome laws of our Superiors, whilst the Son of God would not but be
so punctual in a Ceremony?

Whilst I look to the Persons of those Priests, I see nothing but corruption,
nothing but professed hostility to the true Messiah. All this cannot make thee,
O Savior, to remit any point of the observance due to their places. Their
Function was sacred, whatever their Persons were: though they have not the
grace to give thee thy due, thou will not fail to give them theirs. How justly
do thou expect all due regard to thine Evangelicall Priesthood, who gave so
curious respect to the Legal? It were shame the Synagogue should be above the
Church; or that Priesthood which thou meantest speedily to abrogate, should
have more honor then that which thou meantest to establish and perpetuate.

Had this duty been neglected, what clamours had been raised by his emulous
adversaries? what scandalls? though the fault had been the Patient's, not the
Physician's. But they that watched Christ so narrowly, and were apt to take so
poor exceptions at his Sabbath-cures, at the unwashen hands of his Disciples,
how much more would they have calumniated him if by his neglect the Law of
Leprosy had been palpably transgressed? Not only evil must be avoided, but
offense; and that not on our parts, but on others. That offense is ours, which
we might have remedied.

What a noble and irrefragable testimony was this to the power, to the truth of
the Messiah? How can these Jews but either believe, or be made inexcusable in
not believing? When they shall see so many Lepers come at once to the Temple,
all cured by a secret will, without word or touch, how can they choose but say,
This work is supernatural; no limited power could do this? How is he not God,
if his power be infinite? Their own eyes shall be witnesses and judges of their
own conviction.

The Cure is done by Christ more exquisitely then by Art or Nature; yet it is
not publicly assured and acknowledged, till according to the Mosaicall Law
certain subsequent rites be performed. There is no admittance into the
Congregation, but by sprinkling of blood. O Savior, we can never be
ascertained of our cleansing from that spiritual Leprosy wherewith our Souls
are tainted, but by the sprinkling of thy most precious blood: wash us with
that, and we shall be whiter then snow. This act of showing to the Priest was
not more required by the Law then pre-required of those Lepers by our Savior,
for the trial of their Obedience. Had they now stood upon terms with Christ,
and said, We will first see what cause there will be to show our selves to the
Priests; they need not see our Leprie, we shall be glad they should see our
Cure: do thou work that which we shall show, and bid us show what thou have
wrought: till then excuse us: it is our grief and shame to be seen too much;
they had been still Lepers.

It has been ever God's wont by small Precepts to prove men's dispositions.
Obedience is as well tried in a trifle, as in the most important charge; yea so
much more, as the thing required is less: for oft-times those who would be
careful in main affairs, think they may neglect the smallest. What command
soever we receive from God or our Superiors, we must not scan the weight of
the thing, but the authority of the commander. Either difficulty or slightness
are vain pretenses for Disobedience.

These Lepers are wiser; they obeyed, and went. What was the issue? As they
went, they were healed. Lo, had they stood still, they had been Lepers; now
they went, they are whole. What haste the Blessing makes to overtake their
Obedience? This walk was required by the very Law, if they should have found
themselves healed: what was it to prevent the time a little, and to do that
sooner upon hopes which upon sense they must do after? The horror of the
Disease adds to the grace of the Cure; and that is so much more gracious as the
task is easier: It shall cost them but a walk. It is the bounty of that God
whom we serve, to reward our worthless endeavors with infinite requitals. He
would not have any proportion betwixt our acts and his remunerations.

Yet besides this recompense of Obedience, O Savior, thou would herein have
respect to thine own just Glory. Had not these Lepers been cured in the way,
but in the end of their walk, upon their showing to the Priests, the Miracle
had lost much light: perhaps the Priests would have challenged it to
themselves, and have attributed it to their prayers; perhaps the Lepers might
have thought it was thy purpose to honor the Priests as the instruments of
that mavelous Cure. Now there can be no color of any others participation,
since the Leprosy vanishes in the way. As thy Power, so thy Praise admits of
no partners.

And now, methinks, I see what an amazed joy there was amongst these Lepers,
when they saw themselves thus suddenly cured: each tells other what a change he
feels in himself; each comforts other with the assurance of his outward
clearness; each congratulates other's happiness, and thinks, and says how
joyful this news will be to their friends and families. Their society now
serves them well to applaud and heighten their new felicity.

The Miracle, indifferently wrought upon all, is differently taken. All went
forward (according to the appointment) toward the Priests, all were obedient;
one only was thankful. All were cured, all saw themselves cured: their sense
was alike, their hearts were not alike. What could make the difference but
Grace? and who could make the difference of Grace but he that gave it? He that
wrought the Cure in all, wrought the Grace not in all, but in one. The same
act, the same motives, are not equally powerful to all: where the Ox finds
grass, the Viper poison. We all pray, all hear; one goes away bettered, another
cavils. Will makes the difference; but who makes the difference of wills but he
that made them? He that creates the new Heart, leaves a stone in one bosom,
puts flesh into another. It is not in him that wills nor in him that runs,
but in God that has mercy. O God, if we look not up to thee, we may come and
not be healed; we may be healed, and not be thankful.

This one man breaks away from his fellows to seek Christ. Whilst he was a
Leper, he consorted with Lepers; now that he is healed, he will be free. He
says not, I came with these men, with them I will go; if they will return, I
will accompany them; if not, what should I go alone? As I am not wiser then
they, so I have no more reason to be more thankful. There are cases wherein
Singularity is not lawful only, but laudable. Thou shall not follow a
multitude to do evil. I and my house will serve the Lord. It is a base and
unworthy thing for a man so to subject himself to others examples, as not
sometimes to resolve to be an example to others. When either evil is to be
done, or good neglected, how much better is it to go the right way alone, then
to err with company?

O noble pattern of Thankfulness! what speed of retribution is here? No sooner
does he see his Cure, then he hasts to acknowledge it: the Benefit shall not
die, not sleep in his hand. Late professions of our obligations savor of
dullness and ingratitude. What a laborious and diligent officiousness is here?
He stands not still, but puts himself to the pains of a return. What an hearty
recognition of the blessing? His voice was not more loud in his suit then in
his thanks. What an humble reverence of his Benefactour? He falls down at his
feet, as acknowledging at once beneficence and unworthiness. It were happy for
all Israel, if they could but learn of this Samaritan.

This man is sent with the rest to the Priests. He well knew this duty a branch
of the Law of Ceremonies, which he meant not to neglect: but his heart told him
there was a Moral duty of professing thankfulness to his Benefactour, which
called for his first attendence. First therefore he turns back, ere he will
stir forward. Reason taught this Samaritan (and us in him) that ceremony must
yield to substance, and that main points of Obedience ought to take place of
all Rituall complements.

It is not for nothing that note is made of the Country of this thankful
Leper; He was a Samaritan: The place is known and branded with the infamy of a
Paganish mis-religion. Outward disadvantage of place or parentage cannot block
up the way of God's Grace and free election; as contrarily the privileges of
birth and nature avail us nothing in spiritual occasions.

How sensible were thou, O Savior, of thine own beneficence? Were there not
ten cleansed? but where are the nine? The trouping of these Lepers together did
not hinder thy reckoning. It is both justice and wisdom in thee to keep a
strict account of thy favors. There is an wholesome and useful art of
forgetfulness in us men, both of Benefits done, and of Wrongs offered. It is
not so with God. Our injuries indeed he soon puts over, making it no small part
of his style, that he forgives iniquities: but for his mercies, there is no
reason he should forget them; they are worthy of more then our memory. His
favors are universal over all his works; there is no creature that tastes not
of his bounty; his Sun and Rain are for others besides his friends: but none of
his good turns escapes either his knowledge or record. Why should not we (O
God) keep a book of our receipts from thee, which agreeing with thine may
declare thee bounteous, and us thankful?

Our Savior does not ask this by way of doubt, but of exprobration. Full well
did he count the steps of those absent Lepers; he knew where they were; he
upbraids their ingratitude, that they were not where they should have been. It
was thy just quarrel, O Savior, that whilst one Samaritan returned, nine
Israelites were healed and returned not. Had they been all Samaritans, this had
been faulty; but now they were Israelites, their Ingratitude was more foul then
their Leprosy. The more we are bound to God, the more shameful is our
unthankfulness. There is scarce one in ten that is careful to give God his
own: this neglect is not more general then displeasing. Christ had never missed
their presence, if their absence had not been hateful and injurious.

XXVIII. The Pool of Bethesda.
OTherwhere ye may look long, and see no Miracle; but here behold two Miracles
in one view: the former, of the Angel curing Diseases; the latter, of the God
of Angels, viz. Christ Jesus, preventing the Angel in his Cure. Even the first
Christ wrought by the Angel; the second immediately by himself. The first is
incomparable, for, (as Montanus truly observes) there is no one miraculum
perpetuum but this one, in the whole Book of God. Be content to spend this hour
with me in the Porches of Bethesda, and consider with me the Topography, the
Aitiology, the Chronography of this Miracle. These three limit our speech and
your patient attention. The Chronography (which is first in place and time)
offers us two heads: 1. a Feast of the Jews; 2. Christ going up to the Feast.
The Jews were full of Holy Days, both of God's institution and the Church's.
Of God's, both weekly, monthly, anniversary. Weekly, that one of seven, which I
would to God we had learned of them to keep better. In this regard it was that
Seneca said, the Jews did Septimam aetatis partem perdere, lose the seventh
part of their life. Monthly, the New moons, Numb. 18. Anniversary, Easter,
Pentecost, and the September-feasts. The Church's, both the Purim by
Mardochaeus; and the Encaenia by Judas Maccabaeus, which yet Christ honored by
his solemnization, John 10. Surely God did this for the cheerfulness of his
people in his service: hence the Church has laudably imitated this example. To
have no Feasts, is sullen: to have too many, is Paganish and Superstitious.
Neither would God have cast the Christian Easter upon the just time of the
Jewish Pasch, and their Whitsontide upon the Jewish Pentecost, if he would not
have had these Feasts continued. And why should the Christian Church have less
power then the Jewish Synagogue? Here was not a mere Feriation, but a Feasting;
they must appear before God cum muneribus with gifts. The tenth part of their
increase must be spent upon the three solemn Feasts, besides their former
tithes to Levi, Deuteronomy. 14.23. There was no Holy Day wherein they feasted above
six hours; and in some of them Tradition urged them to their quantities of
drink: And David, when he would keep holy day to the Ark, allows every
Isra^lite a cake of bread, a piece of flesh, a bottle of wine; not a dry
dinner, ( prandium caninum) not a mere drinking, of wine without meat, but to
make up a perfect feast, Bread, Flesh, Wine, 2 Samuel 6. The true Purims of this
Island are those two Feasts of August and November. He is no true Israelite
that keeps them not, as the days which the Lord has made. When are joy and
triumphs seasonable if not at Feasts? but not excess. Pardon me, I know not how
Feasts are kept at the Court: but, as Job, when he thought of the banquets of
his Sons, says, It may be they have sinned; so let me speak at peradventures,
If sensual immoderation should have set her foot into these Christian Feasts,
let me at least say with indulgent Eli, Non est bona fama, filii, It is no good
report, my sons. Do ye think that S. Paul's rule, Non in comessationibus and
ebrietate, not in surfeiting and drunkenness, was for work-days only? The Jews
had a conceit, that on their Sabbath and Feast-days the Devils fled from their
Cities ad montes umbrosos, to the shady mountains. Let it not be said, that on
our Christian Feasts they should e montibus aulam petere: and that he seeks,
and finds not, loca arida, but madida. God forbid that Christians should
sacrifice to Bacchus in stead of the ever-living God: and that on the day when
you should have been blown up by treacherous fire from earth to Heaven, you
should fetch down the fire of God's anger from Heaven upon you by swilling and
surfeits: God forbid. God's service is unum necessarium, one thing necessary,
says Christ. Homo ebrius, superflua creatura, A drunken man is a superfluous
creature, says Ambrose. How ill do those two agree together? This I have been
bold to say out of caution, not of reproof.

Thus much, that there was a Feast of the Jews. Now, what Feast it was, is
questionable: whether the Pasch, as Irenaeus, and Beza with him, thinks, upon
the warrant of John 4.35. where our Savior had said, Yet four months, and then
comes harvest: or whether Pentecost, which was fifty days from the shaking of
the sheaf, (that was Easter Sunday) as Cyrill, Chrysostom, Theophylact,
Euthymius, and some later: or whether one of the September Feasts, as some
others. The excellency of the Feast makes for Easter, the Feast (...) the
number of Interpreters for Pentecost; the number of Feasts for September. For
as God delighted in the number of Seven, the seventh day was holy, the seventh
year, the seventh seventh year: so he showed it in the seventh month, which
reserves his number still, September; the first day whereof was the Sabbath of
Trumpets, the tenth dies expiationum, and on the fifteenth began the Feast of
Tabernacles for seven days. It is an idleness to seek that which we are never
the better when we have found. What if Easter? what if Tabernacles? what if
Pentecost? what loss, what gain is this? Magna nos molestia Joannes liberasset,
si unum adjecisset verbum; John had eased us of much trouble, if he had added
but one word, says Maldonat. But for us, God give them sorrow which love it:
this is one of Saint Paul's (...), vain disputations, that he forbids his
Timothy; yea, (which is the subject thereof) one of them which he calls (...),
foolish and unlearned questions, 2 Timothy 2.23. Quantum mali facit nimia
subtilitas? How much mischief is done by too much subtility? says Seneca.
These are for some idle Cloisterers, that have nothing to do but to pick
straws in Divinity: Like to Appian the Grammarian, that with long discourse
would pick out of Homer's first verse of his Iliads, and the first word,
((...)) the number of the books of Iliads and Odysses; or like Didymus (...),
that spent some of his four thousand books about, which was Homer's Country,
who was Aeneas's true mother, what the age of Hecuba, how long it was betwixt
Homer and Orpheus; or those wise Critics of whom Seneca speaks, that spend
whole volumes, whether Homer or Hesiod were the elder. Non profuturam scientiam
tradunt, They vent an unprofitable skill, as he said. Let us be content with
the learned ignorance of what God has concealed; and know, that what he has
concealed, will not avail us to know.

Rather let us inquire why Christ would go up to the Feast. I find two silken
cords that drew him up thither. 1. His Obedience. 2. His desire of manifesting
his Glory.

First, It was a general Law, All males must appear thrice a year before the
Lord. Behold, he was the God whom they went up to worship at the Feast; yet he
goes up to worship. He began his life in Obedience, when he came into his
Mother's belly to Bethlehem at the taxation of Augustus, and so he continues
it. He knew his due. Of whom do the Kings of the earth receive tribute? of
their own, or of strangers? Then their Sons are free. Yet he that would pay
tribute to Caesar, will also pay this tribute of Obedience to his Father. He
that was above the Law, yields to the Law: Legi satisfacere voluit, etsi non
sub Lege, He would satisfy the Law, though he were not under the Law. The
Spirit of God says, He learned obedience in that he suffered. Surely also he
taught Obedience in that he did. This was his (...) to John Baptist, It becomes
us to fulfill all righteousness. He will not abate his Father one Ceremony. It
was dangerous to go up to that Jerusalem which he had left before, for their
malice: yet now he will up again. His Obedience drew him up to that bloody
Feast, wherein himself was sacrificed; how much more now, that he might
sacrifice? What can we plead to have learned of Christ, if not his first
Lesson, Obedience? The same proclamation that Gedeon made to Israel, he makes
still to us, As ye see me do, so do ye. Whatsoever therefore God injoyns us,
either immediately by himself, or mediately by his Deputies, if we will be
Christians, we must so observe, as those that know themselves bound to tread in
his steps that said, In the volume of thy book it is written of me, I desired
to do thy will, O God, Psalm. 40.6. I will have obedience, (says God) and not
sacrifice. But where Sacrifice is Obedience, he will have Obedience in
sacrificing. Therefore Christ went up to the Feast.

The second motive was the manifestation of his Glory. If we be the light of
the world, who are so much snuff, what is he that is the Father of lights? It
was not for him to be set under the bushel of Nazareth, but upon the table of
Jerusalem. Thither and then was the confluence of all the Tribes. Many a time
had Christ passed by this man before, when the streets were empty; for there he
lay many years; yet heals him not till now. He that sometimes modestly steals a
Miracle with a Vide ne cui dixeris, See thou tell no man, that no man might
know it; at other times does wonders upon the Scaffold of the World, that no
man might be ignorant, and bids proclaim it on the house tops. It was fit the
world should be thus publicly convinced, and either wone by belief, or lost by
inexcusableness. Good, the more common it is, the better. I will praise thee,
says David, in Ecclesia magna, in the great Congregation. Glory is not got in
corners. No man (say the envious kinsmen of Christ) keeps close, and would be
famous: No, nor that would have God celebrated. The best opportunities must be
taken in glorifying him. He that would be Crucified at the feast, that his
Death and Resurrection might be more famous; will at the Feast do Miracles,
that his Divine power might be approved openly. Christ is Flos campi, non
horti, the flour of the field, and not of the garden, says Bernard. God cannot
abide to have his Graces smothered in us. I have not hid thy righteousness
within my heart, says the Psalmist. Absalom, when he would be insignite
improbus, notoriously wicked, does his villainy publicly in the eyes of the
Sun, under no curtain but Heaven. He that would do notable service to God,
must do it conspicuously. Nicodemus gained well by Christ, but Christ got
nothing by him, so long as, like to a night-bird, he never came to him but with
owls and bats. Then he began to be a profitable Disciple, when he durst oppose
the Pharisees in their condemnation of Christ, though indefinitely: but most,
when in the night of his death the light of his Faith brought him openly to
take down the Sacred Corpse before all the gazing multitude, and to embalm it.
When we confess God's name, with the Psalmist, before Kings; when Kings,
defenders of the Faith, profess their Religion in public and everlasting
monuments to all nations, to all times; this is glorious to God, and in God to
them. It is no matter how close evils be, nor how public good is.

This is enough for the Chronography; the Topography follows. I will not here
stand to show you the ignorance of the Vulgar translation, in joining probatica
and piscina together, against their own fair Vatican copy, with other ancient:
nor spend time to discuss whether (...) or (...) be here understood for the
substantive of (...) it is most likely to be that Sheep-gate spoken of in Ezra:
nor to show how ill piscina in the Latin answers the Greek (...) ours turn it a
pool, better then any Latin word can express it: nor to show you (as I might)
how many public Pools were in Jerusalem: nor to discuss the use of this Pool,
whether it were for washing the beasts to be sacrificed, or to wash the
entralls of the Sacrifice; whence I remember Hierom fetches the virtue of the
water, and in his time thought he discerned some redness, as if the blood spilt
four hundred years before could still retain his first tincture in a liquid
substance; besides that it would be a strange swimming-pool that were brewed
with blood, and this was (...). This conceit arises from the error of the
construction in mis-matching (...) with (...). Neither will I argue whether it
should be Bethsida, or Bethzida, or Bethsheda, or Bethesda. If either you or my
self knew not how to be rid of time, we might easily wear out as many hours in
this Pool as this poor impotent man did years. But it is Edification that we
affect, and not curiosity. This Pool had five Porches. Neither will I run here
with S. Austin into Allegories; that this Pool was the people of the Jews,
Aquae multae, populus multus, and these five Porches the Law in the five books
of Moses: nor stand to confute Adrichomius, who out of Josephus would persuade
us that these five Porches were built by Solomon, and that this was stagnum
Solomonis, for the use of the Temple. The following words show the use of the
Porches; for the receipt of impotent, sick, blind, halt, withered, that waited
for the moving of the water. It should seem it was walled about to keep it from
Cattle, and these five vaulted entrances were made by some Benefactours for the
more convenience of attendence. Here was the Mercy of God seconded by the
Charity of men: If God will give Cure, they will give Harbor. Surely it is a
good matter to put our hand to God's; and to further good works with
convenience of enjoying them.

Jerusalem was grown a City of blood, to the persecution of the Prophets, to a
wilful despite of what belonged to her peace, to a profanation of God's
Temple, to a mere formality in God's services: and yet here were public works
of Charity in the midst of her streets. We may not always judge of the truth of
Piety by charitable actions. Judas disbursed the money for Christ; there was no
Traitor but he. The poor traveller that was robbed and wounded betwixt
Jerusalem and Jericho, was passed over first by the Priest, then the Levite; at
last the Samaritan came and relieved him: His Religion was naught, yet his act
was good; the Priest's and Levite's Religion good, their Uncharity ill. Novatus
himself was a Martyr, yet a Schismatic. Faith is the soul, and good works are
the breath, says S. James: but as you see in a pair of bellows there is a
forced breath without life; so in those that are puffed up with the wind of
ostentation, there may be charitable works without Faith. The Church of Rome,
unto her four famous Orders of Jacobins, Franciscans, Augustines, and
Carmelites, has added a fifth of Jesuits; and, like another Jerusalem, for
those five Leprous and lazarly Orders has built five Porches; that if the
water of any State be stirred, they may put in for a share. How many Cells and
Convents has she raised for these miserable Cripples? and now she thinks
(though she exalt her self above all that is called God, though she dispense
with and against God, though she fall down before every block and wafer, though
she kill Kings and equivocate with Magistrates,) she is the only City of God.
Digna est, nam struxit Synagogam, She is worthy, for she has built a
Synagogue. Are we more orthodox, and shall not we be as charitable? I am
ashamed to think of rich Noblemen and Merchants that die and give nothing to
our five Porches of Bethesda. What shall we say? Have they made their Mammon
their God, in stead of making friends with their Mammon to God? Even when they
die will they not (like Ambrose's good Usurers) part with that which they
cannot hold, that they may get that which they cannot lose? Can they begin
their will, In Dei nomine, Amen; and give nothing to God? Is he only a
Witness, and not a Legatee? Can we bequeath our Souls to Christ in Heaven, and
give nothing to his Lims on earth? And if they will not give, yet will they not
lend to God? He that gives to the poor, foeneratur Deo, lends to God. Will they
put out to any but God? and then, when, in stead of giving security, he
receives with one hand and pays with another, receives our bequest and gives us
glory? Oh damnable niggardliness of vain men, that shames the Gospel, and loses
Heaven! Let me show you a Bethesda that wants Porches. What truer house of
effusion then the Church of God, which sheds forth waters of comfort, yea of
life? Behold some of the Porches of this Bethesda so far from building, that
they are pulled down. It is a wonder if the demolished stones of God's House
have not built some of yours, and if some of you have not your rich Suits
guarded with Souls. There were wont to be reckoned three wonders of England,
Ecclesia, Foemina, Lana, The Churches, the Women, the Wool. Foemina may pass
still; who may justly challenge wonder for their Vanity, if not their Person.
As for Lana, if it be wonderful alone, I am sure it is ill joined with
Ecclesia: The Church is fleeced, and has nothing but a bare pelt left upon her
back. And as for Ecclesia, either men have said with the Babylonians, Down with
it, down with it even to the ground; or else in respect of the Maintenance,
with Judas, Vt quid perditio haec? Why was this waste? How many remorsefull
souls have sent back, with Jacob's sons, their money in their Sacks mouths? How
many great Testators have in their last Will returned the anathematized
peculium of Impropriations to the Church, choosing rather to impair their heir
then to burden their Souls? Dum times ne pro te patrimonium tuum perdas, ipse
pro patrimonio tuo peris, says Cyprian; Whilst thou fear to lose thy
patrimony for thy own good, thou perishest with thy patrimony. Ye great men,
spend not all your time in building Castles in the air, or houses on the sand;
but set your hands and purses to the building of the Porches of Bethesda. It is
a shame for a rich Christian to be like a Christmas-box, that receives all, and
nothing can be got out till it be broken in pieces; or like unto a drowned
man's hand, that holds whatsoever it gets. To do good and to distribute,
forget not; for with such Sacrifices God is well pleased.

This was the Place: what was the Use of it? All sorts of Patients were at the
bank of Bethesda: where should Cripples be but at the Spittle? The sick, blind,
lame, withered, all that did either morbo laborare or vitio corporis, complain
either of sickness or impotency, were there. In natural course, one receipt
heals not all diseases, no nor one Agent; one is an Oculist, another a
Bone-setter, another a Surgeon: But all diseases are alike to the
supernatural power of God.

Hippocrates, though the Prince of Physicians, yet swears by Aesculapius he
will never meddle with cutting of the Stone. There is no Disease that Art will
not meddle with: there are many that it cannot cure. The poor Haemorrhoissa was
eighteen years in the Physicians hands, and had purged away both her body and
her substance. Yea some it kills in stead of healing: whence one Hebrew word
signifies both Physicians and dead men. But behold here all Sicknesses cured by
one hand, and by one water. O all ye that are spiritually sick and diseased,
come to the Pool of Bethesda, the Blood of Christ. Do ye complain of the
Blindness of your Ignorance? here ye shall receive clearness of Sight: of the
distemper of Passions? here Ease: of the superfluity of your sinful Humors?
here Evacuation: of the impotency of your Obedience? here Integrity: of the
dead witheredness of good Affections? here Life and Vigor. Whatsoever your
infirmity be, come to the Pool of Bethesda, and be healed.

All these may be cured; yet shall be cured at leisure: all must wait, all must
hope in waiting. Methinks I see how enviously these Cripples look one upon
another, each thinking other a let, each watching to prevent other, each
hoping to be next; like emulous Courtiers, that gape and vie for the next
preferment, and think it a pain to hope, and a torment to be prevented. But
Bethesda must be waited on. He is worthy of his Crutches that will not stay
God's leisure for his Cure. There is no virtue, no success without patience.
Waiting is a familiar lesson with Courtiers: and here we have all need of it.
One is sick of an overflowing of the Gall, another of a Tumor of Pride,
another of the Tentigo of Lust, another of the Vertigo of Inconstancy, another
of the choking Squinancy of Curses and Blasphemies; one of the Boulimy of
Gluttony, another of the Pleuritical stitches of Envy; one of the contracting
Cramp of Covetousness, another of the Atrophie of Unproficiency: one is
hide-bound with Pride, another is consumed with Emulation, another rotten with
Corrupt desires: and we are so much the sicker, if we feel not these
distempers. Oh that we could wait at the Bethesda of God, attend diligently
upon his Ordinances: we could no more fail of cure, then now we can hope for
cure. We wait hard, and endure much for the Body. Quantis laboribus agitur ut
longiore tempore laboretur! Multi cruciatus suscipiuntur certi, ut pauci dies
adjiciantur incerti. What toil do we take that we may toil yet longer! We
endure many certain pains for the addition of a few uncertain days, says
Austin. Why will we not do thus for the Soul? Without waiting it will not be.
The Cripple ( Act. 3.4.) was bidden, (...), Look up to us. He looked up. It was
cold comfort that he heard, Silver and Gold have I none: but the next clause
made amends for all, Surge and ambula, Rise and walk: and this was, because
(...), he attended expecting, verse 5. Would we be cured? It is not for us to
snatch at Bethesda, as a Dog at Nilus; nor to draw water and away, as Rebecca;
nor to set us a while upon the banks, as the Israelites by the rivers of
Babylon: but we must dwell in God's House, wait at Bethesda. But what shall I
say to you Courtiers, but even as Saint Paul to his Corinthians, Ye are full,
ye are rich, ye are strong without us? Many of you come to this place not as to
Bethel, the House of God, or Bethesda, the house of effusion; but as to
Bethaven, the house of vanity. If ye have not lost your old wont, there are
more words spoken in the outer Closet by the hearers, then in the Chapel by
the Preacher; as if it were Closet, quasi close-set, in an Exchange, like
communication of News. What do ye think of Sermons as matters of formality, as
very Superfluities, as your own idle Complements, which either ye hear not, or
believe not? What do ye think of your selves? Have ye only a postern to go to
Heaven by your selves, where-through ye can go, besides the foolishness of
Preaching? or do ye sing that old Pelagian note, Quid nunc mihi opus est Deo?
What need have I of God? What should I say to this but, Increpa, Domine. As for
our household Sermons, our Auditors are like the fruit of a tree in an
unseasonable year; or like a wood new felled, that has some few spires left
for standers some poles distance; or like the tithe sheaves in a field when the
corn is gone, (...), etc. as he said. It is true, ye have more Sermons and more
excellent then all the Courts under Heaven put together: but, as Austin said
well, Quid mihi proderit bona res non utenti been? What am I the better for a
good thing if I use it not well? Let me tell you, all these forcible means, not
well used, will set you the farther off from Heaven. If the Chapel were the
Bethesda of promotion, what thronging would there be into it? Yea if it were
but some mask-house, wherein a glorious (though momentany) show were to be
presented, neither white staves nor halberts could keep you out. Behold here,
ye are offered the honor to be (by this seed of regeneration) the Sons of God.
The Kingdom of Heaven, the Crown of Glory, the Scepter of Majesty, in one word,
Eternal Life is here offered and performed to you. O let us not so far forget
our selves, as in the Ordinances of God to contemn our own Happiness. But let
us know the time of our visitation: let us wait reverently and intentively upon
this Bethesda of God; that when the Angel shall descend and move the Water, our
Souls may be cured, and through all the degrees of Grace may be carried to the
full height of their Glory.

XXIX. The Transfiguration of CHRIST.
THere is not in all Divinity an higher speculation then this of Christ
transfigured. Suffer me therefore to lead you up by the hand into mount Tabor,
(for nearer to Heaven ye cannot come while ye are upon earth,) that you may see
him glorious upon Earth, the Region of his shame and abasement, who is now
glorious in Heaven, the Throne of his Majesty. He that would not have his
transfiguration spoken of till he were raised, would have it spoken of all the
world over now that he is raised and ascended, that by this momentany glory we
may judge of the eternal. The Circumstances shall be to us as the skirts of
the Hill, which we will climb up lightly; the Time, Place, Attendents,
Company. The Time, after six days; the Place, an high hill apart; the
Attendents, Peter, James, John; the Company, Moses and Elias: which when we
have passed, on the top of the hill shall appear to us that sight which shall
once make us glorious, and in the mean time make us happy.

All three Evangelists accord in the Terminus a quo, that it was immediately
after those words, There be some of them that stand here which shall not taste
of death till they have seen the Son of Man come in his Kingdom. Wherein,
methinks, the act comments upon the words. Peter, James and John, were these
some: they tasted not of death, till they saw this Heavenly image of the
Royalty of Christ glorified. But the Terminus quo disagrees a little. Matthew
and Mark say, after six; Luke, post fere octo: which as they are easily
reconciled by the usual distinction of inclusive and exclusive, necessary for
all computations, and Luke's about eight; so, methinks, seems to intimate God's
seventh day, the Sabbath: why should there be else so precise mention of six
days after, and about eight, but to imply that day which was betwixt the sixth
and eighth? God's day was fittest for so Divine a work: and well might that day
which imported God's rest and man's glory, be used for the clear representation
of the rest and glory of God and man. But in this conjecture (for ought I know)
I go alone: I dare not be too resolute. Certainly it was the seventh, whether
it were that seventh; the seventh after the promise of the glory of his Kingdom
exhibited: and this perhaps not without a mystery. God teaches both by words
and acts, says Hilary, that after six Ages of the world should be Christ 's
glorious appearance, and our transfiguration with him. But I know what our
Savior's farewell was, (...), it is not for us to know. But if we may not
know, we may conjecture; yet not above that we ought, says S. Paul: we may not
super sapere, as Tertullian's phrase is.

For the Place, tradition has taken it still for Tabor. I list not to cross it
without warrant. This was an high Hill indeed: thirty furlongs high, says
Josephus; mira rotunditate sublimis, says Hierome: and so steep, that some of
our English travelers, that have desired to climb it of late, have been glad
to give it up in the midway, and to measure the rest with their eyes.
Doubtless this Hill was a Symbol of Heaven, being near it, as in situation, in
resemblance. Heaven is expressed usually by the name of God's hill: and Nature
or this appellation taught the Heathens to figure it by their Olympus. All
Divine affairs of any magnificence were done on Hills. On the hill of Sinai was
the Law delivered: on the hill of Moriah was Isaac to be sacrificed; whence
Abraham's posie is, (...), In monte providebitur: on the hill of Rephidim stood
Moses with the rod of God in his stretched hand, and figured him crucified upon
the hill, whom Joshua figured victorious in the valley: on the hills of Ebal
and Gerizim were the Blessings and Curses: on Carmel was Eliah's sacrifice: the
Phrontisteria, Schools or Universities of the Prophets were still Ramah and
Gibeah, Excelsa, High places: who knows not that on the hill of Sion stood the
Temple? I have looked up to the hills, says the Psalmist. And Idolatry, in
imitation, had its hill-altars. On the mount of Olives was Christ wont to send
up his Prayers, and sent up himself. And here Luke says, he went up to an high
hill to pray; not for that God makes difference of places, to whose immensity
Heaven it self is a valley. It was an heathenish conceit of those Aramites,
that God is Deus montium, the God of the mountains. But because we are commonly
more disposed to good by either the freedom of our scope to Heaven, or the
awfulness or solitary silence of places, which (as one says) strikes a kind of
adoration into us, or by our local removal from this attractive body of the
earth; howsoever, when the body sees it self above the earth, the eye of the
Mind is more easily raised to her Heaven. It is good to take all advantage of
place (setting aside superstition) to further our Devotion. Aaron and Hur were
in the mountain with Moses, and held up his hands. Aaron (say some Allegorists)
is mountainous; Hur, fiery: Heavenly meditation and the fire of Charity must
lift up our prayers to God. As Satan carried up Christ to an high hill to tempt
him, so he carries up himself to be freed from temptation and distraction. If
ever we would be transfigured in our dispositions, we must leave the earth
below, and abandon all worldly thoughts. Venite, ascendamus; O come, let us
climb up to the hill, where God sees, or is seen, says devout Bernard. O all
ye cares, distractions, thoughtfulness, labors, pains, servitudes, stay me
here with this Ass, my Body, till I with the Boy, that is, my Reason and
Understanding, shall worship and return, says the same Father, wittily
alluding to the journey of Abraham for his sacrifice.

Wherefore then did Christ climb up this high hill? Not to look about him,
but, says S. Luke, (...), to pray; not for prospect, but for devotion; that
his thoughts might climb up yet nearer to Heaven. Behold how Christ entered
upon all his great works with Prayers in his mouth. When he was to enter into
that great work of his Humiliation in his Passion, he went into the garden to
pray: when he is to enter into this great work of his Exaltation in his
Transfiguring, he went up into the mountain to pray: he was taken up from his
knees to both. O noble example of Piety and Devotion to us! He was God that
prayed: the God that he prayed to, he might have commanded; yet he prayed, that
we men might learn of him to pray to him. What should we men dare to do
without prayers, when he that was God would do nothing without them? The very
heathen Poet could say, A Jove principium: and which of those verse-mongers
ever durst write a ballad without imploring of some Deity? which of the
heathens durst attempt any great enterprise, insalutato numine, without
invocation and sacrifice? Saul himself would play the Priest, and offer a
burnt-offering to the Lord, rather then the Philistines should fight with him
unsupplicated; as thinking any devotion better then none; and thinking it more
safe to sacrifice without a Priest, then to fight without Prayers. Ungirt,
unblest, was the old word; as not ready till they were girded, so not till they
had prayed. And how dare we rush into the affairs of God or the State; how dare
we thrust our selves into actions either perilous or important, without ever
lifting up our eyes and hearts unto the God of Heaven? Except we would say, (as
the devilish malice of Surius slanders that zealous Luther,) Nec propter Deum
haec res coepta est, nec propter Deum finietur, etc. This business was neither
begun for God, nor shall be ended for him. How can God bless us, if we implore
him not? how can we prosper, if he bless us not? How can we hope ever to be
transfigured from a lump of corrupt flesh, if we do not ascend and pray? As the
Samaritan woman said weakly, we may seriously, The well of mercies is deep: if
thou have nothing to draw with, never look to taste of the waters of life. I
fear the worst of men, Turks, and the worst Turks, the Moors, shall rise up in
Judgment against many Christians, with whom it is a just exception against any
witness by their Law, that he has not prayed six times in each natural day.
Before the day break, they pray for day; when it is day, they give God thanks
for day; at noon they thank God for half the day past; after that they pray for
a good Sunset; after that they thank God for the day passed; and lastly, pray
for a good night after their day. And we Christians suffer so many Suns and
Moons to rise and set upon our heads, and never lift up our hearts to their
Creator and ours, either to ask his blessing, or to acknowledge it. Of all men
under Heaven, none had so much need to pray as Courtiers. That which was done
but once to Christ, is always done to them. They are set upon the hill, and see
the glory of the Kingdoms of earth: but I fear it is seen of them as it is with
some of the Mariners, The more need, the less devotion.

Ye have seen the Place, see the Attendents. He would not have many, because he
would not have it yet known to all: hence was his intermination, and sealing up
their mouths with a Nemini dicite, Tell no man. Not none, because he would not
have it altogether unknown; and afterward would have it known to all. Three
were a legal number; in ore duorum aut trium, in the mouth of two or three
witnesses. He had eternally possessed the glory of his Father without any
witnesses: in time the Angels were blessed with that sight; and after that two
bodily, yet Heavenly, witnesses were allowed, Enoch and Elias. Now in his
humanity he was invested with glory, he takes but three witnesses, and those
earthly and weak, Peter, James, John. And why these? We may be too curious.
Peter, because the eldest; John, because the dearest; James, because next Peter
the zealousest: Peter, because he loved Christ most; John, because Christ most
loved him; James, because next to both he loved, and was loved most. I had
rather to have no reason but, quia complacuit, because it so pleased him. Why
may we not as well ask why he chose these twelve from others, as why he chose
these three out of the twelve? If any Romanists will raise from hence any
privilege to Peter, (which we could be well content to yield, if that would
make them ever the honester men,) they must remember that they must take
company with them; which these Pompeian spirits cannot abide. As good no
privilege as any partners. And withal, they must see him more taxed for his
error in this act, then honored by his presence at the act: whereas the
Beloved Disciple saw and erred not. These same three which were witnesses of
his Transfiguration in the mount, were witnesses of his Agony in the garden;
all three, and these three alone, were present at both: but both times
sleeping. These were arietes gregis, the Bell-weathers of the flock, as Austin
calls them. Oh weak devotion of three great Disciples! These were Paul's three
pillars, (...), Gal. 2.9. Christ takes them up twice; once to be witnesses of
his greatest Glory, once of his greatest Extremity: they sleep both times. The
other was in the night, more tolerable; this by day, yea in a light above day.
Chrysostom would fain excuse it to be an amazedness, not a sleep; not
considering that they slept both at that Glory, and after in the Agony. To see
that Master praying, one would have thought should have fetched them on their
knees: especially to see those Heavenly affections look out at his Eyes; to see
his Soul lifted up in his Hands in that transported fashion to Heaven. But now
the hill has wearied their lims, their body clogs their Soul, and they fall
asleep. Whilst Christ saw Divine visions, they dreamed dreams; whilst he was in
another world, ravished with the sight of his Father's Glory, yea of his own,
they were in another world, a world of fancies, surprised with the cousin of
death, sleep. Besides so gracious an example, their own necessity ( quia
incessanter pecco, because I continually sin, Bernard's reason) might have
moved them to pray rather then their Master: and behold, in stead of fixing
their eyes upon Heaven, they shut them; in stead of lifting up their hearts,
their heads fall down upon their shoulders; and shortly, here was snorting in
stead of sighs and prayers. This was not Abraham's or Elihu's ecstatical sleep,
Job 33. not the sleep of the Church, a waking sleep; but the plain sleep of the
eyes: and that not (...), a slumbring sleep, which David denies to himself
Psalm. 132. but (...), a sound sleep, which Solomon forbids Prove. 6.4. yea
rather (...), the dead sleep of Adam or Jonas; and, as Bernard had wont to say
when he heard a Monk snort, they did carnaliter seu seculariter dormire. Prayer
is an ordinary receipt for sleep. How prone are we to it, when we should mind
Divine things? Adam slept in Paradise, and lost a Rib: but this sleep was of
God's giving, and this rib was of God's taking. The good Husband slept, and
found tares. Eutychus slept, and fell. Whilst Satan lulls us asleep, (as he
does always rock the cradle when we sleep in our devotions,) he ever takes some
good from us, or puts some evil in us, or indangers us a deadly fall. Away with
this spiritual Lethargy. Bernard had wont to say, that those which sleep are
dead to men, those that are dead are asleep to God. But I say, those that sleep
at Church are dead to God: so we preach their Funeral Sermons in stead of
hortatory. And as he was wont to say, he lost no time so much as that wherein
he slept; so let me add, there is no loss of time so desperate as of holy
time. Think that Christ says to thee at every Sermon as he did to Peter,
Etiam, Petre, dormis? Sleep thou, Peter? could thou not wake with me one
hour? A slumbring and a drowzy heart do not become the business and presence of
him that keeps Israel, and slumbers not.

These were the Attendents; see the Companions of Christ. As our glory is not
consummate without society, no more would Christ have his: therefore his
Transfiguration has two Companions, Moses, Elias. As Saint Paul says of
himself, Whether in the body, or out of the body, I know not, God knows: so say
I of these two. Of Eliah there may seem less doubt, since we know that his body
was assumed to Heaven, and might as well come down for Christ's glory as go up
for his own; although some grave Authors, as Calvin, Oecolampadius, Bale,
Fulk, have held his body with Enoch's resolved into their elements: sed ego non
credulus illis. Enoch translatus est in carne, and Elias carneus raptus est in
coelum, etc. Enoch was translated in the flesh, and Elias being yet in the
flesh was taken into Heaven, says Hierome in his Epistle ad Pammachium.

And for Moses; though it be rare and singular, and Austin makes much scruple
of it; yet why might not he after death return in his body to the glory of
Christ's Transfiguration, as well as afterward many of the Saints did to the
glory of his Resurrection? I cannot therefore with the Gloss think, there is
any reason why Moses should take another, a borrowed body, rather then his own.
Heaven could not give two fitter companions, more admirable to the Jews for
their Miracles, more gracious with God for their Faith and Holiness: Both of
them admitted to the conference with God in Horeb; both of them Types of
Christ; both of them fasted forty days; both of them for the glory of God
suffered many perils; both divided the waters; both the messengers of God to
Kings; both of them mavelous, as in their life, so in their end. A chariot of
Angels took away Elias; he was sought by the Prophets, and not found: Michael
strove with the Devil for the body of Moses; he was sought for by the Jews, and
not found: and now both of them are found here together on Tabor. This Elias
shows himself to the Royal Prophet of his Church; this Moses shows himself to
the true Michael. Moses the publisher of the Law, Elias the chief of the
Prophets, show themselves to the God of the Law and Prophets. Alter populi
informator aliquando, alter reformator quandoque, One the informer once of the
people, the other the reformer sometimes, says Tertull. in 4. advers.
Marcionem. Alter initiator Veteris Testamenti, alter consummator Novi, One the
first Register of the Old Testament, the other the shutter up of the New. I
verily think, with Hilary, that these two are pointed at as the forerunners of
the second coming of Christ, as now they were the foretellers of his departure:
neither doubt I that these are the Two Witnesses which are alluded to in the
Apocalypse; howsoever diverse of the Fathers have thrust Enoch into the place of
Moses. Look upon the place, Apoc. 11.5. Who but Elias can be he of whom it is
said, If any man will hurt him, fire proceeds out of his mouth, and devoureth
his enemies, alluding to 2 Kings 1? Who but Elias of whom it is said, He has
power to shut the Heaven, that it rain not in the days of his prophesying,
alluding to 1 Kings 18? Who but Moses of whom it is said, He has power to turn
the waters into blood, and smite the earth with all manner of plagues, alluding
to Exodus 7. and 8? But take me aright; let me not seem a friend to the
Publicans of Rome, an abettour of those Alcoran-like Fables of our Popish
Doctors, who (not seeing the wood for trees) do haerere in cortice, stick in
the bark, taking all concerning that Antichrist according to the letter. Odi,
and arceo. So shall Moses and Elias come again in those Witnesses, as Elias is
already come in John Baptist: their Spirits shall be in these Witnesses, whose
Bodies and Spirits were witnesses both of the present Glory and future Passion
of Christ. Doubtless many thousand Angels saw this sight, and were not seen;
these two both saw and were seen. O how great an Happiness was it for these two
great Prophets, in their glorified flesh to see their glorified Savior, who
before his Incarnation had spoken to them? to speak to that Man God of whom
they were glorified, and to become Prophets not to men, but to God? And if
Moses his face so shone before, when he spoke to him without a body in mount
Sinai, in the midst of the flames and clouds; how did it shine now, when
himself glorified, speaks to him a man, in Tabor, in light and majesty? Elias
hid his face before with a mantle when he passed by him in the Rock: now with
open face he beholds him present, and in his own glory adores his. Let that
impudent Marcion, who ascribes the Law and Prophets to another God, and devises
an hostility betwixt Christ and them, be ashamed to see Moses and Elias not
only in colloquio, but in consortio claritatis, not only in conference, but
in a partnership of brightness (as Tertull. speaks) with Christ; whom if he had
misliked, he had his choice of all the Quire of Heaven; and now choosing them,
why were they not in sordibus and tenebris, in rags and darkness? Sic inalienos
demonstrat illos, dum secum habet; sic relinquendos docet, quos sibi jungit;
sic destruit, quos de radiis suis exstruit: So does he show them far from
strangeness to him, whom he has with him; so does he teach them to be
forsaken, whom he joins with himself; so does he destroy those, whom he graces
with his beams of glory, says that Father. His act verifies his word. Think
not that I come to destroy the Law or the Prophets; I am not come to destroy,
but to fulfill them, Matt. 5.17. Oh what consolation, what confirmation was
this to the Disciples, to see such examples of their future Glory, such
witnesses and adorers of the eternal Deity of their Master? They saw in Moses
and Elias what they themselves should be. How could they ever fear to be
miserable, that saw such precedents of their ensuing glory? how could they fear
to die, that saw in others the happiness of their own change? The rich Glutton
pleads with Abraham, that if one came to them from the dead, they will amend:
Abraham answers, They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them. Behold,
here is both Moses and the Prophets; and these too come from the dead: how can
we now but be persuaded of the happy state of another world, unless we will
make our selves worse then the damned? See and consider that the Saints of God
are not lost, but departed; gone into a far country with their Master, to
return again richer and better then they went. Lest we should think this the
condition of Elias only, that was rapt into Heaven, see here Moses matched
with him, that died and was buried. And is this the state of these two Saints
alone? Shall none be seen with him in the Tabor of Heaven but those which have
seen him in Horeb and Carmel? O thou weak Christian, was only one or two lims
of Christ's body glorious in the Transfiguration, or the whole? He is the Head,
we are the Members. If Moses and Elias were more excellent parts, Tongue, or
Hand; let us be but Heels or Toes, his body is not perfect in glory without
ours. When Christ, which is our life, shall appear, then shall we also appear
with him in glory, Colos. 3.4. How truly may we say to death, Rejoice not, mine
enemy; though I fall, yet shall I rise; yea I shall rise in falling? We shall
not all sleep, we shall be changed, says S. Paul to his Thessalonians. Elias
was changed, Moses slept; both appeared: to teach us, that neither our sleep
nor change can keep us from appearing with him. When therefore thou shall
receive the sentence of death on mount Nebo, or when the fiery chariot shall
come and sweep thee from this vale of mortality, remember thy glorious
re-apparition with thy Savior, and thou can not but be comforted, and
cheerfully triumph over that last Enemy, outfacing those terrors with the
assurance of a blessed Resurrection to Glory. To the which, etc.

XXX. The Transfiguration of CHRIST. The Second Part.
IT falls out with this Discourse as with Mount Tabor it self, that it is more
easily climbed with the eye, then with the foot. If we may not rather say of
it, as Josephus did of Sinai, that it does not only ascensus hominum, but
aspectus fatigare, weary not only the steps but the very sight of men. We had
thought not to spend many breaths in the skirts of the hill, the Circumstances;
and it has cost us one hour's journey already: and we were glad to rest us,
ere we can have left them below us. One pause more (I hope) will overcome them,
and set us on the top. No Circumstance remains undiscussed but this one, What
Moses and Elias did with Christ in their apparition. For they were not, as some
sleepy attendents, (like the three Disciples in the beginning,) to be there and
see nothing; nor, as some silent spectatours, mute witnesses, to see and say
nothing: but (as if their Glory had no whit changed their profession) they are
Prophets still, and foretold his departure, as S. Luke tells us. Foretold, not
to him who knew it before, yea who told it them; they could not have known it
but from him; he was (...), the Word of his Father: they told but that which he
before had told his Disciples; and now these Heavenly witnesses tell it over
again, for confirmation. Like as John Baptist knew Christ before; he was Vox
clamantis, the Voice of a crier, the other Verbum Patris, the Word of his
Father; there is great affinity betwixt vox and verbum; yea this voice had
uttered it self clearly, Ecce Agnus Dei, Behold the Lamb of God: yet he sends
his Disciples with an Art thou he? that he might confirm to them by him that
which he both knew and had said of him. So our Savior follows his Forerunner
in this, that what he knew and had told his Disciples, the other Elias, the
typical John Baptist, and Moses must make good to their belief.

This (...) departure of Christ was (...) a word both hard and harsh; hard to
believe, and harsh in believing. The Disciples thought of nothing but a
Kingdom; a Kingdom restored magnificently, interminably: and two of these
three witnesses had so swallowed this hope, that they had put in for places in
the State, to be his chief Peers. How could they think of a parting? The throne
of David did so fill their eyes, that they could not see his Cross: and if they
must let down this Pill, how bitter must it needs be? His presence was their
joy and life; it was their death to think of his loss. Now therefore that they
might see that his Sufferings and Death were not of any sudden impotence, but
predetermined in Heaven, and revealed to the Saints, two of the most noted
Saints in Heaven shall second the news of his departure, and that in the midst
of his Transfiguration: that they could not choose but think, He that can be
thus happy, needs not be miserable; that Passion which he will undergo, is not
out of weakness, but out of Love. It is wittily noted by that sweet
Chrysostom, that Christ never lightly spoke of his Passion, but immediately
before and after he did some great Miracle: And here answerably, in the midst
of his miraculous Transfiguration, the two Saints speak of his Passion. A
strange opportunity: In his highest Exaltation to speak of his Sufferings; to
talk of Calvary in Tabor; when his Head shone with glory, to tell him how it
must bleed with thorns; when his Face shone like the Sun, to tell him it must
be blubbered and spat upon; when his Garments glistered with that celestial
brightness, to tell him they must be stripped and divided; when he was adored
by the Saints of Heaven, to tell him how he must be scorned by the basest of
men; when he was seen between two Saints, to tell him how he must be seen
between two Malefactors: in a word, in the midst of his Divine Majesty, to
tell him of his shame; and whilst he was Transfigured in the Mount, to tell him
how he must be disfigured upon the Cross. Yet these two Heavenly Prophets found
this the fittest time for this discourse: rather choosing to speak of his
Sufferings in the height of his Glory, then of his Glory after his Sufferings.
It is most seasonable in our best to think of our worst estate: for both that
thought will be best digested when we are well; and that change will be best
prepared for when we are the farthest from it. You would perhaps think it
unseasonable for me, in the midst of all your Court-jollity to tell you of the
days of mourning, and, with that great King, to serve in a Death's head amongst
your Royal dishes, to show your Coffins in the midst of your Triumphs: yet
these precedents above exception show me that no time is so fit as this. Let me
therefore say to you, with the Psalmist, I have said, Ye are Gods: if ye were
Transfigured in Tabor, could ye be more? but ye shall die like men: there is
your (...). It was a worthy and witty note of Hierome, that amongst all trees,
the Cedars are bidden to praise God, which are the tallest: and yet Dies Domini
super omnes Cedros Libani, Esa. 2. Ye Gallants, whom a little yellow earth and
the webs of that curious worm have made gorgeous without, and perhaps proud
within, remember that ere long, as one worm decks you without, so another worm
shall consume you within; and that both the earth that you pranck up, and that
earth wherewith you pranck it, is running back into dust. Let not your high
estate hide from you your fatal humiliation: let not not your Purples hide
from you your Winding Sheet: But even on the top of Tabor think of the depth of
the Grave: think of your departure from men, while ye are advanced above men.

We are now ascended to the top of the Hill. Let us therefore stand, and see,
and wonder at this great sight: as Moses, to see the bush flaming, and not
consumed; so we, to see the Humanity continuing it self in the midst of these
beams of Glory. Christ was (...), says S. Paul, in the form of a servant; now
for the time he was truly (...), transformed: That there is no cause why
Maldonat should so inveigh against some of ours, yea of his own, as Jansenius,
who translates it Transformation: for what is the external form but the
figure? and their own Vulgar (as hotly as he takes it) reads it, Philip. 2.7.
(...), formam servi accipiens. There is no danger in this ambiguity. Not the
substantial form, but the external fashion of Christ was changed: he having
three forms, (as Bernard distinguishes) contemptam, splendidam, Divinam,
changes here the first into the second. This is one of the rarest occurrences
that ever befell the Savior of the World. I am wont to reckon up these four
principal wonders of his life, Incarnation, Temptation, Transfiguration, and
Agony: the first in the womb of the Virgin, the second in the Wilderness, the
third in the Mount, the fourth in the Garden: the first, that God should become
Man; the second, that God and Man should be tempted and transported by Satan;
the third, that Man should be glorified upon earth; the last, that he which was
Man and God should sweat blood under the sense of God's wrath for man. And all
these either had the Angels for witnesses, or the immediate voice of God. The
first had Angels singing, the second Angels ministering, the third the voice of
God thundering, the fourth the Angels comforting: that it may be no wonder, the
Earth marvels at those things whereat the Angels of Heaven stand amazed.
Bernard makes three kinds of wonderful changes: Sublimitas in Humilitatem,
Height to lowliness, when the Word took flesh; Contemptibilitas in Majestatem,
when Christ transformed himself before his Disciples; Mutabilitas in
Aeternitatem, when he rose again, and ascended to Heaven to reign for ever. Ye
see this is one of them: and as Tabor did rise out of the valley of Galilee, so
this Exaltation did rise out of the midst of Christ's Humiliation. Other
marvels do increase his dejection, this only makes for his Glory; and the
glory of this is matchable with the humiliation of all the rest. That Face
wherein before (says Esaias) there was no form, nor beauty, now shines as the
Sun: That Face which men hid their faces from in contempt, now shines so, that
mortal eyes could not choose but hide themselves from the luster of it, and
immortal receive their beams from it. He had ever in vultu sidereum quiddam,
as Hierome speaks, a certain heavenly Majesty and port in his countenance,
which made his Disciples follow him at first sight; but now here was the
perfection of supercelestiall brightness. It was a Miracle in the Three
Children, that they so were delivered from the flames, that their very garments
smelt not of the fire: it is no less Miracle in Christ, that his very garments
were dyed Celestial, and did savor of his Glory: like as Aaron was so
anointed on his head and beard, that his skirts were all perfumed. His clothes
therefore shined as snow, yea (that were but a waterish white) as the Light it
self, says S. Mark, and Matthew, in the most Greek Copies. That seamless Coat,
as it had no welt, so it had no spot. The King's Son is all fair, even without.
O excellent Glory of his Humanity! The best Diamond or Carbuncle is hid with a
case: but this brightness pierces through all his garments, and makes them
lightsome in him, which use to conceal light in others. Herod put him on in
mockage (...), Luke 23. not a white, but a bright robe, (the ignorance whereof
makes a show of disparity in the Evangelists:) but God the Father, to glorify
him, clothes his very garments with Heavenly splendor. Behold, thou art fair,
(my beloved) behold, thou art fair; and there is no spot in thee. Thine head is
as fine gold, thy mouth is as sweet things, and thou art wholly delectable.
Come forth, ye daughters of Sion, and behold King Solomon with the Crown
wherewith his Father crowned him, in the day of the gladness of his heart. O
Savior, if thou were such in Tabor, what art thou in Heaven? if this were the
glory of thy Humanity, what is the presence of thy Godhead? Let no man yet
wrong himself so much as to magnify this happiness as another's, and to put
himself out of the participation of this glory. Christ is our head, we are his
members. As we all were in the First Adam, both innocent and sinning; so are we
in the Second Adam, both shining in Tabor, and bleeding sweat in the Garden.
And as we are already happy in him, so shall we be once in our selves by and
through him. He shall change our vile bodies, that they may be like his
glorious body. Behold our pattern, and rejoice; like his glorious body. These
very bodies, that are now cloddy like the earth, shall once be bright as the
Sun: and we, that now see clay in one another faces, shall then see nothing
but Heaven in our countenances: and we, that now set forth our bodies with
clothes, shall then be clothed upon with Immortality, out of the wardrobe of
Heaven. And if ever any painted face should be admitted to the sight of this
Glory, (as I much fear it; yea I am sure God will have none but true faces in
Heaven;) they would be ashamed to think that ever they had faces to daub with
these beastly pigments, in comparison of this Heavenly complexion. Let us
therefore look upon this flesh, not so much with contempt of what it was and
is, as with a joyful hope of what it shall be. And when our courage is
assaulted with the change of these bodies from healthful to weak, from living
to dead; let us comfort our selves with the assurance of this change from dust
to incorruption. We are not so sure of death, as of transfiguration. All the
days of our appointed time we will therefore wait, till our changing shall come.

Now from the Glory of the Master, give me leave to turn your eyes to the
Error of the Servant, who having slept with the rest, and now suddenly
awaking, knows not whether he slept still. To see such a light about him,
three so glittering persons before him, made him doubt now, as he did after,
when he was carried by the Angel through the iron gate, whether it were a
pleasing dream, or a real act. All slept, and now all waked; only Peter slept
waking, and I know not whether more erred in his speech or in his sleep. It was
a shame for a man to sleep in Tabor; but it is more a shame for a man to dream
with his eyes open. Thus did Peter; Master, it is good for us to be here. Let
us make us three Tabernacles. I could well say with Optatus in this or any
other occasion, Ipsius Sancti Petri beatitudo veniam tribuat, dubito dicere
peccasse tantam Sanctitatem, Let blessed Peter pardon me, I fear to say so
great Holiness offended. Yet since our adversaries are so over-partiall to this
worthy Saint, in whom they have as little as they boast much, that they can be
content his praise should blemish the dignity of all the rest, yea that God
himself is in danger to be a loser by the advancement of so dear a Servant;
give me leave to lay my finger a little upon this blot. God would never have
recorded that which it should be uncharitable for us to observe. It was the
injurious kindness of Marcion in honor of Peter, to leave out the story of
Malchus, as Epiphanius notes: It shall be our blame, if we do not so note, that
we benefit our selves even by his imperfections. S. Mark's Gospel is said to be
Peter's. O blessed Apostle, can it be any wrong to say of thee that which thou
have written of thy self, not for insultation, not for exprobration? God forbid
but that men may be ashamed to give that to him which he has denied to
himself. Let me therefore not doubt to say, (with reverence to so great a
Saint) that as he spoke most, so he is noted to have erred most. Not to meddle
with his sinking, striking, Judaizing; one while we find him carnally
insinuating, another while carnally presuming; one while weakly denying,
another while rashly misconstruing. Carnally insinuating; Master, favor thy
self. Which though some Parasites of Rome would fain smooth up, that he in this
showed his Love to Christ, as before his Faith, out of S. Hierome and S.
Austin; yet it must needs be granted, which Bernard says, diligebat Spiritum
carnaliter, he loved the Spirit in a carnal fashion. Let them choose whether
they will admit Christ to have chid unjustly, or Peter worthy of chiding:
Except perhaps, with Hilary, they will stop where they should not; Vade post
me, spoken to Peter in approbation; Satana, non sapis quae Dei sunt, spoken to
Satan in objurgation. Carnally presuming; Though all men, yet not I. If he had
not presumed of his strength to stand, he had not fallen. And as one yawning
makes many open mouths; so did his vain resolution draw on company: Likewise
said the other Disciples. For his weak Denial; ye all know his simple negation,
lined with an oath, faced with an imprecation. And here, that no man may need
to doubt of an error, the Spirit of God says, he knew not what he said: not
only (...), as Mark, what he should say; but (...), says Luke, what he did
speak: whereof S. Mark gives the reason, (...), they were amazedly affrighted.
Amazedness may abate an error of speech, it cannot take it away. Besides
astonishment, here was a fervor of spirit; a love to Christ's glory, and a
delight in it: a fire, but misplaced, on the top of the chimney, not on the
hearth: praematura devotio, as Ambrose speaks, a devotion, but rash and heady.
And if it had not been so, yet it is not in the power of a good intention to
make a speech good. In this the matter failed: For what should such Saints do
in earthly Tabernacles, in Tabernacles of his making? And if he could be
content to live there without a tent, (for he would have but three made,) why
did he not much more conceive so of those Heavenly guests? And if he spoke this
to retain them, how weak was it to think their absence would be for want of
house-room? Or how could that at once be which Moses and Elias had told him,
and that which he wished? For how should Christ both depart at Jerusalem, and
stay in the Mount? Or if he would have their abode there, to avoid the
sufferings at Jerusalem, how did he yet again sing over that song for which he
had heard before, Come behind me, Satan? Or if it had been fit for Christ to
have stayed there, how weakly does he (which Chrysostom observes) equalize the
Servant with the Master, the Saints with God? In a word, the best and the worst
that can be said here of Peter is, that which the Psalmist says of Moses,
(...) effutiit labiis, he spoke unadvisedly with his lips, Psalm. 106.33.

Yet if any earthly place or condition might have given warrant to Peter's
motion, this was it. Here was a Hill, the emblem of Heaven; here were two
Saints, the Epitome of Heaven; here was Christ, the God of Heaven. And if Peter
might not say so of this, how shall we say of any other place, Bonum est esse
hic? It is good to be here. Will ye say of the Country, Bonum est esse hic?
there is melancholic dullness, privacy, toil. Will you say of the Court, Bonum
est esse hic? there dwells ambition, secret undermining, attendence, serving of
humors and times. Will ye say of the City, Bonum est esse hic? there you find
continual tumult, usury, cozenage in bargains, excess and disorder. Get you to
the Wilderness, and say, It is good to be here. Even there evils will find us
out. In nemore habitat Lupus, says Bernard, In the wood dwells the Wolf:
weariness and sorrow dwell everywhere. The rich man wallows amongst his heaps,
and when he is in his counting house, beset with piles of bags, he can say,
Bonum est esse hic: He worships these molten Images; his Gold is his God, his
Heaven is his Chest: not thinking of that which Tertullian notes, Aurum ipsum
quibusdam gentibus ad vincla servire, that some Countries make their very
fetters of gold: yea so does he, whilst he admires it, making himself the slave
to his servant, Damnatus ad metalla, as the old Roman punishment was. Coacta
servitus miserabilior, affectata miserior; Forced bondage is more worthy of
pity, affected bondage is more miserable. And if God's hand touch him never so
little, can his Gold bribe a disease, can his bags keep his head from a king,
or the gout from his joints? or does his loathing stomach make a difference
betwixt an earthen and silver dish? O vain desires, and impotent contentments
of men, who place happiness in that which does not only not save them from
evils, but help to make them miserable! Behold, their wealth feeds them with
famine, recreates them with toil, chears them with cares, blesses them with
torments; and yet they say, Bonum est esse hic. How are their sleeps broken
with cares? how are their hearts broken with losses? Either Riches have wings,
which in the clipping or pulling fly away, and take them to Heaven: or else
their Souls have wings, ( Stulte, hac nocte, Thou fool, this night,) and fly
from their riches to Hell. Non Dominus, sed colonus, says Seneca, Not the
Lord, but the farmer. So that here are both perishing riches, and a perishing
Soul; uncertainty of riches, (as S. Paul to his Timothy) and certainty of
misery. And yet these vain men say, Bonum est esse hic.

The man of Honor, (that I may use Bernard's phrase) that has Assuerus his
proclamation made before him, which knows he is not only (...), a certain
great man, as Simon affected, but (...), the man, which Demosthenes was proud
of, that sees all heads bare, and all knees bent to him, that finds himself out
of the reach of envy, on the pitch of admiration, says, Bonum est esse hic.
Alas! how little thinks he of that which that good man said to his Eugenius,
Non est quod blandiatur celsitudo, ubi solicitudo major; What care we for the
fawning of that greatness, which is attended with more care? King Henry the
Seventh's Emblem in all his buildings, (in the windows) was still a Crown in a
bush of Thorns: I know not with what historical allusion; but sure, I think,
to imply that great places are not free from great cares. Saul knew what he
did, when he hid himself among the stuff. No man knows the weight of a
Scepter, but he that swaieth it. As for subordinate greatness, it has so much
less worth as it has more dependence. How many sleepless nights, and restless
days, and busy shifts does their ambition cost them that affect eminence?
Certainly, no men are so worthy of pity as they whose height thinks all others
worthy of contempt. High places are slippery; and as it is easy to fall, so
the ruin is deep, and the recovery difficult. Altiorem locum sortitus es, non
tutiorem; sublimiorem, sed non securiorem, says Bernard: Thou have got an
higher place, but not a safer; a loftier, but not more secure. Aulae culmen
lubricum, The slippery ridge of the Court, was the old title of Honor. David's
curse was, Fiat via eorum tenebrae and lubricum, Let their way be made dark and
slippery. What difference is there betwixt his curse and the happiness of the
Ambitious, but this, That the way of the one is dark and slippery, the way of
the other lightsome and slippery; that dark, that they may fall, this light,
that they may see and be seen to fall? Please your selves then, ye great ones,
and let others please you in the admiration of your height. But if your
goodness do not answer your greatness, Sera querela est, quoniam elevans
allisisti me, It is a late complaint, Thou have lift me up to cast me down.
Your ambition has but set you up a scaffold, that your misery might be more
notorious. And yet these clients of Honor say, Bonum est esse hic.

The pampered Glutton, when he sees his table spread with full bowls, with
costly dishes and curious sauces, the dainties of all three elements, says,
Bonum est esse hic. And yet eating has a satiety, and satiety a wearinest: his
heart is never more empty of contentment, then when his stomach is fullest of
Delicates. When he is empty, he is not well till he be filled; when he is full,
he is not well till he have got a stomach: Et momentanea blandimenta gulae
stercoris fine condemnat, says Hierom, And he condemns all the momentany
pleasures of his maw to the dunghill. And when he sits at his feasts of marrow
and fat things, (as the Prophet speaks,) his table, according to the Psalmist's
imprecation, is made his snare; a true snare every way: his Soul is caught in
it with excess, his estate with penury, his Body with diseases. Neither does he
more plainly tear his meat in pieces with his teeth, then he does himself. And
yet this vain man says, Bonum est esse hic.

The petulant Wanton thinks it the only happiness, that he may have his full
scope to filthy dalliance. Little would he so do, if he could see his Strumpet
as she is, her eyes the eyes of a Cockatrice, her hairs snakes, her painted
face the visor of a fury, her heart snares, her hands bands, and her end
wormwood, consumption of the flesh, destruction of the Soul, and the flames of
lust ending in the flames of Hell. Since therefore neither Pleasures, nor
Honor, nor Wealth, can yield any true contentment to their best favorites,
let us not be so unwise as to speak of this vale of misery, as Peter did of the
hill of Tabor, Bonum est esse hic.

And if the best of earth cannot do it, why will ye seek it in the worst? How
dare any of you great ones seek to purchase contentment with Oppression,
Sacrilege, Bribery, out-facing innocence and truth with power, damning your own
Souls for but the humouring of a few miserable days? Filii hominum, usquequo
gravi cord? ad quid diligitis vanitatem, and quaeritis mendacium? O ye sons of
men, how long, etc? But that which moved Peter's desire (though with
imperfection) shows what will perfect our desire and felicity: for if a glimpse
of this Heavenly glory did so ravish this worthy Disciple, that he thought it
happiness enough to stand by and gaze upon it; how shall we be affected with
the contemplation, yea fruition of the Divine Presence? Here was but Tabor,
there is Heaven; here were but two Saints, there many millions of Saints and
Angels; here was Christ transfigured, there he sits at the right hand of
Majesty; here was a representation, there a gift and possession of Blessedness.
Oh that we could now forget the world, and, fixing our eyes upon this better
Tabor, say, Bonum est esse hic. Alas! this life of ours, if it were not short,
yet it is miserable; and if it were not miserable, yet it is short. Tell me, ye
that have the greatest Command on earth, whether this vile world have ever
afforded you any sincere contentation. The world is your servant: if it were
your Parasite, yet could it make you heartily merry? Ye delicatest Courtiers,
tell me, if Pleasure it self have not an unpleasant tediousness hanging upon
it, and more sting then honey. And whereas all happiness (even here below) is
in the vision of God; how is our spiritual eye hindered, as the body is from
his Object, by darkness, by false light, by aversion? Darkness; he that does
sin is in darkness: False light; whilst we measure eternal things by temporary:
Aversion; whilst, as weak eyes hate the light, we turn our eyes from the true
and immutable good, to the fickle and uncertain. We are not on the hill, but in
the valley; where we have tabernacles, not of our own making, but of clay; and
such as wherein we are witnesses of Christ, not transfigured in glory, but
blemished with dishonor, dishonored with oaths and blasphemies, re-crucified
with our sins; witnesses of God's Saints, not shining in Tabor, but mourning in
darkness, and, in stead of that Heavenly brightness, clothed with sackcloath
and ashes. Then and there we shall have tabernacles not made with hands,
eternal in the heavens, where we shall see how sweet the Lord is; we shall see
the triumphs of Christ, we shall hear and sing the Hallelujahs of Saints. Quae
nunc nos angit vesania vitiorum, sitire absynthium, etc? says that devout
Father. Oh! how has our corruption bewitched us, to thirst for this wormwood,
to affect the shipwrecks of this world, to dote upon the misery of this fading
life; and not rather to fly up to the felicity of Saints, to the society of
Angels, to that blessed contemplation wherein we shall see God in himself, God
in us, our selves in him? There shall be no sorrow, no pain, no complaint, no
fear, no death. There is no malice to rise against us, no misery to afflict us,
no hunger, thirst, weariness, temptation to disquiet us. There, O there, one
day is better then a thousand: There is rest from our labors, peace from our
enemies, freedom from our sins. How many clouds of coffeehouse darken the
Sunshine of our joy while we are here below? Vae nobis qui vivimus plangere
quae pertulimus, dolere quae sentimus, timere quae exspectamus! Complaint of
evils past, sense of present, fear of future, have shared our lives amongst
them. Then shall we be semper laeti, semper satiati, always joyful, always
satisfied with the vision of that God, in whose presence there is fullness of
joy, and at whose right hand are pleasures for evermore. Shall we see that
heathen Cleombrotus abandoning his life, and casting himself down from the
rock, upon an uncertain noise of immortality; and shall not we Christians
abandon the wicked superfluities of life, the pleasures of sin, for that life
which we know more certainly then this? What stick we at, my beloved? Is there
a Heaven? or is there none? have we a Savior there? or have we none? We know
there is a Heaven, as sure as that there is an earth below us; we know we have
a Savior there, as sure as there are men that we converse with upon earth; we
know there is happiness, as sure as we know there is misery and mutability upon
earth. Oh our miserable sottishness and infidelity, if we do not contemn the
best offers of the world, and, lifting up our eyes and hearts to Heaven, say,
Bonum est esse hic!

Even so, Lord Jesus, come quickly. To him that has purchased and prepared
this Glory for us, together with the Father and Blessed Spirit, one
Incomprehensible God, be all praise for ever. Amen.

XXXI. The Prosecution of the Transfiguration.
BEfore, the Disciples eyes were dazzled with Glory; now, the brightness of
that Glory is shaded with a Cloud. Frail and feeble eyes of mortality cannot
look upon an Heavenly luster. That Cloud imports both Majesty and obscuration.
Majesty; for it was the testimony of God's presence of old: the Cloud covered
the Mountain, the Tabernacle, the Oracle. He that makes the clouds his chariot,
was in a cloud carried up into Heaven. Where have we mention of any Divine
representation, but a Cloud is one part of it? What comes nearer to Heaven,
either in place or resemblance? Obscuration: for as it showed there was a
Majesty, and that Divine; so it showed them that the view of that Majesty was
not for bodily eyes. Like as when some great Prince walks under a Canopy, that
veil shows there is a Great person under it, but withal restrains the eye from
a free sight of his person. And if the cloud were clear, yet it shaded them.
Why then was this cloud interposed betwixt that glorious Vision and them, but
for a check of their bold eyes?

Had they too long gazed upon this resplendent spectacle, as their eyes had
been blinded, so their hearts had perhaps grown to an over-bold familiarity
with that Heavenly Object: How seasonably does the cloud intercept it? The wise
God knows our need of these vicissitudes and allays. If we have a light, we
must have a cloud; if a light to cheer us, we must have a cloud to humble us.
It was so in Sinai, it was so in Sion, it was so in Olivet; it shall never be
but so. The natural day and night do not more duly interchange then this
light and cloud. Above we shall have the light without the cloud, a clear
vision and fruition of God without all dim and sad interpositions: below we
cannot be free from these mists and clouds of sorrow and misapprehension.

But this was a bright cloud. There is difference betwixt the cloud in Tabor,
and that in Sinai: This was clear, that darksome. There is darkness in the Law,
there is light in the grace of the Gospel. Moses was there spoken to in
darkness; here he was spoken with in light. In that dark cloud there was
terror; in this there was comfort. Though it were a Cloud then, yet it was
bright; and though it were bright, yet it was a Cloud. With much light there
was some shade. God would not speak to them concerning Christ out of darkness:
neither yet would he manifest himself to them in an absolute brightness. All
his appearances have this mixture. What need I other instance then in these two
Saints? Moses spoke often to God mouth to mouth: yet not so immediately, but that
there was ever somewhat drawn as a curtain betwixt God and him; either fire in
Horeb, or smoke in Sinai: so as his face was not more veiled from the people,
then God's from him. Elias shall be spoken to by God, but in the rock, and
under a mantle. In vain shall we hope for any revelation from God, but in a
cloud. Worldly hearts are in utter darkness, they see not so much as the least
glimpse of these Divine beams, not a beam of that inaccessible light: The best
of his Saints see him here but in a cloud, or in a glass. Happy are we, if God
have honored us with these Divine representations of himself. Once, in his
light we shall see light.

I can easily think with what amazedness these three Disciples stood compassed
in that bright Cloud, expecting some miraculous event of so Heavenly a Vision;
when suddenly they might hear a voice sounding out of that Cloud saying, This
is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased; hear him. They need not be told
whose that voice was; the place, the matter evinced it. No Angel in Heaven
could, or durst have said so. How gladly does Peter afterward recount it? For
he received from God the Father honor and glory, when there came such a voice
to him from the excellent glory, This is my beloved Son, etc.

It was only the ear that was here taught, not the eye. As of Horeb, so of
Sinai, so of Tabor might God say, Ye saw no shape nor image in that day that
the Lord spoke unto you. He that knows our proneness to idolatry, avoids those
occasions which we might take to abuse our own fancies.

Twice has God spoken these words to his own Son from Heaven; once in his
Baptism, and now again in his Transfiguration. Here not without some oppositive
comparison; Not Moses, not Elias, but This. Moses and Elias were Servants; this
a Son. Moses and Elias were sons, but of grace and choice; this is that Son,
the Son by nature. Other sons are beloved as of favor, and free election; this
is The Beloved, as in the unity of his essence. Others are so beloved, that he
is pleased with themselves; this so beloved, that in and for him he is pleased
with mankind. As the relation betwixt the Father and the Son is infinite, so is
the Love. We measure the intension of Love by the extension: The love that
rests in the person affected alone, is but straight; true Love descends (like
Aaron's Ointment) from the head to the skirts, to children, friends, allies. O
incomprehensibly-large love of God the Father to the Son, that for his sake he
is pleased with the world! O perfect and happy complacence! Out of Christ there
is nothing but enmity betwixt God and the Soul; in him there can be nothing but
peace. When the beams are met in one center, they do not only heat, but burn.
Our weak love is diffused to many; God has some, the world more; and therein
wives, children, friends: but this infinite love of God has all the beams of
it united in one only Object, the Son of his Love. Neither does he love any
thing but in the participation of his Love, in the derivation from it. O God,
let me be found in Christ, and how can thou but be pleased with me?

This one voice proclaims Christ at once the Son of God, the Reconciler of the
world, the Doctor and Lawgiver of his Church. As the Son of God, he is
essentially interessed in his Love: as he is the Reconciler of the world in
whom God is well pleased, he does most justly challenge our love and adherence:
as he is the Doctor and Lawgiver, he does justly challenge our audience, our
obedience. Even so, Lord, teach us to hear and obey thee as our Teacher; to
love thee and believe in thee as our Reconciler; and as the eternal Son of thy
Father to adore thee.

The light caused wonder in the Disciples; but the voice astonishment: They are
all fallen down upon their faces. Who can blame a mortal man to be thus
affected with the voice of his Maker? Yet this word was but plausible and
hortatory. O God, how shall flesh and blood be other then swallowed up with the
horror of thy dreadful sentence of death? The Lion shall roar, who shall not
be afraid? How shall those who have slighted the sweet voice of thine
invitations, call to the rocks to hide them from the terror of thy Judgments?

The God of mercies pities our infirmities. I do not hear our Savior say, Ye
lay sleeping one while upon the earth; now ye lie astonished: Ye could neither
wake to see, nor stand to hear; now lie still and tremble. But he graciously
touches and comforts them; Arise, fear not. That voice which shall once raise
them up out of the earth, might well raise them up from it. That hand which by
the least touch restored sight, lims, life, might well restore the spirits of
the dismayed. O Savior, let that sovereign hand of thine touch us when we lie
in the trances of our griefs, in the bed of our securities, in the grave of our
sins, and we shall arise.

They looking up saw no man save Jesus alone: and that doubtless in his wonted
form. All was now gone, Moses, Elias, the Cloud, the Voice, the Glory: Tabor it
self cannot be long blessed with that Divine light and those shining guests.
Heaven will not allow to earth any long continuance of Glory. Only above is
constant Happiness to be looked for and enjoyed, where we shall ever see our
Savior in his unchangeable brightness, where the light shall never be either
clouded or varied.

Moses and Elias are gone, only Christ is left. The glory of the Law and the
Prophets was but temporary, yea momentany; that only Christ may remain to us
entire and conspicuous. They came but to give testimony to Christ; when that is
done, they are vanished.

Neither could these raised Disciples find any miss of Moses and Elias, when
they had Christ still with them. Had Jesus been gone, and left either Moses or
Elias, or both, in the Mount with his Disciples, that presence (though
glorious) could not have comforted them. Now that they are gone, and he is
left, they cannot be capable of discomfort. O Savior, it matters not who is
away, whilst thou art with us. Thou art God all-sufficient; what can we want
when we want not thee? Thy presence shall make Tabor it self an Heaven: yea,
Hell it self cannot make us miserable with the fruition of thee.

XXXII. The Woman taken in Adultery.
WHat a busy life was this of Christ's? He spent the night in the mount of
Olives, the day in the Temple: whereas the night is for a retired repose, the
day for company. His retiredness was for prayer; his companiableness was for
preaching. All night he watches in the Mount; all the morning he preaches in
the Temple, It was not for pleasure that he was here upon earth; his whole time
was penal and toilsome. How do we resemble him, if his life were all pain and
labor, ours all pastime?

He found no such fair success the day before: The multitude was divided in
their opinion of him; messengers were sent and suborned to apprehend him: yet
he returns to the Temple. It is for the sluggard or the coward to plead a Lion
in the way: upon the calling of God, we must overlook and contemn all the
spite and opposition of men. Even after an ill harvest we must sow; and after
denialls we must woe for God.

This Sun of Righteousness prevents that other, and shines early with wholesome
doctrines upon the Souls of his hearers. The Auditory is both thronged, and
attentive. Yet not all with the same intentions: If the people came to learn,
the Scribes and Pharisees came to cavil and carp at his teaching. With what a
pretense of zeal and justice yet do they put themselves into Christ's presence?
As lovers of Chastity and Sanctimony, and haters of Uncleanness, they bring to
him a Woman taken in the flagrance of her Adultery.

And why the Woman rather? since the Man's offense was equal, if not more;
because he should have had more strength of resistance, more grace not to
tempt. Was it out of necessity? Perhaps, the man, knowing his danger, made use
of his strength to shift away, and violently brake from his apprehenders. Or
was it out of cunning? in that they hoped for more likely matter to accuse
Christ in the case of the woman, then of the man: for that they supposed his
merciful disposition might more probably incline to compassionate her
weakness, rather then the stronger vessel.

Or was it rather out of partiality? Was it not then, as now, that the weakest
soonest suffers; and impotency lays us open to the malice of an enemy? Small
flies hang in the webs, whilst wasps break through without control. The wand
and the sheet are for poor offenders; the great either outface or out-buy
their shame. A beggarly drunkard is haled to the Stocks, whilst the rich is
chambered up to sleep out his surfeit.

Out of these grounds is the woman brought to Christ: Not to the mount of
Olives, not to the way, not to his private lodging; but to the Temple: and that
not to some obscure angle; but into the face of the assembly.

They pleaded for her death; the punishment which they would onwards inflict
was her shame: which must needs be so much more, as there were more eyes to be
witnesses of her guiltiness. All the brood of sin affects darkness and secrecy,
but this more properly; the twilight, the night is for the adulterer. It cannot
be better fitted then to be dragged out into the light of the Sun, and to be
proclaimed with hootings and basins. Oh the impudence of those men who can make
merry professions of their own beastliness, and boast of the shameful trophies
of their Lust!

Methinks I see this miserable Adulteress how she stands confounded amidst that
gazing and disdainful multitude; how she hides her head, how she wipes her
blubbered face and weeping eyes. In the mean time it is no dumb show that is
here acted by these Scribes and Pharisees; they step forth boldly to her
accusation. Master, this Woman was taken in adultery in the very act. How
plausibly do they begin? Had I stood by and heard them, should I not have said,
What holy, honest, conscionable men are these? what devout clients of Christ?
with what reverence they come to him? with what zeal of justice? When he that
made and ransacks their bosom tells me, All this is done but to tempt him. Even
the falsest hearts will have the plausiblest mouths: like to Solomon's
Curtizan, their lips drop as an honeycomb, and their mouth is smoother then
oil; but their end is bitter as wormwood.

False and hollow Pharisees, he is your Master whom ye serve, not he whom ye
tempt: only in this shall he be approved your Master, that he shall pay your
wages, and give you your portion with hypocrites.

The act of Adultery was her crime: to be taken in the very act, was no part of
her sin, but the proof of her just conviction: yet her deprehension is made an
aggravation of her shame. Such is the corrupt judgment of the world: To do
ill troubles not men, but to be taken in doing it: unknown filthiness passes
away with ease; it is the notice that perplexes them, not the guilt. But, O
foolish sinners, all your packing and secrecy cannot so contrive it, but that
ye shall be taken in the manner; your Conscience takes you so; the God of
Heaven takes you so: and ye shall once find that your Conscience is more then a
thousand witnesses, and God more then a thousand Consciences.

They that complain of the act, urge the punishment; Now Moses in the Law
commanded us that such should be stoned. Where did Moses bid so? Surely the
particularity of this execution was without the book. Tradition and custom
enacted it, not the Law.

Indeed Moses commanded death to both the offenders, not the manner of death to
either: By analogy it holds thus. It is flatly commanded in the case of a
Damsel betrothed to an Husband, and found not to be a Virgin; in the case of a
Damsel betrothed, who, being defiled in the city, cried not; Tradition and
custom made up the rest; obtaining, out of this ground, that all Adulterers
should be executed by lapidation. The ancienter punishment was burning; death
always, though in diverse forms. I shame to think that Christians should slight
that sin which both Jews and Pagans held ever deadly.

What a mis-citation is this? Moses commanded. The Law, was God's, not Moses's.
If Moses were employed to mediate betwixt God and Israel, the Law is never the
more his: He was the hand of God to reach the Law to Israel, the hand of Israel
to take it from God. We do not name the water from the pipes, but from the
spring. It is not for a true Israelite to rest in the second means, but to
mount up to the supreme original of justice. How reverent soever an opinion
was had of Moses, he cannot be thus named without a shameful undervaluing of
the royal Law of his Maker. There is no mortal man whose authority may not
grow into contempt: that of the ever-living God cannot but be ever sacred and
inviolable. It is now with the Gospel, as it was then with the Law: the word is
no other then Christ's, though delivered by our weakness; whosoever be the
Crier, the Proclamation is the King's of Heaven. Whilst it goes for ours, it is
no marvel if it lie open to despite.

How captious a word is this? Moses said thus, what say thou? If they be not
sure that Moses said so, why do they affirm it? and if they be sure, why do
they question that which they know decided? They would not have desired a
better advantage, then a contradiction to that received Lawgiver. It is their
profession, We are Moses's disciples; and, We know that God spoke to Moses. It
had been quarrel enough to oppose so known a Prophet. Still I find it the drift
of the enemies of truth, to set Christ and Moses together by the ears; in the
matter of the Sabbath, of Circumcision, of Marriage and Divorce, of the use of
the Law, of Justification by the Law, of the sense and extent of the Law, and
where not? But they shall never be able to effect it: they two are fast and
indissoluble friends on both parts for ever; each speaks for other, each
establishes other; they are subordinate, they cannot be opposite; Moses
faithful as a servant, Christ as a Son. A faithful servant cannot but be
officious to the Son. The true use we make of Moses is, to be our Schoolmaster
to teach us, to whip us unto Christ; the true use we make of Christ is, to
supply Moses. By him all that believe are justified from all things from which
they could not be justified by the law of Moses.

Thus must we hold in with both, if we will have our part in either: So shall
Moses bring us to Christ, and Christ to glory.

Had these Pharisees out of simplicity, and desire of resolution in a case of
doubt, moved this question to our Savior, it had been no less commendable then
now it is blameworthy.

O Savior, whither should we have recourse but to thine Oracle? Thou art the
Word of the Father, the Doctor of the Church. Whilst we hear from others, What
say Fathers? what say Councils? let them hear from us, What say thou?

But here it was far otherwise: they came not to learn, but to tempt; and to
tempt that they might accuse. Like their Father the Devil, who solicits to sin,
that he may plead against us for yieldance. Fain would these colloguing
adversaries draw Christ to contradict Moses, that they might take advantage of
his contradiction.

On the one side, they saw his readiness to tax the false glosses which their
presumptuous Doctors had put upon the Law, with an I say unto you: on the
other, they saw his inclination to mercy and commiseration in all his courses,
so far as to neglect even some circumstances of the Law; as, to touch the
Leper, to heal on the Sabbath, to eat with known sinners, to dismiss an
infamous (but penitent) offender, to select and countenance two noted
Publicans: and hereupon they might perhaps think that his compassion might draw
him to cross this Mosaical institution.

What a crafty bait is here laid for our Savior? Such as he cannot bite at,
and not be taken. It seems to them impossible he should avoid a deep prejudice
either to his justice or mercy. For thus they imagine; Either Christ will
second Moses in sentencing this woman to death, or else he will cross Moses in
dismissing her unpunished. If he command her to be stoned, he loses the honor
of his clemency and Mercy; if he appoint her dismission, he loses the honor of
his Justice. Indeed, strip him of either of these, and he can be no Savior.

O the cunning folly of vain men, that hope to beguile Wisdom it self!

Silence and neglect shall first confound those men, whom after his answer will
send away convicted. In stead of opening his mouth, our Savior bows his body;
and in stead of returning words from his lips, writes characters on the ground
with his finger. O Savior, I had rather silently wonder at thy gesture, then
inquire curiously into the words thou wrotest, or the mysteries of thus
writing: only herein I see thou meantest to show a disregard to these
malicious and busy cavillers. Sometimes taciturnity and contempt are the best
answers. Thou that have bidden us Be wise as serpents, give us this noble
example of thy prudence. It was most safe that these tempters should be thus
kept fasting with a silent disrespect, that their eagerness might justly draw
upon them an ensuing shame.

The more unwillingness they saw in Christ to give his answer, the more
pressive and importunate they were to draw it from him. Now, as forced by their
so zealous irritation, our Savior rouzeth up himself, and gives it them home,
with a reprehensory and stinging satisfaction; He that is without sin among
you, let him first cast a stone at her. As if his very action had said, I was
loath to have shamed you; and therefore could have been willing not to have
heard your ill-meant motion: but since you will needs have it, and by your
vehemence force my justice, I must tell you, there is not one of you but is as
faulty as she whom ye accuse; there is no difference, but that your sin is
smothered in secrecy, hers is brought forth into the light. Ye had more need to
make your own peace by an humble repentance, then to urge severity against
another. I deny not but Moses has justly from God imposed the penalty of death
upon such heinous offenses: but what then would become of you? If death be her
due, yet not by those your unclean hands: your hearts know you are not honest
enough to accuse.

Lo, not the bird, but the fouler is taken. He says not, Let her be stoned;
this had been against the course of his Mercy: he says not, Let her not be
stoned; this had been against the Law of Moses. Now he so answers, that both
his Justice and Mercy are entire; she dismissed, they shamed.

It was the manner of the Jews, in those heinous crimes that were punished with
Lapidation, that the witnesses and accusers should be the first that should lay
hands upon the guilty: well does our Savior therefore choke these accusers
with the conscience of their so foul incompetency. With what face, with what
heart could they stone their own sin in another person?

Honesty is too mean a term. These Scribes and Pharisees were noted for
extraordinary and admired Holiness: the outside of their lives was not only
inoffensive, but Saint-like and exemplary. Yet that all-seeing eye of the Son
of God, which found folly in the Angels, has much more found wickedness in
these glorious Professors. It is not for nothing that his eyes are like a
flame of fire. What secret is there which he searches not? Retire your selves,
O ye foolish sinners, into your inmost closets, yea (if ye can) into the center
of the earth; his eye follows you, and observes all your carriages: no bolt, no
bar, no darkness can keep him out. No thief was ever so impudent as to steal in
the very face of the Judge. O God, let me see my self seen by thee, and I shall
not dare to offend.

Besides notice, here is exprobration. These men's sins, as they had been
secret, so they were forgotten. It is long since they were done; neither did
they think to have heard any more news of them. And now when time and security
had quite worn them out of thought, he that shall once be their Judge, calls
them to a back-reckoning.

One time or other shall that just God lay our sins in our dish, and make us
possess the sins of our youth. These things thou did, and I kept silence; and
thou thoughtest I was like unto thy self: but I will reprove thee, and set them
in order before thee. The penitent man's sin lies before him for his
humiliation; the impenitent's, for his shame and confusion.

The act of sin is transient, not so the guilt; that will stick by us, and
return upon us, either in the height of our security, or the depth of our
misery, when we shall be least able to bear it. How just may it be with God to
take us at advantages, and then to lay his arrest upon us when we are laid up
upon a former suit?

It is but just there should be a requisition of innocence in them that
prosecute the vices of others. The offender is worthy of stoning, but who shall
cast them? How ill would they become hands as guilty as her own? What do they
but smite themselves, who punish their own offenses in other men? Nothing is
more unjust or absurd, then for the beam to censure the moat, the oven to
upbraid the kiln. It is a false and vagrant zeal that begins not first at home.

Well did our Savior know how bitter and strong a pill he had given to these
false Justiciaries; and now he will take leisure to see how it wrought: whilst
therefore he gives time to them to swallow it, and put it over, he returns to
his old gesture of a seeming inadvertency. How sped the receipt?

I do not see any one of them stand out with Christ, and plead his own
innocence; and yet these men (which is very remarkable) placed the fulfilling
or violation of the Law only in the outward act. Their hearts misgave them,
that if they should have stood out in contestation with Christ, he would have
utterly shamed them, by displaying their old and secret sins; and have so
convinced them by undeniable circumstances, that they should never have clawed
off the reproach: And therefore when they heard it, being convicted by their
own conscience, they went out one by one, beginning at the eldest, even unto
the last.

There might seem to be some kind of mannerly order in this guilty departure.
Not all at once; lest they should seem violently chased away by this charge of
Christ: now their slinking away one by one may seem to carry a show of a
deliberate and voluntary discession. The eldest first. The ancienter is fitter
to give then take example; and the younger could think it no shame to follow
the steps of a grave foreman.

O wonderful power of conscience! Man can no more stand out against it, then
it can stand out against God. The Almighty, whose substitute is set in our
bosom, sets it on work to accuse. It is no denying, when that says we are
guilty; when that condemns us, in vain are we acquitted by the world. With what
bravery did these Hypocrites come to set upon Christ? with what triumph did
they insult upon that guilty Soul? Now they are thunderstruck with their own
Conscience, and drop away confounded; and well is he that can run away farthest
from his own shame. No wicked man needs to seek out of himself for a Judge,
Accuser, Witness, Tormentour.

No sooner do these Hypocrites hear of their sins from the mouth of Christ,
then they are gone. Had they been sincerely touched with a true remorse, they
would have rather come to him upon their knees, and have said, Lord, we know
and find that thou know our secret sins; this argues thy Divine Omniscience.
Thou that art able to know our sins, art able to remit them. O pardon the
iniquities of thy servants. Thou that accusest us, do thou also acquit us. But
now in stead hereof, they turn their back upon their Savior, and haste away.

An impenitent man cares not how little he has either of the presence of God,
or of the mention of his sins. O fools! if ye could run away from God, it were
somewhat; but whilst ye move in him, what do ye? whither go ye? Ye may run
from his Mercy, ye cannot but run upon his Judgment.

Christ is left alone. Alone in respect of these complainants; not alone in
respect of the multitude: there yet stands the mournful Adulteress. She might
have gone forth with them; no body constrained her stay: but that which sent
them away, stayed her, Conscience. She knew her guiltiness was publicly
accused, and durst not be by herself denied: as one that was therefore fastened
there by her own guilty heart, she stirs not till she may receive a dismission.

Our Savior was not so busy in writing, but that he read the while the guilt
and absence of those accusers; he that knew what they had done, knew no less
what they did, what they would do. Yet, as if the matter had been strange to
him, he lifts up himself, and says, Woman, where are thy accusers?

How well was this sinner to be left there? Could she be in a safer place then
before the Tribunal of a Savior? Might she have chosen her refuge, whither
should she rather have fled? O happy we, if when we are convinced in our selves
of our sins, we can set our selves before that Judge who is our Surety, our
Advocate, our Redeemer, our ransom, our peace!

Doubtless, she stood doubtful betwixt hope and fear; Hope, in that she saw
her accusers gone; Fear, in that she knew what she had deserved: and now whilst
she trembles in expectation of a sentence, she hears, Woman, where are thy
accusers?

Wherein our Savior intends the satisfaction of all the hearers, of all the
beholders: that they might apprehend the guiltiness, and therefore the
unfitness, of the accusers; and might well see there was no warrantable ground
of his farther proceeding against her.

Two things are necessary for the execution of a Malefactor, Evidence,
Sentence; the one from Witnesses, the other from the Judge. Our Savior asks
for both. The accusation and proof must draw on the sentence; the sentence must
proceed upon the evidence of the proof. Where are thy accusers? has no man
condemned thee? Had sentence passed legally upon the Adulteress, doubtless our
Savior would not have acquitted her: For as he would not intrude upon others
offices, so he would not cross or violate the justice done by others. But now,
finding the coast clear, he says, Neither do I condemn thee.

What, Lord? do thou then show favor to foul offenders? Art thou rather
pleased that gross sins should be blanched, and sent away with a gentle
connivency? Far, far be this from the perfection of thy Justice. He that hence
argues Adulteries not punishable by death, let him argue the unlawfulness of
dividing of inheritances, because in the case of the two wrangling brethren
thou said, Who made me a divider of inheritances? Thou declinedst the office,
thou did not dislike the act, either of parting lands, or punishing
offenders. Neither was here any absolution of the woman from a sentence of
death, but a dismission of her from thy sentence, which thou knew not proper
for thee to pronounce. Herein had thou respect to thy calling, and to the
main purpose of thy coming into the world; which was neither to be an arbiter
of Civil Causes, nor a judge of Criminal, but a Savior of mankind; not to
destroy the Body, but to save the Soul. And this was thy care in this miserable
Offender; Go, and sin no more. How much more does it concern us to keep within
the bounds of our vocation, and not to dare to trench upon the functions of
others? How can we ever enough magnify thy Mercy, who take no pleasure in
the death of a sinner? who so came to save, that thou challengest us of
unkindness for being miserable, Why will ye die, O house of Israel?

But, O Son of God, though thou would not then be a Judge, yet thou will once
be: Thou would not in thy first coming judge the sins of men, thou will come
to judge them in thy second. The time shall come when upon that just and
glorious Tribunal thou shall judge every man according to his works. That we
may not one day hear thee say, Go, ye cursed, let us now hear thee say, Go,
sin no more.

XXXIII. The Thankful Penitent.
ONE while I find Christ invited by a Publican, now by a Pharisee. Wherever
he went, he made better cheer then he found, in an happy exchange of spiritual
repast for bodily.

Who knows not the Pharisees to have been the proud enemies of Christ; men
over-conceited of themselves, contemptuous of others; severe in show,
Hypocrites in deed, strict Sectaries, insolent Justiciaries? Yet here one of
them invites Christ; and that in good earnest. The man was not (like his
fellows) captious, not ceremonious: had he been of their stamp, the omission of
washing the feet had been mortal. No profession has not yielded some good:
Nicodemus and Gamaliel were of the same strain. Neither is it for nothing, that
the Evangelist having branded this Sect for despising the counsel of God
against themselves, presently subjoyns this history of Simon the Pharisee, as
an exempt man. O Savior, thou can find out good Pharisees, good Publicans,
yea a good Thief upon the Cross; and that thou may find, thou can make them
so.

At the best, yet he was a Pharisee, whose table thou here refusedst not. So
did thou in wisdom and mercy attemper thy self, as to become all things to
all men, that thou might win some. Thy Harbenger was rough, as in clothes,
so in disposition; professedly harsh and austere: thy self were mild and
sociable. So it was fit for both. He was a preacher of Penance; thou the
author of comfort and Salvation: He made way for Grace; thou gave it. Thou
have bidden us to follow thy self, not thy Forerunner. That then which
Politics and time-servers do for earthly advantages, we will do for
spiritual; frame our selves to all companies, not in evil, but in good, yea in
indifferent things. What wonder is it that thou, who came down from Heaven to
frame thy self to our nature, should, whilst thou were on earth, frame thy
self to the several dispositions of men? Catch not at this, O ye licentious
Hypocrites, men of all hours, that can eat with gluttons, drink with drunkards,
sing with ribalds, scoff with profane scorners, and yet talk holily with the
religious, as if ye had hence any color for your changeable conformity to all
fashions. Our Savior never sinned for any man's sake, though for our sakes he
was sociable, that he might keep us from sinning. Can ye so converse with lewd
good-fellows, as that ye repress their sins, redress their exorbitances, win
them to God? now ye walk in the steps of him that stuck not to sit down in the
Pharisee's house.

There sat the Savior, and, Behold, a woman in the City that was a sinner. I
marvel not that she is led in with a note of wonder; wonder, both on her part,
and on Christ's. That any sinner, that a sensual sinner obdured in a notorious
trade of evil, should voluntarily, out of a true remorse for her leudness, seek
to a Savior, it is worthy of an accent of admiration. The noise of the Gospel
is common; but where is the power of it? it has store of hearers, but few
converts. Yet were there no wonder in her, if it were not with reference to the
power and mercy of Christ; his power that thus drew the sinner, his mercy that
received her. O Savior, I wonder at her, but I bless thee for her; by whose
only Grace she was both moved, and accepted.

A sinner? Alas, who was not? who is not so? Not only in many things we sin
all; but in all things we all let fall many sins. Had there been a woman not a
sinner, it had been beyond wonder. One man there was that was not a sinner;
even he that was more then man, that God and Man, who was the refuge of this
sinner: but never woman that sinned not. Yet he said not, a Woman that had
sinned, but, that was a sinner. An action does not give denomination, but a
trade. Even the wise Charity of Christians (much more the mercy of God) can
distinguish between sins of infirmity, and practice of sin; and esteem us not
by a transient act, but by a permanent condition.

The woman was noted for a luxurious and incontinent life. What a deal of
variety there is of sins? That which fails cannot be numbered. Every sin
continued deserves to brand the Soul with this style. Here one is picked out
from the rest: she is not noted for Murder, for Theft, for Idolatry; only her
Lust makes her a woman that was a sinner. Other Vices use not to give the owner
this title, although they should be more heinous then it.

Wantons may flatter themselves in the indifferency or slightness of this
offense; their Souls shall need no other conveiance to Hell then this: which
cannot be so pleasing to Nature as it is hateful to God, who so speaks of it
as if there were no sins but it, a Woman that was a sinner.

She was a sinner, now she is not; her very presence argues her change. Had she
been still in her old trade, she would no more have endured the sight of
Christ, then that Devil did which cried out, Art thou come to torment me? Her
eyes had been lamps and fires of Lust, not fountains of tears; her hairs had
been nets to catch foolish lovers, not a towell for her Savior's feet: yet
still she carries the name of what she was; a scar still remains after the
wound healed. Simon will be ever the Leper, and Matthew the Publican. How
carefully should we avoid those actions which may ever stain us?

What a difference there is betwixt the carriage and proceedings of God and
men? The mercy of God, as it calls those things that are not as if they were,
so it calls those things that were as if they were not; I will remember your
iniquities no more. As some skillful Surgeon so sets the bone, or heals the
sore, that it cannot be seen where the complaint was. Man's word is, that which
is done cannot be undone: but the omnipotent goodness of God does (as it were)
undo our once-committed sins. Take away my iniquity, and thou shall find none.
What we were in our selves, we are not to him, since he has changed us from
our selves.

O God, why should we be niggardly, where thou art liberal? why should we be
reading those lines which thou have not only crossed, but quite blotted, yea
wiped out?

It is a good word, She was a sinner. To be wicked, is odious to God, Angels,
Saints, men; to have been so, is blessed and glorious. I rejoice to look back,
and see my Egyptians lying dead upon the shore, that I may praise the Author
of my deliverance and victory. Else, it matters not what they were, what I was.
O God, thou whose title is, I am, regardest the present. He befriends and
honors us that says, Such ye were, but ye are washed.

The Place adds to the hainousness of the sin; In the City. The more public
the fact is, the greater is the scandal. Sin is sin, though in a desert.
Others eyes do not make the act more vile in it self; but the offense is
multiplied by the number of beholders.

I hear no Name of either the City or the Woman; she was too well known in her
time. How much better is it to be obscure, then infamous? Herein, I doubt not,
God meant to spare the reputation of a penitent Convert. He who hates not the
person, but the sin, cares only to mention the sin, not the person. It is
justice to prosecute the Vice, it is mercy to spare the Offender. How injurious
a presumption is it for any man to name her whom God would have concealed? and
to cast this aspersion on those whom God has noted for holiness?

The worst of this woman is past, She was a sinner; the best is to come, She
sought out Jesus. Where? In the house of a Pharisee. It was the most
inconvenient place in the world for a noted sinner to seek Christ in.

No men stood so much upon the terms of their own Righteousness; no men so
scornfully disdained an infamous person. The touch of an ordinary (though
honest) Jew was their pollution; how much more the presence of a Strumpet? What
a sight was a known sinner to him, to whom his holiest neighbor was a sinner?
How does he (though a better Pharisee) look awry to see such a piece in his
house, whilst he dares think, If this man were a Prophet, he would surely know
what manner of woman this is? Neither could she fore-imagine less, when she
ventured to press over the threshold of a Pharisee. Yet not the known austerity
of the man, and her mis-welcome to the place, could affright her from seeking
her Savior even there. No disadvantage can defer the Penitent Soul from a
speedy recourse to Christ. She says not, If Jesus were in the street, or in the
field, or in the house of some humble Publican, or any-where save with a
Pharisee, I would come to him; now I will rather defer my access, then seek him
where I shall find scorn and censure: but, as not fearing the frowns of that
overly Host, she thrusts her self into Simon's house to find Jesus. It is not
for the distressed to be bashful; it is not for a believer to be timorous. O
Savior, if thy Spouse miss thee, she will seek thee through the streets; the
blows of the watch shall not daunt her. If thou be on the other side of the
water, a Peter will leap into the Sea, and swim to thee: if on the other side
of the fire, thy blessed Martyrs will run through those flames to thee. We are
not worthy of the comfort of thy presence, if wheresoever we know thou art,
whether in prison, or in exile, or at the stake, we do not hasten thither to
enjoy thee.

The Place was not more unfit then the Time: a Pharisee's house was not more
unproper for a sinner, then a Feast was for humiliation. Tears at a Banquet are
as Jiggs at a Funeral. There is a season for all things. Music had been more
apt for a Feast then mourning.

The heart that has once felt the sting of sin, and the sweetness of
remission, has no power to delay the expressions of what it feels, and cannot
be confined to terms of circumstance.

Whence then was this zeal of her access? Doubtless, she had heard from the
mouth of Christ, in those heavenly Sermons of his, many gracious invitations of
all troubled and laboring Souls; she had observed how he vouchsafed to come
under the roofs of despised Publicans, of professed enemies; she had noted all
the passages of his power and mercy; and now deep remorse wrought upon her
heart for her former viciousness. The pool of her Conscience was troubled by
the descending Angel, and now she steps in for a cure. The arrow stuck fast in
her Soul, which she could not shake out; and now she comes to this sovereign
Dittany, to expel it. Had not the Spirit of God wrought upon her ere she came,
and wrought her to come, she had never either sought or found Christ. Now she
comes in, and finds that Savior whom she sought: she comes in, but not
empty-handed: though debauched, she was a Jewess. She could not but have heard
that she ought not to appear before the Lord empty. What then brings she? It
was not possible she could bring to Christ a better present then her own
Penitent Soul: yet, to testify that, she brings another, delicate both for the
vessel and the contents, a box of Alabaster; a solid, hard, pure, clear
marble, fit for the receipt of so precious an ointment: the ointment pleasant
and costly; a composition of many fragrant Odours, not for medicine, but
delight.

The Soul that is truly touched with the sense of its own sin can think nothing
too good, too dear for Christ. The remorsed sinner begins first with the tender
of burnt-offerings and calves of a year old; thence he ascends to Hecatombs,
thousands of rams; and above that yet, to ten thousand rivers of oil; and yet
higher, could be content to give the first-fruit of his body to expiate the sin
of his Soul. Any thing, every thing is too small a price for peace. O Savior,
since we have tasted how sweet thou art, lo, we bring thee the daintiest and
costliest perfumes of our humble Obediences: yea, if so much of our blood, as
this woman brought ointment, may be useful or pleasing to thy name, we do most
cheerfully consecrate it unto thee. If we would not have thee think Heaven too
good for us, why should we stick at any earthly retribution to thee in lieu of
thy great mercies?

Yet here I see more then the price. This odoriferous perfume was that
wherewith she had wont to make her self pleasing to her wanton Lovers; and now
she comes purposely to offer it up to her Savior.

As her Love was turned another way from sensual to Divine, so shall her
Ointment also be altered in the use: that which was abused to Luxury, shall now
be consecrated to Devotion. There is no other effect in whatsoever true
Conversion. As we have given our members servants to iniquity to commit
iniquity, so shall we now give our members servants unto righteousness in
holiness. If the dames of Israel, that thought nothing more worth looking on
then their own faces, have spent too much time in their glasses; now they shall
cast in those metalls to make a Laver for the washing of their uncleanness.
If I have spent the prime of my strength, the strength of my wit, upon my self
and vanity; I have bestowed my Alabaster-box amiss: O now teach me, my God and
Savior, to improve all my time, all my abilities to thy glory. This is all the
poor recompense can be made thee for those shameful dishonours thou have
received from me.

The Woman is come in; and now she does not boldly face Christ, but, as
unworthy of his presence, she stands behind. How could she in that site wash
his feet with her tears? Was it that our Savior did not sit at the Feast,
(after our fashion,) but, according to the then- Jewish and Roman fashion, lay
on the one side? Or was it that this phrase does not so much import posture as
presence? Doubtless, it was bashfulness and shame arising from the conscience
of her own former wickedness that placed her thus. How well is the case
altered? She had wont to look boldly in the face of her Lovers: now she dares
not behold the awful countenance of her Savior. She had wont to send her
alluring beams forth into the eyes of her wanton paramours: now she casts her
dejected eyes to the earth, and dares not so much as raise them up to see those
eyes from which she desired commiseration. It was a true inference of the
Prophet, Thou have an whore's forehead, thou can not blush: there cannot be a
greater sign of whorishness then impudence. This woman can now blush; she has
put off the Harlot, and is turned true Penitent. Bashfulness is both a sign,
and effect of Grace. O God, could we but bethink how wretched we are in nature,
how vile through our sins, how glorious, holy and powerful a God thou art,
(before whom the brightest Angels hide their faces,) we could not come but with
a trembling awfulness into thy presence.

Together with shame, here is sorrow: a sorrow testified by tears; and tears in
such abundance, that she washes the feet of our Savior with those streams of
penitence; She began to wash his feet with tears. We hear when she began, we
hear not when she ended. When the grapes are pressed, the juice runs forth: so
when the mind is pressed, tears distill; the true juice of penitence and
sorrow. These eyes were not used to such clouds, or to such showrs; there was
nothing in them formerly but sunshine of pleasure, beams of Lust: Now they are
resolved into the drops of grief and contrition. Whence was this change, but
from the secret working of God's Spirit? He caused his wind to blow, and the
waters flowed; he smote the rock, and the waters gushed out. O God, smite thou
this rocky Heart of mine, and the waters of Repentance shall burst forth in
abundance.

Never were thy feet, O Savior, bedewed with more precious liquour then this
of remorsefull tears. These cannot be so spent, but that thou keep them in
thy bottle; yea thou returnest them back with interest of true comfort: They
that sow in tears shall reap in joy. Blessed are they that mourn. Lo, this wet
seed-time shall be followed with an harvest of happiness and glory.

That this service might be complete, as her Eyes were the Ewre, so her Hair
was the Towell for the feet of Christ. Doubtless at a Feast there was no want
of the most curious linen for this purpose. All this was nothing to her: to
approve her sincere Humility, and hearty devotion to Christ, her hair shall be
put to this glorious office. The hair is the chief ornament of womanhood: the
feet, as they are the lowest part of the body, so the meanest for account, and
homeliest for employment: and lo, this Penitent bestows the chief ornament of
her head on the meanest office to the feet of her Savior. That hair which she
was wont to spread as a net to catch her amorous companions, is honored with
the employment of wiping the beautiful feet of him that brought the glad
tidings of peace and salvation: and, might it have been any service to him to
have licked the dust under those feet of his, how gladly would she have done
it? Nothing can be mean that is done to the honor of a Savior.

Never was any hair so preferred as this. How I envy those locks that were
graced with the touch of those sacred feet; but much more those lips that
kissed them? Those lips that had been formerly inured to the wanton touches of
her lascivious Lovers, now sanctify themselves with the testimony of her
humble homage and dear respects to the Son of God. Thus her ointment, hands,
eyes, hair, lips are now consecrated to the service of Christ her Savior, whom
she had offended. If our satisfaction be not in some kind proportionable to our
offense, we are no true Penitents.

All this while I hear not one word fall from the mouth of this woman. What
need her tongue speak, when her eyes spoke, her hands spoke, her gesture, her
countenance, her whole carriage was vocal? I like this silent speaking well,
when our actions talk, and our tongues hold their peace. The common practice is
contrary; Men's tongues are busy, but their hands are still. All their Religion
lies in their tongue; their hands either do nothing, or ill; so as their
profession is but wind, as their words. Wherefore are words but for expression
of the mind? If that could be known by the eye or by the hand, the language of
both were alike. There are no words amongst Spirits; yet they perfectly
understand each other. The Heavens declare the glory of God. All tongues cannot
speak so loud as they that have none. Give me the Christian that is seen, and
not heard. The noise that our tongue makes in a formality of profession shall
(in the silence of our hands) condemn us for Hypocrites.

The Pharisee saw all this, but with an evil eye. Had he not had some Grace, he
had never invited such a Guest as Jesus: and if he had had Grace enough, he had
never entertained such a thought as this of the guest he invited; If this man
were a Prophet, he would have known what manner of woman it is that touches
him; for she is a sinner.

How many errors in one breath? Justly (O Simon) has this one thought lost
thee the thank of thy Feast. Belike, at the highest, thou judgedst thy guest
but a Prophet; and now thou doubtest whether he were so much. Besides this
undervaluation, how unjust is the ground of this doubt? Every Prophet knew not
every thing; yea no Prophet ever knew all things. Elisha knew the very secrets
of the Assyrian privy-chamber: yet he knew not the calamity of his worthy
Hostess. The finite knowledge of the ablest Seer reaches but so far as it will
please God to extend it. Well might he therefore have been a Prophet, and in
the knowledge of greater matters not have known this.

Unto this, how weakly did thou, because of Christ's silent admission of the
woman, suppose him ignorant of her quality? As if knowledge should be measured
always by the noise of expression. Stay but a while, and thou shall find that
he well knew both her life and thy heart. Besides, how injuriously do thou
take this woman for what she was? not conceiving, (as well thou might) were
not this woman a Convert, she would never have offered her self into this
presence. Her modesty and her tears bewray her change: and if she be changed,
why is she censured for what she is not?

Lastly, how strong did it savor of the leven of thy profession, that thou
supposest (were she what she was) that it could not stand with the knowledge
and holiness of a Prophet to admit of her least touch, yea of her presence?
Whereas on the one side, outward conversation in it self makes no man unclean
or holy, but according to the disposition of the patient; on the other, such
was the purity and perfection of this thy glorious guest, that it was not
possibly infectible, nor any way obnoxious to the danger of others sin. He that
said once, Who touched me? in regard of virtue issuing from him, never said,
Whom have I touched? in regard of any contagion incident to him. We sinful
creatures, in whom the Prince of this world finds too much, may easily be
tainted with other men's sins; He, who came to take away the sins of the world,
was incapable of pollution by sin. Had the woman then been still a sinner, thy
censure of Christ was proud and unjust.

The Pharisee spoke; but it was within himself: and now, behold, Jesus
answering, said.

What we think, we speak to our hearts, and we speak to God; and he equally
hears, as if it came out of our mouths. Thoughts are not free. Could men know
and convince them, they would be no less liable to censure then if they came
forth clothed with words. God, who hears them, judges of them accordingly. So
here, the heart of Simon speaks, Jesus answers.

Jesus answers him, but with a Parable. He answers many a thought with
Judgment; the blasphemy of the heart, the murder of the heart, the adultery of
the heart are answered by him with real vengeance. For Simon, our Savior saw
his error was either out of simple ignorance or weak mistaking: where he saw
no malice then, it is enough to answer with a gentle conviction. The convictive
answer of Christ is by way of Parable. The wisdom of God knows how to
circumvent us for our gain; and can speak that pleasingly by a prudent
circumlocution, which right-down would not be digested. Had our Savior said in
plain terms, Simon, whether do thou or this sinner love me more? the Pharisee
could not for shame but have stood upon his reputation, and in a scorn of the
comparison have protested his exceeding respects to Christ. Now, ere he is
aware, he is fetched in to give sentence against himself for her whom he
condemned. O Savior, thou have made us fishers of men; how should we learn of
thee, so to bait our hooks, that they may be most likely to take? Thou the
great Householder of thy Church have provided victuals for thy family, thou have
appointed us to dress them: if we do not so cook them as that they may fit the
palats to which they are intended, we do both lose our labor and thy cost. The
Parable is of two Debtours to one Creditour; the one owed a lesser sum, the
other a greater; both are forgiven. It was not the purpose of him that
propounded it, that we should stick in the bark. God is our Creditour, our sins
our Debts; we are all Debtours, but one more deep then another. No man can pay
this Debt alone; satisfaction is not possible: only remission can discharge
us. God does in mercy forgive as well the greatest as the least sins. Our love
to God is proportionable to the sense of our remission. So then the Pharisee
cannot choose but confess, that the more and greater the sin is, the greater
mercy in the forgiveness; and the more mercy in the forgiver, the greater
obligation and more love in the forgiven.

Truth, from whose mouth soever it falls, is worth taking up. Our Savior
praises the true judgment of a Pharisee. It is an injurious indiscretion in
those who are so prejudiced against the persons, that they reject the truth. He
that would not quench the smoking flax, incourages even the least good. As the
careful Surgeon strokes the arm ere he strikes the vein; so did Christ
here, ere he convinces the Pharisee of his want of love, he graceth him with a
fair approbation of his judgment. Yet the while turning both his face and his
speech to the poor Penitent; as one that cared more for a true humiliation for
sin, then for a false pretense of respect and innocence.

With what a dejected and abashed countenance, with what earth-fixed eyes do we
imagine the poor woman stood, when she saw her Savior direct his face and
words to her?

She that durst but stand behind him, and steal the falling of some tears upon
his feet, with what a blushing astonishment does she behold his sidereall
countenance cast upon her? Whilst his eye was turned toward this Penitent, his
speech was turned to the Pharisee concerning that Penitent, by him mistaken;
See thou this Woman? He who before had said, If this man were a Prophet, he
would have known what manner of Woman this is, now hears, See thou this
Woman? Simon saw but her outside: Jesus lets him see that he saw her heart; and
will thus convince the Pharisee that he is more then a Prophet, who knew not
her conversation only, but her Soul. The Pharisee, that went all by
appearance, shall by her deportment see the proof of her good disposition: it
shall happily shame him to hear the comparison of the wants of his own
entertainments with the abundance of hers.

It is strange that any of this formal Sect should be defective in their
Lotions. Simon had not given water to so great a Guest; she washes his feet
with her tears. By how much the water of the eye was more precious then the
water of the earth, so much was the respect and courtesy of this Penitent
above the neglected office of the Pharisee. What use was there of a Towell,
where was no water? She that made a fountain of her eyes, made precious napary
of her hair: that better flax shamed the linen in the Pharisee's chest.

A kiss of the cheek had wont to be pledge of the welcome of their guests.
Simon neglects to make himself thus happy: she redoubles the kisses of her
humble thankfulness upon the blessed feet of her Savior. The Pharisee omits
ordinary oil for the head: she supplies the most precious and fragrant oil to
his feet.

Now the Pharisee reads his own taxation in her praise; and begins to envy
where he had scorned.

It is our fault, O Savior, if we mistake thee. We are ready to think, so thou
have the substance of good usage, thou regardest not the complements and
ceremonies; whereas now we see thee to have both meat and welcome in the
Pharisee's house, and yet hear thee glance at his neglect of washing, kissing,
anointing. Doubtless, omission of due circumstances in thy Entertainment may
deserve to lose our thanks. Do we pray to thee? do we hear thee preach to us?
now we make thee good cheer in our house: but if we perform not these things
with the fit decency of our outward carriages, we give thee not thy water, thy
kisses, thy oil. Even meet ritual observances are requisite for thy full
welcome.

Yet how little had these things been regarded, if they had not argued the
woman's thankful love to thee, and the ground of that love, sense of her
remission, and the Pharisee's default in both?

Love and action do necessarily evince each other. True love cannot lurk long
unexpressed: it will be looking out at the eyes, creeping out of the mouth,
breaking out at the fingers ends, in some actions of dearness; especially those
wherein there is pain and difficulty to the agent, profit or pleasure to the
affected. O Lord, in vain shall we profess to love thee, if we do nothing for
thee. Since our goodness cannot reach up unto thee, who art our glorious Head;
O let us bestow upon thy Feet (thy poor Members here below) our tears, our
hands, our ointment, and whatever our gifts or endeavors may testify our
thankfulness and love to thee in them.

O happy word! Her sins, which are many, are forgiven her. Methinks I see how
this poor Penitent revived with this breath; how new life comes into her eyes,
new blood into her cheeks, new spirits into her countenance: like unto our
Mother Earth; when, in that first confusion, God said, Let the earth bring
forth grass, the herb that bears seed, and the fruit-tree yielding fruit, all
runs out into flowers, and blossoms, and leaves, and fruit. Her former tears
said, Who shall deliver me from this body of death? Now her cheerful smiles
say, I thank God through Jesus Christ my Lord.

Seldom ever do we meet with so perfect a Penitent; seldom do we find so
gracious a dismission. What can be wished of any mortal creature but
Remission, Safety, Faith, Peace? All these are here met to make a contrite Soul
happy. Remission, the ground of her Safety; Faith, the ground of her Peace;
Safety and Salvation, the issue of her Remission; Peace, the blessed fruit of
her Faith.

O Woman, the perfume that thou broughtest is poor and base in comparison of
those sweet savours of rest and happiness that are returned to thee. Well was
that ointment bestowed, wherewith thy Soul is sweetened to all Eternity.

XXXIV. Martha and Mary.
WE may read long enough ere we find Christ in an house of his own. The foxes
have holes, and the birds have nests: he that had all, possessed nothing. One
while I see him in a Publican's house, then in a Pharisee's; now I find him at
Martha's. His last entertainment was with some neglect, this with too much
solicitude. Our Savior was now in his way; the Sun might as soon stand still
as he.

The more we move, the liker we are to Heaven, and to this God that made it.
His progress was to Jerusalem, for some holy Feast. He whose Devotion neglected
not any of those sacred Solemnities, will not neglect the due opportunities of
his bodily refreshing: as not thinking it meet to travel and preach
harbourless, he diverts (where he knew his welcome) to the village of Bethany.
There dwelt the two devout Sisters, with their Brother, his Friend Lazarus;
their roof receives him. O happy house into which the Son of God vouchsafed to
set his foot! O blessed women, that had the grace to be the Hostesses to the
God of Heaven! How should I envy your felicity herein, if I did not see the
same favor (if I be not wanting to my self) lying open to me? I have two ways
to entertain my Savior, in his Members, and in himself. In his Members, by
Charity and Hospitableness; what I do to one of those his little ones, I do
to him: In himself, by Faith; If any man open, he will come in and sup with him.

O Savior, thou stand at the door of our hearts, and knockest by the
solicitations of thy Messengers, by the sense of thy Chastisements, by the
motions of thy Spirit: if we open to thee by a willing admission and faithful
welcome, thou will be sure to take up our Souls with thy gracious presence; and
not to sit with us for a momentany meal, but to dwell with us for ever. Lo,
thou did but call in at Bethany; but here shall be thy rest for everlasting.

Martha (it seems) as being the elder Sister, bore the name of the
Housekeeper; Mary was her assistent in the charge. A Blessed pair; Sisters not
more in Nature then Grace, in spirit no less then in flesh. How happy a thing
it is when all the parties in a family are jointly agreed to entertain Christ?

No sooner is Jesus entered into the house then he falls to preaching: that no
time may be lost, he stays not so much as till his meat be made ready; but
whilst his bodily repast was in hand, provides spiritual food for his Hosts. It
was his meat and drink to do the will of his Father: he fed more upon his own
diet then he could possibly upon theirs; his best cheer was to see them
spiritually fed. How should we, whom he has called to this sacred Function, be
instant in season and out of season? We are, by his sacred ordination, the
Lights of the world. No sooner is the candle lighted, then it gives that light
which it has, and never intermits till it be wasted to the snuff.

Both the Sisters for a time sat attentively listening to the words of Christ.
Household occasions call Martha away: Mary sits still at his feet, and hears.
Whether shall we more praise her Humility, or her Docility? I do not see her
take a stool and sit by him, or a chair and sit above him; but, as desiring to
show her heart was as low as her knees, she sits at his feet. She was lowly
set, richly warmed with those Heavenly beams. The greater submission, the more
Grace. If there be one hollow in the valley lower then another, thither the
waters gather.

Martha's house is become a Divinity-school: Jesus, as the Doctor, sits in the
chair; Martha, Mary, and the rest, sit as Disciples at his feet. Standing
implies a readiness for motion; Sitting, a settled composedness to this holy
attendence.

Had these two Sisters provided our Savior never such delicates, and waited on
his trencher never so officiously, yet had they not listened to his
instruction, they had not bidden him welcome; neither had he so well liked his
entertainment.

This was the way to feast him; to feed their ears by his Heavenly Doctrine:
His best cheer is our proficiency; our best cheer is his Word. O Savior, let
my Soul be thus feasted by thee, do thou thus feast thy self by feeding me;
this mutual diet shall be thy praise and my happiness.

Though Martha was for the time an attentive hearer, yet now her care of
Christ's entertainment carries her into the Kitchen; Mary sits still. Neither
was Mary more devout then Martha busy: Martha cares to feast Jesus; Mary, to
be feasted of him. There was more solicitude in Martha's active part; more
piety in Mary's sedentary attendence: I know not in whether more zeal. Good
Martha was desirous to express her joy and thankfulness for the presence of so
blessed a Guest, by the actions of her careful and plentious entertainment. I
know not how to censure the Holy woman for her excess of care to welcome her
Savior. Sure she her self thought she did well; and out of that confidence
fears not to complain to Christ of her Sister.

I do not see her come to her Sister, and whisper in her ear the great need of
her aid; but she comes to Jesus, and, in a kind of unkind expostulation of her
neglect, makes her moan to him; Lord, do thou not care that my sister has
left me to serve alone? Why did she not rather make her first address to her
Sister? Was it for that she knew Mary was so tied by the ears, with those
adamantine chains that came from the mouth of Christ, that until his silence
and dismission she had no power to stir? Or was it out of an honor and respect
to Christ, that in his presence she would not presume to call off her Sister
without his leave?

Howsoever, I cannot excuse the Holy woman from some weaknesses. It was a fault
to measure her Sister by her self, and apprehending her own act to be good, to
think her Sister could not do well if she did not so too. Whereas Goodness
has much latitude. Ill is opposed to Good, not Good to Good. Neither in things
lawful or indifferent are others bound to our examples. Mary might hear,
Martha might serve, and both do well. Mary did not censure Martha for her
rising from the feet of Christ, to prepare his meal: neither should Martha have
censured Mary for sitting at Christ's feet, to feed her Soul. It was a fault,
that she thought an excessive care of a liberal outward entertainment of Christ
was to be preferred to a diligent attention to Christ's spiritual
entertainment of them. It was a fault, that she durst presume to question our
Savior of some kind of unrespect to her toil, Lord, do thou not care? What
say thou, Martha? Do thou challenge the Lord of Heaven and earth of
incogitancy and neglect? Do thou take upon thee to prescribe unto that
infinite Wisdom, in stead of receiving directions from him? It is well thou
mettest with a Savior, whose gracious mildness knows how to pardon and pity
the errors of our zeal.

Yet I must needs say here wanted not fair pretenses for the ground of this thy
expostulation. Thou, the elder Sister, workest; Mary, the younger, sits still.
And what work was thine but the hospital receipt of thy Savior and his train?
Had it been for thine own paunch, or for some carnal friends, it had been less
excusable; now it was for Christ himself, to whom thou could never be too
obsequious.

But all this cannot deliver thee from the just blame of this bold
subincusation, Lord, do thou not care? How ready is our weakness upon every
slight coffeehouse to quarrel with our best friend, yea with our good God;
and the more we are put to it, to think our selves the more neglected, and to
challenge God for our neglect? Do we groan on the bed of our sickness, and
languishing in pain complain of long hours and weary sides? straight we think,
Lord, do thou not care that we suffer? Does God's poor Church go to wreck,
whilst the ploughers ploughing on her back make long furrows? Lord, do thou
not care? But know thou, O thou feeble and distrustful Soul, the more thou
do, the more thou suffer, the more thou art cared for: neither is God
ever so tender over his Church as when it is most exercised. Every pang and
stitch and gird is first felt of him that sends it. O God, thou know our
works, and our labor, and our patience; we may be ignorant and diffident; thou
can not but be gracious.

It could not but trouble devout Mary to hear her Sister's impatient complaint;
a complaint of her self to Christ, with such vehemence of passion, as if there
had been such strangeness betwixt the two Sisters, that the one would do
nothing for the other without an external compulsion from a Superior. How can
she choose but think, If I have offended, why was I not secretly taxed for it in
a sisterly familiarity? What if there have been some little omission? must the
whole house ring of it before my Lord and all his Disciples? Is this carriage
beseeming a Sister? Is my Devotion worthy of a quarrel? Lord, do thou not
care that I am injuriously censured? Yet I hear not a word of reply from that
modest mouth. O holy Mary, I admire thy patient silence. Thy Sister blames thee
for thy Piety; the Disciples (afterward) blame thee for thy Bounty and cost:
not a word falls from thee in a just vindication of thine honor and innocence,
but in an humble taciturnity thou leavest thine answer to thy Savior.

How should we learn of thee, when we are complained of for well-doing, to seal
up our lips, and to expect our righting from above?

And how sure, how ready art thou, O Savior, to speak in the cause of the
dumb? Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many things; but one
thing is needful, and Mary has chosen the better part.

What needed Mary to speak for her self when she had such an Advocate?
Doubtless Martha was, as it were, divided from her self with the multiplicity
of her careful thoughts: our Savior therefore doubles her name in his
compellation; that in such distraction he may both find and fix her heart. The
good woman made full account that Christ would have sent away her Sister with a
check, and her self with thanks: but now her hopes fail her; and though she be
not directly reproved, yet she hears her Sister more approved then she; Martha,
Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many things. Our Savior received
courtesy from her in her diligent and costly entertainment; yet he would not
blanch her error, and smooth her up in her weak misprision. No obligations may
so enthrall us, as that our tongues should not be free to reprove faults where
we find them. They are base and servile spirits that will have their tongue
tied to their teeth.

This glance toward a reproof implies an opposition of the condition of the
two Sisters. Themselves were not more near in Nature, then their present humor
and estate differed. One is opposed to many, necessary to superfluous,
solicitude to quietness: Thou art careful and troubled about many things; one
thing is necessary. How far then may our care reach to these earthly things? On
the one side, O Savior, thou have charged us to take no thought what to eat,
drink, put on; on the other, thy chosen Vessel has told us, that he that
provides not for his family has denied the faith, and is worse then an
Infidel. We may, we must care for many things; so that our care be for good,
and well. For good, both in kind and measure; well, so as our care be free from
distraction, from distrust. From distraction, that it hinder us not from the
necessary duties of our general Calling: from distrust, that we misdoubt not
God's Providence whilst we employ our own. We cannot care for thee, unless we
thus care for our selves, for ours.

Alas! how much care do I see everywhere? but how few Martha's? Her care was
for her Savior's entertainment, ours for our selves. One finds perplexities in
his Estate, which he desires to extricate; another beats his brains for the
raising of his House: One busies his thoughts about the doubtful condition (as
he thinks) of the Times, and casts in his anxious head the imaginary events of
all things, opposing his hopes to his fears; another studies how to avoid the
cross blows of an Adversary. Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled
about many things. Foolish men! why do we set our hearts upon the rack, and
need not? why will we endure to bend under that burden, which more able
shoulders have offered to undertake for our ease?

Thou have bidden us, O God, to cast our cares upon thee, with promise to care
for us: We do gladly unload our selves upon thee. O let our care be to depend
on thee, as thine is to provide for us.

Whether Martha be pitied or taxed for her sedulity, I am sure Mary is praised
for her devotion. One thing is necessary. Not by way of negation, as if nothing
were necessary but this: but by way of comparison, as that nothing is so
necessary as this. Earthly occasions must vail to spiritual. Of those three
main grounds of all our actions, Necessity, Convenience, Pleasure, each
transcends other: Convenience carries it away from Pleasure, Necessity from
Convenience, and one degree of Necessity from another. The degrees are
according to the conditions of the things necessary. The condition of these
earthly necessaries is, that without them we cannot live temporally; the
condition of the spiritual, that without them we cannot live eternally. So much
difference then as there is betwixt temporary and eternal, so much there must
needs be betwixt the necessity of these bodily actions and those spiritual:
Both are necessary in their kinds; neither must here be an opposition, but a
subordination. The Body and Soul must be friends, not rivals: we may not so
plie the Christian, that we neglect the man.

Oh the vanity of those men who, neglecting that one thing necessary, affect
many things superfluous! Nothing is needless with worldly minds but this one
which is only necessary, the care of their Souls. How justly do they lose that
they care not for, whilst they over-care for that which is neither worthy nor
possible to be kept?

Neither is Mary's business more allowed then her self: She has chosen the
good part. It was not forced upon her, but taken up by her election. Martha
might have sat still as well as she: She might have stirred about as well as
Martha. Mary's will made this choice, not without the inclination of him who
both gave this will and commends it. That will was before renewed; no marvel if
it chose the good: though this were not in a case of good and evil, but of good
and better. We have still this holy freedom, through the inoperation of him
that has freed us. Happy are we if we can improve this liberty to the best
advantage of our Souls.

The stability or perpetuity of good adds much to the praise of it. Martha's
part was soon gone; the thank and use of a little outward Hospitality cannot
long last: but Mary's shall not be taken away from her. The act of her hearing
was transient, the fruit permanent; she now hears that which shall stick by her
for ever.

What could thou hear, O Holy Mary, from those Sacred lips, which we hear not
still? That Heavenly Doctrine is never but the same, not more subject to change
then the Author of it. It is not impossible that the exercise of the Gospel
should be taken from us; but the benefit and virtue of it is as inseparable
from our Souls as their Being. In the hardest times that shall stick closest to
us; and till death, in death, after death shall make us happy.

XXXV. The Beggar that was born blind, cured.
THE man was born blind: This Cure requires not Art, but Power; a Power no less
then infinite and Divine. Nature presupposes a matter, though formless; Art
looks for matter formed to our hands: God stands not upon either. Where there
was not an Eye to be healed, what could an Oculist do? It is only a God that
can create. Such are we, O God, to all spiritual things: we want not sight, but
eyes: it must be thou only that can make us capable of illumination.

The blind man sat begging. Those that have eyes and hands and feet of their
own may be able to help themselves; those that want these helps must be
beholden to the eyes, hands, feet of others. The impotent are cast upon our
mercy: Happy are we, if we can lend lims and senses to the needy. Affected
beggary is odious: that which is of God's making justly challenges relief.

Where should this blind man sit begging, but near the Temple? At one gate sits
a Cripple, a Blind man at another. Well might these miserable Souls suppose
that Piety and Charity dwelt close together: the two Tables were both of one
quarry. Then are we best disposed to mercy toward our brethren, when we have
either craved or acknowledged God's mercy toward our selves. If we go thither
to beg of God, how can we deny mites, when we hope for talents?

Never did Jesus move one foot but to purpose. He passed by; but so as that his
Virtue stayed: so did he pass by, that his eye was fixed. The blind man could
not see him; he sees the blind man. His goodness prevents us, and yields better
supplies to our wants. He saw compassionately; not shutting his eyes, not
turning them aside, but bending them upon that dark and disconsolate Object.
That which was said of the Sun, is much more true of him that made it, Nothing
is hid from his light: but of all other things Miseries (especially of his own)
are most intentively eyed of him. Could we be miserable unseen, we had reason
to be heartless. O Savior, why should we not imitate thee in this merciful
improvement of our Senses? Woe be to those eyes that care only to gaze upon
their own beauty, bravery, wealth; not abiding to glance upon the sores of
Lazarus, the sorrows of Joseph, the dungeon of Jeremy, the blind Beggar at the
gate of the Temple.

The Disciples see the blind man too, but with different eyes: our Savior for
pity and cure, they for expostulation; Master, who did sin? this man, or his
Parents, that he is born blind? I like well that whatsoever doubt troubled
them, they straight vent it into the ear of their Master. O Savior, whilst
thou art in Heaven, thy school is upon earth. Wherefore serve thy Priests lips,
but to preserve knowledge? What use is there of the tongue of the learned, but
to speak a word in season? Thou teach us still; and still we doubt, and ask,
and learn.

In one short question I find two Truths and two Falsehoods; the Truths implied,
the Falsehoods expressed. It is true, that commonly man's suffering is for sin;
that we may justly, and do often, suffer even for the sins of our Parents. It
is false, that there is no other reason of our suffering but sin; that a man
could sin actually before he was, or was before his being, or could beforehand
suffer for his after-sins. In all likelihood that absurd conceit of the
Transmigration of Souls possessed the very Disciples. How easily and how far
may the best be miscarried with a common error? We are not thankful for our
own illumination, if we do not look with charity and pity upon the gross
mis-opinions of our brethren.

Our Savior sees, and yet will wink at so foul a misprision of his Disciples.
I hear neither chiding nor conviction. He that could have enlightened their
minds (as he did the world) at once, will do it by due leisure; and only
contents himself here with a mild solution; Neither this man, nor his Parents.
We learn nothing of thee, O Savior, if not meekness. What a sweet temper
should be in our carriage toward the weaknesses of others judgments? how
should we instruct them without bitterness, and without violence of Passion
expect the meet seasons of their better information? The tender Mother or Nurse
does not rate her little one for that he goes not well; but gives him her hand,
that he may go better. It is the spirit of lenity that must restore and
confirm the lapsed.

The answer is direct and punctual, neither the sin of the man nor of his
Parents bereaved him of his eyes: there was an higher cause of this privation,
the glory that God meant to win unto himself by redressing it. The Parents had
sinned in themselves; the man had sinned in his first Parents: it is not the
guilt of either that is guilty of this blindness. All God's afflictive acts are
not punishments; some are for the benefit of the creature, whether for
probation, or prevention, or reformation; all are for the praise, whether of
his Divine Power, or Justice, or Mercy.

It was fit so great a work should be ushered in with a preface. A sudden and
abrupt appearance would not have beseemed so glorious a demonstration of
Omnipotence. The way is made; our Savior addresses himself to the Miracle: a
Miracle not more in the thing done, then in the form of doing it.

The matter used was Clay. Could there be a meaner? could there be ought more
unfit? O Savior, how often had thou cured blindnesses by thy word alone? how
often by thy touch? How easily could thou have done so here? Was this to show
thy liberty, or thy power? Liberty, in that thou can at pleasure use variety
of means, not being tied to any; Power, in that thou could make use of
contraries? Had thou pulled out a box and applied some medicinal ointment to
the eyes, something had been ascribed to thy skill, more to the natural power
of thy receipt: now thou made use of clay, which had been enough to stop up
the eyes of the seeing, the virtue must be all in thee, none in the means. The
utter disproportion of this help to the Cure adds glory to the worker.

How clearly did thou hence evince to the world, that thou, who of clay
could make eyes, were the same who of clay had made man; since there is no
part of the body that has so little analogy to clay as the eye; this clearness
is contrary to that opacity? Had not the Jews been more blind then the man whom
thou curedst, and more hard and stiff then the clay which thou mollifiedst,
they had, in this one work, both seen and acknowledged thy Deity.

What could the clay have done without thy tempering? It was thy spittle that
made the clay effectual; it was that Sacred mouth of thine that made the
spittle medicinal: the water of Siloe shall but wash off that clay which this
inward moisture made powerful. The clay thus tempered, must be applied by the
hand that made it, else it avails nothing.

What must the blind man needs think, when he felt the cold clay upon the holes
of his eyes? or (since he could not conceive what an eye was) what must the
beholders needs think, to see that hollowness thus filled up? Is this the way
to give either eyes or sight? Why did not the earth see with this clay as well
as the man? What is there to hinder the fight, if this make it?

Yet with these contrarieties must the Faith be exercised, where God intends
the blessing of a Cure.

It was never meant that this clay should dwell upon those pits of the eyes: it
is only put on to be washed off, and that not by every water; none shall do
it but that of Siloam, which signifies Sent; and if the man had not been sent
to Siloam, he had been still blind. All things receive their virtue from Divine
institution. How else should a piece of wheaten bread nourish the Soul? How
should spring water wash off spiritual filthiness? How should the foolishness
of preaching save Souls? How should the absolution of God's Minister be more
effectual then the breath of an ordinary Christian? Thou, O God, have set
apart these Ordinances; thy Blessing is annexed to them; hence is the ground of
all our use, and their efficacy. Had thou so instituted, Jordan would as well
have healed Blindness, and Siloam Leprosy.

That the man might be capable of such a Miracle, his Faith is set on work; he
must be led with his eyes daubed up to the pool of Siloam. He washes, and sees.
Lord, what did this man think when his eyes were now first given him? what a
new world did he find himself now come into? how did he wonder at Heaven and
earth, and the faces and shapes of all creatures, the goodly varieties of
colors, the cheerfulness of the light, the lively beams of the Sun, the vast
expansion of the air, the pleasant transparence of the water; at the glorious
piles of the Temple, and stately palaces of Jerusalem? Every thing did not more
please then astonish him. Lo, thus shall we be affected, and more, when, the
scales of our mortality being done away, we shall see as we are seen; when we
shall behold the blessedness of that other world, the glory of the Saints and
Angels, the infinite Majesty of the Son of God, the incomprehensible brightness
of the all-glorious Deity. O my Soul, that thou could be taken up beforehand
with the admiration of that which thou can not as yet be capable of
foreseeing.

It could not be but that many eyes had been witnesses of this man's want of
eyes. He sat begging at one of the Temple-gates: not only all the City, but
all the Country must needs know him; thrice a year did they come up to
Jerusalem; neither could they come to the Temple and not see him. His very
blindness made him noted. Deformities and infirmities of body do more easily
both draw and fix the eye then an ordinary symmetry of parts.

Besides his Blindness, his Trade made him remarkable; the importunity of his
begging drew the eyes of the passengers. But of all other, the Place most
notified him. Had he sat in some obscure village of Judaea, or in some blind
lane of Jerusalem, perhaps he had not been heeded of many; but now that he took
up his seat in the heart, in the head of the chief City, whither all resorted
from all parts, what Jew can there be that knows not the blind beggar at the
Temple-gate? Purposely did our Savior make choice of such a Subject for his
Miracle; a man so poor, and so public: the glory of the work could not have
reached so far, if it had been done to the wealthiest Citizen of Jerusalem.
Neither was it for nothing that the act and the man is doubted of and inquired
into by the beholders; Is not this he that sat begging? Some said, It is he;
others said, It is like him. No truths have received so full proofs as those
that have been questioned. The want or the sudden presence of an eye (much more
of both) must needs make a great change in the face; those little balls of
light (which no doubt were more clear then Nature could have made them) could
not but give a new life to the countenance. I marvel not if the neighbors,
who had wont to see this dark visage led by a guide, and guided by a staff,
seeing him now walking confidently alone out of his own inward light, and
looking them cheerfully in the face, doubted whether this were he. The
miraculous cures of God work a sensible alteration in men, not more in their
own apprehension, then in the judgment of others. Thus in the redress of the
Spiritual blindness, the whole habit of the man is changed. Where before his
Face looked dull and earthly; now there is a sprightfull cheerfulness in it,
through the comfortable knowledge of God and Heavenly things. Whereas before
his Heart was set upon worldly things; now he uses them, but injoys them not:
and that use is because he must, not because he would. Where before his fears
and griefs were only for pains of body, or loss of estate or reputation; now
they are only spent upon the displeasure of his God, and the peril of his
Soul. So as now the neighbors can say, Is this the man? others, It is like
him, it is not he.

The late-blind man hears, and now sees himself questioned; and soon resolves
the doubt, I am he. He that now saw the light of the Sun, would not hide the
light of Truth from others. It is an unthankful silence, to smother the works
of God in an affected secrecy. To make God a loser by his bounty to us, were a
shameful injustice. We our selves abide not those sponges that suck up good
turns unknown. O God, we are not worthy of our spiritual eyesight, if we do
not publish thy mercies on the house top, and praise thee in the great
congregation.

Man is naturally inquisitive: we search studiously into the secret works of
Nature; we pry into the reasons of the witty inventions of Art; but if there be
any thing that transcends Art and Nature, the more high and abstruse it is, the
more busy we are to seek into it. This thirst after hidden, yea forbidden,
Knowledge did once cost us dear: but where it is good and lawful to know,
inquiry is commendable; as here in these Jews, How were thine eyes opened? The
first improvement of humane Reason is inquisition, the next is information and
resolution: and if the meanest events pass us not without a question, how much
less those that carry in them wonder and advantage?

He that was so ready to profess himself the subject of the Cure, is no niggard
of proclaiming the Author of it; A man that is called Jesus made clay, and
anointed mine eyes, and sent me to Siloam to wash, and now I see. The blind man
knew no more then he said, and he said what he apprehended, A man. He heard
Jesus speak, he felt his hand; as yet he could look no farther: upon his next
meeting he saw God in this man. In matter of Knowledge, we must be content to
creep ere we can go. As that other recovered blind man saw first men walk like
trees, after like men; so no marvel if this man saw first this God only as
man, after this man as God also. Onwards he thinks him a wonderful man, a
mighty Prophet. In vain shall we either expect a sudden perfection in the
understanding of Divine matters, or censure those that want it.

How did this man know what Jesus did? He was then stone-blind; what
distinction could he yet make of persons, of actions? True; but yet the blind
man never wanted the assistence of others eyes; their relation has assured him
of the manner of his Cure, besides the contribution of his other Senses: his
Ear might perceive the spittle to fall, and hear the enjoined command; his
Feeling perceived the cold and moist clay upon his lips. All these conjoined
gave sufficient warrant thus to believe, thus to report. Our ear is our best
guide to a full apprehension of the works of Christ. The works of God the
Father, his Creation and Government, are best known by the Eye. The works of
God the Son, his Redemption and Mediation, are best known by the Ear. O
Savior, we cannot personally see what thou have done here. What are the
monuments of thine Apostles and Evangelists, but the relations of the blind
man's guide, what and how thou have wrought for us? On these we strongly rely,
these we do no less confidently believe then if our very eyes had been
witnesses of what thou did and sufferedst upon earth. There were no place for
Faith; if the Ear were not worthy of as much credit as the Eye.

How could the neighbors do less then ask where he was that had done so
strange a Cure? I doubt yet with what mind; I fear, not out of favor. Had they
been but indifferent, they could not but have been full of silent wonder, and
inclined to believe in so Omnipotent an Agent. Now, as prejudiced to Christ,
and partial to the Pharisees, they bring the late-blind man before those
professed enemies unto Christ.

It is the preposterous Religion of the Vulgar sort, to claw and adore those
which have tyrannically usurped upon their Souls, though with neglect, yea with
contempt, of God in his word, in his works. Even unjust authority will never
want soothing up in whatsoever courses, though with disgrace and opposition to
the Truth. Base minds, where they find possession, never look after right.

Our Savior had picked out the Sabbath for this Cure. It is hard to find out
any time wherein Charity is unseasonable. As Mercy is an excellent Grace, so
the works of it are fittest for the best day. We are all born blind: the Font
is our Siloam: no day can come amiss, but yet God's day is the properest for
our washing and recovery.

This alone is quarrel enough to these scrupulous wranglers, that an act of
Mercy was done on that day wherein their envy was but seasonable.

I do not see the man beg any more when he once had his eyes; no Burger in
Jerusalem was richer then he. I hear him stoutly defending that gracious
author of his Cure against the cavills of the malicious Pharisees: I see him
as a resolute Confessor suffering Excommunication for the name of Christ, and
maintaining the innocence and honor of so Blessed a Benefactour: I hear him
read a Divinity-Lecture to them that sat in Moses his chair, and convincing
them of blindness, who punished him for seeing.

How can I but envy thee, O happy man, who, of a Patient, provest an Advocate
for thy Savior; whose gain of bodily sight made way for thy Spiritual eyes;
who have lost a Synagogue, and have found Heaven; who, being abandoned of
Sinners, art received of the Lord of Glory?

XXXVI. The stubborn Devil ejected.
HOW different, how contrary are our conditions here upon earth? Whilst our
Savior is transfigured on the Mount, Matthew. 17.14. compared with Mark 9.14.
his Disciples are perplexed in the valley. Three of his choice Followers were
with him above, ravished with the miraculous proofs of his Godhead: nine other
were troubled with the business of a stubborn Devil below.

Much people was met to attend Christ, and there they will stay till he come
down from Tabor. Their zeal and devotion brought them thither; their patient
perseverance held them there. We are not worthy the name of his clients, if we
cannot painfully seek him, and submissly wait his leisure.

He that was now awhile retired into the Mount, to confer with his Father, and
to receive the attendence of Moses and Elias, returns into the valley to the
multitude. He was singled out awhile for prayer and contemplation; now he was
joined with the multitude for their miraculous cure and Heavenly instruction.
We that are his spiritual agents must be either preparing in the mount, or
exercising in the valley; one while in the mount of Meditation, in the valley
of Action another; alone to study, in the assembly to preach: here is much
variety, but all is work.

Moses, when he came down from the hill, heard Music in the valley; Christ,
when he came down from the hill, heard discord. The Scribes (it seems) were
setting hard upon the Disciples: they saw Christ absent, nine of his train left
in the valley, those they fly upon. As the Devil, so his Imps watch close for
all advantages. No subtle enemy but will be sure to attempt that part where is
likelihood of least defense, most weakness. When the Spouse misses him whom her
Soul loves, every watchman has a buffet for her. O Savior, if thou be never
so little stepped aside, we are sure to be assaulted with powerful Temptations.

They that durst say nothing to the Master, so soon as his back is turned fall
foul upon his weakest Disciples. Even at the first hatching the Serpent was
thus crafty, to begin at the weaker vessel: experience and time has not
abated his wit. If he still work upon silly Women laden with diverse lusts, upon
rude and ungrounded Ignorants, it is no other then his old wont.

Our Savior upon the skirts of the hill knew well what was done in the plain;
and therefore hasts down to the rescue of his Disciples. The clouds and vapors
do not sooner scatter upon the Sun's breaking forth, then these cavils vanish
at the presence of Christ: in stead of opposition they are straight upon their
knees; here are now no quarrels, but humble salutations; and if Christ's
question did not force theirs, the Scribes had found no tongue.

Doubtless there were many eager Patients in this throng; none made so much
noise as the father of the Demoniack. Belike upon his occasion it was that the
Scribes held contestation with the Disciples. If they wrangled, he sues, and
that from his knees. Whom will not need make both humble and eloquent? The case
was woeful, and accordingly expressed. A son is a dear name; but this was his
only son. Were his grief ordinary yet, the sorrow were the less; but he is a
fearful spectacle of judgment, for he is Lunatic. Were this Lunacy yet merely
from a natural distemper, it were more tolerable; but this is aggravated by
the possession of a cruel spirit, that handles him in a most grievous manner.
Yet were he but in the rank of other Demoniacks, the discomfort were more easy;
but lo, this spirit is worse then all other his fellows; others are usually
dispossessed by the Disciples, this is beyond their power. I besought thy
Disciples to cast him out, but they could not: therefore, Lord, have thou mercy
on my Son. The despair of all other helps sends us importunately to the God of
power. Here was his refuge; the strong man had gotten possession, it was only
the stronger then he that can eject him. O God, spiritual wickednesses have
naturally seized upon our Souls: all humane helps are too weak; only thy Mercy
shall improve thy Power to our deliverance.

What bowels could choose but yearn at the distress of this poor young man?
Frenzy had taken his brain: that Disease was but health in comparison of the
tyrannical possession of that evil spirit, wherewith it was seconded. Out of
Hell there could not be a greater misery: his senses are either bereft, or else
left to torment him; he is torn and racked, so as he foams and gnashes, he
pines and languishes; he is cast sometimes into the fire, sometimes into the
water. How that malicious Tyrant rejoices in the mischief done to the creature
of God? Had earth had any thing more pernicious then fire and water, thither
had he been thrown; though rather for torture, then dispatch. It was too much
favor to die at once. O God, with how deadly enemies have thou matched us?
Abate thou their power, since their malice will not be abated.

How many think of this case with pity and horror, and in the mean time are
insensible of their own fearfuller condition?

It is but oftentimes that the Devil would cast this young man into a temporary
fire; he would cast the sinner into an eternal fire, whose everlasting
burnings have no intermissions. No fire comes amiss to him; the fire of
Affliction, the fire of Lust, the fire of Hell. O God, make us apprehensive of
the danger of our sin, and secure from the fearful issue of sin.

All these very same effects follow his spiritual possession. How does he tear
and rack them whom he vexes and distracts with inordinate cares and sorrows?
How do they foam and gnash whom he has drawn to an impatient repining at God's
afflictive hand? How do they pine away who hourly decay and languish in Grace?

Oh the lamentable condition of sinful souls, so much more dangerous, by how
much less felt!

But all this while what part has the Moon in this man's misery? How comes the
name of that goodly Planet in question? Certainly these diseases of the brain
follow much the course of this queen of moisture. That power which she has in
humors is drawn to the advantage of the malicious spirit; her predominancy is
abused to his despite: whether it were for the better opportunity of his
vexation, or whether for the drawing of envy and discredit upon so noble a
creature. It is no news with that subtle enemy to fasten his effects upon those
secondary causes which he usurps to his own purposes. Whatever be the means,
he is the tormentour. Much wisdom needs to distinguish betwixt the evil spirit
abusing the good creature, and the good creature abused by the evil spirit.

He that knew all things, asks questions; How long has he been so? Not to
inform himself; (That Devil could have done nothing without the knowledge,
without the leave of the God of Spirits;) but that by the confession of the
Parent he might lay forth the woeful condition of the Child; that the thank and
glory of the Cure might be so much greater, as the complaint was more grievous.
He answered, From a child.

O God, how I adore the depth of thy wise and just and powerful dispensation?
Thou that could say, I have loved Jacob, and Esau have I hated, ere the
children had done good or evil, thoughtest also good, ere this Child could be
capable of good or evil, to yield him over to the power of that Evil one. What
need I ask for any other reason then that which is the rule of all Justice, thy
Will? Yet even these weak eyes can see the just grounds of thine actions. That
child, though an Israelite, was conceived and born in that sin which both could
and did give Satan an interest in him. Besides, the actual sins of the Parents
deserved this revenge upon that piece of themselves. Rather, O God, let me
magnify thy Mercy, that we and ours escape this Judgment, then question thy
Justice, that some escape not. How just might it have been with thee, that we,
who have given way to Satan in our sins, should have way and scope given to
Satan over us in our punishments? It is thy praise that any of us are free; it
is no quarrel that some suffer.

Do I wonder to see Satan's bodily possession of this young man from a child,
when I see his spiritual possession of every son of Adam from a longer date;
not from a child, but from the womb, yea in it? Why should not Satan possess
his own? we are all by nature the sons of wrath. It is time for us to renounce
him in Baptism, whose we are till we be regenerate. He has right to us in our
first birth; our new birth acquits us from him, and cuts off all his claim. How
miserable are they that have nothing but Nature? Better had it been to have
been unborn, then not to be born again.

And if this poor soul from an infant were thus miserably handled, having done
none actual evil; how just cause have we to fear the like Judgments, who by
many foul offenses have deserved to draw this executioner upon us? O my Soul,
thou have not room enough for thankfulness to that good God, who has not
delivered thee up to that malignant Spirit.

The distressed Father sits not still, neglects not means: I brought him to thy
Disciples. Doubtless the man came first to seek for Christ himself; finding him
absent, he makes suit to the Disciples. To whom should we have recourse in all
our spiritual complaints but to the agents and messengers of God? The noise of
the like cures had surely brought this man with much confidence to crave their
succor; and now how cold was he at the heart, when he found that his hopes
were frustrate? They could not cast him out. No doubt the Disciples tried their
best, they laid their wonted charge upon this dumb spirit; but all in vain.
They that could come with joy and triumph to their Master, and say, The Devils
are subject to us, find now themselves matched with a stubborn and refractory
spirit. Their way was hitherto smooth and fair; they met with no rub till now.
And now surely the father of the Demoniack was not more troubled at this event
then themselves. How could they choose but fear lest their Master had, with
himself, withdrawn that spiritual power which they had formerly exercised?
Needs must their heart fail them with their success.

The man complained not of their impotence: it were fondly injurious to accuse
them for that which they could not do: had the want been in their will, they
had well deserved a querulous language; it was no fault to want power. Only he
complains of the stubbornness, and laments the invincibleness of that evil
spirit.

I should wrong you, O ye blessed Followers of Christ, if I should say that, as
Israel, when Moses was gone up into the Mount, lost their belief with their
guide; so that ye, missing your Master, (who was now ascended up to his Tabor,)
were to seek for your Faith. Rather the Wisdom of God saw reason to check your
over-assured forwardness; and both to pull down your hearts by a just
humiliation in the sense of your own weakness, and to raise up your hearts to
new acts of dependence upon that sovereign power from which your limited virtue
was derived.

What was more familiar to the Disciples then ejecting of Devils? In this only
it is denied them. Our good God sometimes finds it requisite to hold us short
in those abilities whereof we make least doubt, that we may feel whence we had
them. God will be no less glorified in what we cannot do, then in what we can
do. If his Graces were always at our command, and ever alike, they would seem
natural, and soon run into contempt: now we are justly held in an awful
dependence upon that gracious hand, which so gives as not to cloy us, and so
denies as not to discourage us.

Who could now but expect that our Savior should have pitied and bemoaned the
condition of this sad father and miserable son, and have let fall some words of
comfort upon them? In stead whereof I hear him chiding and complaining, O
faithless and perverse generation, how long shall I be with you? how long shall
I suffer you? Complaining, not of that woeful father and more woeful son; it
was not his fashion to add affliction to the distressed, to break such bruised
reeds; but of those Scribes, who, upon the failing of the success of this suit,
had insulted upon the disability of the Followers of Christ, and depraved his
power: although perhaps this impatient father, seduced by their suggestion,
might slip into some thoughts of distrust.

There could not be a greater crimination then faithless and perverse:
faithless, in not believing; perverse, in being obstinately set in their
unbelief. Doubtless these men were not free from other notorious crimes: all
were drowned in their Infidelity. Moral uncleanness or violences may seem
more heinous to men; none are so odious to God as these Intellectual
wickednesses.

What an happy change is here in one breath of Christ? How long shall I suffer
you? Bring him hither to me. The one is a word of anger, the other of favor.
His just indignation does not exceed or impeach his Goodness. What a sweet
mixture there is in the perfect simplicity of the Divine Nature? In the midst
of judgment he remembers mercy, yea he acts it. His Sun shines in the midst of
this storm. Whether he frown or whether he smile, it is all to one purpose,
that he may win the incredulous and disobedient. Whither should the rigor of
all our censures tend but to edification, and not to destruction? We are
Physicians, we are not executioners; we give purges to cure, and not poisons to
kill. It is for the just Judge to say one day to reprobate Souls, Depart from
me: in the mean time it is for us to invite all that are spiritually possessed
to the participation of mercy. Bring him hither to me.

O Savior, distance was no hindrance to thy work: why should the Demoniack be
brought to thee? Was it that this deliverance might be the better evicted, and
that the beholders might see it was not for nothing that the Disciples were
opposed with so refractory a spirit? or was it that the Scribes might be
witnesses of that strong hostility that was betwixt thee and that foul spirit,
and be ashamed of their blasphemous slander? or was it that the father of the
Demoniack might be quickened in that Faith which now, through the suggestion of
the Scribes, begun to droop; when he should hear and see Christ so cheerfully
to undertake and perform that whereof they had bidden him despair?

The possessed is brought; the Devil is rebuked and ejected. That stiff
spirit, which stood out boldly against the commands of the Disciples, cannot
but stoop to the voice of the Master: that power which did at first cast him
out of Heaven, easily dispossesses him of an house of clay. The Lord rebuke
thee, Satan, and then thou can not but flee.

The Disciples, who were not used to these affronts, cannot but be troubled at
their mis-success: Master, why could not we cast him out? Had they been
conscious of any defect in themselves, they had never asked the question.
Little did they think to hear of their Unbelief. Had they not had great Faith,
they could not have cast out any Devils; had they not had some want of Faith,
they had cast out this. It is possible for us to be defective in some Graces,
and not to feel it.

Although not so much their weakness is guilty of this unprevailing, as the
strength of that evil spirit. This kind goes not out but by prayer and fasting.
Weaker spirits were wont to be ejected by a command; this Devil was more sturdy
and boisterous. As there are degrees of statures in men, so there are degrees
of strength and rebellion in spiritual wickednesses. Here bidding will not
serve, they must pray; and praying will not serve without fasting. They must
pray to God that they may prevail; they must fast to make their prayer more
fervent, more effectual. We cannot now command, we can fast and pray. How good
is our God to us, that whilst he has not thought fit to continue to us those
means which are less powerful for the dispossessing of the powers of darkness,
yet he has given us the greater? Whilst we can fast and pray, God will command
for us; Satan cannot prevail against us.

XXXVII. The Widow's Mites.
THE sacred wealth of the Temple was either in stuff, or in coin. For the one
the Jews had an house, for the other a chest. At the concourse of all the males
to the Temple thrice a year upon occasion of the solemn Feasts, the oblations
of both kinds were liberal. Our Savior, as taking pleasure in the prospect,
sets himself to view those Offerings, whether for holy uses or charitable.

Those things we delight in, we love to behold: The eye and the heart will go
together. And can we think, O Savior, that thy Glory has diminished ought of
thy gracious respects to our beneficence? or that thine acceptance of our
Charity was confined to the earth? Even now that thou sit at the right hand
of thy Father's glory, thou see every hand that is stretched out to the
relief of thy poor Saints here below. And if vanity have power to stir up our
Liberality out of a conceit to be seen of men, how shall Faith encourage our
Bounty in knowing that we are seen of thee, and accepted by thee? Alas! what
are we the better for the notice of those perishing and impotent eyes, which
can only view the outside of our actions; or for that waste wind of applause
which vanishes in the lips of the speaker? Thine eye, O Lord, is piercing and
retributive. As to see thee is perfect Happiness, so to be seen of thee is true
contentment and glory.

And do thou, O God, see what we give thee, and not see what we take away
from thee? Are our Offerings more noted then our Sacrileges? Surely thy Mercy
is not more quick-sighted then thy Justice. In both kinds our actions are
viewed, our account is kept; and we are sure to receive Rewards for what we
have given, and Vengeance for what we have defalked. With thine eye of
Knowledge thou see all we do; but what we do well, thou see with thine
eye of Approbation. So did thou now behold these pious and charitable
Oblations. How well were thou pleased with this variety? Thou saw many rich
men give much; and one poor Widow give more then they in lesser room.

The Jews were now under the Roman pressure; they were all tributaries, yet
many of them rich; and those rich men were liberal to the common chest. Had
thou seen those many rich give little, we had heard of thy censure: thou
expectest a proportion betwixt the giver and the gift, betwixt the gift and the
receipt: where that fails, the blame is just. That Nation (though otherwise
faulty enough) was in this commendable. How bounteously open were their hands
to the house of God? Time was when their liberality was fain to be restrained
by Proclamation; and now it needed no incitement: the rich gave much, the
poorest gave more. He saw a poor Widow casting in two mites. It was misery
enough that she was a Widow. The married woman is under the careful provision
of an Husband; if she spend, he earns: in that estate four hands work for her;
in her viduity but two. Poverty added to the sorrow of her widowhood. The loss
of some Husbands is supplied by a rich jointure; it is some allay to the grief
that the hand is left full, though the bed be empty: this woman was not more
desolate then needy. Yet this poor widow gives. And what gives she? An offering
like her self, two mites; or, in our language, two half-farthing-tokens. Alas,
good woman! who was poorer then thy self? wherefore was that Corban, but for
the relief of such as thou? who should receive, if such give? Thy mites were
something to thee, nothing to the Treasury. How ill is that gift bestowed,
which dis-furnisheth thee, and adds nothing to the common stock? Some thrifty
neighbor might perhaps have suggested this probable discouragement. Jesus
publishes and applauds her bounty: He called his Disciples, and said unto them,
Verily I say unto you, this woman has cast in more then they all. Whilst the
rich put in their offerings, I see no Disciples called; it was enough that
Christ noted their gifts alone: but when the Widow comes with her two mites,
now the domestics of Christ are summoned to assemble, and taught to admire
this munificence; a solemn preface makes way to her praise, and her Mites are
made more precious then the others Talents. She gave more then they all. More,
not only in respect of the Mind of the giver, but of the proportion of the
gift, as hers. A mite to her was more then pounds to them: Pounds were little
to them, two mites were all to her: They gave out of their abundance, she out
of her necessity. That which they gave, left the heap less, yet an heap still;
she gives all at once, and leaves her self nothing. So as she gave, not more
then any, but more then they all. God does not so much regard what is taken
out, as what is left. O Father of mercies, thou look at once into the bottom
of her heart and the bottom of her purse; and esteemest her gift according to
both. As thou see not as man, so thou valuest not as man: Man judges by the
worth of the gift, thou judge by the mind of the giver and the proportion of
the remainder. It were wide with us if thou should go by quantities. Alas!
what have we but mites, and those of thine own lending? It is the comfort of
our meanness, that our affections are valued, and not our presents: neither
have thou said, God loves a liberal giver, but a cheerful. If I had more, O
God, thou should have it; had I less, thou would not despise it, who
acceptest the gift according to that a man has, and not according to that he
has not.

Yea, Lord, what have I but two mites, a Soul, and a Body? mere mites, yea, not
so much, to thine Infiniteness. Oh that I could perfectly offer them up unto
thee, according to thine own right in them, and not according to mine. How
graciously would thou be sure to accept them? how happy shall I be in thine
acceptance?

XXXVIII. The Ambition of the two Sons Zebedee.
HE who had his own time and ours in his hand, foreknew and foretold the
approach of his dissolution. When men are near their end, and ready to make
their Will, then is it seasonable to sue for Legacies. Thus did the Mother of
the two Zebedees; therein well approving both her Wisdom and her Faith:
Wisdom, in the fit choice of her opportunity; Faith, in taking such an
opportunity.

The suit is half obtained that is seasonably made. To have made this motion at
the entry into their attendence, had been absurd, and had justly seemed to
challenge a denial. It was at the parting of the Angel, that Jacob would be
blessed. The double spirit of Elijah is not sued for till his ascending.

But, O the admirable Faith of this good woman! When she heard the discourse of
Christ's Sufferings and Death, she talks of his Glory; when she hears of his
Cross, she speaks of his Crown. If she had seen Herod come and tender his
Scepter unto Christ, or the Elders of the Jews come upon their knees with a
submissive profer of their allegiance, she might have had some reason to
entertain the thoughts of a Kingdom: but now whilst the sound of betraying,
suffering, dying, was in her ear, to make account of and suit for a room in his
Kingdom, it argues a belief able to triumph over all discouragements.

It was nothing for the Disciples, when they saw him after his conquest of
death and rising from the grave, to ask him, Master, will thou now restore the
kingdom unto Israel? but for a silly woman to look through his future Death and
Passion, at his Resurrection and Glory, it is no less worthy of wonder then
praise.

To hear a man in his best health and vigor to talk of his confidence in God,
and assurance of Divine favor, cannot be much worth: but if in extremities we
can believe above hope, against hope, our Faith is so much more noble as our
difficulties are greater.

Never sweeter perfume arose from any altar, then that which ascended from
Job's dunghill, I know that my Redeemer lives.

What a strange style is this that is given to this woman? It had been as easy
to have said, the wife of Zebedee, or the sister of Mary or of Joseph, or (as
her name was) plain Salome: but now, by an unusual description, she is styled*
The Mother of Zebedee's children. Zebedee was an obscure man; she, as his wife,
was no better: the greatest honor she ever had or could have, was to have two
such sons as James and John; these give a title to both their Parents. Honor
ascends as well as descends. Holy Children dignifie the loins and womb from
whence they proceed, no less then their Parents traduce honor unto them.
Salome might be a good wife, a good huswife, a good woman, a good neighbor:
all these cannot ennoble her so much as the mother of Zebedee's children.

What a world of pain, toil, care, cost, there is in the birth and education of
Children? Their good proof requites all with advantage. Next to happiness in
our selves, is to be happy in a gracious Issue.

The suit was the sons, but by the mouth of their mother: it was their best
policy to speak by her lips. Even these Fishermen had already learned craftily
to fish for promotion. Ambition was not so bold in them as to show her own
face: the envy of the suit shall thus be avoided, which could not but follow
upon their personal request. If it were granted, they had what they would; if
not, it was but the repulse of a woman's motion: which must needs be so much
more pardonable, because it was of a mother for her sons.

It is not discommendable in parents to seek the preferment of their children.
Why may not Abraham sue for an Ismael? So it be by lawful means, in a moderate
measure, in due order, this endeavor cannot be amiss. It is the neglect of
circumstances that makes these desires sinful. Oh the madness of those
Parents, that care not which way they raise an house; that desire rather to
leave their children great, then good; that are more ambitious to have their
sons Lords on earth, then Kings in Heaven! Yet I commend thee, Salome, that thy
first plot was to have thy sons Disciples of Christ, then after to prefer them
to the best places of that attendence. It is the true method of Divine
prudence, O God, first to make our children happy with the honor of thy
service, and then to endeavor their meet advancement upon earth.

The mother is put upon this suit by her sons; their heart was in her lips.
They were not so mortified by their continual conversation with Christ, hearing
his Heavenly doctrine, seeing his Divine carriage, but that their minds were
yet roving after temporal Honors. Pride is the inmost coat, which we put off
last, and which we put on first. Who can wonder to see some sparks of weak and
worldly desires in their holiest teachers, when the blessed Apostles were not
free from some ambitious thoughts whilst they sat at the feet, yea in the
bosom of their Savior?

The near kindred this woman could challenge of Christ might seem to give her
just color of more familiarity; yet now that she comes upon a suit, she
submits her self to the lowest gesture of suppliants. We need not be taught,
that it is fit for petitioners to the Great, to present their humble
supplications upon their knees. O Savior, if this woman, so nearly allied to
thee according to the flesh, coming but upon a temporal occasion to thee, being
as then compassed about with humane infirmities, adored thee ere she durst sue
to thee; what reverence is enough for us that come to thee upon spiritual
suits, sitting now in the height of Heavenly Glory and Majesty? Say then, thou
wife of Zebedee, what is it that thou cravest of thine Omnipotent kinsman? A
certain thing. Speak out, woman; what is this certain thing that thou cravest?
How poor and weak is this supplicatory anticipation to him that knew thy
thoughts ere thou utteredst them, ere thou entertainedst them? We are all in
this tune; every one would have something; such perhaps as we are ashamed to
utter. The Proud man would have a certain thing; Honor in the world: the
Covetous would have a certain thing too; Wealth and abundance: the Malicious
would have a certain thing; Revenge on his enemies: the Epicure would have
Pleasure and Long life; the Barren, Children; the Wanton, Beauty. Each one
would be humoured in his own desire; though in variety, yea contradiction to
other; though in opposition not more to God's will, then our own good.

How this suit sticks in her teeth, and dares not freely come forth, because it
is guilty of its own faultiness? What a difference there is betwixt the prayers
of Faith, and the motions of Self-love and Infidelity? Those come forth with
boldness, as knowing their own welcome, and being well assured both of their
warrant and acceptance: these stand blushing at the door, not daring to
appear; like to some baffled suit, conscious to its own unworthiness and just
repulse. Our inordinate desires are worthy of a check: when we know that our
requests are holy, we cannot come with too much confidence to the throne of
Grace.

He that knew all their thoughts afar off, yet, as if he had been a stranger to
their purposes, asks, What would thou? Our infirmities do then best shame us,
when they are fetched out of our own mouths: Like as our prayers also serve not
to acquaint God with our wants, but to make us the more capable of his mercies.

The suit is drawn from her; now she must speak. Grant that these my two sons
may sit, one on thy right hand, the other on thy left, in thy Kingdom.

It is hard to say, whether out of more pride or ignorance. It was as received
as erroneous a conceit amongst the very Disciples of Christ, that he should
raise up a Temporal Kingdom over the now-tributary and beslaved people of
Israel. The Romans were now their masters; their fancy was, that their Messiah
should shake off this yoke, and reduce them to their former Liberty. So
grounded was this opinion, that the two Disciples in their walk to Emmaus could
say, We trusted it had been he that should have delivered Israel; and when,
after his Resurrection, he was walking up mount Olivet toward Heaven, his very
Apostles could ask him, if he would now restore that long-expected Kingdom. How
should we mitigate our censures of our Christian brethren, if either they
mistake, or know not some secondary truths of Religion, when the domestic
attendents of Christ, who heard him every day till the very point of his
Ascension, misapprehended the chief cause of his coming into the world, and the
state of his Kingdom? If our Charity may not bear with small faults, what do
we under his name that connived at greater? Truth is as the Sun; bright in it
self, yet there are many close corners into which it never shined. O God, if
thou open our hearts, we shall take in those beams: till thou do so, teach us
to attend patiently for our selves, charitably for others.

These Fishermen had so much Courtship to know, that the right hand and the
left of any Prince were the chief places of Honor. Our Savior had said that
his twelve Followers should sit upon twelve thrones, and judge the twelve
Tribes of Israel. This good woman would have her two sons next to his person,
the prime Peers of his Kingdom. Every one is apt to wish the best to his own.
Worldly Honor is neither worth our suit, nor unworthy our acceptance. Yea,
Salome, had thy mind been in Heaven, had thou intended this desired
preeminence of that celestial state of Glory, yet I know not how to justify
thine ambition. Would thou have thy sons preferred to the Father of the
faithful, to the blessed Mother of thy Savior? That very wish were
presumptuous. For me, O God, my ambition shall go so high as to be a Saint in
Heaven, and to live as holily on earth as the best; but for precedence of
Heavenly honor, I do not, I dare not affect it. It is enough for me, if I may
lift up my head amongst the heels of thy Blessed ones.

The mother asks, the sons have the answer. She was but their tongue, they
shall be her ears. God ever imputes the acts to the first mover, rather then to
the instrument.

It was a sore check, Ye know not what ye ask. Tn our ordinary communication to
speak idly, is sin; but in our suits to Christ to be so inconsiderate, as not
to understand our own petitions, must needs be a foul offense.

As Faith is the ground of our Prayers, so Knowledge is the ground of our
Faith. If we come with indigested requests, we profane that Name we invoke.

To convince their unfitness for Glory, they are sent to their impotency in
suffering; Are ye able to drink of the cup whereof I shall drink, and to be
baptized with the Baptism wherewith I am baptized? O Savior, even thou, who
were one with thy Father, have a cup of thine own: never Potion was so bitter
as that which was mixed for thee. Yea, even thy draught is stinted; it is not
enough for thee to sip of this Cup, thou must drink it up to the very dregs.
When the vinegar and gall were tendered to thee by men, thou did but kiss the
cup; but when thy Father gave into thine hands a potion infinitely more
distasteful, thou (for our health) did drink deep of it even to the bottom,
and said, It is finished. And can we repine at those unpleasing draughts of
Affliction that are tempered for us sinful men, when we see thee, the Son of
thy Father's love, thus dieted? We pledge thee, O Blessed Savior, we pledge
thee, according to our weakness, who have begun to us in thy powerful
sufferings. Only do thou enable us (after some four faces made in our
reluctation, yet) at last willingly to pledge thee in our constant Sufferings
for thee.

As thou must be drenched within, so must thou be baptized without. Thy Baptism
is not of water, but of blood; both these came from thee in thy Passion: we
cannot be thine, if we partake not of both. If thou have not grudged thy
precious blood to us, well may thou challenge some worthless drops from us.

When they talk of thy Kingdom, thou speak of thy bitter Cup, of thy bloody
Baptism. Suffering is the way to reigning. Through many tribulations must we
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. There was never wedge of gold that did not
first pass the fire; there was never pure grain that did not undergo the
flail. In vain shall we dream of our immediate passage from the pleasures and
jollity of earth to the glory of Heaven. Let who will hope to walk upon Roses
and Violets to the throne of Heaven; O Savior, let me trace thee by the track
of thy Blood, and by thy red steps follow thee to thine eternal rest and
Happiness.

I know this is no easy task; else thou had never said, Are ye able? Who
should be able if not they that had been so long blessed with thy presence,
informed by thy doctrine, and (as it were) beforehand possessed of their Heaven
in thee? Thou had never made them judges of their power, if thou could not
have convinced them of their weakness. Alas! how full of feebleness is our
body, and our mind of impatience! If but a Be sting our flesh, it swells; and
if but a tooth ache, the head and heart complain. How small trifles make us
weary of our selves? What can we do without thee? without thee what can we
suffer? If thou be not, O Lord, strong in my weakness, I cannot be so much as
weak; I cannot so much as be. Oh, do thou prepare me for my day, and enable me
to my trialls: I can do all things through thee that strengthenest me.

The motion of the two Disciples was not more full of infirmity then their
answer; We are able. Out of an eager desire of the Honor, they are apt to
undertake the condition. The best men may be mistaken in their own powers.
Alas, poor men! when it came to the issue, they ran away, and I know not
whither one without his coat. It is one thing to suffer in speculation, another
in practice. There cannot be a worse sign then for a man in a carnal
presumption to vaunt of his own abilities. How justly does God suffer that man
to be foiled purposely, that he may be ashamed of his own vain self-confidence?
O God, let me ever be humbly dejected in the sense of mine own insufficiency;
let me give all the Glory to thee, and take nothing to my self but my
infirmities.

Oh the wonderful mildness of the Son of God! He does not rate the two
Disciples, either for their ambition in suing, or presumption in undertaking:
but leaving the worst, he takes the best of their answer; and omitting their
errors, incourages their good intentions: Ye shall drink indeed of my cup, and
be baptized with my baptism: but to sit on my right hand and my left, is not
mine to give, but to them for whom it is prepared of my Father. I know not
whether there be more mercy in the concession, or satisfaction in the denial.
Were it not an high honor to drink of thy Cup, O Savior, thou had not
fore-promised it as a favor. I am deceived if what thou grantedst were much
less then that which thou deniedst. To pledge thee in thine own Cup, is not
much less dignity and familiarity then to sit by thee. If we suffer with thee,
we shall also reign together with thee. What greater promotion can flesh and
blood be capable of, then a conformity to the Lord of Glory? Enable thou me to
drink of thy Cup, and then set me where thou will.

But, O Savior, whilst thou dignifiest them in thy grant, do thou disparage
thy self in thy denial? Not mine to give? Whose is it, if not thine? If it be
thy Father's, it is thine: Thou, who art Truth, have said, I and my Father are
one. Yea, because thou art one with the Father, it is not thine to give to any
save those for whom it is prepared of the Father. The Father's preparation was
thine, his gift is thine; the Decree of both is one. That eternal counsel is
not alterable upon our vain desires. The Father gives these Heavenly honors to
none but by thee; thou give them to none but according to the Decree of thy
Father. Many degrees there are of celestial Happiness. Those supernall
mansions are not all of an height. That Providence which has varied our
stations upon earth, has pre-ordered our seats above. O God, admit me within
the walls of thy new Jerusalem, and place me wheresoever thou please.

XXXIX. The Tribute-money paid.
ALL these other Histories report the Power of Christ; this shows both his
Power and Obedience: his Power over the creature; Luke 4.31. compared with 38.
his Obedience to civil powers. Capernaum was one of his own Cities; there he
made his chief abode, in Peter's house: to that Host of his therefore do the
Toll-gatherers repair for the Tribute. When that great Disciple said, We have
left all, he did not say, We have abandoned all, or sold, or given away all;
but, we have left, in respect of managing, not of possession; not in respect of
right, but of use and present fruition; so left, that upon just occasion we may
resume; so left, that it is our due, though not our business. Doubtless he was
too wise to give away his own, that he might borrow of a stranger. His own roof
gave him shelter for the time, and his Master with him. Of him, as the
Householder, is the Tribute required; and by and for him is it also paid. I
inquire not either into the occasion, or the sum. What need we make this
exaction sacrilegious? as if that half-shekel which was appointed by God to be
paid by every Israelite to the use of the Tabernacle and Temple, were now
diverted to the Roman Exchequer. There was no necessity that the Roman Lords
should be tied to the Jewish reckonings; it was free for them to impose what
payments they pleased upon a subdued people: when great Augustus commanded the
world to be taxed, this rate was set. The mannerly Collectours demand it first
of him, with whom they might be more bold; Does not your Master pay tribute?
All Capernaum knew Christ for a great Prophet; his Doctrine had ravished them,
his Miracles had astonished them: yet when it comes to a money-matter, his
share is as deep as the rest. Questions of profit admit no difference. Still
the sacred Tribe challenges reverence: who cares how little they receive, how
much they pay? Yet no man knows with what mind this demand was made; whether in
a churlish grudging at Christ's immunity, or in an awful compellation of the
servant rather then the Master.

Peter had it ready what to answer. I hear him not require their stay till he
should go in and know his Master's resolution; but, as one well acquainted
with the mind and practice of his Master, he answers, Yes.

There was no truer play master of the King's dues then he that was King of
Kings. Well did Peter know that he did not only give, but preach tribute. When
the Herodians laid twigs for him, as supposing that so great a Prophet would be
all for the liberty and exemption of God's chosen people, he choaks them with
their own coin, and told them the stamp argued the right; Give unto Caesar the
things that are Caesar's.

O Savior, how can thy servants challenge that freedom which thy self had
not? who that pretends from thee can claim homage from those to whom thou
gave it? If thou by whom Kings reign forbarest not to pay tribute to an
heathen Prince, what power under thee can deny it to those that rule for thee?

That demand was made without doors. No sooner is Peter come in, then he is
prevented by his Master's question, What think thou, Simon? of whom do the
Kings of the earth receive tribute? of their own children, or of strangers?
This very interrogation was answer enough to that which Peter meant to move: he
that could thus know the heart, was not in true right liable to humane
exactions.

But, O Savior, may I presume to ask what this is to thee? Thou have said, My
kingdom is not of this world: how does it concern thee what is done by the
Kings of the earth, or imposed upon the sons of earthly Kings? Thou would be
the Son of an humble Virgin; and chosest not a Royal state, but a servile. I
dispute not thy natural right to the throne, by thy lineal descent from the
loins of Juda and David: what should I plead that which thou wavest? It is thy
Divine Royalty and Sonship which thou here justly urgest; the argument is
irrefragable and convictive. If the Kings of the earth do so privilege their
children that they are free from all tributes and impositions; how much more
shall the King of Heaven give this immunity to his only and natural Son? so as
in true reason I might challenge an exemption for me and my train. Thou
might, O Savior, and no less challenge a tribute of all the Kings of the
earth to thee, by whom all powers are ordained. Reason cannot mutter against
this claim: the creature owes it self and whatsoever it has to the Maker; he
owes nothing to it. Then are the children free. He that has right to all needs
not pay any thing; else there should be a subjection in Sovereignty, and men
should be debtours to themselves. But this right was thine own peculiar, and
admits no partners; why do thou speak of children, as of more, and, extending
this privilege to Peter, say, Lest we scandalize them? Was it for that thy
Disciples, being of thy robe, might justly seem interessed in the liberties of
their Master? Surely no otherwise were they children, no otherwise free. Away
with that fanatical conceit, which challenges an immunity from secular commands
and taxes to a spiritual and adoptative Sonship: no earthly Saintship can
exempt us from tribute to whom tribute belongs. There is a freedom, O
Savior, which our Christianity calls us to affect; a freedom from the yoke of
Sin and Satan, from the servitude of our corrupt affections: we cannot be Sons
if we be not thus free. Oh free thou us by thy free Spirit from the miserable
bondage of our Nature, so shall the children be free: but as to these secular
duties, no man is less free then the children. O Savior, thou were free, and
would not be so; thou were free by natural right, would not be free by
voluntary dispensation, Lest an offense might be taken. Surely had there
followed an offense, it had been taken only, and not given. Woe be to the man
by whom the offense comes. It comes by him that gives it; it comes by him
that takes it when it is not given: no part of this blame could have cleaved
unto thee either way.

Yet such was thy goodness, that thou would not suffer an offense unjustly
taken at that which thou might justly have denied. How jealous should we be
even of others perils? how careful so to moderate our power in the use of
lawful things, that our Charity may prevent others scandalls? to remit of our
own right for another's safety? Oh the deplorable condition of those wilful
men, who care not what blocks they lay in the way to Heaven, not forbearing by
a known leudness to draw others into their own damnation!

To avoid the unjust offense even of very Publicans, Jesus will work a Miracle.
Peter is sent to the sea; and that not with a net, but with an hook. The
Disciple was now in his own trade. He knew a net might enclose many fishes, an
hook could take but one: with that hook must he go angle for the Tribute-money.
A fish shall bring him a stater in her mouth; and that fish that bites first.
What an unusual bearer is here? what an unlikely element to yield a piece of
ready coin?

Oh that Omnipotent power which could command the fish to be both his treasurer
to keep his silver, and his purveyour to bring it! Now whether, O Savior, thou
causedst this fish to take up that shekel out of the bottom of the sea, or
whether by thine Almighty word thou made it in an instant in the mouth of
that fish, it is neither possible to determine, nor necessary to inquire. I
rather adore thine infinite Knowledge and Power, that could make use of
unlikeliest means; that could serve thy self of the very fishes of the sea,
in a business of earthly and civil employment. It was not out of need that thou
did this: (though I do not find that thou ever affectedst a full purse.) What
veins of Gold or mines of Silver did not lie open to thy command? But out of a
desire to teach Peter, that whilst he would be tributary to Caesar, the very
fish of the sea was tributary to him. How should this encourage our dependence
upon that Omnipotent hand of thine, which has Heaven, earth, sea at thy
disposing? Still thou art the same for thy Members, which thou were for thy
self the Head. Rather then offense shall be given to the world by a seeming
neglect of thy dear children, thou will cause the very fowls of Heaven to bring
them meat, and the fish of the sea to bring them money. O let us look up ever
to thee by the eye of our Faith; and not be wanting in our dependence upon
thee, who can not be wanting in thy Providence over us.

XL. Lazarus Dead.
OH the Wisdom of God in penning his own story! The Disciple whom Jesus loved
comes after his fellow-Evangelists, that he might glean up those rich ears of
history which the rest had passed over. That Eagle soars high, and towrs up by
degrees. It was much to turn water into wine; but it was more to feed five
thousand with five loaves. It was much to restore the Ruler's son; it was more
to cure him that had been 38 years a cripple. It was much to cure him that was
born blind; it was more to raise up Lazarus that had been so song dead. As a
stream runs still the stronger and wider, the nearer it comes to the Ocean
whence it was derived; so did thou, O Savior, work the more powerfully, the
nearer thou drewest to thy Glory. This was, as one of thy last, so of thy
greatest Miracles; when thou were ready to die thy self, thou raisedst him to
life who smelt strong of the grave. None of all the sacred Histories is so full
and punctual as this, in the report of all circumstances. Other Miracles do
not more transcend Nature, then this transcends other Miracles.

This alone was a sufficient eviction of thy Godhead, O Blessed Savior: none
but an infinite power could so far go beyond Nature, as to recall a man four
days dead from, not a mere privation, but a settled corruption. Earth must
needs be thine, from which thou raisest his body; Heaven must needs be thine,
from whence thou fetchest his Spirit. None but he that created man, could thus
make him new.

Sickness is the common preface to death; no mortal nature is exempted from
this complaint; even Lazarus, whom Jesus loved, is sick. What can strength of
Grace or dearness of respect prevail against disease, against dissolution?

It was a stirring message that Mary sent to Jesus, He whom thou love is
sick: as if she would imply, that his part was no less deep in Lazarus then
hers. Neither does she say, He that loves thee is sick; but, He whom thou
love: not pleading the merit of Lazarus his affection to Christ, but the
mercy and favor of Christ to him. Even that other reflection of love had been
no weak motive; for, O Lord, thou have said, Because he has set his love upon
me, therefore will I deliver him. Thy goodness will not be behind us for love,
who professest to love them that love thee. But yet the argument is more
forcible from thy love to us; since thou have just reason to respect every
thing of thine own, more then ought that can proceed from us. Even we weak men,
what can we stick at where we love? Thou, O infinite God, art Love it self.
Whatever thou have done for us is out of thy love: the ground and motive of all
thy mercies is within thy self, not in us; and if there be ought in us worthy
of thy love, it is thine own, not ours; thou give what thou acceptest. Jesus
well heard the first groan of his dear Lazarus; every short breath that he
drew, every sigh that he gave was upon account: yet this Lord of Life lets his
Lazarus sicken, and languish, and die; not out of neglect or impotence, but out
of power and resolution. This sickness is not to death. He to whom the issues
of death belong, knows the way both into it and out of it. He meant that
sickness should be to death in respect of the present condition, not to death
in respect of the event; to death in the process of Nature, not to death in the
success of his Divine power, that the Son of God might be glorified thereby. O
Savior, thy usual style is, the Son of man; thou that would take up our
infirmities, were willing thus to hide thy Godhead under the course weeds of
our Humanity: but here thou say, That the Son of God might be glorified.
Though thou would hide thy Divine glory, yet thou would not smother it.
Sometimes thou would have thy Sun break forth in bright gleams, to show that
it has no less light even whilst it seems kept in by the clouds. Thou were now
near thy Passion; it was most seasonable for thee at this time to set forth thy
just title. Neither was this an act that thy Humanity could challenge to it
self, but far transcending all finite powers. To die, was an act of the Son of
man; to raise from death, was an act of the Son of God.

Neither did thou say merely, that God, but, that the Son of God might be
glorified. God cannot be glorified unless the Son be so. In very natural
Relations, the wrong or disrespect offered to the child reflects upon the
father, as contrarily the parent's upon the child; how much more where the love
and respect is infinite? where the whole essence is communicated with the
intireness of relation?

O God, in vain shall we tender our Devotions to thee indefinitely, as to a
glorious and incomprehensible Majesty, if we kiss not the Son, who has most
justly said, Ye believe in the Father, believe also in me.

What an happy family was this? I find none upon earth so much honored; Jesus
loved Martha, and her sister, and Lazarus. It is no standing upon terms of
precedence: the Spirit of God is not curious in marshalling of places. Time was
when Mary was confessed to have chosen the better part; here Martha is named
first, as most interessed in Christ's love: for ought appears all of them were
equally dear. Christ had familiarly lodged under their roof. How fit was that
to receive him, whose in-dwellers were hospital, pious, unanimous? Hospital, in
the glad entertainment of Jesus and his train; Pious, in their Devotions;
Unanimous, in their mutual Concord? As contrarily he balks and hates that house
which is taken up with uncharitableness, profaneness, contention.

But, O Savior, how does this agree? thou lovedst this Family; yet hearing of
their distress, thou heldest off two days more from them? Can thou love those
thou regardest not? can thou regard them from whom thou willingly absentest
thy self in their necessity? Behold, thy love, as it is above ours, so it is
often against ours. Even out of very affection art thou not seldom absent. None
of thine but have sometimes cried, How long, Lord? What need we instance, when
thine eternal Father did purposely estrange his face from thee, so as thou
criedst out of forsaking?

Here thou would knowingly delay, whether for the greatning of the Miracle,
or for the strengthening of thy Disciples Faith.

Had thou gone sooner, and prevented the death, who had known whether
strength of Nature, and not thy miraculous power, had done it? Had thou
overtaken his death by this quickening visitation, who had known whether this
had been only some qualm or ecstasie, and not a perfect dissolution? Now this
large gap of time makes thy work both certain and glorious.

And what a clear proof was this beforehand to thy Disciples, that thou were
able to accomplish thine own Resurrection on the third day, who were able to
raise up Lazarus on the fourth? The more difficult the work should be, the more
need it had of an Omnipotent confirmation.

He that was Lord of our times and his own, can now, when he found it
seasonable, say, Let us go into Judaea again. Why left he it before? was it not
upon the heady violence of his enemies? Lo, Vide Chap. 10. ver. 31, 39.
the stones of the Jews drove him thence: the love of Lazarus and the care of
his Divine glory drew him back thither.

We may, we must be wise as serpents, for our own preservation; we must be
careless of danger, when God calls us to the hazard. It is far from God's
purpose to give us leave so far to respect our selves, as that we should
neglect him. Let Judaea be all snares, all crosses; O Savior, when thou
call us, we must put our lives into our hands, and follow thee thither.

This journey thou have purposed and contrived; but what neededst thou to
acquaint thy Disciples with thine intent? Where did thou ever (besides this)
make them of counsel with thy voiages? Neither did thou say, How think you
if I go? but, Let us go. Was it for that thou, who knew thine own strength,
knew also their weakness? Thou were resolute, they were timorous: they were
sensible enough of their late peril, and fearful of more; there was need to
fore-arm them with an expectation of the worst, and preparation for it.
Surprisall with evils may endanger the best constancy. The heart is apt to
fail, when it finds it self intrapped in a sudden mischief.

The Disciples were dearly affected to Lazarus; they had learned to love where
their Master loved: yet now, when our Savior speaks of returning to that
region of peril, they pull him by the sleeve, and put him in mind of the
violence offered unto him; Master, the Jews of late sought to stone thee, and
go thou thither again?

No less then thrice in the foregoing Chapter did the Jews lift up their hands
to murder him by a cruel lapidation. Whence was this rage and bloody attempt
of theirs? Only for that he taught them the truth concerning his Divine
nature, and gave himself the just style of the Son of God. How subject carnal
hearts are to be impatient of Heavenly verities? Nothing can so much fret that
malignant spirit which rules in those breasts, as that Christ should have his
own. If we be persecuted for his Truth, we do but suffer with him with whom we
shall once reign.

However the Disciples pleaded for their Master's safety, yet they aimed at
their own; they well knew their danger was inwrapped in his. It is but a
cleanly color that they put upon their own fear. This is held but a weak and
base Passion; each one would be glad to put off the opinion of it from himself,
and to set the best face upon his own impotency.

Thus white-livered men, that shrink and shift from the Cross, will not want
fair pretenses to evade it. One pleads the peril of many dependents; another
the disfurnishing the Church of succeeding abettours: each will have some
plausible excuse for his sound skin. What error did not our Savior rectify
in his followers? Even that fear which they would have dissembled is graciously
dispelled by the just consideration of a sure and inevitable Providence. Are
there not twelve hours in the day, which are duly set and proceed regularly
for the direction of all the motions and actions of men? So in this course of
mine which I must run on earth, there is a set and determined time wherein I
must work, and do my Father's will. The Sun that guides these hours is the
determinate counsel of my Father, and his calling to the execution of my
charge: whilst I follow that, I cannot miscarry, no more then a man can miss
his known way at high noon: this while, in vain are either your disswasions or
the attempts of enemies; they cannot hurt, ye cannot divert me.

The journey then holds to Judaea; his attendents shall be made acquainted with
the occasion. He that had formerly denied the deadliness of Lazarus his
sickness, would not suddenly confess his death; neither yet would he altogether
conceal it: so will he therefore confess it, as that he will shadow it out in a
borrowed expression; Lazarus our friend sleeps. What a sweet title is here
both of death, and of Lazarus? Death is a sleep; Lazarus is our friend. Lo, he
says not, my friend, but, ours; to draw them first into a gracious familiarity
and communion of friendship with himself: for what does this import but, Ye are
my friends, and Lazarus is both my friend and yours? Our friend.

O meek and merciful Savior, that disdainest not to stoop so low, as that,
whilst thou thoughtest it no robbery to be equal unto God, thou thoughtest it
no disparagement to match thy self with weak and wretched men! Our friend
Lazarus. There is a kind of parity in Friendship. There may be Love where is
the most inequality; but friendship supposes pairs: yet the Son of God says of
the sons of men, Our friend Lazarus. Oh what an high and happy condition is
this for mortal men to aspire unto, that the God of Heaven should not be
ashamed to own them for friends! Neither says he now abruptly, Lazarus our
friend is dead; but, Lazarus our friend sleeps.

O Savior, none can know the estate of life or death so well as thou that art
the Lord of both. It is enough that thou tellest us death is no other then
sleep: that which was wont to pass for the cousin of death, is now it self. All
this while we have mistaken the case of our dissolution: we took it for an
enemy, it proves a friend; there is pleasure in that wherein we supposed
horror.

Who is afraid, after the weary toils of the day, to take his rest by night? or
what is more refreshing to the spent traveller then a sweet sleep? It is our
infidelity, our impreparation that makes death any other then advantage. Even
so, Lord, when thou see I have toiled enough, let me sleep in peace: and when
thou see I have slept enough, awake me, as thou did thy Lazarus; But I go
to awake him. Thou said not, Let us go to awake him: those whom thou will
allow companions of thy way, thou will not allow partners of thy work; they may
be witnesses, they cannot be actours. None can awake Lazarus out of this sleep,
but he that made Lazarus. Every mouse or gnat can raise us up from that other
sleep; none but an Omnipotent power from this. This sleep is not without a
dissolution. Who can command the Soul to come down and meet the body, or
command the body to piece with it self and rise up to the Soul, but the God
that created both? It is our comfort and assurance (O Lord) against the
terrors of death and tenacity of the grave, that our Resurrection depends upon
none but thine Omnipotence.

Who can blame the Disciples if they were loath to return to Judaea? Their last
entertainment was such as might justly dishearten them. Were this (as literally
taken) all the reason of our Savior's purpose of so perilous a voyage, they
argued not amiss, If he sleep, he shall do well. Sleep in sickness is a good
sign of recovery. For extremity of pain bars our rest: when Nature therefore
finds so. much respiration, she justly hopes for better terms. Yet it does not
always follow, If he sleep, he shall do well: How many have died in
lethargies? how many have lost in sleep what they would not have forgone
waking? Adam slept and lost his rib; Sampson slept and lost his strength; Saul
slept and lost his weapon; Ishbosheth and Holofernes slept and lost their
heads. In ordinary course it holds well; here they mistook and erred. The
misconstruction of the words of Christ led them into an unseasonable and
erroneous suggestion. Nothing can be more dangerous then to take the speeches
of Christ according to the sound of the letter: one error will be sure to draw
on more; and if the first be never so slight, the last may be important.

Wherefore are words but to express meanings? why do we speak but to be
understood? Since then our Savior saw himself not rightly construed, he
delivers himself plainly, Lazarus is dead. Such is thy manner, O thou eternal
Word of thy Father, in all thy sacred expressions. Thine own mouth is thy best
commentary: what thou have more obscurely said in one passage, thou
interpretest more clearly in another. Thou art the Sun, which give us that
light whereby we see thy self.

But how modestly do thou discover thy Deity to thy Disciples? Not upon the
first mention of Lazarus his death, instantly professing thy Power and will of
his resuscitation; but contenting thy self only to intimate thy Omniscience,
in that thou could in that absence and distance know and report his
departure, they shall gather the rest, and cannot choose but think, we serve a
Master that knows all things, and he that knows all things can do all things.

The absence of our Savior from the deathbed of Lazarus was not casual, but
voluntary; yea, he is not only willing with it, but glad of it; I am glad for
your sakes that I was not there. How contrary may the affections of Christ and
ours be, and yet be both good? The two worthy Sisters were much grieved at our
Savior's absence, as doubting it might savor of some neglect; Christ was glad
of it, for the advantage of his Disciples Faith. I cannot blame them that they
were thus sorry; I cannot but bless him that he was thus glad. The gain of
their Faith in so Divine a Miracle was more then could be countervailed by
their momentany sorrow. God and we are not alike affected with the same events;
He laughs where we mourn, he is angry where we are pleased.

The difference of the affections arises from the difference of the Objects,
which Christ and they apprehend in the same occurrence. Why are the Sisters
sorrowful? because upon Christ's absence Lazarus died. Why was Jesus glad he
was not there? for the benefit which he saw would accrue to their Faith. There
is much variety of prospect in every act, according to the several intentions
and issues thereof, yea even in the very same eyes. The father sees his son
combating in a Duel for his Country; he sees blows and wounds on the one side,
he sees renown and victory on the other: he grieves at the wounds, he rejoices
in the Honor. Thus does God in all our Afflictions: he sees our tears, and
hears our groans, and pities us; but withal he looks upon our Patience, our
Faith, our Crown, and is glad that we are afflicted.

O God, why should not we conform our diet unto thine? When we lie in pain and
extremity, we cannot but droop under it; but do we find our selves increased in
true Mortification, in Patience, in Hope, in a constant reliance on thy
Mercies? Why are we not more joyed in this then dejected with the other; since
the least grain of the increase of Grace is more worth then can be equalled
with whole pounds of bodily vexation?

O strange consequence! Lazarus is dead; nevertheless, Let us go unto him.
Must they not needs think, What should we do with a dead man? What should
separate, if death cannot? Even those whom we loved dearliest, we avoid once
dead; now we lay them aside under the board, and thence send them out of our
houses to their grave. Neither has Death more horror in it then noisomeness;
and if we could entreat our eyes to endure the horrid aspect of Death in the
face we loved, yet can we persuade our sent to like that smell that arises up
from its corruption? O love stronger then Death! Behold here a friend whom the
very Grave cannot sever.

Even those that write the longest and most passionate dates of their amity,
subscribe but, Your friend till death; and if the ordinary strain of humane
friendship will stretch yet a little farther, it is but to the brim of the
grave: thither a friend may follow us, and see us bestowed in this house of our
Age; but there he leaves us to our worms and dust. But for thee, O Savior, the
gravestone, the earth, the coffin are no bounders of thy dear respects; even
after death, and burial, and corruption, thou art graciously affected to those
thou love. Besides the Soul (whereof thou say not, Let us go to it, but,
Let it come to us,) there is still a gracious regard to that dust which was and
shall be a part of an undoubted member of that mystical body whereof thou art
the Head. Heaven and earth yield no such friend but thy self. O make me ever
ambitious of this Love of thine, and ever unquiet till I feel my self possessed
of thee.

In the mouth of a mere man this word had been incongruous, Lazarus is dead,
yet let us go to him; in thine, O Almighty Savior, it was not more loving
then seasonable; since I may justly say of thee, thou have more to do with the
dead then with the living: for, both they are infinitely more, and have more
inward communion with thee, and thou with them. Death cannot hinder either our
passage to thee, or thy return to us. I joy to think the time is coming, when
thou shall come to every of our graves, and call us up out of our dust, and we
shall hear thy voice, and live.

XLI. Lazarus Raised.
GReat was the opinion that these devout Sisters had of the Power of Christ: as
if Death durst not show her face to him, they suppose his presence had
prevented their Brother's dissolution: And now the news of his approach begins
to quicken some late hopes in them. Martha was ever the more active. She that
was before so busily stirring in her house to entertain Jesus, was now as
nimble to go forth of her house to meet him: She in whose face joy had wont to
smile upon so Blessed a Guest, now salutes him with the sighs and tears and
blubbers and wrings of a disconsolate mourner. I know not whether the speeches
of her greeting had in them more sorrow or Religion. She had been well
catechized before; even she also had sat at Jesus his feet, and can now give
good account of her Faith in the Power and Godhead of Christ, in the certainty
of a future Resurrection. This Conference has yet taught her more, and raised
her heart to an expectation of some wonderful effect. And now she stands not
still, but hasts back into the Village to her Sister; carried thither by the
two wings of her own hopes, and her Savior's commands. The time was, when she
would have called off her Sister from the feet of that Divine Master, to attend
the household occasions; now she runs to fetch her out of the house to the feet
of Christ.

Doubtless Martha was much affected with the presence of Christ; and as she was
over-joyed with it her self, so she knew how equally welcome it would be to her
Sister: yet she does not ring it out aloud in the open Hall, but secretly
whispers this pleasing tidings in her Sister's ear, The Master is come, and
calls for thee. Whether out of modesty, or discretion. It is not fit for a
woman to be loud and clamorous: nothing beseems that Sex better then silence
and bashfulness; as not to be too much seen, so not to be heard too far.
Neither did Modesty more charm her tongue then Discretion; whether in respect
to the guests, or to Christ himself. Had those guests heard of Christ's being
there, they had either out of fear or prejudice withdrawn themselves from him;
neither durst they have been witnesses of that wonderful Miracle, as being
overawed with that Jewish edict which was out against him: or perhaps they had
withheld the Sisters from going to him, against whom they knew how highly their
Governors were incensed. Neither was she ignorant of the danger of his own
person, so lately before assaulted violently by his enemies at Jerusalem: She
knew they were within the smoke of that bloody City, the nest of his enemies;
she holds it not therefore fit to make open proclamation of Christ's presence,
but rounds her Sister secretly in the ear. Christianity does not bid us abate
any thing of our wariness and honest policies; yea it requires us to have no
less of the Serpent then of the Dove.

There is a time when we must preach Christ on the housetop; there is a time
when we must speak him in the ear, and (as it were) with our lips shut. Secrecy
has no less use then divulgation. She said enough, The Master is come, and
calls for thee. What an happy word was this which was here spoken? what an
high favor is this that is done, that the Lord of Life should personally come
and call for Mary? yet such as is not appropriated to her. Thou, come to us
still, O Savior, if not in thy bodily presence, yet in thy spiritual, thou
call us still, if not in thy personal voice, yet in thine Ordinances. It is
our fault, if we do not as this good woman, arise quickly, and come to thee.
Her friends were there about her, who came purposely to condole with her; her
heart was full of heaviness: yet so soon as she hears mention of Christ, she
forgets friends, Brother, grief, cares, thoughts, and hasts to his presence.

Still was Jesus standing in the place where Martha left him. Whether it be
noted to express Mary's speed, or his own wise and gracious resolutions; his
presence in the Village had perhaps invited danger, and set off the intended
witnesses of the work: or it may be to set forth his zealous desire to dispatch
the errand he came for; that as Abraham's faithful servant would not receive
any courtesy from the house of Bethuel, till he had done his Master's business
concerning Rebeccah, so thou, O Savior, would not so much as enter into the
house of these two Sisters in Bethany, till thou had effected this glorious
work which occasioned thee thither. It was thy meat and drink to do the will
of thy Father; thy best entertainment was within thy self. How do we follow
thee, if we suffer either pleasures or profits to take the wall of thy services?

So good women were well worthy of kind friends. No doubt Bethany, being not
two miles distant from Jerusalem, could not but be furnished with good
acquaintance from the City: these knowing the dearness, and hearing of the
death of Lazarus, came over to comfort the sad Sisters. Charity together with
the common practice of that Nation calls them to this duty. All our distresses
expect these good offices from those that love us; but of all others Death, as
that which is the extremest of evils, and makes the most fearful havoc in
families, cities, kingdoms, worlds. The complaint was grievous, I looked for
some to comfort me, but there was none. It is some kind of ease to sorrow, to
have partners; as a burden is lightened by many shoulders; or as clouds,
scattered into many drops, easily vent their moisture into air. Yea the very
presence of friends abates grief. The peril that arises to the heart from
Passion is the fixedness of it, when, like a corrosiving plaster, it eats in
into the sore: Some kind of remedy it is, that it may breath out in good
society.

These friendly neighbors seeing Mary hasten forth, make haste to follow her.
Martha went forth before; I saw none go after her: Mary stirs; they are at her
heels. Was it for that Martha, being the elder Sister, and the huswife of the
family, might stir about with less observation? or was it that Mary was the
more passionate, and needed the more heedy attendence? However, their care and
intentiveness is truly commendable; they came to comfort her, they do what
they came for. It contents them not to sit still and chat within doors, but
they wait on her at all turns. Perturbations of Mind are diseases: good keepers
do not only tend the Patient in bed, but when he sits up, when he tries to
walk; all his motions have their careful assistence. We are no true friends,
if our endeavors of the redress of distempers in them we love be not assiduous
and unweariable.

It was but a loving suspicion, She is gone to the grave to weep there. They
well knew how apt passionate minds are to take all occasions to renew their
sorrow; every Object affects them. When she saw but the Chamber of her dead
Brother, straight she thinks, There was Lazarus wont to lie, and then she wept
afresh; when the Table, There Lazarus was wont to sit, and then new tears
arise; when the Garden, There Lazarus had wont to walk, and now again she
weeps. How much more do these friends suppose the Passions would be stirred
with the sight of the Grave, when she must needs think, There is Lazarus? O
Savior, if the place of the very dead corpse of our friend have power to draw
our hearts thither, and to affect us more deeply; how should our hearts be
drawn to and affected with Heaven, where thou sit at the right hand of thy
Father? There (O thou which were dead, and art alive,) is thy Body and thy Soul
present, and united to thy glorious Deity. Thither, O thither let our access
be; not to mourn there, (where is no place for sorrow) but to rejoice with joy
unspeakable and glorious, and more and more to long for that thy beatificall
presence.

Their indulgent love mistook Mary's errand; their thoughts (how kind soever)
were much too low: whilst they supposed she went to a dead Brother, she went to
a living Savior. The world has other conceits of the actions and carriage of
the regenerate then are truly intended, setting such constructions upon them as
their own carnal reason suggests: they think them dying, when behold they
live; sorrowful, when they are always rejoicing; poor, whilst they make many
rich. How justly do we appeal from them as incompetent Judges, and pity those
misinterpretations which we cannot avoid?

Both the Sisters met Christ; not both in one posture: Mary is still noted, as
for more Passion, so for more Devotion; she that before sat at the feet of
Jesus, now falls at his feet. That presence had wont to be familiar to her, and
not without some outward homeliness; now it fetches her upon her knees, in an
awful veneration: whether out of a reverent acknowledgment of the secret
excellency and power of Christ; or out of a dumb intimation of that suit
concerning her dead Brother, which she was afraid to utter. The very gesture it
self was supplicatory. What position of body can be so fit for us, when we make
our address to our Savior? It is an irreligious unmannerliness for us to go
less. Where the heart is affected with an awful acknowledgment of Majesty, the
body cannot but bow.

Even before all her neighbors of Jerusalem does Mary thus fall down at the
feet of Jesus; so many witnesses as she had, so many spies she had of that
forbidden observance. It was no less then Excommunication for any body to
confess him: yet good Mary, not fearing the informations that might be given by
those Jewish Gossips, adores him; and in her silent gesture says, as much as
her Sister had spoken before, Thou art the Christ, the Son of God. Those that
would give Christ his right must not stand upon scrupulous fears. Are we
naturally timorous? Why do we not fear the denial, the exclusion of the
Almighty? Without shall be the fearful.

Her humble prostration is seconded by a lamentable complaint; Lord, if thou
had been here, my brother had not died. The Sisters are both in one mind,
both in one speech; and both of them in one speech bewray both strength and
infirmity: strength of Faith, in ascribing so much power to Christ, that his
presence could preserve from death; Infirmity, in supposing the necessity of a
presence for this purpose. Why, Mary, could not thine Omnipotent Savior as
well in absence have commanded Lazarus to live? Is his hand so short, that he
can do nothing but by contaction? If his Power were finite, how could he have
forbidden the seizure of death? if infinite, how could it be limited to place,
or hindered by distance? It is a weakness of Faith to measure success by means,
and means by presence, and to tie effects to both, when we deal with an
Almighty agent. Finite causes work within their own sphere; all places are
equally near, and all effects equally easy to the infinite. O Savior, whilst
thou now sit gloriously in Heaven, thou do no less impart thy self unto
us then if thou stoodest visibly by us, then if we stood locally by thee: no
place can make difference of thy virtue and aid.

This was Mary's moan; no motion, no request sounded from her to her Savior.
Her silent suit is returned with a mute answer; no notice is taken of her
error. Oh that mavelous mercy that connives at our faulty infirmities! All
the reply that I hear of is, a compassionate groan within himself. O Blessed
Jesu, thou that were free from all sin, would not be free even from strong
affections. Wisdom and Holiness should want much work, if even vehement
passions might not be quitted from offense. Mary wept; her tears drew on tears
from her friends, all their tears united drew groans from thee. Even in thine
Heaven thou do no less pity our sorrows: thy Glory is free from groans, but
abounds with compassion and mercy: if we be not sparing of our tears, thou
can not be insensible of our sorrows. How shall we imitate thee, if, like our
looking-glass, we do not answer tears, and weep on them that weep upon us?

Lord, thou knew (in absence) that Lazarus was dead, and do thou not know
where he was buried? Surely thou were farther off when thou saw and
reportedst his death, then thou were from the grave thou inquiredst of: thou
that knew all things, yet ask what thou know, Where have ye laid him?
Not out of need, but out of will: that as in thy sorrow, so in thy question
thou might depress thy self in the opinion of the beholders for the time,
that the glory of thine instant Miracle might be the greater, the less it was
expected. It had been all one to thy Omnipotence to have made a new Lazarus out
of nothing; or in that remoteness to have commanded Lazarus, wheresoever he
was, to come forth: but thou were neither willing to work more miracle then was
requisite, nor yet unwilling to fix the minds of the people upon the
expectation of some mavelous thing that thou meantest to work; and therefore
ask, Where have you laid him?

They are not more glad of the question, then ready for the answer; Come and
see. It was the manner of the Jews, as likewise of those Egyptians among whom
they had sojourned, to lay up the dead bodies of their friends with great
respect; more cost was wont to be bestowed on some of their graves then on
their houses: as neither ashamed then, nor unwilling to show the decency of
their sepulture, they say, Come and see. More was hoped for from Christ then a
mere view; they meant and expected that his eye should draw him on to some
farther action. O Savior, whilst we desire our spiritual resuscitation, how
should we labor to bring thee to our grave? how should we lay open our
deadness before thee, and bewray to thee our impotence and senselesness? Come,
Lord, and see what a miserable carcass I am; and by the power of thy mercy
raise me from the state of my corruption.

Never was our Savior more submissly dejected then now immediately before he
would approve and exalt the majesty of his Godhead. To his groans and inward
grief he adds his tears. Anon they shall confess him a God; these expressions
of Passions shall onwards evince him to be a Man. The Jews construe this well;
See how he loved him. Never did any thing but love fetch tears from Christ. But
they do foully misconstrue Christ in the other; Could not he that opened the
eyes of him that was born blind, have caused that even this man should not have
died? Yes, know ye, O vain and importune questionists, that he could have done
it with ease. To open the eyes of a man born blind was more then to keep a sick
man from dying: this were but to uphold and maintain Nature from decaying; that
were to create a new sense, and to restore a deficiency in Nature. To make an
eye was no whit less difficult then to make a man: he that could do the
greater might well have done the less. Ye shall soon see this was not for want
of power. Had ye said, Why would he not? Why did he not? the question had been
fairer, and the answer no less easy; For his own greater glory. Little do ye
know the drift whether of God's acts, or delays; and ye know as much as you are
worthy. Let it be sufficient for you to understand, that he who can do all
things will do that which shall be most for his own honor.

It is not improbable that Jesus, who before groaned in himself, for compassion
of their tears, now groaned for their incredulity. Nothing could so much
afflict the Savior of men as the sins of men. Could their external wrongs to
his body have been separated from offense against his Divine person, their
scornful indignities had not so much affected him. No injury goes so deep as
our spiritual provocations of our God. Wretched men! why should we grieve the
good Spirit of God in us? why should we make him groan for us that died to
redeem us?

With these groans, O Savior, thou came to the grave of Lazarus. The door of
that house of Death was strong and impenetrable. Thy first word was, Take away
the stone. O weak beginning of a mighty Miracle! If thou meantest to raise the
dead, how much more easy had it been for thee to remove the gravestone? One
grain of Faith in thy very Disciples was enough to remove mountains; and do
thou say, Take away the stone? I wis, there was a greater weight that lay upon
the body of Lazarus then the stone of his Tomb, the weight of Death and
Corruption; a thousand rocks and hills were not so heavy a load as this alone:
why then do thou stick at this shovel-full? Yea, how easy had it been for
thee to have brought up the body of Lazarus through the stone, by causing that
marble to give way by a sudden rarefaction? But thou thoughtest best to make
use of their hands rather: whether for their own more full conviction; for had
the stone been taken away by thy Followers, and Lazarus thereupon walked forth,
this might have appeared to thy malignant enemies to have been a set match
betwixt thee, the Disciples and Lazarus: or whether for the exercise of our
Faith, that thou might teach us to trust thee under contrary appearances.
Thy command to remove the stone seemed to argue an impotence; straight that
seeming weakness breaks forth into an act of Omnipotent power. The homeliest
shows of thine humane infirmity are ever seconded with some mighty proofs of
thy Godhead; and thy Miracle is so much more wondered at, by how much it was
less expected.

It was ever thy just will that we should do what we may. To remove the stone
or to untie the napkin was in their power; this they must do: to raise the
dead was out of their power; this therefore thou will do alone. Our hands must
do their utmost, ere thou will put to thine.

O Savior, we are all dead and buried in the grave of our sinful Nature. The
stone of obstination must be taken away from our hearts, ere we can hear thy
reviving voice: we can no more remove this stone then dead Lazarus could remove
his; we can add more weight to our graves. O let thy faithful agents, by the
power of thy Law, and the grace of thy Gospel, take off the stone, that thy
voice may enter into the grave of miserable corruption.

Was it a modest kind of mannerliness in Martha, that she would not have Christ
annoyed with the ill sent of that stale carcass? or was it out of distrust of
reparation, since her brother had passed all the degrees of corruption, that
she says, Lord, by this time he stinketh, for he has been dead four days? He
that understood hearts, found somewhat amiss in that intimation; his answer had
not endeavored to rectify that which was utterly faultless. I fear the good
woman meant to object this as a likely obstacle to any farther purposes or
proceedings of Christ. Weak faith is still apt to lay blocks of difficulties in
the way of the great works of God.

Four days were enough to make any corpse noisome. Death it self is not
unsavory; immediately upon dissolution the body retains the wonted sweetness:
it is the continuance under death that is thus offensive. Neither is it
otherwise in our Spiritual condition: the longer we lie under our sin, the more
rotten and corrupt we are. He who upon the fresh commission of his sin recovers
himself by a speedy repentance, yields no ill sent to the nostrills of the
Almighty. The Candle that is presently blown in again offends not; it is the
Snuff which continues choked with its own moisture that sends up unwholesome
and odious fumes. O Savior, thou would yield to death, thou would not
yield to corruption: Ere the fourth day thou were risen again. I cannot but
receive many deadly foils; but oh, do thou raise me up again ere I shall pass
the degrees of rottenness in my sins and trespasses.

They that laid their hands to the stone, doubtless held now still awhile, and
looked one while on Christ, another while upon Martha, to hear what issue of
resolution would follow upon so important an objection: when they find a light
touch of taxation to Martha, Said not I to thee, that if thou would believe,
thou should see the glory of God? That holy woman had before professed her
belief, as Christ had professed his great intentions; both were now forgotten:
and now our Savior is fain to revive both her memory and Faith; Said not I to
thee? The best of all Saints are subject to fits of unbelief and oblivion; the
only remedy whereof must be the inculcation of God's merciful promises of
their relief and supportation. O God, if thou have said it, I dare believe; I
dare cast my Soul upon the belief of every word of thine. Faithful art thou
which have promised, who wilt also do it.

In spite of all the unjust discouragements of Nature we must obey Christ's
command. Whatever Martha suggests, they remove the stone, and may now see and
smell him dead, whom they shall soon see revived. The sent of the corpse is not
so unpleasing to them, as the perfume of their obedience is sweet to Christ.
And now when all impediments are removed, and all hearts ready for the work,
our Savior addresses to the Miracle.

His Eyes begin; they are lift up to Heaven. It was the malicious
mis-suggestion of his enemies, that he looked down to Beelzebub: the beholders
shall now see whence he expects and derives his power; and shall by him learn
whence to expect and hope for all success. The heart and the eye must go
together: he that would have ought to do with God, must be sequestered and
lifted up from earth.

His Tongue seconds his Eye; Father. Nothing more stuck in the stomach of the
Jews, then that Christ called himself the Son of God; this was imputed to him
for a Blasphemy, worthy of stones. How seasonably is this word spoken in the
hearing of these Jews, in whose sight he will be presently approved so? How can
ye now, O ye cavillers, except at that title, which ye shall see irrefragably
justified? Well may he call God Father, that can raise the dead out of the
grave. In vain shall ye snarl at the style, when ye are convinced of the effect.

I hear of no Prayer, but a Thanks for hearing. Whilst thou said nothing, O
Savior, how does thy Father hear thee? Was it not with thy Father and thee as
it was with thee and Moses? Thou said, Let me alone, Moses, when he spoke
not. Thy will was thy prayer. Words express our hearts to men, thoughts to God.
Well did thou know, out of the self-sameness of thy will with thy Father's,
that if thou did but think in thine heart that Lazarus should rise, he was
now raised. It was not for thee to pray vocally and audibly, lest those
captious hearers should say, thou did all by entreaty, nothing by power. Thy
thanks overtake thy desires; ours require time and distance: our thanks arise
from the Echo of our prayers resounding from Heaven to our hearts; Thou,
because thou art at once in earth and Heaven, and know the grant to be of
equal paces with the request, most justly thankest in praying.

Now ye cavilling Jews are thinking straight, Is there such distance betwixt
the Father and the Son? is it so rare a thing for the Son to be heard, that he
pours out his thanks for it as a blessing unusual? Do ye not now see that he
who made your heart, knows it, and anticipates your fond thoughts with the same
breath? I knew that thou hear me always; but I said this for their sakes,
that they might believe.

Merciful Savior, how can we enough admire thy goodness, who make our
belief the scope and drift of thy doctrine and actions! Alas, what were thou
the better if they believed thee sent from God? what were thou the worse if
they believed it not? Thy perfection and glory stands not upon the slippery
terms of our approbation or dislike; but is real in thy self, and that
infinite, without possibility of our increase or diminution. We, we only are
they that have either the gain or loss in thy receipt or rejection: yet so do
thou affect our belief, as if it were more thine advantage then ours.

O Savior, whilst thou spak'st to thy Father, thou liftedst up thine eyes; now
thou were to speak unto dead Lazarus, thou liftedst up thy voice, and criedst
aloud, Lazarus, come forth. Was it that the strength of the voice might answer
to the strength of the affection? since we faintly require what we care not to
obtain, and vehemently utter what we earnestly desire. Was it that the
greatness of the voice might answer to the greatness of the work? Was it that
the hearers might be witnesses of what words were used in so miraculous an act;
no magical incantations, but authoritative and Divine commands? Was it to
signify that Lazarus his Soul was called from far; the speech must be loud
that shall be heard in another world? Was it in relation to the estate of the
body of Lazarus, whom thou had reported to sleep; since those that are in a
deep and dead sleep cannot be awaked without a loud call? Or was it in a
representation of that loud voice of the last Trumpet, which shall sound into
all graves, and raise all flesh from their dust?

Even so still, Lord, when thou would raise a Soul from the death of sin, and
grave of corruption, no easy voice will serve. Thy strongest commands, thy
loudest denunciations of Judgments, the shrillest and sweetest promulgations of
thy Mercies, are but enough.

How familiar a word is this, Lazarus, come forth? no other then he was wont to
use whilst they lived together. Neither does he say, Lazarus, revive; but, as
if he supposed him already living, Lazarus, come forth: To let them know, that
those who are dead to us, are to and with him alive; yea in a more entire and
feeling society, then whilst they carried their clay about them. Why do I fear
that separation which shall more unite me to my Savior?

Neither was the word more familiar then commanding, Lazarus, come forth. Here
is no suit to his Father, no adjuration to the deceased, but a flat and
absolute injunction, Come forth. O Savior, that is the voice that I shall once
hear sounding into the bottom of my grave, and raising me up out of my dust;
that is the voice that shall pierce the rocks, and divide the mountains, and
fetch up the dead out of the lowest deeps. Thy word made all; thy word shall
repair all. Hence, all ye diffident fears; he whom I trust is Omnipotent.

It was the Jewish fashion to enwrap the corpse in linen, to tie the hands and
feet, and to cover the face of the dead. The Fall of man (besides weakness)
brought shame upon him; ever since, even whilst he lives, the whole Body is
covered; but the Face, because some sparks of that extinct Majesty remain
there, is wont to be left open. In death (all those poor remainders being gone,
and leaving deformity and gastliness in the room of them) the Face is covered
also.

There lies Lazarus bound in double fetters: One Almighty word has loosed
both; and now he that was bound came forth. He whose power could not be hindered
by the chains of death, cannot be hindered by linen bonds: He that gave life
gave motion, gave direction: He that guided the Soul of Lazarus into the body,
guided the body of Lazarus without his eyes, moved the feet without the full
liberty of his regular paces. No doubt the same power slackned those
swathing-bands of death, that the feet might have some little scope to move,
though not with that freedom that followed after. Thou did not only, O
Savior, raise the body of Lazarus, but the Faith of the beholders. They cannot
deny him dead, whom they saw rising; they see the signs of death, with the
proofs of life. Those very swathes convinced him to be the man that was raised.
Thy less Miracle confirms the greater; both confirm the Faith of the beholders.
O clear and irrefragable example of our resuscitation! Say now, ye shameless
Sadducees, with what face can ye deny the Resurrection of the body, when ye see
Lazarus after four-days death rising up out of his grave? And if Lazarus did
thus start up at the bleating of this Lamb of God, that was now every day
preparing for the slaughterhouse; how shall the dead be rouzed up out of their
graves by the roaring of that glorious and immortal Lion, whose voice shall
shake the powers of Heaven, and move the very foundations of the earth?

With what strange amazedness do we think that Martha and Mary, the Jews and
the Disciples, looked to see Lazarus come forth in his winding sheet, shackled
with his linen fetters, and walk toward them? Doubtless fear and horror
strove in them, whether should be for the time more predominant. We love our
friends dearly; but to see them again after their known death, and that in the
very robes of the grave, must needs set up the hair in a kind of uncouth
rigor. And now, though it had been most easy for him that brake the adamantine
fetters of death, to have broke in pieces those linen ligaments wherewith his
raised Lazarus was encumbred; yet he will not do it but by their hands. He
that said, Remove the stone, said, Loose Lazarus. He will not have us expect
his immediate help in that we can do for our selves. It is both a laziness,
and a presumptuous tempting of God, to look for an extraordinary and
supernatural help from God, where he has enabled us with common aid.

What strange salutations do we think there were betwixt Lazarus and Christ
that had raised him; betwixt Lazarus and his Sisters and neighbors and
friends? what amazed looks? what unusual complements? For Lazarus was himself
at once: here was no leisure of degrees to reduce him to his wonted perfection;
neither did he stay to rub his eyes, and stretch his benumbed lims, nor take
time to put off that dead sleep wherewith he had been seized; but instantly he
is both alive, and fresh, and vigorous: if they do but let him go, he walks so
as if he had ailed nothing, and receives and gives mutual gratulations. I
leave them entertaining each other with glad embraces, with discourses of
reciprocal admiration, with praises and adorations of that God and Savior
that had fetched him into life.

XLII. CHRIST's Procession to the Temple.
NEver did our Savior take so much state upon him as now that he was going
toward his Passion: other journies he measured on foot, without noise or
train; this with a Princely equipage and loud acclamation. Wherein yet, O
Savior, whether shall I more wonder at thy Majesty, or thine Humility; that
Divine Majesty which lay hid under so humble appearance, or that sincere
Humility which veiled so great a glory? Thou, O Lord, whose chariots are twenty
thousand, even thousands of Angels, would make choice of the silliest of
beasts to carry thee in thy last and Royal progress. How well is thy birth
suited with thy triumph? Even that very Ass whereon thou rodest was prophesied
of; neither could thou have made up those vaticall Predictions without this
conveyance. O glorious, and yet homely pomp!

Thou would not lose ought of thy right; thou that wast a King, would be
proclaimed so: but that it might appear thy Kingdom was not of this world,
thou that could have commanded all worldly magnificence, thoughtest fit to
abandon it.

In stead of the Kings of the earth, who reigning by thee might have been
employed in thine attendence, the people are thine heralds; their homely
garments are thy footcloath and carpets; their green boughs the strewings of
thy way: those Palms which were wont to be born in the hands of them that
triumph, are strewed under the feet of thy beast. It was thy greatness and
honor to contemn those glories which worldly hearts were wont to admire.

Justly did thy Followers hold the best ornaments of the earth worthy of no
better then thy treading upon; neither could they ever account their garments
so rich, as when they had been trampled upon by thy carriage. How happily did
they think their backs disrobed for thy way? How gladly did they spend their
breath in acclaiming thee? Hosanna to the Son of David: Blessed is he that
comes in the name of the Lord. Where now are the great Masters of the
Synagogue, that had enacted the ejection of whosoever should confess Jesus to
be the Christ? Lo here bold and undaunted clients of the Messiah, that dare
proclaim him in the public road, in the open streets. In vain shall the
impotent enemies of Christ hope to suppress his glory: as soon shall they with
their hand hide the face of the Sun from shining to the world, as withhold the
beams of his Divine truth from the eyes of men by their envious opposition. In
spite of all Jewish malignity, his Kingdom is confessed, applauded, blessed.

O thou fairer then the children of men, in thy Majesty ride on prosperously,
because of truth and meekness and righteousness: and thy right hand shall teach
thee terrible things.

In this Princely (and yet poor and despicable) pomp does our Savior enter
into the famous City of Jerusalem; Jerusalem noted of old for the seat of
Kings, Priests, Prophets: of Kings, for there was the throne of David; of
Priests, for there was the Temple; of Prophets, for there they delivered their
errands, and left their blood. Neither know I whether it were more wonder for a
Prophet to perish out of Jerusalem, or to be safe there. Thither would Jesus
come as a King, as a Priest, as a Prophet: acclaimed as a King; teaching the
people, and foretelling the woeful vastation of it, as a Prophet; and as a
Priest taking possession of his Temple, and vindicating it from the foul
profanations of Jewish Sacrilege. Often before had he come to Jerusalem without
any remarkable change, because without any semblance of State; now that he
gives some little glimpse of his Royalty, the whole City was moved. When the
Sages of the East brought the first news of the King of the Jews, Herod was
troubled and all Jerusalem with him; and now that the King of the Jews comes
himself (though in so mean a port) there is a new commotion. The silence and
obscurity of Christ never troubles the world; he may be an underling without
any stir: but if he do but put forth himself never so little to bear the least
sway amongst men, now their blood is up; the whole City is moved. Neither is it
otherwise in the private economy of the Soul. O Savior, whilst thou do, as
it were, hide thy self, and lie still in the heart, and take all terms
contentedly from us, we entertain thee with no other then a friendly welcome;
but when thou once beginnest to ruffle with our Corruptions, and to exercise
thy Spiritual power in the subjugation of our vile Affections, now all is in a
secret uproar, all the angles of the heart are moved.

Although, doubtless, this commotion was not so much of tumult, as of wonder.
As when some uncouth sight presents it self in a populous street, men run, and
gaze, and throng, and inquire; the feet, the tongue, the eyes walk; one
spectatour draws on another, one asks and presses another; the noise increases
with the concourse, each helps to stir up others expectation: such was this of
Jerusalem.

What means this strangeness? Was not Jerusalem the Spouse of Christ? Had he
not chosen her out of all the earth? Had he not begotten many children of her,
as the pledges of their love? How justly may thou now, O Savior, complain
with that mirror of Patience, My breath was grown strange to my own wife,
though I entreated her for the childrens sake of my own body? Even of thee is
that fulfilled, which thy chosen Vessel said of thy Ministers, Thou art made a
gazing-stock to the world, to Angels, and to men.

As all the world was bound to thee for thine Incarnation and residence upon
the face of the earth, so especially Judaea, to whose limits thou confinedst
thy self; and therein, above all the rest, three Cities, Nazareth, Capernaum,
Jerusalem, on whom thou bestowedst the most time, and cost of preaching, and
miraculous works. Yet in all three thou receivedst not strange entertainment
only, but hostile. In Nazareth they would have cast thee down headlong from
the Mount: In Capernaum they would have bound thee: In Jerusalem they crucified
thee at last, and now are amazed at thy presence. Those places and persons that
have the greatest helps and privileges afforded to them, are not always the
most answerable in the return of their thankfulness. Christ's being amongst us
does not make us happy, but his welcome. Every day may we hear him in our
streets, and yet be as new to seek as these Citizens of Jerusalem; Who is this?

Was it a question of applause, or of contempt, or of ignorance? Applause of
his abettours, contempt of the Scribes and Pharisees, ignorance of the
multitude? Surely his abettours had not been moved at this sight: the Scribes
and Pharisees had rather envied then contemned: the multitude doubtless
inquired seriously, out of a desire of information. Not that the Citizens of
Jerusalem knew not Christ, who was so ordinary a guest, so noted a Prophet
amongst them. Questionless this question was asked of that part of the train
which went before this Triumph, whilst our Savior was not yet in sight, which
ere long his presence had resolved. It had been their duty to have known, to
have attended Christ, yea to have published him to others: since this is not
done, it is well yet that they spend their breath in an inquiry. No doubt there
were many that would not so much as leave their shop-board, and step to their
doors or their windows to say, Who is this? as not thinking it could concern
them who passed by, whilst they might sit still, Those Greeks were in some way
to good, that could say to Philip, We would see Jesus. O Savior, thou have
been so long amongst us, that it is our just shame if we know thee not. If we
have been slack hitherto, let our zealous inquiry make amends for our neglect.
Let outward pomp and worldly glory draw the hearts and tongues of carnal men
after them; O let it be my care and happiness to ask after nothing but thee.

The attending Disciples could not be to seek for an answer; which of the
Prophets have not put it into their mouths? Who is this? Ask Moses, and he
shall tell you, The seed of the Woman that shall break the Serpent's head. Ask
our Father Jacob, and he shall tell you, The Shiloh of the tribe of Judah. Ask
David, and he shall tell you, The King of glory. Ask Esaias, and he shall tell
you, Immanuel, Wonderful, Counselor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father,
The Prince of peace. Ask Jeremy, and he shall tell you, The righteous Branch.
Ask Daniel, he shall tell you, The Messiah. Ask John the Baptist, he shall tell
you, The Lamb of God. If ye ask the God of the Prophets, he has told you, This
is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. Yea, if all these be too good for
you to consult with, the Devils themselves have been forced to say, I know who
thou art, even that Holy One of God. On no side has Christ left himself
without a testimony; and accordingly the Multitude here have their answer
ready, This is Jesus, the Prophet of Nazareth in Galilee.

Ye undervalue your Master, O ye well-meaning Followers of Christ: A Prophet?
yea, more then a Prophet? John Baptist was so, yet was but the Harbinger of
this Messiah. This was that God by whom the Prophets were both sent and
inspired. Of Nazareth, say you? ye mistake him: Bethlehem was the place of his
Birth, the proof of his Tribe, the evidence of his Messiahship. If Nazareth
were honored by his preaching, there was no reason he should be dishonored by
Nazareth. No doubt, he whom you confessed, pardoned the error of your
confession. Ye spoke but according to the common style: The two Disciples in
their walk to Emmaus, after the Death and Resurrection of Christ, give him no
other title. This belief passed current with the people; and thus high even the
vulgar thoughts could then rise: and, no doubt, even thus much was for that
time very acceptable to the Father of Mercies. If we make profession of the
Truth according to our knowledge, though there be much imperfection in our
apprehension and delivery, the mercy of our good God takes it well; not judging
us for what we have not, but accepting us in what we have. Should thou, O
God, stand strictly upon the punctual degrees of knowledge, how wide would it
go with millions of Souls? for besides much error in many, there is more
ignorance. But herein do we justly magnify and adore thy Goodness, that where
thou find diligent endeavor of better information matched with an honest
simplicity of heart, thou passest by our unwilling defects, and crownest our
well-meant confessions.

But oh the wonderful hand of God in the carriage of this whole business! The
people proclaimed Christ first a King; and now they proclaim him a Prophet. Why
did not the Roman bands run into arms upon the one? why did not the Scribes and
Pharisees and the envious Priesthood mutiny upon the other? They had made
Decrees against him, they had laid wait for him; yet now he passes in state
through their streets, acclaimed both a King and Prophet, without their
reluctation. What can we impute this unto, but to the powerful and overruling
arm of his Godhead? He that restrained the rage of Herod and his Courtiers upon
the first news of a King born, now restrains all the opposite powers of
Jerusalem from lifting up a finger against this last and public avouchment of
the Regal and Prophetical Office of Christ. When flesh and blood have done
their worst, they can be but such as he will make them: If the Legions of Hell
combine with the Potentates of the earth, they cannot go beyond the reach of
their tether: Whether they rise or sit still, they shall by an insensible
ordination perform that will of the Almighty which they least think of, and
most oppose.

With this humble pomp and just acclamation, O Savior, do thou pass through
the streets of Jerusalem to the Temple. Thy first walk was not to Herod's
palace, or to the Marketplaces or Burses of that populous City, but to the
Temple; whether it were out of duty, or out of need: As a good Son when he
comes from far, his first alighting is at his Father's house, neither would he
think it other then preposterous, to visit strangers before his friends, or
friends before his Father. Besides that the Temple had more use of thy
presence: both there was the most disorder, and from thence, as from a corrupt
spring, it issued forth into all the channels of Jerusalem. A wise Physician
inquires first into the state of the head, heart, liver, stomach, the vital
and chief parts, ere he asks after the petty symptoms of the meaner and
less-concerning members. Surely all good or evil begins at the Temple. If God
have there his own, if men find there nothing but wholesome instruction, holy
example, the Commonwealth cannot want some happy tincture of Piety, Devotion,
Sanctimony; as that fragrant perfume from Aaron's head sweetens his utmost
skirts. Contrarily, the distempers of the Temple cannot but affect the Secular
state. As therefore the good Husbandman, when he sees the leaves grow yellow,
and the branches unthriving, looks presently to the root; so did thou, O holy
Savior, upon sight of the disorders spread over Jerusalem and Judaea, address
thy self to the rectifying of the Temple.

No sooner is Christ alighted at the gate of the outer Court of his Father's
house, then he falls to work: Reformation was his errand; that he roundly
attempts. That holy ground was profaned by sacrilegious barterings: within the
third court of that sacred place was a public Mart held; here was a throng of
buiers and sellers, though not of all commodities, (the Jews were not so
irreligious,) only of those things which were for the use of Sacrifice. The
Israelites came many of them from far; it was no less from Dan to Beersheba
then the space of an hundred and threescore miles; neither could it be without
much inconvenience for them to bring their Bullocks, Sheep, Goats, Lambs, meal,
oil, and such other holy provision with them up to Jerusalem: Order was taken
by the Priests, that these might for money be had close by the Altar; to the
ease of the offerer, and the benefit of the seller, and perhaps no disprofit to
themselves. The pretense was fair, the practice unsufferable. The great Owner
of the Temple comes to vindicate the reputation and rights of his own house;
and in an indignation at that so foul abuse, lays fiercely about him, and with
his three-stringed scourge whips out those Sacrilegious chapmen, casts down
their tables, throws away their baskets, scatters their heaps, and sends away
their customers with smart and horror.

With what fear and astonishment did the repining offenders look upon so
unexpected a Justicer, whilst their conscience lashed them more then those
cords, and the terror of that meek chastiser more affrighted them then his
blows? Is this that mild and gentle Savior that came to take upon him our
stripes, and to undergo the chastisements of our peace? Is this that quiet
Lamb, which before his shearers opens not his mouth? See now how his eyes
sparkle with holy anger, and dart forth beams of indignation in the faces of
these guilty Collybists: see how his hands deal strokes and ruin. Yea, thus,
thus it became thee, O thou gracious Redeemer of men, to let the world see,
thou have not lost thy Justice in thy Mercy; that there is not more lenity in
thy forbearances, then rigor in thy just severity; that thou can thunder, as
well as shine.

This was not thy first act of this kind; at the entrance of thy public work
thou begannest so as thou now shuttest up, with purging thine House. Once
before had these offenders been whipped out of that holy place, which now they
dare again defile. Shame and smart is not enough to reclaim obdur'd offenders.
Gainful sins are not easily checked, but less easily mastered. These bold
flies, where they are beaten off, will alight again. He that is filthy will be
filthy still.

Often yet had our Savior been (besides this) in the Temple, and often had seen
the same disorder; he does not think fit to be always whipping. It was enough
thus twice to admonish and chastise them before their ruin. That God who hates
sin always, will not chide always, and strikes more seldom; but he would have
those few strokes perpetual monitours; and if those prevail not, he smites but
once. It is his uniform course, first the Whip, and if that speed not, then the
Sword.

There is a reverence due to God's House for the Owner's sake, for the
service's sake. Secular and profane actions are not for that Sacred roof, much
less uncivil and beastly. What but Holiness can become that place which is the
Beauty of Holiness?

The fairest pretenses cannot bear out a sin with God. Never could there be
more plausible colors cast upon any act; the convenience, the necessity of
provisions for the Sacrifice: yet through all these do the fiery eyes of our
Savior see the foul Covetousness of the Priests, the Fraud of the
Money Changers, the intolerable abuse of the Temple. Common eyes may be cheated
with easy pretexts; but he that looks through the heart at the face, justly
answers our Apologies with scourges.

None but the hand of public Authority must reform the abuses of the Temple.
If all be out of course there, no man is barred from sorrow; the grief may
reach to all, the power of reformation only to those whom it concerns. It
was but a just question, though ill propounded to Moses, Who made thee a Judge
or a Ruler? We must all imitate the zeal of our Savior; we may not imitate his
correction. If we strike uncalled, we are justly stricken for our arrogation,
for our presumption. A tumultuary remedy may prove a medicine worse then the
disease.

But what shall I say of so sharp and imperious an act from so meek an Agent?
Why did not the Priests and Levites (whose this gain partly was) abett these
money changers, and make head against Christ? why did not those multitudes of
men stand upon their defense, and wrest that whip out of the hand of a
seemingly-weak and unarmed Prophet; but in stead hereof run away like sheep
from before him, not daring to abide his presence, though his hand had been
still? Surely, had these men been so many armies, yea, so many Legions of
Devils, when God will astonish and chase them, they cannot have the power to
stand and resist. How easy is it for him that made the heart, to put either
terror or courage into it at pleasure? O Savior, it was none of thy least
Miracles, that thou did thus drive out a world of able offenders in spite of
their gain and stomackfull resolutions; their very profit had no power to stay
them against thy frowns. Who has resisted thy will? Men's hearts are not their
own: they are, they must be such as their Maker will have them.

XLIII. The Fig Tree cursed.
WHen in this State our Savior had rid through the streets of Jerusalem, that
evening he lodged not there. Whether he would not, that after so public an
acclamation of the people he might avoid all suspicion of plots or popularity:
(Even unjust jealousies must be shunned; neither is there less wisdom in the
prevention, then in the remedy of evils;) or whether he could not, for want of
an invitation; Hosanna was better cheap then an entertainment; and perhaps the
envy of so stomacked a Reformation discouraged his hosts. However, he goes that
evening supperless out of Jerusalem. O unthankful Citizens! Do ye thus part
with your no less meek then glorious King? His title was not more proclaimed in
your streets then your own ingratitude. If he have purged the Temple, yet your
hearts are foul. There is no wonder in men's unworthiness; there is more then
wonder in thy mercy, O thou Savior of men, that would yet return thither
where thou were so palpably disregarded. If they gave thee not thy Supper, thou
give them their Breakfast: If thou may not spend the night with them, thou will with them spend the day. O love of unthankful Souls, not discourageable
by the most hateful indignities, by the basest repulses! What burden can
thou shrink under, who can bear the weight of Ingratitude?

Thou that give food to all things living, art thy self hungry. Martha, Mary
and Lazarus kept not so poor an house, but that thou might have eaten
something at Bethany. Whether thine haste out-ran thine appetite; or whether on
purpose thou forbarest repast, to give opportunity to thine ensuing Miracle, I
neither ask, nor resolve. This was not the first time that thou wast hungry. As
thou would be a man, so thou would suffer those infirmities that belong to
Humanity. Thou came to be our High Priest; it was thy act and intention, not
only to intercede for thy people, but to transfer unto thy self, as their
sins, so their weaknesses and complaints. Thou know to pity what thou have
felt. Are we pinched with want? we endure but what thou did, we have reason
to be patient; thou enduredst what we do, we have reason to be thankful.

But what shall we say to this thine early hunger? The morning, as it is
privileged from excess, so from need; the stomach is not wont to rise with the
body. Surely, as thine occasions were, no season was exempted from thy want:
thou had spent the day before in the holy labor of thy Reformation; after a
supperless departure thou spentest the night in Prayer; no meal refreshed thy
toil. What do we think much to forbear a morsel, or to break a sleep for thee,
who did thus neglect thy self for us?

As if meat were no part of thy care, as if any thing would serve to stop the
mouth of hunger, thy breakfast is expected from the next Tree. A Fig Tree grew
by the way side, full grown, well spread, thick leaved, and such as might
promise enough to a remote eye: thither thou came to seek that which thou
foundest not; and not finding what thou soughtest, as displeased with thy
disappointment, cursedst that plant which deluded thy hopes. Thy breath
instantly blasted that deceitful tree; it did (no otherwise then the whole
world must needs do) wither and die with thy Curse.

O Savior, I had rather wonder at thine actions then discuss them. If I should
say that, as man, thou either knew not or consideredst not of this
fruitlesness, it could no way prejudice thy Divine Omniscience; this infirmity
were no worse then thy weariness or hunger. It was no more disparagement to
thee to grow in Knowledge, then in Stature; neither was it any more disgrace to
thy perfect Humanity, that thou (as man) knew not all things at once, then
that thou were not in thy childhood at thy full growth. But herein I doubt not
to say, it is more likely thou came purposely to this Tree, knowing the
barrenness of it answerable to the season, and fore-resolving the event; that
thou might hence ground the occasion of so instructive a Miracle: like as
thou knew Lazarus was dying, was dead, yet would not seem to take notice
of his dissolution, that thou might the more glorify thy Power in his
resuscitation. It was thy willing and determined disappointment for a greater
purpose.

But why did thou curse a poor Tree for the want of that fruit which the
season yielded not? If it pleased thee to call for that which it could not
give, the Plant was innocent; and if innocent, why cursed? O Savior, it is
fitter for us to adore then to examine. We may be saucy in inquiring after
thee, and fond in answering for thee.

If that season were not for a ripe fruit, yet for some fruit it was. Who knows
not the nature of the Fig Tree to be always bearing? That plant (if not
altogether barren) yields a continual succession of increase; whilst one fig
i^ ripe, another is green; the same bough can content both our taste and our
hope. This tree was defective in both, yielding nothing but an empty shade to
the mis-hoping traveller.

Besides that, I have learned that thou, O Savior, were wont not to speak
only, but to work Parables. And what was this other then a real Parable of
thine? All this while had thou been in the world; thou had given many
proofs of thy Mercy, (the earth was full of thy Goodness,) none of thy
Judgments: now, immediately before thy Passion, thou thoughtest fit to give
this double demonstration of thy just austerity. How else should the world have
seen thou can be severe as well as meek and merciful? And why might not
thou, who made all things, take liberty to destroy a plant for thine own
Glory? Wherefore serve thy best creatures but for the praise of thy Mercy and
Justice? What great matter was it if thou, who once said, Let the earth bring
forth the herb yielding seed, and the tree yielding the fruit of its own kind,
shall now say, Let this fruitless tree wither? All this yet was done in figure:
In this act: of thine I see both an Emblem, and a Prophecy. How did thou
herein mean to teach thy Disciples how much thou hate an unfruitful
profession, and what judgments thou meantest to bring upon that barren
generation? Once before had thou compared the Jewish Nation to a Fig Tree in
the midst of thy vineyard, which, after three years expectation and culture
yielding no fruit, was by thee, the Owner, doomed to a speedy excision: now
thou actest what thou then said. No tree abounds more with leaf and shade; no
Nation abounded more with Ceremonial observations and semblances of Piety.
Outward profession, where there is want of inward truth and real practice,
does but help to draw on and aggravate judgment. Had this Fig Tree been utterly
bare and leafless, it had perhaps escaped the Curse. Hear this, ye vain
Hypocrites, that care only to show well, never caring for the sincere truth of
a conscionable Obedience: your fair outside shall be sure to help you to a
Curse.

That which was the fault of this Tree, is the punishment of it, fruitlesness:
Let no fruit grow on thee hence-forward for ever. Had the boughs been appointed
to be torn down, and the body split in pieces, the doom had been more easy;
that juicy plant might yet have recovered, and have lived to recompense this
deficiency: now it shall be what it was, fruitless. Woe be to that Church or
Soul that is punished with her own Sin. Outward plagues are but favors in
comparison of Spiritual judgments.

That Curse might well have stood with a long continuance; the Tree might have
lived long, though fruitless: but no sooner is the word passed, then the leaves
flag and turn yellow, the branches wrinkle and shrink, the bark discolours, the
root dries, the plant withers.

O God, what creature is able to abide the blasting of the breath of thy
displeasure? Even the most great and glorious Angels of Heaven could not stand
one moment before thine anger, but perished under thy wrath everlastingly. How
irresistible is thy Power? how dreadful are thy Judgments? Lord, chastise my
fruitlesness, but punish it not; at least, punish it, but curse it not, lest I
wither and be consumed.

XLIV. CHRIST Betrayed.
SUch an eyesore was Christ that raised Lazarus, and Lazarus whom Christ
raised, to the envious Priests, Scribes, Elders of the Jews, that they consult
to murder both: Whilst either of them lives, neither can the glory of that
Miracle die, nor the shame of the oppugners.

Those malicious heads are laid together in the Parlour of Caiaphas. Happy had
it been for them, if they had spent but half those thoughts upon their own
Salvation, which they misimployed upon the destruction of the innocent. At last
this results, that Force is not their way; Subtlety and Treachery must do that
which should be vainly attempted by Power.

Who is so fit to work this feat against Christ as one of his own? There can be
no Treason where is not some Trust. Who so fit among the domestics as he that
bare the bag, and over-lov'd that which he bare? That heart which has once
enslaved it self to red and white earth, may be made any thing. Who can trust
to the power of good means, when Judas, who heard Christ daily, whom others
heard to preach Christ daily, who daily saw Christ's Miracles, and daily
wrought Miracles in Christ's name, is (at his best) a Thief, and ere long a
Traitor? That crafty and malignant Spirit which presided in that bloody
counsel has easily found out a fit instrument for this Hellish plot. As God
knows, so Satan guesses, who are his, and will be sure to make use of his own.
If Judas were Christ's domestic, yet he was Mammon's servant: he could not but
hate that Master whom he formally professed to serve, whilst he really served
that master which Christ professed to hate. He is but in his trade, whilst he
is bartering even for his Master; What will ye give me? and I will deliver him
unto you. Said thou not well, O Savior, I have chosen you twelve, and one of
you is a Devil? Thou that knew to distinguish betwixt men and spirits,
call Judas by his right name. Lo, he is become a Tempter to the worst of
evils.

Wretched Judas! whether shall I more abhor thy treachery, of wonder at thy
folly? What will they, what can they give thee valuable to that head Which thou
proferest to sale? Were they able to pay, or thou capable to receive all those
precious metalls that are laid up in the secret cabins of the whole earth, how
were this price equivalent to the worth of him that made them? Had they been
able to have fetched down those rich and glittering spangles of Heaven, and to
have put them into thy fist, what had this been to weigh with a God? How basely
therefore do thou speak of chaffering for him whose the world was? What will
ye give me? Alas! what were they? what had they, miserable men, to pay for such
a purchase? The time was, when he that set thee on work could say, All the
Kingdoms of the earth, and the glory of them are mine; and I give them to whom
I please: all these will I give thee. Had he now made that offer to thee in
this woeful bargain, it might have carried some color of a temptation: and
even thus it had been a match ill made. But for thee to tender a trade of so
invaluable a commodity to these pelting petty-chapmen for thirty poor
silverlings, it was no less base then wicked.

How unequal is this rate? Thou that valuedst Mary's ointment which she
bestowed upon the feet of Christ at three hundred pieces of silver, sellest thy
Master, on whom that precious odor was spent, at thirty. Worldly hearts are
peny-wise, and pound-foolish: they know how to set high prices upon the
worthless trash of this world; but for Heavenly things, or the God that owns
them, these they shamefully undervalue.

And I will deliver him unto you. False and presumptuous Judas! it was more
then thou could do; thy price was not more too low then thy undertaking was
too high. Had all the powers of Hell combined with thee, they could not have
delivered thy Master into the hands of men. The act was none but his own; all
that he did, all that he suffered was perfectly voluntary. Had he pleased to
resist, how easily had he with one breath blown thee and thy accomplices down
into their Hell? It is no thank to thee that he would be delivered. O Savior,
all our safety, all our comfort depends not so much upon thine act as upon thy
will: in vain should we have hoped for the benefit of a forced redemption.

The bargain is driven, the price paid. Judas returns, and looks no less
smoothly upon his Master and his fellows then as if he had done no disservice.
What cares he? his heart tells him he is rich, though it tell him he is false.
He was not now first an Hypocrite. The Passover is at hand; no man is so busy
to prepare for it, or more devoutly forward to receive it then Judas.

Oh the sottishness and obdureness of this son of Perdition! How many proofs
had he formerly of his Master's Omniscience? There was no day wherein he saw
not that thoughts and things absent came familiar under his cognizance: yet
this Miscreant dares plot a secret villainy against his person, and face it: if
he cannot be honest, yet he will be close. That he may be notoriously impudent,
he shall know he is descried: whilst he thinks fit to conceal his treachery,
our Savior thinks not fit to conceal the knowledge of that treacherous
conspiracy; Verily, I say unto you that one of you shall betray me. Who would
not think but that discovered wickedness should be ashamed of it self? Did not
Judas (think we) blush, and grow pale again, and cast down his guilty eyes, and
turn away his troubled countenance at so galling an intimation? Custom of sin
steels the brow, and makes it incapable of any relenting impressions. Could the
other Disciples have discerned any change in any one of their faces, they had
not been so sorrowfully affected with the charge. Methinks I see how
intentively they bent their eyes upon each others, as if they would have looked
through those windows down into the bosom; with what self-confidence, with
what mutual jealousy they perused each others foreheads: and now, as rather
thinking fit to distrust their own innocence then their Master's assertion,
each trembles to say, Lord, is it I? It is possible there may lurk secret
wickedness in some blind corner of the heart, which we know not of: It is
possible that time and temptation, working upon our corruption, may at last
draw us into some such sin as we could not fore-believe. Whither may we not
fall, if we be left to our own strength? It is both wise and holy to misdoubt
the worst: Lord, is it I?

In the mean time, how fair has Judas (all this while) carried with his
fellows? Had his former life bewrayed any falsehood or misdemeanour, they had
soon found where to pitch their just suspicion: now Judas goes for so honest a
man, that every Disciple is rather ready to suspect himself then him. It is
true, he was a thief; but who knows that besides his Maker? The outsides of men
are no less deceitful then their hearts. It is not more unsafe to judge by
outward appearances, then it is uncharitable not to judge so.

Oh the headstrong resolutions of wickedness, not to be checked by any
opposition! Who would not but have thought, if the notice of an intended evil
could not have prevented it, yet that the threats of judgment should have
affrighted the boldest offender? Judas can sit by, and hear his Master say, Woe
be to the man by whom the Son of man is betrayed; it had been better for that
man never to have been born, and is no more blank'd then very innocence; but
thinks, What care I? I have the money; I shall escape the shame: the fact shall
be close, the match gainful: it will be long ere I get so much by my service;
if I fare well for the present, I shall shift well enough for the future. Thus
secretly he claps up another bargain; he makes a covenant with death, and with
Hell an agreement. O Judas, did thou ever hear ought but truth fall from the
mouth of that thy Divine Master? Can thou distrust the certainty of that
dreadful menace of vengeance? How then durst thou persist in the purpose of so
flagitious and damnable a villainy? Resolved sinners run on desperately in their
wicked courses; and have so bent their eyes upon the profit or pleasure of
their mischievons projects, that they will not see Hell lie open before them in
the way.

As if that shameless man meant to outbrave all accusations, and to outface his
own heart, he dares ask too, Master, is it I? No Disciple shall more zealously
abominate that crime then he that fosters it in his bosom. Whatever the
Searcher of hearts knows by him, is locked up in his own breast: to be
perfidious is nothing, so he may be secret: his Master knows him for a
Traitor, it is not long that he shall live to complain; his fellows think him
honest: all is well, whilst he is well esteemed. Reputation is the only care
of false hearts, not truth of being, not conscience of merit; so they may seem
fair to men, they care not how foul they are to God.

Had our Savior only had this knowledge at the second hand, this boldness had
been enough to make him suspect the credit of the best intelligence: Who could
imagine that a guilty man dared thus brow-beat a just accusation? Now he whose
piercing and unfailing eyes see things as they are, not as they seem, can
peremptorily convince the impudence of this hollow questionist with a direct
affirmation; Thou have said. Foolish Traitor! could thou think that those
blear eyes of thine would endure the beams of the Sun, or that counterfeit
slip, the fire? was it not sufficient for thee to be secretly vicious, but thou
must presume to contest with an Omniscient accuser? Have thou yet enough? Thou
supposedst thy crime unknown. To men it was so; had thy Master been no more, it
had been so to him: now his knowledge argues him Divine. How durst thou yet
resolve to lift up thy hand against him, who knows thine offense, and can
either prevent or revenge it? As yet the charge was private, either not heard,
or not observed by thy fellows: it shall be at first whispered to one, and at
last known to all. Bashful and penitent sinners are fit to be concealed; shame
is meet for those that have none.

Curiosity of Knowledge is an old disease of humane nature: besides, Peter's
zeal would not let him dwell under the danger of so doubtful a crimination; he
cannot but sit on thorns, till he know the man. His signs ask what his voice
dare not. What law requires all followers to be equally beloved? Why may not
our favors be freely dispensed where we like best, without envy, without
prejudice? None of Christ's train could complain of neglect; John is highest in
grace. Blood, affection, zeal, diligence have indeared him above his fellows.
He that is dearest in respect, is next in place: in that form of side-sitting
at the Table, he leaned on the bosom of Jesus. Where is more love, there may
be more boldness. This secrecy and intireness privileges John to ask that
safely, which Peter might not without much inconvenience and peril of a check.
The beloved Disciple well understands this silent language, and dares put
Peter's thought into words. Love shuts out fear. O Savior, the confidence
of thy Goodness emboldens us not to shrink at any suit. Thy love shed abroad in
our hearts bids us ask that which in a stranger were no better then
presumption. Once, when Peter asked thee a question concerning John, What shall
this man do? he received a short answer, What is that to thee? Now, when John
asks thee a question (no less seemingly curious) at Peter's instance, Who is it
that betrays thee? however thou might have returned him the same answer,
(since neither of their persons was any more concerned,) yet thou condescendest
to a mild and full (though secret) satisfaction. There was not so much
difference in the men, as in the matter of the demand. No occasion was given to
Peter of moving that question concerning John; the indefinite assertion of
treason amongst the Disciples was a most just occasion of moving John's
question for Peter and himself. That which therefore was timorously demanded,
is answered graciously; He it is to whom I shall give a sop when I have dipped
it. And he gave the sop to Judas. How loath was our Savior to name him whom he
was not unwilling to design? All is here expressed by dumb signs; the hand
speaks what the tongue would not. In the same language wherein Peter asked the
question of John, does our Savior shape an answer to John: what a beck
demanded, is answered by a sop.

O Savior, I do not hear thee say, Look on whomsoever I frown, or to
whomsoever I do a public affront, that is the man; but, To whomsoever I shall
give a sop. Surely a by-stander would have thought this man deep in thy books,
and would have construed this act, as they did thy tears for Lazarus, See how
he loves him. To carve a man out of thine own dish, what could it seem to argue
but a singularity of respect? Yet, lo, there is but one whom thou hate, one
only Traitor at thy board; and thou give him a sop. The outward Gifts of
God are not always the proofs of his Love; yea, sometimes are bestowed in
displeasure. Had not he been a wise Disciple that should have envied the great
favor done to Judas, and have stomacked his own preterition? So foolish are
they, who, measuring Gods affection by temporal benefits, are ready to applaud
prospering wickedness, and to grudge outward blessings to them who are
incapable of any better.

After the sop Satan entered into Judas. Better had it been for that treacherous
Disciple to have wanted that morsel: Not that there was any malignity in the
bread, or that the sop had any power to convey Satan into the receiver, or that
by a necessary concomitance that evil spirit was in or with it. Favors ill
used make the heart more capable of farther evil. That wicked Spirit commonly
takes occasion by any of Gods gifts, to assault us the more eagerly. After our
Sacramental morsel, if we be not the better, we are sure the worse. I dare
not say, yet I dare think, that Judas, comparing his Master's words and John's
whisperings with the tender of this sop, and finding himself thus denoted, was
now so much the more irritated to perform what he had wickedly purposed. Thus
Satan took advantage by the sop of a farther possession. Twice before had that
evil Spirit made a palpable entry into that lewd heart. First, in his
Covetousness and Theft; those sinful habits could not be without that author
of ill: then, in his damnable resolution, and plot of so heinous a conspiracy
against Christ. Yet now (as if it were new to begin) After the sop Satan
entered. As in every gross sin which we entertain, we give harbor to that evil
Spirit; so in every degree of growth in wickedness, new hold is taken by him of
the heart. No sooner is the foot over the threshold, then we enter into the
house: when we pass thence into the inner rooms, we make still but a perfect
entrance. At first Satan entered, to make the house of Judas's heart his own;
now he enters into it as his own. The first purpose of sin opens the gates to
Satan; consent admits him into the entry; full resolution of sin gives up the
keys to his hands, and puts him into absolute possession. What a plain
difference there is betwixt the regenerate and evil heart? Satan lays siege to
the best by his Temptations; and sometimes upon battery and breach made enters:
the other admits him by willing composition. When he is entered upon the
Regenerate, he is entertained with perpetual skirmishes, and by an holy
violence at last repulsed: in the other he is plausibly received, and freely
commands. Oh the admirable meekness of this Lamb of God! I see not a frown, I
hear not a check; but, What thou do, do quickly. Why do we startle at our
petty wrongs, and swell with anger, and break into furious revenges upon every
occasion, when the pattern of our Patience lets not fall one harshword upon so
foul and bloody a Traitor? Yea, so fairly is this carried, that the Disciples
as yet can apprehend no change; they innocently think of commodities to be
bought: when Christ speaks of their Master sold, and, as one that longs to be
out of pain, hastens the pace of his irreclamable conspiratour, That thou
do, do quickly. It is one thing to say, Do what thou intendest, and
another to say, Do quickly what thou do. There was villainy in the deed; the
speed had no sin, the time was harmless, whilst the man and the act were
wicked. O Judas, how happy had it been for thee, if thou had never done what
thou perfidiously intendedst? but since thou will needs do it, delay is but a
torment.

That steely heart yet relents not; the obfirmed Traitor knows his way to the
High Priest's hall and to the Garden; the watchword is already given, Hail,
Master, and a kiss. Yet more Hypocrisy? yet more presumption upon so
overstrained a lenity? How knew thou, O thou false Traitor, whether that
sacred cheek would suffer it self to be defiled with thine impure touch? Thou
well foundest thy treachery was unmasked; thine heart could not be so false to
thee as not to tell thee how hateful thou were. Go, kiss and adore those
silverlings which thou art too sure of; the Master whom thou have sold is not
thine. But oh the impudence of a deplored sinner! That tongue which has agreed
to sell his Master dares say, Hail: and those lips that have passed the compact
of his death dare offer to kiss him whom they had covenanted to kill. It was
God's charge of old, Kiss the Son, lest he be angry. O Savior, thou had
reason to be angry with this kiss; the scourges, the thorns, the nails, the
spear of thy Murderers were not so painful, so piercing, as this touch of
Judas: all these were in this one alone. The stabs of an Enemy cannot be so
grievous as the skin-deep wounds of a Disciple.

XLV. The Agony.
WHat a Preface do I find to my Savior's Passion? an Hymn, and an Agony: a
cheerful Hymn, and an Agony no less sorrowful. An Hymn begins, both to raise
and testify the courageous resolutions of his Suffering; an Agony follows, to
show that he was truly sensible of those extremities wherewith he was resolved
to grapple. All the Disciples bore their part in that Hymn; it was fit they
should all see his comfortable and Divine Magnanimity wherewith he entered into
those sad lists: only Three of them shall be allowed to be the witnesses of
his Agony; only those three that had been the witnesses of his glorious
Transfiguration. That sight had well fore-arm'd and prepared them for this: how
could they be dismayed to see his trouble, who there saw his Majesty? how could
they be dismayed to see his Body now sweat, which they had then seen to shine?
how could they be daunted to see him now accosted with Judas and his train,
whom they then saw attended with Moses and Elias? how could they be discouraged
to hear the reproaches of base men, when they had heard the voice of God to him
from that excellent glory, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased?

Now before these eyes this Sun begins to be over-cast with clouds; He began to
be sorrowful and very heavy. Many sad thoughts for mankind had he secretly
hatched, and yet smothered in his own breast; now his grief is too great to
keep in: My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death. O Savior, what must
thou needs feel when thou said so? Feeble minds are apt to bemoan themselves
upon light occasions; the grief must needs be violent that causes a strong
heart to break forth into a passionate complaint. Woe is me! what a word is
this for the Son of God? Where is that Comforter which thou promisedst to send
to others? where is that thy Father of all mercies and God of all comfort, in
whose presence is the fullness of joy, and at whose right hand there are
pleasures for evermore? where are those constant and cheerful resolutions of a
fearless walking through the valley of the shadow of death? Alas! if that face
were not hid from thee whose essence could not be disunited, these pangs could
not have been. The Sun was withdrawn awhile, that there might be a cool, though
not a dark night, as in the world, so in thy breast; withdrawn in respect of
sight, not of being. It was the hardest piece of thy sufferings, that thou must
be disconsolate.

But to whom do thou make this moan, O thou Savior of men? Hard is that man
driven that is fain to complain to his inferiors. Had Peter, or James, or John
thus bewailed himself to thee, there had been ease to their Soul in venting it
self; thou had been both apt to pity them, and able to relieve them: but now
in that thou lamentest thy case to them, alas! what issue could thou expect?
They might be astonished with thy grief; but there is neither power in their
hands to free thee from those sorrows, nor power in their compassion to
mitigate them. Nay, in this condition what could all the Angels of Heaven (as
of themselves) do to succor thee? What strength could they have but from
thee? What creature can help when thou complainest? It must be only the
stronger that can aid the weak.

Old and holy Simeon could fore-say to thy Blessed Mother, that a sword should
pierce through her Soul; but, alas! how many swords at once pierce thine? Every
one of these words is both sharp and edged; My Soul is exceeding sorrowful,
even unto death. What humane Soul is capable of the conceit of the least of
those sorrows that oppressed thine? It was not thy Body that suffered now: the
pain of body is but as the body of pain; the anguish of the Soul is as the soul
of anguish. That, and in that thou sufferedst. Where are they that dare so far
disparage thy Sorrow, as to say thy Soul suffered only in sympathy with thy
Body; not immediately, but by participation; not in its self, but in its
partner? Thou best knew what thou feltest, and thou that feltest thine own
pain can cry out of thy Soul. Neither did thou say, My Soul is troubled; so
it often was, even to tears: but, My Soul is sorrowful; as if it had been
before assaulted, now possessed with grief. Nor yet this in any tolerable
moderation; changes of Passion are incident to every humane Soul: but,
Exceeding sorrowful. Yet there are degrees in the very extremities of evils:
those that are most vehement, may yet be capable of a remedy, at least a
relaxations thine was past these hopes, Exceeding sorrowful unto death.

What was it, what could it be, O Savior, that lay thus heavy upon thy Divine
Soul? Was it the fear of Death? was it the fore-felt pain, shame, torment of
thine ensuing Crucifixion? Oh poor and base thoughts of the narrow hearts of
cowardly and impotent mortality! How many thousands of thy blessed Martyrs have
welcomed no less tortures with smiles and gratulations, and have made a sport
of those exquisite cruelties which their very Tyrants thought unsufferable?
Whence had they this strength but from thee? If their weakness were thus
undaunted and prevalent, what was thy power? No, no: It was the sad weight of
the Sin of mankind; it was the heavy burden of thy Father's wrath for our sin
that thus pressed thy Soul, and wrung from thee these bitter expressions.

What can it avail thee, O Savior, to tell thy grief to men? who can ease
thee, but he of whom thou said, My Father is greater then I? Lo, to him thou
turnest; O Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me.

Was not this that prayer (O dear Christ) which in the days of thy flesh thou
offeredst up with strong crying and tears to him that was able to save thee
from death? Surely this was it. Never was cry so strong; never was God thus
solicited. How could Heaven choose but shake at such a Prayer from the Power
that made it? How can my heart but tremble to hear this suit from the Captain
of our Salvation? O thou that said, I and my Father are one, do thou suffer
ought from thy Father but what thou would, what thou determinedst? was this
Cup of thine either casual or forced? would thou wish for what thou knew
thou would not have possible? Far, far be these mis-raised thoughts of our
ignorance and frailty. Thou came to suffer, and thou would do what thou
came for: yet since thou would be a man, thou would take all of man, save
sin: it is but humane (and not sinful) to be loath to suffer what we may avoid.
In this velleity of thine, thou would show what that Nature of ours which
thou had assumed could incline to wish; but in thy resolution, thou would
show us what thy victorious thoughts raised and assisted by thy Divine power
had determinately pitched upon: Nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will.
As man thou had a Will of thine own: no humane Soul can be perfect without
that main faculty. That will, which naturally could be content to incline
toward an exemption from miseries, gladly vails to that Divine will whereby
thou art designed to the chastisements of our peace. Those pains which in
themselves were grievous, thou embracest as decreed: so as thy fear has given
place to thy love and obedience. How should we have known these evils so
formidable, if thou had not in half a thought inclined to deprecate them? How
could we have avoided so formidable and deadly evils, if thou had not
willingly undergone them? We acknowledge thine holy fear, we adore thy Divine
fortitude.

Whilst thy Mind was in this fearful agitation, it is no marvel if thy Feet
were not fixed. Thy place is more changed then thy thoughts. One while thou
walk to thy drouzy Attendents, and stirrest up their needful vigilance;
then thou returnest to thy passionate Devotions, thou fallest again upon thy
face. If thy Body be humbled down to the earth, thy Soul is yet lower; thy
prayers are so much more vehement as thy pangs are. And being in an agony he
prayed more earnestly, and his sweat was as it were great drops of blood
falling down to the ground. O my Savior, what an agony am I in, whilst I think
of thine? What pain, what fear, what strife, what horror was in thy Sacred
breast? How did thou struggle under the weight of our sins, that thou thus
sweatest, that thou thus bleedest? All was peace with thee: thou were one with
thy coeternal and coessential Father; all the Angels worshipped thee; all the
powers of Heaven and earth awfully acknowledged thine Infiniteness. It was our
person that feoffed thee in this misery and torment; in that thou sustainedst
thy Father's wrath and our curse. If eternal death be unsufferable, if every
sin deserve eternal death, what, O what was it for thy Soul in this short time
of thy bitter Passion to answer those millions of eternal deaths which all the
sins of all mankind had deserved from the just hand of thy Godhead? I marvel
not if thou bleedest a sweat, if thou sweatest blood: If the moisture of that
Sweat be from the Body, the tincture of it is from the Soul. As there never was
such another Sweat, so neither can there be ever such a Suffering. It is no
wonder if the Sweat were more then natural, when the Suffering was more then
humane.

O Savior, so willing was that precious blood of thine to be let forth for us,
that it was ready to prevent thy Persecutours; and issued forth in those pores,
before thy wounds were opened by thy Tormentours. Oh that my heart could bleed
unto thee with true inward compunction for those sins of mine which are guilty
of this thine Agony, and have drawn blood of thee both in the Garden and on the
Cross. Woe is me: I had been in Hell, if thou had not been in thine Agony; I
had scorched, if thou had not sweat. Oh let me abhor my own wickedness, and
admire and bless thy Mercy.

But, O ye blessed Spirits which came to comfort my conflicted Savior, how did
ye look upon this Son of God, when ye saw him laboring for life under these
violent temptations? with what astonishment did ye behold him bleeding whom ye
adored? In the Wilderness, after his Duel with Satan, ye came and ministered
unto him; and now in the Garden, whilst he is in an harder combat, ye appear to
strengthen him. O the wise and mavelous dispensation of the Almighty! Whom
God will afflict, an Angel shall relieve; the Son shall suffer, the Servant
shall comfort him; the God of Angels droopeth, the Angel of God strengthens him.

Blessed Jesu, if as Man thou would be made a little lower then the Angels;
how can it disparage thee to be attended and cheared up by an Angel? Thine
Humiliation would not disdain comfort from meaner hands. How free was it for
thy Father to convey seasonable consolations to thine humbled Soul, by
whatsoever means? Behold, though thy Cup shall not pass, yet it shall be
sweetened. What if thou see not (for the time) thy Father's face? yet thou shall
feel his hand. What could that Spirit have done without the God of Spirits? O
Father of Mercies, thou may bring thine into Agonies, but thou will never
leave them there. In the midst of the sorrows of my heart thy comforts shall
refresh my Soul. Whatsoever be the means of my supportation, I know and adore
the Author.

XLVI. Peter and Malchus: or, CHRIST Apprehended.
WHerefore, O Savior, did thou take those three choice Disciples with thee
from their fellows, but that thou expectedst some comfort from their presence?
A seasonable word may sometimes fall from the meanest attendent; and the very
society of those we trust carries in it some kind of contentment. Alas! what
broken reeds are men? Whilst thou art sweating in thine Agony, they are
snorting securely. Admonitions, threats, entreaties cannot keep their eyes
open. Thou tellest them of danger, they will needs dream of ease; and though
twice rouzed (as if they had purposed this neglect) they carelessly sleep out
thy sorrow and their own peril. What help have thou of such Followers? In the
mount of thy Transfiguration they slept, and besides fell on their faces, when
they should behold thy glory, and were not themselves for fear; in the garden
of thine Agony they fell upon the ground for drouziness, when they should
compassionate thy sorrow, and lost themselves in a stupid sleepiness. Doubtless
even this disregard made thy prayers so much more fervent. The less comfort we
find on earth, the more we seek above. Neither soughtest thou more then thou
foundest: Lo, thou were heard in that which thou fearedst. An Angel supplies
men; that Spirit was vigilant whilst thy Disciples were heavy. The exchange was
happy.

No sooner is this good Angel vanished, then that domestic Devil appears:
Judas comes up, and shows himself in the head of those miscreant troops. He
whose too much honor it had been to be a Follower of so Blessed a Master,
affects now to be the leader of this wicked rabble. The Sheep's fleece is now
cast off; the Wolf appears in his own likeness. He that would be false to his
Master, would be true to his Chapmen: Even evil spirits keep touch with
themselves. The bold Traitor dares yet still mix Hypocrisy with Villainy; his
very salutations and kisses murder. O Savior, this is no news to thee. All
those who under a show of Godliness practice impiety do still betray thee thus.
Thou who had said, One of you is a Devil, did not now say, Avoid, Satan;
but, Friend, wherefore art thou come? As yet, Judas, it was not too late. Had
there been any the least spark of Grace yet remaining in that perfidious
bosom, this word had fetched thee upon thy knees. All this Sunshine cannot
thaw an obdurate heart. The sign is given, Jesus is taken. Wretched Traitor!
why would thou for this purpose be thus attended? and ye foolish Priests and
Elders! why sent you such a band and so armed for this apprehension? One
messenger had been enough for a voluntary prisoner. Had my Savior been
unwilling to be taken, all your forces (with all the Legions of Hell to help
them) had been too little: since he was willing to be attached, two were too
many. When he did but say, I am he, that easy breath alone routed all your
troops, and cast them to the earth, whom it might as easily have cast down into
Hell. What if he had said, I will not be taken? where had ye been? or what
could your swords and staves have done against Omnipotence?

Those Disciples that failed of their vigilance, failed not of their courage:
they had heard their Master speak of providing swords, and now they thought it
was time to use them: Shall we smite? They were willing to fight for him with
whom they were not careful to watch: but of all other Peter was most forward;
in stead of opening his lips, he unsheaths his sword; and in stead of Shall I?
smites. He had noted Malchus, a busy servant of the High priest, too ready to
second Judas, and to lay his rude hands upon the Lord of Life: against this man
his heart rises, and his hand is lift up. That ear which had too-officiously
listened to the unjust and cruel charge of his wicked Master, is now severed
from that worse head which it had mis-served.

I love and honor thy zeal, O blessed Disciple: Thou could not brook wrong
done to thy Divine Master. Had thy life been dearer to thee then his safety,
thou had not drawn thy sword upon a whole troup. It was in earnest that thou
said, Though all men, yet not I; and, Though I should die with thee, yet I
will not deny thee. Lo, thou art ready to die upon him that should touch that
Sacred person; what would thy life now have been in comparison of renouncing
him? Since thou were so fervent, why did thou not rather fall upon that
Treachour that betrayed him, then that Sergeant that arrested him? Surely the
sin was so much greater, as the plot of mischief is more then the execution; as
a Domestic is nearer then a Stranger; as the treason of a Friend is worse then
the forced enmity of an Hireling. Was it that the guilty wretch upon the fact
done subduced himself, and shrouded his false head under the wings of darkness?
Was it that thou could not so suddenly apprehend the odious depth of that
Villainy, and instantly hate him that had been thy old companion? Was it that
thy amazedness as yet conceived not the purposed issue of this seizure, and
astonishedly waited for the success? Was it that though Judas were more faulty,
yet Malchus was more imperiously cruel? Howsoever, thy Courage was awaked with
thy self; and thy heart was no less sincere then thine hand was rash. Put up
again thy sword into his place; for all they that take the sword shall perish
with the sword. Good intentions are no warrant for our actions. O Savior, thou
can at once accept of our meanings, and censure our deeds. Could there be an
affection more worth encouragement then the love to such a Master? Could there
be a more just cause wherein to draw his sword then in thy quarrel? Yet this
love, this quarrel cannot shield Peter from thy check: thy meek tongue smites
him gently, who had furiously smote thine enemy; Put up thy sword.

It was Peter's sword; but to put up, not to use: there is a sword which Peter
may use; but it is of another metal. Our weapons are, as our warfare,
spiritual: if he smite not with this, he incurs no less blame then for smiting
with the other; as for this material sword, what should he do with it that is
not allowed to strike? When the Prince of Peace bade his followers sell their
coat and buy a sword, he meant to insinuate the need of these arms, not their
improvement; and to teach them the danger of the time, not the manner of the
repulse of danger. When they therefore said, Behold, here are two swords; he
answered, It is enough: he said not, Go buy more. More had not been enough, if a
bodily defense had been intended: David's tower had been too straight to yield
sufficient furniture of this kind. When it comes to use, Peter's own sword is
too much: Put up thy sword. Indeed there is a temporal sword; and that sword
must be drawn, else wherefore is it? but drawn by him that bears it; and he
bears it that is ordained to be an avenger, to execute wrath upon him that
does evil; for he bears not the sword in vain. If another man draw it, it cuts
his fingers; and draws so much blood of him that unwarrantably wields it, as
that he who takes the sword shall perish with the sword. Can I choose but wonder
how Peter could thus strike unwounded? how he, whose first blow made the fray,
could escape hewing in pieces from that band of Ruffians? This could not have
been, if thy power, O Savior, had not restrained their rage; if thy seasonable
and sharp reproof had not prevented their revenge.

Now, for ought I see, Peter smarts no less then Malchus: neither is Peter's
ear less smitten by the mild tongue of his Master, then Malchus his ear by the
hand of Peter. Weak Disciple! thou have zeal, but not according to knowledge:
there is not more danger in this act of thine, then inconsideration and
ignorance. The cup which my Father has given me, shall I not drink it? Thou
drawest thy sword to rescue me from suffering. Alas! if I suffer not, what
would become of thee? what would become of mankind? where were that eternal and
just Decree of my Father, wherein I am a Lamb slain from the beginning of the
world? Do thou go about to hinder thine own and the whole world's Redemption?
Did I not once before call thee Satan, for suggesting to me this immunity from
my Passion? and do thou now think to favor me with a real opposition to
this great and necessary work? Can thou be so weak as to imagine that this
Suffering of mine is not free and voluntary? Can thou be so injurious to me
as to think I yield, because I want aid to resist? Have I not given to thee and
to the world many undeniable proofs of my Omnipotence? Did thou not see how
easy it had been for me to have blown away these poor forces of my adversaries?
Do thou not know that, if I would require it, all the glorious troops of the
Angels of Heaven (any one whereof is more then worlds of men) would presently
show themselves ready to attend and rescue me? Might this have stood with the
Justice of my Decree, with the Glory of my Mercy, wirh the Benefit of Man's
Redemption, it had been done; my Power should have triumphed over the impotent
malice of my enemies: but now, since that eternal Decree must be accomplished,
my Mercy must be approved, mankind must be ransomed; and this cannot be done
without my Suffering; thy well-meant valor is no better then a wrong to thy
self, to the world, to me, to my Father.

O gracious Savior, whilst thou thus smitest thy Disciple, thou healest him
whom thy Disciple smote. Many greater Miracles had thou done; none that
bewraied more mercy and meekness then this last Cure: of all other this ear of
Malchus has the loudest tongue to blazon the praise of thy Clemency and
Goodness to thy very enemies. Wherefore came that man but in an hostile manner
to attach thee? Besides his own, what favor was he worthy of for his Masters
sake? And if he had not been more forward then his fellows, why had not his
skin been as whole as theirs? Yet, even amidst the throng of thine
apprehenders, in the heat of their violence, in the height of their malice, and
thine own instant peril of death, thou healest that unnecessary ear, which had
been guilty of hearing Blasphemies against thee, and receiving cruel and
unjust charges concerning thee. O Malchus, could thy ear be whole, and not thy
heart broken and contrite with remorse for rising up against so merciful and
so powerful an hand? Could thou choose but say, O Blessed Jesu, I see it was
thy Providence that preserved my head, when my ear was smitten; it is thine
Almighty Power that has miraculously restored that ear of mine which I had
justly forfeited: this head of mine shall never be guilty of plotting any
farther mischief against thee; this ear shall never entertain any more
reproaches of thy name; this heart of mine shall ever acknowledge and magnify
thy tender mercies, thy Divine Omnipotence? Could thy fellows see such a
demonstration of Power and Goodness with unrelenting hearts? Unthankful
Malchus, and cruel soldiers! ye were worse wounded, and felt it not. God had
struck your breasts with a fearful obduration, that ye still persist in your
bloody enterprise. And they that had laid hold on Jesus, led him away, etc.

XLVII. CHRIST before Caiaphas.
THat Traitor whom his own cord made (soon after) too fast, gave this charge
concerning Jesus, Hold him fast. Fear makes his guard cruel: they bind his
hands, and think no twist can be strong enough for this Sampson. Fond Jews, and
Soldiers! if his own will had not tied him faster then your cords, though
those Manicles had been the stiffest cables or the strongest iron, they had
been but threads of tow. What eyes can but run over to see those hands, that
made Heaven and Earth, wrung together and bruised with those merciless cords;
to see him bound, who came to restore us to the liberty of the Sons of God; to
see the Lord of Life contemptuously dragged through the streets, first to the
house of Annas, then from thence to the house of Caiaphas, from him to Pilate,
from Pilate to Herod, from Herod back again to Pilate, from Pilate to his
Calvary: whilst in the mean time the base rabble and scum of the incensed
multitude runs after him with shouts and scorns? The act of death has not in
it so much misery and horror, as the pomp of death.

And what needed all this pageant of Cruelty? wherefore was this state and
lingering of an unjust execution? Was it for that their malice held a quick
dispatch too much Mercy? Was it for that, whilst they meant to be bloody, they
would fain seem just? A sudden violence had been palpably murtherous: now the
color of a legal process guilds over all their deadly spite; and would seem
to render them honest, and the accused guilty.

This attachment, this convention of the innocent was a true night-work; a deed
of so much darkness was not for the light. Old Annas and that wicked Bench of
gray headed Scribes and Elders can be content to break their sleep to do
mischief: Envy and Malice can make noon of midnight. It is resolved he shall
die; and now pretenses must be sought that he may be cleanly murdered. All
evil begins at the Sanctuary: The Priests and Scribes and Elders are the first
in this bloody scene; they have paid for this head, and now long to see what
they shall have for their thirty silverlings. The Bench is set in the Hall of
Caiaphas: False witnesses are sought for, and hired: they agree not, but shame
their suborners. Woe is me! what safety can there be for Innocence, when the
evidence is wilfully corrupted? What State was ever so pure, as not to yield
some miscreants, that will either sell or lend an Oath? What a brand has the
wisdom of God set upon falsehood, even dissonance and distraction? whereas
Truth ever holds together, and jars not whilst it is it self. O Savior, what a
perfect innocence was in thy Life, what an exact purity in thy Doctrine, that
malice it self cannot so much as devise what to slander? It were hard if Hell
should not find some Factours upon earth. At last two Witnesses are brought in,
that have learned to agree with themselves, whilst they differed from truth;
they say the same, though false; This fellow said, I am able to destroy the
Temple of God, and build it again in three days. Perjured wretches! Were these
the terms that you heard from that Sacred mouth? Said he formally thus as ye
have deposed? It is true, he spoke of a Temple, of destroying, of building, of
three days; but did he speak of that Temple, of his own destroying, of a
material building in that space? He said, Destroy ye: Ye say, I am able to
destroy. He said, this Temple of his body: Ye say, the Temple of God. He said,
I will make up this Temple of my body in three days: Ye say, I am able in three
days to build this material Temple of God. The words were his, the sentence
yours: The words were true, the evidence false. So whilst you report the words,
and misreport the sense, ye swear a true falsehood, and are truly forsworn.
Where the resolutions are fixed, any color will serve. Had those words been
spoken, they contained no crime; had he been such as they supposed him, a mere
man, the speech had carried a semblance of ostentation, no semblance of
Blasphemy: yet how vehement is Caiaphas for an answer? as if those words had
already battered that sacred pile, or the protestation of his ability had been
the highest treason against the God of the Temple. That infinite Wisdom knew
well how little satisfaction there could be in answers, where the sentence was
determined. Jesus held his peace. Where the asker is unworthy, the question
captious, words bootless, the best answer is silence.

Erewhile his just and moderate speech to Annas was returned with a buffet on
the cheek; now his silence is no less displeasing. Caiaphas was not more
malicious then crafty: what was in vain attempted by witnesses, shall be drawn
out of Christ's own mouth; what an accusation could not effect, an adjuration
shall: I adjure thee by the living God, that thou tell us whether thou be the
Christ, the Son of God. Yea, this was the way to screw out a killing answer.
Caiaphas, thy mouth was impure, but thy charge is dreadful. Now if Jesus hold
his peace, he is cried down for a profane disregard of that awful Name; if he
answer, he is ensnared: an affirmation is death; a denial worse then death. No,
Caiaphas, thou shall well know it was not fear that all this while stopped that
Gracious mouth: thou speak to him that cannot fear those faces he has made:
he that has charged us to confess him, cannot but confess himself. Jesus says
unto him, Thou have said. There is a time to speak, and a time to keep silence.
He that is the Wisdom of his Father, has here given us a pattern of both. We
may not so speak as to give advantage to cavils; we may not be so silent as to
betray the Truth. Thou shall have no more cause, proud and insulting Caiaphas,
to complain of a speechless prisoner: now thou shall hear more then thou
demandedst: Hereafter shall ye see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of
power, and coming in the clouds of Heaven. There spoke my Savior; the voice of
God, and not of man. Hear now, insolent High Priest, and be confounded. That
Son of man whom thou see, is the Son of God whom thou can not see. That Son
of man, that Son of God, that God and man whom thou now see standing
despicably before thy Consistorial seat in a base dejectedness, him shall thou
once with horror and trembling see majestically sitting on the Throne of
Heaven, attended with thousand thousands of Angels, and coming in the clouds to
that dreadful Judgment, wherein thy self amongst other damned malefactors
shall be presented before that glorious tribunal of his, and adjudged to thy
just torments.

Go now, wretched Hypocrite, and rend thy garment; whilst in the mean time
thou art worthy to have thy Soul rent from thy body, for thy spightfull
Blasphemy against the Son of God. Onwards thy pretense is fair, and such as
cannot but receive applause from thy compacted crew; What need have we of
witnesses? behold, now ye have heard his Blasphemy. What think ye? And they
answered and said, He is guilty of death.

What heed is to be taken of men's judgment? So light are they upon the balance,
that one dram of prejudice or forestalment turns the scales. Who were these but
the grave Benchers of Jerusalem, the Synod of the choice Rabbi's of Israel? yet
these pass sentence against the Lord of Life; sentence of that death of his,
whereby (if ever) they shall be redeemed from the murder of their sentence.

O Savior, this is not the last time wherein thou have received cruel dooms
from them that profess Learning and Holiness. What wonder is it if thy weak
members suffer that which was endured by so perfect an Head? What care we to be
judged by man's day, when thou, who art the Righteous Judge of the world, were
thus misjudged by men? Now is the fury of thy malignant enemies let loose upon
thee: what measure can be too hard for him that is denounced worthy of death?
Now those foul mouths defile thy Blessed Face with their impure spittle, the
venomous froth of their malice; now those cruel hands are lifted up to buffet
thy Sacred Cheeks; now scorn and insultation triumphs over thine humble
Patience, Prophesy unto us, thou Christ, who it is that smote thee. O dear
Jesu, what a beginning is here of a Passion? There thou standst bound,
condemned, spat upon, buffetted, derided by malicious sinners. Thou art bound,
who came to loose the bands of death; thou art condemned, whose sentence must
acquit the world; thou art spat upon, that art fairer then the sons of men;
thou art buffeted, in whose mouth was no guile; thou art derided, who art
clothed with Glory and Majesty.

In the mean while, how can I enough wonder at thy infinite Mercy, who in the
midst of all these woeful indignities could find a time to cast thine eyes
back upon thy frail and ungrateful Disciple; and in whose gracious ear Peter's
Cock sounded louder then all these reproaches? O Savior, thou who in thine
apprehension could forget all thy danger, to correct and heal his
over-lashing, now in the heat of thy arraignment and condemnation can forget
thy own misery, to reclaim his error; and by that seasonable glance of thine
eye, to strike his heart with a needful remorse. He that was lately so valiant
to fight for thee, now the next morning is so cowardly as to deny thee: He
shrinks at the voice of a Maid, who was not daunted with the sight of a Band. O
Peter, had thy slip been sudden, thy fall had been more easy: Premonition
aggravates thy offense; that stone was foreshew'd thee whereat thou stumbledst:
neither did thy warning more add to thy guilt, then thine own fore-resolution.
How did thou vow, though thou should die with thy Master, not to deny him?
Had thou said nothing, but answered with a trembling silence, thy shame had
been the less. Good purposes, when they are not held, do so far turn enemies to
the entertainer of them, as that they help to double both his sin and
punishment.

Yet a single denial had been but easy; thine (I fear to speak it) was lined
with swearing and execration. Whence then, oh whence was this so vehement and
peremptory disclamation of so gracious a Master? What such danger had attended
thy profession of his attendence? One of thy fellows was known to the High
priest for a Follower of Jesus; yet he not only came himself into that open
Hall, in view of the Bench, but treated with the Maid that kept the door to let
thee in also. She knew him what he was; and could therefore speak to thee, as
brought in by his mediation, Art not thou also one of this man's Disciples?
Thou also supposes the first acknowledged such; yet what crime, what danger was
urged upon that noted Disciple? What could have been more to thee? Was it that
thy heart misgave thee thou might be called to account for Malchus? It was
no thank to thee that that ear was healed; neither did there want those that
would think how near that ear was to the head. Doubtless, that busy fellow
himself was not far off, and his fellows and kinsmen would have been apt enough
to follow thee (besides thy Discipleship) upon a bloodshed, a riot, a rescue.
Thy conscience has made thee thus unduly timorous: and now, to be sure to
avoid the imputation of that affray, thou renouncest all knowledge of him in
whose cause thou foughtest. Howsoever the sin was heinous. I tremble at such a
Fall of so great an Apostle. It was thou, O Peter, that buffetedst thy Master
more then those Jews; it was to thee that he turned the cheek from them, as to
view him by whom he most smarted: he felt thee afar off, and answered thee with
a look; such a look as was able to kill and revive at once. Thou have wounded
me, (may thou now say) O my Savior, thou have wounded my heart with one of
thine eyes: that one Eye of thy Mercy has wounded my heart with a deep remorse
for my grievous sin, with an indignation at my unthankfulness; that one glance
of thine has resolved me into the tears of sorrow and contrition. Oh that mine
eyes were fountains, and my cheeks channels that shall never be dried! And Peter
went out, and wept bitterly.

XLVIII. CHRIST before Pilate.
WELL worthy were these Jews to be tributary; they had cast off the yoke of
their God, and had justly earned this Roman servitude. Tiberius had befriended
them too well with so favorable a Governor as Pilate. Had they had the power
of life and death in their hands, they had not been beholden to an Heathen for
a Legal murder. I know not whether they more repine at this slavery, or
please themselves to think how cleanly they can shift off this blood into
another's hand. These great Masters of Israel flock from their own Consistory
to Pilate's Judgmenthall: The Sentence had been theirs, the Execution must be
his; and now they hope to bear down Jesus with the stream of that frequent
confluence.

But what ails you, O ye Rulers of Israel, that ye stand thus thronging at the
door? why do ye not go into that public room of Judicature, to call for that
Justice ye came for? Was it for that ye would not defile your selves with the
contagion of an Heathen roof? Holy men! your Consciences would not suffer you
to yield to so impure an act; your Passover must be kept, your persons must be
clean: whilst ye expect Justice from the man, ye abhor the pollution of the
place. Woe to you Priests, Scribes, Elders, Hypocrites; can there be any roof
so unclean as that of your own breasts? Not Pilate's walls, but your hearts are
impure. Is Murder your errand? and do you stick at a local infection? God
shall smite you, ye whited walls. Do ye long to be stained with blood, with the
blood of God? and do ye fear to be defiled with the touch of Pilate's pavement?
Does so small a Gnat stick in your throats, whilst ye swallow such a Camel of
flagitious wickedness? Go out of your selves, ye false dissemblers, if ye would
not be unclean. Pilate, onwards, has more cause to fear lest his walls should
be defiled with the presence of so prodigious Monsters of Impiety.

That plausible Governor condescends to humor their Superstition: They dare
not come in to him; he yields to go forth to them. Even Pilate begins justly,
What accusation bring you against this man? It is no judging of Religion by the
outward demeanor of men; there is more Justice amongst Romans then amongst
Jews. These malicious Rabbi's thought it enough that they had sentenced Jesus;
no more was now expected but a speedy execution. If he were not a malefactor,
we would not have delivered him up unto thee. Civil Justice must be their
hangman. It is enough conviction that he is delivered up to the secular powers.
Themselves have judged, these other must kill. Pilate and Caiaphas have changed
places: this Pagan speaks that Law and Justice which that High priest should
have done; and that High priest speaks those murdering incongruities which
would better have beseemed the mouth of a Pagan. What needs any new trial?
Do thou know, Pilate, who we are? Is this the honor that thou give to our
sacred Priesthood? Is this thy valuation of our Sanctity? Had the basest of the
vulgar complained to thee, thou could but have put them to a review: Our
Place and Holiness looked not to be distrusted. If our scrupulous Consciences
suspect thy very walls, thou may well think there is small reason to suspect
our Consciences. Upon a full hearing, ripe deliberation, and
exquisitely-judiciall proceeding, we have sentenced this Malefactor to death;
there needs no more from thee but thy command of Execution. Oh monster, whether
of Malice or Unjustice! Must he then be a Malefactor whom ye will condemn? Is
your bare word ground enough to shed blood? Whom did ye ever kill but the
righteous? By whose hands perished the Prophets? The word was but mistaken; ye
should have said, If we had not been Malefactors, we had never delivered up
this innocent man unto thee.

It must needs be notoriously unjust which very Nature has taught Pagans to
abhor. Pilate sees and hates this bloody suggestion and practice. Do ye pretend
Holiness, and urge so injurious a violence? If he be such as ye accuse him,
where is his conviction? If he cannot be legally convicted, why should he die?
Do you think I may take your complaint for a crime? If I must judge for you,
why have you judged for your selves? Could ye suppose that I would condemn any
man unheard? If your Jewish Laws yield you this liberty, the Roman Laws yield
it not to me. It is not for me to judge after your laws, but after our own.
Your prejudgment may not sway me. Since ye have gone so far, be ye your own
carvers of Justice; Take ye him, and judge him according to your Law.

O Pilate, how happy had it been for thee, if thou had held thee there? thus
thou had washed thy hands more clean then in all thy basins. Might Law have
been the rule of this Judgment, and not Malice, this blood had not been shed.
How palpably does their tongue bewray their heart? It is not lawful for us to
put any man to death. Pilate talks of Judgment, they talk of Death. This was
their only aim: Law was but a color, Judgment was but a ceremony; Death was
their drift, and without this nothing. Bloodthirsty Priests and Elders! it is
well that this power of yours is restrained: no Innocence could have been safe,
if your lawless will had had no limits. It were pity this sword should be in
any but just and sober hands. Your fury did not always consult with Law: what
Law allowed your violence to Stephen, to Paul and Barnabas, and your deadly
attempts against this Blessed Jesus whom ye now persecute? How lawful was it
for you to procure that death which ye could not inflict? It is all the care of
Hypocrites to seek umbrages and pretenses for their hateful purposes; and to
make no other use of Laws (whether Divine or humane) but to serve turns.

Where death is fore-resolved, there cannot want accusations. Malice is not so
barren as not to yield crimes enough. And they began to accuse him, saying, We
found this fellow perverting the nation; and forbidding to give tribute unto
Caesar, saying that he himself is Christ and King.

What accusations said thou, O Pilate? Heinous and capital. Thou might
have believed our confident intimation: but since thou will needs urge us to
particulars, know that we come furnished with such an indictment as shall make
thine ears glow to hear it. Besides that Blasphemy whereof he has been
condemned by us, this man is a Seducer of the people, a raiser of Sedition, an
usurper of Sovereignty. O impudent suggestion! What marvel is it, O Savior,
if thine honest servants be loaded with slanders, when thy most innocent person
escaped not so shameful criminations? Thou a perverter of the Nation, who
taughtest the way of God truly? Thou a forbidder of Tribute, who payedst it,
who prescribedst it, who provedst it to be Caesar's due? Thou a challenger of
temporal Sovereignty, who avoidedst it, renouncedst it, professedst to come to
serve? Oh the forehead of Malice! Go, ye shameless traducers, and swear that
Truth is guilty of all Falsehood, Justice of all Wrong; and that the Sun is the
only cause of Darkness, Fire of Cold.

Now Pilate startles at the Charge. The name of Tribute, the name of Caesar is
in mention: These potent spells can fetch him back to the common Hall, and call
Jesus to the Bar. There, O Savior, stand thou meekly to be judged, who
shall once come to judge the quick and the dead. Then shall he before whom thou
stoodest guiltless and dejected, stand before thy dreadful Majesty guilty and
trembling.

The name of a King, of Caesar, is justly tender and awful; the least whisper
of an Usurpation or disturbance is entertained with a jealous care. Pilate
takes this intimation at the first bound; Art thou then the King of the Jews?
He felt his own freehold now touched, it was time for him to stir. Daniel's
Weeks were now famously known to be near expiring. Many arrogant and busy
spirits, (as Judas of Galilee, Theudas, and that Egyptian Seducer) taking that
advantage, had raised several Conspiracies, set up new titles to the Crown,
gathered Forces to maintain their false claims. Perhaps Pilate supposed some
such business now on foot, and therefore asks so curiously, Art thou the King
of the Jews?

He that was no less Wisdom then Truth, thought it not best either to affirm
or deny at once. Sometimes it may be extremely prejudicial to speak all
truths. To disclaim that Title suddenly which had been of old given him by the
Prophets, at his Birth by the Eastern Sages, and now lately at his Procession
by the acclaiming multitude, had been injurious to himself; to profess and
challenge it absolutely, had been unsafe, and needlessly provoking. By wise and
just degrees therefore does he so affirm this truth, that he both satisfies the
inquirer, and takes off all peril and prejudice from his assertion. Pilate
shall know him a King; but such a King as no King needs to fear, as all Kings
ought to acknowledge and adore: My Kingdom is not of this world. It is your
mistaking, O ye earthly Potentates, that is guilty of your fears. Herod hears
of a King born, and is troubled; Pilate hears of a King of the Jews, and is
incensed. Were ye not ignorant, ye could not be jealous: Had ye learned to
distinguish of Kingdoms, these suspicions would vanish.

There are Secular Kingdoms, there are Spiritual; neither of these trenches
upon other: your Kingdom is Secular, Christ's is Spiritual; both may, both
must stand together. His Laws are Divine, yours civil: His Reign is eternal,
yours temporal: the glory of his Rule is inward, and stands in the Graces of
Sanctification, Love, Peace, Righteousness, Joy in the Holy Ghost; yours in
outward pomp, riches, magnificence: His Enemies are the Devil, the World, the
Flesh; yours are bodily usurpers, and external peace-breakers: His Sword is
the power of the Word and Spirit, yours material: His rule is over the
Conscience, yours over bodies and lives: He punishes with Hell, ye with
temporal death or torture. Yea so far is he from opposing your Government,
that by him ye Kings reign: Your Scepters are his; but to maintain, not to
wield, not to resist. O the unjust fears of vain men! He takes not away your
earthly Kingdoms, who gives you Heavenly; he discrowns not the Body, who crowns
the Soul; his intention is not to make you less great, but more happy.

The charge is so fully answered, that Pilate acquits the prisoner. The Jewish
Masters stand still without; their very malice dares not venture their
pollution in going in to prosecute their accusation. Pilate has examined him
within; and now comes forth to these eager complainants, with a cold answer to
their over-hot expectation; I find in him no fault at all. O noble testimony of
Christ's Innocence, from that mouth which afterward doomed him to death. What
a difference there is betwixt a man as he is himself, and as he is the servant
of others wills? It is Pilate's tongue that says, I find in him no fault at
all: It is the Jews tongue in Pilate's mouth that says, Let him be crucified.
That cruel sentence cannot blot him whom this attestation clears. Neither
does he say, I find him not guilty in that whereof he is accused; but gives an
universal acquittance of the whole carriage of Christ, I find in him no fault
at all. In spite of Malice, Innocence shall find abettours. Rather then Christ
shall want witnesses, the mouth of Pilate shall be opened to his justification.
How did these Jewish bloud-suckers stand thunder-stricken with so unexpected a
word? His absolution was their death; his acquitall their conviction. No fault,
when we have found Crimes? no fault at all, when we have condemned him for
capital offenses? How palpably does Pilate give us the lie? How shamefully
does he affront our authority and disparage our justice? So ingenuous a
testimony doubtless exasperated the fury of these Jews: the fire of their
indignation was sevenfold more intended with the sense of their repulse.

I tremble to think how just Pilate as yet was, and how soon after depraved;
yea, how merciful together with that Justice. How fain would he have freed
Jesus, whom he found faultless? Corrupt custom, in memory of their deliverance
from Egyptian bondage, allowed to gratify the Jews with the free delivery of
some one prisoner. (Tradition would be incroaching; the Paschall Lamb was
monument enough of that happy rescue: men affect to have something of their
own.) Pilate was willing to take this advantage of dismissing Jesus. That he
might be the more likely to prevail, he proposes him with the choice and
nomination of so notorious a Malefactor, as he might justly think incapable of
all mercy; Barabbas, a Thief, a Murderer, a Seditionary; infamous for all,
odious to all. Had he propounded some other innocent prisoner, he might have
feared the election would be doubtful; he cannot misdoubt the competition of
so prodigious a Malefactor. Then they all cried again, Not him, but Barabbas.

O Malice beyond all example shameless and bloody! Who can but blush to think
that an Heathen should see Jews so impetuously unjust, so savagely cruel? He
knew there was no Fault to be found in Jesus; he knew there was no Crime that
was not to be found in Barabbas: yet he hears (and blushes to hear) them say,
Not him, but Barabbas. Was not this (think we) out of similitude of condition?
Every thing affects the like to it self; every thing affects the preservation
of that it likes. What wonder is it then if ye Jews, who profess your selves
the murderers of that Just One, favor a Barabbas? O Savior, what a killing
indignity was this for thee to hear from thine own Nation? Have thou refused
all Glory, to put on shame and misery for their sakes? Have thou disregarded
thy Blessed self, to save them? and do they refuse thee for Barabbas? Have thou
said, Not Heaven, but Earth; not Sovereignty, but Service; not the Gentile, but
the Jew? and do they say, Not him, but Barabbas? Do ye thus requite the Lord, O
ye foolish people and unjust? Thus were thine ears and thine eyes first
crucified; and through them was thy Soul wounded even to death, before thy
death; whilst thou saw their rage, and heardst their noise of Crucify,
crucify.

Pilate would have chastised thee. Even that had been a cruel mercy from him;
for what evil had thou done? But that cruelty had been true mercy to this of
the Jews, whom no blood would satisfy but that of thy heart. He calls for thy
Fault, they call for thy Punishment; as proclaiming thy Crucifixion is not
intended to satisfy Justice, but Malice, They cried the more, Crucify him,
Crucify him.

As their clamor grew, so the President's Justice declined. Those Graces that
lie loose and ungrounded, are easily washed away with the first tide of
Popularity. Thrice had that man proclaimed the Innocence of him whom he now
inclines to condemn, willing to content the people. Oh the foolish aims of
Ambition! Not God, not his Conscience come into any regard; but the People.
What a base Idol does the proud man adore? even the Vulgar, which a base man
despises. What is their applause but an idle wind? what is their anger but a
painted fire? O Pilate, where now is thy self and thy people? whereas a good
conscience would have stuck by thee for ever, and have given thee boldness
before the face of that God which thou and thy people shall never have the
Happiness to behold.

The Jews have played their first part; the Gentiles must now act theirs.
Cruel Pilate, who knew Jesus was delivered for envy, accused falsely,
maliciously pursued, has turned his proffered chastisement into scourging. Then
Pilate took Jesus and scourged him. Woe is me, dear Savior; I feel thy lashes;
I shrink under thy painful whippings; thy nakedness covers me with shame and
confusion. That tender and precious body of thine is galled and torn with
cords. Thou that did of late water the garden of Gethsemani with the drops of
thy bloody sweat, do now bedew the pavement of Pilate's Hall with the showrs
of thy blood. How fully have thou made good thy word, I gave my back to the
smiters, and my cheeks to them that plucked off the hair; I hid not my face
from shame and spitting? How can I be enough sensible of my own stripes? these
blows are mine; both my sins have given them, and they give remedies to my
sins. He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities,
the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes are we healed.
O Blessed Jesu, why should I think strange to be scourged with tongue or hand,
when I see thee bleeding? what lashes can I fear either from Heaven or earth,
since thy scourges have been born for me, and have sanctified them to me? Now,
dear Jesu, what a world of insolent reproaches, indignities, tortures, arr thou
entering into? To an ingenuous and tender disposition scorns are torment enough;
but here pain helps to perfect thy misery, their despite.

Who should be actours in this whole bloody execution, but grim and barbarous
Soldiers, men inured to cruelty, in whose faces were written the characters of
Murder, whose very trade was killing, and whose looks were enough to prevent
their hands? These, for the greater terror of their concourse, are called
together; and whether by the connivence or the command of their wicked
Governor, or by the instigation of the malicious Jews conspire to anticipate
his death with scorns, which they will after inflict with violence.

O my Blessed Savior, was it not enough that thy Sacred Body was stripped of
thy garments, and waled with bloody stripes; but that thy Person must be made
the mocking-stock of thine insulting enemies, thy Back disguised with purple
robes, thy Temples wounded with a thorny Crown, thy Face spat upon, thy Cheeks
buffetted, thy Head smitten, thy Hand sceptred with a reed, thy Self derided
with wry mouths, bended knees, scoffing acclamations? Insolent Soldiers!
whence is all this jeering and sport, but to flout Majesty? All these are the
ornaments and ceremonies of a Royal Inauguration, which now in scorn ye cast
upon my despised Savior. Go on, make your selves merry with this jolly
pastime. Alas! long ago ye now feel whom ye scorned. Is he a King, think you,
whom ye thus played upon? Look upon him with gnashing and horror, whom ye
looked at with mockage and insultation. Was not that Head fit for your Thorns,
which you now see crowned with Glory and Majesty? Was not that Hand fit for a
Reed, whose iron Scepter crushes you to death? Was not that Face fit to be spat
upon, from the dreadful aspect whereof ye are ready to desire the mountains to
cover you?

In the mean time, whither, O whither do thou stoop, O thou coeternal Son of
thine eternal Father? whither do thou abase thy self for me? I have sinned,
and thou art punished; I have exalted my self, and thou art dejected; I have
clad my self with shame, and thou art stripped; I have made my self naked, and
thou art clothed with robes of dishonor; my head has devised evil, and thine
is pierced with thorns; I have smitten thee, and thou art smitten for me; I
have dishonored thee, and thou for my sake art scorned; thou art made the
sport of men for me, that have deserved to be insulted on by Devils.

Thus disguised, thus bleeding, thus mangled, thus deformed art thou brought
forth, whether for compassion, or for a more universal derision, to the
furious multitude, with an Ecce homo, Behold the man: look upon him, O ye
merciless Jews; see him in his shame, in his wounds and blood, and now see
whether ye think him miserable enough. Ye see his Face blew and black with
buffeting, his Eyes swollen, his Cheeks beslabbered with spittle, his Skin torn
with scourges, his whole Body bathed in blood; and would ye yet have more?
Behold the man; the man whom ye envied for his greatness, whom ye feared for
his usurpation: Does he not look like a King? is he not royally dressed? See
whether his magnificence do not command reverence from you. Would ye wish a
finer King? Are ye not afraid he will wrest the Scepter out of Caesar's hand?
Behold the man.

Yea, and behold him well, O thou proud Pilate, O ye cruel Soldiers, O ye
insatiable Jews. Ye see him base, whom ye shall see glorious; the time shall
surely come wherein ye shall see him in another dress: he shall shine whom ye
now see to bleed; his Crown cannot be now so ignominious and painful, as it
shall be once majestical and precious; ye who now bend your knees to him in
scorn, shall see all knees both in Heaven and in earth and under the earth to
bow before him in an awful adoration; ye that now see him with contempt, shall
behold him with horror.

What an inward war do I yet find in the breast of Pilate? His Conscience bids
him spare, his Popularity bids him kill. His Wife, warned by a Dream, warns him
to have no hand in the blood of that just man; the importunate multitude
presses him for a sentence of death. All shifts have been tried to free the man
whom he has pronounced innocent: All violent motives are urged to condemn that
man whom malice pretends guilty.

In the height of this strife, when Conscience and moral Justice were ready to
sway Pilate's distracted heart to a just dismission, I hear the Jews cry out,
If thou let this man go, thou art not Caesar's friend. There is the word that
strikes it dead: it is now no time to demur any more. In vain shall we hope
that a carnal heart can prefer the care of his Soul to the care of his safety
and honor, God to Caesar. Now Jesus must die: Pilate hasts into the
Judgment-hall; the Sentence sticks no longer in his teeth, Let him be crucified.

Yet how foul so ever his Soul shall be with this fact, his hands shall be
clean. He took water and washed his hands before the multitude, saying, I am
innocent of the blood of this just person: see ye to it. Now all is safe I wis:
this is expiation enough; water can wash off blood, the hands can cleanse the
heart: protest thou art innocent, and thou can not be guilty. Vain Hypocrite!
can thou think to escape so? Is Murder of no deeper dye? Can thou dream
waking, thus to avoid the charge of thy wife's dream? Is the guilt of the blood
of the Son of God to be wiped off with such ease? What poor shifts do foolish
sinners make to beguile themselves? Any thing will serve to charm the
Conscience, when it lists to sleep.

But, Oh Savior, whilst Pilate thinks to wash off the guilt of thy blood with
water, I know there is nothing that can wash off the guilt of this his sin but
thy blood. Oh do thou wash my Soul in that precious bathe, and I shall be
clean. Oh Pilate, if that very blood which thou sheddest do not wash off the
guilt of thy bloodshed, thy water does but more defile thy Soul, and intend
that fire wherewith thou burnest.

Little did the desperate Jews know the weight of that blood, which they were
so forward to wish upon themselves and their children. Had they deprecated
their interest in that horrible murder, they could not so easily have avoided
the vengeance: but now that they fetch it upon themselves by a willing
execration, what should I say, but that they long for a curse? it is pity they
should not be miserable. And have ye not now felt, O Nation worthy of plagues,
have ye not now felt what blood it was whose guilt ye affected? Sixteen hundred
years are now passed since you wished your selves thus wretched: have ye not
been ever since the hate and scorn of the world? Did ye not live (many of you)
to see your City buried in ashes, and drowned in blood? to see your selves no
Nation? Was there ever people under Heaven that was made so famous a spectacle
of misery and desolation? Have ye yet enough of that blood which ye called for
upon your selves and your children? Your former Cruelties, Uncleanness,
Idolatries cost you but some short Captivities; God cannot but be just: this
Sin, under which you now lie groaning and forlorn, must needs be so much
greater then these, as your vastation is more; and what can that be other then
the murder of the Lord of Life? Ye have what ye wished: be miserable till ye be
penitent.

XLIX. The Crucifixion.
THE sentence of Death is past, and now who can with dry eyes behold the sad
pomp of my Savior's bloody execution? All the streets are full of gazing
spectatours, waiting for this ruefull sight. At last, O Savior, there thou
come out of Pilate's gate, bearing that which shall soon bear thee. To expect
thy Cross was not torment enough; thou must carry it. All this while thou shall
not only see, but feel thy death before it come; and must help to be an agent
in thine own Passion. It was not out of favor, that, those scornful robes
being stripped off* thou art led to death in thine own clothes. So was thy face
besmeared with blood, so swollen and discolored with buffettings, that thou
could not have been known but by thy wonted habit. Now thine insulting
enemies are so much more imperiously cruel, as they are more sure of their
success. Their merciless tormentings have made thee half dead already: yet now,
as if they had done nothing, they begin afresh; and will force thy weakened and
fainting nature to new tasks of pain. The transverse of thy Cross (at least) is
upon thy shoulder: when thou can scarce go, thou must carry. One kicks thee
with his foot, another strikes thee with his staff, another drags thee hastily
by thy cord, and more then one spur on thine unpitied weariness with angry
commands of haste. Oh true form and state of a servant! All thy former actions,
O Savior, were (though painful, yet) free; this, as it is in it self servile,
so it is tyrannously enforced: Enforced yet more upon thee by thy own Love to
mankind, then by their power and despite. It was thy Father that laid upon
thee the iniquity of us all: It was thine own Mercy that caused thee to bear
our sins upon the Cross, and to bear the Cross (with the curse annexed to it)
for our sins. How much more voluntary must that needs be in thee, which thou
requirest to be voluntarily undertaken by us? It was thy charge, If any man
will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.
Thou did not say, Let him bear his cross as forceably imposed by another;
but, Let him take up his cross, as his free burden: free in respect of his
heart, not in respect of his hand: so free, that he shall willingly undergo
it, when it is laid upon him; not so free as that he shall lay it upon himself
unrequired. O Savior, thou did not snatch the Cross out of the Soldiers
hands, and cast it upon thy shoulder; but when they laid it on thy neck, thou
underwentest it. The constraint was theirs, the will was thine. It was not so
heavy to them, or to Simon, as it was to thee: they felt nothing but the wood,
thou feltest it clogged with the load of the sins of the whole world. No
marvel if thou faintedst under that sad burden; thou that bear up the
whole earth by thy word, did sweat, and pant, and groan under this
unsupportable carriage. O Blessed Jesu, how could I be confounded in my self to
see thee, after so much loss of blood and over-toiledness of pain, languishing
under that fatal Tree! And yet why should it more trouble me to see thee
sinking under thy Cross now, then to see thee anon hanging upon thy Cross? In
both thou would render thy self weak and miserable, that thou might so
much the more glorify thy infinite mercy in suffering.

It is not out of any compassion of thy misery, or care of thine ease, that
Simon of Cyrene is forced to be the porter of thy Cross; it was out of their
own eagerness of thy dispatch: thy feeble paces were too slow for their
purpose; their thirst after thy blood made them impatient of delay. If thou
have wearily struggled with the burden of thy shame all along the streets of
Jerusalem, when thou come once past the gates, an helper shall be deputed to
thee: the expedition of thy death was more sweet to them, then the pain of a
lingering passage. What thou said to Judas, they say to the Executioner, What
thou do, do quickly. Whilst thou yet live, they cannot be quiet, they
cannot be safe: to hasten thine end, they lighten thy carriage.

Had thou done this out of choice which thou did out of constraint, how I
should have envied thee, O Simon of Cyrene, as too happy in the honor to be
the first man that bore that Cross of thy Savior, wherein millions of blessed
Martyrs have (since that time) been ambitious to succeed thee? Thus to bear thy
Cross for thee, O Savior, was more then to bear a Crown from thee. Could I be
worthy to be thus graced by thee, I should pity all other glories.

Whilst thou thus passest, O dear Jesu, the streets and ways resound not all
with one note. If the malicious Jews and cruel Soldiers insulted upon thee,
and either haled or railed thee on with a bitter violence, thy faithful
Followers were no less loud in their moans and ejulations; neither would they
endure that the noise of their cries and lamentations should be drowned with
the clamor of those reproaches: but especially thy Blessed Mother, and those
other zealous associates of her own sex, were most passionate in their
wailings. And why should I think that all that devout multitude which so lately
cried Hosanna in the streets, did not also bear their part in these public
condolings? Though it had not concerned thy self, O Savior, thine ears had
been still more open to the voice of grief then of malice: and so thy lips also
are open to the one, shut to the other. Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for
me, but weep for your selves and for your children. Who would not have thought,
O Savior, that thou should have been wholly taken up with thine own sorrows?
The expectation of so bitter a Death had been enough to have overwhelmed any
Soul but thine: yet even now can thy gracious eye find time to look beyond
thine own miseries, at theirs; and to pity them, who, insensible of their own
ensuing condition, mourned for thine now present. They see thine extremity,
thou foreseest theirs; they pour out their sorrow upon thee, thou divertest it
upon themselves. We silly creatures walk blindfolded in this vale of tears, and
little know what evil is toward us: only what we feel we know; and whilst we
feel nothing, can find leisure to bestow our commiseration on those who need it
perhaps less then our selves. Even now, O Savior, when thou were within the
view of thy Calvary, thou can foresee and pity the vastation of thy
Jerusalem; and give a sad Prophecy of the imminent destruction of that City
which lately had cost thee tears, and now shall cost thee blood. It is not all
the indign cruelty of men that can rob thee of thy Mercy.

Jerusalem could not want Malefactors, though Barabbas was dismissed. That all
this execution might seem to be done out of the zeal of Justice, two capital
offenders, adjudged to their Gibbet, shall accompany thee, O Savior, both to
thy death, and in it. They are led manicled after thee, as less criminous: no
stripes had disabled them from bearing their own Crosses. Long ago was this
unmeet society foretold by thine Evangelical Seer, He was taken from prison and
from judgment; He was cut out of the land of the living; He made his grave with
the Wicked. O Blessed Jesu, it had been disparagement enough to thee to be
sorted with the best of men, (since there is much sin in the perfectest, and
there could be no sin in thee;) but to be matched with the scum of mankind,
whom vengeance would not let to live, is such an indignity as confounds my
thoughts. Surely there is no Angel in Heaven but would have been proud to
attend thee; and what could the earth afford worthy of thy train? yet malice
has suited thee with company next to Hell; that their viciousness might
reflect upon thee, and their sin might stain thine Innocence. Ye are deceived,
O ye fond Judges: This is the way to grace your dying malefactors; this is not
the way to disgrace him whose guiltlesness and perfection triumphed over your
injustice: his presence was able to make your Thieves happy; their presence
could no more blemish him then your own. Thus guarded, thus attended, thus
accompanied art thou, Blessed Jesu, led to that loathsome and infamous hill,
which now thy last blood shall make Sacred: now thou set thy foot upon that
rising ground which shall prevent thine Olivet, whence thy Soul shall first
ascend into thy Glory.

There whilst thou art dressing thy self for thy last Act, thou art presented
with that bitter and farewell-potion wherewith dying Malefactors were wont to
have their senses stupefied, that they might not feel the torments of their
execution. It was but the common mercy of men to alleviate the death of
Offenders; since the intent of their last doom is not so much pain, as
dissolution.

That draught, O Savior, was not more welcome to the guilty then hateful unto
thee. In the vigor of all thine inward and outward senses thou would
encounter the most violent assaults of death, and scornedst to abate the least
touch of thy quickest apprehension. Thou well knew that the work thou
wentest about would require the use of all thy powers; it was not thine ease
that thou soughtest, but our Redemption; neither meantest thou to yield to thy
last enemy, but to resist and to overcome him: which that thou might do the
more gloriously, thou challengedst him to do his worst; and in the mean time
would not disfurnish thy self of any of thy powerful faculties. This
greatest combat that ever was shall be fought on even hand: neither would
thou steal that Victory which thou now atchievedst over Death and Hell. Thou
did but touch at this cup; it is a far bitterer then this that thou art now
drinking up to the dregs: thou refusedst that which was offered thee by men,
but that which was mixed by thine eternal Father (though mere Gall and
Wormwood) thou did drink up to the last drop. And therein, O Blessed Jesu,
lies all our health and salvation. I know not whether I do more suffer in thy
pain, or joy in the issue of thy Suffering.

Now, even now, O Savior, art thou entering into those dreadful lists, and now
thou art grappling with thy last enemy; as if thou had not suffered till now,
now thy bloody Passion begins: a cruel expoliation begins that violence. Again
do these grim and merciless Soldiers lay their rude hands upon thee, and strip
thee naked; again are those bleeding wales laid open to all eyes; again must
thy Sacred Body undergo the shame of an abhorred nakedness. Lo, thou that
cloathest man with raiment, beasts with hides, fishes with scales and shells,
earth with flowers, Heaven with Stars, art despoiled of clothes, and stand
exposed to the scorn of all beholders. As the First Adam entered into his
Paradise, so do thou (the Second Adam) into thine, naked; and as the First
Adam was clothed with Innocence when he had no clothes, so were thou (the
Second) too: and more then so; thy nakedness, O Savior, clothes our Souls not
with Innocence only, but with Beauty. Had not thou been naked, we had been
clothed with confusion. O happy nakedness, whereby we are covered from shame!
O happy shame, whereby we are invested with glory! All the beholders stand
wrapped with warm garments; thou only art stripped to tread the wine press
alone. How did thy Blessed Mother now wish her veil upon thy shoulders? and
that Disciple who lately ran from thee naked, wished in vain that his loving
pity might do that for thee, which fear forced him to for himself.

Shame is succeeded with Pain. Oh the torment of the Cross! Methinks I see and
feel how, having fastened the transverse to the body of that fatal Tree, and
laid it upon the ground, they racked and strained thy tender and sacred Lims,
to fit the extent of their fore-appointed measure; and having tentered out
thine arms beyond their natural reach, how they fastened them with cords, till
those strong iron nails (which were driven up to the head, through the palms of
thy Blessed hands) had not more firmly then painfully fixed thee to the Gibbet.
The tree is raised up, and now not without a vehement concussion settled in the
mortise. Woe is me! how are thy joints and sinews torn, and stretched till they
crack again, by this torturing distension? how does thine own weight torment
thee, whilst thy whole body rests upon this forced and dolorous hold, till thy
nailed feet bear their part in a no-less-afflictive supportation? How did the
rough iron pierce thy Soul, whilst, passing through those tender and sensible
parts, it carried thy flesh before it, and as it were rivetted it to that
shameful Tree?

There now, O dear Jesu, there thou hangest between Heaven and earth, naked,
bleeding, forlorn, despicable, the spectacle of miseries, the scorn of men. Be
abashed, O ye Heavens and earth, and all ye creatures wrap up your selves in
horror and confusion, to see the shame and pain and curse of your most pure
and Omnipotent Creator. How could ye subsist, whilst he thus suffers in whom
ye are? O Savior, did thou take flesh for our Redemption, to be thus
indignly used, thus mangled, thus tortured? Was this measure fit to be offered
to that Sacred Body that was conceived by the Holy Ghost of the pure substance
of an immaculate Virgin? Woe is me! that which was unspotted with sin, is all
blemished with humane cruelty, and so woefully disfigured, that the Blessed
Mother that bore thee could not now have known thee; so bloody were thy
Temples, so swollen and discolored was thy Face, so was the Skin of thy whole
body streaked with red and blew stripes, so did thy thorny diadem shade thine
Heavenly Countenance, so did the streams of thy blood cover and deform all thy
Parts. The eye of Sense could not distinguish thee, O dear Savior, in the
nearest proximity to thy Cross: the eye of Faith sees thee in all this
distance; and by how much more ignominy, deformity, pain it finds in thee, so
much more it admires the glory of thy mercy. Alas! is this the Head that is
decked by thine eternal Father with a Crown of pure gold, of immortal and
incomprehensible Majesty, which is now bushed with thorns? Is this the Eye that
saw the Heavens opened, and the Holy Ghost descending upon that Head, that saw
such resplendence of Heavenly brightness on mount Tabor, which now begins to be
overclouded with death? Are these the Ears that heard the voice of thy Father
owning thee out of Heaven, which now tingle with buffettings, and glow with
reproaches, and bleed with thorns? Are these the Lips that spoke as never man
spoke, full of grace and power, that called out dead Lazarus, that ejected the
stubbornest Devils, that commanded the cure of all diseases, which now are
swollen with blows, and discolored with blewness and blood? Is this the Face
that should be fairer then the sons of men, which the Angels of Heaven so
desired to see, and can never be satisfied with seeing, that is thus foul with
the nasty mixtures of sweat, and blood, and spittings on? Are these the Hands
that stretched out the Heavens as a curtain, that by their touch healed the
lame, the deaf, the blind, which are now bleeding with the nails? Are these the
Feet which walked lately upon the liquid pavement of the sea, before whose
footstool all the Nations of the earth are bidden to worship, that are now so
painfully fixed to the Cross? O cruel and unthankful mankind, that offered
such measure to the Lord of Life! O infinitely-mercifull Savior, that would
suffer all this for unthankful mankind! That fiends should do these things to
guilty souls, it is (though terrible, yet) just; but that men should do thus
to the Blessed Son of God, it is beyond the capacity of our horror.

Even the most hostile dispositions have been only content to kill; Death has
sated the most eager malice: thine enemies, O Savior, held not themselves
satisfied, unless they might enjoy thy torment. Two Thieves are appointed to be
thy companions in death; thou art designed to the midst, as the chief
malefactor: on whether hand soever thou look, thine eye meets with an
hateful partner. But, O Blessed Jesu, how shall I enough admire and celebrate
thy infinite Mercy, who made so happy an use of this Jewish despite, as to
improve it to the occasion of the Salvation of one, and the comfort of
millions? Is not this, as the last, so the greatest specialty of thy wonderful
compassion, to convert that dying Thief? with those nailed hands to snatch a
Soul out of the mouth of Hell? Lord, how I bless thee for this work? how do I
stand amazed at this, above all other the demonstrations of thy Goodness and
Power? The Offender came to die: nothing was in his thoughts but his guilt and
torment: whilst he was yet in his blood, thou said, This Soul shall live. Ere
yet the intoxicating Potion could have time to work upon his brain, thy Spirit
infuses Faith into his heart. He that before had nothing in his eye but present
death and torture, is now lifted up above his Cross in a blessed ambition;
Lord, remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom. Is this the voice of a
Thief, or of a Disciple? Give me leave, O Savior, to borrow thine own words;
Verily I have not found so great faith, no not in all Israel. He saw thee
hanging miserably by him, and yet styles thee Lord; he saw thee dying, yet
talks of thy Kingdom; he felt himself dying, yet talks of a future remembrance.
O Faith stronger then death, that can look beyond the Cross at a Crown; beyond
dissolution at a remembrance of Life and Glory! Which of thine eleven were
heard to speak so gracious a word to thee in these thy last pangs? After thy
Resurrection and knowledge of thine impassible condition it was not strange for
them to talk of thy Kingdom; but in the midst of thy shameful death, for a
dying malefactor to speak of thy reigning, and to implore thy remembrance of
himself in thy Kingdom, it is such an improvement of Faith as ravisheth my Soul
with admiration. O blessed Thief, that have thus happily stolen Heaven! How
worthy has thy Savior made thee to be a partner of his sufferings, a pattern
of undauntable belief, a spectacle of unspeakable mercy? This day shall thou be
with me in Paradise. Before I wondered at thy Faith; now I envy at thy Felicity.
Thou cravedst a remembrance; thy Savior speaks of a present possession, This
day: thou suedst for remembrance as a favor to the absent; thy Savior speaks
of thy presence with him: thou spakest of a Kingdom; thy Savior of Paradise.
As no Disciple could be more faithful, so no Saint could be happier. O
Savior, what a precedent is this of thy free and powerful grace? Where thou will give, what unworthiness can bar us from Mercy? when thou will give, what
time can prejudice our vocation? who can despair of thy goodness, when he that
in the morning was posting toward Hell, is in the evening with thee in
Paradise? Lord, he could not have spoken this to thee, but by thee, and from
thee. What possibility was there for a Thief to think of thy Kingdom, without
thy Spirit? That good Spirit of thine breathed upon this man, breathed not upon
his fellow; their trade was alike, their sin was alike, their state alike,
their cross alike, only thy Mercy makes them unlike: One is taken, the other
is refused. Blessed be thy Mercy in taking one; blessed be thy Justice in
leaving the other. Who can despair of that Mercy? who cannot but tremble at
that Justice?

Now, O ye cruel Priests and Elders of the Jews, ye have full leisure to feed
your eyes with the sight ye so much longed for; there is the blood ye
purchased: and is not your malice yet glutted? Is not all this enough, without
your taunts and scoffs and sports at so exquisite a misery? The people, the
passengers are taught to insult, where they should pity. Every man has a scorn
ready to cast at a dying innocent. A generous nature is more wounded with the
tongue, then with the hand. O Savior, thine ear was more painfully pierced
then thy brows, or hands, or feet. It could not but go deep into thy Soul, to
hear these bitter and girding reproaches from them thou came to save.

But, alas! what flea-bitings were these in comparison of those inward torments
which thy Soul felt in the sense and apprehension of thy Father's wrath for the
sins of the whole world, which now lay heavy upon thee for satisfaction? This,
oh this was it that pressed thy Soul as it were to the neathermost Hell. Whilst
thine Eternal Father looked lovingly upon thee, what did thou, what neededst
thou to care for the frowns of men or Devils? but when he once turned his face
from thee, or bent his brows upon thee, this, this was worse then death. It is
no marvel now, if darkness were upon the face of the whole earth, when thy
Father's Face was eclipsed from thee by the interposition of our sins. How
should there be light in the world without, when the God of the world, the
Father of lights, complains of the want of light within? That word of thine, O
Savior, was enough to fetch the Sun down out of Heaven, and to dissolve the
whole frame of Nature, when thou criedst, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? Oh what pangs were these, dear Jesu, that drew from thee this
complaint? Thou well knew nothing could be more cordial to thine enemies,
then to hear this sad language from thee: they could see but the outside of thy
sufferings; never could they have conceived so deep an anguish of thy Soul, if
thy own lips had not expressed it. Yet, as not regarding their triumph, thou
thus pourest out thy sorrow: and when so much is uttered, who can conceive what
is felt?

How is it then with thee, O Savior, that thou thus astonishest men and Angels
with so woeful a quiritation? Had thy God left thee? Thou not long since
said, I and my Father are one: Are ye now severed? Let this thought be as far
from my Soul, as my Soul from Hell. No more can thy Blessed Father be separated
from thee, then from his own Essence. His Union with thee is eternal; his
Vision was intercepted: He could not withdraw his Presence, he would withdraw
the influence of his comfort. Thou, the Second Adam, stoodst for mankind upon
this Tree of the Cross, as the First Adam stood and fell for mankind under the
Tree of offense. Thou barest our sins; thy Father saw us in thee, and would
punish us in thee, thee for us: how could he but withhold comfort, where he
intended chastisement? Herein therefore he seems to forsake thee for the
present, in that he would not deliver thee from that bitter Passion which thou
would undergo for us. O Savior, had thou not been thus forsaken, we had
perished; thy dereliction is our safety: and however our narrow Souls are not
capable of the conceit of thy pain and horror; yet we know there can be no
danger in the forsaking, whilst thou can say, My God. He is so thy God as he
cannot be ours: all our right is by Adoption, thine by Nature; thou art one
with him in eternal Essence, we come in by Grace and merciful election: yet
whilst thou shall enable me to say, My God, I shall hope never to sink under
thy desertions.

But whilst I am transported with the sense of thy Sufferings, O Savior, let
me not forget to admire those sweet Mercies of thine which thou pouredst out
upon thy Persecutours. They rejoice in thy death, and triumph in thy misery,
and scoff at thee in both: In stead of calling down fire from Heaven upon them,
thou heapest coals of fire upon their heads. Father, forgive them, for they
know not what they do. They blaspheme thee, thou prayest for them; they scorn,
thou pitiest; they sin against thee, thou prayest for their forgiveness; they
profess their malice, thou pleadest their ignorance. O compassion without
example, without measure, fit for the Son of God, the Savior of men! Wicked
and foolish Jews! ye would be miserable, he will not let you: ye would fain
pull upon your selves the guilt of his blood, he deprecates it: ye kill, he
sues for your remission and life. His tongue cries louder then his blood;
Father, forgive them. O Savior, thou could not but be heard. Those who out
of ignorance and simplicity thus persecuted thee, find the happy issue of thine
intercession. Now I see whence it was that three thousand souls were converted
soon after at one Sermon. It was not Peter's speech, it was thy prayer, that
was thus effectual. Now they have grace to know and confess whence they have
both forgiveness and salvation; and can recompense their blasphemies with
thanksgiving. What sin is there, Lord, whereof I can despair of the remission,
or what offense can I be unwilling to remit, when thou prayest for the
forgiveness of thy murderers and blasphemers?

There is no day so long but has his evening. At last, O Blessed Savior, thou
art drawing to an end of these painful Sufferings, when spent with toil and
torment thou criest out, I thirst. How should thou do other? O dear Jesu,
how should thou do other then thirst? The night thou had spent in
watching, in prayer, in agony, in thy conveyance from the Garden to Jerusalem,
from Annas to Caiaphas, from Caiaphas to Pilate, in thy restless answers, in
buffetings and stripes; the day in arraignments, in haling from place to place,
in scourgings, in stripping, in robing and disrobing, in bleeding, in tugging
under thy Cross, in woundings and distension, in pain and passion: No marvel
if thou thirstedst. Although there was more in this drought then thy need: It
was no less requisite thou should thirst, then that thou should die: Both
were upon the same predetermination, both upon the same prediction. How else
should that word be verified, Psalm. 22.14, 15. All my bones are out of joint;
my heart is like wax, it is melted in the midst of my bowels: My strength is
dried up like a potsherd, and my tongue cleaves to my jaws; and thou have
brought me into the dust of death? Had it not been to make up that word whereof
one jot cannot pass, though thou had felt this thirst, yet thou had not
bewrayed it. Alas! what could it avail to bemoan thy wants to insulting
enemies, whose sport was thy misery? How should they pity thy thirst, that
pitied not thy bloodshed? It was not their favor that thou expectedst herein,
but their conviction. O Savior, how can we, thy sinful servants, think much
to be exercised with hunger and thirst, when we hear thee thus plain?

Thou that not long since proclaimedst in the Temple, If any man thirst, let
him come to me and drink: He that believes in me, out of his belly shall flow
rivers of living waters, now thy self thirstest: Thou, in whom we believe,
complainest to want some drops; thou had the command of all the waters both
above the firmament and below it, yet thou would thirst. Even so, Lord, thou
that would die for us, would thirst for us. O give me to thirst after those
waters which thou promisest, whatever become of those waters which thou
would want. The time was, when, craving water of the Samaritan, thou gave
better then that thou askedst. Oh give me to thirst after that more precious
Water; and so do thou give me of that water of life, that I may never thirst
again.

Blessed God! how marvellously do thou contrive thine own affairs? Thine
enemies, whilst they would despite thee, shall unwittingly justify thee, and
convince themselves. As thou fore-saidst, In thy thirst, they gave thee vinegar
to drink. Had they given thee Wine, thou had not taken it: the night before
thou had taken leave of that comfortable liquour, resolving to drink no more
of that sweet juice till thou should drink it new with them in thy Father's
Kingdom. Had they given thee Water, they had not fulfilled that prediction,
whereby they were self-condemned. I know not now, O dear Jesu, whether this
last draught of thine were more pleasing to thee or more distasteful:
Distasteful in it self; (for what liquour could be equally harsh;) pleasing,
that it made up those Sufferings thou were to endure, and those Prophecies thou
were to fulfill.

Now there is no more to do, thy full consummation of all predictions, of all
types and ceremonies, For the full explica^ion whereof, I refer my Reader to my
Passion-Sermon, wherein the particularities are largely discussed.
of all sufferings, of all satisfactions is happily both effected and
proclaimed; nothing now remains but a voluntary, sweet and Heavenly resignation
of thy Blessed Soul into the hands of thine eternal Father, and a bowing of
thine head for the change of a better Crown, and a peaceable obdormition in thy
bed of ease and honor, and an instant entrance into rest, triumph, Glory.

And now, O Blessed Jesu, how easily have carnal eyes all this while mistaken
the passages and intentions of this thy last and most glorious work? Our
weakness could hitherto see nothing here but pain and ignominy; now my
better-inlightned eyes see in this elevation of thine both honor and
happiness. Lo, thou that art the Mediator betwixt God and man, the Reconciler
of Heaven and earth, art lift up betwixt earth and Heaven, that thou might
accord both. Thou that art the great Captain of our Salvation, the conqueror
of all the adverse powers of Death and Hell, art exalted upon this Triumphall
Chariot of the Cross, that thou might trample upon Death, and drag all those
Infernal Principalities manicled after thee. Those Arms which thine enemies
meant violently to extend, are stretched forth for the embracing of all mankind
that shall come in for the benefit of thine all-sufficient redemption. Even
whilst thou suffer, thou reignest. Oh the impotent madness of silly men!
They think to disgrace thee with wrie faces, with tongues put out, with bitter
scoffs, with poor wretched indignities; when in the mean time the Heavens
declare thy righteousness, O Lord, and the Earth shows forth thy power. The Sun
pulls in his light, as not abiding to see the Sufferings of his Creator; the
Earth trembles under the sense of the wrong done to her Maker; the Rocks rend,
the veil of the Temple tears from the top to the bottom: shortly, all the frame
of the world acknowledges the dominion of that Son of God whom Man despised.

Earth and Hell have done their worst. O Savior, thou art in thy Paradise, and
triumphest over the malice of men and Devils: The remainders of thy Sacred
person are not yet free. The Soldiers have parted thy garments, and cast lots
upon thy seamless coat. (Those poor spoils cannot so much enrich them as
glorify thee, whose Scriptures are fulfilled by their barbarous sortitions.)
The Jews sue to have thy bones divided; but they sue in vain. No more could thy
garments be whole, then thy body could be broken. One inviolable Decree
overrules both. Foolish executioners! ye look up at that crucified Body, as if
it were altogether in your power and mercy; nothing appears to you but
impotence and death: little do ye know what an irresistible guard there is upon
that Sacred corpse; such, as if all the powers of Darkness shall band against,
they shall find themselves confounded. In spite of all the gates of Hell that
word shall stand, Not a bone of him shall be broken.

Still the infallible Decree of the Almighty leads you on to his own ends,
through your own ways. Ye saw him already dead, whom ye came to dispatch: those
bones therefore shall be whole, which ye had had no power to break. But yet,
that no piece either of your cruelty or of Divine prediction may remain
unsatisfied, he whose Bones may not be impaired, shall be wounded in his flesh;
he whose Ghost was yielded up, must yield his last blood. One of the soldiers
with a spear pierced his side, and forthwith there came out blood and water.
Malice is wont to end with life; here it over-lives it. Cruel man! what means
this so late wound? what commission had thou for this bloody act? Pilate had
given leave to break the bones of the living, he gave no leave to goar the side
of the dead: what wicked superrerogation is this? what a superfluity of
maliciousness? To what purpose did thy spear pierce so many hearts in that one?
why would thou kill a dead man? Methinks the Blessed Virgin, and those other
passionate associates of hers, and the Disciple whom Jesus loved, together with
the other of his fellows, the friends and followers of Christ, and especially
he that was so ready to draw his sword upon the troup of his Master's
apprehenders, should have work enough to contain themselves within the bounds
of patience at so savage a stroke: their sorrow could not choose but turn to
indignation, and their hearts could not but rise (as even mine does now) at so
impertinent a villainy. How easily could I rave at that rude hand? But, O God,
when I look up to thee, and consider how thy holy and wise Providence so
overrules the most barbarous actions of men, that (besides their will) they
turn beneficial, I can at once hate them, and bless thee. This very wound has
a mouth to speak the Messiah ship of my Savior, and the truth of thy
Scripture, They shall look at him whom they have pierced. Behold now the Second
Adam sleeping, and out of his side formed the Mother of the living, the
Evangelicall Church: Behold the Rock which was smitten, and the waters of life
gushed forth. Behold the fountain that is set open to the house of David, for
sin and for uncleanness; a fountain not of water only, but of blood too. O
Savior, by thy water we are washed, by thy blood we are redeemed. Those two
Sacraments which thou did institute alive, flow also from thee dead, as the
last memorialls of thy Love to thy Church: the Water of Baptism, which is the
laver of Regeneration; the Blood of the new Testament shed for remission of
sins: and these, together with the Spirit that gives life to them both, are the
three Witnesses on earth, whose attestation cannot fail us. O precious and
sovereign wound, by which our Souls are healed! Into this cleft of the rock let
my Dove fly and enter, and there safely hide her self from the talons of all
the Birds of prey.

It could not be but that the death of Christ contrived and acted at Jerusalem
in so solemn a Festival, must needs draw a world of beholders. The Romans, the
Centurion and his band, were there as actours, as supervisours of the
Execution. Those strangers were no otherwise engaged, then as they that would
hold fair correspondence with the Citizens where they were engarisoned: their
freedom from prejudice rendered them more capable of an ingenuous construction
of all events. Now when the Centurion and they that were with him that watched
Jesus saw the Earthquake, and the things that were done, they feared greatly,
and glorified God, and said, Truly this was the Son of God.

What a mavelous concurrence is here of strong and irrefragable convictions?
Meekness in suffering, Prayer for his murderers, a faithful resignation of
his Soul into the hands of his Heavenly Father, the Sun eclipsed, the Heavens
darkened, the earth trembling, the graves open, the rocks rent, the veil of the
Temple torn; who could go less then this, Truly this was the Son of God? He
suffers patiently; this is through the power of Grace: many good men have done
so through his enabling. The frame of Nature suffers with him; this is proper
to the God of Nature, the Son of God.

I wonder not that these men confessed thus; I wonder that any Spectatour
confessed it not: these proofs were enough to fetch all the world upon their
knees, and to have made all mankind a Convert. But all hearts are not alike; no
means can work upon the wilfully-obdured. Even after this the Soldier pierced
that Blessed Side; and whilst Pagans relented, Jews continued impenitent. Yet
even of that Nation, those beholders whom envy and partiality had not
interessed in this slaughter, were stricken with just astonishment, and smote
their breasts, and shook their heads, and by passionate gesture spoke what
their tongues durst not. How many must there needs be, in this universal
concourse, of them whom he had healed of diseases, or freed from Devils, or
miraculously fed, or some way obliged in their persons or friends? These, as
they were deeply affected with the mortal indignities which were offered to
their acknowledged Messiah, so they could not but be ravished with wonder at
those powerful demonstrations of the Deity of him in whom they believed; and
strangely distracted in their thoughts, whilst they compared those Sufferings
with that Omnipotence. As yet their Faith and Knowledge was but in the bud or
in the blade. How could they choose but think, Were he not the Son of God, how
could these things be? and if he were the Son of God, how could he die? His
Resurrection, his Ascension, should soon after perfect their belief; but in the
mean time their hearts could not but be conflicted with thoughts hard to be
reconciled. Howsoever, they glorify God, and stand amazed at the expectation of
the issue.

But above all other, O thou Blessed Virgin, the Holy Mother of our Lord, how
many swords pierced thy Soul, whilst standing close by his Cross thou saw
thy dear Son and Savior thus indignly used, thus stripped, thus stretched,
thus nailed, thus bleeding, thus dying, thus pierced? How did thy troubled
heart now recount what the Angel Gabriel had reported to thee from God in the
message of thy blessed Conception of that Son of God? How did thou think of
the miraculous formation of that thy Divine burden by the power of the Holy
Ghost? How did thou recall those prophecies of Anna and Simeon concerning
him, and all those supernatural works of his, the irrefragable proofs of his
Godhead? and laying all these together, with the miserable infirmities of his
Passion, how were thou crucified with him? The care that he took for thee in
the extremity of his torments could not choose but melt thy heart into sorrow:
But oh! when in the height of his pain and misery thou heardst him cry out, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? what a cold horror possessed thy Soul?
I cannot now wonder at thy qualms and swounings; I could rather wonder that
thou survivedst so sad an hour. But when, recollecting thy self, thou saw
the Heavens to bear a part with thee in thy mourning, and feltest the Earth to
tremble no less then thy self, and foundest that the dreadful concussion of
the whole frame of Nature proclaimed the Deity of him that would thus suffer
and die, and remembredst his frequent predictions of drinking this bitter cup,
and of being baptized thus in Blood; thou beganst to take heart, and to comfort
thy self with the assured expectation of the glorious issue. More then once had
he foretold thee his victorious Resurrection. He who had openly professed Jonas
for his type, and had fore-promised in three days to raise up the ruined Temple
of his Body; had doubtless given more full intimation unto thee, who had so
great a share in that sacred Body of his. The just shall live by Faith. Lo,
that Faith of thine in his ensuing Resurrection and in his triumph over death,
gives thee life, and chears up thy drouping Soul, and bids it in an holy
confidence to triumph over all thy fears and sorrows; and him whom thou now
see dead and despised, represents unto thee living, immortal, glorious.

L. The Resurrection.
GRace does not ever make show where it is. There is much secret riches both in
the earth and sea, which never eye saw. I never heard any news till now of
Joseph of Arimathaea: yet was he eminently both rich, and wise, and good; a
worthy, though close, Disciple of our Savior. True Faith may be wisely
reserved, but will not be cowardly. Now he puts forth himself, and dares beg
the Body of Jesus. Dearth is wont to end all quarrels. Pilate's heart tells
him he has done too much already, in sentencing an innocent to death: no doubt
that Centurion had related unto him the miraculous symptoms of that Passion. He
that so unwillingly condemned Innocence, could rather have wished that just man
alive, then have denied him dead. The Body is yielded, and taken down; and now,
that which hung naked upon the Cross, is wrapped in fine linen; that which was
soiled with sweat and blood, is curiously washed and embalmed. Now even
Nicodemus comes in for a part, and fears not the envy of a good profession.
Death has let that man loose, whom the Law formerly overawed with restraint.
He hates to be a night-bird any longer; but boldly flies forth, and looks upon
the face of the Sun, and will be now as liberal in his Odours, as he was
before niggardly in his Confession. O Savior, the earth was thine and the
fullness of it; yet, as thou had not an house of thine own whilst thou
livedst, so thou had not a grave when thou were dead. Joseph that rich
Councillour lent thee his; lent it so, as it should never be restored: thou
took'st it up but for a while; but that little touch of that Sacred Corpse of
thine made it too good for the owner.

O happy Joseph, that had the honor to be Landlord of the Lord of Life! how
well is thy house-room repaid with a mansion not made with hands, eternal in
the heavens? Thy Garden and thy Tomb were hard by Calvary, where thou could
not fail of many monitions of thy frailty. How often had thou seasoned that new
Tomb with sad and savoury meditations? and had often said within thy self, Here
I shall once lie down to my last rest, and wait for my Resurrection? Little
did thou then think to have been disappointed by so Blessed a Guest; or that
thy grave should be again so soon empty, and in that emptiness incapable of any
mortal in-dweller. How gladly do thou now resign thy grave to him in whom
thou live, and who lives for ever, whose Soul is in Paradise, whose Godhead
everywhere? Had thou not been rich before, this gift had enriched thee
alone, and more ennobled thee then all thine earthly Honor. Now great Princes
envy thy bounty, and have thought themselves happy to kiss the stones of that
rock which thou thus hewedst, thus bestowedst.

Thus purely wrapped and sweetly embalmed lies the precious Body of our Savior
in Joseph's new Vault. Are ye now also at rest, O ye Jewish Rulers? Is your
malice dead and buried with him? Has Pilate enough served your envy and
revenge? Surely it is but a common hostility that can die; yours surviveth
death, and puts you upon a farther project. The chief Priests and Pharisees
came together unto Pilate, saying, Sir, we remember that this Deceiver said
whilst he was yet alive, After three days I will rise again: Command therefore
that the Sepulcher be made sure till the third day; lest his Disciples come by
night, and steal him away, and say to the people he is risen.

How full of terrors and inevitable perplexities is guiltiness? These men were
not more troubled with envy at Christ alive, then now with fear of his
Resurrection. And what can now secure them? Pilate had helped to kill him; but
who shall keep him from rising? Wicked and foolish Jews! how fain would ye
fight against God and your own hearts? how gladly would ye deceive your selves,
in believing him to be a Deceiver whom your consciences knew to be no less true
then powerful? Lazarus was still in your eye: That man was no phantasm; his
death, his reviving was undeniable; the so-fresh resuscitation of that dead
body after four days dissolution was a manifest conviction of Omnipotence. How
do ye vainly wish that he could deceive you in the fore-reporting of his own
Resurrection? Without a Divine power he could have raised neither Lazarus nor
himself: with and by it, he could as well raise himself as Lazarus. What need
we other witnesses then your own mouths? That which he would do, ye confess he
foretold; that the truth of his word might answer the power of this deed, and
both of them might argue him the God of Truth and Power, and your selves
enemies to both. And now what must be done? The Sepulcher must be secured, and
you with it: An huge stone, a strong guard must do the deed: and that stone
must be sealed, that guard of your own designing. Methinks I hear the Soldiers
and busy Officers, when they were rolling that other weighty Stone (for such
we probably conceive) to the mouth of the vault with much toil and sweat and
breathlesness, how they bragged of the sureness of the place and
unremovableness of that load; and when that so choice a Watch was set, how they
boasted of their valor and vigilance, and said, they would make him safe from
either rising or stealing. Oh the madness of impotent men, that think by either
wile or force to frustrate the will and designs of the Almighty! How justly
does that wise and powerful Arbiter of the world laugh them to scorn in
Heaven, and befool them in their own vain devices? O Savior, how much evidence
had thy Resurrection wanted, if these enemies had not been thus maliciously
provident? how irrefragable is thy Rising made by these bootless endeavors of
their prevention?

All this while the devout Mary's keep close, and silently spend their Sabbath
in a mixture of grief and hope. How did they wear out those sad hours in
bemoaning themselves each to other; in mutual relations of the patient
sufferings, of the happy expiration of their Savior, of the wonderful events
both in the Heavens and earth that accompanied his Crucifixion, of his frequent
and clear Predictions of his Resurrection? And now they have gladly agreed, (so
soon as the time will give them leave,) in the dawning of the Sunday-morning to
visit that dear Sepulcher. Neither will they go empty-handed: She that had
bestowed that costly Alabaster-box of Ointment upon their Savior alive, has
prepared no less precious Odours for him dead.

Love is restless and fearless. In the dark of night these good Women go to
buy their spices, and ere the daybreak are gone out of their houses toward the
Tomb of Christ to bestow them. This Sex is commonly fearful; it was much for
them to walk alone in that unsafe season: yet, as despising all fears and
dangers, they thus spend the night after their Sabbath. Might they have been
allowed to buy their Perfumes on the Sabbath, or to have visited that holy Tomb
sooner, can we think they would have staid so long? can we suppose they would
have cared more for the Sabbath then for the Lord of the Sabbath, who now kept
his Sabbath in the Grave? Sooner they might not come, later they would not, to
present their last homage to their dead Savior. Had these holy women known
their Jesus to be alive, how had they hasted, who made such speed to do their
last offices to his sacred Corpse? For us, we know that our Redeemer lives; we
know where he is. O Savior, how cold and heartless is our love to thee, if we
do not haste to find thee in thy Word and Sacraments; if our Souls do not fly
up to thee in all holy Affections into thy Heaven?

Of all the Women Mary Magdalen is first named, and in some Evangelists alone:
She is noted above her fellows. None of them were so much obliged, none so
zealously thankful: Seven Devils were cast out of her by the command of
Christ. That Heart which was freed from Satan by that powerful dispossession,
was now possessed with a free and gracious bounty to her deliverer. Twice at
the least has she poured out her fragrant and costly Odours upon him. Where
there is a true sense of favor and beneficence, there cannot but be a fervent
desire of retribution. O Blessed Savior, could we feel the danger of every
sin, and the malignity of those spiritual possessions from which thou have
freed us, how should we pour out our selves into thankfulness unto thee?

Every thing here had horror. The Place, both solitary and a Sepulcher: Nature
abhors, as the visage, so the region of Death and Corruption. The Time, Night;
only the Moon gave them some faint glimmering: (for this being the seventeenth
day of her age, afforded some light to the latter part of the night.) The
Business, the visitation of a dead Corpse. Their zealous Love has easily
overcome all these. They had followed him in his Sufferings when the Disciples
left him; they attended him to his Cross weeping; they followed him to his
Grave, and saw how Joseph laid him: even there they leave him not, but, ere it
be daylight, return to pay him the last tribute of their duty. How much
stronger is Love then death? O Blessed Jesu, why should not we imitate thy love
to us? Those whom thou love, thou love to the end, yea in it, yea after it:
even when we are dead, not our Souls only, but our very dust is dearly
respected of thee. What condition of thine should remove our affections from
thy person in Heaven, from thy lims on earth?

Well did these worthy Women know what Joseph of Arimathaea and Nicodemus had
done to thee; they saw how curiously they had wrapped thee, how preciously they
had embalmed thee: yet, as not thinking others beneficence could be any just
excuse of theirs, they bring their own Odours to thy Sepulture to be perfumed
by the touch of thy Sacred Body. What thank is it to us that others are
obsequious to thee, whilst we are slack or niggardly? We may rejoice in others
forwardness; but if we rest in it, how small joy shall it be to us, to see them
go to Heaven without us?

When on the Friday-evening they attended Joseph to the intombing of Jesus,
they marked the place, they marked the passage, they marked that inner
gravestone which the owner had fitted to the mouth of that tomb; which all
there care is now to remove; Who shall roll away the stone? That other more
weighty load wherewith the vault was barred, the seal, the guard set upon both,
came not perhaps into their knowledge; this was the private plot of Pilate and
the Priests, beyond the reach of their thoughts.

I do not hear them say, How shall we recover the charges of our Odours? or,
How shall we avoid the envy and censure of our angry Elders, for honoring him
whom the Governors of our Nation have thought worthy of condemnation? The
only thought they now take is, Who shall roll away the stone? Neither do they
stay at home and move this doubt, but when they are well forward on their way,
resolving to try the issue. Good hearts cannot be so solicitous for any thing
under Heaven, as for removing those impediments which lie between them and
their Savior. O Blessed Jesu, thou who art clearly revealed in Heaven, art yet
still both hid and sealed up from too many here on earth: Neither is it some
thin veil that is spread between thee and them, but an huge stone; even a true
stone of offense lies rolled upon the mouth of their hearts. Yea, if a second
weight were superadded to thy Grave here, no less then three spiritual bars
are interposed betwixt them and thee above; Idleness, Ignorance, Unbelief. Who
shall roll away these stones, but the same power that removed thine? O Lord,
remove that our Ignorance, that we may know thee; our Idleness, that we may
seek thee; our Unbelief, that we may find and enjoy thee.

How well it succeeds when we go faithfully and conscionably about our work,
and leave the issue to God? Lo, now God has removed the cares of these holy
Women, together with the gravestone. To the wicked that falls out which they
feared, to the Godly that which they wished and cared for, yea more. Holy cares
ever prove well; the worldly dry the bones, and disappoint the hopes. Could
these good Visitants have known of a greater stone sealed, of a strong watch
set, their doubts had been doubled: now God goes beyond their thoughts, and at
once removes that which both they did and might have feared: The stone is
removed, the seal broken, the watch fled. What a scorn does the Almighty God
make of the impotent designs of men? They thought, the stone shall make the
grave sure, the seal shall make the stone sure, the guard shall make both sure:
Now when they think all safe, God sends an Angel from Heaven above, the earth
quakes beneath, the stone rolls away, the Soldiers stand like carcasses, and
when they have got heart enough to run away, think themselves valiant; the Tomb
is opened, Christ is risen, they confounded. Oh the vain projects of silly men!
as if with one shovel-full of mire they would dam up the Sea; or with a clout
hanged forth they would keep the Sun from shining. Oh these Spiders-webs, or
houses of cards which fond children have (as they think) skilfully framed,
which the least breath breaks and ruins! Who are we, sorry worms, that we
should look in any business to prevail against our Creator? What creature is
so base that he cannot arm against us to our confusion? The Lice and Frogs
shall be too strong for Pharaoh, the Worms for Herod. There is no wisdom nor
counsel against the Lord.

Oh the mavelous pomp and magnificence of our Savior's Resurrection! The
Earth quakes, the Angel appears; that it may be plainly seen that this Divine
person now rising had the command both of Earth and Heaven. At the dissolution
of thine Humane nature, O Savior, was an Earthquake, at the re-uniting of it
is an Earthquake; to tell the world that the God of Nature then suffered, and
had now conquered. Whilst thou laiest still in the earth, the earth was still;
when thou came to fetch thine own, The earth trembled at the presence of the
Lord, at the presence of the God of Jacob. When thou our true Sampson awakedst,
and foundest thy self tied with these Philistian cords, and rousedst up, and
brakest those hard and strong twists with a sudden power, no marvel if the
room shook under thee.

Good cause had the earth to quake, when the God that made it powerfully calls
for his own flesh from the usurpation of her bowels. Good cause had she to
open her graves and yield up her dead, in attendence to the Lord of Life, whom
she had presumed to detain in that cell of darkness. What a seeming impotence
was here, that thou, who art the true Rock of thy Church, should lie
obscurely shrouded in Joseph's rock? thou, that art the true cornerstone of
thy Church, should be shut up with a double stone, the one of thy grave, the
other of thy vault? thou, by whom we are sealed to the day of our Redemption,
should be sealed up in a blind cavern of earth? But now what a demonstration
of power does both the world and I see, in thy glorious Resurrection? The rocks
tear, the graves open, the stones roll away, the dead rise and appear, the
Soldiers flee and tremble, Saints and Angels attend thy rising. O Savior,
thou laiest down in weakness, thou risest in power and glory; thou laiest down
like a man, thou risest like a God.

What a lively image have thou herein given me of the dreadful majesty of the
general Resurrection and thy second appearance? Then not the earth only, but
the powers of Heaven shall be shaken: not some few graves shall be open, and
some Saints appear; but all the bars of death shall be broken, and all that
sleep in their graves shall awake, and stand up from the dead before thee: not
some one Angel shall descend; but thou, the great Angel of the Covenant,
attended with thousand thousands of those mighty Spirits. And if these stout
Soldiers were so filled with terror at the feeling of an Earthquake and the
sight of an Angel, that they had scarce breath left in them for the time to
witness them alive; where shall thine enemies appear, O Lord, in the day of thy
terrible appearance, when the earth shall reel and vanish, and the elements
shall be on a flame about their ears, and the Heavens shall wrap up as a scroll?

O God, thou might have removed this stone by the force of thine Earthquake,
as well as rive other rocks; yet thou would rather use the ministry of an
Angel: or, thou that gave thy self life, and gave being both to the stone
and to the earth, could more easily have removed the stone then moved the
earth; but it was thy pleasure to make use of an Angel's hand. And now he that
would ask why thou would do it rather by an Angel then by thy self, may as
well ask why thou did not rather give thy Law by thine own immediate hand
then by the ministration of Angels; why by an Angel thou struckest the
Israelites with plagues, the Assyrians with the sword; why an Angel appeared to
comfort thee after thy Temptation and Agony, when thou were able to comfort thy
self; why thou usest the influences of Heaven to fruiten the earth; why thou
imployest Second causes in all events, when thou could do all things alone.
It is good reason thou should serve thy self of thine own; neither is there
any ground to be required whether of their motion or rest, besides thy will.

Thou did raise thy self, the Angels removed the stone. They that could have
no hand in thy Resurrection, yet shall have an hand in removing outward
impediments; not because thou neededst, but because thou would: like as thou
alone did raise Lazarus, thou badest others let him loose. Works of
Omnipotency thou reservest to thine own immediate performance; ordinary actions
thou do by subordinate means.

Although this act of the Angels was not merely with respect to thee; but
partly to those devout Women, to ease them of their care, to manifest unto them
thy Resurrection. So officious are those glorious Spirits, not only to thee
their Maker, but even to the meanest of thy servants, especially in the
furtherance of all their spiritual designs. Let us bring our Odours, they will
be sure to roll away the stone. Why do not we imitate them in our forwardness
to promote each others Salvation? We pray to do thy will here as they do in
Heaven: if we do not act our wishes, we do but mock thee in our Devotions.

How glorious did this Angel of thine appear? The terrified Soldiers saw his
face like lightning, both they and the Women saw his garments shining, bright,
and white as snow: such a presence became his errand. It was fit that, as in
thy Passion the Sun was darkened, and all creatures were clad with heaviness,
so in thy Resurrection the best of thy creatures should testify their joy and
exultation in the brightness of their habit; that as we on Festivall-days put
on our best clothes, so thine Angels should celebrate this blessed Festivity
with a meet representation of Glory. They could not but enjoy our joy, to see
the work of man's Redemption thus fully finished: and if there be mirth in
Heaven at the conversion of one sinner, how much more when a world of sinners
is perfectly ransomed from death, and restored to Salvation? Certainly, if but
one or two appeared, all rejoiced, all triumphed. Neither could they but be
herein sensible of their own happy advantage, who by thy mediation are
confirmed in their glorious estate; since thou by the blood of thy Cross and
power of thy Resurrection have reconciled things not in earth only, but in
Heaven.

But, above all other, the Love of thee their God and Savior must needs
heighten their joy, and make thy Glory theirs. It is their perpetual work to
praise thee: how much more now when such an occasion was offered as never had
been since the world began, never could be after? when thou the God of Spirits
had vanquished all the spiritual powers of darkness, when thou the Lord of
Life had conquered death for thee and all thine, so as they may now boldly
insult over their last enemy, O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is
thy victory?

Certainly, if Heaven can be capable of an increase of joy and felicity, never
had those Blessed Spirits so great a cause of triumph and gratulation as in
this day of thy glorious Resurrection. How much more, O dear Jesu, should we
men, whose flesh thou did assume, unite, revive, for whose sake and in whose
stead thou did vouchsafe to suffer and die, whose arrerages thou payedst in
death and acquittedst in thy Resurrection, whose Souls are discharged, whose
Bodies shall be raised by the power of thy rising; how much more should we
think we have cause to be overjoyed with the happy memory of this great work of
thy Divine Power and unconceivable Mercy?

Lo now, how weak soever I am in my self, yet in the confidence of this
victorious Resurrection of my Savior I dare boldly challenge and defy you, O
all ye adverse Powers. Do the worst ye can to my Soul; in despite of you it
shall be safe.

Is it Sin that threats me? Behold, this Resurrection of my Redeemer publishes
my discharge. My Surety was arrested and cast into the prison of his Grave: had
not the utmost farthing of mine arrerages been paid, he could not have come
forth. He is come forth: the Sum is fully satisfied. What danger can there be
of a discharged Debt?

Is it the Wrath of God? Wherefore is that but for sin? If my sin be defrayed,
that quarrel is at an end: and if my Savior suffered it for me, how can I
fear to suffer it in my self? That infinite Justice hates to be twice paid. He
is risen, therefore he has satisfied. Who is he that condemns? It is Christ
that died; yea rather, that is risen.

Is it Death it self? Lo, my Savior, that overcame death by dying, has
triumphed over him in his Resurrection. How can I now fear a conquered enemy?
What harm is there in the Serpent, but for his sting? The sting of death is
sin: that is pulled out by my powerful Redeemer, it cannot now hurt me; it may
refresh me to carry this cool Snake in my bosom.

O then, my dear Savior, I bless thee for thy Death; but I bless thee more for
thy Resurrection. That was a work of wonderful Humility, of infinite Mercy;
this was a work of infinite Power* In that was humane Weakness; in this Divine
Omnipotence: In that thou did die for our sins; in this thou did rise again
for our Justification.

And now how am I conformable to thee, if, when thou art risen, I lie still in
the grave of my Corruptions? How am I a lim of thy body, if, whilst thou have
that perfect dominion over death, death has dominion over me; if, whilst thou
art alive and glorious, I lie rotting in the dust of death? I know the
locomotive faculty is in the Head: by the power of the Resurrection of thee our
Head, all we thy Members cannot but be raised. As the earth cannot hold my Body
from thee in the day of the Second Resurrection, so cannot sin withhold my Soul
from thee in the First. How am I thine, if I be not risen? and if I be risen
with thee, why do I not seek the things above, where thou sit at the right
hand of God?

The Vault or Cave which Joseph had hewn out of the rock was large, capable of
no less then ten persons: upon the mouth of it Eastward was that great stone
rolled; within it, at the right hand, in the North part of the Cave, was hewn
out a receptacle for the body, three handfulls high from the pavement; and a
stone was accordingly fitted for the cover of that Grave.

Into this Cave the good Women (finding the stone rolled away) descended to
seek the body of Christ; and in it saw the Angels. This was the Goal to which
Peter and John ran, finding the spoils of death, the grave-cloaths wrapped up,
and the napkin that was about the head folded up together and laid in a place
by it self: and as they came in haste, so they returned with wonder.

I marvel not at your speed, O ye blessed Disciples, if upon the report of the
Women ye ran, yea flew upon the wings of zeal, to see what was become of your
Master. Ye had wont to walk familiarly together in the attendence of your Lord:
now society is forgotten; and, as for a wager, each tries the speed of his
legs, and, with neglect of other, vies who shall be first at the Tomb.

Who would not but have tried masteries with you in this case, and have made
light touches of the earth to have held paces with you? Your desire was equal;
but John is the younger, his lims are more nimble, his breath more free: he
first looks into the Sepulcher, but Peter goes down first. O happy competition
who shall be more zealous in the enquiry after Christ! Ye saw enough to amaze
you, not enough to settle your Faith. How well might you have thought, Our
Master is not subduced, but risen? Had he been taken away by others hands, this
fine linen had not been left behind: Had he not himself risen from this bed of
earth, he had not thus wrapped up his night-cloaths, and laid them sorted by
themselves. What can we doubt, when he foretold us he would rise? O Blessed
Jesu, how will thou pardon our errors? how should we pardon and pity the
errors of each other in lesser occasions, when as yet thy prime and dearest
Disciples, after so much Divine instruction, knew not the Scriptures, that thou
must rise again from the dead? They went away more astonished then confident;
more full of wonder as yet then of belief.

There is more strength of zeal (where it takes) in the weaker Sex. Those holy
Women, as they came first, so they staid last: especially devout Mary Magdalene
stands still at the mouth of the Cave weeping. Well might those tears have been
spared, if her Knowledge had been answerable to her Affection, her Faith to her
Fervor. Withal, (as our eye will be where we love) she stoops, and looks down
into that dear Sepulcher.

Holy desires never but speed well. There she sees two glorious Angels, the one
sitting at the head, the other at the feet where the body of Jesus had lain.
Their shining brightness showed them to be no mortal creatures: besides that
Peter and John had but newly come out of the Sepulcher, and both found and left
it empty in her sight, which was now suddenly filled with those celestial
guests. That white linen wherewith Joseph had shrouded the Sacred Body of Jesus
was now shamed with a brighter whiteness.

Yet do I not find the good Woman ought appalled with that inexpected glory. So
was her heart taken up with the thought for her Savior, that she seemed not
sensible of whatsoever other Objects. Those tears which she did let drop into
the Sepulcher, send up back to her the voice of those Angels, Woman, why
weepest thou? God and his Angels take notice of every tear of our Devotion. The
sudden wonder has not dried her eyes, nor charmed her tongue: She freely
confesses the cause of her grief to be the missing of her Savior; They have
taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him. Alas, good Mary!
how do thou lose thy tears? of whom do thou complain, but of thy best
friend? who has removed thy Lord but himself? who but his own Deity has taken
away that humane body out of that region of death? Neither is he now laid any
more, he stands by thee whose removal thou complainest of. Thus many a tender
and humbled Soul afflicts it self with the want of that Savior whom it has,
and feels not.

Sense may be no judge of the bewailed absence of Christ. Do but turn back
thine eye, O thou Religious Soul, and see Jesus standing by thee, though thou
knew not that it was Jesus. His habit was not his own. Sometimes it pleases
our Savior to appear unto his not like himself: his holy disguises are our
trialls. Sometimes he will seem a Stranger, sometimes an Enemy; sometimes he
offers himself to us in the shape of a poor man, sometimes of a distressed
captive. Happy is he that can discern his Savior in all forms. Mary took him
for a Gardener. Devout Magdalene, thou art not much mistaken. As it was the
trade of the First Adam to dress the Garden of Eden, so was it the trade of the
Second to tend the Garden of his Church. He digs up the soil by seasonable
afflictions, he sows in it the seeds of Grace, he plants it with gracious
motions, he waters it with his Word, yea with his own Blood, he weeds it by
wholesome censures. O Blessed Savior, what is it that thou neglectest to do
for this selected enclosure of thy Church? As in some respect thou art the true
Vine, and thy Father the Husbandman; so also in some other we are the Vine, and
thou art the Husbandman. Oh be thou such to me as thou appearedst unto
Magdalene: break up the fallows of my Nature, implant me with Grace, prune me
with meet corrections, bedew me with the former and latter rain; do what thou will to make me fruitful.

Still the good woman weeps, and still complains, and passionately enquires of
thee, O Savior, for thy self. How apt are we, if thou do never so little
vary from our apprehensions, to mis-know thee, and to wrong our selves by our
mis-opinions? All this while have thou concealed thy self from thine
affectionate client; thou saw her tears, and heardest her importunities and
inquiries: at last (as it was with Joseph, that he could no longer contain
himself from the notice of his brethren) thy compassion causes thee to break
forth into a clear expression of thy self, by expressing her name unto her
self; Mary. She was used, as to the name, so to the sound, to the accent. Thou
spakest to her before, but in the tone of a stranger; now of a friend, of a
Master. Like a good Shepherd, thou call thy sheep by their name, and they
know thy voice. What was thy call of her, but a clear pattern of our Vocation?

As her, so thou call us, first, familiarly, effectually. She could not
begin with thee otherwise then in the compellation of a stranger; it was thy
mercy to begin with her. That correction of thy Spirit is sweet and useful,
Now after ye have known God, or rather are known of him. Gal. 4.9.
We do know thee, O God, but our active knowledge is after our passive; first
we are known of thee, then we know thee that knew us. And as our Knowledge,
so is our Calling, so is our Election; thou beginnest to us in all, and most
justly say, You have not chosen me, but I have chosen you. When thou would
speak to this Devout client as a stranger, thou spakest aloof; Woman, whom
seek thou? now when thou would be known to her, thou call her by her
name, Mary. General invitations and common mercies are for us as men; but
where thou give Grace as to thine elect, thou come close to the Soul, and
winnest us with dear and particular intimations.

That very name did as much as say, Know him of whom thou art known and
beloved, and turns her about to thy view and acknowledgment: She turned her
self, and says unto him, Rabboni, which is to say, Master. Before, her face
was toward the Angels: this word fetches her about, and turns her face to thee
from whom her misprision had averted it. We do not rightly apprehend thee, O
Savior, if any creature in Heaven or earth can keep our eyes and our hearts
from thee. The Angels were bright and glorious; thy appearance was homely, thy
habit mean: yet when she heard thy voice, she turns her back upon the Angels,
and salutes thee with a Rabboni, and falls down before thee, in a desire of an
humble amplexation of those Sacred feet which she now rejoices to see past the
use of her Odours.

Where there was such familiarity in the mutual compellation, what means such
strangeness in the charge? Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my
Father. Thou were not wont, O Savior, to make so dainty of being touched: It
is not long since these very same hands touched thee in thine anointing; the
Bloudy-fluxed woman touched thee; the thankful Penitent in Simon's house
touched thee. What speak I of these? The multitude touched thee, the
Executioners touched thee; and even after thy Resurrection thou did not stick
to say to thy Disciples, Touch me, and see, and to invite Thomas to put his
fingers into thy side: neither is it long after this before thou suffer the
three Mary's to touch and hold thy feet. How then say thou, Touch me not? Was
it in a mild taxation of her mistaking? as if thou had said, Thou know not
that I have now an Immortal body, but so demeanest thy self toward me as if I
were still in my wonted condition: know now that the case is altered: howsoever
indeed I have not yet ascended to my Father, yet this Body of mine, which thou
see to be real and sensible, is now impassible, and qualified with
immortality, and therefore worthy of a more awful veneration then heretofore.
Or was it a gentle reproof of her dwelling too long in this dear hold of thee,
and fixing her thoughts upon thy Bodily presence; together with an implied
direction of reserving the height of her affection for thy perfect
Glorification in Heaven? Or lastly, was it a light touch of her too much haste
and eagerness in touching thee, as if she must use this speed in preventing
thine Ascension, or else be endangered to be disappointed of her hopes? as if
thou had said, Be not so passionately forward avd sudden in laying hold of
me, as if I were instantly ascending; but know that I shall stay some time with
you upon earth, before my going up to my Father. O Savior, even our well-meant
zeal in seeking and enjoying thee may be faulty; if we seek thee where we
should not, on earth; how we should not, unwarrantably. There may be a kind of
carnality in spiriuall actions. If we have heretofore known thee after the
flesh, henceforth know we thee so no more. That thou livedst here in this
shape, that color, this stature, that habit, I should be glad to know; nothing
that concerns thee can be unusefull. Could I say, here thou satest, here thou
layest, here and thus thou were crucified, here buried, here set thy last
foot; I should with much contentment see and recount these memorialls of thy
presence. But if I shall so fasten my thoughts upon these, as not to look
higher to the spiritual part of thine achievements, to the power and issue of
thy Resurrection, I am never the better.

No sooner art thou risen then thou speak of ascending; as thou did lie
down to rise, so did thou rise to ascend: that is the consummation of thy
Glory, and ours in thee. Thou that forbadst her touch, enjoynedst her errand;
Go to my brethren, and say, I ascend unto my Father and your Father, to my God
and your God.

The annunciation of thy Resurrection and Ascension is more then a private
fruition; this is for the comfort of one, that for the benefit of many. To sit
still and enjoy, is more sweet for the present; but to go and tell, is more
gainful in the sequel. That great Angel thought himself (as he well might)
highly honored, in that he was appointed to carry the happy news unto the
Blessed Virgin (thy Holy Mother) of her conception of thee her Savior: how
honorable must it needs be to Mary Magdalene, that she must be the messenger
of thy second birth, thy Resurrection, and instant Ascension? How beautiful do
the feet of those deserve to be, who bring the glad tidings of peace and
Salvation? What matter is it, O Lord, if men despise, where thou will honor?

To whom then do thou send her? Go tell my Brethren. Blessed Jesu, who are
those? were they not thy Followers? yea, were they not thy Forsakers? yet still
thou stylest them thy Brethren. O admirable Humility! O infinite Mercy! How
do thou raise their titles with thy self? At first they were thy Servants,
then Disciples, a little before thy death they were thy Friends; now after thy
Resurrection they were thy Brethren. Thou that were exalted infinitely higher
from mortal to immortal, descendest so much lower to call them Brethren, who
were before Friends, Disciples, Servants. What do we stand upon the terms of
our poor inequality, when the Son of God stoops so low as to call us Brethren?
But, oh Mercy without measure! Why will thou, how can thou, O Savior, call
them Brethren, whom in their last parting thou foundst fugitives? Did they not
run from thee? did not one of them rather leave his inmost coat behind him,
then not be quit of thee? did not another of them deny thee, yea abjure thee?
and yet thou say, Go tell my Brethren. It is not in the power of the sins of
our infirmity to unbrother us: when we look at the acts themselves, they are
heinous; when at the persons, they are so much more faulty as more obliged; but
when we look at the mercy of thee who have called us, now, Who shall separate
us? When we have sinned, thy dearness has reason to aggravate our sorrows; but
when we have sorrowed, our Faith has no less reason to uphold us from
despairing: Even yet we are Brethren. Brethren in thee, O Savior, who art
ascending for us; in thee, who have made thy Father ours, thy God our God. He
is thy Father by eternal Generation, our Father by his gracious Adoption; thy
God by Unity of Essence, our God by his Grace and Election.

It is this propriety wherein our life and happiness consists: They are weak
comforts that can be raised from the apprehension of thy general Mercies. What
were I the better, O Savior, that God were thy Father, if he be not mine? Oh
do thou give me a particular sense of my interest in thee, and thy goodness to
me. Bring thou thy self home to me, and let me find that I have a God and
Savior of my own.

It is fit I should mark thy order; First, my Father, then, yours. Even so,
Lord, He is first thine, and in thine only right ours. It is in thee that we
are adopted, it is in thee that we are elected; without thee, God is not only
a stranger, but an enemy to us. Thou only can make us free, thou only can
make us Sons. Let me be found in thee, and I cannot fail of a Father in Heaven.

With what joy did Mary receive this errand? with what joy did the Disciples
welcome it from her? Here was good news from a far Country, even as far as the
utmost regions of Death.

Those Disciples whose flight scattered them upon their Master's apprehension,
are now, at night, like a dispersed Covy met together by their mutual call:
their assembly is secret; when the light was shut in, when the doors were shut
up. Still were they fearful, still were the Jews malicious. The assured
tidings of their Master's Resurrection and Life has filled their hearts with
joy and wonder. Whilst their thoughts and speech are taken up with so happy a
subject, his miraculous and sudden presence bids their senses be witnesses of
his reviving and their happiness. When the doors were shut where the Disciples
were assembled, for fear of the Jews, came Jesus, and stood in the midst, and
said, Peace be unto you. O Savior, how thou came in thither I wonder, I
inquire not: I know not what a Glorified body can do; I know there is nothing
that thou can not do. Had not thine entrance been recorded for strange and
supernatural, why was thy standing in the midst noted before thy passage into
the room? why were the doors said to be shut whilst thou earnest in? why were
thy Disciples amazed to see thee ere they heard thee? Doubtless, they that once
before took thee for a Spirit when thou did walk upon the waters, could not
but be astonished to see thee whilst the doors were barred (without any noise
of thine entrance) to stand in the midst: well might they think thou could
not thus be there, if thou were not the God of Spirits. There might seem more
scruple of thy realty then of thy power: and therefore, after thy wonted
greeting, thou show them thy hands and thy feet, stamped with the
impressions of thy late sufferings. Thy respiration shall argue the truth of
thy life. Thou breathest on them as a Man, thou give them thy Spirit as a
God; and as God and Man thou sendest them on the great errand of thy Gospel.

All the mists of their doubts are now dispelled, the Sun breaks out clear.
They were glad when they had seen the Lord. Had they known thee for no other
then a mere man, this re-appearance could not but have affrighted them; since
till now by thine Almighty power this was never done, that the long-since dead
rose out of their graves, and appeared unto many: But when they recounted the
miraculous works that thou had done, and thought of Lazarus so lately raised,
thine approved Deity gave them confidence, and thy presence joy.

We cannot but be losers by our absence from holy Assemblies. Where were thou,
O Thomas, when the rest of that Sacred Family were met together? Had thy fear
put thee to so long a flight, that as yet thou were not returned to thy
fellows? or did thou suffer other occasions to detain thee from this
happiness? Now for the time thou missedst that Divine breath which so
comfortably inspired the rest; now thou art suffered to fall into that weak
distrust which thy presence had prevented. They told thee, We have seen the
Lord; was not this enough? would no eyes serve thee but thy own? were thy ears
to no use for thy Faith? Except I see in his hands the print of the nails, and
put my finger into the print of the nails, and thrust my hand into his side, I
will not believe. Suspicious man! who is the worse for that? whose is the loss
if thou believe not? Is there no certainty but in thine own senses? Why were
not so many and so holy eyes and tongues as credible as thine own hands and
eyes? How little were thou yet acquainted with the ways of Faith? Faith comes
by hearing. These are the tongues that must win the whole world to an assent;
and durst thou the first man detrect to yield? Why was that word so hard to
pass? Had not that thy Divine Master foretold thee with the rest that he must
be crucified, and the third day rise again? Is any thing related to be done but
that which was fore-promised? any thing beyond the sphere of Divine
Omnipotence? Go then, and please thy self in thine over-wise incredulity,
whilst thy fellows are happy in believing.

It is a whole week that Thomas rests in this sullen unbelief; in all which
time doubtless his ears were beaten with the many constant assertions of the
holy Women, (the first witnesses of the Resurrection,) as also of the two
Disciples walking to Emmaus, (whose hearts burning within them, had set their
tongues on fire in a zealous relation of those happy occurrences,) with the
assured reports of the rising and re-appearance of many Saints in attendence of
the Lord and giver of life: yet still he struggles with his own distrust, and
stiffly suspends his belief to that truth whereof he cannot deny himself enough
convinced. As all bodies are not equally apt to be wrought upon by the same
Medicine, so are not all Souls by the same means of Faith; one is refractory,
whilst others are pliable. O Savior, how justly might thou have left this
man to his own pertinacy? whom could he have thanked if he had perished in his
unbelief? But, O thou good Shepherd of Israel, that could be content to leave
the ninety and nine to go fetch one stray in the wilderness, how careful were
thou to reduce this straggler to his fellows? Right so were thy Disciples
re-assembled, such was the season, the place the same, so were the doors shut
up, when (that unbelieving Disciple being now present with the rest) thou so
came in, so stoodst in the midst, so shewedst thy hands and feet; and
singling out thy incredulous client, invitest his eyes to see, and his fingers
to handle thine hands, and his hand to be thrust into thy side, that he might
not be faithless, but faithful.

Blessed Jesu, how thou pitiest the errors and infirmities of thy servants?
Even when we are froward in our misconceits, and worthy of nothing but
desertion, how thou followest us, and overtakest us with mercy; and in thine
abundant compassion wilt reclaim and save us, when either we meant not or would
not? By how much more unworthy those eyes and hands were to see and touch that
immortal and glorious Body, by so much more wonderful was thy Goodness in
condescending to satisfy that curious Infidelity. Neither do I hear thee so
much as to chide that weak obstinacy. It was not long since thou did sharply
take up the two Disciples that walked to Emmaus, O fools and slow of heart to
believe all that the Prophets have spoken; but this was under the disguise of
an unknown traveller, upon the way, when they were alone: Now thou speak
with thine own tongue, before all thy Disciples; in stead of rebuking, thou
only exhortest, Be not faithless, but faithful.

Behold, thy Mercy no less then thy Power has melted the congealed heart of
thy unbelieving follower. Then Thomas answered and said unto him, My Lord, and
my God. I do not hear that, when it came to the issue, Thomas employed his
hands in this trial: his eyes were now sufficient assurance; the sense of his
Master's Omniscience in this particular challenge of him spared (perhaps) the
labor of a farther disquisition. And now how happily was that doubt bestowed,
which brought forth so faithful a confession, My Lord, my God?

I hear not such a word from those that believed. It was well for us, it was
well for thee, O Thomas, that thou distrustedst: else, neither had the world
received so perfect an evidence of that Resurrection whereon all our Salvation
depends; neither had thou yielded so pregnant and divine an astipulation to
thy Blessed Savior. Now thou do not only profess his Resurrection, but his
Godhead too, and thy happy interest in both. And now, if they be blessed that
have not seen, and yet believed; blessed art thou also, who having seen, have
thus believed: and blessed be thou, O God, who know how to make advantage of
the infirmities of thy chosen, for the promoting of their Salvation, the
confirmation of thy Church, the glory of thine own Name. Amen.

LI. The Ascension.
IT stood not with thy purpose, O Savior, to ascend immediately from thy grave
into Heaven; thou meantest to take the earth in thy way; not for a sudden
passage, but for a leisurely conversation. Upon thine Easterday thou spakest of
thine Ascension; but thou would have forty days interposed. Had thou merely
respected thine own Glory, thou had instantly changed thy grave for thy
Paradise; for so much the sooner had thou been possessed of thy Father's joy;
we would not continue in a Dungeon, when we might be in a Palace: but thou, who
for our sakes vouchsafedst to descend from Heaven to earth, would now in the
upshot have a gracious regard to us in thy return.

Thy Death had troubled the hearts of many Disciples, who thought that
condition too mean to be compatible with the glory of the Messiah; and thoughts
of diffidence were apt to seize upon the holiest breasts. So long therefore
would thou hold footing upon earth, till the world were fully convinced of
the infallible evidences of thy Resurrection; of all which time thou only
can give an account: it was not for flesh and blood to trace the ways of
Immortality; neither was our frail, corruptible, sinful nature a meet
companion for thy now-glorified Humanity; the glorious Angels of Heaven were
now thy fittest attendents. But yet how often did it please thee graciously to
impart thy self this while unto men; and not only to appear unto thy
Disciples, but to renew unto them the familiar forms of thy wonted
conversation, in conferring, walking, eating with them? And now when thou
drewest near to thy last parting, thou, who had many times showed thy self
before to thy several Disciples, thoughtest meet to assemble them all
together, for an universal valediction.

Who can be too rigorous in censuring the ignorances of well-meaning
Christians, when he sees the domestic Followers of Christ, even after his
Resurrection, mistake the main End of his coming in the flesh? Lord, will thou
at this time restore again the Kingdom to Israel? They saw their Master now out
of the reach of all Jewish envy; they saw his power illimited and irresistible;
they saw him stay so long upon earth, that they might imagine he meant to fix
his abode there; and what should he do there, but reign? and wherefore should
they be now assembled, but for the choice and distribution of Offices, and for
the ordering of the affairs of that state which was now to be vindicated? Oh
weak thoughts of well-instructed Disciples! What should an Heavenly body do in
an earthly throne? How should a spiritual life be employed in secular cares?
How poor a business is the Temporal Kingdom of Israel for the King of Heaven?
And even yet, O Blessed Savior, I do not hear thee sharply control this
erroneous conceit of thy mistaken Followers; thy mild correction insists rather
upon the time, then the misconceived substance of that restoration. It was thy
gracious purpose that thy Spirit should by degrees rectify their judgments, and
illuminate them with thy Divine truths; in the mean time it was sufficient to
raise up their hearts to an expectation of that Holy Ghost, which should
shortly lead them into all needful and requisite verities. And now, with a
gracious promise of that Spirit of thine, with a careful charge renewed unto
thy Disciples for the promulgation of thy Gospel, with an Heavenly Benediction
of all thine acclaiming attendents, thou take leave of earth. When he had
spoken these things, whilst they beheld, he was taken up, and a cloud received
him out of their sight.

Oh happy parting, fit for the Savior of mankind, answerable to that Divine
conversation, to that succeeding Glory! O Blessed Jesu, let me so far imitate
thee, as to depart hence with a blessing in my mouth; let my Soul, when it is
stepping over the threshold of Heaven, leave behind it a legacy of Peace and
Happiness.

It was from the mount of Olives that thou tookest thy rise into Heaven. Thou
might have ascended from the valley, all the globe of earth was alike to
thee: but since thou were to mount upward, thou would take so much advantage
as that stair of ground would afford thee; thou would not use the help of a
Miracle in that wherein Nature offered her ordinary service. What difficulty
had it been for thee to have styed up from the very center of earth? But since
thou had made hills so much nearer unto Heaven, thou would not neglect the
benefit of thine own Creation. Where we have common helps, we may not depend
upon Supernatural provisions; we may not strain the Divine Providence to the
supply of our negligence, or the humouring of our presumption. Thou that
could always have walked on the Sea, would walk so but once, when thou
wantedst shipping: thou, to whom the highest mountains were but valleys,
would walk up to an hill to ascend thence into Heaven. O God, teach me to
bless thee for means, when I have them; and to trust thee for means, when I
have them not; yea to trust to thee without means, when I have no hope of them.

What Hill was this thou chosest but the mount of Olives? Thy Pulpit shall I
call it, or thine Oratory? The place from whence thou had wont to shower down
thine Heavenly Doctrine upon the hearers; the place whence thou had wont to
send up thy Prayers unto thy Heavenly Father; the place that shared with the
Temple for both: In the daytime thou were preaching in the Temple, in the
night praying in the mount of Olives. On this very hill was the bloody sweat of
thine Agony; now is it the mount of thy Triumph. From this mount of Olives did
flow that oil of gladness wherewith thy Church is everlastingly refreshed. That
God that uses to punish us in the same kind wherein we have offended,
retributes also to us in the same kind and circumstances wherein we have been
afflicted. To us also, O Savior, even to us thy unworthy members do thou
seasonably vouchsafe to give a proportionable joy to our heaviness, laughter to
our mourning, glory to contempt and shame. Our agonies shall be answered with
exaltation.

Whither then, O Blessed Jesu, whither did thou ascend? whither but home into
thine Heaven? From the mountain were thou taken up; and what but Heaven is
above the hills? Lo, these are those mountains of spices which thy Spouse, the
Church, long since desired thee to climb. Thou have now climbed up that
infinite steepness, and have left all sublimity below thee. Already had thou
approved thy self the Lord and commander of Earth, of Sea, of Hell. The Earth
confessed thee her Lord, when at thy voice she rendered thee thy Lazarus; when
she shook at thy Passion, and gave up her dead Saints: The Sea acknowledged
thee, in that it became a pavement to thy feet and (at thy command) to the feet
of thy Disciple; in that it became thy treasury for thy Tribute-money: Hell
found and acknowledged thee, in that thou conqueredst all the powers of
darkness; even him that had the power of death, the Devil. It now only
remained that, as the Lord of the Air, thou should pass through all the
regions of that yielding element; and, as Lord of Heaven, thou should pass
through all the glorious contignations thereof; that so every knee might bow to
thee both in Heaven, and in Earth, and under the earth.

Thou had an everlasting right to that Heaven that should be, an undoubted
possession of it ever since it was; yea even whilst thou did cry and spraul
in the Cratch, whilst thou did hang upon the Cross, whilst thou were sealed
up in thy Grave: but thine Humane nature had not taken actual possession of it
till now. Like as it was in thy true type, David, he had right to the Kingdom
of Israel immediately upon his anointing; but yet many an hard brunt did he
pass ere he had the full possession of it in his ascent to Hebron. I see now, O
Blessed Jesu, I see where thou art; even far above all Heavens, at the right
hand of thy Father's Glory. This is the far country into which the Nobleman
went to receive for himself a Kingdom; far off to us, to thee near, yea
intrinsecall. Oh do thou raise up my Heart thither to thee; place thou my
Affections upon thee above, and teach me therefore to love Heaven because thou
art there.

How then, O Blessed Savior, how did thou ascend? Whilst they beheld, he was
taken up, and a cloud received him out of their sight. So wast thou taken up,
as that the act was thine own, the power of the act none but thine. Thou that
descendedst wast the same that ascendedst: as in thy descent there was no use
of any power or will but thine own, no more was there in thine ascent. Still
and ever were thou the Master of thine own acts. Thou laidst down thy own life,
no man took it from thee; Thou raisedst up thy self from death, no hand did or
could help thee; Thou carriedst up thine own glorified flesh, and placedst it
in Heaven. The Angels did attend thee, they did not aid thee: whence had they
their strength but from thee? Elias ascended to Heaven, but he was fetched up
in a chariot of fire; that it might appear hence, that man had need of others
helps; who else could not of himself so much as lift up himself to the Aerie
Heaven, much less to the Empyreall. But thou, our Redeemer, need no chariot,
no carriage of Angels: thou art the Author of life and motion; they move in
and from thee. As thou therefore did move thy self upward, so, by the same
Divine power, thou will raise us up to the participation of thy Glory. These
vile bodies shall be made like to thy glorious body, according to the working
whereby thou art able to subdue all things unto thy self.

Elias had but one witness of his rapture into Heaven: S. Paul had none, no not
himself; for, whether in the body, or out of the body, he knew not. Thou, O
Blessed Jesu, would neither have all eyes witnesses of thine Ascension, nor
yet too few. As after thy Resurrection thou did not set thy self upon the
pinnacle of the Temple, nor yet publicly show thy self within it, as making
thy presence too cheap; but made choice of those eyes whom thou would bless
with the sight of thee; thou were seen indeed of five hundred at once, but they
were Brethren: So in thine Ascension, thou did not carry all Jerusalem
promiscuously forth with thee to see thy glorious departure, but only that
selected company of thy Disciples which had attended thee in thy life. Those
who immediately upon thine ascending returned to Jerusalem, were an hundred and
twenty persons: a competent number of witnesses, to verify that thy miraculous
and triumphant passage into thy Glory. Lo, those only were thought worthy to
behold thy majesticall Ascent, which had been partners with thee in thy
Humiliation. Still thou will have it thus with us, O Savior, and we embrace
the condition: if we will converse with thee in thy lowly estate here upon
earth, wading with thee through contempt and manifold afflictions, we shall be
made happy with the sight and communion of thy Glory above.

O my Soul, be thou now (if ever) ravished with the contemplation of this
comfortable and blessed farewell of thy Savior. What a sight was this? how
full of joyful assurance, of spiritual consolation? Methinks I see it still
with their eyes, how thou my glorious Savior did leisurely and insensibly
rise up from thine Olivet, taking leave of thine acclaiming Disciples now left
below thee, with gracious eyes, with Heavenly benedictions. Methinks I see how
they followed thee with eager and longing eyes, with arms lifted up, as if they
had wished them winged to have soared up after thee. And if Eliah gave
assurance to his servant Elisha, that if he should behold him in that rapture,
his Master's Spirit should be doubled upon him; what an accession of the spirit
of joy and confidence must needs be to thy happy Disciples in seeing thee thus
gradually rising up to thy Heaven? Oh how unwillingly did their intentive eyes
let go so Blessed an Object! How unwelcome was that Cloud that interposed it
self betwixt thee and them, and, closing up it self, left only a glorious
splendor behind it, as the bright track of thine Ascension? Of old here below
the Glory of the Lord appeared in the Cloud; now afar off in the sky the Cloud
intercepted this Heavenly Glory; if distance did not rather do it, then that
bright meteor. Their eyes attended thee on thy way so far as their beams would
reach; when they could go no farther, the Cloud received thee. Lo, yet even
that very screen whereby thou were taken off from all earthly view was no other
then glorious: how much rather do all the beholders fix their sight upon that
Cloud, then upon the best piece of the Firmament? Never was the Sun it self
gazed on with so much intention. With what long looks, with what astonished
acclamations did these transported beholders follow thee their ascending
Savior? as if they would have looked through that Cloud and that Heaven that
hid thee from them.

But oh, what tongue of the highest Archangel of Heaven can express the welcome
of thee the King of Glory into those Blessed Regions of Immortality? Surely the
Empyreall Heaven never resounded with so much joy: God ascended with
jubilation, and the Lord with the sound of the Trumpet. It is not for us weak
and finite creatures, to wish to conceive those incomprehensible, spiritual,
Divine gratulations that the Glorious Trinity gave to the victorious and
now-glorified Humane nature. Certainly, if when he brought his onely-begotten
Son into the world, he said, Let all the Angels worship him; much more now that
he ascends on high, and has led captivity captive, has he given him a Name
above all names, that at the Name of JESUS all knees should bow. And if the
Holy Angels did so carol at his Birth, in the very entrance into that estate of
Humiliation and infirmity; with what triumph did they receive him now returning
from the perfect achievement of Man's Redemption? And if when his type had
vanquished Goliath, and carried the head into Jerusalem, the damsels came forth
to meet him with dances and timbrels; how shall we think those Angelical
Spirits triumphed in meeting of the great Conqueror of Hell and Death? How did
they sing, Lift up your heads, ye gates, and be ye lift up, ye everlasting
doors, and the King of glory shall come in?

Surely, as he shall come, so he went; and behold he shall come with thousands
of his Holy ones; thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand
thousands stood before him: From all whom methinks I hear that blessed
applause, Worthy is the Lamb that was killed, to receive power, and riches, and
wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and praise: Praise, and honor,
and glory, and power, be to him that sits upon the throne, and to the Lamb
for evermore. And why do not thou, O my Soul, help to bear thy part with that
happy Quire of Heaven? Why art not thou rapt out of my bosom with an ecstasy
of joy, to see this Humane nature of ours exalted above all the Powers of
Heaven, adored of Angels, Archangels, Cherubin, Seraphim, and all those mighty
and glorious Spirits, and sitting there crowned with infinite Glory and Majesty?

Although little would it avail thee that our Nature is thus honored, if the
benefit of this Ascension did not reflect upon thee. How many are miserable
enough in themselves, notwithstanding the Glory of their humane nature in
Christ? None but those that are found in him are the happier by him: who but
the Members are the better for the glory of the Head? O Savior, how should our
weakness have ever hoped to climb into Heaven, if thou had not gone before
and made way for us? It is for us that thou the forerunner art entered in: Now
thy Church has her wish, Draw me, and I shall run after thee. Even so, O
Blessed Jesu, how ambitiously should we follow thee with the paces of Love and
Faith, and aspire toward thy Glory? Thou that art the way, have made the way
to thy self and us: Thou did humble thy self, and becamest obedient to the
death, even to the death of the Cross. Therefore has God also highly exalted
thee; and upon the same terms will not fail to advance us: we see thy track
before us, of Humility and Obedience. O teach me to follow thee in the roughest
ways of Obedience, in the bloody paths of Death, that I may at last overtake
thee in those high steps of Immortality.

Amongst those millions of Angels that attended this triumphant Ascension of
thine, O Savior, some are appointed to this lower station, to comfort thine
astonished Disciples, in the certain assurance of thy no-less-glorious Return;
Two men stood by them in white apparel. They stood by them, they were not of
them; they seemed Men, they were Angels: Men for their familiarity; two, for
more certainty of testimony; in white, for the joy of thine Ascension.

The Angels formerly celebrated thy Nativity with Songs; but we do not find
they then appeared in white: thou were then to undergo much sorrow, many
conflicts; it was the vale of tears into which thou were come down. So soon as
thou were risen, the women saw an Angel in the form of a young man, clothed in
white; and now, so soon as thou art ascended, Two men clothed in white stand
by thy Disciples: thy task was now done, thy victory achieved, and nothing
remained but a Crown, which was now set upon thy Head. Justly therefore were
those blessed Angels suited with the robes of light and joy. And why should our
garments be of any other color? why should oil be wanting to our heads, when
the eyes of our Faith see thee thus ascended? It is for us, O Savior, that
thou art gone to prepare a place in those celestial mansions; it is for us
that thou sit at the right hand of Majesty. It is a piece of thy Divine
Prayer to thy Father, that those whom he has given thee, may be with thee. To
every bleeding Soul thou say still as thou did to Peter, Whither I go
thou can not follow me now, but thou shall follow me hereafter. In assured
hope of this Glory, why do I not rejoice, and beforehand walk in white with
thine Angels, that at the last I may walk with thee in white?

Little would the presence of these Angels have availed, if they had not been
heard as well as seen. They stand not silent therefore, but, directing their
speech to the amazed beholders, say, Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing
into Heaven? What a question was this? Could any of those two hundred and forty
eyes have power to turn themselves off to any other Object then that Cloud, and
that point of Heaven where they left their ascended Savior? Surely every one
of them were so fixed, that had not the speech of these Angels called them off,
there they had set up their rest till the darkness of night had interposed.
Pardon me, O ye Blessed Angels; had I been there with them, I should also have
been unwilling to have mine eyes pulled off from that dear prospect, and
diverted unto you. Never could they have gazed so happily as now. If but some
Great man be advanced to Honor over our heads, how apt we are to stand at a
gaze, and to eye him as some strange meteor? Let the Sun but shine a little
upon these Dialls, how are they looked at by all passengers? Yet, alas! what
can earthly advancement make us other then we are, dust and ashes; which the
higher it is blown, the more it is scattered? Oh how worthy is the King of
Glory to command our eyes now in the highest pitch of his Heavenly exaltation?
Lord, I can never look enough at the place where thou art; but what eye could
be satisfied with seeing the way that thou wentest?

It was not the purpose of these Angels to check the long looks of these
faithful Disciples after their ascended Master; it was only a change of Eyes
that they intended, of Carnal for Spiritual, of the eye of Sense for the eye
of Faith. This same Jesus which is taken up from you into Heaven, shall so come
in like manner as ye have seen him go into Heaven. Look not after him, O ye
weak Disciples, as so departed that ye shall see him no more; if he be gone,
yet he is not lost; those Heavens that received him shall restore him; neither
can those Blessed mansions decrease his Glory. Ye have seen him ascend upon the
chariot of a bright Cloud; and in the clouds of Heaven ye shall see him descend
again to his last Judgment. He is gone: can it trouble you to know you have an
Advocate in Heaven? Strive not now so much to exercise your bodily eyes in
looking after him, as the eyes of your Souls in looking for him.

Ye cannot, O ye Blessed Spirits, wish other then well to mankind. How happy a
diversion of eyes and thoughts is this that you advise? If it be our sorrow to
part with our Savior, yet to part with him into Heaven it is our comfort and
felicity: if his absence could be grievous, his return shall be happy and
glorious.

Even so, Lord Jesus, come quickly. In the mean while it is not Heaven that can
keep thee from me, it is not Earth that can keep me from thee. Raise thou up my
Soul to a life of Faith with thee: let me ever enjoy thy conversation, whilst I
expect thy return.

THE END.
Books Printed for, or sold by, Jacob Tonson, at the Judge's Head in
Chancery Lane, near Fleet Street.
THE Heroin Musquetier, or the Female Warrior; in Four Parts: Containing many
true and delightful Adventures of a French Lady, in the late Campagnes of
1676. and 1677. Sir Patient Fancy, a Comedy, Acted at the Duke 's Theater, and
written by the Author of the Rover. Friendship in Fashion, a Comedy; written
by Thomas Otway: Acted at the Duke 's Theater. Mr. Rimer's Criticisms upon the
Plays of Beaumont and Fletcher, in a Letter to Fleetwood Sheppard, Esquire. The Art
of Making Love, or a Guide for Ladies and Gentlemen in the affairs of Love.
Price 1 s. Pleas of the Crown. Written by Sir Matthew Hales, late Chief Justice
of the Court of King's Bench. An Historical Discourse of Parliaments in their
Original before the Conquest, and continuance since: together with the
Original, growth, and continuance of these Courts following, viz. The High
Court of Chancery, King's Bench, Common Pleas, Exchequer, Duchy, and other
inferior Courts. Price 1 s. Brutus of Alba, or, the Enchanted Lovers, a
Tragedy, written by N. Tate: Acted at the Duke's Theater. The Counterfeits, a
Comedy, Acted at the Duke's Theater. A Treatise of the Principal Grounds of
the Law: Written by W. Noy, late Attorney General to King Charles the First.
Ready for the Press. A Treatise of Sublimity: Translated out of Longin, by H.
Watson, of the Inner Temple, Gent.

