Truth's Discovery; OR THE CAVALIERS CASE CLEARLY STATED BY Conscience and
Plain-dealing.

Presented to the Honorable COMMISSIONERS, And all the truly Loyal, and
Indigent Officers, and Soldiers.

Published for the Satisfaction of all his Majesty's faithful Subjects.

Written by Capt. CHARLES HAMMOND, one of the Truly Loyal and Indigent Officers.

London, Printed by Edward Crowch, dwelling on Snow-Hill. 1664.

To the Courteous READER.
I Know not into whose hands this Pamphlet may come, nor indeed do I much care:
The Proverb says Truth may be blamed, but not shamed, For my own part, I fear
God, and honor my King: I hope at this time I shall displease neither: I will
here use my Pen, as I ever used my Sword; which was more out of love and duty
to my Prince, then lucre of Pay, Honor, or Preferment. As I ever hated to
Insinuatd into any ones Favor: So I hope in this Book I shall incurr no ones
displeasure.

Here is no particular Person Rubbed, but if any be Gaul'd, perhaps they may
Winch, who will be but laughed at, by honest Men; for my part, I fear not their
kicking, but shall Defend my self ( I hope) with honor, having Truth,
Conscience, and Plain-dealing to defend me; Justice and Equity, to second me.
I shall have the Censures of many, in Reading of this Book; All my desire is,
that they would Peruse it all over; I will own it, it is no Bastard decked with
borrowed habit: if it wants Learning, or Language to set it forth, Pray
consider it came from a Soldier, and An Indigent Officer, who can dress it no
better then he is able; confessing himself very poor in his Pen, (as I
believe) we are all left in our Purses; Therefere it may be the better accepted
amongst some of you. However being once past the Press, let it shift (as we
must) for the present; to the grief of our Friends, and derision of our
Enemies; Which God, the King and Parliament, in time ( I hope) will Consider;
to the Comfort and Relief of those that can Clearly make themselves out to be
the Truly Loyal and Jndigent Party.

Which is the humble desire of him, that loves and honors a faithful and
constant Sufferer, a Loyal and civil Subject, a Gallant and Deserving Soldier.

28 MR 59 Charles Hammond.

Truth's Discovery; OR, The Cavaliers Case clearly Stated, BY Conscience and
Plain-dealling.
Laid Open in these Four Heads: 1. Their Grievances made manifest, Impartially.
2. Their Faults laid open, without Flattery. 3. The Causes that produces their
Faults, discovered in reallity. 4. The Remedies discribed in good will, out of
true Loyalty and Fidelity.


And First, The Cavaliers Grievance made manifest.
I Believe we have been a Table-talk in most parts of Christendom these three
Years past; but much more since our Divident of Indigent Money has been
allotted us: not six Weeks Pay for six Years Service, and sixteen years
Sufferings; many Censures and Judgments has been cast upon many Men in the
handling of this business: For my part I shall reflect upon none, but declare
the truth of what I have seen, and heard, and know in it; The King and
Parliament did intend a better Gratuity than it fell out to be. And so it would
have proved, had it been shared to none but those that were truly quallified
according to the Act; but who would not lay Claim to have an Interest in the
Act, when there was neither Penalty nor Punishment for the breakers of it? If
any could procure a Certificate from any Colonel or Captain, that he was a
Commission Officer, that Certificate (with the assistance of some Friends, to
any one or more of the Commissioners) would produce Five of their Hands and
Seals, they believing the Party quallified according to the Certificate that is
so produced from the said Officers, which Officers, it is possible, are to go
sharers with them they so certify for, when they receive their Money; as I
believe too many has (with Impudence) gone clearly off with that Cheat; Others
have Ride up and down the Country, and for some Money in hand, and so much in
the pound (when they receive their Devident) they would secure their business,
and warrant them they shall stand right or wrong; and if they would but conceit
themselves Officers, they would persuade them they were so; and let the Royal
Party that (knew they were no such men) prove it, and by Oath maintain it and
turned them out; yet those Men were brought in again, and have received part of
this Money, and it is not known which way; and if it were, we cannot help it:
It has been proved that some has been dead six years, some ten years, and
some sixteen years; yet those men has been raised again, not to receive their
Money because they are invisible and not to be seen, but to make over Letters
of Attourneys to have their Moneys received for them by such as are not to
learn to Cheat us now, as well as they could the King formerly, by their dead
Musters, and so make him a great Army of Officers now, as they did Soldiers
then; but when they were to do him Service, there could not the Fourth part be
found, no more there will be of these Indigent Officers if the King should call
them for his service, or to have a strict Account whether they be quallified
according to the Act.

Another sort there is of Indigent Officers that carried their Commissions in
their Pockets, that either could not Raise their Regiments Companies, or
Troops, or else would not; yet these made all or most part of their Officers,
especially Quarter Masters, which must provide their Captains quarter for a
Troop, though he had never a Man besides his Officers and their Pedee's and
Baggage Hotses: these would lie upon the Out quarters of the Army if there were
no Danger; else in one Regiment or other: These would serve themselves, being
under no Command; never venturing their Lives unless it were to Plunder, making
the Army odious by their actions; so that civil and gallant Fighting-men were
looked upon by the Country where they marched, as our Indigent Party is here in
the City, all a like; so that a truly Loyal and Indigent Officer now is ashamed
to own himself in regard of so many Counterfeits which has abused both the
King and Country, and is ranked in amongst us, and received as much as any of
the best of us; whether it be their Due or no, I leave that to those in time
may please to Consider of it, if this Book come to their hands; which I hope it
will.

Others there is (that has had a great share in this Money) that may be termed
Indigent Officers, but whether quallified according to the Act, that I shall
not judge of; and they are such as never served the King (if they did) not as
Commission Officers till after 1646, which was at the Rising in Kent, about a
Week standing; or at Colchester, or in Duke Hambleton's Engagement, two or
three Months standing; or in Sir George Boothes business; and all these petty
Risings and TrainRand Officers, that never went out of their own County or
Garrisons where they lived, that were only in a readiness to help to save
themselves, not being able to endure the scent of a light Match upon Service;
yet these are brought in for Indigent Officers too.

And then for Colonels, to make their Serving-men and Grooms Officers, to put
in for the Money; and Captains to appoint Lievtenants, Cornets, Ensigns and
Quarter Masters, (in a Tavern or an Alehouse) and go half snips with them; this
they counted no Cheat if the Officers were dead: Others if they served the
Parliament (after the King was Murdered) till the Restoration of our Sovereign
that now is: nay, some of them proved great Trappaners to the King's Friends
now in these times; yet these are ranked with the truly Loyal and Indigent
Officers, such as were in Pay, when we were in Prison, and could March the
streets, when we were forced to hide our heads: If these be not Grievances
(which we have cause to lay open) let Friends and Enemies both be our Judges;
When it was proved upon Oath before Commissioners, that some never had Command
in their lives: And against others, that there was no such Men known, not so
much as Troopers, or Soldiers, which claimed to be Captains and Commission
Officers, and many of them never appeared to answer for themselves, if there
were any such, as I believe it will be made appear there was not: To be short,
When we thought there had been 1500 at least turned out by Inspection, there
was 300 more then the first Number taken in; so that we were senceable it was
but a folly to strive against the stream, being driven more and more backward.

As for those Indigent Officers that leapt from Corporals to Quarter Masters,
and from Cornets to Captains, Majors, and Lievtenant-Colonels, to put
themselves in Colonels; and to make their Brothers or Kindred
Lievtenant-Colonels and Majors under them, that was accounted nothing, though
it were within a Week or a Fortnight before the laying down of Arms; and some
too that never did the King Service since, nor I believe will never be
Chronicled for their Service they did his Father formerly; for their Loyalty,
it may be they are clear; for I believe they were like a Chip in Pottage, never
did hurt nor good, neither for the King nor his Friends, but all for their own
Ends: Indigent they may be termed, but by their Insinuating, they have gotten
good Gifts and Rewards that has been given by the King (and others) intended
for those that was deserving, and poor; but the Proverb says, Kissing goes by
favor; and Rewards bestowed upon them that can make best Friends, when Service
and Deserts either lies in Prison, or dare not peep out for fear; as by some
it is too openly known, that through Want and Grief together, being ashamed to
make their wants known, especially since the King came in, have broke their
hearts to see some of their Friends slighting them for their Poverty: And
others, that would willingly Relieve them, but not able, the more is their
grief, and to be pitied.

Now there is another sort of truly Loyal, but not Indigent; which some of them
I much honor, having been much impoverished in Estate by their Service for the
King, and never yet had any Reward, that has put in for a Part of this Money,
that are not so Indigent; but if they had thought to what a pitiful sum it
would amount to, they would have left it to them that had more need: But there
are some again that has had good Rewards and Offices (under the King) given
them, some more then their Commands, their Service, or their Sufferings ever
merited, yet has put in, and taken share of this Money too, being so covetous
as to rob the spittle (as I may term it) being ungrateful to his Majesty for
his Favor to them formerly, and abusing his Charity in this which was now
intended for them that were Really in Want for the present: I believe there are
some that has taken of this Money, that if the truth were known (as it may be
made appear) that they have gotten (besides their Places) near a Thousand
pounds a man, and some have Threescore, some an Hundred, nay, Five hundred a
year; yet all these have put in for Indigent Officers; so what I have here
Related concerning our Greivancees is nothing but truth; and much more can be
proved by the truly Loyal and Indigent Party, to the shame of some Persons
(that shall be nameless) if once called to an account: our Wants and
Necessities has been so great, that it is not unknown upon what Rates some men
has been fain to borrow Money, as at Five shillings in the pound, and a
Gratuity to some to help them to it: Some indeed borrowing so much, I believe
they will never come to look for more, knowing they have no right to any of our
Money, if all things had been rightly carried: Besides, there has been
abundance of honest Tradesmen and Housekeepers undone by Trusting and Helping
us in the time we waited for this Money, not any of them thinking but it would
amounted in some measure to a satisfied every moderate man's Debts; but falling
out as it has done, it has undone them, and us too; for some of them are not
able to Relieve themselves now, that formerly Relieved us, that of necessity if
God does not raise Friends for some, they must want Lodging, Food, and Raiment,
unless it be provided them in a Prison, as too many can witness since they have
received this Indigent Money; many being cast into Prison already, others
having neither Money nor Credit, must of necessity either beg, steal, or
starve, unless God be pleased to raise them Friends, to move His Majesty and
the Parliament to provide for them, as they out of their Mercy and Wisdom shall
think fit; which will not be (of the truly Loyal and Indigent Party, that can
prove themselves quallified according to the Act, not) the Fifth part of those
that have gotten their share of this last Money, which I shall more clearly
make out how they may be proved at the latter end of this Book.

So having showed you our Grievances in part, I will now show you the Faults
our Indigent Party is branded with, and not without a cause.

The Faults of the Indigent Party, laid open without flattery.
AS the Complaints are great of the Indigent Party, to the grief of many civil
men (their Friends) so their griefs has been as great to hear the Complaints
against them, which I confess is not without a cause: And give me leave to lay
opent to you those faults which are too openly seen, and heard, to our shame in
the World; that makes many say, We can see the Moats in others eyes, but
perceive not the Beams that are in our own. Our Sufferings was great before his
Majesty was Restored, you will say it is greater now: It Is true our sins was
great before, they are far greater now; God has Restored us to our Peace and
Liberty, which we so long prayed for, and wished for, what Returns have we made
to him for that Mercy? Instead of sending new Praises and Thanksgivings to
present him from our hearts and lips for those Mercies, we have Invented New
Oaths and Curses to send him: He that cannot Swear and Swagger, Drink, Rant,
and Rogue, is looked upon (by some) as a pitiful Fellow, and not worth their
keeping Company; and if he cannot Vapor, he is not looked upon to have any
Valor: These Vices have got such a custom of late, that they are looked upon
to be the only Badge to distinguish a Cavalier from a Sectary, that you shall
find in Court and Camp, in City and Country, that those that are crept into
places of profit and preferment by their Purses (which I believe serves the
King more for lucre of Pay, then love to his Person) these now are become as
absolute Dam-me Boys as the best (or the worst I may say) which formerly would
as soon cut a Cavaliers throat as swear an Oath, and esteemed it a less sin,
unless it had been the Covenant or Engagement; but I have no more to say to
them: but how can we look for Mercies from God, or Favor from the King, when
we (who should show such good Examples for the Glory of God who has delivered
us, and the Honor of our King, whose Cause we fought for) are now so
accustomed to these odious Sins, that we neither feat God's Judgments, nor the
Kings Laws, which are both Enemies to such counterfeit Cavaliers (I can term
them no other, nor ever did) who has done the King more harm by their
deboystness, then ever they can do him good by their service if He should have
occasion to use them; therefore, you that can make your Service and Sufferings
out for His Majesty, show it in your Carriage and Behavior, for your future
Happiness, and His Majesty's Honor: We have Enemies enough, we had need make
God our Friend, and that can never be with such courses: I believe, if some
thought there was a God, they would not call upon him to damn them so often as
they do; it is an Oath so common, it is grown a custom by Rich and Poor, Men
and Women, Old and Young; we can talk against the Pride of the Gentry, the
Covetousness of the Clergy, the Deceit of the Citizens, and the Corruption of
the Lawyer; but Swearing, Cursing, Lying, Backbiting, and Insinuating is
counted no sins amongst us; and that I must be bold to tell you, That those
that profess themselves the Indigent Party, are greatly Guilty in this, and by
Jarring and Quarrelling one with another, every one thinking his own wit best,
till at last some outwitted all those thar are truly Indigent; and well they
may, having Four to One against us, and good backers to second them: These, and
such like, are the Faults of the Indigent Party, which I have here declared,
not out of Envy or Hypocrisy, but out of the Love to them that are of the
right Party, hoping you will better accept of it from a Friend then from an
Enemy; for others, let them think what they will, and speak what they list, I
have done what I can to make it appear who are the truly Loyal and Indigent
Party, and who the Counterfeit, that the Cheat may be found though the
Gamesters be hid) for the satisfaction of our Friends, which are grieved for
us; and likewise for our Enemies which rejoices at our Poverty, and would work
upon our Necessity if they could; but I hope they shall find us more contented
with our Rags of Loyalty, with a quiet Conscience, then they can be in their
Robes of Sedition, which they have gained by our Ruin, not doubting but God's
Mercy, and the Kings Clemency in time may relieve us, when its clearly known
who has faithfully served and suffered for him; in the mean time, I desire all
them that fear God, and honor the King, not to let their Grievances and
Poverty move their Passion so much by their Cursing and Swearing, which makes
us stink in the nostrils of God, and odious in the company of civil persons,
and become a laughing stock to our Enemies, that has nothing else to look for,
but the Judgments of God to fall upon us, such like sins, which are too much
used by those that profess themselves the Kings Friends.

So having now showed you the Faults of our Party, I shall show you the Causes,
which are many; I will instance a few, and though they be great, I desire to
remove them, that our Faults may be mended.

The Causes that produces their Faults, Discovered in Reallity.
WE can plead no cause we have for our sins, or Faults, but what produces
them, we may; and that I shall declare, which is Pride, Poverty, and Passion;
you will say it is strange that the Indigent Party should be tainted with Pride,
for they have cause enough to be humbled: Yes, but the Counterfeits are proud
in conceit, that they have outwitted, out-vapoured, and can out-swear the truly
Loyal and Indigent Party, as by woeful experience we have found; I must tell
you, that they take such pride in their swearing, that they think they are not
looked upon as Gentlemen and Cavaliers, unless they can swear to all they
speak, whether it be truth or lies; nay, I dare say, that there are many
hundreds that have received their potion of this Indigent Money (with the best)
that have discharged more Vollies of Oaths in the faces of the Kings Friends,
then ever they discharged corns of powder gallantly in the faces of his
Enemies, if the greatest Swearers and Vapourers could prove themselves the best
Soldiers and the greatest Sufferers for his Majesty, they then may be proud of
their Loyalty to the King, but they cannot boast of their good service to God:
I must tell you, it is the greatest honor that can redound to a Soldier to be
counted Religious, as well as Valourous; and Humility is the truest badge of
Gentility: you must not blaze every man's Arms now by the Coat he wears on his
back; if you should, Poverty procured by Loyalty, would be a great blot in the
Seutchins of many a gallant Soul, and well bred Gentleman, which can patiently
see every day Rich Coats worn by such as cannot find a Coot of Arms to blaze,
unless they fetch it from the Hauraldy of Rebellion, or buy it, as many has
done Places of Honor and Preferment with the Purses that they have gained by
the Plunder, Purchase, and utter Ruin of some of his Majesty's best Subjects,
which in their Eyes and in their Hearts they think and will speak a far off,
that our Poverty is a just Reward for our Loyalty, terming us Fools that we did
not turn Knaves as they did, and then face about with them, having but Money in
our Purses they say it would a procured us Friends enough at Court, I hope
every rational man may clearly see that I have spoken nothing but truth, and
you may give losers leave to speak, having nothing more to lose now but our
lives; for few of us can boast of being sure of our Liberty, not daring to walk
the streets in the City for fear of a Compter Scuffle, nor out of the City for
fear of a worse Party, which has taken many of our Indigent Officers, and
conveyed them to such Garrisons, where they must lie till God in his Mercy take
them away, or the King in his Clemency find Exchanges for them, which some of
their hard-hearted Creditors had rather see starved to death than Relieved or
Released by them; and this is the Poverty that has caused many a civil Soul to
fall into Passion to see his fellow Sufferer ready to starve, and not able to
Relieve him, to see him carried to Prison and cannot help him, to hear him
laughed at, scorned and derided by others and dare not vindicate him without the
venturing your life, or flying your Country, or suffer your self to be
villified in taking his part, by such as with their insinuating into some men's
Favors that are in Authority, shall smite you secretly (if it be possible) and
you shall never know who hurts you, and shall ruin you in your Credit as they
have done in your Estate, if their Tongue or their Purse can do it: Are not
these sufficient Causes to move passion in civil men to break out beyond reason
sometimes, when our Poverty for our Fidelity shall make us ridiculous, our
inferiors predominating over us, our Superiors more countenancing our Enemies
then hearkening to us, and our own Party not able to help one another, our
Complaints being kept from his Majesty's Ear, as our Persons by our Poverty are
kept from his Presence; so that I believe some of us may compare with Job for
patience, and outstrip him too in some points, as I shall take a little leave
to parrallel; Job was a rich man, had Wife and Children, God suffered Satan to
afflict him in Body and Estate to try his patience, he endured to the end and
was Restored: we cannot read that ever Job wanted Bread, nor was forced to fly
from his own House and Home, or ever stood in danger of his life every hour by
the hands of Rebels, in his own Country; he had his Liberty (though in sores
and misery) no debarring of any Friends that would come and visit him: How many
of the Kings Friends have lost all, many have been starved for want, and at
this time wants bread, having neither House nor Habitation of their own to go
to, and now when the time of Restoration was expected: how many has been
forced formerly to fly their own Country, every day in danger of a Jayle, if
not their Life; their Friends not daring to visit them without being in danger
of being Undone for them; being Plundered and Robbed by their own native
Country, their Kindred (not Caldeans) professed Enemies to our Country, as
Job's was to him; yet in during to the end with patience, never cursing the Day
of our Nativity nor the Cause that brought us to this Misery, as willing still
to venture our lives for his Majesty that now is, as we hazarded our lives and
Estates formerly for his Father of blessed Memory; give me leave to think if
Job had lived in these times to have been an Indigent Officer, and endured so
much slavery and poverty, and afterward been delivered to his former liberty,
and a reasonable Provision provided by King and Parliament for his present
Necessity, and that being Ordered and handled so that it produces him to more
Misery, by the close sinister ends of those that profess to be his Friends, and
of his own Party, I believe it would have urged his patience, and with some of
us, think that (if it were to be searched out) they would find in it much
partiallity, and that the main ends of some covetous Parties has brought many
to misery, and highly abused the King and Parliaments Clemency, which was never
intended for such as has received it, which are above Three thousand not
quallified according to the Act, which has been formerly declared, and can be
clearly made out by civil rational men, that are neither vapourers nor
flatterers; and will prove it the greatest Cheat that ever was acted against so
needful an Act of Charity as this was.

So having showed you our Grievances, our Faults, and the Causes, I shall now
propound some Remedies, which being applied to these sores, may open abundance
of Corruption to the sight of those (in time) may pity our Condition, and use
some Remedies to cure our lingering Disease.

Remedies described in good will (out of true Loyalty) for the recovery of the
truly Loyal and Indigent Party.
THe Remedies that I shall produce, are but few; yet being applied with the
help of these, we look for Relief and Redress from, which are these Honorable
Persons (the Parliament I mean) that (under God) has already, and will heal (I
hope) our tottered and once almost ruined Kingdom, which we may justly claim to
be Members of; though some by Age and Wounds, and others by Poverty, are not
able to do as they have done, yet are willing still; and I dare boldly say (in
the behalf of some) if tried, are as able now (by their Knowledge and Courage)
to do the King as good service (if there were occasion to use them) as they did
formerly for his Father of ever blessed Memory: But for the Remedies in hand;
some things that are past I shall not propound, which were to recover a thing
unpossible, which is the Money that was alloted amongst us, it being dispersed
into so many greedy and needy hands, which I believe (and it is thought by not
rash, but rational men) that a good handsome part of the threescor thousand
pounds will fall into the hands of but a few persons that will be made by our
undoing; but the Letters of Attorney will skin over that sore, and it can
hardly be remedied; for the Office-Money, how that has been handled, none can
justly tell, though give a shrewd guess; but if the Raters and Receivers were
but thoroughly purged and searched, that Corruption may be fetched out, and a
Remedy in time may be procured; but I must confess it is but a folly in me (or
any other of our poor Party) to propound any Remedies for such old sores that
are too deep for us to search into: therefore I shall leave those things that
is past my finding out, and prescribe a few Remedies that may do well for the
future, to help those that are the truly Loyal and Indigent Party, that if ever
the King or Parliament (or any other) should be willing to help heal us; that
those may be looked on whose service, sufferings, and deserts deserves pity,
and that should be made appear by a new Certificate from the Hand or Hands of
the Chiefest Officer of the Regiment now living, that is known himself to be a
Deserving Gallant man, and it was a Complete fighting Regiment, and then to
Certify that he knew such a man, and he had a real Command so long, as he can
testify of his own knowledge, and of his behavior and carriage while he was
under his Command; and thus to certify the truth according to his deserts upon
his Credit; and likewise to get another Certificate from the Hands of
Creditable men where he lived, or from others that knew him where he had been
since the Wars, and would testify for his Loyalty after he left the Kings
Army, to the Restoration of our now Gracious Sovereign: I believe, if none but
those that could produce such a Certificate should have had share of this
Indigent Money, we should have had no cause to declare our Grievances; but I
believe, then it would a been a great grief to some, to have seen none but
honest men provided for; for then they should not a been so well provided (as
they are now) with our Money: Next Remedy is, if for the future there should
any provision be made either by Offices or Places, either Martial or Civil, or
any Money given by his Majesty (or any others) that it may be put into the
hands of impartial men to be distributed, such as Jethro prescribed to Moses,
Men fearing God and hating Covetousness; that Rewards intended for deserving
men and sufferers that wants, may not be distributed to particular persons in
Private, by Letters from Ladies (or Great men) to their Serving-men, Footmen,
or Porters, or to such as has had more already then ever their Service
deserved, being a cluster of Insinuating Impudent (more then Indigent)
Officers, that runs up and down (hearkening after such Gifts) either fawning
with the Favorites, or Feeing them (and the Clerks that belongs to such
persons, that has the distributing of such Gifts) that when their own turn is
served, if there be any thing left, (giving them a part with you) they will
make you acquainted with it; this has been the course of most Gifts that has
been bestowed since his Majesty came in, that if it were openly known upon whom
it has been bestowed, it could not be made appear that it has been half
distributed according to the Intentions it was given for; so that a few
particular persons has and does get a shear in everything, and most of them
deserves nothing, and some wants nothing; when some Gentlemen to my knowledge
that had done the King good service, has been great Sufferers, gallant
Soldiers (and no diserters) that could not get a penny of all this Money to
relieve them, not hearing of it till it was all distributed; some being brought
to that condition through want, that now they are past want; such as could not
make their case known to none but such as could not help themselves, but only
with hopes, which keeps their hearts from breaking, thinking they are now at
the worst; therefore in hopes it will mend. Another Remedy would be desired for
the truly Loyal and Indigent Soldiers that served his Majesty as well as
Officers, which are or should be provided for by Pension according to the Act,
which I believe if they were clearly purged, and none to have it but such as
could produce (from their Officers, and the places where they have lived or
been since the Wars) such Certificates as I prescribed for our Indigent
Officers before, I believe then there would be a good subsistence for all true
Pentioners, Widows (or others) which I believe is not many more then they have
made Indigent Officers, if they were carefully examined; but there is as great
Complaints from them as there is justly from us; some that never served the
King, some that served a while and run home, others that served the Rebels
here in England till the King came in; Yes, and received their Wounds in their
service against the King (some of them) and had Pension for it from them; yet
making Friends, and getting some Officers Hand (like themselves) or to keep
them from the Parish charge, has gotten in to be Pensioners, when (to my
knowledge) there are those that has been stout Soldiers, and served as
Corporals and Sergeants (and continued till the end of the Wars) lame and
wounded too, and have been faithful ever since; some can get nothing, some
Forty shillings or Three pounds a year, when Four pounds (or more) shall be
allotted some that can be proved as unworthy Rascals against the Kings Friends
(in the time of Rebellion) as those that were always against us, and worse
too, and would be as ready still to stand for Rebellion if they thought it
would prove the stronger side; thus has the Kings and Parliaments Clemency in
the Act been abused, which I hope God will put into the hearts of some of the
Nobility and Clergy to move his Majesty in our behalf, that he would appoint
some noble Persons to hear our Grievances, and in some way relieve us, that
such whom God in Mercy, has preserved their lives, and shifted for their
Liberty and Livelihood in the worst of times, as we thought, should not now
complain for want of Food, Raiment, and Liberty, and to see (both in Court and
Camp, Sea and Land) places of profit and preferment bestowed upon them that
has enough to live on besides, which they gained when we lost all; when able
men, and civilmen as ever served his Majesty, only branded with Poverty, must
be looked upon by these persons as unworthy men, and not fit to have any
Employment, by reason of the deboystness of some that has made themselves the
Cavalier Party.

I must of necessity Conclude, and leave these Remedies (and what else is
wanting) to be remedied by those whom God directs and appoints, not only to
hear us, but what they shall see (in their Wisdom) is wanting for the
Advancement of His Majesty, the Peace and Preservation both of Church and
People under his Majesty's Dominions, which shall be the Prayers of him, which
for this time takes his leave, desiring what you see in this Book writ out of
Ignorance or Passion, judge favorably of it, and let that real Intention which
I aim at, without sinester ends, plead for my Infirmities, which you discover
here, reflecting upon your selves, knowing there is none free from some or
other.

Postscript.
I Know there is many will wonder, that I should presume to take upon me, to
write this Book, being there is many of our Party that were far more able to
have undertook the handling of it: I must confess it might have come from a
better Pen, but not a truer Heart; It grieved me to see what Confusion there
has been amongst us from the beginning: some drawing up Remonstrances, and
Grievances, and setting of Hands to this Thing, and that Thing; then Choosing of
Trustees, appointing of Meetings at several places, and so spend our Time and
Money too (them that had it) some siding for one Party, some for another; every
one crying out they are wronged, when some of them are as much tainted
themselves as the worst, yet take upon them to Right others, when they have
done the most Wrong, and think their pretended high Commands that they have
had, will bear them out.

Some of those Gentlemen that we Chose for Trustees, I much honor; whose aim
and intentions I believe were right; but for some amongst them, I cannot
understand that how they can be clearly for our Good, that cannot clear
themselves: Must not they wink at others, for fear themselves should be brought
to light? I should desire every one to rest themselves contented, and not
hearken after the Fancies of every sinister-ended Party, that are more for
their own end, then for the general Good of us (if they should bring their
purposes to pass) For my part, the writing of this Book was intended (from me)
only to give Satisfaction to all Loyal Subjects, how His Majesty's, and the
Parliaments Clemency has been abused, and we wronged and disgraced; having
such a Company of pitiful Fellows lay Claim to be Commission Officers; some (I
believe) knows not a Rank from a File, nor a Countermarch from a Wheell; that
never looked as if they had either Wit or Valor in them (and wanting both,
they were very unfit to Command) for I believe the King was never in such need
of Officers; and some that were more fit for a Rod, than wear a Sword in his
late Majesty's Service, being twenty six or thirty years of Age, has had this
Divident too; so that what long of such (and your Roaring, Dam-me, Counterfeit
Cavaliers) has rendered our Party so ridiculous in the Eyes of some People,
that they slight and scorn all civil Cavaliers for their sakes: but I must tell
them, there was, and is, as gallant and as civil men in the Kings Army, which
hated, and does hate such Courses as much as the greatest Zealot of them all,
not out of Hypocrisy, or fear of the Law, but out of the fear of God, which we
should all live in; perhaps some may censure it is out of Envy, or vain Glory,
that I have so often touched upon Swearing; it is so often in my Ears (against
my will) which makes me mind it so often to you, that you may bend your mind to
leave it.

For Envy or vain Glory, how much I have heen guilty of these two Sins, I
leave those to censure that knows me now, or formerly in the Kings Service;
which I was constantly in one Army, and in one Regiment, though under Four
Colonels: First the Lord Mehuns, then Sir Charles Mehuns, afterward Col. John
Digbys, and last Sir Chichester Wrays; my service being most in the West,
belonging to the Cornish Army; and now since his Majesty's Restoration. I have
served in his Majesty's Regiment of Gaurds (as a Soldier) in the Right
Honorable Col. John Russels own Company: What my service and carriage has
been (from the first to the last) I leave to the censure of those that are able
to Report of both, either for my Credit or Shame, desiring them to give no
better nor worse a Character then I have deserved; which I know can never
redound to my dishonor for my service (and I hope as little for my Carriage
and Behavior to every man) which I shall endeavor to continue with the utmost
of my power, hoping in time to see such men countenanced, if not provided for;
whose service and carriage has never dishonored that just Cause they ever
Fought for, which was for Gods Glory, and his Majesty's just Rights; which is
the Desire of him, that for present leaves you, and remains your Friend to the
utmost of his power, so far forth as you are Loyal Subjects: Hoping this Book
may light into the Hands of some near the King, that may Reflect upon their own
Sufferings formerly; and to do now, as they would be done unto, if they were in
our Condition.

FINIS.

