A DISCOURSE CONCERNING ZEAL, AGAINST Immorality and Profaneness Delivered in
Two SERMONS IN St. Michaels Church DVBLIN, October 29, and November 26. 1699.

DUBLIN, Printed by Joseph Ray in Skinner-Row, for Jacob Milner Bookseller in
Essex-Street, 1700.

TO THE SOCIETIES FOR REFORMATION of MANNERS.
I Consented the more readily to Publish the following Discourse, least I might
be suspected as wanting that Zeal my self, which I Recommended to others, and
as Afraid of those Censures, which I Exhorted you to Despise. Since therefore
you think the Publication of it, may do some Service to Religion, and Promote
that Excellent Undertaking, wherein you have engaged your selves; I do
willingly put it into your Hands, without making any Apology for those Defects,
which may render it liable to Exceptions: For True Zeal Studies to do Good,
rather than to Please; To Improve Men in Piety, not to Gratify a Vain
Curiosity. Plain Dealing is a Part of its Character, and it boldly tells Men
necessary (tho often disobliging) Truths, being more concerned that the Food it
gives, be Wholesome and Nourishing, than Dressed up with great Nicety and Art.

That GOD would Strengthen and Improve your Zeal, and add to your Numbers many
more Zealously Affected in all good things: That he would Bless your
Endeavors, against Vice and Profaneness with Success, and make You happy
Instruments of Advancing and Establishing a General Reformation of Manners, and
at last Reward your Piety and Zeal, with the Glories and Happiness of Heaven:
Is with great Sincerity Prayed for, by

Your Faithful and Affectionate Servant William Hamilton.

Gal. IV. xviii. It is good to be zealously affected always in a good thing.


THE Two great Extremes in Religion opposite to the genuine Spirit of
Christianity and equally destructive of it, are a Cold Indifference on the one
hand; on the other, an Intemperate Zeal. This Transports a Man beyond all
bounds of Sobriety and Prudence; and where the other prevails that Life and
Fervor must be wanting, without which we can neither be good Christians our
selves, nor successful Instruments in making others so.

So that it is in the Moral as in the Natural World, wherein there are violent
Degrees both of Heat and Cold, there are Regions continually exposed to the
Suns hottest Rays, there are others under the constant power of Ice and Snow;
in the one you Freeze, you are Scorched in the other.

But still betwixt these Extremes, lie Temperate Climates, where Cold and Heat
are regularly divided, where there is enough of each to answer the Necessities
of Nature, and Ends of Creation. Thus it is, thus it ought to be in Religion,
we are to choose a middle way betwixt the Lethargy of the Careless, and
Violence of the Zealot. A Religious warmth should actuate our Spirits, but no
Wildfire should inflame them. We should have a hearty concern for the Honor
of GOD, and the Promotion of Piety, and an equal abhorrence of Profaneness and
Vice, but then Modesty and Humility, Sincerity and Prudence, should still
accompany our Zeal. It should be Peaceable and Impartial; its End manifestly
good, its manner of Acting Regular and Legal: And then it would be such Zeal as
St. Paul recommends to us, It is good to be Zealously Affected always in a good
thing.

Zeal in the general acceptance of the World, signifies such a fervent emotion
of our Spirits, such an inflammation of our Passions and Affections, as makes
us pressing and earnest, in the pursuit of any undertaking, together with some
degree of Trouble and Impatience, at our being opposed in our Designs, and
obstructed in the attainment of them. Whatever we vigorously contend for, and
prosecute with a strong endeavor, for that thing we may be said to be Zealous.

Zeal then resides in the Affections, and has its sway over them; and indeed
whenever we are Zealously Affected, all our Passions and Affections have new
Heat and Vigor infused into them, and they become more strong and lively than
before.

Our Love fixes on the Object of our Zeal, and we grasp it with a powerful bent
of desire, and Zeal excites our passion of Hatred, against whatever is contrary
to the thing we Love. Zeal enlivens our hopes with the flattering expectations
of success, but sometimes dejects our Spirits, with the apprehensions of
disappointment. Great Joy attends a Prosperous Zeal, and it is hard not to be
grieved, when we are Zealous in vain.

So that Zeal is strictly nothing else, but a very strong and active warmth of
the two prevailing Passions of Love and Hatred: of Love toward what appears
Good and Excellent: Of Hatred against what we judge Evil and Dangerous; all our
other Passions and Affections; Fears and Hopes; Joy and Grief being consequent
upon these.

Thus for Example. Do we passionately Love GOD, and Burn with some degree of
Angels Fire? Does he possess the Chief Empire of our Hearts and Minds; and do
we suffer nothing to out-Rival him in our Affections? The consequence of this
must be, that with great industry and application we propagate his Service, and
earnestly contend for his Glory; That we make it the constant matter of our
Study and Prayers, to engage others to Love his Name and Obey his Laws. That
our most sensible Grief shall be the effect of seeing him Dishonored, our
greatest Joy, of seeing Religion Prosper. And thus we may be said to be
Zealously Affected toward GOD.

Again, do we hate and abhor Sin with the same degree of Passion, wherewith we
love GOD? Do we see something in it contrary to the Divine Nature; to Infinite
Purity, Justice and Goodness, as also to our own reason and Happiness? Then we
must needs labor to destroy it as a common Enemy; and cannot but mightily
Rejoice, when we do it with any Success. And so we are Zealously Affected
against Sin.

I own the Word Zeal is frequently in Scripture taken in a bad sense;
Emulations [(...)] are by St. Paul reckoned among the works of the Flesh, Gal.
5.20. And St. James cautions us against [(...)] Bitter Envying, or Zeal. Ja.
3.14. And indeed it is the Object of our Zeal together with its manner of
acting, that renders it either Virtuous or Unlawful, a Duty or a Sin.

If we envy our Neighbors Happiness, are uneasy at his Prosperity, and
pleased with his Misfortunes: Then is our Zeal highly Wicked, it is the
prevailing Quality, the very Essence of the Devil. But if our Zeal fixes upon a
right Object, proposes as its end something morally good; and prosecutes that
end by fair justifiable Methods: Then is it a Commendable and Christian Zeal.

But now to render our Zeal truly such, these two Qualifications are necessary:
That it be constant and lasting; and that it be employed in a good thing.

I. Our Zeal must be constant and lasting. It is good to be Zealously Affected
always. True Zeal is no sudden Heat, no violent Transport, nor gust of Passion,
which is vehement for a while but soon blows over; but is a constant Religious
frame of Mind. It Is true it is not always upon the stretch, nor acts to the
utmost of its force, yet is it habitually disposed to it. Like Fire it is ever
moving, yet burns not still alike, but is sometimes blown up into a Flame.

But that which in the Second place Consecrates our Zeal, and renders it such
as St. Paul's was, and such as he proposes to us as excellent and necessary, is
the goodness of its Object. It is good to be Zealously Affected always,
provided it be in a good thing. For the more intense our Zeal is, the greater
mischief it does, if we mistake in the Object of it: As the sharper the Weapon,
and the more violent the Blow, the deeper, the more dangerous must be the
Wound. And both Sacred and Profane History afford us many melancholy
instances of the dismal effects of a Misguided Zeal, which being mistaken in
its Object, and over violent in its degree, has proved fatal to Religion, and
set the World on Fire.

But now since the case is so, since Zeal which is not determined to a right
Object is generally hurtful and always vain; the great Question is, what is the
proper Object of Religious Zeal, and what is that good thing wherein it is good
to be always Zealously Affected?

This is on all hands allowed to be that (what ever that particularly may be)
whereby the Glory of God is Promoted, Religion Strengthened, the good of others
and our own Salvation Advanced and Secured.

So far there is no Controversy, and all persuasions agree. But the misery is,
when Men come to enter upon Particulars, their Zeal is for the most part
confined to the interest and opinions of a Party, to things of smaller
Concernment and Importance, to the externals of Religion, and modes Worship,
things wherein Men never did, nor ever will agree. And while they nicely
dispute and eagerly contend about these, they too often overlook The weightier
Matters of the Law, Judgment, Mercy, and Faith. The Life of Religion, Piety and
Virtue.

It is very true, that nothing in Religion should be esteemed little or
inconsiderable; if it belongs to Religion at all it must be of moment and
challenges our regard. Yet it will be easily acknowledged, that some things of
greater necessity than others, and tho nothing is small enough to fall below
our notice, yet what is of greatest Weight deserves our first and greatest
Zeal; and as our Savior speaks in a Parallel case, the one we should be sure
to do, yet so as not to leave the other undone. Mat. 23.23.

Those things therefore which the Natural Reason of Mankind approves, and all
the differing Parties of Christians agree in as good and excellent, those are
undoubtedly the fittest Objects of a Christian's Zeal, and the good things
wherein we ought to be most Zealously Affected. Such are the great and
substantial Parts of our Duty to GOD and our Neighbor, the constant exercise
of Piety and Devotion toward the one, of Justice, and Charity toward the
other: The attainment of the particular Virtues of the Christian Life; such as
Humility, Meekness, Patience, Self-denial, and the like; and promoting as
effectually as we can the Practice of them in others. And such likewise in a
particular manner are, suppressing public and scandalous Immoralities, and
restraining the progress of Vice, by a just Execution of our Laws against it,
stemming the Torrent of Impiety and Profaneness, and correcting Lewd and
Disorderly Practices. Zeal that is employed in such things as these is truly
Glorious, and it is good to be Zealously Affected always in them: It is good to
be active and industrious, constant and indefatigable, in so Divine a Service;
a Service that has all the Encouragements of Earth and Heaven, to invite us to
it; intitles us here to GOD's particular Grace and Favor, and to extraordinary
degrees of Glory hereafter.

This my Brethren is the good thing wherein you have been, and I hope still are
so Zealously Affected. You have stood in the Gap, and opposed that Flood of
Wickedness, which not long since, had almost overwhelmed us. You have in some
measure checked those Crimes, which heretofore were publicly committed, with
Impunity, and without shame. Your Endeavors and Examples have gained many
Proselites to Piety, which after long languishing, begins to recover both
Strength and Courage; and to shine forth like that Great Light which rules and
makes the Day; tho like the same Sun, its Brightness is sometimes obscured by
Clouds: Its Branches are adorned with very fair Blossoms, which promise a
plentiful Stock of excellent Fruit. You have engaged in a Service acceptable to
good Men, and (what is infinitely more valuable) pleasing to GOD himself, and
you may be assured, you shall never want their Prayers, nor his Blessing. A
Service so Heavenly, that it renders the meanest concerned in it truly
Honorable, and adds more than a Title, an Estate or even a Crown, to the
luster and dignity of the Greatest. A Service which we are all obliged to
encourage and promote, according to our different Capacities and Conditions; if
we are Ministers, by earnest Exhortations and good Example: If Magistrates, by
a just and impartial exercise of our Authority: And if we are but Christians,
we may be useful to it, by the sincerity and constancy of our Prayers.

Now the First of these is, what at present my Office and your Desires oblige
me to Perform. I shall therefore testify my own Zeal, to the great Work you
have taken in hand, by offering the best Motives I am able to Excite and
Confirm yours: That so your Zeal may never languish, nor your Affections to
your Masters service abate and cool: But that this Heavenly Flame of True Zeal
may Burn Brighter and Stronger in your Souls to the last; may in the Evening of
Life maintain its Noonday Vigor, until with the Spirits wherein it dwelt, it
be Translated to the other World, and from the Zeal of Men, be refined to that
of Angels: That so likewise, unreasonable Calumnies and Censures may never
divert you from your Noble Resolutions, but that you may become more Fixed,
Courageous, and Undaunted, in advancing Piety and suppressing Vice; more
earnest in your Prayers to GOD, to keep you steadfast and firm to your good
purposes, and to bless your Endeavors with success.

And tho I can say little upon this Argument but what you have already heard,
and know; yet I hope to be at least your Remembrancer, if not your Instructor,
to put you in remembrance of these things, tho you know them, and be
established in the present Truth. 2 Pet. 1.12.

In order to which I purpose to do Four Things.

First, To enquire what those particular Sins are, in suppressing of which we
ought to be most Zealously Affected.

Secondly, To consider who are principally obliged, and concerned to be
Zealously Affected, against those dangerous Sins.

Thirdly, To point out some of those ways, wherein we may most usefully employ
and show our Zeal, so as to attain its excellent End. And

Fourthly, To offer such Motives, as may best excite and confirm our Zeal, that
so we may be Zealously Affected always in that good thing about which we ought
to be engaged.

I. I am to enquire what those particular Sins are in suppressing of which we
ought to be most Zealously Affected.

It has already been observed in general, that promoting our known Duty,
undisputed Piety and Virtue, is the best thing wherein we can be Zealously
Affected. For these are the Essentials of Religion, without which no other
priviliges we can enjoy or boast of, will be of any advantage to us. Now this
will be most happily effected, by suppressing those Vices and Impieties, which
more directly dishonor GOD, and weaken Religion; and such undoubtedly are
Blasphemous Oaths and Curses, Profaning the Lords Day, either by our Ordinary
Labors, or Scandalous Diversions; together with the Brutal Vices of
Intemperance and Lewdness.

Now we ought to be more Zealously Affected against these, than other Sins,
because they are more destructive Enemies to Piety; there is more of Leprosy
and Infection in them, and they are attended with more Fatal Consequences:
Other Sins, I say, which being more private and unobserved, draw not such a
Train of Mischiefs after them.

The first Sin then, against which it is a good thing to be Zealously Affected,
is Profane Cursing and Swearing.

That horrid Sin, which Dares Omnipotence, and Mocks avenging Justice, which
affronts GOD out of Diversion, and Plays with his Thunder and Lightning. That
Sin, which strikes at the Foundations of Religion, by involving Men in frequent
Perjuries, and taking off all Reverence for an Oath. That Sin, which hurries
daily many Souls to Hell, and is the fearful of Language of that place of
Impiety, as well as Torment; and where the Damned at once Gnaw their Tongues
for Pain, and Blaspheam the GOD of Heaven. That Sin I say, should surely stir
up the Indignation and Zeal of all those who have any Honor, any Love for GOD
or Religion to punish, to destroy it; so effectually to suppress it, that it
never may again Triumph in our Streets.

The misplaced Devotion of the Athenians, inflamed St. Paul's Zeal: He was
filled with various Passions of Anger, of Pity, and of Grief, to see the City
wholly given to Idolatry; He Argued, he Contended with their greatest
Philosophers, and even hazarded his Life to Convert them.

And should not our Spirits be moved within us, to hear the Venerable Name of
the True GOD, Impiously Profaned, and Ridiculously Invoked; and that not by
Ignorant Heathens, but Pretended Christians? by those who while they usurp that
Sacred Title. Are not only far from GOD in their Hearts, but with their very
Lips Dishonor him?

It must needs therefore be a good thing to be Zealously Affected, against this
prevailing Sin; to Vindicate GOD's Honor, and bring those who Profane his
Name to Punishment.

A Second Sin against which, it is a good thing to be Zealously Affected, is
the Violation of the Lord's Day, that Day which is Dedicated to the Worship and
Service of GOD.

The Profanation of the Lord's Day, has so fatal an influence on Religion, and
tends so naturally to deface it, that they who are Zealously Affected for the
one, must have a tender regard for the other. For the concerns of this World,
do so steal upon Men's Minds, so charm and bewitch them, that did not the
constant returns of the Lord's Day relax their Thoughts, and call them off from
Business and Diversion, to Religion and Devotion; not only the Power but form
of Godliness would be lost, not only the thing it self, but very Name of
Religion would be Banished the World.

Whereas the Religious Observation of the Lord's Day, does often awaken those
good thoughts, which all the Week have lay'n Buried under Cares and Pleasures.
And many who at first go to Church out of Decency and Custom, will at length go
out of Religion and Devotion. And indeed our joining in Devout Prayers, and
Heavenly Praises, hearing the Holy Scriptures Read, and our Duty affectionately
recommended; all these preserve Spiritual Life, keep Conscience sensible and
tender.

And the more strictly the Lord's Day is kept, the better will it answer the end
of its Institution, the more effectually promote Piety, and secure Religion,
whereas if only a part of it be allowed to the Worship of GOD, and the rest
taken up in Sports and Diversions, it is to be feared, that our Morning
Thoughts will soon pass away; and that the Evening Pastimes will deface all the
good Impressions of the Day.

Now shall we not do excellent Service to Religion, by rescuing the Lord's Day
from Scandalous Abuses, and hindering those Practices which must if not
prevented, destroy it? The Honor of GOD is inseparably united to that of his
Day. And Religion must languish and decay, when that Day is Neglected or
Profaned: Public Worship must be disused, and Private fall of Consequence. Of
this our Governors are sensible, and therefore good Laws have been Enacted to
hinder it; which are but a dead letter unless vigorously Executed. This surely
then deserves and calls for our most active Zeal, to put the Laws in Execution
against the Prophaners of the Lord's Day, since the preservation or ruin of
Religion, does in a great measure depend upon it.

Thirdly, They who are Zealously Affected against Sin, must labor to suppress
Lewdness and Uncleaness, and make those Wretched Creatures feel the just
Severity of the Laws, who set up Factories for Wickedness, and make
Prostitution their Trade.

Christianity is an Undefiled Religion, Ja. 1.26.3.17. (...).
and the Wisdom from above is pure or chaste; it prohibits all Lascivious
Practices, and lays restraints on our Thoughts. And is it possible there should
be any Country where this Holy Religion is Publicly Professed, and Divine Laws
enforced by Temporal Punishments; where there are Christian Ministers to
persuade, and Christian Mgistrates to correct Offenders: In which
notwithstanding Lewdness and Debauchery should be so much, so long winked at,
as almost to plead Prescription, and Toleration? That there should be
Seminaries for Uncleaness, and yet unpunished, unregarded?

Thus it has been heretofore among us, and these Vices are still not only too
commonly committed, but gloried in, to the great Dishonor of GOD, and Reproach
of Religion. That then must be an excellent Zeal which dares check and oppose
these abominable Sins; which inspires us with Courage to Rescue our
Christianity from Contempt, by bringing the Scandals of it to just Punishment
and Shame, without being moved at their Insolence, or afraid of their Revenge.

There are many other very common, very dangerous Sins, against which it is a
good thing to be Zealously Aflected, particularly Common Drunkenness, and
Excessive Gaming. For these are not only great Sins in themselves, but often
the unhappy causes of those I have already named. Gaming inflames the Passions,
fills the Mouth with Curses, and the whole Man with Rage. Drunkenness divests
Men of their Reason, and puts every irregular desire into a Ferment; and then
no wonder if Blasphemies be their Language, and Fleshly Lusts prevail against
them. And very often Religion is neglected on the Lord's Day, for the sake of
Drinking or Gaming, and wasted away in those mean, unprofitable Entertainments.

But since our Laws more directly take Cognizance of those other Sins, I would
to GOD that our Zeal were successful in entirely suppressing them. For they are
the most pernicious Scandals to Religion, and should therefore be the more
immediate Objects of our Zeal And were no Swearing heard among us, were the
Lord's Day employed in Exercises of Religion and Devotion, and were all known
Traders in in Lewdness driven away; what a Holy, what a Happy People would we
soon become? How Glorious would Piety appear with all its Beauteous Charms? How
would Religion Prosper and Flourish? How would Wickedness Blush and Tremble,
and Fly away?

And this might soon be effected, did all heartily join in it, who are under
particular Obligations so to do; which brings me in the Second place to
consider who are principally obliged and concerned to be Zealously Affected
against those dangerous Sins.

It Is certainly reason sufficient why we should be zealously affected against
public Vices that we are Christians: Professors of that Religion which exacts
the highest degrees of Holiness from our selves, and requires us to be Zealous
and Industrious in reclaiming others from their evil ways, and in promoting
Religion and Reformation of Manners in the World.

But sometimes particular Obligations arising from our Stations and
Circumstances here, are superadded to those which Christianity lays upon us,
which must be various as our Capacities and Conditions are. I shall therefore
mention several ranks of Men, who are principally concerned in this Great Work,
and are bound with more than ordinary Diligence and Zeal to apply themselves to
it.

The First I shall name are the Ministers of Religion, those who are Dedicated
to the immediate Service of GOD, to Preach his Word, Administer his Sacraments,
and attend at his Altar.

And certainly we who are Ambassadors from Christ for this very end and
purpose, to beseech Sinners to be reconciled to GOD, to whose Service we are
solemnly set apart by the imposition of Hands and Prayer; we who are
Messengers, Watchmen, and Stewards of the LORD, Titles of great Dignity and
Honor, and expressive of constant Diligence and Labor; we I say, should
oppose Vice, with a very active Zeal, and with unweari'd application; should
encourage all proposals for Reformation of Manners, and lead the way to others,
in putting them in Execution. Should like GOD's Ministers in Heaven be a Flame
of Fire burning with Zeal so refined and pure, that like theirs it may never
fail; so strong and vigorous, as may spare indeed the Sinners, but entirely
destroy their Vices.

The Reformation of Men's Manners, in order to the Salvation of their Souls, is
the end of our Preaching, and all our Labors; and should we not animate those
good Men who have avow'dly entered the Lists against Wickedness, since we have
reason to hope that thereby our Work will become more easy and delightful, and
that more encouraging successes will attend our Ministry, the most difficult
obstructions (such public Vices are) being happily removed? Nay should we not
bless GOD for exciting a Spirit of Piety and Religious Zeal amongst us; that
there are any in this degenerate World, who have a true concern for Religion
and Virtue? And don't all such deserve our Countenance and Encouragement, our
greatest esteem and tenderest affection? And should we not cheerfully partake
in all their Difficulties and Dangers, as we hope to share in their Rewards and
Glory?

It Is usual to complain of the Corruptions of the Age, but complaints hardly
ever work a Cure. Our discourses may be passionate against prevailing Sins, and
yet those Sins continue to prevail, the most Guilty being seldom our Hearers,
and when they are, not regarding what we say. It is fit then, it is necessary,
that we use Arguments of another Nature, and punish those who are proof against
all Persuasions, that with Stripes and Blows we make those Deaf Adders move,
who stop their Ears against the Voice of the wisest Charmer; make those feel
the coercive power of Humane Laws, who impiously violate the Laws of GOD.

We call our selves Successors of the Apostles and Prophets, and such
undoubtedly all Lawful Ministers are: And should not that one consideration
inspire us with their Diligence, their Courage and their Zeal? That so we may
oppose Profaneness as Elijah did Idolatry, and with the resolution of St. Paul
Reason of Righteousness, Temperance and Judgment to come?

But should there be any so Complaisant for Wickedness, so Cowardly and Mean,
as to be afraid or ashamed to disturb it in its ancient Possessions; must they
not Blush when Surrounded with a Cloud of Witnesses of their own Order, of
Apostles, and Bishops, and Pastors, who were not only Preachers of
Righteousness, but Reformers of Manners? Who did not think they had discharged
their Duty, by saying some handsome things against Vice; bu^ being acted by a
Holy Zeal, were particular and warm in Advices, vehement in their
Expostulations, and bold in their Reproofs? While Men were wicked they pitied
them, they prayed for them, but never made them their Intimates and Companions*
They treated them as their Patients, whose recovery they heartily endeavored,
but never by Flattery and Compliance increased their Distemper.

I hope in GOD there are few or none among us guilty of these Faults, so
disagreeable to their Character, and prejudicial to Religion; the contrary I
think is apparent, that those who are most remarkable for their Piety, and
eminent for their Stations in the Church, do further and encourage all prudent
designs for suppressing Vice, and restoring Piety to its just Glory. But if
there should be any who have so far degenerated from the Zeal of their
Primitive Predecessors, as to be negligent and remiss in this important Concern
(and if some should be so, among so many, it is not at all to be wondered at, nor
any reasonable Objection against our Church) for such this Address is intended,
and that sufficiently justifies the plainess of it, since sure I am they need
it.

Secondly, Next to the Ministers of Religion, the greatest Obligations of being
Zealously Affected against public reigning Vices lie upon Magistrates, upon
those who are invested with Authority and Power.

And that it is the Duty of Magistrates with great Courage and Impartiality, to
suppress and punish all Wicked Practices. is plain from several Intimations of
it in Holy Scripture. As that Rulers are not a Terror to Good Works but to the
Evil. And if we do that which is Good, we need not be afraid of the Power, but
shall have praise of the same: That he is the Minister of GOD for good, and
bears not the Sword in vain, and is a Revenger to execute Wrath upon him that
does Evil. Romans 13.3, 4. Again, we are commanded to be subject to Governors
who are appointed for the punishment of Evil Doers, and the praise of them that
do well. 1 Pet. 2.14.

From all which it appears what sort of Persons Magistrates should be; to evil
works they should be still a Terror, and the Sword of Justice they should never
bear in vain. Upon them that do Evil it is their Duty to execute Wrath; but good
Works they are to Encourage, good Men they are to Support and Praise. It Is for
this end that they have Power given them over others, by him from whom they
originally derive their Commissions, all Power being Ordained by him, for by
him Kings Reign, and Princes decree Justice, and therefore his Service they
should constantly perform, and study the Vindication and Promotion of his
Honor.

Besides, the Suppression of Wickedness and Vice is one great End of all
Magistracy and Government, because thereby that which is its sole end the
public Peace and Safety, is effectually attained and secured. For it is
inconsistent with the Public Safety, to suffer Wickedness to go on
unrestrained, Wickedness, I say, which has a natural tendency to Confusion and
Disorder, endangers the Peace, and destroys the happiness of Society. For the
Natural Consequence of this must be, the entire Ruin of Religion; and when
that is gone, and Men are under no Ties of Conscience, have no regard for GOD,
believe not his Providence, and are under no apprehensions of his just
Indignation, what Villainies then must be every where committed? What Feuds must
continually arise betwixt Governors and Subjects, the one being Tyrannical,
and the other Rebellious? What security can Men have for their Lives or
Fortunes, when Perjury shall be no longer dreaded as a Crime? What an Emblem of
Hell must this World become, Criminals being too numerous, too big to be
Corrected? when those who by their office are supposs'd to be Guardians of
Virtue, by their Practice, will appear Patrons of Impiety. Nay the resemblance
will hold, not only in the Worlds Wickedness and Confusion, but Misery too;
since Vice Countenanced by the neglect of Magistrates, must needs exasperate
the Wrath of Heaven, and bring down heavy Judgments on those Nations, where it
is allowed to thrive, where warmed and nourished by Connivence.

But surely Magistrates cannot neglect the Execution of the Laws against
Immorality and Profaneness, upon such easy Terms, as some of them (if we may
judge by their Practice) imagine; since when they enter upon their Office, they
are Sworn to Execute and Maintain those Laws after their Wit and Power, with
equal respect to Poor and Rich; and therefore every wilful Omission of their
Duty, is a Violation of a Solemn Oath, and adds a new Perjury to all their
other Crimes. And what a sad account shall such Men have to make at the Day of
Judgment? Must they not be ranked with Judas, and such other Wretches, having
betrayed that Religion, they were obliged to defend, and protected those Vices,
they were commanded, they were sworn to Suppress?

And how happy would it be both for them and us, did all our Magistrates
consider and act agreeably to the great Trust reposed in them? Did they with
united Counsels and Endeavors put a stop to Vice, and not commit those Crimes
themselves, they were commanded to punish in others? How would all the
Blessings of Heaven and Earth flow down upon us? And what a happy change would
their Zeal and Courage soon produce? Vice would sneak and not dare to show its
Deformed Face; Men would be ashamed of their Wickedness, and tremble for fear
of a Discovery, but never dare to Glory in it; and all their deeds of Darkness,
would retire and shun the Light.

And certainly a Faithful Magistrate is a Public Blessing: He Is the most
useful Member of the Commonwealth, the best Patriot of his Country, and to his
Prince a most Valuable Subject. He deserves all the Honor the present Age can
give, and while the Name of some shall Rot, Generations to come shall call him
Blessed.

And Praised be GOD's Holy Name, such Magistrates are not wholly wanting among
us, there are some even in this City, who upon all proper Occasions, express a
generous Zeal against Lewdness, Immorality and Profaneness; and have been
glorious Instruments in restraining those Crimes, which were usually committed
with a daring Impudence: Magistrates, who are Zealous for their Masters Honor,
and protect and encourage those who are active and forward in his Service,
whose actions are agreeable to the end for which they were appointed, the
Punishment of Evildoers, and Praise of them that do well. The Merit of such
Excellent Men, challenges the most public and grateful acknowledgments which
the Friends of Piety can pay; and next to the great GOD of Heaven, we should be
loudest in the Praises of these Ornaments of Magistracy, Supports of Virtue,
and Zealous Promoters of Reformation. And I Am very confident they shall never
want a more valuable benefit than Commendations, the sincere and constant
Prayers of all good Men, for their temporal and eteranal Happiness. And I trust
that the same GOD, who has begun a good work in them, will continue, will
improve, and bring it to perfection. That he will so animate and assist them,
that they shall never grow weary in well-doing, nor think any thing a trouble
wherein GOD and Religion are concerned. And others will I hope be influenced by
these Examples, to walk in their Steps, and immitate their Zeal: That so all
our Magistrates may enjoy the invaluable satisfaction which doing good to the
World does here afford; all may be intitl'd to a Glorious Reward in Heaven.

Whatever particular Obligations lie upon Magistrates, to be Zealously Affected
against Profaneness and Vice, do likewise respect the Nobility and Gentry. It Is
true, they are not all Sworn to Execute the Laws, yet Honors and Estates are
conferred upon them, by the Sovereign Proprietor of all things, that they may
be qualified thereby to be the more serviceable to the interests of Piety and
Religion. These Gifts of Heaven are Talents for which they must render an
account to the Great Donor of them: And if they improve them to his Glory, and
the good of Mankind; If they will not decline expense nor trouble, to destroy
Vice, and make Religion prosper; then they answer the intention of Providence,
and shall be able to give an account of their Stewardship with Joy. They shall
entail lasting Blessings upon their Families, and secure endless Glory to
themselves. Nay they will silence the Clamours of Malice and Envy, since few
will not rejoice at the greatness of those who make all their privileges
subservient to Piety and Virtue.

A Third sort of Persons who are concerned to be Zealously Affected against
those dangerous Sins are Penitents: Those who having heretofore been engaged in
sinful Courses, are by the Grace of GOD delivered from their Bondage, and
restored to a better Mind.

It Is a common observation, that Penitents are more Zealous, than any others
against Sin: And indeed there is a Natural Reason why it should be so; for the
more Men know of Vice, when once thoroughly awakened from its Charms, they more
they will abhor and detest it. Besides, it is what they are strictly obliged to
in Conscience: For having heretofore dishonored GOD, obstructed Religion, and
made Men Enemies to Virtue: They are bound (if I may so speak) to make what
Restitution they can to all those, for the Injuries they have done them.

Have they heretofore Profaned GOD's Name, or his Word, or his Day? Then
surely if their Repentance be sincere, they will not only in the highest manner
honor these themselves, but be very assiduous to procure them all possible
Reverence from others. Have they enticed others to Sin, and been but too
unhappily successful in it? Should not then their Zeal be constant and active
as the Sun and Light, and bring Men to a sense of their Duty, that so they may
be Instruments of saving more, than they have been the Fatal Means of
destroying? Have they injured Religion by their Evil Examples? Then surely
their Lives for the future, should be bright and unspotted; their Actions
Eminently Holy, and a most engaging Pattern of Piety, they should set to the
World. Had they almost miscarried and been ruined for ever by their Wickedness,
had not the Goodness of GOD miraculously interposed for their Deliverance? Then
it is certainly their Duty to caution others of those Rocks, whereon they had
well nigh been Ship-rack'd.

Such was the Practice of those great Examples of sincere Repentance, Holy
David, and St. Paul. After the former had in very passionate terms bewailed his
Sins, and implored the Pardon of GOD for them, as the natural consequence of
his Repentance, he declares his Pious Resolution, I will teach thy ways to the
Wicked, and Sinners shall be converted unto thee. Psalm. 51.13. And thus it was
with St. Paul after his Conversion. Did he once make Havoc of the Church? He
afterward labored more abundantly than all the Apostles to enlarge and
strengthen it. Was he once a bitter Enemy to Christianity, a Blasphemer and
Reviler of the Son of GOD? He afterward proved a most Zealous Advocate for the
one, a most Successful Preacher of the other. Did he hale the Saints to Prison,
was he consenting to their Death? To the same Religion, they professed, he
adhered faithfully unto Death, and for it was Crowned with Martyrdom himself.

And thus should all true Penitents behave themselves; whatever tends to the
Advancement of Religon, with all the powers of their Souls they should pursue
themselves, and recommend to others, with a most Industrious Zeal. Then would
their Repentance be not only sincere, but complete; available to their Pardon,
and cause Joy in the presence of the Angels.

Fourthly and Lastly, They who have entered into Societies for Reformation of
Manners, and thereby avow'dly engaged in the service of Piety and Religion, are
particularly obliged to be Zealously Affected against those forementioned
Dangerous Sins.

My Argument does not require that I should undertake a just Vindication of
such Societies, and prove the usefulness of them; this has been fully done by
others, and the great service they daily do Religion, sufficiently proclaims it.

Yet we may in general observe, that Vice is too potent an Enemy to be defeated
by any single endeavors; Vice, which too often baffles the united Labors of
the best Men in the World, and is supported by a confederacy of all the Powers
of Darkness. Besides, we cannot but be sensible, that good Men have need of
Companions, to animate them to a work of Difficulty and Danger. We are afraid
to appear Champions for Religion, are afflicted with an evil shame, and easily
discouraged; when alone. But a competent number when joined in a Society
advise, support, and excite one another. The Prudent Calmness of some,
restrains the Irregular Warmth of others; whose Vigorous Zeal on the other
hand, like Fire, communicates Heat, and Life, and Spirit to the Negligent, and
Indifferent; gives flame to their Affections, and enlivens their Souls. Again
it is reasonable to believe that what the United Councils of many resolve upon,
and what is Prosecuted by their joint Endeavors, will be more wisely
undertaken, and more successfully accomplished, than if there were no such
Union either in Council, or in Action. So that a great many good Men, who would
otherwise be of little use to Religion, do very much advance and promote it, by
thus joining together their Hearts and Hands for that purpose; as those many
little Stars which make up what we call the Milky way in the Heavens, would if
separated wholly disappear, but by their Conjunction afford, a very useful
Light to the World.

We are all sufficiently convinced, of the necessity of Societies in many other
cases, for carrying on any design of Importance. If a Prince is become too
Potent for one Neighbor, whom he is likely to Devour, then many become
Confederates to humble him. Is any great Trade to be undertaken, which is too
difficult and expensive for any Private Fortune and Contrivance? Then is it
usually accomplished by a Society or Company. Our Common Safety shows us the
necessity of Parliaments, which are but great Societies for Reforming the
Common Wealth, by redressing Grievances, and making Useful Laws. And is
Religion the only that either does not need, or does not deserve a Society to
promote and secure it? Is not suppressing Public Impiety, Lewdness and
Profaneness; bringing those who are openly Wicked and Proud of being so
esteemed, to Punishment; and removing from others the Pestilence of Evil
Examples; are not all these Matters of great Weight and Moment; and which
deserve the most serious Thoughts of the Prudent, as well as the Religious? And
if these things can be better effected by Societies than any other way, does
not that fully evince the Usefulness, or rather great Necessity, of them? If
Reformation of Manners can be accomplished more successfully by other Methods,
than these of Societies, it would do great service to Religion, to discover
them to the World, but since that has not yet been done, it is very reasonable
that Persons of Piety and Zeal, should go on in the way they know, till they be
made acquainted with a better.

I own did every Man among us Conscientiously discharge his Duty in his
Station, and according to his Capacity; were there no Negligent Ministers, nor
any Unfaithful Magistrates, and did every other Person in his Private Capacity,
do what in strictness he ought to do, then the whole Church would be one great
Religious Society, and that would supersede the necessity of any other. But
seeing that never was in any Age of the Church, not in the most Primitive and
Purest times: Seeing that Ecclesiastical Discipline is fallen so very low, that
Church Censures are lost upon the greater part of Mankind: And seeing we have
no prospect of any public alteration for the better, but have cause to fear
that every thing will become worse, unless the impending Mischief be in time
prevented; seeing the case is so, I think it plainly follows, that those Men of
Eminent Integrity and Virtue (how low soever some of their Fortunes may be) who
without any prospect of Worldly Advantage (nay to their manifest loss) have
resolved to encounter Difficulties and Dangers; and undergo Calumnies and
Slanders; rather than Wickedness shall continue barefaced, and Vice spread
every where without opposition, any more: Those Men I say, deserve all
Encouragement to themselves, and their design: The countenance and protection
of our Governors, and all who wish well to Religion.

It Is true, they have had no small share in Censures and Objections; But what
Person so innocent, what Design to laudable as to escape them? If Christianity
the best Religion, If the Blessed Jesus the Holiest Person that ever was, have
been, and daily are Blasphemed, Reviled, and Slandered: What are you, my
Brethren, that you should hope to be Exempted from the Common Fate of the best
Men in the World? Has Satan entirely changed his Nature, and laid aside his
Malice? Is he not only transformed into the likeness of an Angel of Light but
become really one? Will he no more oppose Religion, no more obstruct
Reformation of Manners? Or has the Old Serpent lost at once his Cunning and his
Poison? Has he so often misrepresented Religion with great success, and
exposed it to public Hatred, by Painting it as some frightful Monster? And
will not he still prosecute the same Methods, which have hardly ever failed him,
and endeavor to defeat the good Designs of some Men, by raising unaccountable
Jealousies and Fears in others; and labor to undermine by secret Calumnies and
Slanders, what he wants Power directly to oppose?

But yet if Two or Three sorts of Persons were silent, very few Mouths would be
opened against Societies for Reformation. Those who take things upon Trust, and
Condemn without knowing the Merits of the Cause, who have been imposed upon for
want of due enquiry, by false Representations both of the Design and Persons
concerned in it. Or those who being not truly Zealous themselves, are angry
that any should go beyond them, and thereby tacitly reproach their want of
Zeal; or they lastly, who are enraged that their unlawful Liberties should be
checked and restrained, that any should presume to Curb their Lewdness and
Profaneness. But the Clamours of these kinds of Men are ill grounded and unjust;
such as can be no surprise to any who are acquainted with the Corruptions of
Humane Nature, and consider the active indefatigable Malice of the Devil; and
therefore can never shake a prudent well established Zeal.

And such I trust in GOD your Zeal will always be, and that you will still find
that Encouragement and Protection to which you are justly intitl'd, by the
Excellency of your Undertaking, and Prudence of your Behavior. I am persuaded
you did not enter into these Societies rashly and unadvisedly; but weighed all
the hardships and inconveniences you might reasonably expect on the one hand,
and considered the motives which excited your Zeal on the other; and after
mature deliberation chose the good part, and resolved with great Constancy to
adhere to it; cheerfully to bear Opposition, Contempt and Reproach, provided
you might be able to put a stop to any one prevailing Sin.

But the same Christian Zeal which first moved you to Asscociate against Vice,
will oblige you to continue and persevere, to become more Active and Zealous in
suppressing it: To this, your Obligations are great, as Members of the
Christian Church, into which when you were admitted, you vowed to continue
Christ's Faithful Servants and Soldiers to your Lives end: But your belonging to
a Society whose sole end is Reformation of Manners, has much increased them. A
Design the best and noblest in the World, but which ought to be Prosecuted with
a very constant, prudent Zeal; that the Enemies of Piety may not be able to
insult, may have no occasion to upbraid any of you, either with Negligence or
Imprudence. And then will you more successfully promote your Great, and
Excellent End; and in due time stop the Mouths of Gainsayers.

These are the several orders of Men who are particularly obliged to be
Zealously Affected in suppressing Profaneness and Vice; not that any are
exempted from it; it is the Business and Duty, and ought to be the Study and
Practice of every Christian. Here all are Commanded, and may without a Crime,
put forth their Hands to support the Ark. It Is true they cannot, they must not
all attempt to do it the same way; what is the Indispensible Duty of one, may
be a Great Sin in another to pretend to: And tho all ought to show their Zeal
for Religion and Reformation, yet they must take different ways of showing it;
which leads me to the

Third Particular I proposed to speak to, which was to point out those ways
wherein we may best employ and show our Zeal, so as to attain the Excellent
Ends it aims at.

Something of this I have hinted at already, for by mentioning those several
sorts of Men, who are obliged to higher degrees of Zeal against Vice than
others, I did in effect show how their Zeal is to express it self.

Thus for Example: Are we Zealous Ministers of Religion? Then must our Zeal
appear both to GOD and Man in our Public Preaching and Exemplary Life; and in
our Private Labors and Endeavors to infuse Piety and Zeal into others. We
must show our Zeal by leading the way to others in the best manner, Prudence
directs, and so far as our Duty requires. And lastly our Zeal must express it
self in Constant and Fervent Prayers to GOD, for his Blessing and Assistance.

Again, are we Zealously Magistrates? Then are we to employ our Zeal in
Vigorously Executing the Laws against Immorality and Profaneness. We are to
Countenance and Encourage all who are engaged in the Service of Religion and
Reformation, and secure them from the rude insults of those who have made
themselves their Enemies: And to influence others to Honor Religion by the
Brightness of our own Examples.

As for those of Inferior Degree, whose Station is Private, and whose
Condition is Obscure, even they may many ways testify the sincerity of their
Zeal, and make it very serviceable to Piety and Virtue. The meanest Man among
us has a Family to take care of, and that he may preserve from the Infection of
Reigning Sins: He can Admonish, can Reprove, and Correct his Child or his
Servant, with Authority and good Effect. He may also Exhort, and Advise his
Neighbor of his own Rank, nay he may Reprove him too, upon a Just Occasion,
and in a Prudent Manner; and thereby contribute much to reclaim him. Such a Man
may especially be very useful to Religion, by bringing the open Enemies of it,
to deserved Punishment. He will unavoidably be often a Witness of Public Sins.
He will frequently see the Lord's Day Profaned, and hear GOD's Holy Name
Dishonored and Blasphemed; and that by those who are too Great to be Reproved
by him, and who would answer all his Grave Advices with Scorn and Rage. But
then that Man ought, if he has any Zeal for the Honor of GOD, to Inform the
Magistrates of what he has Seen and Heard, and show his own Zeal, by giving
them an opportunity of exercising theirs. He ought without any by-regards to
Interest or Friendship, to acquaint those who bear the Sword, with the Crimes
that have been committed before him, that the Guilty may feel, how they bear it
not in vain.

This is what many among us have of late done with very great success, and
therefore what I cannot but recommend to all, as the most effectual means of
entirely rooting out all gross Immoralities and public Vices, especially those
more heinous ones I have so often named. And since it has pleased GOD, to give
us some good Magistrates, who want neither Zeal nor Courage to put the Laws in
Execution, what remains to accomplish a through Reformation of Manners, but
that we contribute our Endeavors to it, by giving constant and Impartial
Informations against Offenders.

It is true, an Informer has been generally esteemed a Name of Imfamy and
Reproach, and in many cases not without reason. It is an Employment has been
sometimes taken up by Men of Blasted Reputations, upon the basest motives, and
managed in the most disingenuous manner. When we saw a Man accuse others of a
Crime whereof he was himself more Guilty, and that not out of remorse of
Conscience or Zeal to have Criminals Punished, but in hopes of Favor and Money
from those in Power. When we saw Informing made a Trade, and Men getting Bread
by Perjury, mixing much Falsehood, with a little Truth. When we saw all the Laws
of Hospitality and Friendship violated, and things spoken with Freedom and
without Design, told with Aggravations to a jealous Government. When I say,
Informing was such an Employment as this, no wonder, if it was Scandalous to be
concerned in it.

But the Informing I am recommending is of another nature, it is not to catch
at an unwary expression which Malice may wrest to an ill meaning, or when
spoken under the Seal of Friendship. But it is, acquainting our Governors and
Magistrates with those Blasphemies, and Oaths, which are often vented in
Public, and those other Instances of Lewdness and Immorality, which are
overt-acts of Treason and Rebellion, against GOD. In such cases it is our Duty,
and we should reckon it our Glory to be Informers, since GOD himself at the
Last Day will increase our Honor, for being thus Instrumental in Vindicating
His.

It Is true, the Enemies of Religion have been, and still are very loud in their
Clamours against this Practice, and do with great Industry throw an Odium on
those who make Conscience of Informing against them. But they have especially
raised a mighty cry of Injustice, against that manner of Informing, which is
found necessary to restrain Profane Cursing and Swearing, that is, when the
Guilty Person knows not his Accuser. I shall therefore at present endeavor to
Vindicate both these, and show that to Inform against Vice is every Man's Duty,
and that Private Informations are not only Just and Reasonable, but of absolute
Necessity. And this I hope will be judged no digression, since it tends to
confirm us in one of the most useful, and necessary Expressions of our Zeal.

I begin with the First of these, which is to show that we are strictly obliged
in point of Duty, to Inform against Profaneness and Vice.

This will appear if we consider

First, The Commands and Examples which in Holy Scripture require it.

Secondly, If we consider the reasonableness and necessity of the thing.

First, Let us consider the Commands and Examples which in Holy Scripture
require it.

And can any Command be more positive, express and clear, that what we find in
the 13 th of Deuteronomy. from the 6 th to the 12 th verse?

If thy Brother, the Son of thy Mother, or thy Son or thy Daughter, or the Wife
of thy Bosom, or thy Friend, which is even as thy own Soul, entice thee
secretly saying, let us go and serve others gods, (which thou have not known,
thou nor thy Father.)

Thou shall not consent unto him, nor hearken unto him, neither shall thine Eye
pity him, neither shall thou spare him, neither shall thou conceal him.

But thou shall surely kill him, thine Hand shall be first upon him, to put him
to Death, and afterward the Hands of all the People.

And all Israel shall hear and fear, and shall do no more any such Wickedness
as this is among you.

From which words it is plain, that to Inform against dangerous Infectious
Sins, such as have a tendency to destroy Religion, and the Worship of GOD, is
so in dispensable a Duty, that no consideration of Blood or Friendship can
excuse us from it:. Our Duty to GOD Cancells all Obligations to Men; and
nothing must be allowed any compitition in his Love. Those who lie nearest our
Hearts, our Brothers, and Wives, and Children, and our best Friends must be
torn thence, when GOD and our Duty call; when His Service requires it, who is
our most Indulgent Father, our Truest Friend, and our most Generous Benefactor.

But Idolatry was not the only Sin the Israelites thought themselves obliged to
suppress by Informing against it? Cursing and Blasphemy, were to undergo the
same just severity. As appears from the instance of the Israelitish Woman's Son,
Lev. 24.11, 12, 14. Who Blasphemed GOD and Cursed. Those who heard him, were
not troubled with that nice Honor, some now a days pretend to, and thought it
no reflection upon them, to acquaint Moses and Aaron with his Crime, tho
nothing less than his Death was the consequence of their Information. The
Witnesses were Commanded to lay their Hands upon his Head, and all the
Congregation to Stone him with Stones till he Died. And yet tho the Forfeiture
of a small Sum of Money, be all the Penalty inflicted among us, for the
Prophanest Oaths and Curses, how few are there who have Zeal and Courage to
exact even that! who do not let that Sin be often committed in their presence,
and yet are afraid or ashamed, so much as to reprove it!

Nor was the Sabbath-Breaker treated more gently than the Blasphemer, by the
People of Israel. They who found the Man gathering Sticks upon the Sabbath Day,
immediately brought him to Moses and Aaron, and all the Congregation, and he
was Stoned with Stones till he Died. Numb. 15.32. Had these Men lived among us,
how would they have been Hated and Derided as Officious Informers, who meddl'd
in things, that did not at all belong to them! But they were convinced that no
Man ought to stand Neuter when the Laws of GOD are publicly Violated; and that
the cause of Religion every own should esteem his own, and espouse and promote
it with the same Warmth and Resentment.

But that it is our Duty to Inform against Profaneness and Vice, will farther
appear if we consider

Secondly, The reasonableness and necessity of the thing.

For is it not reasonable that Wickedness should be Suppressed, and that Open
Impieties should be Punished and Corrected? But this cannot be done, if it be
Infamous to Inform against them; if the thing it self be necessary, the means
that lead to it, must be necessary too; and the most effectual are, Constant
Informations to the Magistrate. Without this our Laws against Vice have been
made to little purpose; and our Magistrates can but lamely Execute that part of
their Charge, of being a Terror to Evildoers. Therefore to make these
Informations Dishonorable, and to throw Contempt upon those who are most
active in them, is one of the Devils Arts to obstruct Piety, and Reformation of
Manners, and whereby he supplants Religion; which as matters now stand, cannot
be well secured without them.

But the reasonableness and necessity of this Duty will be more evident, if we
consider that all Men allow it in other Cases, and that the two great
Fundamental Virtues of Religion, Justice and Charity require it.

I. All Men allow it in other Cases.

Those Offenses which are more directly committed against, Men, it is allowable,
it is Honorable to discover: If we know a Man Guilty of Murder, or Robbery, or
Treason, none ever thought it severe to Inform against him; nay, should we
conceal him, we might justly be esteemed Parties in his Crime. And is not the
Case and Duty the same, and should not the Honor be so too, with respect to
those Sins which are immediately levelled against GOD? It is commendable to
Inform against a Thief, it is strange it should be otherwise to bring a
Blasphemer or a Prostitute to Punishment; unless it be a much smaller Crime to
affront GOD to his Face, without the least Motive or Temptation, than to meddle
with our Neighbors Goods.

How differently are Men Affected, when sensibly touched in point of Worldly
Interest, and when only influenced by the considerations of their Duty to GOD!
When wronged in their Fortunes, they allow no limits to their Passions, but are
all Indignation and Resentment. Not all their Wit and Malice, can find out
Words sufficiently expressive of their Anger, their Hatred, and their Grief.
Each Circumstance they aggravate, yet pretend that the Injury is greater than
they can represent it, they are big with Fury, and travel with Revenge.

And yet often the very same Persons can be unconcerned Spectators, of the most
Heinous Sins against GOD. Can hear his Being Denied and every Attribute
Contemned, without any sensible Emotions within, or any Attempts to Vindicate
their Maker.

This is but too evident even in our Public Laws, the Penalties of Crimes
being not at all proportioned to their being more or less hateful to GOD, but
the Mischiefs we imagine they occasion to Men. Thus to Steal is an Odious Sin,
and the Wretch that is Guilty of it, must Dye. When Blaspemy and Perjury shall
escape. And he who discovers a Thief shall be as sure of Glory, as he who
Informs against a Blasphemer shall be of Contempt and Hatred.

But even in this particular, Men are generally mistaken, those Sins being
always in the end most distructive to their Worldly Interests, which are most
Odious to GOD: This none can question who believe a particular Providence, and
that GOD is concerned in the Government of the World: But will be more apparent
when we consider

Secondly, That the Two great Duties of Justice and Charity require this
Practice of Informing against Profaneness and Vice.

I. Justice requires it. Justice to out Country, and to the Commonwealth
whereof we are Members, we are obliged to it by the Laws of Society.

All allow that we are unjust to our Country, if we do not oppose whatever may
bring Calamities upon it, don't promote its Interest, and labor to prevent its
Ruin. Now this cannot be better done than by Informing against Vice and
Profaneness, and all Public Wickedness, and thereby putting a stop to those
Courses, which if unrestrained, will make GOD our Enemy, and bring down General
Judgments upon us.

It Is true, when GOD Visits a Nation with Sword, with Pestilence, or Famine, he
regards no doubt Private, as well as Public Sins, and our most Secret Crimes
add Fuel to the Common Flame: But yet General National Judgments, are certainly
the Effects of General National Sins, of Public uncontrolled Wickedness. And
when Societies or Nations are Punished, it is for those Sins which Societies or
Nations (considered as such) have committed. Particular Private Sins committed
under the Shades of Night and Security of Retirement, it is reasonable to
believe shall only prove Fatal to the Offenders themselves, but occasion no
Public Judgment, draw down no Calamity upon the Society in general; and the
reason is, because no Nation, no Society can prevent these Secret Sins. They
are beyond the reach of the severest Laws, and exactest Justice; no Eye sees
them but that of Heaven, and therefore the Society is not accountable for them.
But then a National Judgment may be justly feared, when Vice grows Bold and
Public; when it invades the Seats of Authority and Command; and the Laws,
against it are laid asleep. When like Serpents, Warmed by the Influence of the
Sun above them, it leaves its dark retreats and creeps abroad, filling every
place with confused Hisses, and scattering its Poison round about. Then is
GOD's Honor concerned to Punish such wicked Nations, they are Ripe for Ruin,
and Storms and Thunder are hovering about their Heads.

But if we are just to our Country, and true to its Interest, we will not share
in the Guilt of Public Wickedness, by neglecting it; but do our part to have
it checked in time, before it has gathered great Strength, and lost all
Modesty; is become too Impudent to be ashamed, too Strong to be resisted.
Magistrates alone are not able to do all this, the most Zealous among them, can
of themselves take Cognizance but of few Crimes; few daring to be Profane
before them, unless encouraged by their Connivance or invited by their Example.
And therefore if we would effectually discharge our Duty to our Country, me
must make Conscience of Informing against Vice, now especially when we have
Magistrates, who make Conscience of punishing it; Then we, might hope to see
our Country Prosper, and the Sun daily Shining and Smiling upon us. And tho
some might be still secretly Wicked, yet they durst not be openly so, in
defiance of Religion and the Laws. To be Lewd and Profane, would no more be
Gentile Accomplishments; Impiety would no longer dare to appear at Noonday,
but like a Ghost, would Fly the Light, and retire to its Native Darkness.

But to Inform against Profaneness and Vice, is Secondly a Duty of Charity as
well as of Justice.

First, It is great Charity to the Poor, who are thereby considerably releiv'd;
and this is Charity and Prudence both, making Men's Vices do that, which out of
Conscience they never did, Contribute toward the Maintenance of the Needy.
This is to extract the greatest Good, out of the greatest Evil; an Antidote
from Poison.

Again it is Charity even to those who are Punished. For Admonitions and
Advices, are commonly lost upon a hardened Swearer; they inflame his Passions,
and make him renew his Sin; But when he finds that his Oaths begin to be
Expensive to him, without any Compensation of Pleasure or Profit, by that he
will probably be awakn'd to see the folly of them, and totally at last forbear
them. When a Man has suffered pretty often for Profaning the Lord's Day, he
will at last leave it off, and contract an Habitual Reverence for It. Now it is
Charity to break a Man of those Practices, which if, persever'd in, will ruin
him for ever, let the Methods of doing it be never so disobliging. It Is Charity
to Cure a Madman of his Frenzy, even by Chains and Scourges, tho in the mean
time he hates nothing so much as his Physician.

Lastly, It Is great Charity to the Youth of this present Age, and to the
succeeding Generations also. To the Youth of this present Age, whose Minds are
yet tender and uncorrupted, it is great Charity to remove from them the
Contagious Poison of Vice and Profaneness. For it is the Wickedness of the Aged
that corrupts our Youth, and the Example of the one, has a Fatal Influence upon
the other. But we would need little pains to make those who are Young Honor
GOD's Name, if we could so effectually suppress Swearing, that those who are
Old durst not be their Patterns in that Sin. And our Youth would of themselves
Reverence the Lord's Day, were the Laws so well Executed that others durst not
Profane it. But this never can be done, unless we all think it our Duty to
Inform against the Profane and Vicious; and unless Magistrates Encourage such
Informations.

Then for the Succeeding Generations, it is Charity to them to put a stop to
Wickedness, and hinder it from descending upon them; for would it not be better
for them never to be Born, than to come into a World to Corrupted, that it
would be miraculous to escape Infection; than to be Born to Sin here, and
Misery hereafter. But if we have any Charity for those who are to succeed us,
we will be very Zealous in suppressing all sorts of Wickedness now, and give
continual Informations against those who dare be publicly Guilty of it, and so
we shall entail upon our Posperity, with our Fortunes, a more valuable
Inheritance, Piety and Virtue, and all the Blessings of Heaven.

Upon the whole. To Inform against Profaneness and Vice; is what GOD's Law does
positively enjoin and require. And it is recommended to us by some Excellent
Examples recorded in Scripture. It is highly reasonable and necessary, all Men
esteem it so in other Parallel Cases: Our Duty to our Country, Charity to the
Poor, and to the Offenders themselves; to the Youth of this present Age, and to
the Generations which are yet for to come, do all oblige us to it. And surely
these considerations are sufficient to Vindicate this Practice, and recommend
it too to Christians, those especially who are Zealously Aflected in good
things, let those who want Zeal or Courage to undertake it, or who have been
corrected by it, revile and censure it as they please.

I therefore hope that you will go on in the way wherein you have hitherto
walked, and persevere in a Duty so pleasing to GOD, so reasonable and
necessary, and which Justice and Charity both require. And will not be
Frightn'd by the loudest Clamours, the unjustest Reflections, or most Malicious
Accusations of your Enemies. For if your Informations be disinteressed and
impartial, without respect of Persons, or regard to temporal Advantage. If they
gratify no Passion, but Religious Zeal, (and such I believe yours have been,
and such I hope they will always be) then sure I am, good Men will Love and
Praise, GOD will Reward you for them.

I now proceed in the Second place, To justify Private Informations, which are
found absolutely necessary to restrain Common Swearing, so that they who are
Punished shall not know who Informed against them.

Were we to pass Judgment upon this Practice only by the violent Outcries of
many against it, we could not but condemn it as the greatest Injustice and
Cruelty in the World. The Multitude of the Jews did not cry more loudly against
our Savior, Crucify him, Crucify him. And it is to be feared that some among
us, like Pilate, are born down by Tumult and popular Noise, to pass Sentence
contrary to the Dictates of their own Minds: To Condemn the Innocent, and
Release the Guilty. But Innocence is what all pretend to, and the most Profane
will seldom plead Guilty. It is these Private Informers, say they, who have a
load of Guilt to answer for; their Informations being justly charged with
Malice and Falsehood, and the Magistrates who countenance them with Avarice and
Oppression. And must we not allow it to be wondrous hard, that any restraints
should be laid upon a Blaspheming Tongue! That Men cannot use at pleasure, the
privilege of Speech, which Nature has given them! Cannot publicly Affront GOD,
and imprecate Damnation to all about them, so many Saucy Informers lurking
every where! Is it not harder still that they should not know who these
Invaders of their Unchrististian Liberty are; who by being thus concealed from
their knowledge, are secured from their Revenge, and so they cannot make them
feel the Effects of their Indignation and Resentment!

But our Magistrates it seems are of another Mind, and see no unreasonable
Severity in this method of proceeding. And indeed the Sin of Common Swearing
must be so hateful to all good Men, that to suppress it they cannot judge any
thing severe, if but agreeable even to Rigorous Justice. But Private
Informations against Swearers, are very just, and highly expedient and
necessary: they very much promote the end of the Law, yet are Injurious to
none; nay even they who are most frequently punished by them, have no good
reason to desire that the practice should be otherwise. All which I shall now
endeavor to prove.

First, I am to show that Private Informations against Common Swearers are just.

Now that Practice is just, whereby the end of an Excellent Law is very much
promoted, yet none at all injured nor wronged. And such is the Practice of
Private Informations. For is the Person against whom the Information is given,
Guilty of the Crime, with which he is charged? Then where is the wrong, if he
be Discovered and Punished for it? Justice requires that he should not escape,
and whither the Information be Public or Private, provided it be true, he has
no hardship to complain of: He has Committed a very Heinous Sin; and is he
wronged, because he suffers the Penalty of the Law? And indeed it is notorious
that they who are loudest in their Complaints against Private Informations, are
the most Criminal, they who are oftenest and always justly punished. The true
cause of their Anger, is the Penalty they suffer, the manner of the Information
only a pretense. Let them Swear on and take no notice of their Oaths, and they
will be very modest in their Censures, of Private Informations.

I suppose then it will be granted that Private Informations are just, if they
are true. That which makes an Information unjust, is the falsehood of it. And
whither Informations should be Public or Private, is rather a Consideration of
Expediency than Justice. There are some Cases in which Private Informations
ought not to be allowed, there are others in which they are highly necessary.
The reason why in most Cases Informations ought to be Public, is to prevent
and discourage Perjury and Revenge. For if all Informations were to be Private,
and the Informers never known nor punished (when they deserved it) then no Man
could be secure either of his Fortune or his Life. But if none of these ill
Consequences can attend Private Informations against Swearing, if they are no
Encouragement to Wilful Perjury, and at the same time are highly necessary to
suppress that Sin, which is the Original Cause of most Perjuries, taking off
all Reverence for GOD, and an Oath; if the Case be so, then I think such
Private Informations are very free from Injustice.

Now to be Convinced of this, I would have you consider, that whoever knowingly
Perjures himself to Injure another, must be supposed to do it, either to
procure some Temporal Advantage, or to prevent some great Evil, or to gratify
his Passion of Revenge. It argues the most Uncharitable Savage Temper; to
believe that any Man will go deliberately about the Sin of Perjury, without any
Motive, Inducement, or Temptation. That he will at the same time dishonor GOD,
wrong his Neighbor, and contract the Guilt of a very Heinous Sin himself, and
yet gratify no Passion by it, neither excite any hope of Reward, nor remove
any fear of Punishment, nor calm any Violent Resentment. And yet this is really
the case, with respect to Private Informations against Swearing. The Informers
are to have no share, in what the Swearers are forced to pay. Nor are the
Magistrates further concerned, than to Execute the Law. The Money is wholly for
the use of the Poor. Nor can the Poor be wronged, of what they are thus
Intitl'd to, unless there be a Confederacy of the Informers and Magistrates, of
the Ministers, Churchwardens, and Overseers of the Poor to do it. And as none
are tempted by Rewards to Perjure themselves, neither are they moved by Fear.
They suffer no Penalty if they do not Inform; none will be angry if they
forbear, but they will be sure of Hatred if they do. It Is true, there is one
sort of Fear has some influence upon them. And that is the Fear of the Great
GOD of Heaven. They are under too great an Awe of that Infinite Being, not to
bring those to Punishment who dare Profane his Name. Then as to Revenge that
can never be a motive with our Informers, to be Guilty of Perjury; having no
Personal acquaintance with most of those, against whom they do Inform, and
having never received the least Injury from them.

Some I know will be apt to say, that many even True Informations proceed from
Malice and Resentment, from Quarrels and a Revengeful Spirit. And certainly of
all Men, Common Swearers have most reason to believe, that they will meet with
the Effects of other Men's Displeasure, since they must be Conscious to
themselves, that by their Rage and Passion they have often not only affronted
GOD, but provoked their Neighbor: And no Man will pity them, if this be
sometimes their own case; nor can that be Condemned as Revenge, which goes no
farther than the Execution of a just and reasonable Law. But there is no great
ground among us, for this Uncharitable Observation, the most Diligent Informers
being freest from Revenge, and who wish the Guilty Persons no greater harm,
than Repentance and Reformation. Yet suppose it should be so, that Malice or
Revenge were at the Bottom of some Informations; of such every good Man will
say (with St. Paul in another case) so Swearing be suppressed whither it be
done out of Strife or good Will, I do rejoice, yea and will rejoice. Phi. 1.15.

It Is true, when a Man's Life or Estate is at Stake. it is reasonable he should
be Publicly Tried and Confronted, with his Accusers, and it is a great
Excellency in our Law, that it r^quires such Public Trials, so that no Man
shall be Condemned without being allowed to make his Defense. But when a
Pecuniary Mulct is all the Punishment to be inflicted on a Swearer, for a Sin
hateful to GOD and Man, he is entitled to no such Favor. The Laws against
Swearing are just, which in other Cases would seem severe. That Sin has no
Temptation to Extenuate its Guilt, and therefore the utmost Rigor of the Law,
is but too gentle a Punishment for it. And indeed it is very plain that our
Lawmakers design was, that Swearers should be treated after another manner
than most other Criminals; because by the Statute against Swearing, the Oath of
one Person is sufficient to make them liable, to the Penalty of it. And that it
was their intention that the Informers should in many cases be kept secret; at
least that a discretionary power should be lodged in the Magistrate to conceal
them, when he saw a reasonable cause of so doing, we have reason to believe
from hence, because they could not but foresee, that the constant discovery of
the Informers, must needs discourage many from Informing, and prove a great
Obstruction to the due Execution of the Law, if not render it entirely useless.
Besides, Private Informations, are much more allowable against Swearing, than
in any other Case that can happen. For he who Informs against a Swearer,
proceeds upon very different motives, from those who Inform against Felons or
Traitors, or are Witnesses in Disputes betwixt particular Men. In cases of
Felony, those who are injured, Prosecute the Felon, and spare neither Expense
nor Trouble, to find out the Truth. They will invite Men to a Discovery, by
Proposals of Reward, and can compel those (who may be otherwise unwilling) to
declare upon Oath what they know. And the same Methods are taken in all
Disputes at Law. In Cases of Treason, Honors, Preferments and Estates are
promised, and liberally bestowed to Encourage Informations. And it is necessary
it should be so, the public safety being so nearly concerned. But they who
Inform against Swearers, have no Rewards to Tempt them, nor are they compelled
by any Fears. From Men they suffer nothing if they do not Inform, they gain
nothing if they do. And are acted only by a Generous Zeal, for the Honor and
Servi^e of GOD.

It Is hard, I confess, if not impossible, for Laws to be so contrived, but some
way or other they may be perverted and abused, but in the Case now before us, I
think the Question is not, whither ever an Innocent Person was mistaken and
accused as Guilty: But which sort of Informations, Public or Private, is
attended with the worst Consequences, and clogged with the most Inconveniences?
Whither it be not better and more Expedient, to have Swearing suppressed by
Private Informations, though it should happen through Inadvertency and Error,
that once in an Age, one who was not Guilty of that Sin, should be Accused and
Punished, as if he had been Guilty: Or an Informer should be acted by
unwarrantable Principles, or some base Passion? Than by obliging Magistrates
always to discover the Informers, to have the main end of so good a Law,
against a Sin so Heinous, and yet so prevailing, in a great measure defeated?
And this leads me in the

Second place, To show that Private Informations are not only Just, but highly
Expedient and Necessary. And they are so,

I. Because Private Informations lay greater restraints upon Swearers, than
they would otherwise be under. Men will be afraid to Swear in Public, when
they do not know but some present may Inform against them, yet they never know
who they are. Now the End of Laws is rather to hinder Men from doing Evil, than
to Punish them for it. And if this be better answered by Private Informations,
than it could be were they still to be Public: If they make Men timorous and
reserved, and very cautious how they openly Blaspheme GOD, since they cannot be
sure, but some Informers tho unknown, are present: Does not all this show the
Expediency and Necessity, of such Private Informations? It Is true, the presence
of GOD should have a stronger Influence upon us, than of the whole World, and
his Judgments should be dreaded more, then all that Man can do. But since we
find it otherwise, our Laws must be accordingly contrived and executed, that
they who are so Impious, as not to be afraid of Heaven, may yet be kept under
all possible restraints by Men.

Secondly, Private Informations are necessary, because they secure the
Informers, from the Rage and Insults, of Malicious and Revengeful Men. For what
reason can Swearers have, with so much Eagerness and Passion, to desire to know
who Informed against them? Can it be any other, than that they may Study how to
be Revenged of them, for what they judge a great Injury, tho in reality a great
Favor. Now that which makes Swearers so Inquisitive after Informers, should
make Magistrates conceal them. The Prudence and Zeal of the one, should be a
security against the Malice of the other. And surely all Laws should be so
contrived, that they who are Zealous for the Execution of them, may not suffer
by it. And since they who Inform against Swearing, reap no Temporal Advantage
thereby, can it be reasonable to expose them to Infamy, and Shame, and Ruin.
Which would be unavoidable, if they were commonly known.

And that it would be so, will appear very evident if we consider what is
notorious to all, that they who are most Zealous in pressing Swearing by
constant Informations, are of the lower Rank of Mankind, who support their
Families, by Industry and constant Labor: But that they who are most Guilty,
and most commonly Punished, are considerable for their Stations and Fortunes,
or formidable for their United Numbers: As Officers of the Army and Soldiers;
many Gentlemen of Quality and Estates, with their Servants and Dependants. Now
can it be reasonable to expose Poor Men to the Hatred and Revenge of those, who
are too Wicked to consider the good Design of those who Informed against them;
and too powerful not to be able, to do them Mischief, to Blacken their
Reputations, and to Ruin their Fortunes, and it is well if they spare their
Lives? So that to discover all who Inform against Swearing, would be a Cruelty
equal to that of the Primitive Persecutors, who covered the unhappy Christians,
with the Skins of Wild Beasts, and then turned Dogs and Lions loose upon them.
And is it not a Melancholy thing to consider, that if Private Informations be
laid aside, a good Man must either neglect a necessary Duty, let Wickedness go
o^^ and enlarge its Conquests; or if it does oppose it, must run the hazard of
being undone with his Family.

'Ti^ ^rue, every Man ought to discharge his Duty, what ever may be the
Consequences of his doing so. But we know, and ought to consider, that many
good Men are Timorous in their Natures, or Low in their Fortunes. Men may be
good Christians though not qualified to be Martyrs for Religion. They may have
great Zeal against Vice, yet be unwilling openly to encounter it, when besides
Pains and Trouble, they must in all likelihood suffer Poverty and Disgrace. And
therefore we may reasonably hope, that our Magistrates will have such a regard
for Humane Nature, as to consider Men's Practice, as well as their Duty: What it
is probably they will do, as well as what in strictness they ought to do: And
that the Insolent Clamours of those who are Angry, that they may not still
Swear, as formerly without control, will not hinder them from so managing
Informations, that none may be discouraged nor afraid to give them; which is
hardly possible, unless the Informers be Concealed.

But Private Informations are so far from being Unjust or Unreasonable, that in
the Third and Last place, they who suffer most by them, have no reason to
desire that the Practice should be otherwise. And that for these Two Reasons.

First, Because Private Informations secure the Swearer who i^ Punished, from
the Temptation of adding Revenge to Profaneness, and aggravating one Heinous
Sin, by the addition of another. A good Man is glad to be Ignorant of those who
have done him (...) Wrongs, that so the Charitable Temper of his Mind, and
Peace of his Soul, may not be altered nor disturbed. And what ever the Swearer
may think, in the present violence of his Passion, yet it is a real Kindness in
the Magistrate to keep him in the Dark, and he himself will be effectually
convinced of this in the End. He will find in his Oaths alone, sufficient
matter for a bitter Repentance, without the additional Guilt of Revenge; or if
he Dies without Repentance, his Curses will of themselves, Entitle him to that
Damnation he has so often Imprecated himself; and his Torments will be great
enough, without the load of another Sin, to increase them.

Secondly, Because Private Informations (as was said before) do better restrain
Men from Swearing, than can be done any other Practicable way. And can it be a
valuable Advantage to Men of Reason, that they may Swear as without any
reverence for GOD, so without any fear of Punishment from Men? Can they be fond
of the Nauseous Liberty of being as Profane as they please? Have not many Men
reason to Bless GOD, that they were afraid, or ashamed to do many things, to
which they were violently prompted by the Fury of their Passions? And can any
Man in his cool Thoughts be Angry, that there are Laws made to hinder him from
being a Blasphemer himself, and Infecting others with his Crimes? So Madmen
think themselves Wise, and are enraged at their Confinement. But when restored
to their Reason, they Bless the Hands that Bound them and prevented the Violent
Effects of their Distemper. And so will it be with Swearers, when they are so
happy as to be reclaimed they (...) change their Oaths and Curses, into Prayers
and Prai^^^ Nay the most hardened of them all, will on their Deathbeds alter
their Language, and wish with all the Horrors of Despairing Wretches, that the
Laws against Swearing had been more Severe, and Executed with greater Rigor,
and that some of his Blood rather than his Money, had been the Penalty of every
Oath.

In short then, Private Informations against Swearing are Just, so long as they
are True, and I never heard of any that were otherwise, of any that were Falsely
Maliciously and Accused. And it is hardly possible they should; no Man being
under the least Temptation, to be Guilty of such a Horrid Sin. Private
Informations are expedient and necessary, because by them the end of the Law is
best answered and promoted; without them many would be Guilty of Swearing, who
by fear are restrained from it, and many who are Guilty, would escape
Punishment. Good Men would be laid open to the Hatred of many, and Contempt of
more: And they who are punished for Swearing, suffer nothing by the Privacy of
the Informations, but that they cannot grati^ie their Revenge.

Having thus I hope shown the Duty of Informing against Vice and Profaneness,
and Vindicated the Practice of Private Informations against Swearing, I now at
length proceed to my

Fourth and Last Particular, which is to offer such Motives, as are proper to
excite and confirm our Zeal, that so we may be Zealously Affected always in the
good thing, about which we ought to be engaged.

And certainly if all the Arguments of both Worlds can convince us, if our most
valuable Interests can awaken our Affections, or the best Examples can inflame
our Zeal: If the most Honorable Employment can work on our Ambition, or the
greatest Dangers quicken our Fears If we have any concern for the happiness of
the Church, and would remove those differences, which have broken its Unity,
and disturbed its Peace. If we would enjoy the truest Delights which are to be
had below, and be entitled to extraordinary degrees of Glory above: If these
are desirable things, and can make any Impressions on (...) they all combine to
excite and confirm our Zeal, in suppressi^^ Vice and Profaneness, and promoting
a through Reformation of Manners in every Rank among us.

But the better to excite and confirm both your Zeal and my own, I shall insist
particularly on these things, and therefore entreat you with me to consider.

First, That it is impossible we should Love GOD, and be sincere in the
Practice of Religion, without being Zealously Affected against Vice and
Profaneness, and vigorously bent on the extirpation of it. For without this Zeal
nothing else we can perform, will be a sufficient Proof of the sincerity of our
Love to GOD. Being just in our Dealings, and bountiful to the Poor, Temperate
and Sober, constant Hearers of GOD's Word, and constant Guests at his Table,
none of those are not only because these Duties may be performed, and yet the
Love of GOD be the motive of none of them; but chiefly because the like actions
will not be accepted in any Parallel Case.

Thus for Example, Do I profess Friendship for another Man? To convince him of
its truth and reality it is not enough that I show him all outward Marks of
Honor and Esteem; that I treat him with the most endearing Caresses, and
always express my self to his Advantage. For if notwithstanding all this, I can
hear him Slandered without showing some Resentment, and that by those who know
I profess to be his Friend: If I can silently listen to Malicious Aspersions on
his Credit, yet make no attempts to Vindicate his Fame: If I am privy to a
Design whereby his Life or Fortune may be endangered, or his Reputation
blasted; and yet never discover it to him, use no endeavors to prevent it: If
all this I can do, and yet assume the sacred Name of Friend, my Pretentions are
false and disguised, and Hypocrite is my truest Title.

Are these the Rules and Measures of our Friendship to Men, and will GOD accept
our Love on any lower Terms? Dare we say we Love GOD, and yet can patiently
hear his Being and Providence Disowned, His Word Ridiculed, and His Glorious
Name Profaned? No it is plain there must be a want of true Love to GOD in the
Soul, when little or none appears on the most necessary occasions, then when
his Honor and Service call for the most public expressions of It: Let me see
any Man near so much moved when GOD is Dishonored in his presence, as he would
be, should any presume to Reflect on the Memory of his Dead Father, and then I
will not suspect sincerity of his Love.

Besides, whatever Religious Actions we may our selves perform, can never
without this Christian Zeal against Profaneness and Vice, proceed from Right
Principles; from worthy Apprehensions of the Nature and Perfections of GOD, His
Infinite Wisdom, Power and Goodness. For these Principles do equally incline us
to suppress Wickedness in others, as to be Pious and Virtuous our selves. Thus
do I, for Example, Love GOD because of his Goodness? That must needs move me
very powerfully to Hate Sin, which is the greatest Contradiction to that
Goodness; and what I passionately Hate I will labor to destroy. Do I with the
Humility becoming a Creature, Reverence GOD's Word, and Adore his N^me? Then I
cannot hear both these Impiously Profaned, but strong Resentments will arise
in my Mind. And therefore if it ^e otherwise with us, we have cause to suspect
our selves, and may justly fear, that all our other Acts of Service, how exact
so ever we may be in the performance of them, will be rejected of GOD as mere
pretense and show, as so many Instances of Religious Deceit.

But farther, we know that true Piety is ever attended with great Charity and
Compassion for the Souls of them. And indeed it cannot possibly be otherwise.
For the more we Love GOD, (that is, the more truly Pious we are) the more shall
we be like Him, the nearer approaches shall we make to his Nature. But now Love
to Mankind, is the most Glorious Attribute of the Deity, and doing us Good, is
his most Delightful Work: For Happiness he Created us, and sent his Son to put
us into a Capacity of Bliss and Glory. Surely then if we Love GOD in sincerity,
those who are the declared Objects of his Love, must be so of Ours. Their
Happiness we will consult, and spare no pains to deliver them from Destruction.
He who Loves GOD sincerely, and serves him faithfully, must needs be sensibly
touched to see a Creature endu'd with a rational Nature, and a Soul that is
Immortal, that yet does neither. A Wicked Man he pities most, and with great
reason esteems him the most Unhappy of Mankind; not an unfortunate Wretch
broken upon the Wheel is so miserable, since the most exquisite Temporal
Torments, bear no proportion to Everlasting Burnings.

Christianity is a Generous Institution, and inspires us with a Charitable
Concern for the Happiness of others; as the great end of it is to qualify us
for the Society of Angels hereafter, so where it is allowed to exert its Power,
it gives us somewhat of their Divine Temper here, makes us endeavor after the
Conversion of Sinners, and raises strong and lasting Joy in our Souls, whenever
it is effected. And can that Man be esteemed a sincere Christian, who has no
regard for his Brothers Eternal Happiness? Who will not labor to stop the
progress of a Contagious Vice, and thereby prevent the Ruin of many Souls? Let
him pretend what he will to prove that he Loves GOD, it is all Hypocrisy and
Disguise; for it is a Truth Written in Heaven, as well as Recorded in
Scripture, That he who Lo^es not his Brother whom he has seen, can never Love
GOD whom he has not seen.

And what a Melancholy Surprise will it be to many, when at the Last Day the
Great Judge of the World, shall bid them depart from him, notwithstanding all
their Pompous Devotions, and Gaudy appearances of Religion? And that because
they were not Zealously Affected against Vice, and did not Industriously
promote Reformation of Manners? Because they labored not to retrieve the
decayed Spirit of Christianity, and were Negligent and Indifferent when the
Cause of Religion was at Stake? And what various Passions of Indignation, of
Grief and Shame must distract such unhappy Souls, when the Son of GOD shall
thus Expostulate with them? Can ye hope to dwell with me, for whom you never
had any true Honor, whose Cause you did not Plead, whose Interest you did not
Espouse? Can you say you sincerely Loved me, when you declined my most
Necessary Service, the Punishment of Vice, and Advancement of Piety? What tho
you did not Profane my Name your selves, yet others you could hear do it with
a Smile: And did rather Encourage than Suppress that Sin? And since through
your want of Zeal, many escape that Punishment, which their Lewdness deserved,
is it not reasonable that you should share in their Torments, as you
contributed toward their Guilt? Therefore you must have no Honor from me,
whom you did never Honor: And seeing you in effect Denied me upon Earth, by
neglecting my Service, Justice requires that you should be disowned by me for
ever.

And what Reply shall such unhappy Sinners be able to make to Infinite Justice,
when thus Arraigned before Angels and Men! Must they not be struck with silent
Horrors at the Charge, and Agonies of Soul too big to be uttered? But if they
presume to speak at all, their Language must be made up of Guilty
Acknowledgements: They must own the Justice, even when they begin to feel the
severity of their Sentence.

Secondly, Another Motive to excite and confirm our Zeal in the good things
about which it ought to be engaged, suppressing Public Vice, and promoting
Reformation of Manners; is the consideration of its being the most Honorable
Service wherein we can be employed. A Service of the greatest Dignity and Glory.

In other Cases the Worth and Greatness of the Person, to whom the Service is
paid, renders it Honorable. Thus to be entrusted with the most Weighty
Affairs of our Prince and Country, to Execute the Laws, and Encounter the
Enemies of both, is what Ambitious Men are still aspiring after, and wherein
they place their Glory and their Happiness: But now in this respect, no Service
so Honorable as Opposing and Suppressing Immorality and Profaneness. It is the
immediate Service of GOD himself, of the Supreme King and Governor of the
World, before whom all Earthly Princes are as nothing. Whose Transcendent
Nature nothing can comprehend, and who dazles all the Angels with the
Brightness of his Glory.

Again, does the Excellency of those who are employed in any Service render it
Honorable? Then none so Honorable as this. It is at once the work and delight
of Angels, and the Heavenly Host esteem it their Privilege and Glory. For
wherein consists the employment of the Ministering Spirits of Heaven? But in
their being the Instruments of GOD's Justice in Punishing his Enemies, the
Instruments of his Mercy in Rewarding his Servants? In their restraining us
from Sin by their powerful Influence, and awakening us to Repentance by unseen
ways? Those happy Beings that are above, whither Angels, or the Spirits of Just
Men made perfect, are all Zealous of our Reformation: They Pray for our
Repentance, they Rejoice at our Conversion, and long for our Society. And every
Pious Soul that arrives safely among them, increases their Raptures, and adds
new strength and fervor to their Praises. And is not that a Glorious Service,
whereby we Cooperate with the Holy Angels. And must not our being thus employed
in the Work of Angels, be an excellent Preparative for their Conversation?

Lastly, The more useful any Service is, the more Honorable it should be
esteemed? Thus they who have been Authors of any great Good to the World, have
been highly Honored while Alive, and when dead have been Adored. But what
Service so useful as this? What way can we do so much good to Mankind, as by
bringing Obstinate Offenders to Punishment, and removing Infectious Examples?
As by extirpating Vice, and promoting Piety and Virtue? As by averting the
Wrath of GOD, and smoothing the way to Heaven?

Let us not then be ashamed of our Great Masters Service, but Praise him for
the Honor it confers upon us; and while others Glory in their Wisdom, their
Riches or their Might, which are all Imperfect, Transient and Vain, if we Glory
at all, let it be in this, that we are allowed the privilege, and inspired
with Grace, to be employed in our Heavenly Fathers Business.

Thirdly, Another Motive to excite and confirm our Zeal against Profaneness and
Vice, is the consideration of those many and Excellent Examples which recommend
it. And indeed we find none in the Holy Scriptures Eminent, for their Piety and
Virtue, who were not equally remarkable for their Zealous Endeavors against
Impiety and all sorts of Wickedness.

Noah was not only a Worker but Preacher of Righteousness; 2 Pet. 2.5. verse
7.8.
and of Lot it is said, that his Righteous Soul was vexed with the Sodomites
filthy Conversation. How was Moses Transported at the Israelites Idolatry?
Exodus 32.19.
His usual Meekness seemed to have forsaken him, his Anger waxed hot, and he
cast the Tables out of his Hands, and brake them beneath the Mount. Numb.
25.11, 12, 13.
Phineas's Zeal is Recorded to his Honor, it stopped the Raging Pestilence, and
Calmed the Anger of an Incensed GOD. Psalm. 106.30.
Holy David expressed his Zeal, in great Variety of Passions, it appeared in
his Hatred, his Joy, and in his Grief. In his Hatred: Psalm. 26.5.
I have Hated the Congregation of the Wicked, and will not sit among the
Ungodly. In his Joy: Psalm. 122.1.
I was glad, says he, when they said unto me, we will go into the House of the
LORD. He was glad to see Piety prevailing among others, and that the Motion of
going to the House of the LORD should come from any besides himself. But the
greatness of his Zeal chiefly showed it self in his Grief, a truly Zealous Man
meeting with many more occasions of Sorrow, than Joy from others: And therefore
the Psalmists Language is sometimes very Mournful; Psalm. 119.136.
Rivers of Waters run down mine Eyes, because they keep not thy Law. And again.
verse. 158.
I beheld the Transgressors and was grieved, because they kept not thy Word. 1
King. 18.
How Zealous was Elijah against Idolatry? He boldly Reproved the King of
Israel, and destroyed the Priests of Baal, tho he was no Stranger to Jezabels
Revengeful Spirit. Nay he appealed to GOD himself that he had been very Zealous
for the LORD GOD of Hosts. Neh. 13.15.21.
Nehemiah is a Noble Example of Zeal and Courage, fit for all Christians, but
chiefly Magistrates to follow; He Contended with the Great Men of Judah, for
Profaning the Sabbath. He did not modestly pass by their Faults, out of
respect to their Quality, nor gently touch, as if afraid to hurt them; but
opposed all abuses of the Sabbath, with great Zeal and Resolution, and at last
effectually suppressed them, tho very general and prevailing.

The Time would fail me to mention all the Prophets, and Apostles; the
Primitive Saints, Confessors, and Martyrs, who have been Eminent Examples of a
fervent Zeal, who valued not Ease, nor Fame, nor Life, so they might propagate
the True Religion, and effectually discourage Impiety and Vice. A Zeal which
Conquered the World, and all the Powers of Darkness, to which nothing was too
difficult to be done, nor too grievous to be suffered, in so Glorious a Cause.
If we observe but the single instance of St. Paul, we cannot without amazement
Reflect upon the many Persecutions, Calamities and Afflictions; the many Perils
by Land and Sea, from his own Countrymen and Strangers, from open Enemies,
pretended Friends, and false Brethren, which his Zeal embold'd him to meet, and
enabled him to bear.

But behold we have a greater Example of Holy Zeal than he, and that is the Son
of GOD, and Savior of the World. It was Zeal for the Reformation and Happiness
of the World, brought him down from Heaven, and exposed him to Poverty and
Misery, and Disgrace, here below: The same Holy Zeal made him boldly Reprove
the Greatest among Men, whilst he fami^iarly Conversed with the Meanest; made
him Toil and Labor and go about doing Good, even to those who made him the
returns of Hatred, for his Good Will. Out of Zeal for the True Religion he
Unmasked the Pharisees, and laid open their Hypocrisy, and brought upon
himself the Hatred and Revenge, of that Malicious Dissembling Sect. Nay his
Zeal made him once lay aside the Lamb, and with the Resentment as well as
Authority of an Offended Judge, Vindicate the Honor of GOD, by Scourging the
Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple. So that with great Justice, does the
Evangelist apply that Expression of the Psalmist to our LORD, the Zeal of thy
House, Jo. 2.15.17.
has Eaten me up.

But the most Stupendous Instance of Divine Zeal, is the Blessed Jesus, Dying
to promote the Glory of GOD, and happiness of Mankind. We Honor the Zeal of
those who are willing to undergo Trouble, and run a few Hazards for Religion
What then shall we say of the Zeal of our Blessed Savior? Zeal, which Nailed
him to the Cross, and Shed his Blood, and made him yield up the Ghost? Zeal
which made his Soul all Gloominess and Horror, deprived him of the usual
Manifestations of his Fathers Love, forced him to cry out that his GOD had
forsaken him, and in the bitterest Agonies of Soul and Body to expire. This was
wonderful Zeal indeed, nay Zeal that wants a Name, being beyond our
Expressions, and even too narrow Thoughts: Yet such as should strongly engage
us to the exactest Imitation we are capable of, and turn our whole Soul into
Flames of Zeal and Love for him, to whom we owe whatever we enjoy or hope for,
who even laid down his Life for us, to Rescue us from Misery, and Entitle us
to Eternal Glory.

Such Examples of Zeal does the Word of GOD set before us, the best and
greatest we can have, even Patriarchs and Kings, Prophets and Apostles, and
above all the Great Captain of our Salvation, the Holy Jesus. And while we have
these in view, can any of us be cold and indifferent in that Service, which is
most acceptable to GOD, the Promotion of Religion, and Reformation of Manners?
In other Cases Examples raise a Generous Emulation, they give us Courage to
attempt the most difficult Undertakings, and Constancy to endure the greatest
Trials: And shall this be the single Instance, in which we are not ashamed to
be outdone by all? Let us then blush and hang down our Heads, when we compare
our own Slothfulness with the unwearied Labors of others, and find our selves
backward to meet with Difficulties and Dangers, in a Service wherein so many
have cheerfully Sacrificed their Lives.

But to these Primitive Examples, give me leave to add one of this present Age,
of a Person Eminent for the Greatness of her Station, much more for Piety and
Goodness, whose Memory we all Honor, and whose Untimely Death we yet bewail, I
mean our late Excellent QUEEN, whose Zeal for Piety and Religion, seemed to
our-shine Her other Excellent Qualities. She was not Diverted by the
Solicitudes of a Crown, from neglecting any Religious Duty Her self: Her
Example Recommended Piety to the World, with all its Native Charms: And in Her
appeared all the Majesty of a Queen, with the Unaffected Humility of the
Devoutest Christian. Nothing went nearer Her Heart, than that Immorality and
Profaneness, She perceived every where prevailing, and nothing with so much Joy
did She Encourage, as what had a tendency toward Reformation of Manners. Of
which I need give but one Instance, the Countenance She gave the Societies for
Reformation in England. For (as we learn from a very Pious and Useful Book
Entitled, Page 8.9.
An Account of the Societies for Reformation of Manners, etc.) having this
Affair laid before her, in the absence of the King, by a Prelate of Great
Learning and Fame, (the late Lord Bishop of Worcester) she had just Sentiments
of it, and therefore thought it became her to give it Countenance: She
Graciously condescended to Thank those who were concerned in it, and readily
promised them her Assistance; and afterward upon Application made to her
Majesty, she was pleased to send her Letter to the Justices of Middlesex,
Commanding them to put the Laws against Profaneness and Vice in Execution, with
all Fidelity and Impartiality: And to this end, that they should be careful and
diligent in Encouraging all Persons to do their Part, in giving Informmations
against Offenders, as they were obliged by their Oath, as Magistrates to do:
And when there was further occasion, she showed she was in Earnest to promote
this Design, by taking other more Effectual Methods for that purpose. And she
took particular satisfaction, Page 16.
in those other Societies of Religious Persons, who meet to Pray, Sing Psalms,
and Read the Holy Scriptures together; and to Reprove, Exhort and Edify one
another, by their Religious Conferences; she enquired often and much about
them, and was glad they went on and prevailed.

Such was the Hearty and Affectionate Concern, such were the Zealous
Endeavors, of that Excellent Woman, to promote this great Work of Reforming a
Wicked Age: Of her, who was the Glory and Ornament of her Sex and Crown; who
now enjoys the Reward of her Piety and Zeal, a Crown incorruptible and that
fades not away. She esteemed the Persons who were principally concerned in it,
and approved of the Methods proposed to accomplish it; and is not her
Approbation alone, a sufficient Answer, to all the Objections that have been
raised against it? Hers, I say, whose Judgment and Prudence, were equal to Her
Piety and High Condition? And should not so Great, so Good an Example, engage
Persons of all Ranks and Qualities, to join Vigorously in Prosecuting the same
Design? Should it not especially Inflame the Zeal of Her own Sex, and Influence
them to do all that in them lies, to Check and Restrain Vice, to Encourage and
Promote Piety and Virtue?

They Boasted of Her (and very justly) while She Lived, they profess a
Veneration for Her very Name, now that She is gone; let them show it by
Contributing what they can, to that Noble Undertaking, wherein She expressed so
much Satisfaction. And if they have but Zeal, they cannot want ways of
expressing it to their own great Honor, and the benefit of the World. They may
serve it by their Prayers, (in the constancy and fervency whereof, we must own
they usually exceed us,) and draw down upon it the Blessings of Heaven. They
can often with great Advantage Recommend it to others, and Engage Persons of
Power and Authority to Encourage it. And Lastly, they may do much toward
Reforming the World, by a Prudent Management of their Families, by instilling
good Principles into their Children betimes, and making them in Love with GOD
and Religion; as also by a strict and constant Inspection, into the Lives and
Manners of their Servants.

And if there needed any other Motive to excite their Zeal, after mentioning
the Example of our Excellent QUEEN. I would desire them to consider, that one
main Branch of that Public Reformation of our Manners, which is attempted at
this time, does directly tend to Vindicate the Credit of their Sex. They must
be sensible, that it suffers by those Wretched Creatures who are lost to Shame,
as well as Virtue: They know too well, that there have been some such
Instances, even among those of more considerable Rank, and that Honor and
Wealth have been the Rewards of a Scandalous Prostitution; and they cannot be
Ignorant what uncharitable Censures from the Observation of the Bad, have been
passed upon the Good and Virtuous. And must not such Rejoice, when they see
those Wretches Punished, who Dishonor their Sex, as well as their Religion?
They must, they will express their Abhorrence of a Strumpet, let her Quality be
never so High, and will leave nothing unattempted, to Banish such from the
Society of those, who have any regard for Modesty and Virtue. So will they be
Glorious Instruments in Promoting Reformation of Manners, and share with us, in
the Honor and Advantage of so useful a Design in this World, and share with
Her in Glory, whose Example I have been Recommending to them.

Fourthly, Another Motive to excite and confirm our Zeal against Profaneness and
Vice is this, That the Endeavors of Good Men in this Kingdom to Promote
Reformation o^ Manners, have been highly applauded in England. Gre^^^ (...)
said of them there, and greater expected from them. This we Learn from several
Hands, particularly the Book I already Quoted, in these words. Page 23.24.
-- The Endeavors of these Gentlemen have not been confined to this City and
Kingdom, but have extended as far as Ireland, where they have had an Influence,
very little, I think to the Honor of that Kingdom, from whence it had its First
Rise, of which since a more particular account may be expected; I may satisfy
my self at present, with saying in general of my own Knowledge, that the
Transactions, of Reformation here, having been, near Two Years since, laid
before some few Persons in Ireland, and most of those (I must again observe)
Private Persons, and of the Lower Rank of Men, with proper considerations to
move them to unite in the same Design, and Methods to pursue it with Advantage,
it determined them to engage heartily in it; and they have Prosecuted it with
so much Vigor, that there are now several Societies for Reformation, in the
City of Dublin; which I am assured by diverse Accounts, that I have in my Hands
from thence, are spreading into several Parts of the Kingdom, and are
Encouraged by His Excellency the Earl of Galway, one of the Lords Justices of
Ireland, The Right Reverend the Archbishop of Dublin, many of the Clergy, and
the Best of the Magistrates and Gentlemen of that City: In one of which
Societies, most of the Parish-Ministers of Dublin, several of the Pious
Bishops, particularly, the Celebrated Archbishop, and diverse other Persons of
Quality are Members; some of which have shown a Zeal, which if it prevailed the
Three Kingdoms over, might soon produce a Glorious Reverse of the State they
are now in, and which in less than Two Years space has succeeded, (tho not
without such various Oppositions, as might be expected from Combinations of Bad
Men) to that degree in Dublin, that the Profanation of the Lord's Day, by
Tippling in Public Houses, by Exercising of Trade, and Exposing of Goods to
Sale, is almost suppressed; that Lewd Women are so strictly enquired after, and
severely Punished, that they have Transported themselves, as in England, to our
Plantations; and that Swearing is so run down, that an Oath is rarely heard in
their Streets; so that Public Disorders are remarkably Cured; and in short,
Vice is afraid and ashamed to show its Head, where within a few Years past, it
was Daring and Triumphant.

This Account, Blessed be GOD, is in the main true, and my Design in mentioning
it to you, is not to Please or Flatter you, by telling what you have done, but
to excite and spur you on to double your diligence, and make it more apparent
to the World, how answerable your Zeal is, to the Character that has been
publicly given of it. Commendations do generally improve, and nourish Virtue;
and will it not be base and dishonorable, should we hereafter fall short of
what is published to the World concerning us? Are our Magistrates and Clergy
Commended, for discharging their Duty with so much Zeal? And should not those
among us Blush who are conscious to themselves, that they are Entitled to none
of these Praises? Let us then resolve not to lose the Reputation we have
already gained; least it be hereafter as publicly declared of us, that for a
while indeed we seemed warm, and in earnest against Vice, but that our First
Fervours are gone, and we are unhappily reconciled to our Old Sins; and are
liable to the Character of the Foolish Builders who began a good Work indeed,
but could not bring it to an end.

It Is true, we ought no more to do a Good Action to be Praised of Men, than we
should do an Evil one, to avoid their Censures: And I trust in GOD that your
Zeal will never be Infected with the least mixture of Vain Glory. Yet just
Praises are the Rewards of Virtue, and should be so esteemed. And it is our
Duty not only to be sincerely Religious, but open Advocates for Piety; to stir
up others by our Zeal, and so to let our Light shine before Men, that they may
see our good Works, and Glorify our Father which is in Heaven.

I might mention, as another Motive, to excite and confirm your Zeal against
Profaneness and Vice, the necessity of it, to avert the just Wrath and heavy
Judgments of GOD, and the reason we have to expect and dread them if Iniquity
still prevail: And that we can hope to escape them on no other Terms, than our
Endeavoring with great Industry and Sincerity, to suppress all kinds of
Wickedness.

The truth of this might be easily demonstrated from the Word of GOD, and from
the End and Reason of this Judgments; this is most apparent from his Method of
dealing with other Nations, of this we may be convinced from his dealings with
our selves: But this has been so fully insisted on, and largely proved by
others, that I shall do no more than name it; And pass on to a

Fifth Motive, to excite and confirm our Zeal for Reformation of Manners, and
against all Profane and Immoral Practices, namely, that we have reason to
hope, that it may prove hereafter an excellent means of Uniting the Established
Church, and the Dissenters; and of Propagating the Reformed Religion, among
those who are Strangers to it, and prejudiced against it.

It will not be here needful to inquire into the Immediate Causes of our
unhappy Divisions, nor shall I take up your time in Lamenting the Miseries
which have been, and still are the consequences of them. It concerns us much
more to learn, how our Breaches may be Healed, and those Wounds Cured, which
have often reduced our Religion to a very Languishing Condition.

And they who have most seriously considered this matter, have with great
reason observed, that nothing will more allay our Heats and Animosities;
nothing lay a better Foundation for a firm and lasting Union among Protestants,
than our becoming Zealous and Active against Vice and Profaneness.

For First, our jointly endeavoring to beat down Public Wickedness, must
needs Unite the Affections of all those who are concerned, in that Excellent
Undertaking. We cannot but Love and Value all who have an Active Zeal for GOD
and Religion, tho in some things, their Judgments may be different from ours.
There are Charms in Piety, which none can resist, and if we Love GOD our
selves, we must Love those also who serve him in Humility and Sincerity of
Heart, tho we may judge them mistaken in things of lesser Moment. But now Unity
of Affection is a necessary Preparative for Unity of Judgment; and true Holy
Zeal Unites the Minds, as well as Hearts of all those in whom it dwells. And if
we go on to assist one another in Suppressing Lewdness, Immorality and
Profaneness, we will soon be convinced that differences of Opinion, about the
circumstances of Religion, when we agree in all the Essentials of it, should
never make us Hate and Calumniate one another. But that whatever our
Sentiments, as to some particulars may be, we are Brethren and Fellow
Christians, Servants of the same Lord, Partakers of the same Blessed Hope, and
Heirs of the same Eternal Kingdom: That tho we differ in a little in the Roads
we take, yet we both direct our Course, toward the same Heaven, whither they
who are truly Pious, Humble and Sincere of both Parties, may hope to arrive at
last, and where without Controversy or Dispute, they shall for ever dwell
together, in the profoundest Peace, and most charitable Agreement.

But as our being truly Zealous against Profaneness and Vice, has a natural
tendency to Unite our Affections, so in the Second place, it will convince us
of the necessity of Uniting together, in Worship, and Sacraments, and every
other way. For the more Zealous we are against Vice, the more clearly will we
see, the great Mischiefs which are caused by our Divisions, the more fully will
we be convinced, that they are the great Hindrances of a General Reformation of
Manners; that the most prevailing Vices and Impieties are owing to them, and
that till they be removed, Reformation may be wished for, but can never be
happily Effected.

For this is the great Popular Objection, against our Religion, insisted on so
much by the Enemies of Piety, that there are so many Parties among us, that
they know not whom to close with, and therefore will treat them all with equal
Neglect and Scorn. This is what some pretend to justify their Impiety, and is
the real cause, why others are Profane; and cannot be but a Stumbling Block to
many weak Minds. Besides, Dissentions in Religion, destroy Ecclesiastical
Discipline, and deprive Church Censures of their Force. They enfeeble the Civil
Power, and compel Magistrates to Wink at great Irregularities. They distract
Private Families, and separate the nearest Relations. Where they prevail, the
State is seldom free from Tumultuous Disorders, not the Church from numerous
Heresies and Schisms without end. And in short, they naturally lead to the
Subversion of all sober Religion, all Peace and Order. Nay our Divisions, not
only cause most of our Distempers, but hinder our Cure, they weaken the Hands,
and obstruct the Endeavors of those, who are Zealous for Suppressing Public
Vices. For he must be a Stranger to Humane Nature who does not know, that so
long as there are separate Parties, there will be separate Interests, and that
many will Prosecute their particular Designs, to the prejudice of the common
cause of Religion. One Party will be sometimes for Acting alone, and that will
raise Jealousies in the other; at least there is cause to fear that they will
not always Act with that Confidence in each other, upon which in a great
measure their Success depends. These things I confess ought not to be so, and
all that can be said for them is, with Humility to own, that even good Men are
Frail, and not above the Passions and Weaknesses incident to our Nature. But
now they who are truly Zealous against Profaneness and Vice, must needs be
sensible how Fatal our particular Controversies are to Christianity in general,
to Piety and Virtue. And therefore they cannot but pray for Unity, with all the
Fervor of their Souls, and will spare no Pains to procure so inestimable a
Blessing. All prudent Attempts for Peace, they will Encourage and Promote, and
submit to many Inconveniences, rather than want it. And if all Parties among
us, were thus Zealously Affected, if every one laid to Heart our Crying Sins,
and considered our Divisions as (and such sure I am, they have been and are)
one Principle Cause of them: How soon might we hope to see a happy Change! How
fast would all our Disputes and Controversies Fall and Dye! Then we should soon
behold what David pronounces so Good, and Pleasant, Brethren Dwelling and
Worshipping GOD together in Unity and Peace: And our Church below, would in all
respects be a lively Emblem of the Church Triumphant in Heaven.

But farther Thirdly, Our being Zealously Affected against Profaneness and Vice,
will if we continue and persevere in our Zeal, lay a firm Foundation for a
lasting Union among us, because it will turn our Zeal into its true Channel,
and fix it upon its right Object, and that is the Suppressing of known Sins,
and the Promoting of Piety and Virtue, and Reformation of Manners.

It is very certain, and much to be lamented, that many, both Members of the
Established Church and Dissenters also, are more Zealous for their particular
Opinions wherein they differ, than the great things of Religion wherein they
agree. This is manifest from the Practice of both. Thus we find that those who
seem warm for the Established Constitutions, shall be esteemed and valued by
others of the same Principles, tho Guilty of many Irregularities in their
Lives. And the Case is the very same among the Dissenters. Those who are hearty
for their Interests and firm to their Party, shall be Caressed and Celebrated
for their Zeal, tho in many things their Practices are Immoral. Now of this I
can assign no other Reason, but that the Zeal of both Parties, has been
unhappily Diverted from things of the greatest, to those of little importance,
in comparison of the other. And not only so, but mightily inflamed by the
Artifices of our Common Enemies. It has been the constant Endeavor of those
who studied our Ruin, strongly to engage us in Contentions, about the Outside
of Religion, and our minds were kept in such a constant ferment and hurry by
these Differences, that we could not observe, at least did not, sufficiently
consider it, how Atheism and Infidelity, Irreligion and Vice, were entering in
at our Breaches. We were like the Unfortunate Inhabitants of Jerusalem during
the last Dreadful Siege, who were more Violent against one another, than the
Romans, the avowed Enemies of them all.

But now were our Zeal once Vigorously Employed, in beating down Vice and
Profaneness, were our Warmth and Industry in that great Affair, answerable to
the moment of it; then our Passions against our Brethren would cool of
themselves, and our Resentments gradually abate, and at last be quite
extinguished. Our Wounds would no more Fester, but Close and Heal. And we would
Love and Value Men, not according to their Engagements to a Party, but their
Zeal and Concern for Virtue and Holiness and all our Endeavors we would Unite
against the Enemies of Religion in general, the Vicious and Profane.

And that our Zeal against Vice, were it strong and Active, as it ought to be,
would be attended with these happy Consequences, is what we will easily be
convinced of, if we consider that our Faculties are so imperfect, that they
cannot with any degree of Intenseness, be exercised at once upon different
Objects; and that as any one of our Passions, whither Love, Hatred, or Anger,
increases toward one Object, it must abate with respect to all others. If our
Passion is divided upon several Objects, it must act weakly upon them all, if
confined to one, it is Strong and Violent. As Rivers whatever they gain upon
the Land of one side, lose proportionably of the other; and if their Waters run
in one Channel, they are impetuous, and with a mighty Torrent, force their way,
but when separated into many Streams, they glide insensibly along. Now it is
easy to apply all this, to the Case before us. So long as we were warmly
engaged in Disputes, about Modes and Ceremonies, Postures and Garments, used in
Religious Worship, it was not in our Power to be so Zealous against Profaneness
and Vice, as we ought to have been, our Zeal was so exhausted by the one, that
we had too little to spare for the other. But now that our Zeal begins to be
better employed, to turn into another, and better Channel, our heat about other
things will by degrees wear off, and a Holy Zeal against Impiety, and Public
Wickedness, succeed in its room. And when ever, by the Blessing of GOD this is
happily Effected, will we not be apt to look back with Wonder, upon our former
Disputes and Quarrels, and be surpised that we should be Angry with one
another, when so many Public Sins needed all our Zeal and Indignation, and
Endeavors to Suppress them? Nay I am inclinable to hope, that we shall
resemble the Happy Lovers in Heaven, that all our Peevish Mistakes shall be
changed into Inviolable Love and Friendship, into the highest degrees of
Endearment and Affection. And this we have no reason to despair of, if we
consider in the

Fourth and Last place, that our being Zealously Affected against Profaneness
and Vice will Entitle us to the Blessing of GOD, without which no Concord, no
Unity, can be attained.

Many have wondered, considering the favorable Opportunities we have often had,
which Invited the Established Church and Dissenters to an Union, considering
especially, how much our Interest and Common Safety called for it, that it has
not yet been Effected. I will not pretend to judge where the fault lay, or
whence it came to pass, that all endeavors hitherto used to Unite us have
miscarried. Only it may be in general observed, that our want of true Zeal for
GOD and Religion; our great Ingratitude for the many Mercies of Heaven, and
that Corruption of Manners which almost universally prevailed every where; all
these I say, deprived us of the concurring Influence of Divine Providence,
without which all Humane means are contrived and applied in vain; we wanted
that, because we did not deserve it; Unity and Concord were too great Blessings
for a People, who had made such ill returns to GOD, for all his other Favors.

But let us at last become truly Zealous for Virtue and Religion, and decline
no Pains to Curb those Vices, which have so long Triumphed over both; let it be
our constant Study so to Execute the Laws against Impiety, that whoever dares
be Wicked, may yet be afraid of a Discovery. Then may we look up to GOD; and
expect his Blessing upon our Endeavors and Prayers for Union, as well as
Reformation: Let us but qualify our selves for it, and with great boldness we
may say, LORD speak the Word, and thy Servants shall be Healed.

And should the goodness of GOD so far bless our Zeal, as at once to make it
the means of Suppressing our Vices, and Curing our Divisions, what reason would
we have, with all the Ardours of the Heavenly Host, to Praise and Adore the
Divine Clemency and Mercy! Love and Peace as among them, prevailing every
where! Piety and Religion gaining Proselites every Day! and none daring to be
openly Vicious or Profane! These are I own, too great Blessings to be fully
expected in this World, yet we should not distrust GOD's Power, nor question
his Goodness. Great things have succeeded very slender and discouraging
Beginnings: And it is agreeable to the Wisdom of Providence, that it should be
so; least we should vainly ascribe that to our selves, which is wholly due to
GOD.

But it is not we alone, who shall receive all the Benefit of this Holy Zeal,
for it not only Promotes Unity and Peace among our selves, but will be a means
of Propagating our Reformed Religion among those who are Ignorant of it, and
prejudiced against it.

For how comes it to pass, that the Reformation for above an Age, has been
almost wholly at a stand, or rather declining? And if it has any where gained
Ground, it has in other places lost more; whereas at the Beginning it carried
all before it, and nothing could oppose its Conquests? The best reason of this
that I can give is, that the Piety and Zeal, the Purity and Stedfastness of our
first Reformers, Charmed and Subdued their very Enemies. They were all Eminent
for Holiness and Goodness, for Charity and Zeal, for Constancy and Patience.
But now there is a fatal reverse of things, we are fallen into many of those
Sinful Courses, which heretofore were peculiar to the Church we left. Our Zeal
has sensibly decayed, Piety Flourishes not among us, as it did among them, nor
is the Reformation of our Lives, answerable to that of our Faith. But yet if
the Spirit which acted our Reformers, did again revive in us, it would still
produce as considerable Effects.

It Is very true, that the Prejudices which those of the Church of Rome, have
Sucked in their Education against us, are great and strong, yet Exemplary
Holiness, and Prudent Zeal, would in due time perfectly overcome them. These
would Command Respect even from our Bitterest Enemies, and effectually convince
them of the Excellency of our Religion, did they see so good Fruits of it in
our Lives. This is the shortest and surest Method of dealing with them, for
after all that can be said, by way of Argument, yet that will always be thought
the best Church, which makes the Best and Holiest Christians: And unless our
Practices be much better than theirs, they will never believe that our Religion
can be so.

We may boast of the Purity of our Faith and Worship, and upbraid them with the
Superstition and Absurdity of theirs; but after all, the prevailing Arguments
must be the Innocence of our Lives, a hearty Zeal for the Honor of GOD,
expressed in a Vigorous Prosecution of all that is Vicious and Prosphane. These
are sensible Arguments, and carry along with them powerful and lasting
Convictions; these the most Ignorant can Comprehned; yet the most Learned
cannot resist.

Sixthly and Lastly, The most prevailing Motive of all, and which if duly
weighed would not only excite and inflame our Zeal, but preserve it always
Vigorous and Strong, is the Consideration of its exceeding great Reward. And
that with respect to both Worlds, in this it affords us the truest
Satisfactions, and Intitles us to extraordinary degrees of Glory, in the other.

As to this World, if there be any such thing as Satisfaction in it, any thing
exempted from that Vanity and Vexation of Spirit, wherewith the Wiseman has
charged the whole Creation. It does, it must consist in the pleasing
Reflections of our own Minds, upon the good we have done to Mankind, by
Suppressing Profaneness and Vice, and Encouraging Piety and Virtue. This is a
Pleasure Rational and Noble, proper for him who is made after the Image of GOD:
A Pleasure which stands the Test of Fruition and can never Cloy, but daily
gives the Soul a grateful Relish of some new Delight: A Pleasure which abates
our Troubles, and qualifies our Pains, which blunts the Edge of Sorrow, and
calms the Disorders of the Soul, which inspires us with Courage at the Hour of
Death, takes away its Sting, and deprives it of its Terrors.

And with what a generous bravery may we expect our end, if we have been
Instrumental in Advancing Religion among Men! If we have lived to so good
purpose, that any one Vice has been lessened by our Endeavors and Zeal! That
one Thought will refresh us more, when in a Languishing Condition, or on a
Dying Bed, than the Grandeur of Princes, or Riches of the World.

What a Satisfaction must it be to a good Magistrate, when about to render an
Account of his O^^ice, to the Great King of Heaven, to consider that he has
been Faithful to him that appointed him, has Justly and Impartially Executed
the Laws against all sorts of Wickedness! To a good Minister! When ready to
appear before the Great Bishop of Souls, that he can Reflect upon his Sincerity
and Zeal; and Courage in the discharge of his Duty! That Vice he still opposed!
And considered neither Interest, nor Reputation, nor Safety, when his Masters
Service called for him! To a Sincere Penitent, when he looks back upon his
Life, since his happy Conversion! That he made all possible Atonement, for his
former Injuries to Religion, by bringing more to Repentance than he had
formerly led astray! To all those who make Religion their Business, and
Reformation of Manners their constant Study! To remember how Active, how
Constant was their Zeal, what Labors and Troubles they underwent, what
Slanders and Calumnies they bore, to Punish and Restrain Wickedness and Vice,
to Maintain and promote Piety and Virtue! Such Thoughts as these will
wonderfully Support Good Men, when they have a near view of Eternity; will
Relieve their Languishing Spirits, and Raise their Dejected Heads, and Comfort
their Departing Souls.

But neither the Joys nor Sufferings of this present World, are worthy to be
compared with the Glory that shall hereafter be Revealed. There are Glories
reserved for good Men, beyond any thing we can conceive or know: And of these
extraordinary degrees belong to those who are Zealously Affected always in good
things: To those who with great Industry and Application, Promote Reformation
of Manners. For since that is a Service particularly pleasing to GOD, the
Reward that attends it, shall be proportionably great; And GOD will Honor
above others at the Last Day, those who are Zealous for his Honor here.

He that Converteth a Sinner (says St. James) from the error of his way,
shall save a Soul from Death, Ja. 5.20.
and shall hide a multitude of Sins. Now if he who gives a Cup of Cold Water to
a Disciple, shall not lose his Reward, what shall his Happiness and Glory be,
who rescues Souls from endless Destruction, secures them from Misery and
Unquenchable Fire, and so effectually covers Sins, that Infinite Justice shall
never find them out? And they who turn many to Righteousness, Dan. 12.3.
(as the Prophet tells us) whether it be by Advice or Correctition, or Example,
shall Shine as the Stars for ever and ever, with a peculiar, distinguishing,
and Eternal Brightness.

And should not the hopes of this Infinite Reward, inspire us with Holy Zeal,
Undaunted Resolution, and Invincible Patience? Make us despise both the Smiles
and Frowns of Fortune and of Men, the Uncharitable Censures of some, and
Profane Scoffs of others? Make us constant in our Endeavors against Vice, as
those Stars are in their Motions, which we hope hereafter in Glory to Outshine?

And what a Joyful Surprise will it be, to those Happy Souls, who here have
ever burned with Zeal and Love, to find in the other World, their Glories equal
to their Wishes, and infinitely beyond their too narrow hopes! When Mansions of
Peace, shall be their Habitations, Angels their Friends, and perfect Spirits
their Companions! When Praise shall be their Employment, and GOD himself their
exceeding Great Reward!

And if Souls in the other World retain any knowledge, of those who here have
been their most Intimate Friends (as I hope and believe they shall) then what
Transports of Love and Divine Friendship, what Endearments and Gratulations,
shall be among those happy Spirits, who have in this World been
Fellow Laborers in Advancing Reformation, and Fellow Sufferers for their Zeal
against Vice?

How will it add to their Raptures (tho almost Infinite before) to relate over
to one another, the Difficulties they here Surmounted, with all the Troubles
and Calamities they suffered! How sometimes they were Encouraged and Supported,
and the good Improvement they made of it! How again they were opposed in their
good Purposes and Designs, yet were not diverted from them by any Opposition!
How they were often exposed to Public Disgrace and Scorn, their best Actions
being foully misrepresented, yet GOD supported them under these Trials,
inspired them with a Generous Contempt of all Unjust Reflections, raised them
up unexpected Friends, and blessed their poor Labors, with surprising
Successes! How they were exhorted by the Ministers of Religion cheerfully to go
on in their Masters, Service, and to depend on his Word, for a Glorious Reward,
they believed and they obeyed; they recruited their Lamps with fresh Oil, and
their Zeal continued Flaming, Bright, and Strong to the last, so that nothing
could obscure or weaken, or even resist it! But that now at last, they find all
the Promises of GOD Graciously fulfilled, and therefore have cause to Praise
him for all their Sufferings, since their light Afflictions, which were but for
a Moment, have wrought for them, a far more Exceeding and Eternal Weight of
Glory!

Methinks like Moses from Pisgah, we may now take a Prospect of the Land of
Bliss, and see those who here used to meet together, for Religion and Devotion,
for Suppressing Vice and Promoting Reformation, welcoming one another into the
Heavenly Regions, with Joy in their Looks, and Glory about their Heads, and
nothing to be heard but Anthems and Hallelujahs!

Thus my Brethren, I trust in GOD it will be with you another day, but seeing
we are as yet in the Wilderness, Let us have our Faces always directed toward
the Promised Land: Our Journey cannot be long; let us not be Frightened at the
Dangers or Difficulties of the way, but go on Courageously in it, and Endless
Peace and Joy, shall soon succeed our Toil and Labor.

ERRATA.
Page 4 line 30. read are of greater necessity. p. 12. l. 27. r. Warm in their
Advices. p. 16. last l. r. the more they will. p. 22. l. 27. r. Zealous
Magistrates. p. 25. l. 24. r. indispensable. p. 39. l. 25. r. of their Blood,
rather than their Money. p. 43. l. 24. r. escaped p. 59. l. 33. leave out --
yet. p. 60. l. 7. r. comprehend. There are several Errata's in the Pointings.


