LICENSED, January the 15th, 1689/90.

Ja. Vernon.

A TRUE RELATION OF THE ACTIONS OF THE Inniskilling-Men, FROM Their First
Taking up of Arms in December, 1688. for the Defense of the Protestant
Religion, and their Lives and Liberties.

Written by ANDREW HAMILTON, Rector of Kilskerrie, and one of the Prebends of
the Diocese of Clogher, in the Kingdom of Ireland; an Eyewitness thereof, and
Actor therein.

LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard; and are to be Sold by Richard Baldwin in the Old Bailey. MDCXC.

TO Their Most Excellent MAJESTY'S, WILLIAM and MARY, KING and QUEEN Of
England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, etc.
May it please Your Majesty's,
THAT which imbolden'd me to lay these Papers at Your Royal Feet, was in
discharge of the Instructions I received from the Governor and Garrison of
Inniskilling, humbly to Present before Your Majesty's, together with their
Address, a true Account of their Faithful Endeavors for the Support of the
Protestant Interest, and of Your Majesty's; together with the Reasons and
Grounds upon which they proceeded in this so extraordinary a Revolution; and
the rather, because Inniskilling made no Declaration upon their first taking up
Arms, as most other parts of Ulster have done.

And, witb Submission, I think it most pertinent to plead before Your Majesty's
the Difficulties we found in what had but the appearance of Disloyalty to our
Prince; for Your Majesty's will be ill served by men who have not Loyalty in
their Principles. They who pretend they forsook their King for you, out of a
Desire only of change, their pretense is immoral, and humors are inconstant,
their Flattery is but the Tribute of Base Souls, and of Traitorous Consequence
to Princes; against whom the Justice or Wisdom of a Prince cannot secure him;
for both these could not preserve Moses and David from the madness of the
people.

May it please Your Majesty's, We in Ireland were ill used, exceeding ill; we
were disarmed and displaced, after the most signal Services of our Fathers, and
many of our selves, to the Crown; and the Arms put into the hands of the
Murderers, the bloody Murderers of Forty one, and their Offspring; of whom
our County afforded the most remarkable, the Mac Guires, who were the first in
that hellish Conspiracy, and inhuman in the execution of it. The chief of whom
was thought worthy to be brought hither, and suffer the pains of his Rebellion
in London. Your Majesty's will believe us, that not only the Offspring, but
some of the very Hands which committed those Massacres, were armed by Authority
at the same time that Protestants were thrust out of the Army, on pretense that
some one or other of their Relations had engaged with the Usurpers, though
themselves had served the King to the utmost Extremities; and many were
Cashiered, against whom even that pretense could not be found, and who had
bought their Places with the King's License, and laid out all they had upon it;
till at last, being a Protestant, was given for the Reason: and we were
discouraged by all the Artifice of Jesuit, or Irish, and even threatened another
Massacre by many of their lesser Politicians, yet could not all this remove us
the least step from our Duty to the King.

But, with Your Majesty's Patience, there was more than all this; We had Acts
of our Parliament which did incapacitate these men from bearing either Arms or
Offices; yet did we even faultily acknowledge, and submit to their Authority,
out of profound deference to the King, who had placed them over us, though
apparently to our Ruin, and overthrow of our Religion. All our Bishoprics and
Livings that fell in the King's Gift, were kept vacant, and the Revenues given
to the Popish Clergy. Their Bishops kept public Visitations in the Vacant
Diocesses, and assumed even the Title; one of whom was made Secretary of State,
and signed himself by the name of his Bishopric in all his Warrants and
Dispatches, that none might plead ignorance of the King's Intentions toward
us. And we were told by some in the highest place, That the King would fill no
Protestant Vacancies in the Church; so that we saw great part of our Churches
in their possession, and nothing interpose, but the lives of a very few (and
most of them) Old Men, to leave us not one Protestant Bishop in the Kingdom.
And for our Civil Rights, our Judges, Justices of the Peace, Sheriffs, and even
Constables, were for the most part made of Papists: and the Act of Settlement
was then doomed in every Coffee-house to the same Condemnation under which it
has fallen since. And the Army being entirely in those worst of Popish Hands,
the most barbarous Irish, who had thrown off humanity it self, our prospect was
all black and dismal.

Then it was that You, Sir, appeared, like the Sun, to dispel those mists which
had darkened all our Sky. Your Declaration revived us from the very Grave,
while it showed us a way only to stand by, and see the Salvation of the Lord;
only not to hinder you to relieve us without hazard, or even Dishonor to our
King; No more being asked, than to let our Parliaments be free; and the Laws run
in their Ancient Channel. To this generous Declaration, we gave full and
absolute Credence; and drank it in as thirsty Sands does the showers of Heaven:
And looked upon You as no other than a Miracle; a Moses sent immediately from
God, to deliver us from Egyptian Servitude and Idolatry. And as a no less
wonderful effect of this, that our King had been so perniciously Advised, as to
Abdicate his Throne, Voluntarily to throw up his Government, Disband his Army,
and Retire, some said to a Monastry, some to Rome, and some Dead; as every
man's Fancy led him, and which to believe we knew not; for at that Distance, we
were absolute Strangers to Court, and to any true Intelligence. At this very
time, Lord Tyrconnel Armed the Rabble of the Irish Papists, to the Number of
Forty or Fifty Thousand, and to live upon the Country without Pay; whence
ensued miserable Depredations, open Noonday Robberies, and an inevitable, and
sudden Ruin of the British and Protestant Interest in Ireland. Having granted
Commissions dated about the beginning of January last for these New Levies, he
after upon Notice of the King's Desertion the 10th of December, altered the
dates of these Commissions to the first of December; to bear a show as done
while the King was in the Government, and consequently that we should believe
it was by his Majesty's Orders.

And many of these New-raised men were so Transported with the Glorious
prospect they had before them, that they had not the Continence, no, not their
Priests, to refrain telling us, That they were now our Masters, and we must
submit to new Laws, such as should be their Pleasure, and what we had deserved
in their Opinion.

Then it was we thought our selves no longer under obligation to be active in
our own Destruction, to acknowledge Officers whom our Laws did incapacitate, and
acting more violently than ever, in the open Contempt of our Laws, and visibly
to our Extirpation; and that in all reasonable Presumption, even without Orders
from the King, who being gone from us (for what Reasons we neither knew at that
distance, nor could examine) we did not think we ought to continue in assisting
to the breach of our Laws in any lesser hands, whether of the Lord Tyrconnel,
or of any other. And in this Cause only it was, that we first took Arms in
defense of our Laws, against those, who when the King was gone, would govern by
Force, tho the Law said they should not be capable of any Employment; and when
they declared they would act in contradiction to all the Laws in being; and
went so far in it, as to lay us absolutely in the mercy of another Massacre,
with which some of them threatened us, and the most moderate of them did not
tell us we were secure from it. But on the contrary, very many Intimations were
sent from Fosterers, and others among the Irish, to their Friends of the
Protestants, to be gone, to send away their Effects, to save their Lives, for
that a storm was coming. They had Public Masses through all the North, for the
furthering of that which they called Inteneragh, that is, a Secret Intention.
Our Hills were daily covered with Multitudes of them, Arming and Inlisting
themselves; and they were quartered in our Towns, and in Private Houses. All of
them were Armed, of all Sorts, Sexes, and Ages; the old Women, and young
Children, provided them Skeans and Half-Pikes, for which they cut down our
Woods before our Faces; and it was difficult to get a Horse shod in our
Country; all Smiths being taken up in fitting this sort of Armory. Nor were
their Circumstances altered more than their Looks and Behavior; and if we
might believe themselves, nothing wanted but the Signal to perfect what had
been begun in Forty one; we were absolutely in their Power, and we had but that
moment to rescue our selves.

Such Extremities might have excused great Excesses; which I might very fully
show, were it not for swelling this Discourse beyond its intended bounds, and
therefore I forbear it.

And now it remains to show how we became Subjects to Your Majesty's, without
breach of our former Loyalty; or rather how the same Loyalty becomes now due to
Your Majesty's; and we do even with boldness hope, That the showing how firm
this our Loyalty held out through all the Temptations of the last Reign, will
render it the more acceptabte to Your Majesty's. This then was the scheme of
Affairs which our little Intelligence brought to us; That the Late King had, by
Advice of the Jesuits, quitted the Government on purpose to put us into
Confusion; and had then put himself into the hands of a bigoted Prince, Enemy
to our Nation, and Persecutor of our Religion; That upon his obstinate
Desertion and Abdication of the Government, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
and Commons of England, Assembled, did unanimously place Your Majesty's upon
the Vacant Throne. Thus we heard, and this we believed.

And what were we, that we should take upon us, at our distance from Affairs,
to understand them better than those at the Helm, or to dispute what no one in
England, made the least hesitation to admit?

And what could we embrace with more delight, than to see the Crown, Madam,
upon Your Royal Head, the next undoubted Heir to him who had Abdicated it?
Whose Virtues gave You as good a Title to the Election, as Your Blood to the
Succession, in that Illustrious Line, which we Pray God may Reign over us till
Time shall be no more.

And were not even our Wishes left behind, to behold all Your Glories doubled,
in Your Conjunction with His Present Majesty, born to Empire, and a Pattern to
Future Fate.

It was this Fate, Great Sir, Great Madam, These were the Steps by which we
were raised beyond our own Contrivance, but with our ready Consent, to become
Your Subjects: And how we have acquitted our selves in that Glorious Relation
we stand in to Your Majesty's, is the business of that Account which I now
begin, without studying the Style, or any other Ornament but Truth, which must
be obscured in any dress I could bestow upon it.

THE ACTIONS OF THE INNISKILLING-MEN.
ABout the first Day of December, 1688. there came a Letter from Mr. Secretary
Ellis, by the Lord Tyrconnel's Order, to the Provost of Inniskilling, to
provide Quarters for two Foot Companies; viz. Capt. Nugent's and Capt.
Shurloe's Companies, that were sent to Quarter in that Town; and about the same
time a report was spread through the Country, That the Irish intended to
Massacre all the British; and to confirm the same, upon Friday the 7th of the
same Month, there came to Inniskilling, and to most Gentlemen in the Country
about, a Copy of a Letter from the County of Down, written to the Earl of
Mount-Alexander, telling, That the Massacre was to be on the Sunday following,
being the Ninth of December 1688.

This Letter had an incredible Operation on the Minds of all near Inniskilling,
for many of them were yet alive, who had been Eyewitnesses of the Barbarous
Cruelties Committed on the Protestants, by the Irish Papists in the Rebellion
of (41) without any Compassion, or distinction to Age or Sex. This Letter with
the other to the Provost, to receive a Garrison into the Town (which had not had
a Garrison for a long time before in it) and having good Information from
Dublin, that the Lord Tyrconnel had granted Commissions all over the Kingdom to
put all Papists in Arms; and that any Papist that was able or could propose any
way to maintain men for three Months, had got what Commissions they desired;
and to confirm the same, they saw the Natives that lived in the Country near
them, gather in great numbers, and forming themselves into Companies, and had
some experienced Soldiers sent to several Parts of the County to exercise them.
This made those of Inniskilling apprehensive that those Preparations were all
making for the intended Massacre; and knowing that Inniskilling was the only
place of Consequence upon Logh Earne, (all Protestants, and who held out the
whole Rebellion of 41, with remarkable Courage) and if the Irish were possessed
of it, they had an open Passage from Connaught to Vlster; they therefore did
unanimously resolve not to admit the Two Foot Companies to Quarter in the Town,
but did immediately dispatch Letters to all the Gentlemen in the Country near
the Place, acquainting them with their Resolution, and craving their Advice and
Assistance in that Juncture; for of themselves they were not able to keep out
the Two Foot Companies, there being but about Eighty Dwellers in the Town, and
few or no Arms among them; but when their Messengers returned, tho some few
gave Encouragement, yet the greater part did dissuade them from the Enterprise
^s dangerous; the Irish being well provided of Arms, Ammunition, and all things
necessary; whereas they had not ^^n Pounds of Powder in the Town, and not
Twenty ^^^ll fixed Firearms: But the Townsmen were still bent ^^n their first
Resolution, at all hazards, not to receive the ^arison; for then they did
expose their Lives, as they said, (...) the Mercy of their barbarous and bloody
principl'd ^nemies.

Upon Thursday, the 13th. of December, News was brought to the Town, that the
two Companies were on their March toward them, and upon Friday that they were
come to Clownish, within eighteen miles of the Town; and then the Townsmen
(thinking it full time to look to themselves.) send again to all their
Neighbors, praying them to come to their relief, promising that whilst they
stayed with them they should have Free Quarter for Man and Horse. Upon this,
several of the Neighborhood came into the Town, with their best Horse and
Arms, promising to stand by them in Defense of their Lives and the Protestant
Religion, which they did believe, (by the preparations they heard were making
by our Enemies,) would be very soon invaded.

Upon Saturday, the 15th. of December, the two Foot-Companies came to Mac
Guires Bridge, within eight short miles of the Town, and upon Sunday by ten of
the Clock, word was brought into Town that they were upon their march, and come
to Lismella a Village about four miles distant from Innskillen: At the time
when the news of their so near approach came, most of the men in the Town were
gone to Church, but soon came out and went to their Arms, resolving to meet the
two Companies before they came near the Town, and being drawn out, they were
about 200 Foot, and a hundred and fifty Horse, and having consulted what was
fit to be done, they sent some of their number before to persuade them by fair
means to return, and brought some Ale and Meat from the Town to treat them in
case they did comply with their desire. And at the same time Gustavus Hamilton,
Esquire our present Governor, came with about a hundred Horse within a mile of the
Town, to support the Townsmen if there should be occasion, for it was reported
that the two Companies had brought with them two or three Horse loads of spare
Arms, to Arm a numerous Rabble of the Country- Irish that flocked to them from
all hands. But the Inniskillen Horse advancing toward them under the Command
of Captain Browning, and Lieutenant Christopher Carleton, and the Foot under
the Command of Captain Molcome Cathcart, who came no sooner in view of the two
Companies, but they with the whole Rabble that was with them, turned their
backs and fled without halting, in very great fear and disorder, back that
Night to Mac Guires Bridge, and their Officers being then at Dinner in a
Gentleman's House not far from them, hearing that Inniskillen-men were come out,
left their Dinner (as was reported) before they had half done, and fled after
their men in as great fear and disorder as they had gone before. The next day
they went to Cavan twenty four miles distant from Inniskillen where they stayed
in great fear of the Inniskillen-men, till they received new Orders from the
Lord Tyreconel to march to some other Quarters: And I must here take notice,
that they did not show their Potent to Quarter in the Town, nor once asked to be
admitted into the place.

About the 18th. of December, the men of Inniskillen and those that did adhere
to them, seeing the Storm that threatened them grew still more black, the Irish
arming on all hands, and growing much more insolent than usual, thought it
advisable to put themselves in some posture of Self-Defence, and at a full
meeting unanimously made choice of Gustavus Hamilton, Esquire to be their
Governor, a Gentleman that was a Justice of the Peace in the County of
Fermanagh, of which Inniskillen is the County Town: His Father Lodowick was
Brother to the late Lord Glenawly in Ireland, both Sons of Archibald Hamilton,
Arch Bishop of Cashell in Ireland, had been both Colonels under Gustavus
Adolphus King of Sweden, and both raised to the dignity of Lords in that
Kingdom. The Lord Lodwick married his Lady (who is Mother to our Governor) in
Swedland, she was a great Fortune to him, and it is said she is nearly related
to the Crowns of Denmark and Swedland; But he desirous to live in his native
Country near his Brother, the Lord Glenawly, upon his return was unfortunately
killed at Sea, leaving our Governor and a younger Son behind him. Our
Governor had been for several years Cornet to the Troop that belonged to his
Uncle the Lord Glenawly, but was disbanded by the Lord Tyrconel, when the rest
of the Protestant Offices were turned out of the Army in Ireland, and after
that he lived constant ly at home on his own private Estate.

He was not present at the Election, but as soon as it was made known to him,
he consented to take that Charge upon him, and immediately gave orders to raise
two Foot Companies in and about the Town, the one under the Command of Captain
Allen Cathcart, and the other under the Command of Captain Malcome Cathcart,
and in a very few days formed a good Troop of Horse, and a Foot Company for
himself, out of his own Estate and the Country adjoining, and used all the
endeavors he could to provide them Arms and what else they wanted, and then
removed his Family from his own Dwelling House to the Castle of Inniskillen.

Some time before this, having heard that Derry had denied entrance to the Lord
Antrim's Regiment, that was ordered to Quarter in that Town, and had chosen
their former Governor Mr. Phillips, and were putting themselves in a Posture
of Self-Defence against any Irish Garrison to be sent there, which nearly
resembled our Case; we did therefore about the 20th. of December, send Captain
Allen Cathcart, and Lieutenant William Mac Cormick to Derry, with Letters,
acquainting the Governor and others, that had any Command there with what we
had done, craving their advice and assistance in case of any trouble to us, as
promising them likewise our Friendship and assistance if they stood in need of
it, and we had a very kind return to our Letters by those Gentlemen that were
sent.

Soon after this we had news brought us, that the Protestants in all parts of
the Kingdom were very much oppressed by the Papists, first by stealing their
Goods in the Night, and in a short time after taking them publicly in the day,
and upon complaint made to the Magistrates, (who were for the most part
Papists) had no redress given them; some of them having the confidence to tell
the Protestants (who had been robbed of their Goods,) that if their Lives were
spared they had no cause to complain, and now about this time several came to
us from other parts of the Kingdom, leaving all their goods behind them; and
among many others, those two worthy Gentlemen, Thomas Lloyd and Daniel Hodson
Esquires, with their Families; the first is now a Colonel among us; who though
young, and of little experience before, yet by his care and diligence has
supplied all other wants, and shown himself a person of Courage and good
Conduct beyond expectation.

It was about this time that the News came to us of the ate King having
deserted the Kingdom and Government, disbanded his Army, and left all in
confusion in England, and the Lord Tyrconell of his own head was Arming all the
Irish Papists, and inlisting forty or fifty Thousand of them.

The Month of January was spent with us in Raising some more Troops and Foot
Companies, and our Officers used all the care and diligence they possibly could
to fix the few fire Arms they had procured; they caused a great Number of Pikes
to be made, and beat out a great many Sythes, fixing them in Poles, whereby in
a short time, the few Foot we had were in an indifferent posture of defense;
and having about twelve Companies and some few Troops raised, the Officers
thought it time to Regiment themselves, and made choice of Gustavus Hamilton
Governor of Inniskillen to be their Colonel, and Thomas Lloyd their
Lieutenant Colonel, and about the latter end of January sent Mr. Hugh Hamilton
and Mr. Allen Cathcart (two ^o) their number, who had been very active among
them* with an Address to the then Prince of Orange, and with full power and
instructions to act for them at the Court of England, to solicit for
Commissions, Arms, Ammunition, and some Money for the place. We ordered them to
make their way by Scotland for their greater safety, and sent Letters by them
to the associated Lords and Gentlemen of the Counties of Down and Antrim,
acquainting them with our Affairs, and craving their aid in Case we were put to
any extremity; and soon after had very kind Answers returned to us.

The month of February was spent in Consultations, and several Meetings and
Treaties with Colonel Lundy, and the leading men in the Counties of Derry,
Dunegall, Tyrone, Cavan, and else where: orders were given out that the
protestants in the several Counties in the North West part of Ireland should
form themselves into Troops and Companies, and afterward into Regiments (for
the North East part had done the same before) and all concluded (in case of
extremity) to submit to Colonel Lundy, who was in great reputation with us for
Conduct, and experience in military affairs.

The Gentlemen of the County of Fermanagh did meet and conclude to raise two
Regiments of Foot and a Regiment of Horse, which by reason of some men's
backwardness to the service were not made up, so that the great stress of our
Country was left upon the Governor of Inniskillen, and those Gentlemen who did
adhere to him.

And here I cannot but with honor make mention of Sir John Hume, who has been
always reputed to have the greatest fortune and best Estate in that County, but
was then so sickly and infirm, that he could not undergo the Toil and Fatigue
of those Confusions, yet he was not behind in contributing to his utmost for
the common security; he raised more than a hundred Horse, and above two hundred
Foot of his Tenants, and Armed them indifferently well at his own expense (who
have behaved themselves on all occasions very well with us) he sent for his
Eldest Son from England, who had been three or four years in the Army there; a
very hopeful young Gentleman (who died in the service) to Command them, and to
defend his house, which standing near Loghearn, within three miles of
Inniskillen, he fortified very well, and plentifully furnished it with
Provisions to his great charge, which has maintained a great Garrison ever
since, and been a very great security to the Country about, and of much
consequence to the defense of Inniskillen: He being forced by his great
infirmity retired into England with his younger Children, his second Son being
in England before he came there he sent him under the Command of Major General
Kirk to the relief of Derry, who died of a Fever at Sea much lamented of all
that knew him.

Now came the News to us, That the Convention of the Estates in England, as
well Spiritual as Temporal, had Voted the late King James's Desertion to be an
Abdication, and placed their Present Majesty's in the vacant Throne, and from
this time and upon these grounds we thought we were obliged to behave our
selves as their Subjects, our Allegiance being transferred and descending from
the late King James upon his voluntary Desertion, as if he had been naturally
dead, and accordingly March the Eleventh, we did proclaim King William and
Queen Mary at Inniskillen with such Joy and Solemnity as our Circumstances
could bear, rejoicing unspeakably to see the Crown descend in the same Royal
Line, which time out of mind had inherited our Government.

About the 16th. of March we had an Account, that the Garrison of Dunganon by
order from Colonel Lundy was deserted, and that they and all the Inhabitants
in the Country near Dunganon were fled toward Strabone and Derry. And about
the same time, our Governor received Letters from Colonel Lundy, acquainting
him, that it was concluded at their Committee, that all the Forces in the North
West of Vlster should draw toward Derry and the Legan, to make good Fin Water
against the Enemy, and he gave us a very melancholy account of the Ill
condition his own men were in. But our Governor and the rest of the Gentlmen
that adhered to him, were positively resolved not to desert Inniskillen, the
keeping whereof being of so great consequence, that it kept the Conaught Irish,
from joining with the Vlster Irish, and so was a great security to Derry and
all the Country about it.

March the 20th. all the Protestants in the County of Cavan in pitiful stormy
Weather, and in great disorder came running to Inniskillen, and the Villages
about, to the no small surprise of us all; about three or four Troops of Horse
coming before, followed with about as many Foot Companies, and then the whole
inhabitants with their Women and Children to their middle in Clay and Dirt,
with pitiful Lamentations, and little or no Provision to sustain them. Our
Governor ordered them free Quarter for Man and Horse in the Town and Country
about, many of them were indifferently well Armed, and we were joyful that they
were come to us, being in hopes that they would join with us in the defense of
our Country.

But upon enquiry into the reasons of their leaving their Country as they did,
(where they had several good strengths that might for some time have been
defended.) Their Officers told us, that they had orders from Colonel Lundy for
so doing, and did endeavor (though to no purpose,) to persuade our Governor
to do the same with Inniskillen; But that which hastened them away in so great
disorder, was the Lord Gilmoy's coming with a part of the Irish Army into the
County of Cavan, and surprising a House that belonged to Mr. Dixy Dean of
Kilmore, and made Prisoner the Deans Eldest Son, (who was Captain of a Troop of
Horse,) Edward Charleton his Cornet, and about eight or ten of his Troopers;
upon news of which all the Garrisons about broke up, some setting fire to their
own Houses, and the whole Country fled to us without knowing who or what number
of men were come against them.

The Lord Gilmoy animated by their running away, and thinking by their example
to drive the whole Countty before him, came with his Soldiers to Belturbet,
and next day sent a party to besiege Crom, in the County of Fermanagh, a Castle
standing on Loghearn, about sixteen miles distant from Inniskillen, it was
under our protection, and has been ever since our Frontier Garrison toward
Dublin, and his Lordship thinking to frighten that Garrison to a Compliance
with his Demands, sent two Canon made of Tin, near a yard long in the Chase,
and about eight Inches wide, strongly bound about with small Cord, and covered
with a sort of Buckram, near the color of a Canon. These two mock Canon he
drew toward Crom with eight Horses a piece, making a great noise as if they
were drawn with much difficulty. As soon as they came before Crom, he threatened
to batter the Castle with these two great battering Guns, and had the vanity to
fire one of them, which burst and had like (as it was said,) to have spoiled the
Gunner. But those within the Castle (depending upon aid from Inniskillen)
denied to surrender, and fired out at them from the Castle, killing several:
Gilmoy continues the Siege, and on Friday the 22th. of March, sent a Letter to
the Governor of Inniskillen in the nature of a Summons, acquainting him that
King James was come to Dublin, and that he was come with an Army to reduce that
Country to his obedience, and that by his Commission, he had power to grant
them better Conditions than they might ever expect from him afterward, if they
were reduced by force. Upon receipt of this Summons, our Governor called his
Officers together to consult what was fit to be done, and all of them did
unanimously conclude not to desert Inniskillen, nor to submit to any but to
King William and Queen Mary whom they had now Proclaimed, and accordingly
returned Lord Gilmoy an answer, that they owed Allegiance to none but them, nor
would they submit to any but to their Majesty's, or those Commissioned by them,
and so did prepare themselves the best they could to defend the Town, and to
use what means they could to relieve Crom.

On Saturday the 23d. of March early in the morning, many of the County of
Cavan-men left Inniskillen, and marched toward Derry, in obedience (as they
said) to Colonel Lundies orders: And the same day in the afternoon, our
Governor drew out all the Horse and Foot he had under his Command to the
common Hill near Inniskillen, keeping them all day at their Arms, expecting
every hour to hear that the Lord Gilmoy was on his march toward us, and
resolved to give him battle before he came near the Town, for ever since we
took up Inniskillen, we judged it advisable rather to fight the Enemy at a
distance from it, than to let them lay Siege to it, and we have hitherto done
accordingly: But seeing no Enemy appear all that day, and our Scouts returning
and bringing us word that Gilmoy came only the length of Lisnaskea a Village
ten miles distant from the Town, and that upon the news of our drawing out
against him, was retreated back with his men to the Siege of Crom. Our
Governor therefore in the Night, sent a detachment of about two hundred of his
best armed men, some by Land and some in Boats toward Crom, hoping they might
get into the Castle in the Night, but it being day before they got there, the
Enemy used all the Endeavors they could to keep our Boats from Landing at the
Castle, firing many Vollies at them, but being bad marksmen, killed only one
old Boatman, and did our men no farther harm, but our men shot several of them
dead from the Boats, Landed at the Castle, and having joined those that were
within, they sallied out together, and beat them from their Trenches, killed,
between, thirty and forty of them, got the Fire arms of those that they killed,
took their two mock Canon, (one of which was left at Crom, and the other
brought to the Castle of Inniskillen,) got two suits of Armor, and several
other things of value, and immediately after this the Lord Gilmoy quit the
thoughts of any farther Siege against Crom, and retreated to Belturbet.

At this time one Brian Mac Knaghor Mac Guir (who had been a Captain in the
Irish Army,) was a Prisoner with us at Crom. Him the Lord Gilmoy had a desire
to release, and the next day sent an Express to Captain Crighton (the
proprietor of the Castle of Crom, and is Governor thereof) proposing to
exchange Captain Dixie for this Captain Mac Guir, and desiring if the change
were approved of, that Capt. Mac Guir might be sent to him, promising upon his
Honor, to return us Captain Dixie for him. The exchange was very acceptable to
the Govern our and all that were in the Castle of Crom, but yet would conclud
nothing until they had the consent of the Governor of Inniskillen, and the
other Officers that were there, and so sent an Express from Crom to Inniskillen
for their Resolution. The Messenger was immediately sent back to Captain
Crighton, with Orders from the Governor to go on with the Exchange:
Accordingly Captain Crighton sent Mac Guir to the Lord Gilmoy desiring that
Captain Dixie might be returned to him according to his promise under his hand,
which Letter is in the hands of the Governor of Inniskillen.

But the Lord Gilmoy (showing what we may expect from the word and promise of a
Papist) as soon as he had Mac Guir in his hands, called a Council of War on
Captain Dixie and his Cornet Mr. Charleton, where they were both found guilty,
and sentence of Death passed upon them, for levying men by the Prince of
Oranges Commission, which was found in their Pockets; and immediately they were
desired to prepare to Die against the next day; but in the mean time great
endeavors were used, and promises made them of life and preferment, if they
would turn Papists and adhere to King James. But they (though both young men,)
resolutely rejected the offer, and preferred their Religion to the saving of
their Lives.

And here I cannot but remember Mac Guires Carriage, who (as it was reported)
showed an extraordinary concern for the Lord Gilmoyes breach of Faith, he went
to him and told him, that his putting Mr. Dixie to death, (after his promise
under his hand to return him) would be a perpetual stain to his honor, and
rather than he should do so base a thing, prayed that he might be returned a
prisoner back to Crom, and that Mr. Dixies Life might be saved, for he did not
desire to purchase his Freedom by so great injustice. But the Lord Gilmoy deaf
to any thing that could be said on their behalf, caused both the Young
Gentlemen to be hanged on Mr. Russels Sign Post in Belturbet, and when they
were dead commanded to take their Corpse into the Kitchen, to cut off both their
Heads, and ordered them to be thrown out into the Street to the Soldiers, to
play at foot ball with, and when the Soldiers for some time had pleased
themselves with this Barbarous sport, their heads were set up on the Market
House in Belturbet.

March the 25th. 1689 having intelligence that Captain James Hamilton was come
to Derry from England with great store of Ammunition, and Arms: The Governor
sent Nicholas Westby Esquire and my self Andrew Hamilton Clark, and a guard of four
and twenty men to Derry with letters to Colonel Lundy, and Captain James
Hamilton for a supply of Arms and Ammunition, Captain Hamilton was very
desirous to supply us, but Colonel Lundy having the Command of all gave us but
a very cold welcome, would not give us one fixed Arm, and only sixty Musket
Barrels without stock or lock, that were thrown by in the store house of Derry
as useless, which we soon fixed, and five Barrels of Powder out of at least
five hundred Barrels then in Derry, the Powder and Musket Barrels we sent safe
to Inniskillen, and this was all the supply that ever we had of Arms and
Ammunition (but what we took from the Enemy) until Major General Kirk supplied
us.

And now. Mr. Hamilton on his way back from Derry to Inniskillen, met Dr.
Walker at Lifford where a token passed between them which was of great use
afterward during the Siege of Derry. For, all the Correspondence that was kept
between Derry and Inniskillen was managed by Dr. Walker and Mr. Hamilton, and
because it was hazardous to write, it was concluded on, that all messengers
that credit was to be given to by either party, were to give that token which
if they could not give, no notice was to be taken of what they said. And during
the first month or six weeks of the Siege the Irish Army did not much Scruple
to let both men and women pass to and from Derry, whereby we had a constant
Correspondence with them during that time, but after that they, would suffer
none to go into the City, whereby our Correspondence was in a manner wholly cut
off.

April the 13th. having intelligence that Colonel Cuningham and Richards were
come to the Lough of Derry, with Men, Arms, and Ammunition. The Governor of
Inniskillen sent Mr. Andrew Hamilton to Derry again for a farther supply of
both, but the Lagan Army happening to be broke near that time, and the Irish
Army coming before Derry, Colonel Cuningham returned to England without
landing the Men or Arms he brought with him; and Mr. Hamilton endeavoring to
make his way back from Derry to Inniskillen was taken by a Quartermaster of
the Irish horse, but then King James having issued out his Proclamation, that
all men that pleased should have liberty to go to their former dwellings, Mr.
Hamilton procured Lieutenant General Hamiltons Pass, to return to his house in
Kilskirry, and so got Safe back to Inniskillen. But before he left the Irish
Camp, he got a trusty messenger sent into Derry to Dr. Walker, and having given
him the token that was between them, it was Concluded on, that Dr. Walker
should not give credit to any report that might come to Derry of Inniskillen
being taken by the Irish unless he saw it under the Governors hand, or Mr.
Hamiltons: and neither were we to believe that Derry was taken unless we saw it
under Dr. Walkers hand, and this was very happily concluded on, for there was
Scarce a week after the Siege of Derry began, but the Irish found means to
spread a report among us, that Derry was taken by them, which we gave no credit
to since we did not see it under Dr. Walkers hand, which was well known to
several of us.

It will be but a small digression here to relate an unnatural piece of
Cruelty, that I saw in the Irish Camp before Derry, at the time that I came to
get Lieutenant General Hamiltons Pass to return to my own House.

On Thursday the 25th. of April, with one Mr. Anthony Dobbin (a Justice of the
Peace near Derry,) I came to the Irish Camp about Nine or Ten of the Clock in
the Morning, at which time a considerable party of the men of Derry came from
the Town, and were Skirmishing with some party of the Irish, where Lieutenant
General Hamilton went himself in person to encourage his men, and whilst we
were expecting his return, Mr. Dobbin and I went as near the place where the
Fight was, as (in the circumstances we were in) we durst venture, and coming
among some of their Tents, we met Lieutenant Colonel Farrell, Lieutenant
Colonel Nugent, and his Father Mr. Nugent of Coolamber, with several others,
who being of the County of Longford, and having some Estate in that County, and
been acquainted with those Gentlemen formerly they came to me, and very civilly
offered to do me any Service they could in that place; whilst we were together,
we heard several Shots going off within a little way of us, and seeing a
Soldier coming from the place, Lieutenant Colonel Farrel enquired of him what
the reason of it might be, who made answer that there was very good sport
there, for the Soldiers had got an English or a Scotch Witch who came to
bewitch their Horses, and had been gathering their Horse-Dung, but the
Soldiers had made above twenty Shot at her and could not get her killed, upon
which believing it was some poor old Creature that they were murdering, I
entreated those Gentlemen to step to the place and to save her, until they
enquired into the matter, who accordingly went, (my self, Mr. Dobbin, and above
twenty others being in Company with them,) and as they came within twenty or
thirty yards of the place, we saw a poor old Woman at least seventy years of
Age, sitting with her breast laid bare, and one of the Soldiers came close up
to her, and held the muzle of his Musket to her breast and so shot her dead. It
seems they being bad marks-men and shooting at her at a distance, none of their
former shots were mortal, though she was wounded in several places. I being
concerned at the barbarous Cruelty of the Fact, inquired into the matter, and
who the Woman was, and found that she had been a Woman of the Country near
Derry, who being robbed of all that she had by the Irish Army, and hearing that
the Army was full of Provisions, having got all the Meal of that Country, and
that they were very civil to all people that came among them, she came there
that morning to beg a little Meal among the Tents, and a man passing by her
with a load of Meal, the bag burst, some of the Meal falling upon some
Horse-dung, and after the man had gathered up as much of the Meal as he thought
fit, the poor Woman came, and was throwing the Horse-dung out of the dirty-Meal
that he had left, which an Irish Soldier seeing, called out that there was a
Witch, gathering their Horse-dung to bewitch their Horses, that the men of
Derry might get the better of them, upon which the Soldiers gathered about
her, and brought her to that Tragical end that I have here told.

April the 24th. Lieutenant Colonel Loyd by our Governors order took a party
of foot and horse, and went from Inniskillen toward Omagh, where the Irish had
a Garrison, (which his party was not in a condition to besiege) he drove all
the Cattle near that place with him, from thence he went to Aughor, where the
Irish had another Garrison in the Castle, which fled before he came to it, but
least they might return thither again, he set the Castle on fire burning it to
the ground, and defacing the fortifications about it. From thence went into the
Country of Moneghan, and so returned to Inniskillen with a very great prey of
Cows and Sheep, which proved a seasonable relief to the poor people in and
about Inniskillen, for when the party came in one might have bought from the
Soldiers a good milch Cow for two shillings or half a Crown, and a dry Cow, or
an Ox cheaper, and this was Lieutenant Colonel Loyds first expedition with our
men.

About this time in the later end of April there came to us from Ballishany
some troops and soot companies of excellent men that belonged to my Lord
Kingston, and came with him to Belishany, when at Colonel Lundies desire he
left Sligo. And then our Governor raised a Fort on the common hill next the
stone bridge, which he afterward (to his great charge) did finish, and is a
very considerable, strength, and great security to the Town.

May the 2d. The Irish Garrison in Omagh sent two men unto the Parish of
Kilskirry within five miles of Inniskillen and in the night the two men stole
away about twenty or thirty Cows. In the morning the owners missing their Cows,
and seeing their track go toward the road that leads to Omagh did believe them
stolen, and therefore sent to some of their neighbors to come and assist them
in going in Quest for their Cows; Accordingly eight of them got together and
went upon the trace of the Cattle and overtook them within a few miles of
Omagh, but the theives made their escape to that Garrison: The men that
followed the Cows having got them gave themselves no further trouble in
following the thieves, but were bringing the Cows back with them to their own
dwelling, but before they got above half way home they were overtaken by four
and twenty Dragoons from Omagh well mounted; the men (having all but bad horses
and few Arms) three of them quit their horses and got into a great bog: The
other five thinking they had done no harm but followed their own Goods,
submitted and had Quarter given them. The Dragoons (leaving a guard with the
five prisoners) followed the other three men, but to no purpose, for the Bog
that they got to lay near a mountain not passable by horse, whether they
escaped and so got home. The Dragoons returned to the prisoners carried them a
little way back with them, and then most barbarously murdered them all cutting
them so in the face with swords and baggonets that their friends scarce knew
one of them when they found them: and this for the most part was the fair
Quarter that the Irish gave our men when ever they took any of them, which was
the principal cause of our so obstinate defense both of Derry and Inniskillen
against such unequal odds for these with what I told before of the Lord Gilmoy
and other like barbarous Usages and breach of Faith, with the same yet in
memory practiced in 41. and all agreeing with the Principles of their Religion,
That Faith is not to be kept with those whom they account Heretics. All this
made so strong an impression upon the minds of the People, that they were
firmly persuaded the Irish would not keep Articles with them; and therefore
that it was in vain to capitulate. And they not only acted these Inhumanities
without remorse, but gloried in them; for the next day after that horrrid and
base Murder I have told, Bellew the Governor of Omagh sent an Express to
Lieutenant General Hamilton before Derry, acquainting him that a Party of his
Garrison had gone toward Inniskilling, and killed about a hundred of our Men
(calling every man twenty) which good News soon went through the whole Irish
Camp, and caused a great deal of Joy among them.

May the 4th. our Governor had an Express sent him from Captain Folliot,
Governor of Ballishany, acquainting him, That a considerable Party of Men were
come from Conaught to besiege that place; he sent him the Summons he had got,
and prayed him to send speedy relief. May the 6th. our Governor sent to all the
Garrisons under his Command, ordering them to send him speedily all the armed
Men they could spare; and the next day sent Lieutenant Colonel Lloyd with about
twelve Foot-Companies, and some Troops of Horse toward Bellishany, who meeting
the Enemies Horse near Beleek (a Village three miles nearer Inniskilling than
Bellishany) soon put them to the rout, killed about sixscore of them, and took
about sixty Prisoners: All their Foot fled away toward Sligo, and got off
safe, except some few that were taken in the Fish-Island near Bellishany, with
their Captain, one Mac Donagh, a Counselor at Law commonly known by the Name
of Blind Mac Donagh' We got two small Cannon, several service-Horses, and some
good Arms; and thus was Bellishany relieved by us on the eighth day of May
1689. and this was the first time that our men encountered the Enemy in the
Field with Foot and Horse; and having had so great Success in the beginning, it
encouraged our men very much; and so we returned to Inniskilling, having gained
this Victory without the loss of one man.

Immediately after this, we had an Express sent us from Colonel Sarsfield,
proposing an exchange of some Prisoners of War that the Irish had at Galway and
Ballinrob, for those that we had taken it Bellishany. Our Governor was willing
to listen to the Change, but having been so treacherously served before by
Gilmoy in the matter of Captain Dixie, desired Col. Sarsfield to send him the
Names of the Prisoners that he would change for those then at Inniskilling.
Col. Sarsfield delayed sending their Names for near a Month after, and in the
mean time he ordered all the Protestants in the Province of Conaught (that had
a little before taken Protection from him and others) to be put into the Goal
of Sligo, and then sent their Names to our Governor, pretending that Sir
Thomas Southwel and some other Prisoners in Galway, that before he promised us,
were to be sent into England to relieve some Irish Prisoners who were kept
there; but our Governor suspecting some deceit, refused the Change: upon which
Col. Sarsfield dealt very hardly with these he had in Prison, scarce allowing
them Food to keep them from starving, and made them send some of their Wives to
our Governor with Petitions and Letters, begging of him to relieve them out of
their Misery: Upon which at length our Governor consented to the Change; but
this was not without Treachery, as the Governor had suspected; for he found
all those who were sent him in exchange, to have been persons protected by the
Irish, whom afterward they made Prisoners, and used them ill (not regarding
the Protections they had given) on purpose to cheat the Governor with the
exchange. It was the experience of such faithless Dealing, and cruel Butcheries
of our men after Quarter given, that made some of our Soldiers less merciful
to them in Battle, than they would have been to any other Enemy. And we suppose
it was for this reason that for some time we enjoyed our quiet, being a terror
to the Irish on all hands near us.

But in the latter end of May, information being brought to the Governor, that
there was a Garrison of the Irish in Redhill, and another at Bellinacareg (two
Houses in the County of Cavan) who straightened those of our bounds that lay next
them; Lieutenant Col. Lloyd was sent from Inniskilling against them; but he no
sooner set out with about 1500 Horse and Foot, but the news of his march was
brought to the County of Cavan before him, and their fear added to his number,
he being reported to be about fifteen, or sixteen thousand; upon which all the
Irish fled, and we no sooner came to Redhill, but the Garrison held out a sign
for a Treaty; and having Conditions offered them, immediately surrendered the
Place with all that was therein, getting Quarter to all the men that were in
it; and so without destroying that House, we marched from thence with the
Prisoners we had taken, to Bellinacareg, which was reputed one of the strongest
Castles in that part of Ireland; and that which gave it the greater name (though
it was indeed a strong place) was because Oliver Cromwell lay several days
before it, and could not take it, but left it, until afterward the Irish
deserted the place, when he had overcome the rest of the Kingdom. But when we
came before it, there was no great Garrison, and but little Ammunition in it;
and the news of our taking Redhill struck so great a terror in those of the
Castle, that not many hours after our men came there, they held out a Flag for
a Treaty, and did capitulate, That both they and the other Prisoners taken at
Redhill, should have free liberty to go, without being stripped, leaving the
Castle with the Arms, Ammunition, and what Goods were in it, to the Plunder of
our Soldiers, which was accordingly performed by both Parties. We got in the
Castle some Pikes, about thirty Muskets, some Cases of Pistols, and but very
little Powder. As soon as our Soldiers had plundered the Castle, we set some
Masons, who were in our Party, to undermine the Walls of it, which they soon
did, and then set it on fire, and in a very few hours it fell to the ground,
and sunk in a heap of Rubbish; which we did, because it was a place of great
strength, and lying in the heart of the Irish Country.

The News of our taking Redhill and Bellinacareg was soon brought to Dublin,
with a report, that our Army was on their March thither (being ever after this
reputed among the Irish to be above fifteen thousand well armed Men) and it is
incredible to think what a Consternation the Irish about Dublin were in; but
our number was too small, and not half well armed for such an Undertaking;
however our Men marched near Kells and Finna in the County of Mead, and
brought from thence above three thousand Cows and Oxen, two thousand Sheep, and
some Horses, and then returned safe to Inniskilling, without the loss of one
Man.

June the 3d. Information was brought to Inniskilling, That the Irish Army
before Derry had sent a great many of their service-Horses to graze in some
waste Lands near Omagh, eighteen miles distant from Inniskilling; and the next
day our Governor sent two Troops under the Command of Captain Francis Gore,
and Captain Arnold Cosbie, into the Parish of Kilskirry, ordering them to keep
Garrison at Trellik, a House belonging to Captain Mervyn, and about half way
betwixt Inniskilling and Omagh. They had not staid there above two days, when
taking with them another Troop and two Foot-Companies that quartered in the
Parish of Kilskirry, they went in the Evening about Sunset from Trellick
toward Omagh, and before eight of the Clock the next day they returned to
Trellick with about eight score of good service Horses taken from the Enemy at
Omagh, and near as many more smaller Horses fit for labor, and about three
hundred Cows. This was a lucky hit; for by it we did disable about three Troops
of the Enemy, and bettered several of our own Troops, when the Horses were
divided among the Men they sold the Horses they got to others of our party, at
very easy rates; and our Men had certainly surpised the For at Omagh, and
taken it, if notice had not been sent to the Enemy of their coming, and so they
had time to secure the Fort, but not to save their Horses, who were grazing
within a short way of the Town.

Soon after this, we had information from all hands, of the miserable condition
that the Garrison in Derry was reduced to, and several Messages were sent us to
endeavor their Relief; but alas our Condition was very unfit to attack so
powerful an Enemy, and so well appointed as the Army that lay before Derry was;
for we were not then at most above two thousand Men, and those very ill armed;
and we had not above two Barrels left of the five Barrels of Powder that Col.
Lundy gave us. But hearing that Derry must surrender very soon, unless
relieved, and believing that much of our Safety did depend upon it, our
Governor resolved in person, with all the strength we could make, to endeavor
its relief, or perish in the Attempt.

Our Governor therefore drew all his Men to the Field, and notwithstanding
that he was much pressed by those of Inniskilling not to go in Person, but
rather to stay in the Town for the securing of the Place, yet (since Derry was
in so great hazard) he could not be persuaded to stay, but on the 10th. day of
June, he marched his Men, being near two thousand, and came that night to
Trellik; the next day we marched toward Omagh, and on the Road we were
informed, That the Garrison at Omagh hearing of our coming, had fled from that
place, which (though it was a false information) yet encouraged some of our
Party, who were free Booters, and not under any Command, to go on before in
hopes to get the Plunder of the Town before the Soldiers came to it. They went
near a mile before our Forelorn, but by that time that they came within less
than three miles of Omagh, and fearing no Enemy, they were surpised by a party
of the Garrison at Omagh, that lay in Ambush in a hollow, and came upon them
unawares; yet all of them made their escape, and retreated safe to our
Forelorn, except one Rowland Betty, a man in good esteem among us, who after he
had discharged his Pistol, just as he was wheeling his Horse, fell to the
ground, and before he could recover his Saddle again, they came upon him and
took him Prisoner, carried him with them a great way nearer Omagh, and then
murdered him. And thus (as I said) for the most part they dealt with many of
our Men after they had been their Prisoners, and gotten fair Quarter.

Our Governor with his Men marched that night within a mile and a half of
Omagh, and next day early he possessed himself of the whole Town (being an open
place) except the Fort, which he laid close Siege to Our Men placed themselves
in all the Houses near the Fort, and being good Marksmen, plied them so warmly
with their small Shot, that not a man of them durst come in view; for they
killed one of them, and wounded several others. But we had not been there many
hours, when several Expresses came fron Inniskilling, one after another to our
Governor and the Officers that were with him, acquainting him and them, that
Col. Sarsfield with five or six Thousand Men was come to besiege Bellishanny,
within twenty miles of Inniskilling, and that Col. Sowtherland was come with
another Army to Belturbet, about twenty miles distant from Inniskilling on the
other hand; and that the one Army, if not both, would be very soon at
Inniskilling: Our Governor therefore having received this Account, called his
Officers together, to consult what was fittest to be done, whether to go on to
relieve Derry, or to return for the defense of Inniskilling. But the most of
them having their Families or Friends in Inniskillng, it was soon resolved on
to return: Some of the Officers were for burning the Town, it being a great
shelter for the Irish Army on their March to and from Derry; but the Town,
belonging to Capt. Mervyn, who is a good Protestant, and in great esteem in
that Country, it was resolved to spare the Town for his sake; and so we left it
as we found it, and the next day our Men returned to Inniskilling.

June the 15th. we had Intelligence that Col. Sowtherland's Party at Belturbet,
was daily increasing, the Irish flocking to him from all Parts, and that he
intended soon to draw toward Inniskilling. But we were ever resolved, not to
suffer the Enemy to come so near as to lay siege to the Town, but rather to
sight them before they came to it; neither did we think it safe to give them any
long time to stay near our Quarters; and therefore our Governor ordered Lieut.
Col. Lloyd to take the Field with the greatest strength we could make in Foot
and Horse, and to march against Sowtherland.

June the 17. Lieut. Col. Lloyd came with his Men to Mac-Guires Bridge, a Place
not full half way betwixt Inniskilling and Belturbet, where Col. Southerland
and his Party lay; from which Place an Irish Spy went in the night, and
acquainted Col. Southerland, that all the Forces of Inniskilling were coming
against him: Col. Southerland had then with him but about two Regiments of
Foot, a Regiment of Dragoons, and some few Troops of Horse; he had brought with
him from Dublin spare Arms for two Regiments of new levied Men that were every
day expected to come to him; he had some Pieces of Cannon, and great store of
Biscuit, Wheat, Flower, Malt, and other Provisions for his Army, in order to
besiege Inniskilling. When this News was brought him, that the Inniskilling
Army was coming against him, and believing it true that they were so numerous,
above fifteen thousand (as was reported) he thought it not safe to stay at
Belturbet, having no Place of any Strength there but the Church and
Churchyard, which was a little fortified, but not large enough to contain the
number of men he had with him: He therefore thought it best to provide for his
own Safety, and to secure the Cannon, and what he could on a sudden carry with
him; but withal drew out a Detachment of Eighty Dragoons, and about two hundred
Foot, and left them in the Church of Belturbet, under the Command of Lieut.
Col. Edward Scot, and some other Officers, to see if they could make good that
Place against the Inniskilling Men, until he came back to their Relief, and so
marched with the rest of his Men toward Monaghan, that if he were pursued, he
might come to Charlemont under the shelter of the Castle.

The next day happened to be a most terrible day of Rain, insomuch that our Men
could march no further that day; and this gave Col. Southerland time enough to
go off with those Men that he brought with him; but the next day again proving
fair, Lieu-Col. Lloyd with his Men advanced toward Belturbet, and ordered
Capt. Robert Vaughan and Capt. Hugh Galbraith, with their two Troops of
Dragoons to be the Forlorn; but by that time they came within two miles of
Belturbet, there met them about a Troop of Dragoons that fired at them, but our
Dragoons alighting from their Horses, and lining the Ditches on both sides of
the Road, and the main Body of our Men coming in view, the Irish Dragoons
retreated to Belturbet, and went all into the Church and Churchyard to the
rest of their Men, intending to make good that Place, firing very fast at us,
but with the same success that is usual with them; for they touched not a man
of ours, but one, who recovered afterward. Our men came very close upon them,
and soon got into all the Houses near the Church, and some of them getting into
the Archbishop of Dublin's House in Belturbet, (which by its height does
overtop the Churchyard) from the upper windows they did so gall them with
their Shot, that not a man of them could keep the Church yard; and within less
than two hours after we came there (some of their men being killed) they held
out a Flag for a Treaty; which being granted, they made Conditions; and it was
Agreed, That all the Officers and Soldiers should be our Prisoners: The
Officers to have all their Clothes and Money given them if it did not exceed
t^^ ^ounds the piece; the common Soldiers were to have their Lives saved, but
to be stripped of all their red Coats, which was accordingly performed. And
thus we got about three hundred Prisoners, whereof thirteen were Commission
Officers, together with Lieut. Col. Scot, their Commander in chief; but next
day we let go near 200 of the meanest of the common Soldiers, because of the
Charge we were at in maintaining them; and the rest, with their Officers we
brought with us to Inniskilling. We got about seven hundred Muskets, a Barrel
and a half of Powder (which was as much as we had in our Storehouse before)
eighty Dragoon-Horses, with all the Accoutrements belonging to them, about
twenty Horse-loads of Biscuit, above fifty Barrels of Flower, a hundred Barrels
of Wheat, some Malt, and other Provisions, all which we sent by Water to
Inniskilling; we got but as many red Coats as served two Companies, many of
their men (being new Levies) wearing Gray; and then we returned to Inniskilling
without the loss of one man, laden with the Spoils and Provisions of our
Enemies, which came very seasonably to us; for by it we were plentifully
provided with Bread until our Harvest supplied us again; and our Companies, who
were ill Armed before, were now well recruited, and some new Companies were
immediately raised, so that our Condition was very much bettered by it.

July the 3d. we received a Letter from Mr. Archdeacon Brown, Chaplain in the
Bonadventure Frigate, Capt. Thomas Hobson Commander, giving us an Account, That
Major General Kirk had sent that Ship from the Lough of Derry round to
Bellishany, to know in what condition we were at Inniskilling, and if we stood
in need of Ammunition, or any other thing that he could spare, we should be
provided; and withal desired that some of our Number should be sent to the Ship
to give Capt. Hobson a particular Relation of our ^ffairs. This was a most
seasonable and acceptable Message to all the Garrison of Inniskilling,
especially when we were in hopes of a supply of Powder; for although our
Foot-Souldiers were indifferently provided in Arms by the supply that we took
from Col. Southerland, yet (as I observed before) we had but little Powder, not
much more than three Barrels in our Garrison, whereof we got a little before a
Barrel and a half in Belturbet.

Orders were therefore that very night given by the Governor that Lieut. Col.
Lloyd, Capt. Francis Gore, Capt. Hugh Montgomery, Mr. Andrew Hamilton, and some
others should go the next day to Bellishany, with some Troops and Companies to
guard what Ammunition we should get, and to acquaint Capt. Hobson with the
state and condition of our Country; and accordingly, all things being in
readiness for our journey, we marched the next day toward Bellishany, being
Thursday the Fourth of July.

The same day the Duke of Berwick with some Troops of Horse, about two
Regiments of Foot, and two Regiments of Dragoons, came to the Dwelling House of
Mr. Andrew Hamilton (he being but about two hours before gone toward
Bellishany with a Troop of Horse) and having searched the House for him, and
not finding him, first ordered the Soldiers to plunder the House, and then set
fire to it, burning it to the ground, with all the other Houses belonging to
him upon any of his Lands in that Country, saying, if they had got him himself,
they would have made him Meat for their Hawks; and that this was in revenge of
the Horses taken a little before from Omagh, for which they blamed Mr.
Hamilton. They did no prejudice to any other man's Estate; but after they had
burned and destroyed all that belonged to him and his Tenants, they drove away
all their goods to Trellick, where the Duke encamped his men for some few days.
This was a surprise upon us, most of our men being abroad at Bellishany and
other places: However, our Governor came that night to Mr. Hamilton's House,
but they were gone before he came there, and he had not a Party strong enough
to beat up their Quarters, and so he returned to Inniskilling, ordering strong
Guards to be kept on all the Roads from Trellick to Inniskilling.

Within two or three days our Scouts brought word to the Governor, That the
Duke of Berwick with all his Army was on their march to Inniskilling, and in a
few hours would be near the Town. Upon notice whereof, our Governor commands
two Foot-Companies (with two Troops to second them) to go and defend a strait
Pass near the Mill of Inniskilling, by which the Dukes Army must pass before
they could come near the Town, and which might easily be defended by a few men:
and in the mean time the Governor was getting the rest of his men together to
second them. But the two Companies coming to the Mill, and seeing no Enemy
near, after some stay there, advanced near a mile farther than the Post which
they were ordered to keep, and coming to a Hollow between two Hills, were on a
sudden surprised with the whole Body of the Enemies Horse and Dragoons coming
upon them: The two Companies were soon put to the Rout, and the two Troops who
were to second them, seeing the number of the Enemy so great, wheeled about
without coming to their Relief; we had five and twenty of our men killed,
whereof one was an Ensign, six and twenty taken Prisoners, and the rest (though
many of them wounded) escaped to Inniskilling; we lost most of the Arms that
belonged to both the Companies. Our Governor (though too late) by the time that
they were broken, was advanced on his way toward their Relief; on whose
Approach the Duke retreated to Trellick, taking the Prisoners along with him,
and from thence, the next day to the Camp near Derry: But our Governor sent an
Express after him, desiring that our men who were taken might be used as
Prisoners of War; for if they received any damage, he would revenge it on the
Prisoners then in his hands; and in a few days we had all our Prisoners
returned to us in exchange for others that we sent them. We gave Lieut. Col.
Scot for a Captain of ours that was taken; and these were the only Prisoners of
our men that they took and did not afterward murder, which we attribute wholly
to the message of our Governor sent after them. This was the only Loss that we
sustained since our first taking up Arms; which was their own Fault, by going
beyond the Post that they were ordered to maintain; and besides was the
occasion of burning of Capt. Corry's House and several other Houses near
Inniskilling, which the Governor ordered to be burned as soon as he heard the
two Companies were engaged, apprehending the D. of Berwick would have made
Capt. Corr'ys House his Head Quarter, being of considerable strength and
accommodation, and that his men would have quartered in the other Houses.

But now to return to those who were sent to the Bonadventure: On Friday the
5th. of July, the Officers went on Board the Ship where that worthy Gentleman
Capt. Hobson treated them with great Civility; and being fully informed of the
State of our Affairs, he gave us good encouragement, assuring us, that very
soon there would be care taken to relieve us. He gave us thirty Barrels of
Powder, which our Officers within two days sent safe to Inniskilling; he gave
us also a few Firelocks, which we left in the Garrison of Ballishany; and at
last it was concluded on by Capt. Hobson and our Officers, that two of our
number should be sent to Major Genesis Kirk for Commissions, some more Ammunition
and Arms (for we had, and still have a great many Men in our Country that never
bore Arms) and (...)aid of Men, especially experienced Officers, of which we
had great want. And this being agreed on, Mr. John Rider, and Mr. Andrew
Hamilton were chosen to go to the Bonadventure to Major Genesis Kirk, who
accordingly went on Board the 8th. day of July, and the 12th. came into the
Lough of Derry, where Maj. Genesis Kirk lay with the Fleet. Mr. Rider and Mr.
Hamilton being brought before the Major General, he for about two days did
inform himself by them of the condition Inniskilling was in, what store of men
belonged to that Garrison, and how armed.

We had then about seventeen Troops, thirty Foot-Companies, and some few Troops
of Dragoons; our Foot were indifferently well armed, but our Horse and Dragoons
not so well. The Major General had few or no Arms fit for Horsemen, but he gave
us six hundred Firelocks for Dragoons, a thousand Muskets to raise more Foot
with, twenty Barrels of Powder, besides the thirty we received out of the
Bonadventure, with Bullets and Match proportionable; eight small Cannon, and
some few Hand-Granadoes. He gave us Commissions for a Regiment of Horse
consisting of sixteen Troops, and fifty private men in each Troop, besides
Officers; for a Regiment of Dragoons consisting of twelve Troops, and the like
number of private men in each Troop, and for three Regiments of Foot, and an
independent Troop of Horse to every Regiment, each Regiment of Foot to consist
of eighteen Companies, whereof two Companies to be Granadees, and sixty private
men in every Company. The Major General told us, he could spare none of his
private men, but gave us some very good Officers, viz. Col. Will. Wolsely to be
our Commander in chief, and Col. of Horse; Capt. Will. Berry to be
Lieutenant Colonel to our Horse; Capt. Charles Stone to be Major to our Horse;
Capt. James Winn a Gentleman from Ireland, but then a Captain in Col. Stewarts
Regiment, to be Col. of our Dragoons; and for our three Regiments of Foot,
Gustavus Hamilton Governor of Inniskilling, was made eldest Colonel; and
Lieutenant-Col. Lloyd and Major Tiffan were the other two Colonels; he gave us
Capt. Thomas Price (who has a Troop of Horse with us) to be our Aid
Major General, and one Capt. Johnston, who has a Foot-Company, to be our
Engineer.

In a word; when Major-Gen. Kirk knew what Condition we were in (which he was a
Stranger to before, until he saw one of our selves) he then granted us
whatsoever Mr. Rider and Mr. Hamilton desired of him, as far as he saw it for
our Advantage; and no man could have shown more Zeal than he did for their
Majesty's Service, and the Preservation of the Protestants.

And thus being by the Major General furnished according to our own desire,
with some choice Officers, with Commissions, Arms and Ammunition, we took leave
of him on Sunday the 20th. of July; we were a little before that come from
Lough foil (which is the Lough that comes from Derry) to Lough-swilly, where
the Isle of Inch is, and the same day the Major General went from Swilly to
Lough-foyle in the Swallow-Frigat, accompanied with the Mountjoy of Derry, and
another lesser Vessel laden with Provisions; but the Wind being fair for them,
and cross to us, we were the same night driven back to the Isle of Inch, where
we staid two days, but the Major General went on his Course with the Store
ships toward Derry.

Wednesday the 24th. of July, we went to Sea again toward Bellishany, but the
Wind falling scant upon us, the Ketch that the Officers were in, did ply round,
and we landed safe within three miles of Bellishany on Friday the 26th. of
July, but the other Vessels wherein the Arms and Ammunition were, did not come
to Bellishany for three or four days after. When we landed, we were met with
several Troops of Inniskilling-men (who with much impatience expected our
coming) welcoming us with firing several Vollies at our landing, and giving us
all the expressions of Joy and Satisfaction that they were able, and so
conveyed us the same day to Bellishany.

We were no sooner come to Bellishany, but notice was given us, that
Lieutenant General Macarty with a considerable Army, was come to Belturbet, in
order to besiege Inniskilling; upon this our Officers went the next day to
Beleek, and on Sunday the 28th. day of July, they went by water from Beleek,
and landed safe at Inniskilling, and so they did not stay for the Arms and
Ammunition that Major General Kirk sent us. When the Officers landed at
Inniskilling, all the Foot-Souldiers in the Town were drawn up from the Castle
to the far point of the Island next to Bellishany, where they came ashore and
received them with a Guard; and when they were come to the Gate, gave them
three full Vollies. All the Men and Women, and younger sort of People that were
in the Town, came in great Crowds toward the place where they were, insomuch
that they could scarce get coming to the Castle; and nothing was heard but loud
Acclamations welcoming those Centlemen, and praising God, that their English
Friends had not quite forgot them, but that there was some sign of Relief come
at last.

That Night that they landed at Inniskilling, there came an Express from Crom
to the Governor, acquainting him, That Lieutenant General Macarty had marched
his men from Belturbet, and was come before Crom, and was raising a Battery to
play upon the Castle: our Governor was then ill of a Fever, and Colonel
Wolseley by his Commission being Commander in Chief, the Express was brought to
him; and the next day on Munday-morning the 29th. of July, by another Express
from Crom, we were informed, That Lieutenant General Macarty had begun to
batter the Castle with his Cannon, and made his Approaches very near it. The
Besieged with their small Shot from the Castle, killed a great many of the
Enemy, but yet being unacquainted with Cannon, they made earnest request to our
Governor Hamilton (for as yet all Expresses were sent to him) for speedy
Relief. Colonel Wolseley returns an Answer, That he would make all the haste he
could to get our Soldiers together; and upon the Wednesday following he would
endeavor to relieve them. And the same Monday Colonel Wolseley sent Orders to
Bellishany, That all the Men there that belonged to our Army should march the
next day to Inniskilling, leaving a convenient Garrison at Bellishany (for
Sarsfield with his Army, lay at Boudrows, within four miles of it.) Accordingly
some Troops of Horse, and about four or five hundred Foot marched from
Bellishany to Inniskilling in their Arms, which is twenty long English Miles,
by Land, and some of them lay two or three Miles farther than Bellishany, and
they showed no weariness at all when they came to Inniskilling, but were
willing that very night to to go toward the Enemy, for to relieve their
Friends at Crom.

A little after our Men came from Bellishannon, about an hour and an half after
Sunset, we saw from Inniskilling a great Light in the Air above Newton-Butler
(where Lieut. Genesis Mac-Carty with his Army lay) which continued for some hours,
and was seen by most of all the People in and about Inniskilling; but we
concluded, that either they had set the Town of Newton-Butler, and all the
Country about, on Fire; or had raised some Fire in that Country, to give notice
to Col. Sarsfield, that he was on his March toward us: but after the Fight was
over, upon enquiry into the matter, we found there was no Fire that Night
raised among them.

I am not very superstitious to lay great stress upon such sort of Signs in the
Air, but something remarkable there is in them. The like was seen at Glaslogh
before the Action they had there with the Irish of the Garrison of Charlemont,
whom they defeated upon the 13th of March last, killing their Leader, and about
200 of his Men, with the loss only of Capt. Ancketill on their side; but were
ordered the next day to desert the place upon the coming down of the Irish
Army, under the Command of L. Genesis Hamilton, which they did, and marched to
Derry. About a Week before this, at Eleven at Night, the Night being very dark,
there appeared in the Air several Pillars of Light pointed from toward
Charlemont, which were so bright, that they might have read by them, and this
lasted above two hours to the Observation of all the People there.

This brought into my Mind a Passage in the Examination of Dr. Robert Maxwell,
late Lord Bishop of Kilmore, then Rector of Tynon in the County of Armagh,
printed at the end of Burlacy's History of Ireland, in the last Page but one; I
shall give you his own words, having told a little before of 56 Men, Women and
Children who were taken out of his House and drowned by the Irish at Cur-Bridg.
About three or four Nights (says he) before the six and fifty Persons were
taken out of the Deponents House and drowned; in the dark of the Moon, about
one of the Clock at Night, a Light was observed in manner of a long Pillar to
shine for a long way through the Air, and refracted upon the North Gabel of the
House: It gave so great a Light about an hour together, that diverse of the
Watch read both Letters and Books of a very small Character thereby, the
Deponent presaging thereby that bloody Massacre which ensued.

I pretend to make no Explanation, or enter into the Reason or Dependence we
can have upon these things, having resolved only to tell you matters of Fact,
and to leave every Man to his own Conjectures of them.

Information was brought us upon Monday at Night, that L. Genesis Mac-Carty
intended the next day to send a part of his Army toward Lisnaskea, within ten
Miles of us, and to place a Garrison in the Castle; upon this L. Col. Berry the
next Morning, being Tuesday the 30th of July, was sent with seven or eight
Troops of Horse, about three Foot Companies, and two Troops of Dragoons, with
Orders to take up the Castle of Lisnaskea before the Enemy came to it, and to
place a Garrison in it if he found it tenable, but otherwise to burn it, if he
thought it might be useful to the Enemy: And withal he had Directions given him
to see if he could discover the Enemy, what their Strength was, and how posted,
with assurance that all the rest of our Men would soon follow to relieve him,
and to raise the Siege from Crom.

L. Col. Berry, according to his Orders, marched to Lisnaskea, and when he came
there, he found the Castle so much out of order, that he judged it a place of
no Consequence, and so left it without doing it any prejudice, keeping his Men
all that Night in the Field. The next day being Wednesday, the last day of
July, early in the Morning, he marched his Men from Lisnaskea toward the Enemy
(who lay about six Miles from him); he sent his Scouts before, ordering them
not to engage any Enemy they met with, but to retreat until they might discover
their Strength, and fight them on some advantageous Ground. He had not marched
above two Miles, when near a place, called Donagh, his Scouts did discover a
considerable Body of Horse, Dragoons and Foot marching toward them, who
immediately advertise L. Col. Berry of their approach; he therefore retreats
with his Men to Lisnaskea again, the Enemy still advancing toward him, and
being a rising Ground the way that he retreated, before he came to Lisnaskea he
had a full view of the Enemy, and found them to be above double his Number, and
therefore did not think fit to fight them in that open place, but to retreat
till he came to some more advantageous Ground. But as soon as he began to
retreat, he sent off an Express to Col. Wolseley in Inniskilling, acquainting
him what Condition he was in, and desiring him to make all the haste he could
to his Relief, which accordingly he did.

Now there are two ways leading from Lisnaskea to Inniskilling, the one lately
made through some Bogs and low fenny Grounds, nearer Loghearn than the old way;
and this Road L. Col. Berry resolved to take, as being more secure, and several
Passes on it much easier to defend than the other. He had not stayed long at
Lisnaskea but the Enemy came near him, and then with his Men he retreats by
this new Road (which turns off from the old at the end of the Town of
Lisnaskea) and marched in good order, the Enemy still advancing upon him till
he came about a Mile distant from Lisnaskea, to a Bog with a narrow Causway
through it, that two Horsemen could scarce ride in abreast upon, and at the end
of this Causway (which is an easy Musket Shot over) Berry halted, resolving to
make good that Pass against the Enemy until he had Relief from Col. Wolseley;
there was a Thicket of Under-Wood at the end of the Causway where Berry placed
his Foot and Dragoons, ordering them to make good their Ground; the Horse he
drew a little farther off, promising that they should relieve the Foot and
Dragoons, and gave the Word, Oxford.

They made but a very short stay there, when Col. Anthony Hamilton (who was
Major General to Mac-Carty) came in view with a considerable Body of Men, who
alighting from his Horse, ordered his Dragoons to do so too, and very bravely
advanced near the end of the Causway, his Men firing briskly at ours, but with
no great Success; for it pleased God that after a great many Vollies of Shot
which they made at us, not one of our Men was killed, and but about a dozen or
fourteen of them wounded; our Men were better Marks-Men, they shot about a
dozen of the Enemy dead at the end of the Causway, and wounded Col. Anthony
Hamilton, their Leader, in the Leg; he being hurt, retreated a little, and
mounted his Horse, ordering another Officer to lead on the Men, who very soon
was likewise killed, with some more of their Men: The Enemy seeing their Men
thus drop by our Shot, and their General, Col. Hamilton, being gone a little
ways back, and no chief Officer there to lead them on, began to retreat from
the end of the Causway, which our Men seeing, gave a Huzza, and called out that
the Rogues are running, and immediately our Foot and Dragoons took the Bog on
each hand, and our Horse advanced on the Causway toward them, which the Enemy
perceiving, began at first to retreat a little faster from us, but their
Retreat soon turned to a most disorderly flight, without offering to face
about, or fire any more at us: our Horse soon overtook them, and fell in among
their Foot, and such Dragoons as were on Foot, and made a very great Slaughter
of them, having the Chase of them through the Town of Lisnaskea, and near a
Mile farther; and the Execution had been greater, but notice was brought to
Berry, that L. Genesis Mac-Carty, with the Body of his Army, was advancing toward
him: upon this he sounds a Retreat, and brings back his Men to the place where
the Fight first began, having killed about 200, and taken about 30 Prisoners,
which he sent immediately to Inniskilling, with several Horse-loads of Arms
that he had taken from the Enemy, and this Action happened about 9 a Clock in
the Forenoon.

About 11 of the Clock there came an Express from Col. Wolseley, to Lieut. Col.
Berry, acquainting him, that he was come with his Men to his Relief; and
desiring him to march the Party under his Command, to the Moat above Lisnaskea,
where both their Parties might join together, and then consider what they had
to do. Now Col. Wolseley had marched his Men the old Road from Inniskilling to
Lisnaskea, leaving the new Road, where Berry and his Men were, about a mile on
the right Hand. As soon as this Express came, Berry marched, and both he and
Col. Wolseley, with their Men, met at the same time near the Moat, above the
Town of Lisnaskea: And after some kind words had passed between both Parties at
their meeting, Col. Wolseley acquainted the Officers, that the Party under his
Command had made so great haste to relieve the other Party, that few or none of
them had brought a Meal of Meat with them; and therefore they must speedily
consider what they had to do, for either they must advance toward the Enemy,
and resolve to fight them that very day, or return back again to Inniskilling
for want of Provision. But after the thing was debated among the Officers, it
was agreed on to consult the Soldiers themselves, and to know their mind in
the Matter: The Men were called to their close Order, and the Question was
asked, Whether they would advance and fight the Enemy that Day, or turn back to
Inniskilling? They who had never before turned their Back to their Enemy,
thought it dishonorable then to begin, especially after so remarkable a
Victory obtained that Morning, and upon so unequal Terms, which they took for a
Presage of what they might expect in the Afternoon: All of them therefore, with
one Acclamation, called out to Advance. Upon this Col. Wolseley, and the other
Colonels, drew up all the Men in Battalia, and gave them the Word, No Popery:
which was very acceptable to all our Party: And then he drew out four Men out
of every Troop, with an Officer to command them, for a Forlorn: Our whole
Number, when all were joined together, did consist of about 16 Troops of Horse,
3 Troops of Dragoons, and 21 Companies of Foot, besides some that were not
under Command: So that in the whole Party, we reckoned our selves some more
than 2000.

The Forlorn Col. Wolseley ordered to march on about half a Mile before the
Army; he ordered Col. Tiffan to lead on the first Battalion of Foot, consisting
of about 5 or 6 Companies, seconded with some few Troops. C. Lloyd led on the
next Battalion of Foot, consisting about the same Number, and the same way
seconded; then followed the Dragoons: and Col. Wolseley himself led on the main
Body of Foot, followed with the rest of our Horse, under the Command of L. C.
Berry, and Maj. Stone. And in this order we marched from Lisnaskea to Donagh,
and so toward the Enemy, who we were informed had raised their Siege from
Crum, and were come to Newton-Butler, a Village about two miles from Donagh.

We had not marched above half a mile from Donagh, when our Forlorn came in
view of the Forlorn of the Enemy, who immediately retreated before our Men; we
advanced after them till we came within about half a mile from Newton-Butler,
where there is a steep Hill that the Road leads through; and before you come to
the Hill, there is a Bog, with a Causey through it, where only two Men at most
can ride in Abreast: the Enemy was drawn up in very good Order upon the Hill
above the Bog; and no other way had we to come at them, but by the Bog and
Causey through it.

When our Men came near the Place, our Officers considered the Ground, and how
advantagiously the Enemy had posted themselves, and then Col. Wolseley ordered
Col. Tiffan, with his Battalion of Foot, to take the Bog on the right Hand of
the Causway, and Col. Lloyd with his Battalion to take the Bog on the left, and
Col. Win to divide his Dragoons, and the one half to second Col. Tiffan on
Foot, and the other to second Col. Lloyd; and he ordered Lieut. Col. Berry to
advance with the Horse upon the Causway as the Foot on each hand advanced
through the Bog; and he himself brought up the main Body in the Rear to send
Recruits to those that went before, as he saw cause: and thus whilst we
advanced, in good order, toward the Enemy, they ordered the Town of
Newton-Butler, and the Country-Houses about to be all set on Fire; and before
our Men came within Musketshot of them, they began to Fire at us; but by that
time that we came within Shot of them, and had fired two or three Vollies at
them, our Men saw them begin to draw off and retreat toward Newton-Butler,
which our Men misapprehending, believed them running away, and our Officers had
much ado to keep them from pursuing with all the speed they could: But Col.
Wolseley, and the Officers with him, from a Height opposite to the place where
the Enemy was posted, saw them go off in so good Order, that they believed it
was either to draw our Men into an Ambush, or bring them to some place of
better advantage for the Enemy; and therefore sent orders to Col. Tiffan and
Lloyd, that no Man should go out of his Rank, but pursue them in good Order,
until they were certain that they were flying: Our Men having received this
Command, advanced after the Enemy, keeping their Ranks, and the Enemy still
faced about in their Rear, firing at us till we went through the Town of
Newton-Butler, and near a mile past it, and thus in very good Order they
retreated, and we advanced, till they came to a Bog, on the Road near half an
Irish Mile over, with a narrow Causey through the middle of it, by which we
must pass to them: And as soon as ever the Front of our Men came to the Bog
side, they saw the Enemy all drawn up on the Hill opposite to them, at the
other side of the Bog, having their Canon placed at the end of the Causey: Col.
Wolseley ordered our Men to advance toward them as they had done before, the
ground being much alike; and so Col. Tiffan with his Foot, took the Bog on the
Right, and Col. Lloyd with his Foot took it on the left Hand, seconded by Col.
Wynn and his Dragoons; and Lieut. Col. Berry and Major Stone advanced with our
Horse toward the Causey; but as soon as our Horse came to the side of the Bog,
and were beginning to come upon the Causey, the Enemy fired their Canon at
them, and plied them so hard, that our Horse could not advance one step; but
our Foot and Dragoons on both sides advanced by Degrees upon them through the
Bog, (the Enemy still keeping their Ground) till at last they came up and
seized their Canon, killed all their Cannoneers, and then advanced toward the
Body of their Men that were drawn up a litlittle above them. As soon as our
Horse perceived that their Cannons were seized by our Foot, they advanced on
the Causey; which the Enemies Horse perceiving, they wheeled about with such
Dragoons as were on Horseback, and fled toward Wattle-Bridg, deserting their
Foot; their Foot stood their Ground till our Men came among them: But then
perceiving their own Horse and Dragoons fled, and ours coming up to them, they
thought it no time to stay any longer, but turned their Backs; and instead of
going to the left Hand, where they had an open Country, and might have made
their escape, they (being Strangers in the Country) fled all to the right Hand,
through a great Bog above a mile long, which leads toward Loghearn, most of
them all throwing away their Arms into Turf-Pits.

Now the Country there is so full of Bogs, and standing Pools and Loughs, that
there is no passing for Horse, but upon the Road, which for the most part is
all paved. Our Horse followed theirs in a String, over the narrow Ways from the
Place where the Enemy had planted their Cannon, to Wattle-Bridg, which is a
Bridge over a Branch of Loghearn, and left a good Guard of Horse on the Bridge to
secure that Pass; and about an hundred Foot, under the Command of Captain
George Cooper, were ordered to guard the Cannon that we had taken. Our Horse
kept all the Road between the two Places, that not one of their Foot could pass
them: Our Foot in the mean time followed theirs through the Bog into a Wood
near Loghearn, and gave Quarter that day to few or none that they met with,
unless Officers; which the Enemy perceiving, and having no Courage to fight for
their Lives, they desperately took the Lough in several places, to the number
(as was computed) of about five hundred, and not one of them that took the
Water, escaped drowning, but one Man, who got through after a great many Shot
made after him. All that Night our Foot were beating the Bushes for them, and
all that their Officers could do could not bring them off from the Pursuit till
next day about ten of the Clock, by which time scarce a Man of them that took
toward the Lough-side, escaped, but was either killed, taken Prisoner, or
drowned.

In this Action there was a remarkable Stroke given by Captain William Smith,
who at one blow cut off the upper part of a Man's Head, just under the Hat; as
much of the Skull as was within the Hat, with all the Brains, being struck
quite away from the other part of the Skull that stuck with the Body, and not
so much as a bit of Skin to keep them together, but what was cut quite through.

Lieutenant General Mackarty, when his Men were fled, he with about five or six
Officers, went into a Wood near the Place where the Cannon were planted; and
some small time after, came out of the Wood with those that were with him, on
Horseback, and fired his Pistol at the Party that were guarding the Cannon.
Our Men, when they came first from the Wood, thought them some of our own
Party, (supposing all the Enemy fled) and never questioned them, till Mackarty
fired his Pistol; and then seven or eight of the Soldiers fired their
Musqukets at him, shot his Horse dead, and wounded him very ill in several
places, and then to put him out of pain, one of the Soldiers club'd his Musket
to have knocked out his Brains, which one of those that came with him from the
Wood, espying, called to the Soldier to hold his Hand, for it was their
General Mac-Carty; at the hearing of which Captain Cooper came up, and gave
Lieutenant General Mac-Carty, and those that were with him, Quarter, and that
Night carried him to Newton-Butler; and he, being asked how he came so rashly
to hazard his Life, when he might have gone off with his Horse when they made
their escape? professed that he found now the Kingdom like to be lost, his Army
being the best (for their number) that King James had, unless those before
Derry, who were then much broken, and that he came with a design to lose his
Life, and was sorry that he missed of his End, being unwilling to outlive that
Day: And thus ended that Day's Service.

Whence we may reckon the Safety of the Protestants in Ireland, God having
given us the greatest and most remarkable Victory over the Irish that was
obtained in this or any former Age. They were reckoned six thousand, and we not
much above two; we killed that day in the Morning and the Afternoon about two
thousand, brought to Inniskilling above four hundred Prisoners with their
General, and a great many other Officers: There were drowned in several places
of Loghearn, (as was computed) about five hundred. The Irish themselves confess
there were three thousand of their Men wanting, when those that fled came to
Dublin, but would not own that we killed so many, but that for fear of
Punishment and Shame for being beaten by so few, many of their Men had
deserted, and not returned to their Colors. We took seven Cannon, fourteen
Barrels of Powder, a great quantity of Cannon and Musquet-Ball, all their
Drums, and what Colors they had, which were not many, they having but about
three pair of Colors to every Regiment.

Some few Days after this Fight, King James sent Mr. Huben, one of his
Surgeons, to Inniskilling, to attend Lieutenant General Mac-Carty, and
likewise sent him some Money to subsist him and the other Officers who were
taken Prisoners, and sent him some Hogsheads of Wine and other Provisions that
were fit for him, which he could not get at Inniskilling.

We lost (as was computed) about 20 Men, whereof not above a dozen were Men
under Command; and no Man of any Note, but one Capt. Robert Corry, and Cornet
William Bell; the rest were all private Men; and we had about 40 or 50 Men
ill vvounded.

The Action of this Day, made the Irish, through the whole Kingdom, take new
Measures: It put them in a very great Consternation, and had we followed our
Blow, we might (in all humane reckoning,) have marched to Dublin; which the
Irish themselves did apprehend, for they had but a few Men then in Arms there;
but that we did not know, and it was too great an Attempt upon uncertain
Grounds: But the chief Reason of it was this, That when Lieut. Genesis Mac-Carty
was taken, there was a Letter found with him written by Col. Sarsfield to him,
from his Camp at Bondrows; wherein he acquainted him, That the Duke of Berwick
was at such a Day to be near Inniskilling, with a Party of Horse and Dragoons
from Derry; desiring Lieut. Genesis Mac-Carty, with the Army under his Command, to
join the Duke of Berwick to besiege Inniskilling, on that side of the Town that
lies next to Londonderry; and that he, with the Army under his Command at
Bondrows, would besiege Inniskilling on that side of the Town that lies next to
Connaught. And now the Fight that we had with Genesis Mac-Carty, happening but
some few days before this was to be done, our Officers therefore immediately
resolved to march our Men back to Inniskilling, and to go and meet either
Sarsfield, or the Duke of Berwick, whom they judged to be on their way thither.

And so, with our Prisoners, and considerable Plunder gotten in Lieut. Genesis
Mac-Carty's Camp, we marched from Newtown-Butler toward Inniskilling, on
Thursday the first of August, and there our Officers conclude next to go meet
Sarsfield on his Road from Brondrows near Bellishannon. Accordingly our Army
marched toward Bellishannon, on Friday the 2d of August: but before we went
half way, there met us an Express from Capt. Folliot of Bellishannon,
acquainting us that Sarsfield (having information of the Defeat that we had
given Mac-Carty, and that we were returned back) had raised his Camp at
Bondrows, and was retreated to Sligo: As also informing us, That the Arms and
Ammunition sent us by Major Genesis Kirk, was landed at Bellishannon. Upon which
Col. Wolseley sent Col. Tiffan, and his Lieut. Col. Gore, to Bellishannon, with
three Troops of Horse, and some Companies of Foot, to secure the Arms and
Ammunition, and to send them to Inniskilling; and withal, to stay at
Bellishannon to secure that Place, in case Sarsfield should return with his
Army to besiege it: And having so done, the rest of our Army returned the next
day to Inniskilling, resolving to go and meet the Duke of Berwick; but on
Sunday morning, the 4th of August, we had intelligence that the Siege of Derry
was raised, on Thursday the 1st of August in the Morning, a little before day,
and that the Army which lay before it, was marched past Omagh. Upon this Lieut.
William Charleton was sent, with about a Troop of detached Horse, to follow the
Irish Army on their march toward Charlemont; who returned on Monday, and told
us, That he had seen the Rear of them pass by Castle-Cawsield, within three
short miles of Dunganon, and so it was in vain to follow them.

And thus having defeated Lieut. Genesis Mac-Carty's Party, and taken him
Prisoner, Sarsfield fled; and the Siege of Dery being raised, our Fears were
now at an end, and for some time we enjoyed quiet from all our Enemies, and the
Name of Inniskilling-men became a Terror to the Irish. We had nothing left to
employ us after this, but to take care to regiment our Men, according to the
Commissions which Maj. Genesis Kirk gave us.

Wednesday, the 7th of August (being the same day sevenight that Lieut. Genesis
Mac-Carty was beaten) we kept as a Day of Thanksgiving for the great Victory
God gave us over our Enemies, and the Peace which we then enjoyed from them on
all Hands. And the same Day Mr. Andrew Hamilton was sent by the Officers at
Iniskilling to Maj. Genesis Kirk, to congratulate him for his happy Success in the
Relief of Derry. He received him very favorably, and within two days, sent him
back to Inniskilling, with Orders to Col. Wolseley, to send him 500 Horse, and
200 Dragoons, that he might march the Foot he had toward Colrain, and so
toward D. Schonberg (whom we had advice was at Sea, or landed at
Carrickfergus.) He likewise ordered the Dragoons to bring with them 200 of the
common Prisoners that we had taken of Lieut. Genesis Mac-Carty's Party, to help to
empty the Store-ships at Derry, and to cleanse the Town, for they wanted Horse
at Derry; and their Men were so sickly, that they were not able to do any thing
toward the emptying of the Ships. According to these Orders, our Horse and
Dragoons, with the 200 Prisoners came to Derry, about the 15th of August, and
within a day or two the Major General ordered the Horse to march toward
Colrain, but to halt at Newtown, (a place halfway betwixt Derry and Colrain)
until he came up with the Foot and Dragoons. But the News coming to Colrain,
that the Inneskilling Horse were joned with the Maj. General, and that they
were all on their march toward that place, the Garrison there deserted the
place, and fled toward Charlemont: Notice whereof being sent to the Maj.
General from Colrain, the Messenger met the Inniskilling Horse at Newtown; who
immediately marched forward, and came peaceably into Colrain, being ready to
receive the Maj. General into the Town the next day when he came to them, and
so the Inniskilling Horse marched before the Maj. General all the way, until
his Party joined Duke Schonberg at Carrickfergus.

And here I would have ended, having been no longer an Eyewitness to any of
their Actions at Inniskilling, but I cannot omit the manner of our taking
Sligo, and driving Col. Sarsfield and his Party from thence; and although I was
not present at the Action, as I was at most of the rest, yet I had the Account
of it from a Person of good Credit, and so may with confidence relate it here;
and thus it was.

Col. Tiffan having from Bellishanon sent us the Arms and Ammunition that Maj.
Genesis Kirk ordered for us; within some few days after (seeing no sign of Col.
Sarsfield's return to besiege Bellishanon) he ordered Lieut. Col. Gore, to take
three Troops of Horse, and an 150 Foot with him, to go as near Sligo as he
could with safety, and to bring him intelligence in what condition Sarsfield's
Army was, what their Number, and how posted; that if he might be able to
attacque them with the Men under his Command, (which in the several Garrisons
about Bellishanon, would have been about 1000 Men Foot and Horse) he would do
it: But if the Party he had were too weak for them, that he might send to
Inniskilling for the rest of our Men, for he did not think it fit to let an
Enemy lie so near our Borders.

Lieut. Col. Gore, according to Col. Tiffan's Orders, took three Troops of
Horse, and 150 Foot, and marched toward Sligo; but by that time that he came
within six or seven miles of Sligo, some of his Party took an Irishman
Prisoner, and brought him before Lieut. Col. Gore, who knew him to be a
foster-Brother of his own, (that is, a Son of his Nurses, which is reckoned a
great Relation amongst the Irish); but being of Irish Parents, and bred a
Papist, he had forsaken the Lieutenant Colonel since these Troubles began in
our Country, and adhered to his own Countrymen and Friends: The Lieut. Col.
threatened to hang him for deserting him: but the other finding his Life was at
stake, begged earnestly of L. C. Gore to spare him, assuring him, that if he
would admit him into his Service again, he would be just to him for the time to
come: Gore, after some time, pretended to be overcome by the fair Promises of
the Fellow, and the Intercession of some Gentlemen that were with him, he
consented to spare his Life; and as a Trial, employed him in an Affair to
Sarsfield's Camp, which, he said, if he performed truly, he would be kind to
him whilst he lived, and take him into his Service. The foster-Brother
faithfully undertook to observe his Commands: and then Lieut. Colonel Gore
desired him to go to Sligo privately, to five or six Officers in Col.
Sarsfield's Army, (whom he named; and for whom he said he had a particular
Kindness) and to acquaint them, That all the Army belonging to Inniskilling,
with the Men of Derry, and the English that came over under the Command of Maj.
Genesis Kirk, were all joined together, and on their march toward Sligo; that
they were above 20000 Men, and would be there the next day; and that he, with
the Horse and Foot under his Command, were only the Forlorn, sent before to
clear the way for the Army; and therefore desired that those Friends of his
should provide for their own safety; but charged him not to tell any of the
rest of Sarsfield's Army: And thus having instructed his foster Brother, he
sent him away toward Sligo, whilst he with his Party marched slowly on their
way.

All the Country near Sligo was planted with Irish; and as soon as ever the
foster-Brother met any of them on the Road, he told, that the Inniskilling-Men,
with the rest before named, were on their march to Sligo, giving an Account of
their Number, and the Time of their being there, according to what Lieut. Col.
Gore had told him.

This Story going from one to another, set all the Irish near Sligo, a running
with their Goods toward Roscomon and Athloan, and some toward Gallway, not
one daring to stay for fear of this great Army. The foster-Brother goes on till
he came to Sligo; and as soon as he came there, he told every one that he met,
what Col. Gore ordered him to tell only to some few Gentlemen that were his
Friends, assuring them, that Lieut. Col. Gore would be with them in a few
Hours, and that the whole Army was following fast after him. This was soon
noised over the whole Camp; which coming so unexpectedly upon them, put them
all in a terrible Fear, and every one began to think of his own Safety, and
packing up what he might most easily carry with him; and so all were leaving
the Camp, and flying toward Athloan: Which coming to Col. Sarsfield's Ears, he
sent to know the reason of the Tumult; the foster-Brother who had brought the
News to Town, was soon brought before him; who having told what Lieut. Col.
Gore gave him in charge, and naming those Gentlemen, (who happened accidentally
to be then with Col. Sarsfield) and all of them knew that Gore had a kindness
for them; this did fully satisfy them of the Truth of what he told Col.
Sarsfield: Who immediately caused beat his Drums, to bring his Men together, but
in vain, for he could not get one of them to their Arms, all of them (much like
Sarsfield's carriage at Wincanton, Hist. Desert. page 77.) making the greatest
haste they could toward Roscomon and Athloan, and so to Dublin, leaving
Sarsfield, with his own Servants, to break the Carriages of his Cannon, and so
he marched after his Men to Athloan. And thus Colonel Sarsfield and his whole
Party left Sligo to us, without seeing an Enemy, and in some few Hours after
Lieutenant Colonel Gore with his three Troops of Horse and the hundred and
fifty Foot, entered the Town, got fourteen Cannons (and some say three more
afterward) and a Mortar-Piece, with the whole Provisions that belonged to
their Army, except what small matter (in the great Hurry they were in) they
could carry with them.

This, may it please your Majesty's, is a faithful and true Account of the
Success of your Majesty's Arms, in the Hands of the Men of Iniskilling, till
about the end of August last; for then it was that the Governor, Officers,
Clergy and other Gentlemen, belonging to the Garrison of Iniskilling, sent me
to your Majesty's with the Address, which your Majesty's were graciously
pleased to receive from me at Hampton Court the 12th. Day of October last.

And now, may it please your Majesty's to give me Leave, in the Names and by
the Commission of those Gentlemen of Iniskilling, humbly to beg your Majesty's
to accept of these their Services for your Honor, in the just Defense of their
Religion and Laws, and to pardon the Imperfections in the Relation, by

Your Majesty's obedient and loyal Subject and Servant, Andrew Hamilton.

The Address sent from Iniskillin by Mr. And. Hamilton.
To their Most Excellent Majesty's K. William and Q. Mary. The humble Address
of the Governor, Officers, Clergy, and other Inhabitants of Your Majesty's
Town of Iniskillin, in Your Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland.
WE your Majesty's most Faithful and most Loyal Subjects, do in the first place
offer up unto Almighty God our most humble Thanks for the Deliverance
vouchsafed us from our Merciless and Bloody Enemies; and next, unto Your Most
Sacred Majesty's, for Your gracious Care taken of us, and in sending Major
General Kirk to the Relief of the poor handful of Your Majesty's Protestant
Subjects left in this Place, and Derry, (whose miraculous holding out, under
God, has been the Preservation of the Protestant Interest in this Kingdom) and
for those worthy Officers sent to this Place by him; among which the Honorable
Colonel William Wolsley, our Commander in chief, under whose great and happy
Conduct, God has been pleased to bless us with the most signal and remarkable
Victory obtained over our Enemy, in this or the former Age. And as we were
early in the demonstration of our Loyalty, in proclaiming Your most Sacred
Majesty's, on the eleventh Day of March last; so we shall persevere in the same
Dutiful Allegiance to our Lives End, ever imploring the Divine Majesty to
continue Your prosperous Reign long and long over us, most humbly begging Your
Most Sacred Majesty's favorably to accept this Address of our most humble and
sincere Obedience, which we shall ever be ready to make good both with our
Hearts and Hands.

Gustavus Hamilton, Govern. Tho. Lloyd Tho. Heart Edw. Dixy Dan. Hodson W. Smith
Morgan Heart Allex. Acheson Isaac Collyer George Dury Tho. White William
Wiseheart Robert Moor Fran. Folliot John Dean Fran. Graham William Jivine Ja.
Graham Tho. Roscrow Andrew Montgomery Daniel French Henry Smith Richard
Newstead Robert Starling Henry Johnston Matthew Webster William Slack Allan
Cathcart An. Hamilton James Johnston Ja. Golden Arnold Cosbye Jo. Price Robert
Johnston Francis Aldrich William Parsons Ambrose Bedel H. Hughs Jason Hazard
Tho. Hughes Ichabod Skelson Hon. Howel Robert Stevenson Thomas Johnston William
Johnston Thomas Osborn Thomas Scot John Louder William Kitle William Birney
James King Jo. Rider Christopher Carleton Ja. Devitt Charles mac Fayden
Lawrence Crow Edward Ellis William Blashford Robert Clark William Browning Ja.
Johnston Ja. Browning Roger Wilton Ed. Wood F. King Robert Drury John Browning
Ja. Campbell George Cashell Povey Hooks John Armstrong Toby M^lloy Robert
Vaughan Robert Wear Malcome Cathcart Robert Robison James Matthews Mart.
Armstrong Claud. Bealy Nivian Scot Tho. Armstrong Jo. Frisell Dan. Armstrong
Matthew Young Marc. Buchanan George Wattson To. mac Connell Ja. Robison Jo.
Roberts To. Ward Bar. Gibson. Jo. Crozier Hu. Blair Jo. King Thomas Young John
Fulton George Heart James Matthews Ja. Lucy Francis Ellis Hercules Ellis John
Corry Jo. Neper James Corry John Sherriffe George Corry Samuel Forth. James
Cathcart Edward Cosbye William mac Cormick William Campbell Charles King Hugh
Montgomery George Cooper Hu. Cathcart Hugh Corry Ed. Davenport Au. Ellis Jo.
Woodward William Gore William Charleton George Russell Aylet Sammes Ja. Michell
Mat. Lindsay Thomas Davenport All. Fulton Paul Dean, Provost Ja. Ewart Jo.
Ballard Thomas Shore Richard Tailor Ed. Gubbin Thomas Leturvel George Hamersley
William Frith Jo. Hall Robert Johnston Cor. Donellau Theo. Bury Hu. Galbraith
William Ross John Galbraith Matthew Young James Delap William Ball Jo. Smith.
BEcause some who delight to reflect upon others, for reflecting sake, even
where no occasion is given, have ventured to give it out, That neither Mr.
Andrew Hamilton, who came lately over, nor Mr. Hugh Hamilton and Mr. Allen
Cathcart, who were sent over hither from Iniskillin, in January 1688. had any
Commission or Instructions, from the Governor and Gentlemen of Iniskillin, but
took upon them such Employment merely to recommend themselves; whereby they
have done what in them lay to obstruct what might be offered by them in behalf
of that People: I have therefore subjoyned to this Narrative, the Credentials
which they had from Iniskillin, with which I would not otherwise have encumbered
this Brief Relation, desiring to have nothing in it, but what was necessary to
the Subject in Hand.

The Governor of Iniskilling his Commission, in behalf of himself and People,
unto Mr. Hugh Hamilton and Mr. Allen Cathcart, to present their Address to the
then Prince of Orange; and to solicit for Arms and Ammunition.
TO all Christian People, to whom these Presents shall come, We Gustavus
Hamilton, Esquire elected Goververnour of Iniskillin, in the County of Farmanagh,
and Kingdom of Ireland, together with the Inhabitants of the said Town, and a
select number of Protestants united to them, send greeting in our Lord God
Everlasting; forasmuch as we have drawn and signed an Address of Thanks, to be
presented to his Royal Highness the Prince of Orange, for his being the happy
Instrument, under God, of our Delivery from Popery and Arbitrary Power. Now
know ye, That we the said Inhabitants of Iniskillin, aforesaid, for diverse
Causes and Considerations us thereunto moving (but more especially that they
have been eminent in concurring with us, and influencing the Country against
the Designs the Lord Tyrconnel had against this Place) have nominated,
constituted and appointed our well-beloved Friends Mr. Hugh Hamilton and Mr.
Allen Cathcart, jointly or severally, to offer the said Address to his
Highness, and to be presented by the Honorable Earl of Clarenden, or any other
Nobleman about Court: As also we empower the said Mr. Hugh Hamilton and Mr.
Allen Cathcart, to solicit his Highness for Arms and Ammunition for this
Place: We also desire, That Credit may be given to these our Deputies, both for
our Trust to them, as also in their charactering this Country.

Given under the Hand and Seal of the Governor, this sixteenth Day of January,
One thousand six hundred eighty and eight, by unanimous Consent of the
Inhabitants of the said Town. Gustavus Hamilton.

The Copy of a Letter sent to the Earl of Mount-alexander, Lord Viscount
Massareene, and unto diverse others of the Nobility and Gentry in the North East
part of Ulster, from the Governor of Iniskillin.
Iniskillin, January 23. 1688. My Lord,
WHilst we and all the Protestants of this Kingdom groaned under the fears of
approaching Miseries, and there was nothing but a universal dread of imminent
Ruin suggested to our Thoughts, and that we see our Religion, our Laws, Lives,
and our All at stake; so that nothing could be added to our danger, but our
willingness to lay under whatsoever was imposed upon us: The Law of
Self-preservation (one of the ancientest of the World) constrained us rather to
choose a hazardous undertaking than, a voluntary Slavery; to which we were the
more provoked by the insulting menaces of those, who, under the pretense of
Quartering upon us, came to Pillage us, and designed to make this their
entrance to the devastation of this part of the Province. So that not being
willing to be enslaved, and help to make others so too, this Pass being the
only Inlet from Conaught to Ulster, from whence, as by an Inundation, it might
have been overflowed: We stand upon our Guard, and do resolve, by the blessing
of God, rather to meet our danger, than expect it. We doubt not but your
Lordships Consideration, with others of that part of the Country, has suggested
thoughts of this nature to you also, which may induce you to a necessary
defense of your selves and others; and therefore do entreat your Lordships
candid and sincere Advice in the management of this great affair, too weighty
for our weak Shoulders to bear alone, since we are sure to be the first shall
meet with the dangerous and highly incensed revengeful hand of our Enemies. Our
great hope is, that God will incline your Lordship to our assistance, and give
us Courage and Success in this so just an undertaking; we entreat Credit may be
given to these our Messengers Mr. Hugh Hamilton and Mr. Alan Cathcart, who are
well acquainted with the proceedings of those who shall not fail to continue

Your Lordship's Faithful, humble Servant, Gustavus Hamilton.


Mr. Hamilton's Letter of Attorney, impowering him to solicit at the Court of
England, on behalf of the Garrison of Iniskillin.
KNow all Men by these presents, That we the Governor, Colonels and other
Officers belonging to the Garrison of Iniskillin, do hereby Nominate, Constitute
and Appoint our Right Trusty and well-beloved Friend, Andrew Hamilton, Clerk,
as our true and lawful Attorney, to go to the Court of England, and in our name
and stead to solicit our Affairs and all Concerns belonging to our Garrison;
hereby ratifying and Confirming what our said Attorney Mr. Andrew Hamilton
shall do, in as ample manner as if we were personally present.

Given under our hands at Iniskillin this 6th Day of August, 1689. Gustavus
Hamilton, Governor. With a great many other Officers.


The Certificate of the Governor and Officers of Iniskillin, in behalf of Mr.
Andrew Hamilton, when they sent him their Agent to Their Majesty's, King
William and Queen Mary.
TO all Persons to whom these Presents shall come: We the Governor, Colonels
and other Officers belonging to the Garrison of Iniskillin and County of
Farmanagh, do hereby Certify and Declare, That the Bearer hereof, Andrew
Hamilton Clerk, Rector of Kilskiny, and one of the Prebends of the Diocese of
Clogher, has truly and faithfully adhered and joined with us since the ninth
Day of December last past; at which time we did associate together, in Defense
of our selves and the Protestant Religion: And the said Andrew, at his own
proper Costs and Charge, did raise a Troop of Horse and a Foot-Company, and
joined them with us in the same Cause; for which his Enemies did him and his
Tenants all the Mischiefs they could: And upon the fourth of the last Month,
sent under the Command of the Duke of Berwick, an Army of four or five thousand
Men, and did burn the Dwelling House and all other the Houses belonging to the
said Andrew, in ten several Villages; and drove away from the said Andrew and
his Tenants above a thousand Cows, two hundred Horses and Mares, and about two
thousand Sheep, with all their Houshold-Goods: And the said Andrew, between his
Temporal Estate and Church-Living, was worth above four hundred Pounds per
Annum, the Prifit whereof he has lost, much of it lying in the Enemies
Country. And we farther Certify and Declare, That the said Andrew Hamilton
has been one of the Prebends of Clogher these fifteen Years past: and has
all-along, during the said Time, continued a painful and constant Preacher, and
of a good Fame among us;

All which we Certify under our Hands, at Iniskillin, this sixth Day of
August, 1689. Gustavus Hamilton, Governor Thomas Lloyd Abraham Creichton
William Smith Alexander Acheson Morgan Heart Thomas Heart Daniel Hodson John
Fulton Alexander Fulton William Browning Robert Vaughan Robert Clark Oll.
Jackson William Parsons Hugh Montgomery.


POSTSCRIPT.
SInce this was put into the Press, I have heard of a Pamphlet which does abuse
both the Men of Derry and Iniskillin, and am informed, That not only Papists,
but others who pretend to be Protestants, have or late falsely, maliciously and
industriously made it their business to lessen the Actions of both these
places, and have insinuated that the People now in Arms in Ireland, who are
called The Iniskillin men, were Men of no Fortune or Reputation, and that the
Actions done by them are not so considerable as Fame makes them.

As for Derry, no True Protestant will deny, but the holding out of that place
against the Irish Army, was of so great importance, that the safety of these
Three Kingdoms did depend very much upon it. And it is well known, that during
the whole time of that long Siege, the Men of Iniskillin kept at least the one
half of the Irish Army from coming before Derry, and kept them in so great fear
of their coming to Relieve the Town, that they durst never make a Regular
Attack upon the place, but were forced to divide their Men, keeping strong
Guards at Strabane, Lifford, Castlefim, Clawdybridge, Newtown Stewart, Castle
Derrig, and Omagh, lest Iniskillin men should come upon them. By so doing, they
made the Siege a great deal easier to the besieged: and therefore (as those who
were best acquainted with the Affairs of Derry during the Siege, do confess)
Iniskillin does deserve no small part of the honor of that places Preservation.

And now in regard of these Scandalous Reports which the Papists, and (perhaps)
some rotten hearted Protestants, have raised upon these Men, I thought fit here
to advertise the Reader, that as to their Actions I refer him to the Relation
before written, which every Man that knows them, will allow that I have been
modest in giving account of them, though I have omitted but very little of
moment that has been done by them from their first taking up Arms, until the
time that I have ended this Relation.

And as for the Men themselves, those who first took up Arms and embodied in
the County of Farmanagh, where Iniskillin is the County Town, were all
Protestants, House keepers, and most of them Men of substance, living as well
as most Men in that Kingdom, of their Quality, but were never friends to
Popery, which I suppose, is that which offends that Party. As for those who
came to us from Conaught and other places of the Kingdom, we are informed, that
most of them lived very happily, till plundered and driven from their
Habitations, they were forced to take shelter among us, scarce one of them
bringing any manner of substance along with him; for whose maintenance they
have several times gone into their Enemies bounds, and brought considerable
Preys of Cattle from them, who are yet their Debtors for plunder and burnings
more thousand pounds than 'twas once thought needed to have been spent for
reducing the Kingdom, but never meddled with any thing that belonged to their
Protestant Friends till the later end of August; and what they have done since,
I pretend to give here no Relation of.

Those Men have kept free from the Enemy the whole County of Fermanagh, from
the Castle of Crom, to Bellishanny, and all that part of the Country of
Dunegall that lies next the Sea from Bellishanny to Killabeggs, which will be
above fifty Miles in length, and in those bounds have raised, for their
Majesty's Service, Three Regiments of Foot, Two Regiments of Dragoons, and
about Twenty Troops of Horse; most of them officer'd by Men of Estates, and
many of the private Men, having Freeholds and Estates in that Kingdom. So that
when ever Ireland is reduced, I do with confidence averr, That the very
Officers (without accounting the Real and Personal Estates of those who were
content to bear Arms as Private Soldiers) if restored to their own, and no
more, will be found worth above 10000 l. per Annum, who have adhered to
Iniskillin, and are now called Iniskillin-men: for Sir John Hume lost his
eldest Son in the service we were jointly engaged in, and Sir G. Irvine died in
command in Duke Schomberg's Camp at Dundalk. I could reckon up many
particulars, and signalize other Gentlemen of that Party, but that I believe I
shall gratify their modesty more to have it thought that I did endeavor to
give an impartial account of their joint Actions, than to plead for particular
Persons. And if I were inclined to mark out those who merited most, I should be
disappointed, where each out-did the Example which others set before him. I
have therefore purposely avoided saying any thing in Commendation of those
Gentlemen, otherwise than by barely relating the matter of fact which they did;
and I hope those from whom I am sent will attribute it to no other cause, that
I have not particularly named them, and the brave Actions that they have done:
and so were not a necessitous Rabble, as those Libellers would make them.

And besides those Regiments that are now raised, there are a great many Men in
that Country who never bore Arms as yet, and will be able to raise some more
Regiments of Foot, if there be Officers to their mind appointed over them; and
if we judge by the Actions of their Fellows, we may conclude, That they will go
as far for their number, in the Service of Their Majesty's, as any Men Their
Majesty's have; for I am sure they are lovers of the Protestant Interest, and
with a cheerful Heart and willing Mind, will fight in that Quarrel, under their
Majesty's.

FINIS.
Books lately printed for Richard Chiswel.
Dr. Tennison's Sermon against Self-love, before the House of Commons, June 5.
1689.

Mr. Tully's Sermon of Moderation, before the Lord Mayor, May 12. 1689.

An Examination of the Scruples of those who refuse to take the Oath of
Allegiance. By a Divine of the Church of England.

A Dialogue betwixt two Friends, a Jacobite and a Williamite; occasioned by the
late Revolution of Affairs, and the Oath of Allegiance.

The Case of Oaths stated. 40.

A Letter from a French Lawyer to an English Gentleman, upon the Present
Revolotion. 40.

The Advantages of the present Settlement, and the great Danger of a Relapse.

Reflections upon the Opinions of some Modern Divines, concerning the Nature of
Government in general, and that of England in particular. With an Appendix
relating to this Matter, containing, 1. The seventy fifth Canon of the Council
of Toledo. 2. The Original Articles in Latin, out of which the Magna Charta of
King John was framed. 3. The true Magna Charta of King John in French: By which
the Magna Charta in Matthew. Paris is cleared and justified, and the Alterations
in the Common Magna Charta discovered (of which see a more particular Account
in the Advertisement before the Appendix.) all three Englished.

The Doctrine of Non-Resistance, or Passive Obedience no way concerned in the
Controversies now depending between the Williamites and the Jacobites.

A Discourse concerning the Unreasonableness of a new Separation on account of
the Oaths. With an answer to The History of passive Obedience.

A Discourse concerning the Ecclesiastical Commission opened in the
Jerusalem-Chamber, October. 10. 1689.

Bishop Burnet's Sermon of Peace and Union.

The Interest of England in the preservation of Ireland.

The answer of a Protestant Gentleman in Ireland to a late Popish Letter of N.
N. upon a Discourse between them, concerning the present Posture of that
Country, and the Part fit for those concerned there to act in it. 40.

An Apology for the Protestants of Ireland, in a brief Narrative of the late
Revolutions in that Kingdom; and an Account of the present State thereof: By a
Gentleman of Quality. 40.

A true Representation to the King and People of England how matters were
carried on all along in Ireland by the late K. James, in favor of the Irish
Papists there, from his Accession to the Crown to the 10th. of April 1689.

The mantle thrown off: or the Irishman dissected.

Mephibosheth and Ziba: Or an Appeal of the Protestants of Ireland to the King,
concerning the Settlement of that Kingdom.

A full and impartial Account of all the secret Consults, Negotiations,
Stratagems and Intriegues of the Romish Party in Ireland from 1660, to 1689.
for the settlement of Popery in that Kingdom.


