At Edinburgh, The first of December, One Thousand Six Hundred and Ninety Six
Years.
THE Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, do hereby allow and grant Liberty,
to George Mosman Bookseller in Edinburgh, To Print and Vend a Book Entitled,
A Cordial for Christians Traveling Heavenward: Being the substance of some
Sermons, upon the Eight Chapter of Paul's Epistle to the Romans, Preached in the
City of Edinburgh by a Minister of the Gospel there. And Discharges any other
Persons to Print, Re-print, Vend, or Import the said Book, for the space of
Thirteen Years, after the Day and Date hereof, without License first had and
obtained from the said George Mosman for that effect, under the pain of
Confiscation of the said Books so Printed, Reprinted, Imported, or Vended, to
the use of the said George Mosman besides what farther punishment the Lords of
Privy Council shall please to inflict upon the Controveeners Extracted by Me

GILB: ELIOT Cls. Sti. Cons.

A CORDIAL FOR Christians, Traveling HEAVENWARD;

Being the Substance of some Sermons, upon the Eight Chapter of Paul's Epistle
to the Romans:

Preached in the City of Edinburgh, by a Minister of the Gospel there.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by George Mosman, and to be sold at his Shop in the
Parliament-Closs, Anno Dom. 1696.

Reader.
THou may think strange, That the following Sheets appear in Print, without the
usual solemnity of a Dedication and Preface; But the worthy Author's
Self-denial, and Modesty would not allow it.

They need no Commendation; had the Author given way to the prefixing of his
Name, that would have sufficiently commended them,

All I shall say, It Is a Great Subject, and thou will find it both Judiciously
and succinctly handled, to thy Edification and Comfort, if Read, with desire
after the Consolations in the Gospel.

If thou profit by them, It will not only Excuse me, at the Authors Hand, for
Printing them, against his Inclination; But (I hope) prevaill with him, to give
Thee a farther taste of his Labors.

Geo. Mosman.

BOOKS To be sold by George Mosman at his Shop in the Parliament. Closs.
ANnotations upon the Holy Bible by Mr. Matthew Poole 2 Vols. Fol:

An Essay concerning Humane Understanding, by John Lock Gent. Fol.

The Lives of the Popes from the time of our Savior to the Reign of Sextus IV
Written Originally in Latin by B. Platina and Englished by Sir Paul Ryca^. Fol.

The History of Scotland, written in Latin by George Buchanan faithfully
rendered into English. Fol.

A great Dictionary in three parts. I. The English before the Lat. II. The
Latin before the English. III. The proper Names of persons etc. Fol. by Thomas
Holyoke.

The Decisions of the Lords of Council and Session, by the Viscount Sta^r, Patt
2.

Several Discourses upon several Subjects by Mr. Clarkson D. D. Fol.

A Body of Practical Divinity, consisting of above 176 Sermons, Upon The lesser
Catechism Fol. by Thomas Watson

The Laws and Acts of Parliament made by K. James the 1st. and His Royal
Successors. Fol.

The Roman History, Written by Titus Livius, with the Supplements of John
Frenchemius, and John Dusatins; faithfully done into English, Fol.

The Commentaries of C. Julius Caesar of his Wars in Gallia, etc. by Clement
Edmonds. Fol.

The Polyglot Bible with Castalios Lexicon in 7 Vol. Fol.

Thesaurus Geographicus, a new Body of Geography, or a complete description of
Europe Fol.

Pools Synopsis Criticorum etc. 5. Vol Fol.

Mantons 4th. Vol of Sermons upon several subjects. Fol.

A survey of the Bible, or an Analytical account of the Holy Scriptures by
Samuel Clerk. 4to.

Institutiones Theologiae Elencticae, per Franc. Turrettinum 3 Vol. 4to.

-- Disputationes de satisfactione Christi, 4to.

-- Disputationes de necessaria secessione nostra ab Ecclesia Romana Accessit
decas disputationum Miscellanearum. 4to.

Philosophia vetus and nova ad usum scholae accommodata, 4to 2. Vol.

Idem in 2. Vol. 12.

Ioannis Mack^ con pendium Theologiae christianae didactico-El^ncti^um. 4to.

An Exposition, with practical Observations upon the Book of ^ob, by ^oseph
Cary^ 4to. (...) Vols.

The complete Works of Mr. Isaac Ambrose s^

A^ Exposition, with practical Observations upon the Book of Eccles^tes. by Mr.
Alex. N^tus Minister of the Gospel at ^win 4to.

Flerman^ Wi^ ^iscul^ sa^m 4to.

A Discourse concerning the Holy spirit, wherein an account is given of this
Nante, Nature, Personality. Dispensation. Ope^tions and Effects, by John O^n D.
D, fol.

Joshua Red^viv^s, Or, Mr. Rutherford's Letters. 8vo.

The fulfilling of the Scriptures., 3d Edition, Corrected and Enlarged, 8vo.

Naphtali, or the Wrestlings of the Church of Scotland. for the Kingdom of
Christ. 12mo.

The History of the Church of Ethiopia, by Michael Geddes D. D. 8vo.

An Exposition of the Assemblies shorter Catechism, by Thomas Vincent, 12mo.
Printed at Lonaon 1696.

An Alarm to unconverted Sinners, by Joseph Allen, 8vo Printed at London 1688.

The sound Believer, A Treatise of Evangelical Conversion, by Tho. Shepherd
12mo.

A brief Concordance to the Holy Bible of the most usual and useful Places,
which one may have occasion to seek for, in a new Method. by Samuel C^erk, 1mo.

The Worthy Communicant, Or, A Treatise showing the due order of receiving the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, by Jeremiah Dyke, 12mo.

An Account of Denmark, as it was in the Year 1692. ^8vo.

The Decisions of the Lords of Council and Session from July 1621 to July 1642,
by Sir Alexander Gibson of Durie, Fol.

SERMONS Upon ROMANS Chap. VIII.
Verse 1. There is therefore now no Condemnation, to them that are in Christ
Jesus, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit.


HERE the Apostle infers from the Doctrine of Justification, delivered in 3d.
4th. and 5th. Chapters; (For the 6th. and 7th. come in by way of Digression, to
answer the Objections against the Doctrine of Justification, for the further
clearing of it,) That there is no Condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus: And because many may pretend to be unite to Christ, that are not really
so, therefore such as are unite to him, are described by their Walk, which is
not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit.

This being a comfortable Conclusion from the Premises, in the preceding part
of this Epistle, Viz. 'That there is no condemnation to the Believer that 'is
in Christ; We shall clear First what the Words import. And 2ly. Hold out some
Scriptural Grounds that may and will clear the certainty of this Truth

As to the First, When the Apostle says, there is no Condemnation, his meaning
is, 1st, That the Law does not condemn the Believer. 2ly. That the Believers
Conscience cannot warrantably condemn him. And 3ly. By these Words, he assures
us, that the Judge will never condemn Believers in Christ.

For the 2d. Thing, The certain Grounds of the Believers Freedom from
condemnation are these. 1st Ground, is the Covenant of God, made with Abraham,
and his Spiritual Seed, to which God interposed his Oath, to be their God. Now
these to whom he is a God, he must prepare for them an Heavenly City; now
Believers in Christ are Abraham's Spiritual Seed, with whom that Covenant was
made; and therefore they must go to Heaven, and cannot be condemned to go to
Hell. 2d. Ground of their freedom from Condemnation, is their freedom from the
Law; Believers are not under the Law, but under Grace, Romans 6 They are married
to Christ and so are not under the Dominion of their old Husband the Law, They
are not under the Law as an Covenant, tho they be under it as an Rule of Life,
and so they cannot be under the commination of that Covenant, because of the
Transgressions of it; now where the Law does not condemn, the Judge cannot
condemn 3d. Ground of Certainty, is the Believers interest in Christ's
Sacrifice. Heb. 12.24. It is said, we are come to the blood of sprinkling, we
have a real Interest in his Sacrifice, because he is One that had our nature.
2ly. That Sacrifice, by God's Appointment, and his own Consent, was offered up
for Believers; and he had a Spiritual S^bness to them: Now since Believers have
an interest in this Sacrifice, this cannot but secure them from Condemnation,
if you consider the expiatory Virtue thereof: which expiatory Virtue, is
evinced from these few Considerations, 1st. Consider the infinitely wise God
chose this Sacrifice, to expiate the Sins of Believers, Heb. 10.5. 2ly. He
accepted of this Sacrifice, as a proper and effectual Mean to produce this end,
Ephesians. 5.2. 3ly. This Sacrifice had an Intrinsic Worth in it, and was spotless.
4ly. It was offered up by the Heavenly-Fire of the Eternal Spirit, Heb. 9.14.
5ly. The Offerer was the High Priest of the New Testament himself, inaugurate
in his Office by God himself, Heb. 7.21. 6ly. The Sufferings he was put to, by
being thus a Sacrifice, were the accomplishments of the Commination of the Law.
An Fourth Ground of Certainty, is the absolution of Christ, the Believers
soverty in his Resurrection, and this absolution more fully cleared, by his
Session at God's Right Hand, Romans 4 and last. and Heb. 1. and 3. A 5th. Ground
of Certainty of the Believers freedom, is, the promulgate Gospel, which plainly
asserts, that the Believer is not condemned, John 3.18. and 5.24. And this
Truth of the Gospel is confirmed by external Miracles, and by the Internal
Operations of the Spirit of God. A 6th. Ground is, the Privileges that this
Gospel declares, are conferred on Believers, as 1st. The Privilege of
Justification, and that secures the Believer from Condemnation; 1st. Because it
is God's Deed, Romans 8 33. and 34. 2ly. It is an Act of Grace, Romans 3.24 We are
justified freely by his Grace, now Grace must reign over Sin and Death, Romans 5.
and last. 3ly. It is an Act founded on Christ's Righteousness, which is called
the Righteousness of God, viz. of his Invention and Approbation 2 Cor. 5. and
last; And therefore this Privilege of Justification cannot but secure the
Believer from Condemnation. 4ly. This Act of Justification draws with it the
total and irrep^alable Pardon of all Sin, Romans 4.5, 6. compared with Psalm.
32.1, 2^ For the Apostle, Romans 4 clears from that Psalm, that the
Gospel-Righteousness is not a Righteousness of Works, for it draws with it as
its attendant, the Remission of Sins. A 2d. Privilege that the Gospel secures
to a Believer, is Adoption, John 1.12. and this cannot but secure the Believer
from Condemnation, because a sure Title to eternal Life depends on it, and
follows the same, Romans 8.17. 1 John 3.1, 2. A Third Privilege that the Gospel
assures us Believers have, Is that they are sanctified by the Spirit of God,
which is their being made meet for Heaven, Col. 1.12. It is the Earnest of it,
Ephesians 1 14. Now this cannot but secure them from Condemnation, because God cannot
separate a man that has his Image from himself, seeing the Image of God is
given by him to prepare a man for Communion with himself. A 7th. Ground is, the
Believer is unite to Christ not only because Christ has the same Humane Nature
with him, but because he is mystically and spiritually one with him, 1 Cor.
6.17. The Believer is a piece of Christ mystical, therefore the Church of
Believers is called his fullness, Ephesians. 1. and last. Now this Union with Christ
secures from Condemnation, because the Love of the Father that is terminate on
Christ primarly and principally, must also necessarly terminate on them, see
Jo. 17. last, An 8to Ground of certainty is, That Christ is Judge; and the Rule
whereby he proceeds, is not the Law but the Gospel, John 12.48, 49, and 50.

Use of Consolation from this Doctrine is. 1st. To these who are under the
conviction of Sin, Guilt, and Death, and who have fled for Refuge to Christ,
such are not allowed to have the Spirit of Bondage again to fear Condemnation,
Romans 8.15. 2ly. To such who are under paternal Chastisements for Sin; because
these are our evidences of our freedom from Condemnation, 1 Cor. 11.32. And
therefore they should not be looked on as Prooffs of our lyableness to
Condemnation. 3ly. It is comfortable to those that are Assaulted with Satan's
Fiery Darts, suggesting to them that they will be condemned, and yet giving
them no sufficient ground to found that Assertion on: If a man's Conscience tell
him that he believes on Christ, from this Text he may easily repel all these
horrid Temptations. 4ly. It is very comfortable at the hour of Death, for Death
wants its Sting to an Believer, 1 Cor. 15.55. Death is but a sleep to a
Believer, Death does not separate a Believer from the Love of God, Romans 8.
last. But it is the Believers passage to immediate Communion with God, and
therefore Paul 2 Cor. 5.8. Desires to be absent from the body, and present with
the Lord.

The former Scriptural-Grounds, assuring the Believer, that he is free from
Condemnation, they are fit to be applied by these Believers that know they have
Faith and whose fears of Condemnation, arise more from their reflection on
their Guilt, Corruption and Misery, then from any Jealousy that they want
Faith: But for such whose fears of Condemnation arise from the weakness of
their Faith, I would have them consider many Scripture Instances, which clear
that a weak Faith maybe very profitable, if it be true: As the Faith of the
Leper, who believed Christ's Power but questioned his Willingness. M^th. 8, and
as the Faith of the Prodigal, who believed his Father might put him amongst the
Servants, but could not make him a Son: see what Opinion Paul has of the Faith
of the Hebrews, Heb. 6.9. compared with the 12. and 13. and compared with the
5. and 12.

Secondly, There is an use of Trial, to try whether we have an Interest in this
Privilege or no. And 1st. Try it by your Faith whether ye believe the promises
of God, whose performances are very improbable like, as Abraham did, Then are
we Abraham's spiritual Seed, and so have Interest in the Covenant made with
him. 2ly. Try your Interest in this privilege by your being Married to Christ,
that is by forsaking your own personal Righteousness, which is by the Law, and
betaking your selves to Christ's. Romans 7.4 3ly. Try your Interest by your Union
with Christ; If you would know that Union with Christ, ye must try it by this
whether ye be new Creatures or no, 2 Cor. 5.17. 4ly. ye must try it by the mark
in the Text, which is, that such as are in Christ, They walk not after the
flesh, that is they have not an walk that evidences the dominion of Lust over
them: Pride, Covetousness Malice, and Self-love do not Influence their
Conversation. And 2ly. They do not regulate their Life by the Laws of
Corruption, which are directly opposite to the Laws of God; whereof some of
them may be repeated. As 1st. The Natural Man thinks it fit to depend upon
himself, and not upon God, and to please himself and not God. 2ly. The Natural
Man denis the Being of God and mistakes the perfection of God, and his walk
evidences his Atheism, Psalm. 14.1. and his denial of God's perfection. Psalm.
36.1. 3ly. It is a Principle of the Natural Man that he Exercises himself in
Superstitious Worship. In being formal in appointed Worship as meritorious with
God, see Luke 18. about the Pharisee. 4ly. It is his principle that we may
warrantably use unlawful means to obtain our end; That false policy is better
then tenderness of Conscience. 5ly. It is a Principle of his, that Folk should
rather Sin then suffer Affliction. 6ly. It is a Principle of the Carnal Man,
that we should not love our Neighbor with a pure and single Love, but with a
Selfish Love, not designing singly his good, but aiming still at our own
Advantage in what kindness we do to him. 7ly. Its the walker after the flesh
his Principle, that we should not live in Subjection to Superiors from
Conscience, but because of fear of force, and because of Expectation of
Advantage. 8ly. It Is his Principle, that his Felicity stands in sensual good,
9ly. He is not content with what satisfies Nature, but with what satisfies
Lust, and Lust being unsatiaable, he cannot but always be discontented.

Now this Walk after the Flesh, does not only import a Walk that evidences
reigning Lusts in the Heart, and a Walk that is the practical improvement of
those pernicious Principles formerly mentioned and such like; but it is a Walk
tending to corrupt Ends, a Walk wherein a Man's Imaginations, Desires and
Purposes are all levelled at the gratifying of some one predominant Lust or
other. And 5ly. we would try our interest in this privilege, by our walking
after the Spirit: Which is a walk first, which stands in obedience to the
motions of the Spirit, Romans 8, 13. Gal. 5.18. 2ly. It stands in giving God
spiritual Worship, Phi^ip. 3.3. and Jo. 4 24. 3ly. It stands in having a Walk
flowing from Spiritual Principles, viz. Faith. 2 Cor. 5.7. Love, Ephesians. 5.2. 4ly.
It stands in eying an spiritual Rule in our Walk, viz. The Law in its spiritual
meaning, in having a spiritual frame in conforming our selves to that Law, that
we may do what we do in the strength of Christ's Spirit. And 5ly. It stands in
designing spiritual Ends, viz. The Glory of God, the Edification of our
Neighbor and our own Salvation.

From the Restriction of this privilege to such as Walk after the Spirit. We
may infer an Use of Reproof to many who walk after the flesh, and yet will
apply this privilege to themselves; The causes of their security, may be 1st.
They lean to their Superstitious Services, Mica: 6, 7. Isa. 1, 11. And to their
External Acts of Worship. Isai: 58, 3. Jer. 7, 10. 2ly. They Lean to their
present impunity Psalm: 50, 21. And 3ly. They lean to their own Gifts, Matthew.
7.22.

Observe that the Apostle divides all the Members of the Visible Church, in
these Two sorts of Men, viz. Who walk after the Flesh, and Who walk after the
Spirit; Importing to us that all those that Walk not after the Spirit, they
certainly walk after the Flesh. From this one may infer, That all Moralists and
Civilians. Whatever pretenses they have for Innocence, in Walking, since they
are unacquainted with a walking after the Spirit, they are certainly to be
reckoned as Walkers after the Flesh.

Observe next, from the words, That when the Apostle would give a discovery to
persons of their spiritual state, and of their Interest in the privilege of
Non-condemnation, he brings this Discovery not from a particular Act of their
Walk, whether good or bad; but from the Tract of their Walk; for a Godly Man
may be overcome with an Temptation at a time, and do an evil Act, which may be
called an Act of the Flesh; and an godless Man may do an Act materially good,
but a Godly Man cannot Walk after the Flesh, neither can a godless man walk
after the Spirit.

Verse. 2. For the Law of the Spirit of life, in Christ Jesus, has made me
free from the Law of Sin and Death.


SOme take the meaning of those words to be, That the Gospel does free the
Apostle Paul from the Law and Covenant of Works, and its Threatening: And
therefore since the Gospel frees him from the Laws Threatening, It cannnot but
secure all that are in Christ from Condemnation; seeing he has no privilege by
the Gospel, but what all that are in Christ actually have; for the Gospel
confers privileges of this sort and nature equally on all Believers; And if
the words be taken in this sense, they are a proof of the first part of the
first verse to this purpose, as if the Apostle had said: Ye may be very sure
that there is no Condemnation to them that are in Christ: Because I, who am a
Believer by the promulgate Gospel, am delivered from the Threatening of the
Covenant of Works: And so these that ascribe this sense to the words, they say
that by the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, is meaned the Gospel,
called the Law of Faith, 3d. Romans And it gets that Name, because as a Law has
Authority in it, to oblidge to Obedience, so the Gospel has the stamped of
Divine Authority on it, obliging to Obedience. Likeways, It is called a Law of
the spirit of life, because the Gospel, and not the Law, (which is as to this a
Dead Letter) is the Ministration of the Spirit, see Gal. 3.5.2 Cor. 3.8. and we
are receivers of the spirit by the hearing of Faith, Gal: 3.2 and it is said
the Gospel is the Law in Christ Jesus, because Christ Jesus is the principal
Subject about which it Treats. Or these words, in Christ Jesus, may be added,
not to denote that the principal Subject of the Gospel is Christ Jesus, but to
denote that the Spirit of Life, which is conveyed by the Gospel is to be had
from Christ Jesus. 2ly. Those that ascribe this sense to the words they say,
that by the Law of sin and death, is meant the Law of God with it is sanction,
and Threatening: For as it is a perfect Rule of Righteousness, it discovers sin:
As the Apostle says, by the Law is the knowledge of sin; and by reason of the
Threatening subjoined to the Law it brings the sinner under a lyableness to
Death, and upon their Accounts it is concluded by their Divines who ascribe this
sense to the Text, That the Law of God gets this Name of the Law of ^in and
Death.

But yet when we consider the Text more narrowly, we think it has an other
meaning; For it is very clear from the preceding Chapter. That by the Law of
sin the Apostle means, Corruption, and we do not find the Apostle in other
places of Scripture giving that name of the Law of sin and death to the Law of
God. And therefore by the Law of the spirit of life, is meant the powerful
influence of the spirit of life upon Believers, which frees Paul from
Corruption, these 3. ways. 1st. By dwelling in Paul's heart he makes up a
spiritual Union betwixt Christ and him, and so frees him from the guilt of
Corruption, because by the spirit making up that Union he winns to a justified
state, 1 Cor* 6.11. 2ly. He frees Paul from his Corruption because by his power
he breaks the dominion of sin. And 3ly. By his presence and efficacious
working, he will in his own time abolish the remainders of Corruption out of
Paul's heart.

The Cohesion of this Verse with the former, seems to be the Apostles proving
the latter part of the Verse thus, That those that are in Christ must walk
after the Spirit, and not after the Flesh, because the Spirit of Life breaks
the Dominion of Sin in them, as it did in Paul. Or 2ly. This Second Verse may
be added, to illustrate the first part of the first Verse, viz. That there is
no condemnation to the man who is in Christ, and it may be set down to prevent
an Objection against that Truth, that the man that is in Christ is free of
condemnation For it may be said, that the man that is in Christ, has the Law
of Sin and Death, and since he has the remainders of Corruption in him, how
can he be free from Condemnation? It is Answered, That the Spirit of Life frees
the Believer from the Law of Sin and Death, because, by uniting a man to
Christ, it frees him from the Guilt of Corruption, and by the Spirits presence,
as a Spirit of Life, in God^s own time, he will be freed from the remainders of
Corruption.

From what has been said, we may soon see. That our discerning of the
remainders of Corruption in us inevitably brings us under many fears of
Condemnation: The fight of Indwelling Sin more forcibly puts us under a fear of
Condemnation, than the feeling of all our numerous Miseries can do, and
therefore it were fit for a Believer to strengthen his hope of the total
abolition of Sin in him, and this may be done, 1st. By considering our Union
with Christ, and Christ's Exaltation to Glory, which necessarly says, that all
the Members must have a sinless conformity with the Head. 2ly. This Hope may be
strengthened, by considering that the guilt of our Corruption is already
pardoned in our Justification, for the 1st Verse says, There is no condemnation
to the man that is actually in Christ. And 3ly. This Hope may be strengthened in
this, that the breaking of the Dominion of Corruption in us by the Spirit of
Life, is a Pledge given us of God, to assure us of its total abolition.

Observe 2ly. That Paul was a man deeply exercised with the sense of remaining
Corruption in him, as appears by the last part of the former Chapter, and now
he wins to a great deal of freedom to apply Gospel-Priviledges, and this tells
you that the freedom of the Actings of Faith is very consistent with the sense
of Indwelling Sin.

Observe 3ly. Paul used many Means for Mortification, he watched, he prayed, he
kept himself out of the way of Temptation, yet he ascribed not his freedom from
Corruption, to the use of these Means, but to the Principal Author of his
freedom, viz. The Spirit of Life, who did bless these Means, for that end. Take
notice of that Name that is given to the Influencing Spirit, that liberats Paul
from the Law of Sin and Death, it is called The Law of the Spirit of Life;
Because, that as a Law has a Moral Efficacy, to draw those that live under it
into Obedience; So the gracious Spirit of God, where he has an indwelling, has
an strong Efficacy to bring the Person in whom he dwells, to follow his
Conduct. And this leads us into an

4. Observation, anent the mighty Working of the Spirit, and his Grace in the
Hearts of Believers; and this mighty Power of the Spirit, and his Grace,
evidences it self in these few things following, amongst many more As 1st. In
the actings of Faith under many Trials, which must argue a great Power that
makes a man believe, notwithstanding of great and manifold Guiltinesses, and of
long Continuance, notwithstanding of Corruptions, notwithstanding of violent
Assaults from Satan, yea notwithstanding of Desertions, Chastisements and
Death; And therefore, it is said, Ephesians. 1.19 That there is an exceeding
greatness of Power, that works in Believers. 2ly. The Power of Grace kythes, in
that it can make a man forgo those Sins his natural Complexion enclines him
to, whereunto he has been much accustomed, and which have brought him great
worldy Advantage. 2ly Graces Power appears, in that it makes a man forsake his
own Righteousness, and betake himself to Christ's which deed will be very much
opposed by Pride and Self-love. 4ly. Its Power appears in this, in tha^ it can
make Christians, with Paul, not to look t^ things seen, that is, to depise the
allurements of the World, which have a sensible certainty, and are very
grateful to our external Senses. 5ly. It evidences it self in making People
patient under manifold sore, continuing, and extreme Miseries, even such o^
whom is legible God's Quarrel with us for our Sins the Exercise of Patience
under such, must be an Effect of great Power, See Cor. 1.10, 11. And that
because Patience will be opposed by our natural Pride, Self-love and Unbelief.

Use of Information, To let you see to whom you may ascribe the great Works of
the mortified Believer, even to the mighty efficacious Worker the Spirit of
Life, that is in Christ Jesus.

Use of Encouragement to the despondent Believer, who ^s feared, when he
considers the Greatness and Spirituality of his Work; he thinks that Work is so
far above him, he will not get it accomplished; But the Answer is, His
Encouragement should spring from his looking to the mighty Power of that
indwelling Spirit in him; and albeit he may find himself very weak to manadge
his Spiritual Work, if he compare the greatness of his Work, with the strength
of that measure of inherent Grace he has for the time, yet he would not be
discouraged, for although the present measure of inherent Grace that is in him,
be not able to do his work, and overcome the opposition made to it; yet there
is an abundance of strength in the Spirit of Life, that principally resides in
the Head, and is derived from him to all his Members, to manadge all the
Christians Work, and to overcome all the opposition made to it.

Take notice, 5ly. Of the name the Spirit gets here, he is called the Spirit of
Life, or a quickening Spirit, and he is called so for Three Reasons. 1st.
Because he raised Christ from the dead. 2ly. Because he raises us from the
Death of Sin. And 3ly. Because he is to raise the Christian at the last day to
immortal Glory. From this we infer, that those in whom the Spirit dwells, must
have Spiritual Life, that is, they must live so as to make his Will their Rule,
and his Glory their End, and his Love their chiefest Comfort.

6ly. Take notice, That the Spirit of Life is said to be in Jesus Christ; and
that 1st. Because Christ did merit the Spirit of Life to his People. 2ly.
Because the Spirit of Life did evidence principally It Is quickening virtue in
his raising Christ from the dead; He did this, that believers might have a
pledge by this deed that he could raise them from the death of sin and of the
grave. 3. He is said to be in Christ Jesus, because, he is given to him
principally and primarly, and in a greater measure then to Believers; the
Father gave not the Spirit by measure to him John 3.34. And the Spirit is given
to believers from Christ, and for his sake: and this directs Believers how to
strengthen their Faith, as to the expectation of the Spirits grace and
influence to their Hearts. Unbelief will say in their Hearts, they should not
expect the Spirits presence seeing they cannot deserve it. The Answers is, that
Christ has deserved it from them, tho they have not deserved it themselves.
2ly. Unbelief will object the difficulty of the Spiritual and Corporal
Resurrection, a work so difficult how can the accomplishment thereof be
expected? The answer is, That this Spirit of life has performed ane greater
work in raising Christ from the dead, then he should perform tho he should
raise thee who are the Believer from the death of sin and the grave. 3ly.
Unbelief in Believers will object against their undertaking great Spiritual
work for God, because they do not find such strength of the Spirits grace in
them, as many be proportioned to the greatness and Spirituality of that work.
But the Answer is, They should not take their encouragement to the work, from
the greatness of the strength of their present inherent grace but from the
greatness of the strength of that Spirit of life that primarly and principally
resides in Christ and therefore Paul 1 Timothy 2.1. He bids Timothy be strong in
the grace that is in Jesus, and in the Philip: 4. He says he can do all things
through Christ that strengthens him, and in 2 Cor. 12. He says, he rejoices in
his infirmity that the power of Christ may rest upon him; And therefore an
exercised Believer with indwelling sin, if he would have the most comfortable
look of Christ, let him look to him as having the fullness of the Spirit of
life in him; for Christ is not only lovely to a Believer, as his Blood has an
Expiatory virtue to cleanse away our guilt, but as he has an fullness of the
Spirit whereby he is able to quicken the Believer and raise him from the Death
of sin to a Spiritual life.

Observe the designation of Corruption, it is called the Law of Sin to hold out
its moral evil, 2ly. It is called the Law of Death, to hold out the prejudice
it does to us. It gets the name of the Law of sin, to hold out the impetuous
activity of it, to make us commit Actual sin, notwithstanding all the
restraints that God puts upon us, by his prohibitions, by his Threatenings, by
his Judgments and Crosses, by his Checking, and Restraining-providences, by
his Allureing mercies, by his awakening-Smarting challenges of our conscience.
2ly. This Corruption is very powerful to overcome the restraints of Men made
against it; No humane law, with it is most Vigorous execution, can altogether
stop its Impetuousness: Indwelling sin is so impetuous, that it does overcome
the restraints the the sinner puts on himself, he will break his own Vow's
purposes and promises.

From the Impetuousness and efficacy of this indwelling sin, we may infer the
folly of them that think to get it Mortified by their own strength, without the
efficacy of the Spirit of life, convoyed to us in the humble use of appointed
means. 2ly. It says, they are fools who look upon their resolutions to live
blamelesly, as a sufficient guard against Scandalous sins; Indwelling sin is so
impetuous in its acting, that it will break out notwithstanding of that
resolution, if it be not mortified by the Law of the Spirit of life.

Next, the Text holds out the prejudice we lustain by Corruption: here it is
called the Law of Death, and that first, because the strength of Corruption and
it is Actings mar Spiritual Life. 2ly. Because although the Guilt of Corruption
be Pardoned to ^ Believer, yet the intrinsic Demerite of Eternal Death sticks
to it. 3ly. Because that Natural Death necessarly is Connected with it. For
though the Death of a Believer be not the effect of a Curseing Law as the just
Punishment of Corruption, yet the Tota^ removeal of Corruption from the
Believer is to be brought about by Death and the Dissolution of Nature If this
were well considered by Believers, it would make us humble under the Sense of
Indwelling sin and would make us painful for its Mortification, an^ make us
exceedingly long for it is Total Abolition*

Observe, Paul applies this Privilege of freedom from indwelling sin to
himself, and the Application is worthy of Observation, if y^ look to its
Qualities. As 1st. It Is an Application that is attended with a due Sense of sin
the Moral ill and prejudice of it; an Christian exercised with the exceeding
sinfulness of indwelling sin, and the prejudice following on it, is a fit
apply of this benefit. 2ly. This Application is an humble Application; he
expects freedom from indwelling sin, not from any pains he can take to Mortif^
it, but from the Law and Efficacy of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus. 3ly
Paul's Application of this benefit is from Knowledge, he know's the Guilt of
indwelling sin is removed by his Justification, and he knows the presence of
it, is to be removed alsewell as the Dominion of it to be broken, by the
Efficacy of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus; Paul did expect this benefit
on rational Grounds, which he understood: Not like many ignorant Christians,
that expect benefits fra^ God, and yet they have not distinct Grounds to found
their Expectation on. 4ly. This Application was warrantable and no ways
presumptuous, He did not intend it as a mean securely to make him neglect his
duty, but he rather used it as an Encouradgement for to make him walk after
the Spirit and not after the Flesh.

Observe That Paul assured himself of his freedom from the Law of Sin and
Death, that he might with the greater freedom apply the Privilege of
Non-condemnation, to himself, spoken of in the first part of the first Verse,
And if we would be free of the fears of Condemnation, we would be assured of
the removal of indwelling sin, because that the fear of Condemnation follows
the presence of it, because the Law connects Sin and Death together. 2ly.
Because Corruption, where it is, unfits folk for Communion with God, and mean
Measures of Communion awaken fears of Condemnation. And 3ly. Some^ime God
afflicts the Christian to restrain indwelling in from outbreaking; and these
Afflictions heighten ^hese fears; For this Reason, people would be assured of
sins total removeal, by considering that our Union with Christ speaks the
necessity of it, that we must ^e sinless as he is, he has undertaken it, his
Blood ^oth merit it, Ephesians: 1.7. Titus. ^.14. and his ^esurrection is the Pledge
of it.

Verse 3. For, what the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the
Flesh* God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful Flesh and for Sin,
Condemne^ Sin in the Flesh.


THis Verse and the following are brought in t^ clear the first part of the
first Verse, viz. Tha^ there is no Condemnation to the man that is in Christ
They are an illustration of that great truth, that the Believer in Christ,
though in part sinful, is not lyab^ to any Condemnation: and these Verses cle^
this truth, because they hold out that the meth^ that God takes to justify the
sinner, is not inconsistent with his Law and Justice.

The words hold out the way and Method, t^ Infinite Wisdom has found out to
Justify a sinn^ though not by the Law, yet consistent with the La^

The words contain in them First, the necess^ of this Method, it was necessary
to God to fall on because the Law could not justify the man, for he ^ in an
Estate of Corruption; the Law could not d^ for it was weak through the Flesh.
2ly. The words ^ out the Method it self, which may be taken up these three.
1st. The Preparation for it. 2ly. T^ Action it self in order to it. 3ly. The
Conseq^ and Effect of that Action.

The Preparation lies in these words, God ^ding his own Son in the likeness of
sinful Flesh, for Sin; In which words ye may Observe Person made use of, for
to bring about sinners Justification consistent with Law, described from the
relation he has with God the Father, his own Son. 2ly. Observe his Mission he
sent his own Son, 3ly. Observe his Incarnation, he sent him in Flesh, that is
in Human Nature, he is not said to be sent in the likeness of Flesh, as though
he had assumed only the appearance of Human Nature, but he is said to be sent
in the likeness of sinful Flesh, because the Nature he assumed was like our
sinful Nature, because he was subject to these Infirmities that our sinful
human Nature is subject to. 4ly. Observe his Condition after his Incarnation,
and that stands in two 1st. He was Sinless, he had not sinful Flesh, but the
likeness of sinful Flesh. 2ly. He was Subject to the Infirmities, of our
Nature, on that account he is said to be sent in the likeness of sinful Flesh,
5ly. Ye may take notice of the end of this Mission expressed in these words. And
for Sin (...) signifieing these two. 1st. That our sins, all our sins,
especially the sinfullness of our Nature, was the moveing and procuring cause
of Christ's taking on him our Nature with the sinless Infirmities thereof. Or
rather (...) may admit that sense that they have 1 Peter 3.18. That the
Abolition and Destruction of sin, both as to its Guilt, power and presence, is
the final cause of the Mission, Incarnation, and Infirm condition of the Son of
God.

2ly. Take notice of the Action it self, in which consists the way and method
that God uses, to bring about the Sinners Justification consistent with his
Law, and that is expressed in these words, He (or God the Father) condemned Sin
in the Flesh. Some make the Exposition of the Words to be, That God sentenced
or appointed sin to be totally extirpate out of our Nature; But it seems rather
to be of Gods punishing sin in Christ's Humane Nature: Condemnation of sin, is
here taken for the punishment of sin; Punishment ordinarily following on
Condemnation, and this is the method that God takes to justify the Sinner,
because the punishment was inflicted upon Flesh, that is on Humane Nature, a
piece of that Nature possessed by the Redeemer, whereof we all partake; now this
is Ascribed to God the Father, that God condemned sin in the Flesh, for though
Men were the Instruments of Christ's Sufferings, yet God the Father had the
principal sinless hand in bringing these about; He was delivered to suffering
by the determinate Counsel and foreknowledge of God, Acts 2, 23. Romans 4.25. It
is said he was delivered, viz. to Death for our offenses; And that Delivery
must be ascribed to the Father, because it is made a ground of our
Encouragement to believe on him, Romans 8.32. The Delivery of the Son to Death is
ascribed to the Father. Next this punishment of Sin on Christ must be referred
to God the Father, because he offered himself up a Sacrifice to God the Father
Ephesians: 5.2. Beside the Father is said to make him sin, or a sacrifice for sin, 2
Cor: 5. last. And in the third place the Father is said to punish sin in Humane
Nature, because it was convenient for the manifestation of Divine Justice, and
preservation of the Honor and Credit of the Law, that the punishment
inflicted for the Transgression of the Law, should be inflicted on that same
Nature that transgressed the Law, though not on the same individual persons
that did transgress; and it contributes very much to make the satisfaction
imputable to sinners, that the Satisfier share of the same Nature with them.

In the third place take notice of the effect and consequent of this Action of
God, the Father, viz. His Condemning or Punishing sin in the Human Nature of
Christ and it is this, That the Righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in
Believers; It is not said, that it is fulfilled by them, for if that could have
been done Christ needed not to have suffered for them; But the meaning is that
the Righteousness of the Law is fulfilled for their behoof.

This Righteousness of the Law, (...) is nothing else but the just Punishment
due to sin, by Virtue of Gods Law, and the Threatenings thereof, all one with
that (...) Rom: 1. and last. For that is meant of the Righteousness of God,
that is, the Punishment due to sin by virtue of Gods justice, for it is all one
Punishment that is due by virtue of divine justice or by Virtue of the
Threatening Law. Now this Punishment due by Law is said to be fulfilled in us,
by Gods Punishing sin in Christ; For though God did dispense so far with the
severe Threatening of the Law, as that he would not inflict that severe
Punishment on the Transgressor himself, yet these severe Punishments for kind,
that were Threatened by the Law against Transgressors, God, in Punishing Christ,
he inflicted these upon him, and therefore, Heb. 2.14. It is said, that he
behooved to become man that he might bear Death, the particular Punishment
threatened against the sin of man by the Law, And therefore the Scripture
asserts, that Christ bore no other Curse but the Curse of the Law; for the Law
threatening, was the Rule by which Justice did proceed in inflicting punishment
on the Mediator, And therefore it is said, Gal. 4 4 He was made under the Law.

Now for the necessity of this Method that God has fallen upon to justify the
Sinner, in a way consistent with Law, The Words express it thus, Because the
Law as a Covenant, could not justify the sinner, it being weak and
insufficient to do it, by reason of the corrupt state of Man; and this is
clear, First, because neither the Natural Law delivered to Adam, nor the Moral
Law delivered on Mount Sinai, could justify the sinner, because both these
Laws, though the same as to the matter, did require that the Acts of Obedience
should First Be Perfect. 2ly. Constant, If the Creature were to obtain
Justification thereby; Now the Acts of Obedience of the sinner, cannot by
reason of Corruption be perfect without Defects, because they cannot flow from
the love of God in the heart; Love being imperfect where any Corruption remains.

2ly. Neither can Obedience be constant, where Corruption remains. And if it be
said, that the disobedient sinner may be justified by Law, by bearing the
punishment threatened by it: It is Answered, frail Nature is not able to bear
the extremity of Punishment threatened by the Law, neither is it able of it
self, to overcome Death, which is the particular Punishment threatened by it
against sin. Likeas corrupt m^n cannot bear the extreme Punishment due to sin
sinlesly; for the extremity of Misery irrirates their Corruption, to murmr
and repine against God, under their sufferings.

Use 1st. To diswade Folks from seeking Justification by the Law, for if we do
this, we say Christ dyed in vain, Gal. 2. and last. And 2ly. Our doing of this
makes Christ to become of no effect to us, Gal. 5, 3, 4. It keeps us from
submitting to the Righteousness of God, and approving of his device, Romans 10.3.
It makes the motions of sin, which are by the Law, bring forth Fruits unto
Death, and it marrs our bringing forth Fruit unto God, by virtue of our
Marriage with Christ, Romans 7.4. It makes all our external Obedience, in order
to this end, useless for our good; Paul reckoned all his Obedience while he was
in a Legal state, loss and dung, Phil. 3.8. And it brings us under a spirit of
Bondage, Gal. 4. and last. But if it be said, shall the Believer cast at the
Law? It is Answered, he should live under it as a Rule of Life, but not as a
Covenant: If it be said, For what then should he obey the Law, if not to be
justified by his Obedience? Answer, he should do it, 1st. To please God, Col.
1.10. 2ly. To Glorify their Heavenly Father, John 15.8. 3ly. Because it is the
Way to promote Holiness, Romans 6.19. and the Way to the enjoyment of Salvation;
It is the notifieing Evidence, that they have right to Life, Rev. 22.14. For
though Obedience to the Law cannot justify us from the charge, of being in
part Transgressors of the Law; yet it may justify us from the Charge of
Hypocrisy: Obedience may justify us, as to the reality of our Faith, and we
may obey in order to that end, that by it we may know we have true Faith. 1
John 2.3. But it is only the Righteousness of Christ that justifies our Person
in a Legal Way: Likeas we may obey, that by our Obedience we may attain to
further manifestations of the love of God. John 14.21. Likeways we may obey, to
edify our Neighbors.

2. Use of Reproof to the Unconverted, that seek to be justified by the Law;
and such are they who do expect that they shall be free of wrath, and merit
Heaven, either for their Morality or external Righteousness, as the Scribes and
Pha^isees did. Or 2ly. Such as are formal Hypocrites, that lean to their
external Acts of Worship, see Isay 58.23. Or 3ly. Such as are superstitious,
leaning to their Arbitrary Devotions. Or 4ly. Such as these who continue in
their Prophanity, and yet lean to Acts of Charity. Or 5ly. Such as lean to
their Legal Sorrow. Or 6ly. Such as lean to the Exercise of their Gifts, for
promoting of the Gospel. Matthew. 7.22. Or 7ly. Such as lean to their Zeal to
promote a Good Work, contrary to Nehemiah's Practice, Nehem. 13.22. 2ly. This
reproves the Godly, who degenerate into a Legal Frame; and this they do, when
they Found their Expectation of Heaven, their Immunity from wrath, the
acceptance of their Persons, Prayers and Services, upon any Performance of
their own, when they think, because of their Charity, their Repentance, their
Devotion, and exact walking, God is obliged to them, to free them from Hell,
and give them Heaven: It is true, Gods free Promise to Believers in Christ,
makes these things the Rewards of Grace, to the Obedience of his own; but that
is not done for the Intrinsic Worth of the Acts of our Obedience, Romans 8.18.
because the Reward is counted of Grace and not of Debt, Rom: 4. and their
greater alse well as their lesser Rewards are given, on the account of their
Adoption, and not as an Hyre for their Work, Col. 3.24.

Now we come to speak to the Method it self. And 1. To the Preparation for this
Method, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful Flesh, and for sin:
Where Observe, that the Person made use of for the Justification of the sinner,
is Gods own Son, or his only begotten Son, John 1.18. It was convenient it
should be so, First, That we might be more certain of the Revelation of the
Gospel made by him, John 1.18. 2ly. The World was made by him, John 1.2. Heb.
1.2. And therefore it is fit the world should be restored by him to its
primitive Beauty, which it lost by the Son of man. 3ly. The Elect behooved to
be sanctified, and the sanctifieing Spirit is the Spirit of his Son 4ly. God
intended to Adopt his Elect, and Adoption must be founded on our Union with the
only Begotten Son of God, Gal. 4.5. 5ly. This contributes to the Expiatory
Virtue of his Sacrifice, and the prevalency of his Intercession. 6ly. It makes
him capable to exerce his mediatory Kingly Power over all the Creation, for
their good and safety, Ephesians. 1. and last. Psalm 2. He has by Inheritance
obtained a more excellent Name than the Angels, and it is of the Son it is
said, His Throne is for ever and ever. Likeas it is by his Soneship he is
capable, for the comfort of Believers, to be the Judge of the quick and the
dead, John 5.22.

Observe 2ly. Christ's Mission, He was sent of the Father, 2nd this Mission
imports. 1st. The Fathers great Love to the believing World, John 3.16. 1 John
4.9. 2ly. It imports, that Christ his acting the Work of our Redemption, was
the Effect of a former Decree, and was no casual or fortuitous Thing, but was
the accomplishment of a Divine Purpose Acts 4 28. and therefore that Providence
is not to be stumbled at. 3ly. It imports that Christ had Gods Warrant for what
he did, Jo. 6.27. and he confirmed his Commission by Miracles, Jo. 5.36 And
therefore they that reject Christ contemn the Fathers Authority. 4ly. It
secures us of Christ's Fidelity, that he will pursue the Accomplishment of the
Fathers Designs; for the infinitely Wise God, would choose none but those that
would be trusty to him* John 6.38. and 8.29. And from this we may gather his
success, Isa, 44.1, and 4:

Observe 3ly. The Incarnation of the Son of God, He was sent in Flesh, he was
not sent in the likeness of Flesh, but in the likeness of sinful Flesh, he was
made real Flesh, John 1.14. He was made of a Woman, Gal. 4. He was manifest in
the Flesh, 1 Timothy 3.16. He was the man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5. and this was
done, 1st. That he might communicate the Gospel Revelation to us, in a way
condescending to our Infirmitly, Heb. 1.1. 2ly. That we might have one in our
Nature to cast a Pattern to us for Obedience to God, Phil. 2.7.8, 3ly, That he
might be capable to bear the particular Punishment threatened by the Law, viz.
Death, Heb. 2.14. And That his suffering being the suffering of Humane Nature,
might be imputable to us, See the Text, God punished sin in his Flesh, or in his
Humane Nature, that the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in
Believers. 4ly. That he might be a Sympathiseing Intercessor, Heb. 2. and last,
and 4.15. and that by virtue of the Experience of these Temptations we are
subject to. And 5ly. That the Father might make him a Pledge to us of our
Victories, and Blessings, he would make him in our own Nature, to overcome
Death and all our Spiritual Enemies, that his Victory might be a Pledge to us,
that God can make frail man overcome death, and all their Spiritual Enemies,
though they have a frail Nature. And 6ly. That we might have an easy Passage
to God the Father, because we go to him through his own Son, dwelling in our
Nature, Joh. 14 6. Heb. 10.20. We go through the vail of his Flesh, to the
Father, That is the Passage.

Observe 4ly. Christ was not made sinful Flesh, but was made like unto sinful
Flesh; This holds out Christ's sinlesness: this behoved to be, that he might be
a perfect Pattern for our Obedience, that he might be a spotless and acceptable
Sacrifice, that he might be the Truth of these his Types, viz. the Legal
Sacrifices that were to be offered without blemish, that his Sufferings might
be for the behoof of others, seeing he knew no sin himself, 2 Cor. 5. and last,
That he might be a prevalent Intercessor, Heb. 7.26. He was free of Original
Sin, being conceived by the Holy Ghost, in the Womb of the Virgin, and so not
springing from the first Adam, by way of ordinary Generation: And it was not
consistent with Justice that he should want Original Righteousness, by virtue
of Adam's breach of the Covenant of Works, seeing he was not a Person engaged
in that Covenant, either Virtually or Formally, for, as I said, he came not of
Adam by ordinary Generation.

Observe 5ly, He was made in the likeness of sinful Flesh, which imports these
two, 1st. A subjection to the common Infirmities of Mankind, such as Hunger,
Weariedness, and Mortality; And this should sweeten these Miseries to
Believers, because we may expect his sympathy with us under them, for he had
personal Experience of them. Likeas this may sweeten our Lot under them, that
God gives us an Instance in his Person, that these Infirmities are consistent
with special Love, and after-happiness, as we see in Christ's case.

2ly. The Phrase being made in the likeness of sinful Flesh, imports not only
Christ's Subjection to the common Infirmities of our Nature, that all men are
subject to; but it imports his lyableness to extreme Sufferings for our sins,
As our Soverty.

Observe 6ly. From the Word (...) which imports the final cause of Christ's
Mission, Incarnation and Humiliation; That the Abolition of Sin is the End why
God sent his Son into the World to dye, which holds out the odiousness and
hurtfulness of Sin, seeing all this ado was made for the removal of it. And
therefore we should be watchful against the committing of it, grieved when
either we or others do commit it, and restless and painful for the
mortification of it.

Now follows God's Action, by which he brought about the Justification of the
Sinner, consistent with Law, expressed in these Words, He, viz. God the Father,
condemned, that is, punished, upon a Judicial Sentence past against Christ as
Soverty, He condemned Sin in the Flesh.

The Text holds out Three things, anent Christ's Sufferings, 1st. Their
Quality, they were Punishments; for they were not Miseries sent on him by God,
to express his Sovereignty, but the Effects of Divine Justice. 2ly. The Words
hold out who is the Principal Author and Inflicter of them, and that was God
the Father. 3ly. They hold out the Subject of his Sufferings, and that was his
Flesh or Humane Nature; The Text says, He condemned Sin in the Flesh, That is,
in the Flesh of his own Son; Flesh, being here put for frail Nature.

For the First of these, That Christ's Suffering is a Punishment for sin,
Appears, 1st. Because he was the Truth of the Levitical Sacrifices, The
sacrificed Beast, was substitute in the room of the guilty Sinner, for the
Sinner confessed his Sin over the head of the Sacrifice. 2ly. Christ is said to
bear the Curse of the Law, Gal. 3.13. 3ly. He is said to dye in our stead, Romans
5.8. 4ly. He is said to be a Propitiation through his Blood, Romans 3 25. 5ly. He
is said to give his Life a Ransom for many, 1 Timothy 2.6. 6ly. He is said to bear
our sins in his own Body on the Tree, 1 Peter 2.24. God is said to make him sin
for us, 2 Cor. 5. and last. To lay our iniquity on him, Isa^ 53.6.

This tells us, 1st. That it was not only to give us a Pattern for Patience that
he suffered, or to give an Confirmation to the Truth of his Doctrine, but the
main End was to satisfy for our sins; And though Christ be God-man, yet it is
not incongruous to say that he satisfied his Fathers Justice for the contempt
of his Father's Authority, by the violation of that Law, so expressly enacted by
the Father, because he did reveal himself to the Rational World by that
Constitution. Neither is the freedom of pardoning-Grace inconsistent with this
satisfaction of Christ* because though Christ bought our Pardon, we did not buy
it our selves, and our Pardon may well be called free, though it be given us
for Christ's sake because the Father of Grace provided Christ for us.

2ly. Of Grace he accepted of Christ's suffering in our stead, he might have
required personal satisfaction from our selves, And 3ly. Of Grace he gives ^
Faith, through which we have interest in the satisfaction; Neither can it be
said that Christ's sufferings are not satisfactory to Justice, because they
were not Eternal. For 1st. The Dignity of his Person contributed to the value
of his sufferings, and therefore it is said, God by his own Blood purchased his
Flock Acts 20.28. 2ly. He bore the extremity of suffering sinlesly, and
overcame them by his own Spirit in raising himself from the dead; He ascribes
the raising up of the Temple of his Body to himself, Jo^ 2.19. Now the damned
in Hell can neither suffe^ sinlesly, nor yet relieve themselves from their
Sufferings, which makes their Sufferings to be Eternal. 2ly. It tells us, the
Godly may well bear wi^ Chastisements for sin, seeing Christ has born the Legal
Punishment. 3ly, This may encourage us to make use of Christ as a Savior, seeing
he can give (...) such a Salvation as is consistent with the Justice (...) God,
he having born the punishment due to si^ 4ly. This may give us an account of
the Righteousness of that Providence* whereby an most innocent Person was
exposed to the greatest Extremity of Misery: The Answer is, tho he was
personally Innocent, yet he was Legally Guilty, for he willingly undertook to
be our Soverty. And this m^ tell us, that the most dark and strange
Providence, would appear highly Rational, if God's Designs were known in them.

The particulars, wherein Christ's suffering did consist, Are 1st, In that he
was subject to the sinless Infirmities of our Nature. 2ly. In his Subjection to
the Moral and Ceremonial Law. Gal. 4.4. 3ly. In his Temptations frae Satan.
4ly. In his Persecutions from the World. 5ly. In his Poverty. 6ly. In his
Reproach Shame and Contempt he suffered from the World. 7ly. In his severe
pains he had on the Cross, in all the parts of his Body, and without the least
Alleviation of inward Joy: which many of the Martyrs had. 8ly. It consisted in
Natural Death. Like as he had Trouble in his Soul, as appears in his Prayers,
by strong Crying and Tears, and by his Bloody sweat in the Garden, and by his
Outcry on the Cross, when he said, Why have thou forsaken me? And this
suffering in his Soul consisted in his fear of being swallowed up of Wrath, see
Heb 5.7, 8. which Fear was sinless, because he having frail Nature and having a
quick apprehension of Divine Wrath, and its unsupportableness to that Nature,
without supernatural support, and he at this time not reflecting on the promise
of supernatural support, he could not but fear the being overcome thereby. If
it be said, it was a sin to him, not to reflect on that promised Support. I
Answer, It was no sin, because his Mind being Finite, and being fixed in the
apprehension of that terrible Object of Divine Wrath, it could be in no Natural
Capacity at that same moment of time to reflect on the promises of Support, the
which he did quickly after, when the Mind was in its Natural Capacity to do it.
2ly. His Soul-trouble consisted in the want of the sensible Enjoyment of his
Fathers Love, whereof he complain^ on the Cross. 3ly. His Soul-Trouble
consisted in that great Grief which put him in an Agony, and made him Sorrowful
even to Death: And this was, for feeling the Wrath, of an Angry God, against
sin.

From this, First, We may see the greatness of the moral ill of Sin, that
brought on such sharp and sore Sufferings upon Christ. 2ly. We may see the
firmness of the Commination of the Law, for i^ the Threatening was exactly
accomplished on the the Elects Soverty, It will be exactly accomplished on the
Sinners themselves that have no interest in the sovertys satisfaction. 3ly. In
Christ's severe Sufferings, ye may read the greatness of his Love. 4ly. Since
his Sufferings were so extreme; It commends his Carriage, as an imitable
pattern under an suffering lot; see him Exercising Faith, Love to God, and his
People, Sympathy with God's People, as he had with the Disciples, when he found
them sleeping, Zeal, Patience, Self-denial and the like. etc.

We may here observe, that the Text refers the inflicting of this Punishment to
the Father, he tha^ sent his own Son, Condemned, that is, punished si^ in the
flesh of his own Son: This is clear, because that this punishment was inflicted
for manifestatio^ of the Father's Justice. Romans 3.2^. Because he was offered to
God the Father as an sacrifice, Ephesians. 5.2. His suffering was the accomplishment
of the Father'^ purpose, and brought about by the Fathers provividence, Acts
4.28. This Cup was holden to his Head by his Father, Jo. 18.11. He dyed in
Obedience to his Fathers command, Jo. 10.18. This speaks the Fathers regarding
the Credit of his own Law, who tho he intended to save his Elect, yet would
not do it without keeping up the Honor of his Law, and the Glory of his
Justice. 2ly. It holds out the greatness of his Love to the believing World,
and gives them an ground of Assurance that there is no promise in the Covenant
of Grace, but he will perform it for their good; He that punished his own Son,
to make way for their good, will certainly, for his cause give them all that
good which he has purchased, Romans 8.32.

Verse 4. That the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled, in us, who walk
not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.


THis is the Effect of the wise Method, that God did take for the Justification
of the sinner, in a way consistent with the Law: And in speaking to these
Words, as they are connected with the former verse, we will speak to these 3.
Things. 1st. Clear what this Righteousness of the Law is, and that it is a
Righteousness. 2ly. That Christ has acted and done it. And 3ly. That it is
surely ours, and that it is fulfilled in us.

As for the first, The Righteousness of the Law, to clear what it is, and that
it is; you must know that it has two parts; its preceptive part, and it is
Comminatory part, now both these are Righteous. 1st. The preceptive part, it is
Righteous, if ye consider either the Authority enjoining, or the Matter
enjoined: The Authority is just, If ye consider ou^ obligation to God, and our
dependencies on him, and if ye consider that Infinite Wisdom, Goodness and
Power, which qualify him to be the supreme moral Governor of the World. 2ly.
If ye look to the matter of the Law, it is Righteous, to acknowledge the
Creator as our God, to give him the prescription of his own manner of Worship,
to be reverend in that Worship, to give him a part of our time, to do the
Relative Duties to our Superiors, because o^ our dependence on him, and
benefit by them, sincerely to design the preservation of our Neighbors Life,
Chastity, Goods and Name, as we do design the preservation of our own, and that
because ou^ Neighbors participate of the same nature and spring from the same
common Root of Mankind. Because the good of Humane society tends much to Gods
Glory, To be content with our Lot, as being prescribed be the good and wise
God, The practice of these Duties are Righteous, because the very light of
nature approves them: The practice of the Duties of the first Table of the Law
having a Native tendency to fit a Man to Converse with his God, in which stands
his Felicity: And the practice of the duties of the second Table of the Law,
being necessary for the preservation of humane society, clearly evinces, That
that practice is Righteous.

From the Righteousness of the preceptive part of the Law we infer, First, That
every sin has in the bosom of it, a Rebellion against the Authority of God.
2ly. Of its own nature, it is Unrighteousness. 3ly. We see that every true
Christian with Paul, must consent to the Law, and approve it as good and
Righteous.

Now as to the Righteousness of the Threatening annexed to the Law, the
punishment threatened is most Righteous; For the Law threatens the sinner, with
Death, Natural, Spiritual, and Eternal: Now it is a Righteous thing, that no
less punishment should be due for sin nor that threefold Death, becaue^ God,
who is Essentially just, and necessarly the Moral Governor of the World, has
appointed it, and he cannot err. 2ly. His Deputy within us, Our Conscience
approves this punishment is due for sin. 3ly. The Intrinsic evil that is in
sin deserves it. It being an ungratitude against our Benefactor,
Unrighteousness upon the matter, and Rebellion against the just Authority of
our Ruler.

From the Righteousness and dueness of punishment by the Threatening, we infer,
That we should not repine, when God punishes us for sin.

Now we come to clear, That the Righteousness of the Law is perfectly to be
found in Christ, and this stands upon the connection of the former verse with
this: It is expressly said, that Christ was put to suffering, That the
Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us. 1st. Then look to Christ's
Active obedience to the Laws Precepts; it is such an obedience as makes the
sinner Righteous, Romans 5.19. 2ly. The perfection, required by the Precepts of
the Law, is to be found in Christ, Romans 10.4. He is the End of the Law for
Righteousness, that is, a perfect conformity, to the preceptive part of the
Law, is to be found in Christ, as a Basis for our Justification. 3ly. Christ's
Righteousness is perfect, standing in a perfect obedience to all the Commands
he was under, Because he is allowed to stay with the Father in Heaven; he could
not enjoy that perfect Felicity constantly, if he had been disobedient to the
Father in the least. Jo. 16.10. This obedience of Christ's flows from a
principle of Love to the Father. Jo. 14. last, it tends to a good end, viz. to
please God, Jo. 8.29. it is constant and uninterrupted. Ibid.

From this we may see. 1st. That Christ's obedience makes him an excellent
Pattern for our Imitation. 2ly. It holds out, that our Justification through
Christ, has a solid Basis, it does establish the preceptive part of the Law,
Romans 3. last. and 10.4. 3ly. We must not now study Obedience to be justified
thereby, seeing Christ's complete Obedience may be sufficient matter for our
Righteousness.

Next, a perfect conformity to the Commination of the Law, is to be found in
Christ. 1st. If ye look to the Extremity of his Suffering, He was obedient to
Death, even the Death of the Cross, Phil. 2.8. 2ly. The quality of his
Sufferings, he bore the whole Curse of the Law, Gal: 3.13. They were the
Effects of vindictive Wrath. 3ly. If ye look to the Effects of his sufferings:
As first, Perfect expiation of sin, Heb. 10.14. The procuring of Eternal
Salvation, Heb. 5.9. 4ly If ye look to the Evidences of the compleatness of his
Sufferings: As first his Resurrection, as being the absolution of our Soverty,
Romans 4.25. 2ly. His Session at God's right Hand, as being his Reward. see Heb.
1.3.

From the perfect conformity of Christ, to the Threatening of the Law, We see
how the Justification of a Believer by the Gospel, fully secures the Beleiver
from Law-Vengeance. 2ly. We see we are bound to do and suffer for Christ, who
has fully satisfied the Threatening of the Law for us. 3ly. We see it is very
unsafe for our selves, and injurious to Christ, to judge, that either our
Actions or Sufferings can come in as Partial Causes with Christ's Satisfaction
to the Threatening of the Law to procure the Expiation of Sin.

We have spoken to the Righteousness of the Law in it self, As it is
prescribed, and required by the Law. 2ly. We have spoken to it as performed
acted and done by Christ: We must speak to that Righteousness performed by
Christ, as imputed to us, and possessed by us. And First, It is imputable to us,
because the punishment, Born to satisfy the Threatening of the Law, was Born by
one in our Nature; the Father punished sin in Christ's Flesh, and his Flesh was
our Flesh. 2ly. Christ was the second Adam, and our Legal Soverty. 3ly. We have
an Mystical and spiritual Union with him, we are called his Spiritual Seed.
Isai. 53.10. as being born according to his Image, by the power of his Word and
Spirit. Likeas, The sovereign Lord, and supreme Governor of the World declares
in the Gospel, That he accepts Christ's satisfaction to the threatening of the
Law, in the place of a complete satisfaction from Sinners,: Here is a strong
persuasive to invite sinners to make use of Christ, because he is in himself a
complete legal Righteousness, and can invest them sickerly and securly with it.
2ly. It calls on Actual Believers, seeing they have a sure pretension to an
complete Legal Righteousness, it calls on them, I say, to expel the fears of
Law Vengeance out of their Mind, it calls on them to have an quiet and
peaceable Consciencece Boldness in Prayer, and the lively hope of Glory.

Verse 5. For they that are after the flesh, do mind the things of the flesh:
but they that are after the Spirit, the things of the Spirit.


BY these that are after the flesh, are meaned such in whom there is no new
Nature, and who give a ready and full obedience to their Corruption, By the
things of the flesh, are meant either such outward Enjoyments as are gratifying
to our Corrupt Lusts, or such sinful methods as Corrupt Men ordinarily choose to
attain these Enjoyments by, or both: By ^ding the things of the flesh is meant,
Corrupt Men their high esteem of, strong desires after, and solicitous care
about these Enjoyments of the World, that gratify unrenewed Lust.

That Unrenewed Men thus mind the things of the flesh appears, Because, to
enjoy the Objects of their Lusts, they will not stand to commit the greatest of
crimes; Jeroboam would not stand to commit Idolatry to gratify his Ambition;
Judas would not stick to betray his Master to gratify his Covetousness. 2ly.
Unrenewed Men will expose themselves to much to ill of Spirit, and Labor of
Body to obtain these Enjoyments. 3ly. They expose themselves to many Bodily
dangers to enjoy them. 4ly. They have great fears of loseng them, they have a
great confidence and rejoiceing in the enjoyment of them, Luke 12. The Rich Man
bad his Soul take rest and be Merry. 5ly. Unrenewed Folks have an exceeding
grief, when they want these Enjoyments.

The Causes, why Unrenewed Fold mind the things of the Flesh, are first,
Ignorance of and Infidelity about an other Life A second cause is, a wrong Set
of heart, whereby they love to have their satisfaction placed in outward
things, more than in God. A Third is. the Devil hurries Corrupt Men to follow
sinful courses, who by that can get no leisure to reflect on the Vanity of
these Enjoyments.

The Evils of their thus minding the things of the flesh. Are 1st. This
practice ordinarily hardens People, and gathers strength to Corruption, and
makes customary sin hard to be overcome. Jer. 13.23 2ly. This course is very
scandalous, and offensive to others. 3ly. It exposes Men to great smarting of
Conscience for it. 4ly. It exposes them to many snares and destuction, 1 Timothy
6.9, 10. 5ly. It exposes them to great Torment, through disapointment of their
expectations.

The Use of this serves, First for Trial: Those that mind the things of the
flesh, are in a state of Nature. 2ly. It bids us pity those those that are in
an unrenewed state; For they have a pityful Employment, minding always the
things of the Flesh. 3ly. It exhorts such as are unrenewed, to seek the
Renovation of their Nature, by Prayer to God for it, and the use of the means
of Grace, see Peter's Exhortation to to Simon Magus, Acts 8.22. and Ezekiel. 36.37.

The last part of the verse is contained in these words, Those that are after
the Spirit, mind the things of the Spirit.

Now First, By those that are after the Spirit, are meaned: Such who have an
renewed Nature, whose Conversation flows from Faith and Love who are led by the
Spirits motions, whose Conversations are regulated by the Law in its spiritual
meaning whose Conversation has an tendency to promote spiritual Ends, viz. The
Glory of God, and the pleasing of him, their own Salvation, the preserving
Peace of Conscience, the attaining of Communion with God in the World, and the
Edification of the^ Neighbor.

By the things of the Spirit, are meant these Duties the New Man exercises
himself in with Delight and these Comforts that please the new Nature, and its
Felicity.

By the minding of the things of the Spirit. is meant the Christians esteem of,
and concernment about, the enjoyment of spiritual Good.

We may observe here, the Renewed Man mind the things of the Spirit, that is,
he minds the Duti^ that are pleasant and profitable to the New Nature As 1st.
The duties of the Moral Law, Paul tells (...) in the 7 Romans That he delights in
the Law of Go^ after the inward Man. 2ly. He minds the Exerci^ of Faith, he
sits down under Christ's shadow, wit^ great delight, C^r^. 2.3. 3ly. He is much
taken (...) about the guiding of his Conscience. 1st. That (...) Conscience may
witness for his Integrity, 2 Cor. ^ 12. 2ly That his Conscience may testify his
Tende^ness, 1 Cor. 4.2. 3ly. That it may testify his (...) offensive walking.
Acts 24.16. 4ly. That his Conscience may testify for him, that he has an
Inten^ in Christ's Blood, Heb. 10.22, 4ly. The rene^ed man minds Duty, if you
consider that he is careful to mix the Exercise of Grace with the Exercise of
Gifts, 1 Timothy 1 14. 5ly. He is careful to Exercise the various Graces of the
Spirit, as providence calls him to it. 2 Pet. 1.5.

Next, as to the Comforts of the New Nature, he is an Man that has a panting
desire after fellowship with God, Psalm. 63.8. and that either in Ordinances
Psalm. 27.4. or in Providence, Psalm. 34.7.8.

In the last place, the renewed man is taken up about his Felicity. As 1st. To
make his Title sure to it, Phi. 3.9.10. 2ly. That he may hastily enjoy it,
Phil. 3.14. 3ly. That he may keep entire friendship with God, who is the giver
of it, 2 Cor. 5.8. 4ly. That he may taste something of it, before he enjoy it
fully, Philip. 3. penul^. And 5ly. He commits the keeping of it to God, till he
come to the Actual Enjoyment of it 2 Timothy 1.12.

From this, we make an Use of Trial of our renewed state: And 2ly. We would be
exhorted, if we would be in capacity to mind the things of the Spirit, to study
more Heart-renovation, by laboring to entertain the impressions of the word,
without prejudice. Romans 6.17.

Verse 6 For to be carnally minded, is Death: But to be spiritually minded, is
Life and Peace.


HEre the Apostle proves, That those that walk after the flesh are liable to
Condemnation; Because to be Carnally minded tends to Death, and the truth is,
that these Objects which gratify Lust, or rather those sinful courses, that
corrupt Nature takes for to attain the Enjoyment of these gratifying objects,
certainly tends to Death; many times the wickedness of men brings them to an
untimeous Natural Death, and always Men's acting of Wickedness increases
Spiritual Death, which stands in the Al^e, nation of the Heart of Man, from
conversing with God, whether to converse with him by Prayer, in the use of
public Ordinances, or in conscientious Reflections upon, and improvement of
the course of Divine Prvoidence: Now since Sin increases our Alienation from
God, it cannot but increase our Spiritual Death, for the Life of the Soul lies
in Communion and fellowship with God. 2ly. The Carnal Acts of the carnal mind
increase Spiritual Death, because they increase in us an impotency to do that
which is spiritually good, and they increase in us a Readiness and Ability to
do that which is Evil, so then Sin cannot but increase Siritual Death: Because
Spiritual Death consists in an Aversion from doing good, and a readyness to do
Evil. Likeas there is a strict Connection between the sinful course of the
Carnal unrenewed Mind, and Eternal Death, which stands in the Eternal
separation of an Man from the favorable presence of God, And the Intimation
and Expressions of his special Love, and it lies in the undergoing, to all
Eternity, the Effects of his displeasure, as a just Revenging God, punishing
all disobedience to his Law: And that this Eternal death is surely connected,
with the profane course of a Carnal Mind. Appears 1st, Because that the Law
binds over all the Transgressors of it, to endure this Death, The Wages of sin
is death, Romans 6.23. Now there is non can evite the Accomplishment of this
Law-Threatning, but such as are in Christ; and the Carnal-minded Man is not so,
while he remains Carnally Minded. 2ly. It appears that the course of the Carnal
minded Man tends to Death, because while he is in that course of Life, the
Gospel and all it is promises are unsavory to him, and so he cannot be in case
to follow the Counsels therein proposed, for escaping Eternal Death.

Use 1st. Seeing that such persons are running to Death, it serves to reprove
them that are in this case, that are very secure and fearless, expecting that
they will go to Heaven, notwithstanding of their wicked course of Life: This
security of theirs may arise 1st. From their Morality, leaning to that. 2ly.
From their Formality. 3ly. From their immunity from present Trouble. 4ly. From
the exercise of their common Gifts. 5ly. From their Carnal Policy, they make a
Covenant with Death and Hell. Isai. 28. They think they have wit to escape the
Wrath of God, let it burn never so hot. 6ly. This security comes from the
Flattery of bad Ministers and false Friends.

A second Use of Exhortation, And that First. To the Carnally minded, That they
would consider what is the danger of their Condition, and what is the remedy
thereof. And 2ly. To Ministers, and other Godly People, to pity such, and do
what they can in their station, to prevent the danger of their Folks. A Third
Use, is to instruct us in the miserable condition of such, who not only are
liable to Death, but the whole tendency and labor of their Body, and toil of
their Mind, during the course of their Life, while they are in that state, is
to involve them more and more under Eternal Death.

Next Observe, To be Spiritually Minded is Life and Peace, and therefore the
Man, that walks after the Spirit, is free of Condemnation.

The Life of Grace follows on Spiritual Mindedness and the Life of Glory is
connected with it, see Romans 8.13. This is a singular advantage to have
spiritual Life. For 1st. It is the best kind of Life, the Animal is better then
the Vegetative Life, the Rational is better than the Animal, and the spiritual
Life is better then the Rational. 2ly. It is the end of Christ's Death, John
4.10. 3ly. It is the same Life that he possesses, 1 John 5.11. 4ly. Tho it be
obscure to Sense, yet it is sure to Faith, Col: 3.2. 5ly. It is a Life from
God, springing from his Gracious presence* It makes a Man live with God, to
entertain Converse with God, and disposes him to live to God, and to give him
much Self-denying Obedience. Now spiritual-mindedness increases this Life,
because to be spiritually-minded is vigorously to act this Life, and the
vigorous acting of it, increases it.

From this we may see, That Christians may blame their own Carnality for the
want of the increase of spiritual Life. 2ly. Since the Apostle, to prove that
Spiritual Mindedness is inconsistent with the state of Condemnation, adduces
this Argument, that spiritual Life attends spiritual Mindedness: from this he
warrands the Christian to conclude from his spiritual Life, that he cannot be
condemned: and indeed it is a good Ground for such an Conclusion, for spiritual
Life is begun G^ory: Likeas the Christian is hereby taught to be induced to
spiritual Mindedness, because it is attended with this advantage, the increase
of spiritual Life: Tho the World look on spiritual-mindedness as folly, yet
this again should make them look on it, as true Wisdom.

The next Advantage following on spiritual Mindedness is Peace, which includes
in it, Peace with God, peace with our own Conscience, and freedom from the
disturbance of Lusts: The spiritual-minded Man has Peace with God, because he
has an Union with Christ; he has peace with his own Conscience, because he lies
near the Communication of saving Light, whereby he may discern his Interest in
Gospel-Priviledges. 3ly. He acquires freedom from disturbance frae his Lusts,
because Spiritual-mindedness lessens a Man's inclination to Sin.

Verse. 7. Because the carnal mind is Enmity against God: For it is not subject
to the Law of God, neither indeed can be.


HEre the Apostle proves, That the unrenewed Man is liable to Death and
Condemnation: Because the Carnal Mind is Enmity against God; That is, it is an
irreconcilable Enemy to God, and this he proves, because the Carnal Mind
cannot comply with the Law, nor be subject to it.

There are three Things observable in the Text* 1st. That the carnal and
unrenewed Man is God's irreconcilable Enemy. 2ly. That the unrenewed Man
cannot be subject to the Law, nor comply with it. And 3ly. The Man that is
God's Enemy is liable to Death: For here the Apostle proves from the Enmity,
that the carnal Man has against God, (that former Assertion,) That to be
carnally minded is Death.

For the First Observation, That the Unrenewed Man is God's Enemy, it appears,
from his carriage toward Gods Law 1st. He contemns its Authority. 2ly. He
vilifies the Rewards, that are promised to the Obedience of it. 3ly. He defies
the Threatenings of it, Deuteronomy. 29.19. 4ly. He dislikes the Matter of it.
Secondly; It appears from his Carriage toward Gods Spirit. As 1st. He rejects
his Testimony for the Gospel. 2ly. He resists his Motions. 3ly. He traduces his
special Operations, whether his Works of Miracles, or his Works of
Sanctification in the hearts of the Godly, Thirdly, It appears from his
Carriage toward the Gospel, he slights the Acts of Grace, contained therein,
Matthew. 22.5. He rejects the revealed Mysteries thereof, 1 Cor. 2.4. He is an
Enemy to the settlement of the Ordinance of the Gospel, and a great Enemy to
the serious Preachers of it Fourthly, This Enmity kythes, by his Carriage
toward the Providence of God, for as the Corrupt man is ready to deny the
Being of God, Psalm. 14.1. So he is ready to deny the Being of Providence, Zeph.
1.12. And 2ly. He is a great Reflecter upon Providence, Mal. 3.13. And Fifthly,
this Enmity appears in his Carriage toward the Godly, his Calumniating and
Persecuting the innocent Godly tells, that he hates the Image of God. And
Sixthly, He is an Enemy to God, because he desires never to think on him, he
would fain have God far from him, he says to God, Depart from me, Job. 21.

Use, This speaks the Folly of the unrenewed Man, who loves to be at enmity
with so powerful and good a God. 2ly. It speaks the Wickedness of his Heart,
since he keeps emnity at so holy a God. 3ly. It speaks his Ingratitude, since
he is an Enemy to his Benefactor. 4ly. It lets us see the Justice of Gods
Judgments on the unrenewed World, since they are his stated Enemies. 5ly. It
commends the Patience and Bounty of God toward his Enemies. 6ly. It teaches
the Godly to discern the Power of Grace in their Conversion. 7ly. It teaches
them to discern the Freedom of it, for they were once Enemies. 8ly. It gives
them a great ground of Confidence, to expect the continuance of Favor; for if
Grace made them Friends of Enemies, it will much more continue toward them,
when they are made Friends. 9ly. It takes off the Offense that might arise from
the Worlds opposition to the Gospel, for it is a confirming Argument for the
Truth of the Gospel, that it is of God, seeing the World are Gods Enemies. 10ly.
Unrenewed Men would see the misery of their Condition, and not delude
themselves with that Opinion, that God is their Friend, while they are in that
state, seeing they are his Enemies.

For the 2d. Observation, That the unrenewed man cannot comply with the Law.
1st. They cannot comply with the Ends of the Law. 2ly. They cannot practice the
Duties enjoined by the Law. First, They cannot design the Ends of the Law, for
a first End of the Law is to bring men to please God: but the unrenewed man,
preferrs the pleasing of himself, and his Lust, to the pleasing of God. The 2d.
End of the Law is to bring men by pleasing of God, to have Communion with him,
but this cannot be signed by the unrenewed man, because he place^ Happiness,
not in Communion with God, but in gratification of his Lust. A Third End of the
(...) is, to bring men to glorify God, but the con^ man's Selfishness makes him
unconcerned with (...) Glory, if he can but get his selfish Interest advanc^

Next, the Corrupt man cannot obey the Dutie^ the Law; he cannot obey the
Duties enjoined in^ First Command, for the Scope of it is, to make Trust, Love
and Delight in God, but Corrup^ enclines men to Trust, Love and Delight in
inse^ Goods: Neither can they obey the Duties of the cond Command, because the
Scope of it is, to en^ men the exercise of appointed Worship, for their
vancement in Holiness and Communion with G^ But Corruption enclines them to
Idolatry, Super^ on and Formality; and at the best to exercise th^selves in
appointed Worship, Externally, to bribe t^ Consciences to acquire a false
peace; that they (...) with the greater quietness, prosecute satisfaction their
Lusts. Neither can they obey the Duties of Third Command, because the Scope of
it is, to (...) seriousness and suitableness in the inward frame going about
the Service of God; But the Co^ man's bensill of Spirit, is to serve his
predomin^ Neither can they do the Duties of the Fourth C^mand, because the
carnal mind makes the Crea^ through worldlyness, unfit to keep a Sab^ in a
Spiritual manner, to the Glory of God. (...) there can they observe the Fifth
Command, for Scope of it is, to press conscientious Subjectio^ Superiors, from
respect to Gods Glory, and ^blick Good, but the Corrupt man obeys only ^rough
fear. and not from Conscience. Neither (...) they obey the Duties enjoined in
the 6th. 7th. (...), and 9^h. Commands, Because the Scope of those to enjoin us
to preserve the Life, the Chastity, the ^oods and Name of our Neighbor, and
that from ^pure and sincere Love to our Neighbor. Now Pride marrs men from a
Conscientious Obedience ^ the 5th. Command, so Corrupt Selfishness marrs ^em
from a Conscientious Obedience to rest; for ^orrupt Selfishness will incline
men to pursue Satisfa^ion to their Lusts, notwithstanding that satisfaction
^ould be attended with the detriment of their Neigh^ur. Neither can Corrupt Men
obey the 10th. Com^and, because the design of it is to enjoin Contenta^on with
our Lot^, but Corrupt Men, they have ^ust reigning in them, and we know Lust is
an ^satiable thing.

This Doctrine affords us an Use of Trial, For Corruption be a non-subjection
to the Law, then ^e may gather the Degree of our Mortification, by ^nsidering
what length we have come in comply^ng with the Law. 2ly. It affords us an Use
of ^struction, it lets us see that every corrupt man ^th an aversion from all
Good, and an inclination ^ all Evil: It Is true, all corrupt men do not com^it
all actual sins; but their Forbearance to com^it these sins, does not flow from
a conscientious ^ubjection to the Law, forbiding the same, but ^om the want of
Temptations, or from common ^straining Grace, o^ from the fear of Punishment by
^umane Law, or the like. 2ly. It affords us an ^se of Exhortation, viz. That as
we would be brought to comply with the Law of God, so we would not give way to
unmortified Lusts, we would not place our Happiness in getting satisfaction to
these for it is a sinful satisfaction, it is a vain and empty satisfaction,
attended with many Disappointments, many foolish and groundless Expectations
and it is a comfortless satisfaction at the hour (...) Death.

Verse 8. So then, they that are in the Flesh cannot please God.


THE Apostle inferrs from this, That the Carnal Mind is enmity against God,
because no subject to his Law, That therefore these that are ^ the Flesh, That
is, those that are carnally minded cannot please God, That is, God is not in a
state o^ Friendship with them, and deals not with them as he deals with his
Friends.

The Apostle Expresses the Conclusion; because it is of great import to
unrenewed folks, to believe that God is not a friend to them; Or the Word may
be taken as an new Reason to prove the Principal Thesis, which is, That such as
walk after the flesh, are not free from Condemnation: And if i^ be taken as a
Reason, the meaning of the Verse is That unrenewed folks Actions cannot please
God that is, be accepted of him, as rewardable by him and if their Actions be
not acceptable and rewardable, the Apostle takes it for granted, that their
Persons cannot be accepted of God, nor reconciled t^ him, and we know that the
Non-acceptableness of the unrenewed man's Actions to God, is well inferred from
the opposition of his unrenewed Nature to the Law.

The Words carry in them these Two Observations. As 1st. Observe, That
unrenewed People, while they are such, God is not reconciled to them. 2ly
Observe, That unrenewed People, while they are such, their Actions are not
accepted of God, nor rewarded by him: when I deny a reward to their Actions, I
do not deny but some of their Actions being materially Good. a temporal Reward
may attend them, as it was with Jehu, but they are not rewardable in this
Sense, they have no Spiritual Rewards in this life, nor Eternal Rewards in the
life to come; neither will the material Goodness of their Actions keep them
from the Vengeance of God due to them, for the Evil that is mixed with them, as
appears by the 1. of Hosea, the Threatening against the House of Jehu, for the
blood of Jezriel.

Now for the 1st. Observation, That God is not reconciled to those that are
unrenewed, is clear, Because none can be reconciled to God but those that have
an interest in Christ, and we can have no interest in Christ without the
Presence of his Spirit, and that Presence is always a renewing Presence. For
the Apostle, in the 4. of the These. proves, That we are called to Holiness
because he has given us of his holy Spirit, verse. 7, 8. 2ly. Christ's Errand is
to save his People from their Sins, Mat. 1.21. And therefore those that Christ
reconciles to God, he must renew, seeing his Salvation includes in it, as well
the abolition of the Power of Sin by renovation, as the removal of the guilt of
it by reconciliation; neither is it consistent with Christ's H^nour, to make him
the minister of Sin, to say the his errand into the World was to suffer, and
ther^ by to procure a liberty to Rebels, to continue in the Rebellion against
God, and yet be free of Punis^ment. 3ly. To say that People can be reconcile to
God, and yet unrenewed, is to say that Christ cannot by Water as well as by
Blood: It is to de^ a great part of the virtue of the Redeemer. 4 To assert
this, that People may be reconciled to G^ and yet unrenewed, is to say, that
God misses t^ designed End that he has before him, in reconci^ing them to
himself, As 1. To free them of t^ Bondage of Satan, Justice is satisfied for
them, the they may be renewed, and that Satan may have (...) plea against them,
to detain them under his Tyrrany. 2. He designs to bring them to himself, have
access to him, to be consecrate Temples him, Ephesians. 2.21. He designs to have
their way ple^sing to him, Psalm. 37.23. He designs to make ^irself lovely to
them, and to make them take Delig^ in him, Romans 5.10, 11. And he designs by
Reco^ciliation, to present them holy and blameless in (...) sight, Col. 1.20,
21. Now none of these Ends, the God intends to bring about by reconciling his
People to himself, can be attained without Renovatio^

Use 1st. To Instruct the unrenewed anent the great misery, God is their stated
Enemy, and ^ their Blessings are Snares, their Crosses are Curse and Pledges of
their Eternal Ruin, they have ^ access to God in their mi^ery, and as
afterward ^ will see from the Text, all their Services are reject^ of him as
Refuse.

Use. 2. To reprove the unrenewed, Who will believe that God is reconciled to
them, notwithstanding of their unrenewed state, and there are many sorts of
such Persons. As 1st. The Moralists 2ly. The Formalists. Luke 18.11. and 12.
3ly. The Partial Reformer, Mark 10.21. 4ly. The Temporary Believer, see Heb. 6.
and the Parable of the Sower. 5ly. Such as lean to their wide Profession and
their Name amongst the Godly. Math. 25.3.

Use 3. Is of Exhortation, To Exhort these that are unrenewed to do their best
for the change of their State; Seeing certainly God is their Enemy while they
remain such: And for this Effect, they would Pray to be delivered from the Bond
of Iniquity, this is Peter's advice to Simon Magus, Acts, 8.2. Direction for
change of their state is, Jam. 1.21. Receive with meekness the engrafted word,
which is able to save your Soul. 3. Direction is, Be convinced that ye are
unrenewed, and of the evil and danger of that condition.

4th. Use, Is an Use of Trial, Since there is such danger in being in an
unrenewed state, try it by this mark, if ye allow your selves in an continued
Rebellion against the divine Law, ye are certainly unrenewed.

Use 5th. Is of Consolation and Exhortation, to the truly Godly and renewed;
They are called to apply the privilege of Reconciliation to themselves,
because the Text supposes, that all those that are in the Spirit pleases God:
When it asserts that all those that are in the flesh cannot please him. For the
Text divides all Professors into these two sorts, viz. These that are in the
flesh, and those that a^ in the Spirit, denying the privilege of
Non-co^demnation to the first* and allowing it to the secon^ And indeed it is
not Gods will, that renewed for should forbear applying Reconciliation to
themselv^ for this confident Application, would make way for confident walk and
converse with God, and confide access to him in Prayer; It would support us
und^ the Worlds Emnity, and defend us against t^ Worlds Allurements, and
encourage us to the stu^ of Mortification, with the greater Cheerfulness.

As to the second Observation, That unrenewed Persons their Actions are not
accepted of God, is cle^ 1st. Because their Persons are not acceptable throu^
Christ. 2ly. Because they have not the Image God, neither are they Objects of
his Complacen^ he hates the Workers of Iniquity, Psalm. 5.5.5 The Action it self
is wholly Flesh and corrupt, because flowing from himself, without the
assistance the Spirit, and directed to his own self ends allenaly.

Use, To reprove the unrenewed, who belie^ the acceptance of their Devotion,
and are sometim^ angry with God, when they find it otherways, 1st. 58.3. 2ly.
They believe the acceptance of the Charity. 3ly. Their suffering for their
Profession 4ly. They believe their acceptance of their Zeal f^ public
Reformation: The cause of this mis^a^ is, the Ignorance of the Spirituality of
Gods Nature and the Spirituality of his Law. 2ly. Their Ignorance of the great
obligations they ly under to Go^ which makes them think, that God is obliged to
accept of the meanest piece of service done by there A 3d. Cause is, Their
overlooking the deceitfulness and wickedness of their Heart. 4th. Cause is,
Self-Love, whereby they are inclined to overvalue all they do. 5th. Cause is,
their few Reflections upon their great and many Sins.

Use 2. To the Godly, To believe the acceptance of their service; seeing these
that are in the Spirit, The Text supposes their services to please God; this
belief is necessary to them, to keep up their heart under the Worlds Censures
of their good Actions and under the Godlyes Censures of the same, and under the
want of Temporal Rewards for them, and under the Afflictions that may attend
them for the trial of their Constancy therein, They would not be discouraged
from this belief for the sinful imperfections that attend them, see Rev. 2.4
and 5. See Rachabs case in hiding of the Spies, God accepted of the service,
who tho he does not approve of the Lie, yet he approves of the Faith and
Affection that was in the service. Neither should they be discouraged from
their after-faillings, The weakness of Moses Parents, in exposing the Child to
danger in the Ark of Bull-rushes, did not hinder God to notice their Faith in
the Preservation of the Child three Months. Neither should they be discouraged
from the faith of acceptance, because of the difficulties that attend the doing
of a good work; the opposition the people met with in Building the Temple, In
the days of Nehemiah, should not have marred the faith of their Acceptance, in
the doing of it. Neither should they be discouraged from the faith of this
Acceptance, because of the Afflictions that do immediately attend the doing of
Gods Service; which was Hezekiahs case, in the time of the Invasion of
Senacherib; Neither should they be discouraged, because of the groundless
Censures, that the Godly pass upon their way; This was Mary's case, who was
Censured by the Disciples in pouring Ointment upon Christ's Head.

We would give some Directions to the Godly; Whereby they may win the more
easily to the faith of this acceptance. As 1st. What they do, they would do it
from Faith, seeing what is not done from faith is Sin, Romans 14.23. They would do
their Good Works from the Faith of a Command, from the faith of acceptance, and
the Faith of Remuneration. 2d. Direction is, They would do what they do from
Love. 1 Cor. 13. and 1. A 3d. Direction is, They would do it from Self denial,
in respect to God's Glory, Abraham's offering up of Isaac was accepted of God,
because there was much of Self-denial in it, Genesis 22. A 4th. Direction is, That
what they do, they would owe it to the Strength of Christ's Spirit, because
then the Action does not flow from Corruption. A 5th. Direction is, They would
reflect upon the Spiritual Rewards that God bestows upon them, to testify the
acceptance of their Service; such as these 1st. The giving them more means of
Knowledge, and increase of Light, as he did to Cornelius, Acts 10.6. 2ly.
Greater manifestations of his Love, see John 4. and ^3. 3ly. A greater measure
of assistance, for doing Duty, 1 Timothy 4.14. 4ly. He gives them fairer
opportunities of doing God great Service, and in keeping them from the Evil of
Temptations. Rev. 3.10. 5ly. In suiteing their Trials to their strength, see
Mal. 3.17. And a 6th Reward is their prevailence with God in Prayer, see Ezekiel.
14. where it said, that Noah, Job and Daniel had much power with God, because
of their Piety.

Verse 9 But ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit: If so be that the
Spirit of God dwell in you etc.


HEre the Apostle makes an Application of his Doctrine, He applies an
privilege of Non-condemnation to the Roman's, because Charitably he constructs
them Renewed: But lest they should lean too much to his Charitable Judgment of
them, he gives them an Mark to try themselves by, because they can know
themselves better then he can know them; And the Mark he gives, to evidence the
change of their State, is, The Indwelling presence of the Spirit; and lest they
should slight this Mark, or try by other false Marks, he gives them a
peremptory certification, That if they want the Spirit of Christ, they have
nothing to do with him.

From whence we may see, That Ministers should not only in the general, speak
of Gospel-Comforts, but in particular make application of them, by giving
particular marks of these, to whom they do belong; But withal, the Marks they
give of Peoples particular Interest in Christ, should be very sure and solid,
such as this was: And likeways they should press People by peremptory
Certifications, to make enquiry, whether they have these solid Marks or no,
left either they neglect to try themselves by these Marks, or examine
themselves by False marks.

The Doctrine is, That the Indwelling Spirit is the sure mark of the Renovation
of our state. By the Indwelling of the Spirit is not meant, the transient
operations of the Spirit, as are wrought in Temporary Believers, Matthew. 13.
Heb. 6 Neither is meant the having of these Gifts that are given for the
Churches Edification: But by it is meant, the Gracious and continuing presence
of the Spirit, produceing these Effects in Believers, viz. Illumination,
Supplication, Consolation, and Sanctification.

The Indwelling Spirit produces Illumination, By opening the understanding,
that they may know the Scriptures. Luke. 25.45. By taking away the Vail that is
on the Mind in Reading of the Word. He proves an Spirit of Illumination, by
discovering the Glory of God, in the face of Christ Jesus, by letting us see,
that all the perfections of the Divine Nature, do manifest themselves clearly
in the Mediators Work of Mediation. 2 Cor. 4 6. He opens the Eyes of Men, and
lets them see that the way of Salvation, holden out by the Gospel, is the most
wise and and effectual way of Salvation; These that want this Spirit, they look
on the Gospel as Foolishness, 1 Cor. 1.23. and 2.14. He proves a Spirit of
Illumination to the Godly, by making them love the Truth, for the want of
which, those are destroyed, that are spoken of, 2 Thessalonians. 2. and 10. And this
Illumination is attended with the Faith of Truth revealed: Therefore Christ's
says that every one that is Taught of the Father comes to him. Joh. 6.

2ly. This Spirit he is a Spirit of Prayer, by making us Pray Fervently,
Submissively, and Regularly. Romans 8.26. Believingly, 8.15. In the Name of
Christ. Ephesians. 2.18. Penitently. Zech. 12.10. for all Saints, Ephesians. 6.18.
Perseveringly, Ibid. and singly out of a pure Heart.

Next, The Indwelling Spirit is the Author of Sanctification, First, By
exciteing Repentance. Zech. 12.10. And this is done by manifesting many Evils
in the Heart; and the Moral Evil of sin. 2ly. He sanctifies, by applying the
Word. Joh. 17.17. 1 Pet. 1.23. By applying the Command, to make the Conscience
stand in awe, by applying the promise to outbid Temptations, by applying the
Threatenings to restrain them from outbreaking in sin.

And lastly, he proves a Spirit of Consolation, by manifesting the great
Happiness of Believers, both in this Life, and that which is to come: It is by
the Spirit we take up the Reality and Excellency of these Privileges, that are
freely given us of God, even in this World, 1 Cor. 2.12. It is by the Spirits
light we understand, what is the Hope of our Calling. Ephesians. 1.18. 2ly. He proves
a Comforter, because he helps the People of God, to apply the Promise, for
which cause he is called the Spirit of Promise, Ephesians. 1.13. 3ly. He Comforts as
a Witness; He Witnesses to our Adoption. Romans 8.15, 16. He testifies to the
Truth, and grouth of our Graces.

Use 1st. For instruction, This lets us see, why many of the Godly are not
Assured of their renewed state, It is because through grieving of the Spirit,
the presence of the indwelling spirit, is not so clear to them.

Use 2d. Of Consolation to the Godly, that have this Indwelling Spirit, They
would from this conclude the Renovation of their state; But lest they doubt of
their Renovation, when there is no ground of doubting: They would consider,
First. That they may have the Spirit of truth in them, tho they may be ignorant
of many great Truths, as the Apostles were before Christ's Resurrection; if
they believe, Love, and Practice what they know. 2ly. They may have the Spirit
of Prayer in them, though they have not that withgate and liberty in Praying
through a defect of the Gift of Prayer, which stands in a clearness of
Conception of things needful, and a clearness of Expression; if they have
fervent single desires after spiritual good, and these desires put up in the
Name of Christ. 3ly. They would consider that tho Believers may want sometimes,
that Peace passing understanding, that Joy unspeakable and Glorious, the
Spirits Testimony for their Aodption, that full and free Application of the
Promises: Yet they may have the Comfort of the Spirit, if they have that
support in their Mind, and calmness in their Conscience, as makes them
cheerfully go about their duty, and hear their Crosses. 4ly. They would
consider, That the Spirit may be a sanctifying Spirit to such who are overtaken
with Temptations at a time, Gal. 6.1. and whose fervor of their first Love is
abated. Rev. 2.5. If their Exercise be to keep a good Conscience toward God
and Man; and if the tract of their way be to please God.

A Third Use of Exhortation to the Godly, That since the Indwelling Spirit; is
a sure evidence of a renewed state, they would Labor to entertain the presence
of this Spirit in their Hearts: And first, they would entertain the presence of
the Illuminating Spirit. First, By using all appointed means for the increase
of Knowledge. 2ly. By depending on the Spirit in the use of these means, for
the growth of Knowledge, and not on the quickness of our understanding. 3ly. By
having single desires after Knowledge, by desireing the same, not for
Vainglory or By Ends, but for Gods Glory and our own and others Education.
Next, We would entertain the presence of the Spirit of Prayer, First, By
applying our selves seriously to that Duty, as Daniel did, Daniel. 9. 2ly. By
being constantly exact in our Life, which ministers confidence to us in Prayer.
3ly. By Examining our own Condition, that we may not want matter for Prayer,
when we go to God. 3ly. We would entertain the Spirit of Sanctification, by
watching against Temptations, and by the use of all appointed means for the
Communicating of the Spirits Grace, and searching after the Evils of your
Heart; and by knowing the plagues of your own Heart, ye may know what Evils ye
are mostly to set your selves against, by Repenting for them, Praying against
them, and watching in opposition against them. 4ly. Ye would entertain the
spirit of Consolation. As 1st. By improving his Comforts, to make you
Cheerfully obey, Ast^ 9.31. And 2ly. By forebearing to drench your self too
much in Worldly Comforts. Jo. 14.17.

Verse. 9. Now, if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his.


HEre is a Certification of the distance of all from Christ, that want his
Spirit; And this is given on purpose to make the Romans make enquiry, whether
they have the Spirit or not, This Spirit is called the Spirit of Christ. 1st.
Because he meritoriously procures him. Gal. 3.14. 2^y. He is primarly possessed
by him* he possesses a greater number and measure of his Gifts, than any of his
Members, John 3.34. Isa. 61.1. 3ly. The Communication of the Spirit flows from
his Intercession, John 14.16, 4ly^ The dispensation of the Spirit is from him,
John 15.26. and 16.7. And 5ly. The Spirits Work ^ to glorify him, and to apply
his Purchase, John 16.14.

From the Words observe, 1st. That all that have not the Spirit of Christ are
none of his, The meaning is not, that these that have not Christ's Spirit, they
are none of them elected, or that the Salvation of such is not transacted for
in the Covenant of Redemption, for the Elect themselves may be Children of
Wrath, Ephesians. 2.2. and void of Christ^ Spirit alse well as others. But the
meaning is, that the man that wants the Illuminating, Praying, Sanctifying, and
Comforting Spirit, Christ has no^ that Interest in them, that he has in
Actual Believers; they do not so belong to him, as they do^ that is, by virtue
of the Fathers actual Donation i^ time, which stands in effectual Vocation,
John 6.37, 38. they may be entrusted to him in the Covenant of Redemption, but
yet if they be void of Christ^ Spirit, they are not effectually Called. 2ly.
They do not belong to him, by virtue of their persona^ Resignation to him, they
cannot offer themselves as a living and acceptable Sacrifice to him, without
Christ's Spirit. 3ly. They do not belong to him* by reason of his Conquest of
them, of redeeming them from the Dominion of Sin and Satan, because a man that
wants Christ's Spirit is under the Tyrrany of both. 4ly. They belong not to him
as his Members by Mystical Union; for as that Union is made up of Faith on our
part, Ephesians. 3.17. so it is made up by the Communication of his Spirit on his
part, 1 Cor. 6.17. 5ly. They are not his, by that near relation of his
Spiritual marriage, so as to be his Spouse; because without Christ's Spirit they
cannot quite the Law as a Husband, and consent to be married to Christ, Romans
7.4. For, to quite our own Righteousness, is a Work far above the power of our
Faculties, without the Communication of the Spirit of Grace. 6ly. Neither can a
man, void of Christ's Spirit, belong to Christ in this sense; As tho the
Mediator stood obliedged, by virtue of the Covenant of Grace, to conferr upon
him Justification, Adoption and Sanctification, and to bring him to Glory: For
by virtue of that Covenant, he is only tied to conferr these things on sincere
Believers; now these that are void of the Spirit have no sincere Faith: It Is
true, Christ may be engaged, by virtue of the Covenant of Redemption to bring
some, who for the present are void of Christ's Spirit, into an Estate of
Justification Adoption and Sanctification. But for Answer, 1st. That Obligation
lies not on him, by virtue of the Covenant of Grace made with the Church. or
the promulgate Gospel to them; But that Obligation lies upon him by virtue of
that undertaking that he makes to his Father, in the Covenant of Redemption:
Likeways when he undertakes to possess them of an Estate of Justification,
Adoption and Glory, he does not undertake to bring them into that (...) state
and Condition, and that they should be voi^ of the Spirits Presence while they
are in that Estate but he undertakes to bring them into that Estate b^
Communicating of his Spirit to them.

Now, that no man that wants the Spirit of Christ can so belong to him, as
actual Believers do, appear^ by this, we cannot belong to Christ without
receiving him, and it is in the Word of the Gospel that ^ receive him; now when
we receive him in the Gospel we receive him and his Spirit together, See Gal.
2.3. Therefore is it that the Gospel is called the Ministr^tion of the Spirit,
2 Cor. 3 8

The use of this is, to reprove the unrenewed world that are void of the
Spirit, for believing they ha^ an actual Interest in Christ, and in the
Privileges of the Gospel Covenant; the reason of this Mistake is They believe
that an external Profession of the Christian Faith, is sufficient to Entitle
them to Christ, and these Privileges; for this, see Mat. 7.21. a^ Romans 2.28,
29. 2d. Cause of this Mistake (...) That People think, that to whomsoever the
Sacrament of Baptism is administered, though they be voi^ of Christ's Spirit, yet
they have an Interest in Christ and in the Gospel, Against this, see Romans 2.2^
If thou break the Law, thy Circumcision is made uncircumcision. And Luke 3.7,
8. also Simon Magus was baptized, and yet was in the Gall of Bitterness and
Bond of Iniquity. It is true, that Baptism gives those that are baptized, who
are not Ignorant o^ Scandalous, a Right to join with the Church, in al^
Church-Institutions, but it does not possess them with a Right to the great
Privileges of the Gospel, except they cordially receive Christ offered
therein. It is true, it does really seal the Truth of the free Covenant of
Grace, and the closs Particular and condescending Good offered therein: but it
cannot oblige God to give that Good to those that refuse it, and will not
cordially accept it. A 3d. Cause of the Mistake is, They take Morality for true
Grace, so they think their Morality evidenceth their Interest in Christ, but
Christ tells us Mat. 5.20. That our Righteousness must exceed the Righteousness
of the Scribes and Pharisees, otherways we cannot enter into the Kingdom of
God. A 4th. Cause is, They think the great and sole End of Christ's Mission is,
to free them from the Guilt and Curse of the Law; Therefore they think, tho
they be void of Christ's Spirit, they may have an Interest in Christ, and the
Gospel, because they think Christ is come to save them from Wrath, tho they
take liberty to live as they will: so they make Christ the Minister of Sin. See
Gal. 2.17. The folly of their Persons is evidenced from this, That Christ's
Errand into the World was, to Redeem us from all Iniquity and to purify to
himself a Peculiar People, zealous of good Works. A 5th. Cause of this Mistake
is, That unrenewed Folks takes the Challenges of their Consciences to be the
strivings of the Spirit against the Flesh, for they conclude, from having these
Challenges, that they have the Spirit of Christ; tho they altogether want him:
But to undeceive such, they would consider, that those that have the strivings
of the Spirit, they do not fulfill the Lusts of the Flesh, the External
Conversation is regular, although the inward Frame with Paul, as Romans 7. may
want some Degrees of Perfection. Likeas, the strivings of the Spirit where they
are, they oppose heart-evils, as well as external-evils, evils against the
Gospel, as well as evils against the Moral-Law.

As this Text tells us, That those that want Christ's Spirit, Christ has no such
peculiar Interest in them, as he has in Believers; So it plainly supposes that
all those, that have a peculiar Interest in him, have this great Privilege of
the Presence of his Spirit. I shall clear 1st. That it is so. 2ly. Confirm it,
by telling you what are the Causes, from whence the presence of the Spirit
flows. 3ly. What are the Ends and Uses for which God bestows this Benefit on
Believers. 4ly. We shall exhort the People of God, to improve this Benefit,
and not to lie out in the use making of it. And 5ly. Seeing all that are
Christ's have the Spirit, and none other, We will reprove those that have this
Spirit, and yet notwithstanding, question Christ's peculiar Interest in them,
and theirs in him.

As for the First, Scripture shows it, and the Experience of the Saints
confirms it, that Believers have the Spirit. 1st. Their illumination clears it;
their distinct, clear, near, and solid Views of the sublime Mysteries of Gods
Covenant, that the sharpest Wits that want the Spirit reckon foolishness, 1
Cor. 2.12. That Illumination discovers it self in a Presence of the Spirit. 2.
The Work of Sanctification discovers it; if ye look to the greatness of the
Change, the thorrowness of the Change upon the whole Faculties, and the whole
conversation, the constancy of the Change, the suddenness of it, and that it is
carried over great and manifold Obstructions, from Allurements and Terrors,
from bad Counsel and bad Custom, from many false Suggestions of a deceitful
Heart, and subtle Reasonings of a tempting Devil. 3ly. The Spirits Consolation
evinceth the reality of this Gift, if we consider how the Saints Hearts are
kept up, under fightings without, and terrors within. 4. Their Devotions
clears it, if you consider their single, humble, fervent, spiritual and
confident Desires, persevered in, notwithstanding of Guilt, Corruption, Misery
and Repulses; surely such Desires come from no other Principle, than the
Omnipotent Spirit of God.

The Causes of this Gift, may be 1st. The Internal moving Cause, is, Electing
Love. 2ly. The Meritorious Cause is, Christ's Satisfaction, Gal. 3.13, 14. 3ly.
The Procuring Cause, is Christ's Intercession, John 14.16. 4ly. The Dispensing
Cause is, Christ himself, John 16.7. and 15.26 5ly. The Final Causes and Ends
of this Gift, are these, following. He is given 1st. As an Illuminator, to
guide us into all Truth. John 16.13. and to direct us in dubious Cases, and
lead us, Romans 8.14. 2d. End is to help our Infirmity in Prayer, Romans 8.26. 3d.
Is to comfort us in our Trouble, John 14.16 A 4th. Is to sanctify us, 1 Thessalonians.
4.7. A 5th. Is to be the Earnest of our Inheritance, and to strengthen our Hope
thereof, Ephesians. 1.19. A 6th. End is, he is Gods Mark and Seal upon us, till the
Day of Redemption, to obstruct the Worlds Calumnies, whereby they calumniate us
as Hypocrites; and to hinder us to dispose upon our selves as we were our own.
And 7ly. That his Presence may be a standing Witness, in, and to the World, of
the Truth of Christianity, 1 John 5.10.

As to the 4th. Thing, how to improve this Gift, we have by Promise from the
Fathers Love, Christ's Merit and Intercession. 1st. Believe, that God will give
us this promised Mercy, Ephesians. 1.13. 2ly. We would pray for it, Luke 11.13. 3ly.
We would obey the Spirits Motions, Gal. 5. penult. 4ly. Grieve not the Spirit,
and meddle not with these sins mentioned, Ephesians. 4.30. 5ly. Savor the things of
the Spirit, and have an high esteem of Spiritual Privileges Romans 8.4.

A 2d. Use is, since these that are Christ's have this Gift, and none other, it
reproves these that participate in part of this Gift, and question Christ's
Interest in them, and theirs in him; and that First on the account of their
Miseries, Crosses and Mortality. 2ly. On account of the Remainders of their
Corruption, and sinful Infirmities. 3ly. Upon account of their partial Darkness
in Spiritual Matters, for we know but in part. 4ly. Upon account of their
strong Temptations from Satan.

Verse 10. And if Christ be in you, the Body is dead because of Sin; but the
Spirit is Life, because of Righteousness.


THE Apostle having applied to the Romans, the former Privileges spoken of, in
the former Verse; He in this Verse preoccupies an Objection, that they might
have made against the Application of the Privilege of Non-condemnation; It
might have been said, that since Believers must dye, what benefit can be
expected by them, as enjoying that Privilege? It is Answered, they must dye,
because of inherent Sin; For God, to show his indignation against all sin,
appointed Death. Likeways they must dye for the abolition of it, God appointing
the dissolution of our Nature to be the Method for its perfect cure; yet the
comfort is, that tho the body dye, yet the Soul lives, because of Christ's
Righteousness: And a second Comfort is, that the Souls Life is an Pledge of the
Resurrection of the Body.

Here we may see, that Christ dwe^ls in his Peoples Hearts by his Spirit, 1
John 3. last. And ye may Observe, 1st. That there may be Inherent Sin in those
in whom Christ dwells, though it reign not, Romans 7. last. The Lord does not
perfect our Cure all at once, he leaves this evil Neighbor in our Hearts, to
embitter the Worlds Comforts to us: to try our Faith of Justification, and to
call us to a vigilant and dependant frame upon himself.

Observe, 2ly. That the Godly must dye; For albeit Christ has removed the
whole Curse of the Law, and satisfied Justice completely for all our sins, and
has the Fathers Promise that he shall free his People from all the bad
Consequences of sin; yet a present total freedom, from all these Consequences
that follows on sin, upon their first believing, is not promised by the Father
to him, or to them: It is secured, that it shall be done in Gods time and way,
but mortality is not removed from them presently. If ye shall say, they are
freed from the Curse of the Law in Justification, why then and they not freed
presently from all the effects of that Curse? Answer, Mortality continues on
the Justified, not by virtue of a curseing Law, as though it would be a
Reflection upon Justice, if God should deliver the Believer upon his first
Faith, altogether from Mortality; But Mortality is continued by the Sovereign
God, for wise Ends, not to make a particular satisfaction to Justice for our
sin that Christ has left unmade, but because God will have the whole Mystical
Body its perfection to be all at once, and he will have his People to live in
this World by Faith, and therefore he makes the Mortality of Believers a vail,
to hide their promised Felicity from Sense, And that the Mortality of Believers
is not continued upon them, as the Effect of a curseing Law, is clear from what
the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 15. That their Death wants its Sting: Next, we see
Death inflicted as a Chastisement upon some of the Godly, See 1 Cor. 11.30, 31,
32 And it is clear in the Instance of Josia, who dyed in peace, and yet was
chastised with a violent Death, for his rash engagement in a War. Now God,
inflicting Death upon Believers, testifies his Fatherly Displeasure against
sin, but not his Justice against them as a just Judge* for Affliction is sent
upon them as an Accomplishment of the Threatening annexed to the Covenant of
Grace, but not as an Accomplishment of the Law-curse, Psalm. 89.32. This is much
for the Comfort of Believers.

Use of this is, since Believers must die, They would prepare for Death, and if
they would be prepared, they would make use of these Directions: 1st. Labor to
be sure of the indwelling Spirit, for that is the only sure mark of an interest
in Christ, they would not lean to an empty profession, a great measure of
common gifts, or mere Morality. A 2d Direction is, They would found their Title
to Life, only upon the Righteousness of Christ, and not upon their own merit.
A 3d. is, They would be willing to dye, and therefore they would mortify their
Covetousness and their Security, and they would labor for a firm Faith in
Divine Providence, whereby they may committ the disposal of all their concerns
and the concerns of the Church to God, as Joseph did Genesis last: 4th. Direction
is, They would labor to have peace of Conscience at Death; and for this effect
they would beware of lying under impenitency for old or new contracted Guilt.
Likeas they would labor for a Testimony from their Conscience, that they have
readily accepted of the Gospel-Offer. 2ly. They would labor to have the
Conscience witnessing their singleness in their Conversation at Death, as
Hezekiah had in his sickness, Isai. 38. Likeas they would have the Conscience
witnessing their Diligence in Duty, That so an entrance may be Administered to
them abundantly to the Everlasting Kingdom of our Lord Jesus, 2 Pet. 1.4. A 5th
Direction is, They would fix themselves in the faith of the Immortality of the
Soul; which Immortality appears from its conception of immaterial Objects. 2ly.
From its Oper^tions, independent on the Body, as in Ecstasies. 3ly. From the
Moral Government of God in the World, by Laws and Judgment considered jointly
with the impartial Justice of God, with the Miseries of the Godly, and the
Prosperity of the Wicked. A 6th. Direction is, We would build our selves up in
the faith of the Resurrection of the Body.

Observe 3ly. That the Godly have a spiritual life in their Soul, as appears by
the spiritual sense they have of spiritual things, They have an Hunger and
Thirst after spiritual Food: They have a spiritual sigh of spiritual Mysteries
by Faith, and they have a spiritual feeling of sin and misery: Now this
spiritual Life continues after Death, as appears from Luke 16.23, and 23, 43.
Phil, 1, 23. 2 Cor: 5, 1

The Apostle supposes, that the continuance of this Life after Death, is a
sufficient comfort to the Godly, under their present Mortality; and these
considerations may clear the sufficiency of this Comfort: if ye consider First,
The great Good that is in it; 1st. There is a freedom in it from Trouble and
Vexation. Rev. 14.13. Isai. 57.1. 2ly. The perfection of Holiness is in it,
Heb. 12.23. And s^ there is freedom from Co^ruption, and horrid Temptations;
much uninterrupted Peace, and Joy in expectation of a future Blessedness. 3ly.
The^ have much good Company in it, they have the fellowship of Angels and
Saints, Heb 12.22, 23 They have the fellowship of the Patriarchs, Luke 16.25.
They have the fellowship of Christ, Philip. 1.23 2 Cor. 5.8.

Use of this is, Godly Folks would comfort themselves with this Consolation
under their Mortality* 1st. Because this Comfort is a pure Comfort, unmixed
with Trouble. 2ly. It is a sure Comfort, as appears by the Scriptures formerly
cited. 3ly. It is a near Comfort, they have it partly in possession and they
are to have a great measure of it immediately on their Death. This speak the
great misery of these Mortals, who altogether want spiritual life; they want
the great support that can Support Sinners under the View of Mortality; Likeas
this calls to the Godly to have a great measure of the sensible presence of the
Spirit, that they may have his supporting encouragement at their hand, under
their seeing and feeling Mortality.

When the Text says, The Spirit is Life, in opposition to the Bodies Death; It
does not only intimate, that the Soul lives a spiritual life, and likeways that
it does live that Life after Death immediately: But likeways it imports, that
the Holy Spirit of God, as present in the Soul of a Christian, is a pledge and
cause of spiritual life here and immediately after Death, when it is a pledge
and cause of immortal Life at the Resurrection; For when the Text speaks of the
Spirit being Life, the word Spirit is not meant so much of a man's Soul, as of
the Indwelling spirit of God in Belivers, which is clear by the words subjoined
in the Eleventh verse.

Observe from these Two Verses jointly considered, That the Indwelling presence
of the Spirit in Believers is a sure pledge of immortal Glory; and this is
clear by these three, 1st. Consider the import and significancy of this Gift.
2ly. It Is Efficacy. 3ly. Consider it is Irrevocableness.

And First, As to It Is significancy, Consider the Names, Designations, and
Descriptions, it gets in Scripture. 1st. It is called the Blessing of Abraham,
Gal. 3.14. so it signifies that God's Covenant with Abraham belongs to them,
now Christ Luke 20 Evinces, That God cannot be the God of the Dead but of the
Living. 2ly. It is called a Seal. Ephesians. ^ 30. To signify, that God has an
peculiar interest ^ them that have it, as his peculiar Treasure, and therefore
it is sure he cannot lose them by death, An^hilation, and Perdition. 3ly. It is
called the Ernest, Ephesians. 1.13 2 Cor. 5.5. and 1 22. And therefore where it is
given, it signifies Gods purpose an^ Obligation to give the Inheritance. 4ly.
It is call^ the Unction or Anointing. 2 Cor. 1.21. As 1 John 2.20. To hold out
that by the present of the Spirit, Gods People are separate, sanct^fied, and
dignified to be Gods Kings, to triumph over all their spiritual Enemies,
whereof Death i^ one. 5ly. It is called the Spirit of Promise, Ephesians. 1 13. and
the promise of the Spirit, Gal. 3.14. Because the Gracious Indwelling of the
Spirit in ^ perfection is the primary and comprehensive go^ promised in the
Gospel, and the great design of the Gospel being to possess People of the
Spirit therefore the Gospel is called, 2 Cor. 3. The Mi^stration of the Spirit,
and therefore the presence ^ the Spirit signifies, that God will grant to the
have of it, Glory to come, seeing when God grants t^ primary good promised in
the Gospel, he will no^ deny them any accessory good that is promised (...) the
same: Now Glory is a consequent unto the presence of the Spirit, see Verse 11.

Next, Consider the Efficacy of this Gift, whi^ kyths in these two. 1st. in
raising us from t^ Death of sin. 2ly. In raising Christ from the Dea^ see for a
proof of its Efficacy, Ephesians. 1.19, 20.

And 3ly. Consider, its an irrevocable Gift, because the Gifts and Callings of
God are without Repentance. And 2ly. Because the Spirit is given to them, not
to be taken from them again, for he is said to dwell in them by his Spirit, and
to make them a perpetual Sanctuary to himself, Ezekiel. 37.26. He is to be a
spring of Eternal Life to them, Joh. 7.38. Joh. 4.14. The Soul that is thus
possessed of the Spirit cannot miss Eternal Life, for it is an Eternal
habitation for God, and the Spirit gives the Soul Eternal Life; now the Spirit
cannot give the Soul Eternal Life, if the Body lay perpetually in the Grave.

The Use of this is, since the presence of the Holy Spirit in a Believer is a
sure pledge of immortal Life, it reproves Believers that have it, that they are
not more lively in their hope of Glory.

A 2d. Use is, To Instruct us in the worth of this Gift, God may give and take
other Gifts from us, but he gives us this Gift without Rueing and Repenting, we
may lose other Gifts, but this is a permanent Enjoyment, there is nothing in
the World that has the full significancy that this Gift has, nor has its
Efficacy; And therefore these that have it should be thankful for it, and
whosoever want it should be at pains to obtain it.

Verse 11. But if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell
in you; he that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal
bodies, by his Spirit that dwells in you.


HEre the Apostle preoccupies an Objection, they might have said, since our
Soul lives, and shall our Body ly perpetually in the Grave, wherefore then
serves our Justification? It is Answered, That if the Spirit of God dwell in
us, that same Spirit will quicken our Mortal Body.

In the Words ye may take notice of the Assurance that the Apostle gives of the
Resurrection of the Body, upon the account of the Pledge thereof in time; and
that is the Spirit dwelling in us.

And 1st Ye may observe, That the Mortal Body shall be quickened again; and
this appears from the privilege of Justification, seeing Death is a punishment
following upon sin. 2ly. Adoption clea^ it, Luke 20.36. compared with Romans
8.23. 3^ Christ's Resurrection clears it, his Resurrection being the exemplary
cause of ours, 1 Cor. 15.2^ 4ly. The Spirits Indwelling in the Body clears it 1
Cor. 6.19. and see the Text. 5ly. The Body being a piece of Christ Mystical,
see 1 Cor. 6.15. 1 These 4, and 14. 6ly. Christ's Engagement to the Father clears
it, Joh. 6.37. 7ly, The Immortality of the Soul, compared with the Natural
Inclination of i^ to the Body clears it, because nihil violentum est de rabite,
and therefore Luke 20.37. Christ takes it for granted, since Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob live in their Souls, their Bodies must revive again. And that the
self same Body shall rise again: Appears 1st. Becau^ Christ had the self same
Body, and his Resurrection was a Pattern of ours. 2ly. Christ says God can ca^
the Body in Hell after Death. 3ly. The Bodies tha^ are raised, come out of
their Graves, John 5.28, 29 4ly. Paul Prays that the Body may be kept blameles^
till the coming of Christ 1 Thessalonians. 5. 5ly, It Is the Mortal Body, see the Text,
1 Cor, 15. This Corruptible, etc.

Use of Exhortation, strive to believe this Article. And that by considering
the Scriptures are the Word of God, and believing the Omnipotent Power of God,
Luke 20, 36. 2ly. It exhorts us to abound in Gods Service, 1 Cor. 15. last 3ly.
It bids us suffer for Christ when called to it. 4ly. It reproves those that
stain their Body by Intemperance and Lust, see 1 Cor. 6.

An other Use is of Comfort, for those that have pained Bodies, like Lazarus
and Job: its sown in Dishonor, its raised in Glory; and it is of comfort to
them that have weak Bodies, it is sown in weakness, its raised in Power. 3ly.
To those that are pinched with Hunger, its sown a Natural Body its raised a
spiritual Body.

2ly. Observe that the Spirit dwelling in our Mortal Body, is a pledge of this
Resurrection; This dwelling of the Spirit imports first. Constant Residence.
2ly. Government. 3ly: His care to adorn and beautify. This indwelling of the
Spirit cannot but be a Pledge of the Resurrection, if ye consider 1st. The end
why he takes up his Lodging in the Man, it is to confer upon him Everlasting
Comfort, Isai, 60.14. 2ly. Everlasting Life, 3ly. Everlasting purity. 4ly.
Everlasting Communion Ezekiel. 37, 26, with Rev. 20, 3 and 4. 2ly. If ye consider
the Spirit to be the great Love-token of God to his People, he is the whole of
Abraham's Blessing, Gal. 3. He that gives this will not deny them the
Resurrection to Life. 3ly. The spirit has power to raise them, as it is kythed
in the Resurrection of Christ, and in quickening the dead Soul from the death
of sin, John 5.25.28. 4ly. Spiritual life is a fruit of the Spirit, and
spiritual life is a pledge of the Resurrection.

Use 1st. Of Consolation, to them that have the Spirit of God, they have an
assureing pledge, that they shall rise to life, though they be Pained, Poor,
Persecute, and Tempted with Corruption and Satan, 2ly. This reproves those who
have the Spirit, who will not entertain the lively hope of Heaven. 3ly. It bids
us try, whether this spirit dwells in us or not. 4ly. It bids the Godly Man
strengthen his faith by this pledge, by considering the Spirits power, the Love
of God discovered in that gift, and Gods design in sending him into the Heart.

Observe. 3ly. The description of this Spirit here He is the spirit of the
Father, 1st. Because he proceeds from the Father, John 15.26. 2ly. Because he
is promised by the Father, Acts 4.33. 3ly. He is given of the Father, Luke
11.13. And this tells us from whom we should seek the spirit, and to whom we
should be thankful for him; and how we may know whether it be the spirit of God
that dwells in us or no; if it be so, he will make us sensible of the Fathers
Love in raising Christ for us; if it be so, he will raise us up to a newness of
Life, and conform us to a risen Savior.

The giver of this Indwelling spirit, is described from his great Work: One
that raised Christ from the dead, where first Note, why Christ's Resurrection is
ascribed to the Father, 2ly. To what end Christ rose.

And 1st. It is ascribed to the Father, to show that he kept his promise to
the old Fathers, Acts 13, 32. And if this promise, made to the old Church,
received its accomplishment, all the rest of the promises made to them will.
2ly. To show that he kept his promise to Christ in the Covenant of
Redemption. Isai: 42 6. And that says, all the rest of the Promises made to him
will be accomplished, to reward him for his Humiliation. Phil: 2, 9. To show
that none shall lose that humble themselves for him: 4ly Its ascribed to the
Father, because it is the Absolution of him as soverty. 5ly. It was a step to
that delegated power that now he enjoys as Mediator: and we know that Power
comes from the Father; He Raised him 1st, That he might, that was the
purchasser be the dispenser of our Mercies Act, 5.31. And that Christ is raised
to be the dispenser of our Mercies encourages us to be bold in Prayer. 1st.
Because he sympathises with us in our wants, be will not frustrate his
purchase, by forbearing to dispense And 2ly. If his Love made him purchase, his
Love will make him dispense.

2ly. Christ was raised by the Father, to clear, That he had merited full
pardon, and Believers may strengthen their Faith of Pardon with this
Resurrection. 1st. Because it is an evidence of full satisfaction to Justice.
2ly. It is an evidence of his Godhead, Rom: 1, 4. And so of his meriting worth
3ly. it was an step to his Intercession.

3ly. The Father raised him, to assure the People of God, of their through
Mortif^tion of Sin Romans 6.11. And this 1st. Reproves so^ that are diffident,
their sin shall not be Mortified: ^d that 1st. Because Terror has not
Mortifyed it y^ against this see Exodus: 32 19. with Exodus: 19.20. 2ly. Because
Communion with God does not Mortify it, David's falling in Adultery after
Communion with God, 2 Samuel: 7. Answers that. 3ly. Because they have been at
Solemn Ordinances, and these have not done their turn; Therefore they think it
cannot be done For Answer, see Luke 22.24. The Apostles unmortifyed after
these. And 4ly. It reproves those that think they cannot be Mortifyed, because
Crosses have not done it already. Answ. Hezekiahs Ambi^ion was cured, tho it
brake out after his Sickness.

Use 2d. Of Exhortation is, to Believers to strengthen their Faith of through
Mortification by Christ's Resurrection, which they may do by considering, It is
a sufficient evidence of his Deaths meriting sufficient Grace for Mortifying of
sin. Romans 6.6.

4th. End is, That he might strengthen our Faith in our Resurrection to Life,
and this is done by considering, that tho we be Tempted, yet so was he; tho we
be under Desertion as to Comfort, so was he; My God, says he, Why has thou
forsaken me, Tho we be Mortal, so was he; tho we be Guilty, so was he
imputatively so.

Verse 12. Therefore Brethren, we are Debitors, not to the flesh, to live after
the flesh.


HEre we have a Conclusion drawn from several prejudices, That these that live
after the flesh have: For 1st. They have not the privilege of Justification,.
1. 2ly. They mind the things of the flesh,. 5. 3ly. They are in the way to
Death. 6. 4ly. They are Enemies to God,, 7. And 5ly. They cannot please God. 8.

Observe 1st. here, That the flesh is always craving. 2ly. Tho it be craving,
yet we owe it nothing: it craves, we are not Debitors to it: 3ly. The service
of the flesh, is a very unprofitable service. 4ly. The former Grounds upon
which the Apostle infers this inference are sufficiently convincing.

For the First, That the flesh is craving appears in these six; first. In that
it craves Love and Affection: 2ly. Obedience: 3ly. Awe: 4ly. Entertainment:
5ly. Spareing; And 6ly. hideing of its Nakedness.

First, It craves Love of us, That is, it craves that we may have a regard to
it in our Heart; People should beware of this, because it is inconsistent with
the Enmity we ought to have at Sin, it provokes God to forbear reproving of us,
Hosea 4.17. 2ly. It restrains Mortifying Grace. 3ly. It marrs the Love of God,
4ly. It hinders the Answers of Prayer, Psalm. 66.18.

2ly. It craves Obedience of us, Romans 6.12. But this should not be, because we
are made free from Sin, and Servants to Righteousness. 2ly. It grieves the
Spirit, Ephesians. 4.30. 3ly. It Is offensive to others 4ly. It strengthens the flesh,
Romans 6.19. 5ly. It fears the Conscience,

3ly. Corruption craves, That the Christian should stand in fear and awe of it,
That they should be hopeless ever to get it overcome; and this he is prompted
to by his sinful Heart, through considering the multitude of his Corruptions,
and the deepness of their Root, and of his often Essays against it, with
frustration following thereupon, and his want of skill to improve Christ's
Mortifying Grace; But the Christian is not a Debtor to give it this awe an^
fear; for this discourageing fear of the power of Corruption should be studied
against* 1st. Because he is free of the Guilt of it. 2ly. Because he is no mo^
a Slave to it. Romans 6.14. 3ly. This Fear does hi^ prejudice. For 1st. It makes
him suspend his Fait^ upon the promise of pardon. 2ly. It makes him doubt, if
God would hear his Prayers. 3ly. I^ make him ^ath to engage against it, as
being hopeless of the successfulness of his engagement, and so he is a Prey to
the meanest Temptation, and then confusion of Spirit, and want of peace follows.

4ly. We are not Debitors to the Flesh to give it Entertainment, for it craves
of us, that we should seek External Temptations to it to feed it; this should
be denied, because it stops folks confidence in Praying for Mortifying Grace.
2ly, It obscure the sight of sincerity Psalm. 18 23. 3ly. It provoke God, to let
them meet with these occasions.

5ly. We should not hearken to Corruption, when it craves the hideing of its
Nakedness from us, by making us extenuate it; for the yiedling to it in this
will not lessen it in Gods sight. 2ly. It keeps away the impressions of
pardoning Mercy, Psalm: 32.3. 3ly. it will keep us from the Exercise of
Repentance, or Soul-Loathing, and tenderness of Conscience against Sin, and
weakens the Man's esteem of Christ's Blood, and sets God against the Man. Jer.
2.35.

And 6ly. Corruption craves spareing of it, That we should not seek the Life of
it, but be content with an mean measure of Mortification; And this it does
telling us, that we may have peace and Communion with God, and keep up our Name
of Profession, notwithstanding of this; But we should not yield to this,
because Corruption was cruel to us, seeking our Death. 2ly. If we attempt not
its Death, none of our Attempts will be successful against it, 3ly. When we
attempt its Death, it makes it as it were despaired, and gives us more ado,
whereby we are necessitate to believe on Christ, for Mortifying Grace, and
forced to have a desire to be gone to be sure of it; and withal if we do spare
it, it may break out, to our shame.

Verse 13. For if ye live after the Flesh, ye shall ^y: But if ye through the
Spirit do mortify the deeds of the Body, ye shall live.


HEre the Apostle is proving, we are Debitors not to the flesh, but to the
Spirit: And that because of the benefit we have by the one, and the prejudice
we have by the other, Death is by the one, and Life by the other.

Observe 1. That those that live after the flesh shall dye: after the flesh,
imports, a man's fixed purpose, not to contradict the Corruptions of his Nature,
Psalm. 36, 3. 2ly. When a man resolutely sets himself to bring the motions of
his Corruption to External Acts, Mica. 2.1. Psalm. 36 4 3ly. When he delights in
sinning, and is frequent in it, and is fearless under it, Psalm. 36 2. In a
word, it is to be a slave to Corruption, and to make it our design to give it
full satisfaction, Ephesians. 2.1, 2. To spend our time, Wit and Parts to the
gratifying of our Lusts, and to place our felicity and satisfaction in them;
such a course of Life ends in Eternal Death, as appears by the Threatening of
the Law and of the Gospel, and the Self-condemnation of such Folks Consciences.

Use of reproof, to those that are secure, and have their security springing
from misbelief of future Wrath, False-Imaginations of Divine Mercy, Stupidity
and souredness of Conscience, Blinding Self-Love, and Atheistical Thoughts of
Providence, as tho God would neither do Good nor Evil; but such would remember
to reflect on the Truth of the Scriptures, the hatefulness and demerite of Sin,
and the Justice of God.

Observe: 2ly. That the Mortifying of the Deeds of the Body is a most
advantageous thing, and brings Life with it; it brings with it the Life of
Justification, or Pardon, because it is the great Pledge of Pardon, 1 John 1.8.
2ly. It brings with it the Life of Sanctification, consisting in these Four.
viz. The Easy, Vigorous, Cheerful, and Constant Exercise of Grace; 1st. It
brings the easy Exercise of Grace with it, because it makes a man quick-sighted
to discern his Duty, for Lust blinds the mind, it frees him of these Lusts that
makes him ordinarily shift the doing of his Duty. 2ly. Mortification makes him
Vigorous in the Exercise of Grace, 1 Timothy: 6.11. Because the whole Heart when
Mortified gets liberty to be about its Duty in the Exercise of Grace. 3ly. It
makes him cheerful in it, Because the Exercise of Grace is connatural to a
Mortified Heart; And the mind of a Mortified Man, does more clearly discern the
Advantage of the Exercise of Grace, than the mind of another, 4ly. It is useful
for the constant Exercise of Grace, and that because it keeps him from being
easily overcome with Temptation, 2ly, He cannot weary of it, for he finds a
pleasure in it. And 3ly. He does not soon satisfy himself with what he has
done, because he sees many of his Imperfections therein; But 3ly. Mortification
is good for the life of Comfort, Because it fits a Man for discoveries of God,
Matthew. 5.8. It qualifies him for hope, 1 John 3.3. And contributes to the
intrinsic pleasure, that the New Man has in Duty. And 4ly. It brings the life
of Glory with it, because it tends to prepare a Man for it.

From all this we may see 1st. The cause, why many Christians wants the
intimation of their Pardon: its because they study not Mortification. 2ly. We
see, that we need not lay the blame of the want of Sanctification, either upon
Gods sparingness to give us sanctifying Grace, or upon External Temptations, so
much as upon our own neglect of Mortifying our Lusts. 3ly. This tells us, why
so many Professors are Strangers to Comforts.

Use 2d, Of Exhortation, if we would win hastily to Heaven, we would strive to
mortify Lusts, and as we would have those Advantages, let us go about the Duty:
1st. Labor for the discovery of the Evils, in the Imperfections of your
Services, Romans 7.21. 2ly. Repent of them, Jam. 4.8.9. Continually groan under
Corruption, Romans 7.24. make no provision for Corruption, Romans 13. last. And
apply the promises of the Gospel, 2 Cor. 7.1. Next, study to reflect on the
prejudices you have sustained by them, how often they have brought on Judgments
upon your Person, made you Scandalous to others, interrupted your Communion
with God, broken your peace of Conscience. Next, Regulate your life by the
Word, having a constant Eye upon that as your Rule.

Use 2d. Of Reproof, If this be so advantageous an Exercise; it reproves those
that lay this work aside, because they think the neglect of Mortification is
consistent with Grace, but (as we were saying) it is not consistent with the
Life of Grace, And the total neglect of it is inconsistent with Grace it self.
3ly. It reproves those that forbear Mortification because they see not many
Evils to Mortify, through want of Self-Examination. 4ly. Those that spare
their Sins, because they think there are few free of the like of these Evils,
they are loath to Mortify.

Use 3d. Of Trial, To try whether we be about this Work or not. 1st. The Man
that is about this Work, he is glad of any actual separation Providence makes
between him and his Ills by Crosses. 2ly. He is daily watchful against External
Temptations. 3ly. He is daily porcing on the Mischiefs that Sin does him, and
Prays more for Grace against sin, then to be free of Crosses, and welcoms that
Word most that particularly hits his Evils, and does not spurn at it.

Observe 3ly. That the Spirit is the great and principal cause of
Mortification; This is clear if ye consider the strength and deceitfulness of
Lusts, it must require the Spirits power, in opposition to them. 2ly. if ye
consider, the ineffectualness of the means that many enjoy, without the Spirits
Blessing. 3ly. If ye consider that even those that are weak in natural parts,
they will, when they depend upon the Spirit, find great success in
Mortification, beyond others.

The manner how the Spirit does Mortify, is by discovering the hatefulness of
Sin, and its danger, 2ly. By applying the promises of the Gospel, and so
outbidding Corruption 3ly. By enforcing the Commands of God, against sin, upon
the Conscience.

Use, If it be so, we should use the means, and Pray for the Spirits Blessing
upon them. 2ly. We should not grieve the Mortifieing Spirit, by unwatchfulness
against External Temptations, by want of Self-Examination to discern our
Evils, by falling into a frame of indifferency about Mortification, that so we
desire it faintly.

Verse 14. For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of
God.


HEre is a proof, That those that Mortify their Corruption by the Spirit, shall
live, because They are the Sons of God; And he proves this, because that as
many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God.

Observe, the Children of God, are led by Gods Spirit; I shall clear how this
is, and then apply it.

And first, The Spirit leads the Child of God, by giving him saving
Instruction, this is Gods teaching according to the Covenant-Promise. 1st. He
opens his understanding that he may understand the Scriptures, Luke 24.45. He
makes them understand Truth and Error, 1 John 2.27. 2ly. He reveals the good
things of the Gospel to him in their reality, and usefulness, 1 Cor. 2, 13.
3ly. He reveals the spirituality of the Law to them, he makes the Commandment
which is the Law, come in its spiritual meaning to them, Romans 7.9. 4ly. He
instructs them in the vanity of the Creature, he makes them see an end of all
perfection, Psalm. 119.96 But 2ly. He leads them as a Comforter, and Encourager
of them in their Journey, and this he does these three ways, 1st. By witnessing
their Adoption, Romans 8.15. 2ly. By helping them to apply the Promises, Ephesians.
1.13. 3ly. By exciting their Hope, Romans 15.13. A 3d. way how he leads them is
by strengthening their Grace, and so assisting them in their Duty, Ephesians. 3 16. A
4th, Way is, By exciting them to their Duty when they are laisy: And this is
done 1st. By bringing the Word to their Remembrance. Jo. 14.27. 2ly. By
bringing their Engagements to God to their remembrance. 3ly. He excites them to
their Duty, by making them observe the Call of Exciteing Providence. A 5th:
Way is, By being a Reprover to them, discovering to them their sinful
Inclinations, and strayings out of the way A 6th. Way is, By discovering unto
them, and giving them a foresight of the Stumbling Blocks that lie in the way,
and of the manifold Temptations they may meet with in it. A 7th. Way is, By
determining them in dubious cases; Paul was bound in the Spirit, to go to
Jerusalem, tho Agabas the Prophet told him of his suffering there.

From this, We may make an Use of Trial; We may conclude that we are Gods
Children, if we observe these Operations of the Spirit in us. 2ly. We would be
exhorted to beware of these things, that marrs the presence of this Guide from
us. And 1st. We would beware of impenitency under known Guilt, Psalm. 51. David
was afraid of the loseing the free Spirit by his Impenitency. 2ly. Beware of
Worldliness, John 14 17. 3ly. Beware of Intemperance, These that would be
filled with the Spirit, must not be filled with Wine, Ephesians. 5.18. 4ly. Beware of
an Vindictive Spirit, Ephesians. 4.31. 5ly. Beware of slighting the Motions of the
Spirit, if we would live by the Spirit, we must walk in the Spirit, Gal. 5.25.
6ly. Beware of a Legal Frame of Spirit: The Spirit glorifies Christ, and so is
grieved, when Christians give not Christ his due. The Spirit glorifies Christ,
John 16.14. 7ly. We would beware of Laziness, or lying by from the use of
appointed Means, for that is the Way to quench the Spirit, 1 Thessalonians. 5.19. 8^y.
Beware of neglecting Praying for the Spirit, for the Father gives the holy
Spirit to them that ask him. 9ly. Beware of casting your self upon Temptations,
we should abstain from all appearance of Evil, if we would not quench the
Spirit, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22.

Motives to persuade us to entertain the presence of this Guide. 1st. He is an
unerring Guide; He neither can nor will mislead us, 2ly. He is an experienced
Guide, he has led many Sons to Glory. 3ly, He is sent by the Father and the
Son to lead the Believer to Heaven. 4ly. This Guide is near us, and constantly
with us, if we do not grieve him, he remains with us, and shall be in us,
John 14, 17. 4ly. This Guide is absolutely needful for the Christian, without
him he has no Light, no Comfort, and no Strength: The ignorant, dejected and
weak Condition of the Christian makes the guiding and leading of the Spirit
absolutely needful to him.

There is a 3d. Use of Consolation from this Doctrine, if the Child of God have
the leading of the Spirit, he may be much comforted under the various Cases he
is in in the World; he is many times weak for his Duty, The Spirit can
strengthen him with Might in the inward Man: The Child of God is many times
environed with Temptations, the Spirit can give him the foresight of these: He
is many times straightened to know what is his Duty, The Spirit can lead the blind
by a way they know not; He is subject to many Discouragements, but the Spirit
is a strong Comforter. The Child of God is subject, through self-love, to
overlook his Faults, but the Spirit is a sharp and seasonable Reprover; The
Child of God is subject to lazieness, and upsitting in the Way of God, but the
Spirit of God is a seasonable and powerful Exciter to Duty.

There is a 4th. Use of Instruction from the Doctrine; This instructs us what
is the Cause, Why the Children of God keep Gods Way, notwithstanding of their
Weakness in the Point of Light, notwithstanding of the remaining Wickedness of
their Heart, and notwithstanding of the manifold external Temptations; It is
neither the strength of their Reason, nor the strength of their Inherent Grace,
that is the Principal Cause of their keeping the way of God; but this is the
Cause of it, Because they are led by the Spirit of God.

There is an other Use of Instruction from the Doctrine, It instructs us in the
misery of these that are not Gods Children, such are not led by his Spirit; For
to be led by his Spirit, is the alone Privilege of Sons; and this must be a
great Misery to want this Guide; because such are led by bad Exampl^ in this
World, by the Dictates of Corrupt Reason and by the swing of their Lusts.

There is an other Use from this Doctrine, and that is of Exhortation to the
Godly, to exhort them rightly to improve this Privilege; And for this Effect,
1st. They would be humble and docile to his Teachings; the meek he will guide
in Judgment, the meek he will teach his way, Psalm. 52.10. 2ly. They would
improve his Comforts for Encouragement to walk in the Way of God, Acts 9.31.
3ly. They would be painful in improving his Assistance, Col. 1.29. 1 Cor.
15.10. 4ly. They would shun these Temptations he forwarnes them of. And 5ly:
They would hearken to these Calls to Duty, and Excitements he trysts them with,

Verse 15. But ye have not received the Spirit of Bondage again to fear, but ye
have received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father.


HEre the Apostle proves, that those that are led by the Spirit, they are the
Sons of God, by two Arguments; One is, that they have received the Spirit of
Adoption, The other is, the Spirit of God, and their own Spirit witnesses that
they are Sons. Observe 1st. That Gods People receive the Spirit of Bondage,
before they receive the Spirit of Adoption. Observe 2ly. That the Elect People
of God, that receive the Spirit of Bondage, they are allowed of God the Spirit
of Adoption, 3ly. Observe, That those that have received the Spirit of
Adoption, they never again receive the Spirit of Bondage. 4ly. The Spirit of
Adoption, where it is, it is a Spirit of Liberty; it is here opposed to a
Spirit of Bondage. Observe 5ly. That those that receive the Spirit of Adoption,
their condition is preferable to those that receive a Spirit of Bondage. 6ly.
The Apostle seems to glance at the frame of Gods People, that lived under the
Legal Administration, differing it from the frame of such as lived under the
Administration of the Gospel. Observe 7ly. That the Spirit of Adoption in
Believers, prompts them to Prayer, and these Prayers are free and fearless,
fervent and serious; and these Two Qualities of Prayer are included in the
Word, Crying: As also these Prayers are confident and affectionate; the Spirit
of Adoption makes them cry, Father. 8ly. Observe, the Spirit of Adoption is a
Benefit common to the Gentiles with the Jews. The Apostle, to denote this, he
expresses the homely Compellation of God, both in Hebrew and Greek:

For the First Observation, that the Elect People of God receive the Spirit of
Bondage, before they receive the Spirit of Adoption; We shall clear it. 1st. By
showing what is meant by the Spirit of Bondage, and what is meant by the Spirit
of Adoption. 2ly. We shall prove that God dispenses the Spirit of Bondage to
the Elect, before he dispenses the Spirit of Adoption. 3ly. We shall give the
Reasons of this Dispensation. And 4ly. Give the Uses of the Point.

For the First, by the Spirit of Bondage, is meant, that Frame of Soul, wrought
in them by Gods Spirit, preparing them for the state of Conversion, springing
from a sight of their state of Bondage, while they are in an state of Nature,
convinceing them of their state of slavery to Sin and Satan, and so bringing
them under a full Conviction of their unability to relieve themselves from that
condition; Likeas, this Conviction is attended with a Grief for their former
sins, and a fear of their imminent danger. By the Spirit of Adoption is meant
that disposition of Soul, wrought in the Elect, becoming the state of Adoption;
It is wrought by Gods Spirit, through the application of Gospel-Promises. It
includes in it. 1st. The reverential awe of God. 2ly. An affection and care to
imitate God in his moral Perfections. 3ly. A kindly submission to his
Corrections. 4ly. A lively Expectation of the Inheritance of God.

For the second thing proposed, Viz. the Proof of this, that God dispenses to
the Elect the Spirit of Bondage, before he dispenses to them the Spirit of
Adoption, It is clear from the Experience of the Converts, Acts 2. And from
Paul's Experience at his Conversion; and from the Experience of the Jailer.

For the third Thing, Viz. The Reasons why God thus dispenses to his Elect the
Spirit of Bondage, before the Spirit of Adoption, they are these. 1st. He does
this, that he may make the Mysteries of the Gospel more credible to them; For
before a Man be convinced of his Sin and Misery, The Mystery of Christ's Cross
seems but a Fable; to the unconvinced Jew Christ's Cross is but a stumbling
Block, and to the unconvinced Greek it seems foolishness: but to the convinced
and called Man, it is the Wisdom of God, and the Power of God. See 1 Cor. 1.
2ly. He does this, to disengage their Affections from sin; Our hearts through
long custom acquire a great lyking to a course of sinning, and until our
Spirits smart for our sins by grief and fear, we cannot fall in a dislike with
them. 3ly. He does this, that thereby he may bring us to quite our own
Righteousness, and accept of Christ; For Pride, Self-love, and Blindness of
Mind do all concur to make us tenacious of our own Righteousness, before the
Spirit work this Work in us. A 4th. Is, he dispenses this, to make his Elect
willing to subject themselves to the Divine Law, as a Rule of Life; for when
they are made by the Spirit of Conviction to smart for sin, no terms of their
freedom from sin and misery, seems hard to them. A 5th. Reason he thus
dispenses, is that he may bring his own to have an^ high Esteem of Christ. to
reckon all things but as dung and dross, in comparison of the Son of God. A
6th. is, he does it, that he may make the burden of Christ's Cross seem light
to them.

For the 4th. Thing proposed, the Uses of the Point, The First is, an Use of
Trial; hereby ye may try if ye have had the Spirit of Bondage or no; if the
Mystery of Christ's Cross be credible; If sin appear an hateful thing to you; If
readily ye accept of Christ's offered Righteousness; If willingly ye subject
your selves to the Divine Law, as a Rule of Life; If ye prefer Christ to all
things in your Esteem; If ye esteem the burden of Christ's Cross light. Then ye
have received the Spirit of Bondage.

2d. Sort of Uses, are Uses of Instruction, It instructs us in the Cause, why
so many Men see so little of the Moral Ill of Sin; the Cause is, they have not
received the Spirit of Bondage. 2ly. Since the Spirit of Bondage goes before
the Spirit of Adoption, we may soon see, that if the Spirit of Bondage be a
rare thing in the World, the Work of Conversion is as rare. 3^y. We may be
instructed, that the Hearts of the Elect are very stupid under sin, because
that a man's Convict^on of his sin and misery must be brought about by the
mighty Power of the Spirit of Bondage.

The Causes of the stupidity under sin before this Work of the Spirit of
Bondage are, 1st. A feared Conscience, through customary sinning. A 2d. Is
Impunity, Eccl. 9.3. A 3d. is Prosperity in sin, Ephraim said, I am become
rich, there is no iniquity in me. A 4th. Cause is the flattery of Ministers and
Neighbors. A 5th. Cause is leaning to formal Services.

There is a 3d. Use of Exhortation to Ministers, to preach the Law; to prepare
People for receiving of the Gospel, because it is the moral Mean, whereby this
Work is wrought. A 2d. Use is, to all the Members of the Visible Kirk, as they
would desire this necessary preparatory Work to be wrought in them, so they
would consider the Spirituality and Perfection of the Law, and examine their
Life according to it.

A second Observation, Viz. That God allows the Spirit of Adoption to these
that have received the Spirit of Bondage; He gives them this Frame, to evidence
the Reality of the Grant of Adoption; and this Grant of Adoption is given them
to test^ his Love, 1 John 1.3. 2ly. To testify his Resp^ to Christ, to whom
they are united, Ephesians. 1.6. A^ 3ly. To confirm their hope of Glory, he gives the
this Honorable Title to it, over and above the T^tle they have to it, by their
Justification.

The Use of this, is 1st. of Consolation; if G^ give them the Spirit of
Adoption, to evidence t^ Reality of this Grant; Then these that have the S^rit
of Adoption may be sure, that God deals wi^ them as with Children; he will
correct them for the faults, Heb. 12 6. He Will pity them, under the straits,
Psalm. 103.13. He Will punish them sparing Mal. 3.17. He Will give them access to
himself un^ their Trouble, Ephesians. 2.18. He Will be reconcilable ^ them after their
strayings, Luke 15. He Will provi^ for all their wants, Mat. 6.32. And he will give
the^ the Heavenly Inheritance in the end, Romans 8.17.

Use of Reproof, since God allows the Spirit (...) Adoption to these that have
had the Spirit of Bondage; It reproves such who have had some measur^ of the
Spirit of Bondage, and do lay Obstructio^ in their own way, for their receiving
the Spirit ^ Adoption: Such are these, 1st. Who refuse ^ take with all the
Aggravations of their Guilt, s^ Psalm. 32.9. 2d. Sort are such, who continue
ignora^ of the Grace of the Gospel. A 3d. sort, are sud^ who continue an
respect to their old Predominan^ A 4th. sort are such, who are tenacious of
their ow^ Righteousness, and will not quite it.

It is to be Observed, That God, in his Soveraig^ Wisdom, deals variously with
his Elect, as to the leaving them longer or shorter time under the Pre^sures of
the Spirit of Bondage; There are some that lie short time under it; As 1st.
Such as are called in their younger Years. 2ly. Such as are called, presently
after their Conversion, to great and difficult Services, as it was with Paul.
3ly. Such as upon their Conversion are called to endure hard ^ersecutions, as
it was with these Converts, Acts ^3. Some he continues longer under the Spirit
of Bondage, As 1st. Such as are Persons of Eminent Gifts, such as Heman was,
Psalm. 88. This he does to to prevent their Pride. A 2d. sort are such, as have
been very gross sinners before their Conversion, such are continued longer
under the fears of Wrath, that their Condition may be a scar to others to live
in gross sins. A 3d. sort are such, who are continued long under these fears,
that they may acquire a skill and sympathy, to be useful and comfortable to
those, that are in the like condition.

For the 3d. Observation, These that once have received the Spirit of Adoption,
the Spirit of God never becomes to them a Spirit of Bondage; A full Conviction,
that the sinner is presently liable to wrath cannot be wrought by Gods Spirit,
in the Adopted Child of God; because such a Conviction as this, is inconsistent
with the Word, seeing the Adopted Child of God, notwithstanding of his Failings,
is not under the Law, but under Grace. If it be questioned, what fears the
Child of God may be allowed to entertain? seeing this Text tells us, that he is
not allowed to entertain a fear of his present actual lyableness into Wrath? It
may be answered to the Question, he should entertain a fear and jealousy of
the Evil of his own Heart, that it may make him neglect his Duty, and mislead
him into sin, Phil. 2.12. 2ly. He should fear, that he will fall under certain
ruin, on supposition of his total Apostasy from God; and this fear will breed
an aversation from sins again light, and upsitting in duty, and halting in the
wa^ of God, seeing that Carriage has an tendency to Apostasy: the Apostle, in
the Epistle to the Hebrews labors to cure their lame walk in the way of God by
proposing the danger of Apostasy to them.

Use 1st. Of Reproof, to such that are Gods Adopted Children, who have
tormenting fears ^ Wrath in their bosom, which fears are not wrough^ by Gods
Spirit, but they flow from their own mi^believing hearts, and Satan's
suggestions, and are permitted of God as Chastisements for their former si^
such, I say; are to be reproved, who reckon the^ fears well grounded, as
judgeing them wrought b^ Gods Spirit, when as they are nothing but permittod of
God for their Chastisement. 2ly. Such ar^ to be reproved, who entertain these
fears, as an ^ for restraint against sin, seeing although they ^ restrain from
the outward Transgression, yet the are never effectual to remove the inward
Inclination to sin.

Use 2d. Of Exhortation, Seeing God allows no^ his Adopted Children to entertain
Tormenting fears of Wrath, they would beware of these Sins, that provocks God
to give them up to their mis-believing Hearts to fill them with these fears; As
first, They would beware of Scandalous Sinning, for a Act of a life after the
flesh draws with it the fear of Everlasting Death. 2ly. They would beware of
Impenitency for their old sins before Conversion; P^ was an man that Exercised
Repentance continually for his old Persecution, and therefore we do not much
read, that he was troubled with the Spirit of Bondage after. 3ly. Beware of
Relapses in Predominants, for these always break the peace of Conscience. 4ly.
Beware of indifferency as to grouth, and of contentment with your present
Attainements in Religion: For it is only such who make progress in the way of
God, that enjoys most of the Comforts of the Gospel, and are freest of
Tormenting Fears, these that walk in the fear of God, walk also in the Comforts
of the Holy Ghost, Acts 9.31. 5ly. Beware of these Sins mentioned, Ephesians. 4.30.
which greives the Spirit of God, and makes him forbear to discover to the
Godly, that they belong to God, as his peculiar Treasure, and where that
discovery is wanting, the Heart cannot but be subject to Tormenting Fears.

Observe 4ly. That the native effect of the presence of the Spirit of Adoption
in a Believer, is Spiritual freedom, it is here opposed to the Spirit of
Bondage; this spiritual liberty appears from the Christians freedom from these
Fears that are awakned in him, through the Accusations of his Conscience for
Guilt. 2ly. In his freedom from the Fears of Death. 3ly. In his freedom from
the Fears of severe Judgments, 4ly. In his freedom from the fear of Gods
Wrath, and frightful Dispensations.

2ly. As the Spirit of Freedom lies in a being quite of these Tormenting Fears;
so it lies in a ready and dareing Application of Gods Promises suiteable to our
Exigence, when we reckon it no presumption to apply promises as we need them.
3ly. It lies in a Liberty for supplication, when we have no Jealousy of God,
that he will take advantage of us in our low condition; but when we can with
great freedom of spirit, open our own Heart before him, as an Affectionate
Father. In a word, Faith has its fullest freedom in Prayer; where the spirit
of freedom is, therein is Believing the acceptance of our Prayers, the
prevalency of our Prayers, and the fullest accomplishment of the promises that
are in our view. 4ly. The Spirit of Liberty lies in this, that with great
facility we get our duty done by the presence of this Spirit, Mastering our
Corruptions, and repelling the Devils Temptations, that may obstruct us in our
Duty; We walk at liberty in keeping Gods Precepts 5ly. The Spirit of Liberty
where it is, it keeps us from the crushing weight of Crosses, because it lets
us see, that all our Crosses are totally free of the Curse of the Law, and so
the Man has Internal Freedom of Spirit, and rest in his Soul under outward
Trouble: And this holds out the greatness of the benefit of the Spirit of
Adoption.

Observe 5ly. That Familiarity in Prayer is the special effect of the Spirit of
Adoption, This Familiarity in Prayer appears in an free and fearless Confession
of our Guilt and Heart-Plagues before God. 2ly. In a humble and submissive
Representation of the difficulties of our case to him. 3ly. In the reasoning
with him for supply, strength and delivery upon the account of his promises, as
Nehemiah did, Neh. 1. 4ly. In peremptor Desires after spiritual Good, when with
Jacob, we will not let him go until he Bless us.

Motives to this Familiarity are. 1st. Gods Fatherly Relation to us. 2ly. His
sitting upon a Throne of Grace, and not upon a Throne of Justice, he follows a
method of Grace, and not of strict Justice in his dispensations toward his
People. 3d. Motive is, Christ's Sympathy is the spring of his Intercession for
his People: A 4th. is, The example of the Saints using this Familiarity with
God, is proposed in the Scripture for our Imitation.

The means to win to this Familiarity, Are 1st. We should study singleness and
sincerity, Heb. 10.22. 2ly. We should beware of these Sins we have repented of,
Vowed against, and have born Chastisements from the hand of God for them. 3ly.
We would beware of Formality, and study Seriousness and Forvour in our
Devotions.

Verse 16. The Spirit it self bears witness with our Spirit, that we are the
Chilren of God


HEre the Apostle proves, That the Sons of God may be Familiar with him,
because they may be assured of their Sonship: Likeas here he proves that the
Children of God must live, by a second Argument: He proves their Sonship,
because it is witnessed by the Testimony of Gods Spirit, and by the Testimony
of their own Conscience.

Observe, 1st. That Gods People may be assured of Sonship.

Observe, 2ly. That the manner of attaining it, is by the Testimony of the
Spirit, and by the Testimony of Conscience.

For the First Observation, I clear the attainableness of assurance, by these
Four Grounds. 1st. God Commands to endeavor to attain it. 2 Pet: 1.11, 12.
2ly. The Saints have attained it before, Romans 8. Last. Ye see the experience of
David frequently in the Psalms. 3ly. He has laid down positive marks in th
Scripture, evidenceing the state of Sonship, many of these are set down in the
1 Epist. John, and it cannot be conceived that the Spirit of God should lay
down these Marks but for this end, that the People of God by discerning them in
themselves may attain to Assurance thereby. 4th. Ground is the necessity and
usefulness of Assurance to Gods People; Without Assurance they cannot win to
the Love of God, which is a necessary Principle for Gospel-Obedience; without
it we cannot r^joice in Tribulation, which is their necessary Duty, and
approveable temper, Romans 5.3. Without it they cannot rejoice in God, as their
Covenanted Portion ibid 10. Without this we cannot be cheerful in Obedidience,
We cannot rejoice and work Righteousness. As also, without Assurance they
cannot rejoice in the hope of the Glory of God; Likeas, it should be
considered, That Gods promises into his People are made for that end, that they
may be applied, and without this Assurance, Believers can have no freedom to
apply these Promses.

The Apostasy of Temporary Believers speaks nothing against this Assurance,
Because true Believers have Seize, that Temporary Believers are wholly
Strangers to, Heb. 6.9. And albeit the Holy Ghost does dispense Threatenings in
the word, against Apostates, Gods method in that, militates nothing against
Assurance: And that first, because these Threatenings are given out indefinitly
against the whole Members of the Visible Church, amongst whom there are many
Hypocrites. And 2ly. Because the Holy Ghost makes use of these Threatenings, to
beget in the Heart of true Believers, a Cautelous Fear, and abstaining from
Sins against Light, which sins in their own nature have a Tendency to Apostasy.

Use of this serves, To reprove the Error of the Roman Church, which maintains,
that true Believers can attain to no more then a conjectural Opinion anent
their sonship. 2ly. It reproves the Carnal Professors of the Visible Church,
who, because of their being strangers to the Operations of the Spirit in the
Hearts of true Believers, look upon Assurance as an unattainable thing.

As to the second Observation, The way to win to this Assurance, it is set down
in the Text, and it is by getting a two fold Testimony for our Sonship; The one
from the Spirit, and the other from our Conscience.

The Spirit Testifies to our Sonship. 1st. By giving an External Revelation in
the Scriptures, that penitent Believers are the Sons of God, John 1.12. 2ly.
The Spirit concurrs with this Testimony, by illuminating the Mind and
Understanding, and persuading it of the truth of this External Revelation, 1
Cor. 2.12. 3ly. The Spirit concurrs to this Testimony, by being an evidence of
our Sonship, by reason of his Gracious sanctifying presence in us: Therefore
the Scripture calls him the Earnest of our Inheritance, Ephesians. 1: 13, and Gods
Seal on us Ephesians: 4.30, 4ly. The Spirit testifies our Sonship by giving us this
Internal Objective Revelation. viz. That we are Sons, and that we have these
true Graces in us, that are the true Marks of our Adopted state; and albeit we
cannot discern a true difference between a suggestion of the Spirit of God
injecting this thought in us, That we are ^on^, differing, I say, from the Act
of our Conscience concluding our Sonship from reflecting on the truth of our
Graces; yet there may be a difference between these Two; the thought and
persuasion injected by the Spirit, being attended with a total expulsion of all
Fears: Whereas the Act of the Conscience may have some mixture of fears
attending it: And if we consider this Text, which asserts the Spirit, to be a
Co-witness with Conscience testifieing Sonship, it supposes that the Spirit
does give this Internal Objective Revelation to the Mind, as a distinct
Testimony from that of the Conscience; For to say, that all that the Spirit,
works in this affair, is to assist the Conscience concluding Sonship from the
discerning of the true Marks of a renewed state; To say this does not seem to
be the whole of his Text; for in that case the Spirit helps only the Conscience
to be a Witness; but he cannot properly be called a Testator himself, yea also
and another Testator besides the Conscience, which the Text does here assert
neither does t^ is Assertion of the Spirits giving this Internal Objective
Revelation anent the Son ship of the Saints, take off Believers from the
written word, as a Rule of their Life, and expose Believers to delusions, by
leading them to wait upon Internal Revelations differing from the Revelations
made in Scripture: And that 1st. Because this Internal Revelation is agreeable
to Scripture-Revelation, because it is the Revelacion of Sonship to a
particular Membe^ of the Church, who has all the Scripture-marks of an Adopted
state; neither is this internal Revelation of Sonship to a particular Believer,
a new Revelation of a new Article of Faith, not contained in the Scriptures,
added to the Creed of other Believers, obliedging them to believe the same; it
is only the Revelation of a Truth, consonant to the Scriptures, made to a
particular Believer to his comfort; And if it be said, the asserting of such an
Revelation leaves men at great uncertainty, because they may take Satan's
Suggestion for the Testimony of the Spirit. It is Answered, The Testimony of
the Spirit is attended with the Testimony of Conscience, concluding upon
rational Grounds their Sonship, he is said here to be a Co-witness with our
Spirits. 2ly. Where it is, it brings with it a disposition and promptitude for
Prayer: It is the Testimony of the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we Cry Abba,
Father. 3ly. It disposes the Soul for Holiness, it is the holy Spirit of
Promise, that gives this Testimony, Ephesians. 1.13.

There are these Three or Four Ways, whereby we may win to this Spirits
Testimony. As. 1st. By exact walking, God gives it as a Reward to his Obedient
Children, 2ly. By being of a Gospel-frame of Spirit, he is the holy Spirit of
Promise, and we receive the Spirit as well in his comforting Testimony, as in
his Sanctifying Virtue, by improving the Gospel; We receive the Spirit by the
hearing of Faith, Gal. 3.2. That is by the acceptance and improving of the
Object of Faith, Viz. the Promise of the Gospel. A 3d. Way we receive the
Spirit, is to be devout, much given to Prayer, the Spirit of Adoption prompting
us to pray, is attended with this Testimony, as we see by their two Verses
joined together A 4th. Way to win at it, is Labor for the constant witnessing
of our own Conscience, testifying to our Son ship, and this is win at by
studying singleness and sincerity, 2 Cor. 1.12. See Job^ Experience, 2ly. We
would labor for the grouth of Grace, for when Grace is grown, it is better
seen than when it is in a mean measure. 3ly. We would labor to have all the
Graces of the Spirit; for our shortcoming in some, makes us jealous we want
all. 4ly. When God calls us to self-denying Acts of Obedience, we would readily
answer Gods Call; For if God take self-denying Acts of Obedience for Evidences
of the Truth of Grace, a man's own Conscience may safely take them for a sure
Evidence of the same, for God says, Genesis 22. That by Abraham's offering up of
Isaac, he knew that he feared God.

Verse 17. And if Children, then Heirs, Heirs of God, and Joint-Heirs with
Christ: if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified
together.


HERE the Apostle infers a certainty of the Children of Gods possessing the
Inheritance; If Children, then Hears; and he commends that Inheritance from
these two Grounds; As 1st. It is an Inheritance suitable to the Giver; they are
Heirs of God. 2d. Ground is, it is the same Inheritance possessed by the Lord
Christ, they are Coheirs with him; The Apostle here also prevents an Objection
that might be made against this Doctrine, which might be taken from the
suffering Lot of the Saints; and he turns the Objection to a Confirmation of
this Truth, See 1 Pet. 1.14 If so be that we suffer with him, that we may be
also glorified together.

Observe 1st. From the Text, that God's Children shall certainly possess the
Inheritance; The 1st. Ground of this Objective Certainty is, the Oath and
Promise of the Covenant, See Heb. 6. 2d. Ground is, the two Privileges of the
Saints, whereby they have Right to this Inheritance. And these are 1st.
Justification. Tit. 3.6. 2ly. Adoption, See the Text. 3d. Ground are the Seals
whereby God confirms the Promise of this Inheritance to his People. 1st. Seal
is the internal Seal of the Spirit, Ephesians. 1.13. 2d. Seal is the external Seal of
the Sacrament of the Supper, which is a Seal of the Communion of his Body and
Blood, the Bread which we break is the Communion of his Body, and the Cup which
we drink, is the Communion of his Blood, 2 Cor. 10. And we know that the
Communion of his Body and Blood secures Eternal Life to the Believer, according
to his Doctrine, John. 6. The 4th. Ground of Certainty, is the Enjoyment of the
first Fruits of the Spirit, Viz. Peace and Joy, which are the Beginnings of
Heaven; They that wait for the first Fruits, they wait for the Adoption and
Redemption of their Body, see the Verses subsequent to this Text. The 5th.
Ground of Certainty is, the performance of that Good to the Children of Israel,
that was Typical of this. God possessed the natural Seed of Abraham, of the
earthly Canaan, which was a Type that he would possess the Spiritual Seed of
Abraham of the Heavenly Canaan.

Use, This Exhorts the Godly to be content with their Lot, and to make nothing
their Treasure and Felicity, which is upon Earth. 2^y. It Exhorts the Godly to
attain a subjective certainty of this Inheritance, and to found that subjective
certainty on the former Grounds, which clear the objective certainty of the
same. 3ly. This lets the World see, that Godliness is no folly, because the
Godly have sufficient Grounds, for the certain Possession of their Salvation.

Observe, 2ly. That the Inheritance is such as becomes God to give; It is
clear, because it is a suitable Expression of his infinite Love, 1 John 3.1
1st. It is a manifestation of the reality of the Grant of Adoption: when Gods
People shall enjoy it, there will be no room left for doubting that God did
really reckon them his Children, when he favored them with Adoption; the day
when they possess that Inheritance is called a day of the manifestation of the
Sons of God. 2ly. God is an all sufficient God, this is an all-sufficient
Inheritance, God is all in all, 1 Cor. 15. The Godly inherit all things, Rev.
2^. 3ly. God is an Eternal and Unchangeable God, and therefore it is an Eternal
Inheritance, it cannot be wasted away. It is an Inheritance incorruptible, that
fades not away, 1 Pet. 1.3. 4ly. We cannot be dispossessed of this Inheritance,
not by Power or Violence; for the Omnipotence of our God secures us against all
opposition, the Inhabitants of the New Jerusalem are within a City highly
walled: We cannot be dispossessed by Law-Quirks or Cheats, for we have the
ultimate Decision of the great Judge, Mat. 25. see the Process of Judgment;
our God is an holy God, and therefore this Inheritance is undefiled, 1 Pet.
1.3. Created Enjoyments are subject to be abused by men, through their
Corruption, (it is a piece of the vanity of the Creature, to which it is
subjected, that it may be made Fuel to Lust) but this is a Land, wherein
dwells Righteousness, there is nothing enters that defiles.

This is to reprove those, that have low and carnal Conceptions of this
Inheritance. 2ly. It reproves such, who have mean Expectations from God in this
World, and are content with mean Measures of Spiritual Good, seeing God designs
to possess them of such an Excellent Inheritance.

Observe 3ly. That the Inheritance to be possessed by Gods Children, for the
nature of it, is the same possessed by the man Christ; the Glory the Father gives
to him, he gives to them, John 17.^4. They participate of the same Spirit with
him, they that have not the Spirit of Christ, are none of his: that same
Spiritual Life that he has, is conferred on them; because he lives, they live,
John 14. And as the living Father sent him, and he lives by the Father, so they
that eat him shall live by him, John 6.57. The Glory of their Body is of the
same kind with his, Phil. 3. last. That same Love that the Father has to him,
vents it self in suitable Expressions toward them, John 17. last. They are
admitted to the same glorious Place with him, John 14.3. That same light of
Glory, whereby they see him as he is, brings them to a conformity with him, 1
John 3.2. The Reason of this is, their Adoption, which calls for this
Participation of Glory; if Children then Coheirs with Christ, and this
Adoption is granted to give them a Title to this Inheritance, 1 John 3.2. There
must be conformity betwixt the Head and the Members, but Christ must have the
Preeminence, in respect of Degrees, Col. 1.18. He is the First born amongst
many Brethren.

This speaks the great Love of the Redeemer, that is content to communicate his
Inheritance with us, 2ly. It calls on Believers to make their Right
unquestionable, to this excellent Inheritance. 3ly. It exhorts Believers to be
content with their suffering Lot, seeing they are to share in his Glory. 4ly. It
exhorts them to imitate him in his Obedience: it was universal, he did always
what pleased the Father: it was conscientious, out of respect to the Fathers
Command. As the Father gave him Commandment, even so he did, John 15. last. It
was single, done with respect to the Fathers Glory; he glorified his Father on
Earth, he sought not his own Glory, but the Glory of him that sent him; It was
a self-denying Obedience, he humbled himself and became obedient to death.

Observe 4ly. Christ behooved to suffer before he was glorified, Luke 24.
Christ behooved to suffer, and so to enter into his Glory; the Reason is,
because he behooved to satisfy Justice fully, as the Soverty of his People,
before Justice could admit him into the Possession of his Glory. 2ly. He
behooved to go through the Course of his Obedience, before the possession of
his Reward. 3ly. The Father gives a full instance of the consistence of his
Love with a suffering Lot, 4ly. By this, the Father would make a discovery,
what should be the course of his Providence, toward his Adopted Children, viz.
That they should be brought, through, many sufferings, to the possession of
their Glory.

And this tells us 1st, That we should not stumble at the sufferings of Gods
People, as tho that Lot signified Gods want of Love to them. or the want of a
purpose to Glorify them; 2ly. It reproves the Coffeehouse of Gods Children
with their suffering Lot; It is an arrogant presumption in them, to expect that
God will use more tenderness in his dealing toward them, then he has used
toward his own only begotten Son. 3ly. It may contribute toward the
strengthening the Faith of the Saints in their Extremity of Sufferings, seeing
Christ's Sufferings did not mar his Glory, they may expect that their
Sufferings will not mar theirs. 4ly. It reproves those that are impatiently
desirous of Glory, and would shift a suffering Lot. 5ly. It bids us lay our
Count with a suffering Lot in this World. And this is a 5th. Observation from
the Text: And this is done for the Trial of their Faith, 1 Pet. 1.5. For the
Exercise of their Patience, Ja. 1.3. For Mortification of their Sin; and their
preparation for Heaven, 2 Cor: 4. last. As also, That they may have occasion
for many Experiences of Gods Love, for Patience in Tribulation, works
Experience, Romans 5. And that they may have opportunity to prove the sincerity
of their Love to God; and that they may try whether they Love God, even under
h^ Afflicting-Hand.

Use, Seeing this Providence is so reasonable, ^ your Heart comply with it. and
let it be the oc^sion of the Exercise of all these Graces to you; and that your
Heart may win to a compliance with it Labor 1st. to be Mortified to the Vanity
of the World. 2ly. Labor to Mortify your Predom^nants, which alienate you
from the Cross, as takin^ away the Fuel from these Lusts. 3ly. Labor to a
firm Faith, that your Sufferings will not, neith^ can mar your Glory. 4ly. Be
often considering That a part of your conformity with Christ stands ^ this, and
that your Sufferings are an Moral mea^ appointed of God, to make you meet for
Glory.

Use 2d. If this be our appointed Lot, Let u^ rather be desirous to have the
Blessing of it, then t^ be quite of it.

Use 3d. It reproves those, who stumble at the Providence, and that have their
Mind alienate from Religion, upon that account.

Observe 6ly. The description that is given o^ right Suffering, it is called a
Suffering with Christ which is a testifying the same Truth, that he testified
unto, 1 Timothy 1.13. It is not a Suffering for maintaining of Errors, or for
committing of Crimes. 1 Pet. 4.13. 2ly. It is an imitating of Christ in the
manner of our Sufferings, which takes in a Suffering flowing from the like
Principles, that his Sufferings did flow from; such as Love to God, Jo. 14.31
Love to the People of God, Jo. 15.12. Rev. 1.5 Self-denial, and Humility, Phil.
2.3, 4. Patience, 1 Pet. 2.22. Heb. 12.3. and Faith, Heb. 12, 2. Jo. 17.2, 3.
3ly. The imitation of Christ, in the manner of his Suffering lies in this, that
the forest Sufferings did not hinder him to be Active in Duty, so far as was
possible, he went about doing good, Acts 10. He comforted and warned his
Disciples under his Agony in the Garden, Matthew. 27. 4ly. This Imitation, lies
in the entire submission to the disposal of Providence, not my will but thine
be done says our Lord. 5ly. This Imitation lies in our meekness toward our
Persecutors, Father forgive them, for they know not what they are doing, was
the Language of our Savior on the Cross. And 6ly. This imitation lies, in not
declining the variety of sufferings, and the extremity of them.

Use 1st. Of Trial, To try whether we imitate Christ in the manner of our
suffering; Use 2d. Of Imitation.

Motives to this Duty are 1st. He is proposed as our Pattern, Heb. 12.1. 1 Pet.
2.21: Motive 2d. is, The Issues of his Sufferings are proposed for our
Encouragement, Heb: 12, 2. 3d. Motive is, He was Innocent, and we are Guilty.
4th. Motive is, His Sufferings took the sting out of our sufferings.

Verse 18. For I reckon, that the sufferings of the present time are not worthy
to be compared with the Glory which shall be revealed in us.


THE Apostle, in the former Verses, having encouraged Christians to suffer for
Christ, from these two Grounds: The one is, That their suffering Lot is, the
way appointed by God to bring them to Glory; And the other is, That Christ's
Suffering Lot, was the way that he came to the Possession of his Glory: He, in
this Verse encourages them to suffer for Christ; from this Ground, that there
is no proportion, betwixt their Sufferings and their Glory; That there is much
more satisfying good in their Glory, nor there is discouraging evil in their
Cross. This is clear; if ye consider, That tho their Affliction causes Grief,
yet their Glory has in it, not only the removal of the occasion of their
Grief, but it affords them matter of Exuberant Joy, Psalm. 16, last 2ly. Their
Afflictions do only afflict their outward Man, and their inward Man is
Afflicted, by way of sympathy; But Glory intimately possesses the Soul. 3ly.
There is no Christian that has all Afflictions, but the Glorified Saint wants
no comfort that is suitable to, or can gratify the new Nature. 4ly. The
Crossed Christian has an mixture of Comfort with his Cross, both Temporal and
Spiritual, but the Glorified Saint, his Comforts are not mixed with grief, or
occasions thereof: no Death, no Sorrow, no Crying in Heaven. 5ly. The Number of
the Comforting Ingredients, that are in the Lot of the Glorified Saint, exceeds
far the Number of the Afflicting Ingredients, that is in the sufferings of the
Christian, while he is in his militant state; none can reckon up the particular
good things that are in the Glorified state; Comforts springing from Communion
with God, with Angels and Saints, Comforts springing from the sanctity of the
Soul, and incorruptibility of the Body; Comforts springing from Reflections on
their confirmed state, all these are innumerable. 6ly. The Evil of the
suffering of the Saints, is but Temporary, they end with this present Life, as
the Text says, but the Glory to come is Eternal.

Use 1st. Of Instruction, To let us see, that the voluntary Sufferings of the
Saints, are not condignally Meritorious of Eternal Life; For 1st, God can be a
Debtor to none, the Creature owes it self and all it has to him. 2ly. The
suffering Saint receives more Spiritual and Eternal Good from God, even in this
Life, then can sufficiently compense any Evil that is in their Suffering Lot.
3ly. The sufferings of the Saints are Chastisements for their Sins, 1 Pet.
4.17. Therefore they cannot be Meritorious. 4ly. The Voluntary Sufferings of
the Saints have Moral defects attending on them, they spring not from that
degree of Love and Zeal that becomes, they are attended with Unbelief and
Impatience.

This serves for the Humiliation of sufferers for Christ, and may be useful to
refute the Popish Opinion anent the merit of Martyrs.

Use 2d. To encourage Folks to suffer for Christ: For 1st. It is an Honor to
suffer for him; To give a Testimony to that sacred Verity that he Preached, see
Phil. 1. last. Acts 5. last. 2ly. Their Sufferings for Christ are short, they
terminate with Life. 3ly. They affect but the outward Man, and take but away
our outward Enjoyments, they do not reach our Soul. 4ly. They consist in the
loss of these things, that we will want at Death, whether we will or not. 5ly.
They are Medicinal and preparatory for Heaven, 2 Cor. 4, last. 6ly. As our
sufferings abounds for Christ, so our Consolations abound through him, 2 Cor.
1, 6.

The 3d. Use is, Of Exhortation, to reckon the good of Glory greater then the
Evil of Suffering, It Exhorts us to give a firm assent of our Mind, and draw a
full Conclusion from the former Premises, and so deliberatly to choose a
suffering Lot, for Christ, in the World.

Helps to win to this assent, and make this choice Are 1st We would labor to
have a clear view, by Faith, of the Reality and Excellency of this Glory, and
to pierce through those Vails, that hides it from sense; the Text says, It is a
Glory to be revealed; the Vails are the sinfulness of our state, the frailty of
our Nature and Death, the Contempt and Persecution from the World, the mean
measures and frequent Interruptions of our Communion with God.

2d, Help to win to this choice, Labor to be Mortified to all
Creature-Enjoyments, by considering their insufficiency and unsuitableness to
make us happy, to quiet our Conscience and content our Mind. 2ly By
considering, outward things may be possessed by the outward Man, but they cannot
be intimatly possessed by the Soul, 3ly, By considering the uncertainty of our
possessing of them they may be taken from us, or we may be taken from them.

A 3d. Help is, Labor for the moderating the Fears of Persecutors Malice, as
knowing their fury is under restraint by providence.

A 4th Help is, Daily meditate on the Excellency of this Glory, Considering it
is the Glory possessed by Christ, and suitable to Divine Adoption.

Use 4th. Seeing there is a greater Good in the Glory to come, then there is
Evil in the suffering Lot of the Saints, surely this reproves those who look
upon the Saints as Fools, because they choice deliberately a suffering Lot for
Christ, before they run the hazard of losing the future Glory.

Verse 19. For the earnest expectation of the Creature, waits for the
manifestation of the Sons of God.

And Verse 20. For the Creature was made subject to Vanity, not willingly, but
by reason of him, who has subjected the same in hope.


THE Apostle, to reconcile Gods People to their Suffering Lot, confirms the
excellency of their Glory from this. That the Creature shall attain its ancient
perfection as an attendant of that Glory, And he confirms the certainty of this
Glory, from this, that the Creation will never be brought to its primitive
Vigor and Beauty, until this Glory come, And the Creation must be brought to
that Vigor; For nihil violentum est durabile: He proposes in the 19 Verse
(speaking figura^ively) That the Creature is a pattern for our Imitation,
casting us a Copy for Patience and Hope under our Crosses; And he lays down in
the 20 Verse the Condition of the Creature, that it has need of this
Metaphorical Patience and Hope, because it was made subject to Vanity. 2ly. He
lays down the Ground of the Creatures Hope. 1st. Because God subjected the same
to Vanity in Hope, that is, he never designed, when he imposed the Vanity on
the Creature, to perpetuate the same. The 2d. Ground of the Creatures Hope is,
that their relief necessarly follows the Liberty of the Sons of God, because
Vanity was imposed on the Creature for the Sin of Man, therefore Vanity must be
removed totally from the Creature, when the Sin of Man is totally taken away;
the Creature it self must be delivered from the Bondage of Corruption, into the
Glorious Liberty of the Sons of God.

In speaking to these Verses, I shall clear first, what is meant by the
Creature. 2ly. What is meant by the Creatures subjection to Vanity. 3ly. How it
is not willingly subject. 4ly. How the Creature does expect and wait patiently
for its relief; And lastly come to speak practically to those Graces that the
Apostle would lead Believers to the Exercise of, by the stirring them up to
imitate the Creature. And these are 1st. Hope. 2ly. Patience, The Creature does
earnestly wait for the manifestation of the Sons of God; The 3d. Grace that the
Creature is proposed as a Pattern to us here, is the Grace of Submission to the
will of God. The 20 Verse says, That the Creature is subject to Vanity, by
reason of him, viz. God, that subjected the same in hope. And

1st. By the Creature is here meant, the frame of the Universe, and Mass of the
Elements, for it is distinguished here from the Godly, who expects Heaven, and
it is incongruous to say, that it is meant of the Wicked, for they neither
expect nor desire future Glory.

For the 2d thing, The Vanity that the Creature is subject to, you may take it
up either Relatively or Absolutely; The Relative Vanity of the Creature
consists in this, that there is nothing in the Creature that can satisfy Man's
desires, quiet his Conscience, or put him in a quiet or stable condition, free
of all Troubles, and enjoying all satisfaction; and the Spring of this Vanity,
is the Creatures insufficiency. 2ly. The Creatures perishing Nature and
Corruptibility, 3ly. The uncertain Enjoyment of the Creature, we may be taken
from it, or it from us. 4ly. The incapacity of the Creature to be immediately
possessed by the Soul.

Next, ye may consider the Vanity of the Creature absolutely, and it stands in
that degenerate condition of the Creature, from what it was in the state of
Innocence. And 1st. It stands in its Corruptibility, the Elements are
corruptible and changeable, as to their Parts, as witness the changes that are
made in Fire, Air, Earth and Water. 2ly. It stands in the defect of their
Primitive Vigor, the Earth is not so fruitful as it was in Innocence. 3ly. It
stands in the Creatures hurtfulness to man, and considering the noisome Plants
and Herbs brought forth by the Earth, the unwholesomeness of the Air, and the
malignant Influences of the Heavens. 4ly. It stands, in that the Creatures are
but Fuel to men's Lusts. 5ly. They are subjected to Satan, in part to gratify
his malice against Mankind, the Devil raised a stormy Wind, and destroyed Jobs
Children.

For the 3d. Thing, by the Creatures not subjecting it self willingly to
Vanity, is mean'd, that this Vanity is against the first Institution and Order
of God in the Creation. And 2ly. That this Vanity is against the natural
Propensity and Inclination of the Creature.

For the 4th. Thing, that the Creature was made subject to Vanity by reason of
God, the meaning of it is, That albeit the Creatures have a natural Capacity to
be more beautiful and perfect than they are, yet they bear the Vanity that is
imposed on them, by reason of that Obediential Subjection they owe to their
Creator, every Creature keeping that Condition appointed to them by God.

5ly. By the Creatures expectation of its liberty, is not meaned any proper
Hope; but that the Creature has a tendency to its own Perfection, and God
having made it perfect, in the state of Innocence, what ever Defects it has
acquired since the Fall of Man, it cannot be perpetual

We come now to speak to the 19. Verse, In which ye may observe these Two
Things, Viz. 1st. The Creatures Hope and Patience, 2ly. The Object of both,
that is the Manifestation of the Sons of God.

Observe 1st. That we are called to exercise the hope of Heaven, in Imitation
of the Creature. Reasons of it, Are 1st. It engages to Purity, 1 John 3.6. 2ly.
It supports under outward Afflictions, 1 Samuel 30.3. 3ly. It supports under
Desertions, Psalm. 42. 4ly. It makes folks thankful for their Mercy, Psalm.
71.14. The Way to come by this Hope, is 1st. To live by Faith, Romans 15.13. 2ly.
To discern our Regeneration, 1 Pet. 1.3. 3ly. To continue in affection to the
Godly, as the unquestionable Sign of Grace, Heb. 6.12. And 4ly. To remember
former Experiences.

For the Object of the Creatures Hope, it is said to be the manifestation of
the Sons of God; this Figurative Manifestation of the Sons of God, is ascribed
to the Creature, because they will never attain to their Primitive Perfection
and Beauty, till the Sons of God be Glorified, and until the last Day, At
which time, or rather the Beginning of Eternity, when there shall be a
Manifestation of the Sons of God, It shall be manifested then how excellent a
Dignity it is to be the Sons of God; the outward Visible Effects of Adoption,
are delayed till that day, and therefore the Redemption of the Body is called
Adoption in the subsequent Verses; It is true, the adopted receive the Spirit
of Adoption, whereby they themselves may know they are adopted, but that effect
is not so discernible by others. 2ly. At that day it shall be manifested, who
are the Sons of God, the Book of Life will be opened to the view of all, and
the Children will have the Sentence of the Judge for their Possession of this
Inheritance, see the Process of Judgment, Mat. 25. 3ly. It will be made
manifest in that day, what good Works the Children of God have done, God will
bring to light the hidden Counsels of the Heart, and so every man shall have
praise of God, see 2 Cor. 4

This Description of the last Day affords us an Use of Consolation, to the
Christian that doubts of his Adoption. 2ly. To the Christian contemned by the
World. 3ly. To the Christian censured by the World for his Hypocrisy. A 2d.
Use is of Exhortation, to exhort folks to live suitably to this Adoption, seeing
its Manifestation is so certain.

From the 20. Verse. Observe the Vanity of all this visible Creation, and its
Insufficiency to make men happy; And therefore Folks, 1st. Should not have
excessive Desires after it; Our Desires should not be p^remptor, like Rache^s
after Children, we should be content to want what God denies. 2ly. It reproves
these that have big Expectations from the World, like that fool Luke 12. who
builded his large Barnes: We should not expect full contentment of Mind, or
quiet of Conscience from any thing here away. 3ly. It reproves those that are
unsober in their Enjoyments, who do not use the World as though they used it
not, such who look on their Enjoyments as perpetual, and suffers their heart so
to run out after the Worlds Good, that they turn incapable to enjoy God, or the
Privileges of the Gospel. 4ly. It reproves those that gives way to anxious
Care, about obtaining of the Worlds Good, which anxiety makes them with Martha
neglect the one thing needful, and choaks the Word, and makes it become
unfruitful, see Phil. 4.6 5ly. It reproves these that give way to Excess of
Sorrow, when Providence separates their Enjoyments from them, sorrow is
excessive, when it hinders them always to rejoice in God, and when it weakens
their health.

A 2d. Use of Exhortation, from the Vanity of the Creature, is, People should
be crucified to it; That they may win to this, they should labor 1st. For
Mortification of their Lusts. 2ly. They should labor for a lively Faith of a
better World 3ly. They should observe the frequent Disappointments they meet
with from the Worlds Good.

From the Creatures aversion to this Vanity, It is subject to Vanity, not
willingly: Christians may learn, they are allowed to have a lawful Aversion
from the Cross, which aversion kythes in their Prayers to remove the Cross, and
in using all lawful Endeavors for its removing.

From the Creatures being subject to Vanity, by reason of Gods imposing it on
them; Christians should learn an entire submission to cross Providence: Which
submission kythes, 1st, In an grateful Acknowledgement of the present Mercies
of their Lot. 2ly. In a cordial Compliance with their Duty, notwithstanding of
their Cross. 3ly: In a believing of Gods Promises, made to them notwithstanding
of it. 4ly. In a Justification of Gods Way toward them, notwithstanding of the
same. 5ly. In a refusing of all unwarrantable Ways for their relief.

Helps to win at this Submission, Are 1st. A full Conviction of their Guilt; a
living man should not complain for the punishment of his Sins. A 2d. Is the due
consideration of the Goodness, Justice, and Sovereignty of God. A 3d. Is, the
firm belief of Divine Wisdom, which can extract our profit out of the most
dark and cross Providence we can live under, Romans 8.28.

The Text says, that he subjected the same in Hope; To hold out that God did
not design to perpetuate its Vanity, but had appointed its restoration to its
primitive Perfection. And this is set down here, as an Ground of the Creatures
Metaphorical Hope; And from this we may learn, from the Creatures Example, to
strengthen our Hope by the consideration of this; That God designs not to keep
us perpetually in Misery, but there is a firm Determination in Heaven for our
Relief, we may put on the Breastplate of Faith, and Love, because, as the
Apostle says to the Thessalonians, God has not appointed (...) to Wrath, but
to obtain Salvation by Jesus Christ.

Verse 21. Because the Creature it self also shall be delivered from the
Bondage of Corruption, into the Glorious Liberty of the Sons of God.


THE Apostle, having, Verse 19. ascribed a Figurative Hope to the Creature; in
the 20. and 21, Verses, he lays down the Grounds of that Hope and in the 20
Verse there are Two Grounds laid down, whereof one is, That the Vanity to which
it was subject, was contrary to its natural Inclination, and Gods primitive
Institution in the state (...) Innocence: The Text says, It was not subjected
(...) vanity willingly. A 2d. Ground is, there was a fi^ed purpose in God, for
the restitution of the Creature to its Primitive Vigor and Beauty; He subjec^
the Creature to Vanity under Hope. And there a 3d. Ground of the Creatures
Hope, laid down (...) the 21. Verse, Viz. The necessity of the Creature
partaking, according to its measure and capacity, (...) the glorious Liberty of
the Sons of God. And there is a Reason given for this, because Vanity was
imposed on the Creature for the sins of Gods People and therefore when Gods
Children are made free (...) sin, both as to its Guilt and Presence, it is but
re^sonable, that the Creature should be liberate of i^^ Vanity also.

We may Observe here 1st. That Gods Children are, while they are here away,
under Bondage. (...) They shall certainly meet with a glorious Liberty from
that Bondage. 3ly. When they meet with that Liberty, the Creature shall then,
and not till then, be liberate from their Bondage.

For the 1st. Observation, Though the Godly be not slaves to Satan nor to Sin,
yet they are under a sort of Captivity, for while here away, they are subject
to Death, and to the frailties of Nature, and to great fears that Death may
have its sting toward them; for though they be free of the sting of Death,
which is the Venom of the Curse of the Law in it, yet they are not altogether
free of the fears of the sting of Death. 2ly. The Godly, tho they be free of
the reigning Power of Lust, yet they are not free of the solicitations of it,
Paul, complains of this, Romans 7. 3ly. Though the Godly be not Children of the
Kingdom of Darkness, and Slaves to Satan, yet here-away they are subject to
many vexing Temptations from him, and therefore this present condition should
make us more willing and desireous to dye, that we may be freed from this state
of Bondage. And 2ly. It lets us see, that considering Christians, that have a
view of this Bondage, cannot send without Faith.

Observe 2ly. That the Children of God shall certainly get this glorious
Liberty, because here it is taken for granted, and fully and clearly promised
in the Word, and therefore we should als firmly believe it. There are three
things that Christians should firmly believe as to this Liberty. As 1st. A
total freedom from the indwelling Presence of sin. 2ly. A total freedom from
Satan's Temptations. 3ly! A total freedom from Death. I shall give the Scripture
Grounds, that the Christian has allowed to him, for founding his Faith and
Hope, of all these three upon.

For the First; Grounds to found the Faith of a Christian, to make him believe
and expect the total removal of sin, are these, 1st. Christ designed its total
removeal by his Death, we cannot think that he can be frustrate of his Design,
see Ephesians. 5.25, 26. 2ly. His Death did merit the crucifixion and killing of the
Old Man, Romans 6.6. 3ly. His Resurrection is a Pledge thereof see Romans 8.11. For
the Spirit that raised Christ from the dead, did it to assure him, and the
Believing World, that he could and would raise up all his Members perfectly
from a Death in Sin. 4ly. The Spirits Presence beginning this Work, says, he
will perfect it. because his great Design, when he enters into the Child of
God's Heart, is not to make a partial, but a total conformity between him and
Christ. 5ly. The Privilege of Justification says it must be, for if all our
guilt be pardoned, and our Remission be complete, according to the Promise of
the new Covenant, Ezekiel. 18 and Ezekiel. 33. Where it is said, that all Iniquity
shall be forgiven, and none shall be mentioned. Then Corruption must be
removed: for a loving God, and a loving Mediator will remove such an hurtful
Evil from Believers, since the state of Justification tells, it may he done
without reflection on his Justice. A 6th. Ground of Faith, for the removal of
sin is this, that Baptism is the External Seal, confirming the Promise, for its
total removal, and therefore its said, we are buried as to our old Man, with
Christ, by our Baptism Romans 6.4.

For the Second piece of the Christians Liberty Viz. A freedom from Satan's
Temptations; the Grounds to found our Faith of that upon, Are 1st. The Promise
made to Eva, that the Seed of the Woman should trample down the Head of the
Serpent; from which Paul infers, Romans 16. That God would tread Satan under
their feet shortly. A 2d. Ground is, Christ by his Death has taken away Satan's
Plea against us, Heb. 2.14, 15 For all his ^lea was, that we were Enemies to
God, and therefore it were but just that we should be given up to him, to
delude and vex us; But now Christ by his Death has destroyed him, that is, he
has enervate the strength of his Plea, by reconcileing us to God, and
therefore he is said, Col. 2.15. to spoil Principalities and Powers, and to
triumph over them on the Cross, by setting at liberty their Captives. A 3d,
Ground is, Christ's Personal Victory over Satan's Temptations and Persecutions
which Victory he attained in our Nature, by making use of the Sword of the
Spirit, which is the Word of God, and exercising the Graces of the Spirit, and
by wrestling in Prayer with the Father, see Mat. 4. and Mat. 26.41. He overcame
by Faith, Love, Patience, Meekness, Submission, and Zeal; and this Victory was
given to him, to be a Pledge to him, and his Spiritual Seed that are
incorporate in him, of their total Freedom from his seduceing and vexing
Temptations. A 4th. Ground is, the strength of Christ's Spirit, that is stronger
in Believers, than the Devil that is in the World.

For the Third piece of the Liberty of the Christian, it stands in his delivery
from death, and there are these following Grounds, upon which the Christian may
build the Faith of his Delivery from it First Ground is, Gods Covenant Relation
to him, it was from this Relation, that God had to Abraham, that Christ
inferred the necessity of the Resurrection Math. 22. 2d. Ground is the
Believers Union with Christ, that necessarly draws with it a conformity of the
Members with the Head in respect of Immortality, these that sleep in Jesus, God
will bring with him, 1 Thessalonians. 4.4. A 3d. Ground is, the the Believers Body is a
consecrate Temple to the Holy Ghost, and therefore it cannot be always subject
to Corruption. A 4th. Ground is, Christ ha^ power to raise the Body, Phil. 3
last. A 5th. Grou^ is, He has undertaken to the Father to do it, he says he
will raise them up at the last Day, John 6.4^ A 6th. Ground is Christ's Death,
which gives assurance of Immortality. 1st. Because it is a full sa^faction for
sin; and it is unpardoned sin that ca^ keep folk eternally under Deaths Power:
It w^ by means of his Death for the Redemption of Transgressions, that those
that are Called, receive the Promise of the Eternal Inheritance, see Heb. 9.15.
Besides God the Father gives an Promise of Etern^ Life in the Covenant, and
Christ's Death is a Ratification of that Covenant, he that spared not his own
So^ will he not with him freely give us all things, Ro^ 8.32. Likeways Christ
gives us Eternal Life in h^ Testament, and his death is an Evidence of the
unalterableness of his Purpose to Confer it. 6ly. The Resurrection is a Ground
of Faith for it, because (...) is the absolution of our Soverty, Romans 4 last.
and (...) Pledge of our Resurrection, Christ is the first Fruit^ of them that
sleep, 1 Cor. 15. A 7th. Ground is his Ascension into Heaven, if he had not
obtained Eternal Redemption by his Blood and Suffering, which includes
immortality, Justice had given him no access to Heaven, he could not have
entered into that holy Place by his own Blood, except he had obtained
immortality for us by that Blood, which he as Soverty undertook to do, see Heb.
9: 12. The 8th. Ground is, his Session at the Fathers Right Hand, which is
given him as a Pledge of his Victory over all his Peoples Enemies, whereof
Death is one, Psalm. 110.1. The 9th. Ground is, Christ's Intercession for
Salvation to his People to the uttermost, which includes in it the immortality
of the Body, Heb. 7.25. 10th. Ground is, the Spiritual Life of Believers is a
sure Pledge of the Bodies Immortality, Romans 8.11.

From the assurance of this glorious Liberty, we infer, 1st. That we have a
sufficient Comfort under the unavoidable Vanity, that sticks to all Worldly
Enjoyments. 2ly. We have an sufficient Support under all our Sufferings, of
whatsoever kind they be. 3ly. We have full Encouragement, to abound in the Work
of the Lord; seeing our Labor will not be in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor: 15. last.

Observe 3ly. That the Creature will participate of this glorious Liberty; For
man's sin being taken away as to its guilt and presence, all the bad
consequences of it must be taken away likeways, whereof this is one, the
imposing of Vanity on the Creation; the day is coming when the Creatures
Defectiveness, as to man's use, and its hurtfulness to man shall be removed, The
time draws on, when the Creature will be no more made use of by Satan, (...)
satisfy his Malice against Man: nor can be mo^ made use of, to gratify Man, as
to his corrupt Lu^ This cannot but be very comfortable to the God^ when it
shall fall out to be, who now in the tim^ of their Pilgrimage, are taken up in
grieving for the ill of sin, and for the Marks of Gods displeasure against, it
on the Creature.

Verse 22. For we know, that the whole Cr^ation groaneth, and travelleth in pa^
together until now.


HEre the Creature is Figuratively proposed, (...) an excellent Pattern to the
Saints, for man excellent Frames becoming them, in the state (...) their
Pilgrimage And 1st. Groaning, is ascribe to the Creature, because the Vanity
imposed on it, i^ contrare to its natural Inclination, and Primit^ State. And
this Groaning calls to the Christian (...) be affected with their Bondage under
the Rema^ders of sin, and vexing Temptations of Satan, a^ fears of Death. 2ly.
There is a continuation groaning under many preceding Ages, ascribed (...) it,
it is said to groan even till now; to tell us t^ neither the soreness of the
Vanity imposed upon (...) Creature, nor its long continuance does break (...)
Figurative Hope of its Liberty ascribed to it; a^ this is done, to call the
Christian to imitate the Cr^ture, by keeping up of his Hope of Liberty,
n^withstanding of the sore and continuing Crosses, the may be trysted with in
this Life: 3ly. Travel^ in pain, as a Woman does, is ascribed Figurati^ly to
the Creature, because, as a Woman's Travel is an endeavor for releif, so the
Creature has an natural tendency for its freedom; and this Figurative
Endeavor, ascribed to the Creature for its Liberty, calls the Christian to
have a proper Endeavor for his

Observe 1st. Here, That the Christian is called to groan, and to be affected
with his Bondage under Sin and Satan, see Rom 7.24 This groaning imports sorrow
for sin, and a vehement desire for relief: and this reproves those that are
stupid under sin, and the sad Consequences of it; and this Stupidity may arise
from a feared Conscience. Or, 2ly. From the want of observation of the Effects
of Divine Displeasure against sin. Or 3ly From the deceit of the Heart, that
clothes sin with the Cloak of Virtue: this stupidity procures to us the
continuance and addition of many troubles, and renders them all unprofitable.

Observe, 2ly. We should imitate the Creature, who keeps up its Figurative
Hope, under its sore and lasting Vanity, through many Ages; So the Christian
should live in the hope of Liberty, notwithstanding of his sore and long
Crosses; And I give these Three Reasons for it, 1st. Because Christ himself,
his Mystical Body, and individual Believers, have been trysted with such an
Dispensation; consider the Bondage in Egypt, and Captivity in Babylon, see the
case of Job, Heman, and David. A 2d. Reason is, the Advantagiousness of Hope to
the Christian in such a case; It preserves the Love of God in the heart,
mitigates the Cross, makes them submissive to Providence, and makes them
cheerful in their Duty. 3d. Reason is, that the^ should hope under such an case
because this Dispensation is appointed for them by infinite Wisdom, as an fit
Dispensation for their Good; An^ First God may intend it, as a suitable
Expression o^ his Fatherly Displeasure against their sin: An Af^fliction of a
lesser Degree and of an shorter continuance than what they are trysted with,
could not sufficiently express his dislike at some of the^ Crimes: No less
trouble could David be trysted with for numbering the People, than three day^
Pestilence; No less was appointed for his Chastisement, nor the Sword never to
depart from his House, for his sin of Adultery and Murder; N^ less Punishment
was appointed for the Jews sins, than Seventy Years Captivity in Babylon. 2ly.
God may intend this sore and long Affliction to be (...) mean to reform them
from these ills, that they lov^ well, and have been long accustomed to. 3ly* H^
may intend it as a mean to discover the secret (...) of their Heart, as Jobs
long Trial made some impatience appear in him. 4ly. God may intend it, (...) to
be the occasion of exerciseing of Faith, and the occasion that Patience may
have its perfect Work 5ly. God does it, that the Delivery may appear the more
wonderful, as in the Lame Man's case, John 5.

Use of this is, to learn us to exercise Hope under sore and long Trials; that
you may keep up your Hope, beware it break not, tho the means made use of for
your releif proves ineffectual, see Exodus 5.22. 2ly. Quite not your Hope when
your Prayers meet with an repulse, see Lam. 3.8. Neither quite your Hope though
your Corruption be irritate by the Cross, Neither quite your hope, though you
live under dark Providence, Job 23. Isa. 50.10, Neither quite it, because of
the improbability of an outgate, Isa. 40.37.

Observe 3ly. That we should imitate the Creature, in our Endeavors after our
Liberty. And 1st. We should endeavor after our Freedom from Sin, and that by
exerciseing Repentance for the Body of Sin and Death that is in us, Romans 7.24.
And 2ly. by repenting for our actual Sins, James 4.9, 10. 3ly. By forbearing to
add Fuel to your Lust, by casting our selves upon external Temptations, Romans
13. last. 4ly. By entertaining the Word in our Heart against Sin, Psalm. 119.9.
Romans 6.17. 5ly. By obeying the Motions of the Spirit, Gal. 5.17.

Next, We should endeavor our freedom from the fears of Death, by our frequent
considerations, and firm Applications of these Scriptural Grounds formerly laid
down, to assure us of the Redemption of our Body.

3ly. We should endeavor our freedom from Satan's Temptations, and that first
by resisting them, Jam. 4. 1 Pet. 5. 2ly. By opposing the Word to them, Matthew.
4. 3ly. By Praying against them, 2 Cor. 12.8, 9. 4ly. By clothing our selves
with the Scriptural Armor, Ephesians. 6. And being constantly Watchful, Ibid. And
5ly. By being acquaint with his Devices and Subtilty in Tempting, who takes
advantage of us when we are lying out of our Duty, 2 Samuel 11. when Corruption
stirrs in us, Ephesians. 4.27. He suites his Temptation to our External Condition, he
tempts them that are in Adversity to despair and them that are in Prosperity to
Pride; he suits his Temptations to our Predominants, as he tempted Covetous
Judas with 30 pieces of Silver, he conveys his temptations to us by Instruments
beloved of us, as he tempted Adam by his Wife, and by Instruments unexpected by
us, as he tempted Job to despair by his Godly Friends, and as he tempted Christ
to forbear suffering, by Peter.

Verse 23. And not only they, but our selves also, which have the first fruits
of the Spirit, even we our selves groan with. in our selves, waiting for the
Adoption, to wit, the Redemption of (...) Body.


HEre the Apostle goes on, to hold out the certainty and excellency of the
Glory to come, from the Saints Frames relative to it; First they vehemently
desire it, They groan within themselves. 2ly. They patiently expect it, They
wait for the Adoption

And in this Verse ye may observe three things, 1st. Gods allowance to his own
in this life, they receive the first fruits of the Spirit. 2ly. Observe their
Affections toward the other Life, they groan for it, and wait for it. 3ly.
Observe the description of the happiness that is given of the other World, in
this Verse it is called the Adoption, The redemption of our Body.

For the First, That God allows the first fruits of the Spirit to Believers in
this Life; By these first fruits, are not to be understood, the extraordinary
Gifts of the Spirit given to the Apostles in the primitive times; but by these
are understood the ordinary Graces of the Spirit conferred upon all Believers,
called the first Fruits because as the first Fruits were offered up to God
under the Law, so these Graces should be used to Gods Glory; and as they were
an pledge of a plentiful Harvest, so these Graces are a pledge to us of our
full Felicity, because God gives us them for that end to confirm our Hope. 2ly.
They are a pledge, because that same Love and Grace that moved God to confer
the beginnings of our Salvation, will move him to perfect them, and if God
bestow upon Believers part of Christ's purchase, he will bestow the whole; By these
first Fruits then are meant the Renovation of our Nature, Peace of Conscience,
and Joy in the Holy Ghost Communion with God, which stands in saving views of
God in his Word, and in his Works. 2ly. It stands in access to God, Ephesians. 2.18.
And 3ly. In Influences ^rae God.

God gives these first Fruits to Believers in this Life, to defend them against
the Worlds deriding their Faith in the Gospel, to give them the Witness of the
Gospels Verity in their own Heart, 1 John 5 10.11. 2ly. He does it, to excite
and confirm their hope of Heaven, and to awaken their desire after it, See the
Text. 3ly. To Comfort and support them under their Sufferings. 4ly, To
encourage them to Self-denying Duties. 5ly. To make them content with a mean
measure of Worldly Enjoyments, 6ly. To make them content to go through Death,
that they may have the full measure of the Spirits presence, seeing they
experience the sweetness of a small measure of it.

Use 1st. Of Exhortation, Labor for the presence of the Spirit, that ye may
have these first Fruits, 1st. Act Faith on Christ, Ephesians. 1.10. 2ly. Be tender of
grieving the Spirit. Ephesians. 4 30. 3ly. Obey his Motions, Gal. 5.17, 4ly. Pray for
his presence. Luke 11.18. 5ly. Be not Worldly Minded, John 14.17. 6ly. Beware
of Sensuality, See the Epistle of Jude Verse 19.

2d Use is of Trial, Try whether ye have Sanctification or no; true
Sanctification possesses the whole Man it makes a change on the Mind, Will, and
Affections, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. True peace it founded on the merit of Christ, and
guards the Heart against Temptations, Phil. 4.3. True joy strengthens the Heart
for Duty, and makes the Heart despise Worldly Comforts in comparison of it, and
is an attendant on tender walking, Acts 9, 31. True Communion with God advances
the Believer in a conformity to Gods Image, 2 Cor. 3.18.

For our Affections relative to the Glory to come. 1st. They have an vehement
desire after it, which they cannot sufficiently express, and therefore they are
said to groan within themselves for the Adoption. Likeas this phrase imports
the sincerity of their desire, this was Paul's desire and he reckons it to be
the desire of the rest of the Godly, 2 Cor. 5.1, 2. But this desire tho it be
vehement, it should be attended with submission to God, prescribing the time of
our Death, Phil. 1. This Desire should flow rather from a desire of enjoying
full Communion with God, than a desire to be free of Trouble, 2 Cor. 5.8. This
Desire is necessary for the Saints, that their Affections may be set on
Heavenly things; That they may be reconciled more to Death, and that they may
be more Zealous for further degrees of Mortification: And therefore
Covetousness after the good things of this World marr's this desire, as also
Anxiety and Concernment, about the future Events of Providence marrs this
Desire, and again the want of the enjoyment of the first Fruits of the Spirit
marr's it; For when we feel not the sweetness of Communion with God, we cannot
have an desire after an full measure of it.

The best way to excite this Desire, is frequently to reflect on our Misery
through Original and Actual Sin, our Chastisement for our Sins, our trying
Dispensations from God, and our persecutions from the World. The 2d: mean to
excite this Desire, is the firm Faith of the certainty, of the Excellency, and
of the Eternity of the Glory to come; This vehement Desire is of great use to
the Godly; It makes them Strangers in the World, and sober in the Enjoyment of
Worldly Good, and sober in their expectations from it.

The next Affection that is ascribed to the Godly, Relative to Heaven is
waiting: Importing first, Their expecting their Felicity. 2ly. It imports their
patience, under the delay of the same.

For the first, They should expect it, for that engages them to Purity, 1 John
3, 3. 2ly. It supports them under Sufferings, Heb. 10.35. 3ly. It makes them
content with little in the World, 1 Pet. 1.13.

The way to win to this Expectation, is to be diligent in all Dutys, especially
the Dutys of Brotherly-Love, Heb. 6.12. 2ly. Make use of your Victory over
Temptations, as a confirmation to your Hope, Psalm. 73.23. 3ly. Be often
considering the Grounds of security, that secures your right to Heaven: And
first consider the promise of Eternal Life in the Word: First, Consider its
universa^ extensiveness to all, Acts 13: 48. Tit. 2.12. Act^ 2.39. 2ly.
Consider the freedom of the promise, Gal. 3. It is said the Inheritance is not
by the Law, but by the promise, Romans 4. It is said, that the Inheritance is by
Grace that it might be sure to all the seed. 3ly. Consider the Antiquity of the
Promise, Tit. 1, 3. That Promise Genesis 3.16. That the seed of the Woman should
Trample down the head of the Serpent, it was an promise of Life to the
Spiritual Seed of Christ, because it is said Christ should destroy the Works of
the Devil, and therefore he must abolish Death which followed upon Sin, which
was brought in by Satan. 4ly. Consider the Repetition and confirmation of it,
by Oath to Abraham: For, by the Covenant made with him, there was a Right to
the Heavenly Inheritance conveyed to him, and all his Spiritual Seed. Gal. 3.
which Covenant God ratifyed by Oath, Heb. 6. 5ly. Consider the Internal Seal of
this Promise, to wit the presence of the Spirit, Gal. 4.30. Ephesians. 4.30.

Now for the strengthening our Hope, He has placed our Eternal Life in Christ,
he has given to us Eternal Life, and that Life is in his Son, 1 John 5. our
Life is hid with Christ in God, Col. 3.3. He is said to be our Life ibid. He
calls himself to Mary John 11. The Resurrection and the Life, and he is called
Eternal Life; And first, He is the Meritorious cause of this Life, 1 John 4.10.
He sent his Son to dye, that we might live through him. 2ly. He is the
exemplary cause of this Life, Romans 6.10. 1 Thessalonians. 4. It is said, that if God
raised up Christ from the Dead, them that sleep in Jesus, will God bring with
him. 3ly. He is the dispensing cause of it, he has power to confer it, Phil.
3. last. And he has Commission to confer it. John 17.3, 4, and 6.37.

I add, for the strengthening of Believers Hope, he has appointed the Sacrament
of the Communion, for the frequent renewing the Believers Right, to the person
of the Redeemer, and therefore the eaten Bread is said to be Communion of his
Body, as the drinking of the Wine is said, to be the Communion of his Blood,
because by Gods appointment, it conveys a sure Right to his Humane Nature as
Crucified for us, and we know that he says John 6. He that eats his Flesh,
and drinks his Blood, has Eternal Life; And in the first of John's Epistles
Chap. 5. It is said, he that has the Son has Life. As also, I add, for the
strengthening of their Hope, he gives them the first Fruits, the beginning of
Glory in the World, See the Text.

The next thing that is in this waiting, is Patience, which imports an
continuation of hope, without freting or fainting under sore and continuing
Crosses; And this may be win to, by considering what our deservings are, and
how short a thing Time is, compared with Eternity, 2 Cor. 4. last.

Now for the description of the Happiness of the other World, It is called
first Adoption, to show us, that our right to it, flows from Adoption, Rom:
8.17.

Use of this is first, To Exhort us to receive Christ aright, that we may be
Adopted, Jo. 1.12,

2d. Use is an use of Trial, to try our Right to Heaven, by trying our
Adoption; the best way to try that, is to try if we have the Spirit of
Adoption, which appears in procuring access to God, in a study of Imitation of
him, and subjection to his Corrections, Heb. 12.

2ly. Heaven is called Adoption, because till we come to Heaven, Adoption is
not fully manifested, 1 Jo. 3.1, 2. And thefore in the preceding verse, the
happiness of Heaven is called the manifestation of the Sons of God: And this
tells you, how you may win to a due esteem of Adoption, by considering it with
this consequent: The possession of Glory, fully manifests the worth of this
privilege, and withal this teaches Believers, to be content with the Worlds
contempt, seeing in this World their Adoption is not fully manifested. 3ly.
Heaven is called Adoption, Because, it is an Inheritance suiteable to the
dignity of the Son's of God, and therefore we should abound in the Work of the
Lord, knowing that our Labor will not be in vain in the Lord.

Verse 24. For we are saved by hope: But hope that is seen, is not hope: For
what a man sees, why does he yet hope for?

Verse 25, But if we hope for that we see not, then do we with patience wait
for it.


AS the Apostle, in the other Verses, had comforted the Romans, by proving the
excellency and certainty of the Future Glory, from the Creatures desire after
it, and the Believers desire after it; so now he Comforts them under their
Cross, by letting them see, that their future Happiness is very consistent with
their present Misery: And this he does by telling them they are saved by hope;
which he clears by these two things. 1st. That the object of hope is neither
presenty enjoyed, nor sensibly certain, Hope is not seen, that is, the object
of Hope is not seen. 2ly. He clears it by describing the Affection of hope, he
says, it is a Patient expecting of a distant good; The 24 Verse holds out the
Advantagiousness of it; The other two Verses hold out the nature of the Object
and affection of hope,

When it is said, we are saved by hope, As it supposes that our felicity is at
a distance, so it says that all the good that we can get of that distant
felicity, for the present time, is obtained by hopeing for it; and therefore if
we cannot hope for it, we loss all the Encouragement we have by it.

Next, When the Text says, we are saved by Hope, it imports, that if we can
hope for Heaven, it will save us from the Ill of the Cross, for here he is
laboring to comfort crossed Christians; it will save, for it keeps the Cross
from being crushing, because it expells the apprehensions of Wrath in a Cross.
2ly. It keeps the Cross from being ensnaring, it cannot drive us from our Duty
through fear, for where this Hope is, it lets us see, that we have more gain by
our duty nor loss by it.

Use of this is to exhort us to hope. For 1st. This Hope is suitable to the
Revelation of the Gospel, which has brought to the Church a clearer discovery
of Heaven, than was brought under the Law. 2ly. It is suitable to Gods Name,
which he has taken under the Gospel, he is called the God of Hope, Romans 15.13.
3ly. It is suitable to Gods Works, in raising Christ from the Dead, and
communicating the first Fruits of the Spirit to us, it is an obeying of the
Gospel-Precepts, and imitation of Gospel Examples: We should not be deterred
from the Hop^ of Heaven, because we are under afflictions for ou^ Sin, 1 Pet 4.
compare the 13. verse with the 17. Neither should we cast away our Hope, for
being guilty of upsiting in the Way of God, compare Heb 5.12. with 10.35.
Neither should we quite ou^ Hope of Heaven, because of our great sins before
Conversion, for so did not Paul.

Use of this is, that we should labor for Hope 1st. By making Grace the ground
of it, 2 Thessalonians. 2 16. 2ly. By making Christ's Resurrection the ground of it, 1
Pet. 1.21. 3ly. By making his entry into Heaven the ground of it, Heb. 6. last.
4ly. B^ discerning the Fruits of the Spirit, see the preceding Verse. 5ly. By
observing the Victories over Temptations, that God affords us, Psalm. 73.24.

Observe from the next Verse, that our Happiness, which is the Object of Hope,
it is not presently enjoyed but deferred; 1st. Because Christ mystical is not
perfected; the Souls under the Altar, Rev. 6. their cry is not answered, until
their Brethrens Sufferings be fulfilled as well as theirs. 2ly Individual
Believers are not fit for Heaven, till they be free of Sin and Mortality, 1
Cor. 15. 3ly. God continues Believers in the World, he does not translate them
to Heaven presently, that they may be^ Light shining in the dark World, by good
Example. 4ly. That they may keep off Wrath from the Society where they live; if
there had been ten Righteous Persons in Sodom, it had not been destroyed and
that they may be Intercessours for the sinful^ ^orld, that it may not be
destroyed, as Moses was ^r sinful Israel, Ezod. 32. And 5ly. It is deferred,
^at Heaven may be the sweeter when it comes, ^ope deferred makes the Heart
sick, but when the ^re comes, it is a Tree of Life. Prove, 13.12.

Use of Caution, Beware of chosing present plea^res, before a deferred
Happiness; For these Plea^res are insufficient, Eccl. 2.1. 2ly. They are the
^easures of Sin, and very momentany, Heb, 11.25: ^y. This deferred Happiness is
very certain, and ^ery near, Romans 13. It is said our Salvation is nearer ^en
when we Believed. Heb. 10.37.

Use 2d. Wonder not to see the Lord delay the Temporal deliverance of his Kirk,
seeing he delays ^e complete delivery of it; The Churches lying under the
Egyptian and Babilonish Captivity was ^ong; But seeing this is a piece of the
Saints their Trial, to have their partial and total deliverance deerred, we
should be prepared to bear it, First by considering the certainty of it, that
it will come. ^ly. By considering that Infinite Wisdom will appoint ^he fittest
season for its coming, which will tend most ^o his Glory and our Comfort. 3ly.
We should comfort our selves by considering, that God is still at work, in the
mean time, fulfilling Scripture-predictions.

Use 3d. That since this happiness is deferred, while we have time, we should
improve it, in making our Title sure to it, and fitting and preparing our
selves for it.

Observe next, That since happiness is the object of hope, we have no certainty
for it, for it is only knowable by Supernatural Revelation, Col. 1.5. 2 Timothy
1.10. Happiness is the effect of Mercy, The acting of which Attribute is free,
and therefore only knowable by Divine Revelation, tho the actings of vindictive
Justice be necessary, and so easily known by Natures Light. 2ly. This happiness
is hid and veiled to sense, by many Vails of Sinfulness, Misery and Mortality;
The difficulty of Faith and unstability thereof, in Believers tells it has no
sensible certainty of Heaven, and the total Ignorance of the Heathen
Philosophers of this truth, with the scant knowledge that those had of it, that
lived under the Law, tells us, that there is no sensible certainty for Heaven.

Use of Caution, Let not the sensible certainty of allureing present good be
preferred to this Happiness, for the alluring Good of this World, is uncertain
and ensnaring. 2ly. Let not the sensible Persecutions of this World, deter you
from your Duty, so as to make you miss this Happiness, for all the Evil of
Persecution is but Chastisement, Heb. 12. It is limited, Psalm. 76. Jer. 10. It
is mixed with strong Consolations, 2 Cor. 1.6. It is light and momentany 2 Cor.
4. and penult.

A 2d. Use of Trial, seeing ye want of sensible certainty of it, try whether ye
have the Faith of it or no: Marks of it are first, ye will please God with
Enoch: Heb 11.6. 2ly. Ye will chose. Affliction before Sin with Moses, Heb.
11.35. 3ly. Ye will be strangers o^ the Earth with the Patriarths. Heb. 11, 13.
4ly. Ye will be hearty sufferers for Christ, Heb. 10.34. 2 Timothy 1, 12. A 5th
Mark is, ye will be unwearied in diligence for doing good, 1 Cor. 15. And
Lastly, Ye will be fearless of Death, Phil 1.23. 2 Cor. 5.1, 2.

A 3d. Use is, An Use of Exhortation, since ye want the sensible certainty of
your happiness, Labor for a certainty of the Faith of it; For this effect,
Labor to be well acquaint with with Christ, the knowledge of Christ will draw
with it the believing certainty of this Happiness, See Ephesians. 1.18, 19. 2ly.
Meditate much on Scriptures, and the Power of God: Christ tells the Saducees,
that they would not believe the Resurrection to Life, because they knew not the
Scriptures, nor the Power of God. A 3d. Help to Faith, Look on the Spirits
presence under the notion of an earnest, for so it called, Ephesians. 1.2. Cor. 5.
The first fruits of the Spirit should make us wait for the Adoption. 4ly. We
should with Abraham not stagger at the promise of Heaven through unbelief, we
should not sit as Judge upon the Truth or falsehood of the Promise, we should
instantly repel all Thoughts of the improbability of the performance of
Promises, Abraham would not consider his own Body now Dead. We have the more
need to obey this Exhortation to have the certainty of the Faith of our
Happiness, when we want the sensible certainty thereof; the more need we have
of it under the Cross, nor any other time, because our sight by Faith of Heaven
is dimned under Crosses. For 1st. Our Consciences accuses us of Sin, and for
our Guilt. Then 2ly. We become Jealous of the Truth of our former Experiences
of Gods Love. 3ly. With Hezekiah we become apprehensive of the grouth and
continuance of our Trial Isai. 38. From Day until Night thou will make an end
of me, and because with the Church Lam. 3. He will reckon God his Enemy, and
his case hopeless, all which are Clouds to dim our sight of Heaven.

Use of Instruction, this lets us see, first the reason why the Members of the
Visible Church have need of Saving Grace to help them to assent to the truth of
the Gospel; the reason is, because this assent is no founded on sensible
certainty, or rational evidence but upon Divine Testimony, and therefore it
being the assent of Faith, it most be the Gift of God, Ephesians. 2.10. 2ly. This
instructs us in the true reason, why these that are wise Men after the flesh
are not called* It is because they know not to set to their Seal to Gods truth,
all that they win to, is the improveme^ of their reason.

Now follows the description of the Affection o^ hope, It is called a Patient
waiting for Heaven, which imports first, A longing for Heaven, 2 Timothy 4. ^ Romans
8, 23, Phil. 3, last. 2 Cor. 4. last. and 5, and (...) Phil. 1.23. The
Excellency and Eternity of the blessedness, together with this, that it carries
(...) the bosom of it a removal of all Evil, engages (...) to long for it; It
is our diffidence of the certain^ of this happiness, and our Carnal Minds
whereb^ we are strongly affected to Bodily and external goo^ These two make us
unconcerned and indifferent as (...) our going hastily to Heaven. 2ly. This
Patie^ waiting for Heaven, imports our expectation of (...) we would believe
that it is kept for us, 1 Pet. ^ 2ly. We should believe we are kept for it,
1 P^ 1 5. 1 Pet 4, last. 2 Timothy 1, 12. This firm expect^tion of Heaven is
necessary for defending us again Worldly Allurements, and fixing our Love to
Go^ 3ly. This Patient waiting, imports in it, an end^ing of Crosses without
Fretting, without Faintin^ we should not fret under Persecutions, under Per^nal
Chastisements, under the labor and toil of Duty, under the singularity of
Crosses, under the Assaults of Satan's Temptations, which may be violent strange
and frequent; we should kyth our Patience in the want of fretting under
Crosses, by our Love to God, compliance with our present Duty, and our
loathness to take sinful courses for our relief. 4ly. This Patient waiting for
Heaven, imports a protracted and continued hope, See Psalm. 71, 14, Col. 1, 19,
1 Pet. 1, 13, Heb, 3.14. It is necessary because it is long betwixt the promise
of it, and the performance of it. 2^y. Our Work continues, and therefore our
hope should continue. 3ly. Our Trials may continue, and therefore our Hope
should continue. 4ly. We have good reason to continue our hope under continuing
Trials, because God has born through formerly the Saints under all long
Trials, and the experience we have had of Gods through bearing us in our former
Trials, should make us believe, that he will carry us through all the Trials
that is before our hand.

Use of this is, If we would wait patiently for Heaven, as the Text bids us, we
must strive for an all of Patience Col. 1.10, and for this effect, we should
acquire much of the Art of Self-denial.

Verse 26. Likeways the Spirit also helps our Infirmities


HEre the Apostle gives us an other Ground of Comfort under the Cross, viz,
That tho the Saints be compassed with Infirmities; yet the Spirit supports them
under those, and does (as the word in the first Language imports join himself
with them in bearing of their Burden.

Observe, The Saints under Crosses have Infirmities, both Moral and Physical:
Moral Infirmities, such as Discontent, as Jonah had; Impatience, which Job had
a share of; Unbelief with David Psalm. 77, Partial Atheism, Psalm. 73, Pride with
Hezekiah Isai. 39. Passionate revenge with David in the case of Nabal,
Selfishness with those People that lived in the days of Hagai, who Builded
their own houses and forgot to Build the house of God; weariedness in Labor,
and toil in Duty, with Moses who wearied in the toil and labor of the
Government of the People; Partial Hypocrisy with David in the matter of Vriah,
1 Pet. 2, 1, 2ly. They are subject to Physical Troubles, because they meet with
Challenges for their old and new Sins, under the Crosses, which makes them
apprehend their Crosses to be wrathful, and makes them fear their continueing
and grouth; In the 3d, place, They are subject to Bodily Frailty, and Sickness
and Death, which certainly contributes to make the Cross the more uneasy.

The Saints subjection to these manifold Moral Infirmities, should b^ a motive
to humble them, and to make them watchful, lest they break out into gross
Transgressions by them: For when I say the Saints are subject to those
Infirmities, my meaning is not, that the tract of their life is spent in
outward Acts, signifying the Predominancy of these ills in their heart, for the
Godly Man does no Iniquity in that sense, See Psalm, 119, 2, 1 Jo. 3.8. But when
I say they are subjs^ct to Infirmities, my meaning is, That Corruption tho it
be broken in its Power in Believers, yet it is partially Acting with their
Graces.

There is another Use, And that is, Since the Saints are subject to physical
Throuble, then they need not wonder, that besides the Persecution they
sustained for the Testimony of the Truth, they are liable to manifold personal
troubles, since the Saints have been tried with those before them.

Observe 2ly. That the Spirit supports the Saints under their Infirmities; he
keeps them from despair under their most violent Temptations. Psalm. 42.5. Psalm.
73, 23. and 73.3. Lam. 3.13. The Spirit supports the Saints by giving them a
prospect of Heaven, Ephesians. 1.18. this cures their impatience and discontent. 2ly.
He supports them by discovering the Truth of their Grace, 1 Cor. 2.12. this was
the way he supported Job. 2ly. He supports them against Temptations to Sin, by
discovering the odiousness of Sin to them, this was it, whereby he kept David
from yiedling to the Temptations of fretting against the prosperity of the
Wicked; the Spirit did convince him, that if he gave way to that Temptation, it
were upon the matter an denying of the necessity and advantage of Piety, Psalm.
73, 17. 4ly. The Spirit keeps a man from sinning under the Cross, by fixing a
man in such thoughts as may best preserve him from these sins he is presently
tempted to; and therefore when the Spirit would preserve David from despair,
Psalm. 77. He fixes his thoughts on the former kindnesses of God toward him: He
called to mind the former days. 5ly. He supports the Saints by strengthening
the habits of Grace, Ephesians. 3.17. and this makes their Gracious Work more easy.
6ly. He applys the promises to them, and so makes them cheerful in their duty,
notwithstanding of their Infirmities. 7ly. He gives them access to God in
Prayer, as the Text afterward tells us.

Use 1st. This lets us see. That common Courage will not bear us through our
Infirmities. 2ly, This refutes the Worlds Atheism, because it evinceth that
there is an efficacy in the Spirit, that supports the Saints under their
Infirmities. 3ly. It bids Crossed Christians under their Infirmities be careful
to obtain and entertain the Spirits presence, by shunning Legality, Worldlyness
and Sensuality, greiving the Spirit, Repelling his motions, and quenching them;
we should Pray much to God for the Spirit, Luke 17, 18. We should labor to
attain the Spirits presence by the use of Ordinances: next we should be careful
to refer our through-bearing to the Spirit, and not to our selves.

Verse 26. -- For we know not what we should pray for as we ought: but the
Spirit it self also makes Intercession for us, with groanings which cannot be
uttered.


THE Apostle does instance the particular help the Spirit affords us in Prayer;
To prove that, the Spirit is the helper of our Infirmities under the Cross.

Observe 1st, That Prayer is a very suitable Exercise to Crossed Christians.
2ly. We are very ignorant what to Pray for, or how to Pray. 3ly. This
indisposition for Prayer is removed by the Spirit And 4ly. Where the Spirit
removes indisposition, he helps the Christian with groanings unutterable.

For the 1st. Prayer is necessar for crossed Christians, because it is the Way
to obtain Heavenly Wisdom, to understand the meaning of Providence. Iam. 1.5.
2ly. Prayer is the Way to obtain strength to bear the Cross, Psalm. 138. In the
day I cried to thee, thou strengthened me with strength in the Soul. 3ly. Prayer
quiets the Mind, see Phil. 4.6. see Hannas case. 4ly. It is the Way to obtain
Delivery, Psalm. 50. Call upon me in the day of thy trouble, and I will deliver
thee. 5ly. Because under Affliction, we are ready to be tempted by the Devil,
we had need to be armed with the Spiritual Armor, and Prayer is the Exercise,
whereby we put on that Armor, Ephesians. 6.17.

The Use of this is, if we be afflicted, we should pray, Isa. 5. Motives to
engage us to this Exercise, Are 1st. God sends the Cross upon us, and designs
and expects we should pray under it, Hos. 5. last. 2d. Motive is, Satan takes
advantage of our external Lot, to tempt us; therefore we have need to go to
God, to get strength to resist him. 3d. Motive is, our external Lot may
occasion a fit Disposition for Prayer to us, a crossing condition and Lot
disposes us to be humble, to be serious and penitent. 4ly. God offers us by our
Crosses, an opportunity to have an fresh Experience of his seasonable Help,
which may prove afterward a Confirmation to our Faith, Use, be not tempted by
the Devil to forbear Prayer under your Cross, for that gratifies Satan, and
makes you naked and exposed to his Temptations, let neither your former guilt,
nor present indisposition hinder you to go about this Duty: When Simon Magus
was under the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity, Philip even in that
case exhorts him to pray, see Acts 8.

Observe, that we are very ready under Crosses, to miscarry in the matter of
our Prayers, we know not what to pray for as we ought, says the Text, The
Reasons are, 1st. Our Ignorance of Gods Designs under the Cross, and so we are
ignorant how to comply with these; when God crosses a Saint, he intends to
challenge them for sin, to excite them to their duty, to try their Grace, to
give them new Experience of his Support: But the confusion of our Mind
indisposes us to take up these Designs, and so we are unfit to pour out our
Desires to God. to comply with these Designs. A 2d. Cause is, our Ignorance of
Gods Promises in his Word, which Promises should regulate our Desires; for the
Promises are the Foundation of our Prayers, we should pray for nothing but what
is promised. A 3d. Cause of our Mistake, is our ignorance of our Spiritual
Wants, the knowledge of which affords us fit Matter for Prayer, A 4th. Cause
is, our Impatience and Pride of Heart under Crosses, which prompts us more to
seek Delivery from the Cross, than to obtain Edification by it. A 5th. Cause
is. our inordinate Affections to predominant Ills, which prompts us to be
remiss in our Desires after mortifying Grace, and to entertain sinful
Intentions to improve the condition we are in, to the gratifying of these
Lusts. A 6th. Cause is, Earthlymindedness, disposeing us to prefer earthly
Things to Heavenly, contrary to that, Mat. 6.33.

Use of this is, 1st. We should not be proud of our Prayers to God under
Crosses, or reckon with the Pharisee, Luke 18. That God is oblidged to hear us
for them, seeing we are so subject to mistake in the Matter of our Prayers. 2ly.
We should not be angry at God, for not giving Returns to our Prayers, seeing we
are so subject to mistake in the Matter of our Prayers: and we should observe
the Divine Providence, answering more our Necessities, than irregular Desires.
A 3d. Use is, Since we are so subject to mistake in this matter, we should be
much given to Meditation, and due Preparation of Heart, to consider what is fit
for us, before we rashly bring forth our Desires before God. A 4th. Use of
Exhortation is, we should labor to have fit and proper Matter for our Prayers
to God, under our Crosses, and for that effect, we should imitate the Saints,
to pray for what they prayed for under the Cross; we find them praying for
Support under Trials, Psalm. 133. We find them praying for the pardon of their
sin, for Light to know their Way, and for the Blessing of the Cross. 2ly. We
would labor to have Prospect of the Designs of Providence, that the Matter of
our Prayers may be in compliance with these Designs. 3ly. We would labor for a
single Intention after Gods Glory and our Spiritual Good, that our chief
Desires may run after the Communication of Gods Grace, to promote those Ends

Observe, we are not only ready to miscarry in the Matter of our Prayers, but
also in the Manner of our Prayers, the Text says, we are ignorant not only what
to pray for, but how to pray becomingly, as the Word may be translated; I shall
clear the Truth of this, by instanceing the many miscarriage of People in the
Manner of their Prayers And 1st. They may mistake in the Object of their
Worship, by presenting God under some external Image, or in their fancy
ascribing some likeness to him, seeing he is an invisible Spirit, and we are
forbidden to make any representations of God, either external or internal in
our Fancy; for to do this is against the Second Command, A 2d. Mistake we are
ready to fall in, is, We look on God the Father as hardly accessible by us, and
as one that is not so ready to hear us as Christ would be, which apprehension
Christ cures, by telling us, that the Father himself loves us, and the
Scripture cures it, by making the Fathers Love the Fountain of our Redemption:
A 3d. Is, our going immediately to God, and miskenning of Christ; We should come
to the Throne of Grace, being encouraged by his Intercession, springing from
his Sympathy with us, Heb. 4. last. We should found our expectation of our
Mercy upon his Merit, this is to ask in his Name, this is to go in to the
Holiest, by the New and Living Way, by his Blood, Heb. 10. Self-righteousness
obstructs this. A 4th. Cause of our miscarriage is, the want of singleness in
our Intentions, to use our Mercy, not as Fuel to our Lusts, but as a Mean to
glorify God, therefore Heb. 10. We are desired to draw near to God with a true
Heart. A 5th. Cause is, our Formality, which makes us judge with the Pharisee,
Luke 18. That the external Act of praying is obligeing to God, and meritorious
with him; whereas, we should lay only the stress of procureing our Mercies on
Christ's Merit, and use Prayer as an appointed Mean for obtaining of our Mercy.
6ly. Our Stupidity and want of sense of the Necessity and Excellency of
Spiritual Mercies, makes us miscarry in the Manner of our Prayers; it makes us
faint in our desires, and not fervent in pursueing our necessary Good. 7ly. Our
peremptoriness in seeking what we would be at without submission, makes us
miscarry; we should be absolute in our Desires, but it is for what is
absolutely promised; in all other things we should leave God the liberty of his
disposal. 8ly. Our unbelief makes us miscarry in the Manner of our praying,
James tells us, that what we ask, we should ask in Faith, James 1.3. 9ly.
Presumption is the cause of our miscarriage, when we do not found our Prayers
upon Promises, Psalm. 119. Remember thy Word to thy Servant, upon which thou
have caused me to hope. A 10th. Cause is selfishness, and the want of a public
Spirit, when we pray for our selves, and neglect the Saints, Ephesians. 6, 17. We
should pray for the peace of Jerusalem Psalm. 122. 11ly. We miscarry, when we
neglect the Confession of Sin, and Thanksgiving to God for Mercy, see Dan. 9.
Phil. 4.6. Confession is necessary for strengthening of Faith, Thanksgiving
makes way for the obtaining of further Mercy. And 12ly. Want of an firm Belief
of the Power and Efficacy of Prayer, which makes us be unfrequent in it, when
we get not our will at the first, when we are called to pray always, Ephesians. 6.17.
and to pray without ceasing, 1 Thessalonians. 5.

Use is, since we are so ready to miscarry in the manner of our praying, we
should be far from thinking, that our Acts of Devotion are meritorious before
God, and we should reckon, that when God hears any Prayers we put up to him, he
evidences his rich Grace, in overlooking our Infirmities that stick to our
Prayers.

Observe The Spirit helps us to pray aright, 1st. Because it is his inward
Light, that discovers what is expedient for our Good, he sets us on a right
Choice, he makes us prefer Spiritual Mercies to Temporal Mercies, he makes us
prefer the Mercy of the Cross, to our Deliverance from it, he makes us prefer
the Spiritual Good of our Neighbors, before our own Temporal Good, he gives
our heart a right set as to its choice. 2ly. The Spirit gives us the clearest
view of Gods Attributes, and his relation to us, and so presents the Object of
Prayer aright to us, Romans 5.5. 3ly. The Spirit glorifies Christ, and enclines
the Soul to give him his due, and makes the Soul acknowledge his Merit, as the
ground of our expectation of Mercy, and makes the Soul look on his
Intercession, as the appointed Mean to obtain the same, Ephesians. 1.18. John 16.14.
4ly. The Spirit is a Spirit of Promise, and leads the Soul to the Promises of
God in the Word, which are the Foundation of our Expectations of Mercy, Ephesians.
1.16. John 14.26. 5ly. The Spirit increases a great Esteem of Spiritual Mercies
in the Hearts of the Godly, and makes them pursue with fervent Desires, the
obtaining of the same, Paul tells us, Romans 8.5. That those that are after the
Spirit, do mind the things of the Spirit. 6ly. The Spirit discovers a man's
Evils to him, and so makes the Creature humble in its Addresses to God, he is a
convinceing Spirit, John 16.8. 7ly. The Spirit is a Spirit of Faith, and
therefore he keeps up the heart, in believing under the sense of Guilt,
Corruption and Temptations, 2 Cor. 4.13. And this Faith in Prayer makes way for
returns to it; unbelief being a great Restraint to God's working for us.

When it is said, the Spirit interceeds for us, the meaning it, that our
Intercession flows from his Influence; This Intercession is not like Christ's
Intercession, for he interceeds for us, when we make no intercession for our
selves, as witness, his Intercession for Peter when he fell; but the Spirit is
said to interceed for us, when he makes us interceed, as it is said in Matthew.
10. That we do not speak but it is the Spirit of the Father that speaks in
us; The Spirit assists us in Prayer, by causeing a fervor in our Desires, and
bringing us into a cordial submission to his Will, he makes us groan, he makes
us pray, according to the Will of God.

This lets us see, that we are to depend on the Spirit of God for his
assistance in Prayer, as being convinced that we cannot pray aright without
him; The darkness of our mind as to spiritual Things, the disquiet of our
Conscience, and perverseness of our Will, the disorder of our Affections, makes
it impossible for us to pray aright without his help; And therefore in all the
Course of our Walk, we should be tender of grieving this Spirit, lest by doing
so, we marr^ our Devotions, which are the great Mean of our intercourse with
God.

Observe, That under Crosses the Saints may be very indistinct, as to their
Prayers, they have groans unutterable, that is, they have such Desires, as that
they cannot give an perfect and explicit Account of; The Text says plainly,
That they know not what to pray for as they ought, their Faith may be up and
down in their Prayers, as witness David's practice in the Psalms, their
Petitions may be upon the matter inconsistent, and yet they do not know: many a
desire had Job to God, that he would take away his life, and yet undoubtedly he
had his own desires for delivery; many a time they are forced to sist in a
Petition for help in the General, without condescending to particular Requests,
because they are ignorant what is expedient for them, but all the irregular
desires of the Saints in such a case does not come from the Spirit but only the
lawful Desires that are mixed with these irregular Desires, these are called,
the Sense and Meaning of the Spirit, which God approves of, in the next Verse.

Now, these confused Prayers of the Saints, they arise from various Causes;
1st. From dark Providence, this was Jobs case: When men know not the Cause,
why God afflicts, nor the Ends which he intends to bring about by the
Affliction, it is no wonder then they be indistinct in their Prayers, they know
not what to seek of God in this Case. 2ly. When men are under the Apprehensions
of imminent great Trouble, causeing a fear that they may be overcome by the
Trouble, the Creature is at a stand, and knows not what to desire; even
innocent finite Nature, while it is seiled upon by these great Fears, the Mind
is not free at the time, to have the actual uptaking of what is fit to be
desired or expected of God, for the finite Mind is detained in the
Contemplation of the greatness of the Trouble that is coming on them, see
Christ's Words, John 12.27. 3ly. When Corruption is tumultuating in the Heart,
and Grace fighting against it, the Spirit lusts against the Flesh, and the
Flesh against the Spirit; it is no wonder the Soul be troubled, with contrary
Tides of contrary Desires. 4ly: While the Soul is troubled with sad Challenges
of Conscience for sin, that vexation of mind, caused by these Challenges, makes
the Creature unfit to take up the particular state and condition of their Soul,
so that they cannot have distinct Petitions to God about their condition, and
therefore David, Psalm. 38. When he fears Gods rebukeing of him in Wrath, all
that he wins to is, All my desire is before thee, and my groaning is not hid
from thee, Psalm. 38 9.

This speaks out, what sad Condition the Saints may be in sometimes, when they
are under this confusion; They would not conclude that they are in an unrenewed
state; on the account of this condition, neither would they reckon that all of
their Prayers they put up to God in this condition, are refused by him, for God
observes what is regular in their Desires, and accepts it, tho it be mixed with
many irregularities, as the next Verse tells us, and this is an Evidence of the
great Favor and Grace of God to his own; and this tells us, that the
prevalency of Prayer springs more from Divine Favor, than from its own
absolute and intrinsic Perfection.

Observe next, that in the sad conditions of the Saints, they are called to
fervency in Prayer; this is necessary, if they would imitate Christ in his
Prayers, and if they would imitate the Saints Practice, according to the
Scriptures. And 3ly. The Fervor of Prayer is necessary for the prevalency of
it* for as James tells us, that the effectual fervent Prayer of the Righteous
avails much with God; if men would win to fervor in Prayer, they would labor
to be under the fullest conviction of the necessity and usefulness of the
Mercies prayed for.

Verse 27. And he that searches the Hearts, knows what is the mind of the
Spirit because he makes Intercession for the Saint^ according to the Will of
God.


HEre the Apostle adds the Consolation, the God accepts the indistinct and
confused Prayers of the Saints, and he gives the reason of this acceptance,
1st. He knows, what in these Prayer^ flows from his Spirit; men in confusion
cannot tak^ up what is the good, and what is the bad of their Prayers, but God
can take it up, because he searches the Heart, and by searching knows what i^
perfectly in it, and so can accept the good and refus^ the evil in them. 2d.
Cause of acceptance is, The good of these Prayers comes from his Spirit, and
therefore he cannot, and he will not refuse the good desires that are excited
by his Spirit sent into their Hearts. A 3d. Cause is, these good Desires an^
Intercessions are made for the Saints, for their Spiritual and Eternal Good,
whose Felicity God intends to bring to a Perfection. A 4th. Cause is, that this
Intercession made by the Spirit, is according to the Will of God, that is,
according to his Promise, for the Spirit excites no desire in a Saint for any
good but what is promised of God. 2ly. Their desires are according to the
revealed Will of God, which is the Rule of Duty, and agreeable thereto, the
Desires excited by the Spirit are all lawful Desires. 3ly. Their Desires are
according to Gods Will, because attended with submission to his disposeing Will.

Observe 1st The Designation that God gets in the Text, he is called the
Searcher of Hearts, and one, that by searching, perfectly knows the Heart; man
by Reflections can but know his Heart imperfectly, for the Lusts of his Heart
are deceitful, and darkens his mind, that he cannot see all the evil that is in
his Heart perfectly; and the number and greatness of the evils, that is in the
Heart of the best marrs the mind of man from taking up the good that is mixed
with these evils. Next Satan does not perfectly know what is in the Heart, he
only can conjecture by the external Conversation and Temperature of the Body
what is in it, but God has the perfect knowledge of it, he framed it, and
therefore knows it. 3ly. The Heart of Man, as to its actings, depends on Gods
Influences, the Heart of man is in the hand of the Lord, and he turns it
whethersoever he will. 3ly. The internal Acts of a Man's Heart and Soul; is
regulate by the Divine Law, and the Sum of the Law is to love the Lord with all
our Heart, alse well as to give him external Service, and therefore he being
Judge of them, he must know them: In a Word, his Immensity and Omniscience
makes him perfectly know all the Good and all the Evil that is in the Heart.

Use of this is first, to exhort Folks to look well to the Heart, that it be
right, for God knows it; we should look to this, that the Heart hate the Ill
and love the Good. 2ly. This is very comfortable to these that are sincere, for
let the World calum^niate as they please, God sees the contrary. 3ly. It may
terrify the Hypocrite, who professes fair and neglects the Heart.

Observe next, That God accepts and hears the sincere Prayers of the oppressed
Saints, The Tex^ says, he knows what is the mind of the Spirit, tha^ is, he
approves and hears the Desires excited by the Spirit in the Hearts of the
Godly; This is cle^ from the returns he gives to those Prayers, b^ giving
Spiritual and Temporal Mercies, This Go^ does to keep his promise, for he has
promised t^ hear the Prayers of his People. 2ly. To convinc^ the Atheistical
World of a Providence. And 3^ To testify his respect to Prayer, and to endear
the Exercise to the Saints. 4ly. To testify his respect t^ Christ for whose
sake he hears them. 5ly. To testi^ that Blessed Harmony, that is amongst the
Persons (...) the Trinity, in carrying on the Work of our Salv^tion; The Father
hears these Prayers that are d^ctate by the Spirit for the Saints Good. 6ly.
The he may sweeten our Mercies, as coming to us the way, and intimate his Love
to his Saints thereb^ see Dan. 9. And 7ly. That he may put a note o^ respect on
his Saints, and show the view of the moyen with him, as he did to Moses and
Daniel.

Use, Seeing this is a privilege of the Saints, L^bour to win to these Prayers,
that prevails with God and for this effect, First, Labor to be renewed, be
Saints, for it is only the Prayers of such, that prevails with him. 2ly. See
that your Prayers come not so much from the gift of Prayer, as from the Grace
of Prayer, let them come from an Holy Inclination to promote your spiritual
good, they must come from the Spirit, 3ly. They must be lawful, desires
agreeable to his will. 4ly. They must be attended with submission. 5ly. They
must be founded on the the promise. 6ly. They must be single Desires, we must
not regard Iniquity in our heart. Psalm. 66.18. 7ly. They must be fervent,
groanings unutterable. 8ly. They must be attended with Breathings after the
public good of the Saints Ephesians. 6, 16 9ly. They must be in faith, Ja: 1, 3.
10ly, They must be free of resentment and revenge; see 1 Timothy 2, 8.

Use 2d, Of Trial, Since the great reason why the Lord hears the Prayers of his
People, is because they flow from his Spirit, ye would try whether your Prayers
come from the Spirit or not, And 1st. ye would try by the matter of your
Prayers, whether they be spiritual things or no these Prayers that are from the
Spirit are for spiritual things, Romans 8, 5. 2ly, Try the subject that Prayer is
seated in, if it be in the Heart, God by searching the Heart finds the Prayers
raised by the Spirit there, see the Text, The mind is rightly attentive, both
as to the matter and manner of Praying, the intention is found to use Mercies
to Gods Glory, the Affections have something of Purity and Heavenlyness in
them, see 2 Samuel: 7, 18. Isai: 26, 8. 3ly, Try it by the abundance of Prayer in
the Heart, see Ephesians: 6, 16, where the abundance of Prayer is there will be these
several parts of Prayer: First, as Confession, Thansgiving Supplications for
Good and Deprecations of Evil. 2ly, In this abundanc^ there will be fervor of
the Desire, Groanings u^utturable, see the preceding Verse. 3ly. In the
abundance there will be strong spiritual Reasoning from the promise, see Neh:
1. A 4th, Mark of the Spirits Prayers is, the frequency, of them they will Pray
always, Ephesians. 6, 17. A 5th. is, Delays and Repulses will not discourage them,
they will continu^ therein with all perseverance, see Ephesians. 6.17. A 6th is, They
will be for all Saints, see ibid. A 7th. The^ will be attended with a Holy
constancy in the Christian profession; this lays by the Prayers of those that
are guilty of Fundamental Errors in their Judgment. An 8th. Mark is, There
will be tenderness in their conversation, see for these two last the 20 Verse
of the Epistle Jude. And an 9th. is, The^ will be attended with Repentance, see
Zach 12.1^

The 3d. Use of Trial, since God hears the Prayer of his People, We would try
if God has heard us or not. And 1st. Try it by this, whether God h^ given us
that which we desired or no. 2^. Mark is, if he hears us he intimates his
pardon to us, Psa. 85.8. A 3d. is, He gives us a farther degree (...)
Reformation of our Life, Psalm. 85, last. A 4th. Mark is, He gives us strength
and support to be^ our Trials, Psalm. 138. In the day I cried, he answered me,
and strengthened me with strength in my Soul. A 5th. Mark, He gives them the
faith of acceptance, he makes them joyful in the house (...) Prayer, Isai. 57.
A 6th. Mark is, he disposes their heart to improve their Mercy for their
advantage, he hears the desire of the humble, he prepares their heart and hears
their cry, Psalm, 10, 17. A 7th. is, He removes their distrustful Anxiety, see
Han^as case. Phil. 4, 6.

A 5th Use is, An 2d Use of Exhortation, Since God hears the Prayers of his
People, we should wait for God, and expect the Answer; we should direct our
Prayers to God, and look up, Psalm. 5, 2^y. We should observe Providence, and
see what Answer we get, 3ly. We should not abuse the Answer of our Prayers, to
be proud of them, but we should improve them to our best advantage, for the
confirmation of our Faith, for the exciteing of our Love, and for the endearing
of Prayer more to us.

Verse 28. And we know that all things work together, for good to them that
love God.


HEre the Apostle adds another Consolation under the Cross, which is, That all
things work together for good to them that love God, That is, that all
Afflictions tend to their spiritual Good; By (All things) here are meaned
Afflictions, the universal particle being resticted to the subject matter of
the discourse.

Observe 1st. The Consolation, that all Afflictions tend to the good of the
Believer, 2ly. Observe the certainty of this Consolation, Paul speaks of it as
an uncontraverted truth, we know that all things work together for good, says
he. 3ly. We have the persons to whom this Consolation belongs, described from
these two, Love to God, and their Effectual Calling.

For the first, That all Afflictions tend to their good appears, Because
Internal and External Affliction tend to their good; External Afflictions tend
to the good, because they are 1st. The occasion of the experience of delivery
from great outward Trial Psalm. 18, 2ly They are the occasion of supp^^ under
Trials, Psalm. 138 3, and 73, 26. 3ly. The^^ are the occasion of feeling
sweetness in Spiritual Comforts, 2 Cor. 1, 4. 4ly, They are the occasion of
Faith, Hope, and Meekness, which otherway would not have any occasion of
Exercise. 5ly. b^thir Afflictions we know the truth, reality and grou^ of these
Graces. 6ly. They are the occasion of the hightening of our Repentance for our
present Sins 2 Kin^ 15, 30. And of cureing our stupidity for ou^ old Guilt,
Gen: 41, 21. 7ly. By them Predominant are restrained: Hos: 2, 7, 8. 8ly, By
them People are made Sympathilers with others in Trouble Heb: 10, 33.

The Use of this is, Not to be Angry with God, for our Afflictions. 2ly, Not to
stumble at the Afflictions of our Godly Neighbors, 3ly, We should try, whether
the forementioned good be the effect of our Troubles, yea, or no.

Observe next, That inward Trials tend to the good of the Saints, And 1st,
Inward temptation^ they tend to their good, because they make them to depend
upon Christ's strength, 2 Cor: 12, 8. 2ly, They tend to excite the people of
God, to Exercise Grace, and put on the Spiritual Armor, see Ephesians: 6, 10. 3ly.
By them the Christian is acquaint^^ with the devices of Satan.

Next, Gods Desertions leaving them to yield to a Temptation tends to their
Good, because it tends to their Humility, Jo: 21, 15. 2ly. It tends to their
greater measure of watchfulness, and sympathy with others. This should keep
Folks from Despair that are in this case.

And 4ly. Desertions, in respect of Comfort, tend to their good, because their
Desertions put the people of God to try their Impenitency, Formality Security
and Predominant ills. 2ly. They tend to their good, because they make them to
breath more fervently after Communion with God, Psalm. 42.1. 3ly. It is a great
help to the purified Exercise of Faith I^a. 50.10.

Use, Of Instruction, This tells us why God trysts his people with Inward
Afflictions. It is to be observed, that without the Spirit Folks will be the
worse of Afflictions, Isai. 1.6. But by the Spirit the Blessing of the
Affliction is attained, Isai. 4.4.

A 2d Use is, Of Exhortation, We should be careful to get good of our
Afflictions, And that 1st By Prayer under them, Job. 27.10 Ja. 5.13. 2ly. By
being suitably Exercised by them, Heb. 12.13. 3ly. By observing Gods Call to
our particular duties by them Mic. 6: 9.

A third Use is, Of reproof to these that are the worse of their Afflictions.
Such 1st. As are either Despisers of the Lord, or Fainters under his Rebuke
Heb. 12.6. Or 2ly. Denyers of Providence Psalm. 73.11. Or 3ly. These that
despair and conclude, that God intends their ruin by the providence they are
under, See Jos. 7, 7. Or 4ly. These that deny the Reality of the Grace of God
in them, and if they believe not this, they will not be careful to please God.

A 4th. Use is, An Use of Trial, to try if we b^ the worse of Afflictions or
not. The first is, If y^ rue in your Religion, Mal. 3, 14. 2ly When (...)
reckon Gods former favors Snares, and Entangl^ments Jos. 7, 7. 3ly, When your
Afflictions dri^ you to unlawful means for your relief, 1 Samuel 27, ^ And when
you use lawful means without dependan^ on God, 2 Chor: 16 12. 4ly, When you
contin^ in old Sins 2 Cho: 28, 22. ^ly, When your repynin^ against providence
weakens your Love to God, an^ Faith in his promises, and makes you under valu^
the present Mercies of your Lot, as the Children o^ Israel did in the
Wilderness. 6ly, When people sti^ and refuse the Comforts of the word under
their A^fliction Exodus: 6, 9. 7ly. When they weary of the^ Life with Rachael.
Gen 30, 1.

When it is said, that all things work for good it may be taken more generally,
as taking in, Pr^sperity, alse well as Adversity, for prosperity m^ through
Gods Blessing tend to the good of Believer, for it may be the occasion of their
Charity, Hum^lity, Sobriety and Thankfulness.

Use of Reproof to these that censure providence which Censure of providence
arises from Atheism (...) denying of providence. 2ly. It arises from unbeli^
questioning of Gods Love in the manageing of providence to our advantage. 3ly,
From Sensuality the enclines us to misconstruct all providence, that do n^
gratify the same. 4ly. From too hasty passing sentence upon providence before
these signal periods of (...) come, that may manifest its meaning. 5ly. The
Censure of providence arises from the ignorance (...) the ills of our heart,
and how closly these Ills stick (...) us, so much we have need of sharp Crosses
to make a separation betwixt us and them. 6ly. The Censure of it arises from
narrow views of it, that every stroke of Providence has various effects upon
various Persons, in various Parts of the visible Church. 7ly. It arises from
not considering, that God may send a lesser Cross to prevent a greater, see
Jer. 24.5.

Now for the certainty of this Consolation, the Apostle says, they know the
Truth of it; And that 1st By Scripture, Jer. 24.5. Psalm. 34.20. 2ly. By
Experience, and this has these Two Things in it. 1st. That we should observe
the Experiences of our Advantage by the Cross. And 2ly. We should be assured of
the Certainty of the Thing, upon the Observation of that Experience. This tells
us, that there is no Persons of the World more inexcusable for despondency of
Spirit, than those that are observers of former Experiences.

The use of Exhortation is, that they would remember how often the Cross has born
down their Pride, restrained their Predominants, and been the occasion of
sending them often to Prayer; This is necessary to make this Observation of
Experiences, because if it were made, and well improven, the the Crosses that
we turn now as Arguments for our Unbelief, would prove Confirmations for our
Faith.

He describes the Persons, to whom the Consolation belongs, from their Love to
God; And this he does, 1st. Because Love, is best tried by the Cross, as to its
sincerity and constancy; it is sincere Love to God for himself, and for his
Spiritual Benefits. 2ly. As to its constancy, it is a constant Love, that
enclines a Soul to take part with God. under Crosses. 2ly. He describes their
Persons from Lo^ to God, because Love defends them from the sna^ of the Cross,
it keeps us from useing unlawful Me^ for our relief, it keeps us from being
discontent wit^ our Lot, as being content with God as our Portice^ it keeps us
from being misconstructers of Gods Providence toward us. 2ly. He describes
their Persons to whom the Consolation belongs, to be Love of God, because Love
furthers the Accomplishme^ of these things that are designed by God, such (...)
nearer Communion with God, hatred at sin, an mourning for it.

Use of Instruction, here we may see upon w^ we may father the missing of the
Spiritual Benefi^ of the Cross, viz. upon the want of Love to Go^ Use 2d. of
Trial to try whether we have Lover God or not. try your reality of Love, by
your d^light in God, and the tenderness of your Obedien^ John 14.28. Use 3d. of
Exhortation, to Labo^ for Love, and for that effect, believe Gods Love (...)
you. 2ly. Consider the Mercies of your Lot. An^ 3ly. Repel these
misrepresentations of God, the Satan makes of him, as tho he were cruel, becau^
he were crossing us.

Verse 28. To them, who are the Called according to his Purpose.


HEre a 2d. description of these persons to who^ all providence are
profitable, and it is from their Effectual Calling, The phrase here used abo^
this Calling imports these Four. 1st. The speciali^ of this Mercy. 2ly, That it
flows from mere Grace; for where it is said to be a Calling according to
purpose. that is a note to distinguish it, from a Call that is according to
Works, 2 Timothy 1, 9. 3ly. It imports the effectualness of the Call, for Gods
purpose is a standing purpose, Romans 9, 11, And 4ly, It imports the
perseveringness of this Call, because it is an unalterable purpose.

For the 1st. That it is an Special Call, appears, because it is not the
external Call alone, for it is limited and restricted by this, that it is a
calling according to purpose, Now all the externally called, are not thus
internally called, for many of the externally called ones are not converted,
see Deuteronomy. 29.5. But all the internally called ones are converted, John 6.45.
Besides, this is not the simple external call, for it seems to be a call
peculiar to the Elect. It being a call squared by purpose, which is meaned of
the purpose of Election, and since there is a call peculiar to the Elect, as
appears by that 2 Pet. 1.10. Where the assureance of our Calling, and the
assurance of our Election goes together, it would seem that that calling
peculiar to the Elect were meaned; and therefore it cannot be meaned of the
external Call, for it is extended to more than the Elect, by Christ's Words,
Many are Called, but few are chosen.

If it be said, that all the externally called, are internally called, because
the externally called are said to resist the Holy Ghost? Answ. Such may be said
to resist the Holy Ghost, as Stephens hearers did, Acts 7. Who resist his
external call, and who resist his common operations. If it be said, that the
internal call, is always attending on the external call, because the Spirits
Efficacy is joined with the D^pensation of the Word, in that Promise made to^
Church, Isa. 59. last It is Answered, that Pro^ does not say, that every
dispensation of the Wo^ has the Spirits attendance on it; it says indeed the
the Spirits Presence never wholly leaves the Visi^ Church: Neither will this
Opinion, Viz. That (...) external call may be without Efficacy; reflect (...)
Gods sincerity, in the external call, for the external call only holds out what
is Duty, and what m^ be a sufficient encouragement for the doing of the Duty,
but it does not signify any thing of Gods (...) terminate Purpose to bring
about Events. Neith^ are these only that are externally called, excusab^ for
their disobedience upon the account of their wa^ of the internal Call; for they
are willingly disobedient, and they have sufficient discovery of Du^ with
sufficient encouragement to perform it.

Use 1st. This lets us see the Sovereignty o^ God, in dispensing this internal
Call to some, and denying it to others, this is handled by the Apostle, Romans 9.
Use 2d. Of Exhortation, to exhort the internally called to thankfulness, seeing
it is a special Mercy not granted to all within the Visible Church.

Observe next, that this internal Call is of Grace (...) and not of Works, see
2 Timothy 1.8 This is clear, (...) ye consider, who they are the Called, The Poor,
1 Cor. 1.27. The Foolish, Matthew. 11.25. The Profane, passing by the Civil, 2
Cor. 6.10. The dead in Trespasses and Sins, Ephesians. 2.1. The Gentiles passing by
many of the Jews; besides Gods calling the wicked Nation of the Jews to a
Visible Church State passing by other Nations that were more Civilized then
they, was a representation of the freedom of this Internal Call, see Deuteronomy. 9.4.
Now there were some Nations better then the Jews, for when God sent Ezekiel to
them, he said, if he had sent them to other Nations, he had not found them so
Rebellious, as the house of Judah, and Christ said that tho the Jews were
Impenitent under his Doctrine and Miracles, yet if they of Tire and Sidon had
heard and seen them, they would not a been so.

Next, This Internal Call is free, Because the Soul is passive in Vocation,
Phil. 3.12. 2ly. It is free, because it is not merited by Works: for all the
good Works that a man can do flows from the Power of Grace, 1 Cor. 15.10. Now
we want Grace before we be internally Called, and we are in the flesh also,
before we be internally Called; Now these that are in the flesh cannot please
God, and therefore cannot merit this internal Call. Again, neither can it be
said, that the receiving of this internal Call does merit, because Gods
Working in us to Will, is of good Pleasure, also well as his working in us to
do, Phil. 2.12. Use 1st. The internally Called should be humble. 2ly. They
should be confident of their perseverance; seeing Grace began their Salvation,
it can also carry it on. 3ly. Seeing ye get this Grace freely of God, use it for
him. Use 2d. To encourage these who find their Grace under decay, to use means
for its recovery, and expect it, seeing it was given freely. Use 3d. Of
Instruction, to let us see that Glory is of Grace, seeing our first Calling to
it is free. Use 4th. It encourages Ministers to go on with the external Call
because God may confer the internal Call upon the worst, seeing it is free, and
the worst of sinners may use the means for their conversion to God, seeing God
can confer this internal Call upon the worst of them freely.

Observe 3ly. This Call is effectual, seeing it is the accomplishment of a
standing purpose, see Romans 9.11. Jo. 6 44.45. Cant. 1.3, 4. The promise of the
Spirit, Ezekiel. 36.^6. Does not only say, that God will enable us to walk in his
Statutes, but that we shall actually walk in them; beside not only a Power to
believe, but Actual Believing, is Gods Gift, Phil. 1. last. And actual
Repentance is the certain effect of converting Grace, Jer. 31, 18. Likeas, this
Grace conferred by this Internal Call, cures the resistance to it self, because
by it the stony heart is taken out of our flesh, and we get an heart of flesh:
Neither can it be said, that our concurrence into this Internal Cal^ makes it
effectual, because then Gods working in us to do, were not so much of his good
pleasure, as his working in us to will, contrair to Phil. 2.2. And our Calling
which is said to be of Grace. and not of Works, might be said to be of this
Work, Viz. A Concurrence with the internal Call, which cannot be consistent
with this which is said in the 2 Timothy 1.9. Viz. That our Calling is not of Works
b^ of Grace: Besides, to say that the effectualness of this Grace depended on
our concurrence, it were also much as to say, that it were in our power to make
Christ's Death fruitless, and to render void the Promise of the Father to the
Son, in the Covenant of Redemption, Viz. That he should see his seed, and the
pleasure of the Lord should prosper in his hand, Isai. 53.10 Neither does the
effectualness of this Call take away the natural freedom of the Will, for that
Natural freedom consists in a spontaneous willing acting from choice. Neither
does the Doctrine of the effectualness of Grace speak any thing against the
approvableness of the Saints obedience to Gods Call, for it may flow from
determinating Grace, and yet be approvable; for the obedience of Angels, and
confirmed Saints in Heaven is approven of God.

Use 1st. This lets us see the difference betwixt Gods working on Men's Spirits,
and Satan's working on them; Satan can only persuade, but God can determine.
2ly. we may see the great power of God, in the power of converting Grace; It is
compared to the Power that raised Christ from the Dead, Ephesians. 1.18. 3ly. It
says, we need not despair of the Conversion of the worst. 4ly. It says, that
the Converted may believe that they shall persevere, notwithstanding of the
opposition made to their perseverance; because that same powerful Grace that
converted them at first, can make them persevere. Next, When it is said, they
are called according to purpose, it speaks this Call to be a persevering Call,
for this purpose is irrevocable. Romans 11.29.

Observe next, That those that are called according to purpose, their Calling
is a sure pledge, that God will make all their Afflictions tend to their
spiritual good, and that because their Calling is linked with their Glory, as
being the first prime effect of their predestination v, 30.

Use of this is, That if we would be sure that ou^ Afflictions would advance
our spiritual Good, we would try our Calling; And first, try it by our Saving
Knowledge, 2 Pet. 1.58. 2ly. Try it by ou^ attainment to Holiness, 1 Thessalonians 4.7.
3ly. Try it by your Communion with Christ. 1 Cor. 1.9. 4ly. Try it by your
esteem of the mystery of the Cross, 1 Cor. 1.23. 5ly. Try it by the deep
impressions of the Gospel Truths on your Heart, Romans 6.17. 6ly. Try it by your
esteem of the Calling Word; If ye desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye
may grow thereby, 1 Pet. 2.2.

Verse 29 For, whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed
to the image of his Son, that he might be the firstborn amongst many brethren.


HEre the Apostle proves, That the Called according to purpose, Their
Afflictions must tend to their Spiritual Good, because they are predestinate to
be conformed to the Image of the Son of God. And the medium he makes use of to
prove it is, that the foreknown are predestinate to be conformed to the Image
of God; and he takes it for granted, that all the Called according to purpose,
are foreknown. By a conformity with Christ's Image, is not here understood an
Conformity with him in his Suffering Lot, else the Argument would not infer
what the Apostle intends to prove, viz. That the Afflictions of the called ones
might tend to their spiritual Good, for many might be predestinate to be in a
suffering Lot, which Lot might prove not very edifying to them. 2ly. The
Illustration subjoined viz. That he might be the firstborn amongst many
Brethren, signifies that by conformity with Christ's Image, is not meaned
Suffering, but a shareing in his privileges significative of favor. 3l^. It
must not be a conformity to his Suffering Lot here meant, because as the
Apostle expresses it in the bulk v, 29. That the effect of Predestination is a
conformity to Christ's Image, so more plainly and particularly he sets out
wherein that conformity does consist, v. 30. viz. By giving us the effects of
Predestination; which are Calling, Justification and Glory.

By Foreknowledge here is not meaned a Foreknowledge of our Faith or good
Works, or of our concurrence with the External Call; The reason is because
Faith is the effect of Predestination, v. 30. Therefore it cannot be the object
of Foreknowledge, because Foreknowledge is before Predestination, and Faith is
the effect of Predestination, Acts 13.48. neither can it be meant of the
Forknowledge of good Works, because these are the effects of Predestination.
Likeways Ephesians. 2.10. Neither can it be meant of the Foreknowledge of our
concurrence with the External Call, because our Effectual Calling depends not
upon that concurrence, but upon Gods purpose, and Grace that was given to us in
Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 1.9. By this Foreknowledge therefore is meant, the Love of
God toward such whom he predestinates to be saved through Christ, because
Knowledge in the Hebrew Language is taken for Affection, Psalm. 1, ^l^. Romans
11.2. 1 Pet. 1.2

We may observe here, that all the Called of God, are foreknown of him, that is
they are the Objects o^ his Eternal Love, and this tells us, that their Callin^
comes from free Love and not from merit. 2l^ It bids us conclude from our
Calling that we are the Objects of Eternal Love. 3ly. It says, that if Go^
Loved us from Eternity, he will Love us to Eternity 4ly. It says, that since
God Loved us from Eternity we should Love him in time.

Next, Observe, that the Called are predestinate t^ be conformed to the Image
of his Son, and this tel^ us, that Electing Love was toward Gods Elect, before
they were considered as in Christ: nay the gi^ing of them to Christ does say,
by the decree of Predestination, which as to our uptaking is revealed in t^
Scripture to be posterior to this Love, that the peop^ of God were his by
Electing Love, before they w^ given to Christ to save, Jo. 17.6. And we see the
were designed to be conformed to the Image (...) Christ after they were
foreknown, And therefo^ that Arminian Tenet is false, that God can have
Elective Love toward none, but such as he does for see to be Believers; And
this says next, that if G^ Love his people with an Love of Benevolence, befo^
he consider them as in Christ by Faith, he will c^tainly Love such with an Love
of complacency, as a^ actually in him by Believing.

Observe 3ly. That God designs a Fraternity betwixt Believers and Christ, That
is, that there shou^ be a Communion of Natures betwixt us and him; he has the
same human Nature with the Children. Heb. 2.14. Likeas they partake of his
Spirit Romans ^ ^. And this is appointed of God, 1, That there mig^ be an
Imputation of his Obedience and Sufferings t^ us, because we are sib to him,
2ly. That we might claim with confidence the effects of his merit. And 3ly.
That he might sympathisingly interceed for us. And 4ly. That we might with
boldness employ him in all his Offices, as one we are so nearly related to. And
5ly. That there might be access to conform us to his Image, As the Text says,
that is, to share with him in his privileges here, and his Glory hereafter.
And first we share with him in his Natural Sonship by our Adoption, Gal. 4.5.
2ly. We share with him in his Justification, he was justified by his
Resurrection, as our Soverty, 1 Timothy 3 last. And we are justified through him,
Phil. 3.9. He received the Spirit from the Father as Spirit of Life, and we
receive that Spirit from him, Jo^ 14.19. And 6.57. He raised himself from the
Grave by his own Power, we are to be raised by his Power, Romans 8.11. Jo. 528.
He went into Heaven and acquired an nearness to his Father by his own Blood, we
acquire an access to Heaven by the same Blood, Heb. 10.19.20. He allows us a
share of his Glory, Jo. 17.24. This speaks out the Fathers Love, that advances
us to partake of their privileges with Christ, and it exhorts us to be content
with his Lot in this World, and to imitate his Virtues.

Observe, That Christ has the pre-eminence, in respect of privileges over all
his Brethren: He is the Natural Son, we are the Adopted Children; he received
the Spirit above measure, we by measure; the Fountain and fullness of Life is in
him, we have but a share of it; he was justified by his own Righteousness and
Obedience, we by his; he got access to the Fathers Glorious presence by virtue
of his own Blood, we by virtue of the same, Heb: 10.19. He rose by the Power of
his own Spirit, we are raised by virtue of his Power: As to his personal Glory,
it is greater nor ours, because he sits on the right hand of the Throne of
Majesty, This tells us we owe him great Honor, Homage, Love, Esteem, and
Dependence.

Observe, That Christ possessed with their privileges evidences himself to be
Gods first born and Heir: what privileges I have named do testify, that he is
the Son of God, so that after Christ's Exaltation, to deny hi^ Divinity, is an
inexcusable Fault, and it is an inexcusable Infidelity in the Saints to deny
their Adoption, while they feel in themselves an Communication of the Spirit of
Life from Christ. And as their Privileges testify, that he is the Natural Son
of God, so they testify that he is the Heir of all things; he is called here
the Firstborn. The Father Loves the Son, and gives all things into his hand,
and this speaks our right to these Privileges to be very firm, seeing we have a
right to them by his Testament, ratified by his Blood and Death.

Verse 30. Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them he also called, and whom he
called, them he also justified, and whom he justified, them he also glorified.


OBserve here, the Apostle clearing, That the Called, according to purpose, or
the Predestinate Folks, their Afflictions must tend to their Good, because of
this Argument, that Calling, Justification and Glory are the certain effects of
Predestination, And therefore God in his Wisdom must order Afflictions, so as
they must have a certain tendency to bring them to Glory at last.

Observe here, All the predestinate Folks are effectually Called, And therefore
this says first, That none will win to Heaven but those that are Effectually
Called, for Calling here goes before Glory, and such as are Predestinate to
Glory, are Predestinate to Calling. 2ly. It says that the first clear discovery
of Predestination is Calling, A Man cannot know his Election by any other
evidence then by Calling. 3ly. It says that this is a sure evidence thereof.
4ly. We see that Calling being the effect of Predestination, and it being an
irrevocable purpose, Romans 9.11. That Calling must as to its effect be
irresistible. 5ly. We see that since Calling is the effect of Predestination,
the Foreknowledge of our Calling cannot be the cause of it, and therefore our
foreseen Faith cannot be the cause of our Election. And 6ly. Seeing we see the
Apostle proving that the Called according to purpose, are to be conformed
according to Christ's Image, that is, they are to share of his privileges and
Glory, he proves this I say, by that sure Link that Predestination puts between
their Calling and Glory, which tells us that all Effectually Called do share of
Christ's Privileges, and shall after share of his Glory.

The Text says, Whom he Calls he Justifies, this says there are none Justified
till they be Called, and therefore the Antinomian Error is reproveable, who
say the Elect are justified from Eternity, Elect Paul before Conversion, was a
Child of Wrath even as others, Ephesians. 2.2. 2ly. This says, That presently upon
their being Called they are Justified, and therefore their Justification is not
delayed till they persevere in Good Works to the end of their Life, or else how
should they rejoice in the hope of the Glory of God while they are in time.
3ly. If the Called Folks be justified, then they are in a state of Friendship
with God, and therefore there is no Wrath in their most severe Lots. Romans 5.7.
And they may with freedom use access to the Throne of Grace. 4ly. If the Called
be justified, It says their Afflictions must tend to their Good, because when
they know that Sin is pardoned, they cannot but be sure that God will bless
their Crosses to them, and not make them a Curse 5ly. If Called Folks be
justified, they should have peace in their own Conscience, they may well be
humbled for Sin, they should not have an Tormenting fear of Hell for it. 6ly.
If the Called be justified, their Obedience should flow more from Love to God
then from distrustful fears.

Now I clear that the Called are justified, That is, they are indemnified as to
the punishment for Sin threatened by the Covenant of Works, and they have an
unquestionable Title to Life; the reason is, because they have a right to
Christ's Obedience and Suffering; For the Father gives Christ to them for
Righteousness, 1 Cor. 1 30. 2 Cor 5. last. And Christ ratifies the Gift of his
own Consent, and seals his own gift and the Fathers Gift, by the Sacrament of
the Supper. Now that the Called Man is justified appears, because the Called
have Faith, and the Gospel-Promulgation secures, that all Believers are
justified. 2ly. It appears that the Called Man is justified, because God gives
him of his Spirit, and we know that he gives his Spirit to none, but to such to
whom he is reconciled. 3ly. The Called Man is justified, because he is Just,
and that upon the account he has a sure interest in a perfect justifying
Righteousness. It is a justifying Righteousness, if ye consider, 1st. The
compleatness of his Obedience and Sufferings. 2ly. If ye consider, That that
Obedience and Suffering was for us, and not for himself. 3ly. If ye consider,
that the Father appointed it to be so, 2 Cor. 5. last. 4ly. If ye consider,
there were Grounds for this Appointment, viz. Christ's sibness to us, and his
consent it should be so. From this we infer, that the Called, since they are
justified, may bear the Calumnies of the World, and live in the Hope of the
sentential Justification of the Judge at the last Day, seeing they are Legally
justified by Law, and that Law of his own Constitution.

Observe, All the justified shall be glorified, this Glory stands as to the
Body in its Clarity, Immortality, Spirituality, and Power; As to the Soul, it
stands in its Light, in its Life, in its Communion with God, and in its Joy and
Comfort springing from all these. That Light is full and immediate, we see no
more through a Glass darkly, but face to face: It is Eternal, our Sun will no
more go down; that Life it is a Life on, from and to God; it is full and
abundant, there is a River of Waters of Life in Heaven; it is eternal as to its
duration; that Communion we have with God is immediate, without Ordinances,
there is no Temple in the New Jerusalem, Rev. 22. It is constant without
interruption, we are made Pillars of the Temple of God, Rev 7: 10. The Joys
that follow thereon, are full an^ satisfying, constant and lasting, Psalm. 16.
last. Now this Glory, all the Justified shall possess it, as appears, by the
linking of Calling Justification, an^ Glory together, and they are linked
together by reason of Predestination, Christ's Merit, and the Spirits
Application. 2ly. It is sure by the nature of Justification, it being a Right
to Life, alse well as Immunity from Wrath. 3ly. It appears from Sanctification,
which is a Preparation for Glory, and a Pledge of it. Ephesians. 4.30. It appears
from their Adoption, Romans 8.17. It appears from this, that the Gospel is the
Rule of Judgment; the Word that Christ speaks, shall judge them at the last
Day, John 12. It appears from the necessary Righteousness that is in the Judge.
And Lastly, it appears from the Truth of God, and the Truth of his Promise.

From this we infer, that the Justified do share of Christ's Privileges here,
such as access to God, seeing they are to share of his Glory hereafter, and
partial Conformity with Christ in this World secures our total Conformity with
him in Glory in the other. 2ly. This says that the justified are sanctified,
seeing Sanctification must go before Glory, and it is Glory begun. 2ly. It says
that the justified are sure of perseverance, seeing they that endure to the end
must be saved, and none but they. 4ly: That since Glory is connected with
Justification, we should hope for Heaven, wait for Heaven, and work out our
Salvation with fear and trembling. 5ly. We should submit to the Cross, seeing
this condition is certainly abiding us. 6ly. We should never be jealous that
the Cross will tend to our prejudice, but believe it will tend to our profit,
seeing God designs to bring us to Glory, for Grace must reign through
Righteousness into eternal Life. And 7ly. Ye would try your state to
Justification, as ye would try your right to Glory.

Verse 31. What shall we say then to these things? If God be for us, who can be
against us.


HEre the Apostle, by way of interrogating, what shall we say then to these
things? infers the truth and sufficiency of the Comforts formerly laid down;
because when he says, What shall we say to them, imports, that we can say
nothing to them: And afterward, from this he concludes a triumphant Defyance,
against all the Opposition that can he made to their Salvation under the Cross,
and that is, because it appears by the Comforts formerly laid down, that God is
with them; that is, God is Friends with them, they have fellowship with him,
and he assists them against all the Opposition that is made to their Salvation.

Observe here 1st. That the Comforts formerly laid down, are real and
sufficient, and that proven so by the Experience of all Saints. The Comforts
formerly spoken to, are the Certainty of Glory, and its preferable Good to the
Evil of Afflictions; that we are saved by Hope; that the Spirit helps our
Infirmities, especially in Prayer; that all things work together for our Good,
especially Afflictions, and t^ our love to God, and Calling according to purpo^
are Pledges thereof; that we are Predestinate to^ conformed to Christ's Image,
and sharers of his ^viledges; that Predestination has put a sure Con^ction
betwixt Calling and Glory. From this (...) infer, that the Enjoyers of these
Comforts are (...) excuseable for their being prevailed upon, by d^couragements
under the Cross. 2ly. This tells (...) that Ministers, when they comfort People
und^ Crosses, should afford them plain and unquestio^able Grounds of
Consolation, that cannot be cont^dicted, such as the Text says here, we have
nothi^ to say against,

Observe next, that the Enjoyers of these Comforts may conclude that God is
with them; From this I infer, 1st. That these Comforts are sure Mar^ of a
state of Reconciliation. 2ly. I infer that the are certain Pledges of Divine
Assistance, against opposition made to our Salvation. 3ly. I infer the they are
real Evidences of Spiritual Communion betwixt God and us,

Observe 3ly. That while Saints are under the Cross, their is much opposition
made to their Salvation; It Is clear 1st. By their Corruptions being irritate by
the Cross. 2ly. By the Devils taking advantage by the Cross to tempt us. 3ly.
It appears by the Worlds insulting over the People of God, while they are under
the Cross. 4ly. It appears from the Challenges of Conscience, for sin that they
are liable unto while under the Cross; This says that we have not only need of
Patience to bear the Cross, but we have need of Watchfulness against that
opposition that is made to our Faith under the Cross, and we had need to pray
for strength against that opposition, much more than for Deliverance from the
Cross.

Observe 4ly. That this Opposition is all succesless, because it is limited by
Providence, and we have strength afforded us by the Spirits Influence against
it. Use, This is comfortable to People under long continuing Crosses. 2ly. This
invites us to bring our Faith up to that, triumphantly to defy all the
opposition that is made against it.

Verse 32 He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all; How
shall he not with him freely also give us all things?


HEre the Apostle, as he had in the former Verses comforted the Saints under
the Cross, by telling them that God would secure and defend them from the evil
of it, by giving them many sensible Supports for that end; So likewise in this
Verse, he does comfort them, by telling them of his readiness to confer Favors
upon them, and this he confirms by the Love of Christ to them, and by the Love
of the Father in giving Christ.

Observe. 1st. That there is an abundance of Spiritual Things that the
afflicted Christian stands in need of: Here the Apostle says, they may expect
an, All, of things; They have need of Pardon to be intimate to them, and that
because the Cross is really an Effect of Paternal Displeasure, and People under
the Cross are ready to be jealous of God anger as a Judge. 2ly. They have need
of Grace to prevent the irritation of their Corruption. 3ly. They had need of
Patience under the Cross, because of the continuance of it. 4ly^ They had need
of Repentance, because the Cross leads them to it. 5ly. They had need of
Comfort, because they are called to suffer with joy and cheerfulness under the
Cross, alse well as otherways. 6ly. They had need of Deliverance, to prevent
their overwhelming under the Cross; and they had need of the Blessing of the
Cross, to make it effectual for their good.

Use, This lets us see, how much we are in Gods Reverence, therefore we should
be loath to offend him. 2ly. This tells us that afflicted Folks should be much
in Prayer, for the supply of their wants, and other Folk should pray for them.
3ly. They are called to be very humble, seeing they have so great need of so
many things in their afflicted Condition.

Observe, 2ly. That God is very ready to give bountifully to his People, in
their afflicted State; As appears 1st. By the compleatness of their Pardon,
Psalm. 85. 2ly. By the fullness of their Comfort, 2 Cor. 1.6. 3ly. By the
sufficiency of their Grace against Temptations, 2 Cor. 12.8. 4ly. By their
innumerable Deliverances, Psalm. 71.15. 5ly. By the seasonableness of these
Deliverances, Psalm. 46.1. 6ly. By their unexpectedness, Psalm. 126.1. 7ly. By
their Deliverance, being above their Merit, Isa^. 57.18. 8ly. By the
Communication of Light to them, Prove. 3.8. Psalm. 25.8.

Use of Reproof, for the narrow Thoughts we have of the Bounty of God toward
us in our afflicted state. 2d. Use of Exhortation, to exhort us to have large
Desires and Expectations, suitable to this large Bounty. 3ly. It reproves us
for repineing under Crosses, seeing God puts us in that Condition, of purpose
that we may be capable of having the Experience of the Expressions of his
Bounty. 5ly, Do not shift a Cross, seeing God can by the Expressions of his
Bounty, make it both pleasant and profitable. 6ly. Do not obstruct the
Expressions of his Bounty by Unbelief, Impenitency, and neglect of Prayer. 7ly.
Labor to observe the Expressions of Gods Bounty, to confirm your Faith, to
excite your Love and Thankfulness.

Observe 3ly. That their Expressions of Love are freely given, because they
exceed and go beyond our Faith, Psalm 31.21. 2ly. They go beyond our Merit, Isay
57.18. God will deliver us even when we are guilty of Treachery toward him,
Jer. 3.20, 21. This teaches us Humility and confidence in Prayer.

Observe 4ly. All their Expressions of Bounty are given with Christ, which holds
out, that if we have an interest in him, we have an interest also in all these:
all things are yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods, 2 Cor. 1. last, 2
Cor. 1.20. 2ly. It imports, that Christ is the principal Gift, other things
cannot be had without him, and if they could, they would not be sweet to us.
3ly. When the Text says he gives us all things with him; it imports, that all
the Expressions of his Bounty conferred on us in our afflicted condition, are
given to us upon the account of his Merit, and not upon the account of ours

Observe 5ly. The Apostles manner of Expressio^ showing Gods readiness to
supply the need of his af^cted People on Christ's account, in these Words, He
shall be not with him freely give us all things, imports, the crossed Saints
should have no doubt of Gods read^ness to supply their Wants; This appears from
(...) Faithfulness in keeping Promises. 2ly. The U^changeableness of the
goodness of his Nature. 3l^ From his tender Sympathy toward his People (...)
their afflicted condition, In all their afflict^on he was afflicted, Isa. 63 9.
4ly. It appears f^^ the great love that was vented in procureing them Savior.

Use of Reproof, to those that have hard though^^ of God, as tho he were
unready or unwilling to su^ply their wants. Use of Exhortation, to conclud^
from hence, that what ever our Lot is, it is suite for us; This would make us
love our God, and comply with our Duty and Cross, notwithstanding o^ Cross were
against our Natural Humor v^ far.

Observe 6ly. That Gods giving up of Christ (...) Death, is a great
Confirmation of the Fathers L^ to us. In speaking to this, I shall clear first,
in w^^^ sense it is, the Father did not spare his Son. 2ly. W^ he is called his
own Son. 3ly. In what sense it (...) said, that he delivered him up to Death.
And 4^ How all this is the very highest Expression (...) his Love.

For the First, The Father is said not to spare t^^^ Son, to hold out that our
Salvation was so dear (...) him, that rather than it were not brought about, it
was content to expose his Son to a state of Hum^ation for us; and this must be
an Argument of great Love; It was great Love to design and bestow Salvation on
us, but it was an greater Argument of Love to design such a Salvation for us,
as would not be brought about, but by the Humiliation of his Son: and this
tells us, we are still great Debitors to the Fathers Love, for it is impossible
that we can express Love to him, as he has to us. 2ly. It says, that as we are
obliged to Christ, who by his Humiliation merited our Salvation, so to the
Fathers Love likeways, who to make way for it, procured Christ's Humiliation,
3ly. It says, there is nothing promised in the Covenant, but we may expect it
from the Fathers Love, seeing Heaven it self, if it could have heen given
another way then this, had been an expression of Love below this exp^cision of
it. 4ly. If Love made him part with he Son for us, it says, that there is
nothing so dear to us, that we should not part with, to testify our Love to him.

2ly. He is said not to spare him, because after he had undertaken to be our
Soverty, Justice exacted all the Penalty of him for the breach of the Covenant
of Works, and for all our Sins, he forgave him nothing, Isai. 53 7 It was
exacted, and he Answered it, though these Words be otherways in our Translation;
when Christ dyed, he said, It was finished, Jo. 19.30. He suffered in his Soul,
Body, and Name, The Lord withdrew his sensible Comfort from him, at appears by
his crying My God why has thou forsaken me, Devils vexed him, Men mocked him;
From this, See 1st. The greatness of Gods Love to us, that he would not divide
the Legal punishment of Sin 'twixt Christ and us, but would have him to bear it
all. 2ly. We would read the greatness of Gods Love in the Extremity of Christ
his Sufferings; And for this effect be often considering 1st. The painfulness of
his Death. 2ly. The Ignominiousness of his Death. 3ly. It was a Cursed Death,
and he dyed in the account of many as deserving Death, and in the view of many.
3ly. Consider the trouble of his mind, Jo. 12.27. It puts him to that, what
shall I say, He was exceeding sorrowful, Matthew. 26 38. 4ly Consider his Prayers
for relief; his sinles nature shuning this Cup; he that was so willing to
suffer being put to that, tells us he was put to great Extremity. 5ly. Consider
his Prayers, the fervor of them, Luke 22.44 The frequency and shortness of
them, and that he desired the Disciples to watch and pray with him: all that
says, that he was sore put to it, 6ly. Consider that he stood in need of the
confirmation of an Angel, Luke 22.43. 7th. The prophetical Expressions of the
old Testament about his Sufferings says, he was in great Extremity, his being
bruised, pouring out his Soul to Death, Isai. 53. His Heart being poured out
like Water, Psalm. 22. That says he behooved to be in great Extremity.

Use 3d If God spared not Christ, but put him to bear the whole Curse for his
People, then they are to bear no portion of vindictive Wrath themselves. 4^. if
Justice spared not him, it will not spare others, that have no Interest in his
Suffering The Wicked and Unbelievers may expect the exact accomplishment of the
Threatening. 5ly. Believen may venture on his Satisfaction. 6ly. Be affected
with Sin, that procured this Extremity of Suffering. But

2ly. He is said to be his own proper peculiar Son, Jo. 10.34 1 Jo. 4.10. Jo.
1.8. Gal 4.4. And this was a great Expression of the Fathers Love, If ye
consider that he was the Object of his Fathers Eternal Love, Prove. 8. 2ly. In
that he gave up his own Son, He testified by this his design, to bring up his
People to the Honorable state of Adoption. From this see, the necessity of our
Salvations being brought about by Christ, and by no other, for no other was
capable of the Work of Mediation but he, He had only Personal Dignity to make
his Sacrifice of Value, He only had the Spirit to apply the purchases of that
Sacrifice.

3ly. How the Father delivered him up to Death, This Delivery to Death is
ascribed to the Father; by reason of his Decree that he should dye, 1 Pet.
1.20. 2ly. Because it was by his Providence all that was inflicted on him, he
had the main hand in inflicting all that punishment on him that he sustained,
And that Providence had the main hand in Christ's Sufferings. Appears 1st. In
that he suffered not till the appointed time came, notwithstanding all his
Enemies Malice: The Scripture says no man laid hands on him, for his hour was
not yet come. 2ly. Scripture-Prophecy about them tells us, that Providence
ordered them. 3^. Christ's foreknowledge of them, Jo. 18.4. 4ly. Enemies being
limited that they could not do all they would, Jo. 19 36. And Christ himself
acknowledges this, Jo. 18.11. And this was the reason, why Christ betook
himself to Prayer under the Cross.

Use 1st. I^ the Father was the main deliverer of him up to Death, see here the
great intended end of Christ's Suffering, was satisfaction to his Justice; It
was the Fathers Justice did pursue him; And that consideration is comfortable
to us, and significative of the Fathers Love, that Justice did forbear to
punish us, and did insist in the pursuit of him, 2ly. We see, that Justice may
inflict punishment by Instruments, for Guilt, whether imputed or following upon
personal Transgression, it was Justice delivered him up to Death, tho it was
Men that were the instruments in inflicting of it: And this tells us that under
all our Sufferings from Men we should mainly look to God, for he has the chief
Hand. 3ly. Since the Father delivered him to Death out of Love to us for our
Salvation, there is no cause to stumble at this Providence, or strengthen
Atheism thereby; If Gods designs in this Providence, and his Hand be
overlooked, it seems a strange thing for such a person to be given up to the
will of Men, but if the reason of this Providence be thoroughly considered,
there needs none stumble at it. 4ly. if Christ's Sufferings were ordered by the
Fathers Providence, then all the Sufferings of his People must be ordered by
the same providence. 5ly, We see in this Providence Gods Hand Christ's Hand, and
the Hand of the Wicked Instruments: God was Just, because he was imputatively
Guilty; Christ kythed his Affection, in submitting to all that was inflicted on
him, though he did not actively take away his own Life, but the Instruments were
Wicked, because they did it to satisfy their Malice.

Now if ye would consider the Apostles reasoning hence, To confirm the People
of God in his Love, it is very strong. 1st. Considering who he was, he was his
own Son. 2ly. To what be was delivered, it was up to Death. And 3ly. If you
consider for whom, for Us, Worthless Sinful Creatures: All that makes it a High
expression of Love.

Use 1st. To reprove those amongst Believers that doubts of his Love: For 1st.
There are some that doubt of it, because he crosses them, but they would look
to his defending them against the Snare of the Cross, and for his supplys of
Grace under the Cross, and how necessary it is for us. 2ly. Some doubt of his
Love, because they want Gifts, but alas Gods great Gift, is Christ to save;
other Gifts are more significative of Love to others in the Church, then that
they signify Gods Love to thy self. To press the believing of this Love,
Consider 1st. It makes you Love him. 2ly. It will make you construct well of
his dealing, Charity thinks no Evil. 3ly. It will make you very thankful for
Mercies; For if thou think God Loves thee not, thou will be ready to think
every thing a snare to thee, and so will not be so thankful for it. 4ly. If
thou believe his Love, thou will not be feared for the Aspect of an coming
Cross, Psalm. 56 4.

Use 2d, Of Exhortation, Love the Father of our Lord Jesus, and express your
Love. 1st. By Obedience. 2ly. By loving his spiritual presence in his
Ordinances, see Psalm. 27.4. His Presence was David's, One Thing. 3ly. By Loving
them that are his, Psalm. 16. My Goodness extends not to thee, but to the
Saints. 4ly. Let your heart be warmed with Love to God under the Rod, Heb.
12.9. 5ly. Grieve, For others and your own offending him. 6ly. Have nothing but
what you can give it him, and bestow it for his use, Your Health, Time, Gifts,
Friendship in the World, Riches, study how all these may be employed for him,
and his Glory. 7ly. L^ Love make you willing to part, though it were with your
Life to Glorify him, seeing Christ parted with his for your Salvation.

Use 3d. ^eing the Father his Love, has made o^ Salvation so easy, Then work
it out with fear and trembling; He does not require a conformity to the Law of
thee, that thou may be saved, that he has got of Christ, when he did not spare
him; all the Co^formity he requires is, in order to Thankfulness and by virtue
of Christ's strength.

Verse 33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It is God that
justifies


HAving spoken elsewhere, to the Nature of Justification, that it does not
stand in the infusi^ of Gracious qualities in the Soul, or in a person
conformity to the Law, In regard of our Actions. But it stands in an Absolution
from the charge of the Law, for want of an Conformity to its preceptive and
comminatory parts. 2ly. As also having spoken to the compleatness of
Justification, as it is an Absolution from any possible charge or clame that c^
be given in against us. And 3ly. To the sureness an^ firmness of it

Here the Apostle triumphs by Faith, as judging it so firm, As it cannot be
quarrelled by any (...) any time, upon just Grounds. But the Text supposes
there will be Challenges of our Justification and these are the censuring
World, the misinforme Conscience, and the Tempting Devil. And fin^ our
Justification is firm in it self, and objectively certain, it were fit we had
an subjective certainty of it, that we may the more easily defend our selves
against these Challengers. And for this effect, first we would be truly
convinced of sin, Psalm. 32.1. 1 Jo. 1.7. People that are either stupid in their
Conscience or Extenuaters of their Faults, rarely win to the assurance of their
Justification. 2ly. We would not found this Assurance of ours upon a good
lively frame, or upon some eminent assistance to do a particular Duty, or upon
some singular returns of Prayer, or upon some signal external favorable
Providence, but we would lay the stress of it upon this, that by Faith we
appropriate to our selves the general grant of pardon recorded in the Gospel, 1 Timothy 1.15. 3ly. We would Labor to be of an Evangelical Spirit, and not of an
Legal, Phil. 3.10. 4ly. We should study sincerity, Heb. 10.22. The true Heart
there is joined with an Heart sprinkled from an Evil Conscience. And 5ly. Make
it your work to walk after the Spirit, Romans 8.1.

The Apostle adds two Grounds, upon which he founds the sureness, of our
Justification, One is taken from its Author, it is God that justifies, the
other is taken from the subjects of this privilege, the Elect.

For the first, Gods being the Author of Justification, that contributes to its
firmness: And first consider his Relation that he stands in toward the
justified, he is their Ruler by Laws* and their supreme Judge. 2ly. Consider
the hand he has to their particular Justification. 1st. His Infinite Wisdom
found out the Method of it, 2 Cor. 5.17. 2ly. Christ's Resurrection-says he
approved it. 3ly. I^ the word of the Gospel he recommends it to us, as (...)
way to make use of, Romans 3.25. 1 Cor. 1, 30.

Use, since God Justifies, the People of God may contemn the Worlds Censures,
the Devils suggestions, and the groundless Challenges of our own Conscience.

When he adds, that it is the justification of Gods Elect, he holds out. First,
The freedom of it. 2ly* The continuance of it, it is a state of standing
favor, it is called the Grace wherein we stand. Romans 7.1.

Verse 34. Who is he that condemns? It is Christ that dyed, yea rather that
is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes
intercession for us.


HEre the Apostle comforts the Afflicted, Persecuted Christian with this, That
not only he can Answer the Law-Charge, but also with this, that he is free from
a Condemnatory Sentence by the Judge. This freedom does appear from these
considerations. First, Christ is the Judge. 2ly. The Gospel, and not the Law is
the Rule of Judgment, Jo. 12.48. 3ly. Consider the qualities of their Pardon,
it is total, irrepealable, well confirmed by Christ's Death, the Oath and
promise of God. 4ly, Look to the satisfaction, on which this Remission is
founded: it is complete in its Nature, exactly Answering all the comminatory
parts in the Law, He exhausted the whole Curse, Gal 3.14, The punishment of all
our sin was laid on him, Isa^ 53.6. The Expiatory Virtue of the Sacrifice was
perfect, Heb^ 10.14, and 1.3. 2ly. This Satisfaction was Gods choice, Heb.
10.6. 3ly. God approves of it, Ephesians. 5.2. This appears by his Resurrection, in
setting him at his own right Hand. 4ly. Christ is an ^ntercessor ready to
vindicate it from all Aspersions of its insufficiency for us, 5ly. The Father
declares, that this Satisfaction is ours by Right.

Use, to reprove the People of God, that have a slavish fear of Condemnation;
This arises either from our ignorance of the forementioned Grounds, or our
unbelief of them. Or 2ly. It arises from our Conscience accusing us, for our
great sins before Conversion, or for them after Conversion, or from our
declineing from a good frame. Or this fear of Condemnation may arise from some
singular Cross that we are under, or from the frightful Apprehension we have of
Death: This misbelieving Fear, brings us under a Spirit of bondage, through the
fear of Death, and makes us neglect our duty of longing for Christ's second
return.

Use of Exhortation, to the confidence of Absolution at his 2d. Coming, and if
we would have this confidence at his coming, labor to keep the Anointing with
you, labor to abide in him, 1 John 2.^7, 28.

Observe next, that this freedom from Condemnation, belongs only to the Called,
the Elect of God, for of such only does the Context speak; the unconverted
Folks are under Law-Wrath, John 3. last, and their contempt of the Gospel
brings them more under condemnation, John 3 19 Neither can it be otherways,
because these that are uncalled h^ no interest in Christ's Person, and so
cannot, w^ Paul, have fellowship with his Sufferings; for at (...) only our
effectual Calling, that brings us to a fe^lowship with Christ's Person, 1 Cor.
1.9. This repro^ the unconverted for wanting the fear of Condemnation; this
Security arises from a stupidity of Conscience not accusing them for sin. 2ly.
It arise from the abuse of their Prosperity, or it may a^ from their ^ning to
their Morality, or to the ^nency of Gifts, or to their leaning to a great Name
amongst the Godly: To such Persons ordinarily the Gospel-Offer is very unsavory,
because they cannot see their need of it, and ordinarily such Persons a^
supprised with horrible Awakenings of Conscience under great Crosses, or at the
hour of their Death.

Directions, how secure People may win to an awakening 1st. They would examine
their Life by the Rule of the Law. 2ly. They would be of considering the old
Covenant of Works. 3ly. The would consider, that not one Word of the Gospel
confirms their Security. 4^y. They would consider that Justice spared not
Christ, when he was inputatively guilty. 5ly, They would consider, the Gods
Holiness, Justice, and Veracity, and his respect to the Glory and Credit of the
Redeemer, ^gadges his Wrath to pursue the rejecters of Christ 6ly. We would
consider the Marks of Gods indignation upon the Souls and Bodies of Men, upon
Inferior Animals, and upon the Works of Creation, which are imprinted upon
them for sin; This will give them a visible Evidence of Gods hatred at sin;
This may secure expected Punishment from God, if Grace prevent not. 7ly. They
would retire them s^lves from the Worlds noise, and make a Reflection on their
inward Temper, and beg the convinceing Spirit of God, to through the Work of
Conviction on their heart.

The Apostle, in laying down the Grounds upon which Faith triumphs over the
fear of Condemnation, holds out these four, Viz. Christ's Death, Resurrection,
Session at the Right Hand, and Intercession. Christ's Death may well be a ground
of freedom from this fear because 1st. It was the Punishment threatened in the
Covenant of Works against our sin, and he never having been a transgressor of
that Covenant, (for he never personally transgressed it,) neither could Adam's
Transgression be imputed to him, because he sprang not from him by the way of
natural Generation, I say, he being thus Innocent, his Death behooved to be a
dying in our stead. 2ly. This Death may free us of this fear, because he
endured the Spiritual Death, threatened in the Old Covenant, he took it off us,
and laid it on himself; he suffered in his Soul also well as in his Body, as
Witnesses the History of his Passion, which shows us that his Father withdrew
his Comforts from him, when he cried out, My God, Why have thou forsaken me?
And likewise it tells us, his Soul was subjected to Trouble, to Soul-Grief,
Fear and Agony. 2ly, His Resurrection is a good Ground to secure us against
this Fear, because it is the Fathers absolution of him as our Soverty. 3ly. The
Session at the right Hand, secures us against this Fear, because i^ is a
Preludium of his being Judge, and a certain Pledge given him of the Father, of
his total Victory over all the opposition made to h^ Peoples Salvation, Psalm.
110.1. Likeas it is a furth^ Testimony of the Fathers acquiesceing in that
satisfaction he paid to Justice for the sins of his People, Heb. 1.3. 4ly. His
Intercession secures us from this fear, because it is a Ground that may
sufficiently comfort us, by assureing us of the continuance of our Friendship
with God, and our standing in our justified state, notwithstanding of our da^
sinful infirmities, 1 John 2.1, 2.

But because this Text speaks of the great Articles of our Creed, we would
infer some comfortable Inferences from them: And 1st. From his Death, infer
the greatness of his Love to us, Job* 15.12. 2ly. Infer the strong
Confirmation of the new Covenant, therefore his Blood is called, The Blood of
the New Testament, in the Institution of the Sacrament. And 3ly We see the
Truth of the Divine Threatening in the Covenant of Works because he bore the
same Punishment for kind, that was threatened in that Covenant. 4ly. We see the
care that Christ has to remove the fear of Death from us, Heb. 2.15. 5ly. We
may be assured that a living Christ will save us, since he dyed to reconcile us
to God, Romans 5.10. 6ly. We may expect the total Crucifixion of the Body of Sin
and Death, by the diligent use of the Means of Mortification, since he dyed to
procure the same, Romans 6.6. 7ly. We see the Fathers good Will to conferr the
Covenant-Good on us, since he exposed his Son to Death, to make way for the
same.

From his Resurrection infer, since it was the first step of his Exaltation,
after his self denying Obedience, Phil. 2. We may see from this the Fathers
readiness to reward the self-denying Obedience of his People. 2ly. We may see a
Confirmation of his being the Son of God from it, Rom: 1.4. 3ly. We may see the
Fathers care to vindicate him from the Calumnies that were laid on him, he was
reckoned to be a Blasphemer, and a false Teacher; God raised him from the Dead
for a vindication from these Calumnies 4ly. We may infer we have sufficient
Ground to expect our Spiritual Life from him, Romans 6.11. 5ly. We may expect the
Resurrection of our Body from him, seeing his Resurrection was a Pledge of our
Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.20. and 23. 6ly. From this we may infer, that we have
an good Ground for our Faith of Justification, through Christ, because he
raised him from the Dead, to give us assurance of his Absolution, as our
Soverty, 1 Pet. 1, 21.

From Christ's Session at the right Hand, infer 1st. That we should set our
Hearts on things above, where he is, Col. 3.1. 2ly. That we should cast the
Anchor of our Souls Hope within the Veil, because Christ the Forerunner is
there, Heb. 6.20. If he be there, he'ell fetch us to himself, that where he is,
there we may be, John 14.2, 3. 3ly. From this we have a further confirming
Ground for the answer of a quiet and peaceable Conscience, notwithstanding of
sin, 1 Pet. 3 21, 2^. 4ly We may expect for our Consolation, the Mission of the
Spirit of God to us, John 16.7. for he goes to Heaven for that end, Acts 2.33.
5ly. We may securely expect that all things will be managed for the safety of
the Church, seeing this Session at the right Hand, includes in it, a Power over
all Flesh, that he may possess these h^ has given him with Eternal Life, John
17.3. 6ly We need not fear any opposition made to our ^alvation, seeing the
frustration of that is included i^ Christ's sitting at the right Hand, since the
Father gave him that Session at his Right Hand, as a Pledge of that total
Victory over all our Personal Enemie^ Psalm. 110.1.

From Christ's Intercession the People of God m^ expect that Spiritual
Benediction, spoken of Numb. ^ last verses. They may expect the Unity, the
Preservation from the Evils of the World, and the seven other things prayed for
in the 17 of John; The^ may expect Grace and Mercy to help in time o^ need, Heb
4. They may expect perfect Salvation* Heb. 7.23. They may expect the presenting
of ther^ imperfect Prayers to God; Rev 8.3. He offers (...) the Incense of the
Prayers of the Saints; The Church may expect his ^ntercession for them, whi^
they are in a Low Condition, Zech. 1.

This Intercession will be prevalent, 1st. If (...) consider his Sympathy, Heb.
4, 2ly. Consider, h^ is called the High Priest in the New Testament, inaugurate
by Oath, Heb. 7, it is founded upon Bloo^ Next, it is founded upon the Promise
made to Christ and the Promise made to us; Likeas, it cannot be b^ prevalent,
because of the great Affection the Father bears to the Son, and if ye consider
that Mystical Union, that is 'twixt him and us.

Use of Consolation, 1st. To such as are at (...) distance from God, and have
not clear views of hi^ This High Priest is appearing before God, and is a no
distance from God. 2ly. It Is comfortable to su^ as are jealous that God may
forget them, but this Intercession secures the contrary, because this true
High Priest carries the Names of the true Israelites upon his heart before the
Lord; for he is the truth of that Levitical Priest, that had the Names of the
Twelve Tribes of the Israelites, written on his Breastplite. 3ly. It is
comfortable to those that meet with Satan's Temptations, because he prays for
such, that their Faith fail them not, Luke 22.23. 4ly. It Is comfortable to such
as miss the Spirits Presence, John 14.16.

Verse 35. Who shall separate us from the Love of Christ? shall Tribulation or
Distress, or Persecution, or Famine, or Nakedness, or Perrill, or Sword?

Verse 36. As it is written, For thy sake we are killed all the day long; we are
accounted as sheep for the slaughter.

Verse 37. Nay in all these things we are more than Conquerors, through him
that loved us.


HEre the Apostle prevents another Discouragement, ariseing from Trouble: He
had prevented Discouragements ariseing from Sin in the former Verses; And now
he prevents a Discouragement, ariseing from fear, that our Trouble may draw us
from the Love of Christ. The Question here proposed anent it, imports a strong
denial, that any Trouble will drive us from the Love of Christ: And this is
clear, that through Christ's Assistance we are more than Conquerors: The Apostle
adds a Description of Christ from his Love, to hold out, that Lo^ is the
Principle of Assistance: and he wills us to be assured of his love to us, by
proposeing his own Example to us to imitate: Paul was Assured of b^ love to
him, as the last Verse in the Chapte^ shows.

Observe 1st. here, That the People of God ar^ subject to all the Evils here
enumerate. And 1^ To Tribulation, which is taken for Distempers an^ Pressures
on the Body; the Reason of it is, 1st. T^ humble them under these Notes of
Respect, God p^ on them, as Hezekiah was, Isa. 38. 2ly. To try the^ Patience,
Job 2. 3ly. To excite Repentance, Psa^ 38. 4ly. To set them to Prayer, Psalm. 6.
5ly. T^ presignifie their Mortality, and to make the Wor^ werch to them. 6ly.
That they may have an entire Faith in God, 2 Cor. 1.12. And Lastly, the God may
give them fresh Experiences of his Suppo^ and Relle.

Use, Improve all the Distempers of your Body for these Ends.

Observe 2ly. That the Godly are subject to D^stress or Anguish of Mind, that
is, Perplexity ariseing from a doubtfulness about our delivery, and the methods
of it; This is done by God, that the Delivery may be seen the more to be of
him, see Exo^ 14. 2ly. He trystes them with this, to try whether their Faith be
grown stronger, or not, with their former Experiences, see that same Text. 3ly.
Tha^ they may prize their Delivery the more, Hezeki^ was oppressed with his
sickness, and when he undelivered, he could not express the greatness of the
Sense he had of it. 4ly. He brings his People to this pass, to try if they rue
their former Religion, Hezekiah was tried; whether he rued his Reformation, by
the Assyrian Invasion, 2 Chronicles. 32.1. 5ly. He does it to make them fervent in
Prayer, 2 Chronicles. 20.12. 6ly. To try their Integrity, whether they shall take
unlawful Ways for their Relief, 7ly. This is to make them not to trust in their
own Wisdom, but in Gods, 2 Cor. 1, 8 9 And 8ly. This is done to punish their
sin, Isa. 59.10, 11, 12.

Observe 3ly. The Saints may meet with Exile or Banishment, the Word here
translated, Persecution, may be meant of Expulsion from the Society, whereof
they are Members. This is caseable to the Saints; as witness the case of David,
and of the Captives in Jeconiab's days; God trysts them with this, 1st. To
awaken their longing after the Ordinances, Psalm. 63.8. Psalm. 42. 2ly. To punish
the Wicked with the want of their Company. 3ly. To convert the Elect where they
go, Acts 11.19. Isa. 66 19. 4ly. To fit them for great Services, by accustoming
them to bear hardship, as he did with Moses and David. 5ly To make them to be
denied to their Relations, and to be strangers on the Earth. 6ly. That they may
have Experience of Gods Fatherly Provision of them, in such a case.

Use, If this may be their case, prepare to meet with it; and for this effect,
use your Liberty, and the Company of your Friends edifieingly, that when you
are in Exile, you may bear off your Conscience-Challenges for abuse of Mercies.
2ly. Use the World as an strange Place, and make Heaven your Home. 3ly. Labor
for Communion with God, that wh^ you want the Company of your Friends, you
(...) have Gods Company to make it up. 4ly. In t^ midst of your Prosperity,
acquaint your self with Life of Faith, and Dependence upon God, that wh^ ye
come to straits, that life may be the more easy ^ you. 5ly. Acquaint your self
with the comfortab^ allowances of Gods People under Exile. As 1st. H^ supplies
the want of Ordinances to them, Ezekiel. ^.16. 2ly He provides Friends to them
where the go, as he provided to Joseph and Daniel. 3ly. H^ supports them under
that case, 2 Cor. 4 9. 4ly. The^ are sure of a Recompense, Mat. 19 ^9. 5ly. H^
sanctifies that condition to them, Jer. 24.7. 6ly He renews the sense of their
Interest in Gods Covenant-Promise, Genesis 28 And discovers more of the Secrets of
the Covenant of Grace, than at any ^ther time: See his dealing with the
Captives in Ba^lon: and sometimes he gives them a foresight (...) the future
State of the Church, as he did to Daniel.

Observe 4ly. That Gods People may be trye^ with Famine. God does this 1st. To
punish Sensuality, Lam: 4.5. 2ly. To humble them, and ^ prepare them for
Plenty, Deuteronomy. 8 3, 6. 3ly. To t^ their Faith and Integrity, as it was with
Christ (...) the Wilderness. 4ly. To depend more upon Providence than to trust
what they presently posses^ 5ly. That they may have experience of Gods blessing
their little.

Use. Be comforted under this case, when ye fa^ in it. For 1st. Christ was in
this case, that he might Sympathize with you. 2ly. This case m^ prevent the
Snare of Plenty. 3ly. It may be the occasion of some extraordinary Way of Gods
providing for you, for it may be an occasion of Gods giving them an experience
that he blesses their little.

Observe 5ly. They may be tried with Nakedness, 2 Cor. 11.27. Heb 11.37. And
this teaches you not to be Prodigal, as to clothes, ye know not what may come.
2ly. The People of God may be comforted under this Lot, because it is not a
singular case. 2ly. They have Christ's Righteousness to cover their Spiritual
Nakedness, and may expect the Garment of Immortality.

Observe 6ly. They may meet with Perils, that may put their Life in hazard to
be taken away suddenly, 2 Cor. 11.26. And this reproves the vulgar, who
censures the state of the Godly, upon the account of their meeting with their
Perils, see Acts 28.4. 2ly. It says, the state of the Saints is secure, tho
they should suddenly be taken away. 3ly. It bids them prepare for Death, lest
they be surprised with it. 4ly. It bids them be thankful for the continuance of
their life, seeing they are liable to so many Perils as may take it away.

Observe next, The Saints may be tried with the Enmity of the Powers of the
World against them, this is meant by the Sword, and this is done for the
greater Trial of the Saints, that they may suffer in their Name, alse well as
in their Body; for when the Powers of the Earth persecute them, they pretend
their being guilty of Crimes, that they are innocent of. The Apostle insists in
this Trial, by citeing the Experience of the Saints, in Psalm. 44. The Words
are, as it is written, For thy sake we are killed all the day long, we are
counted as sheep for the slaughter. In which Words, we may see, 1st. That the
recorded Persecution of the Saints in Scripture, is* great comfort to the
Saints when they are persecute 2ly. We may see that the Powers on Earth man
take away the life of the Saints, for adhereing to the Truth; The Reason is,
because Gods Truth w^ not let them sin without a Witness; it awakens the^
Conscience against them. These Prophets tormented them that dwelt on the Earth.
Rev. 11. 2ly They persecute them, because they oppose their wicked political
Designs, as Jeroboam persecute Amos. God permits this, that Persecutors should
kil^ them, to the End, that Persecutors their Enmity should be better
discovered, and their Cup the sooner filled, that the Saints Faith may be
better tried and their Corruptions more purged, and they made more heavenly,
and that Hypocrites may be purge^ out of the Kirk, by that soreness of the
Persecution, and that the Power of God may be more seen it enlarging of his
Church under that Persecution, as it was seen in Egypt, and in the Primitive
Times.

Use, Since this is caseable, Gods People would be comforted under this
Providence, by these Grounds 1st. It is an honor, that they are to co-witness
with Christ to the Truth. 2ly. Truth will receive no Damnage by this, it is more
cleared and confirmed; the Church receives no damnage by it, it is more purified
and enlarged; the Godly receive no damnage by it, for they are born up, Luke
21.14, 15. The Lord takes this way, for to chastise their sin, and that tends
in the hinderend for their honor, and he lets them not want comfort, and by
this they have a great evidence of the soundness of their Grace,

Next, From this Citation, that we are killed all the day long, There is
imported, 1st. That Persecutors Malice is not soon satisfied, the constancy of
Saints irritates their Malice, and former Acts of persecution gives the Devil
access to hurry them to more, and they foolishly dream, that a continued
Persecution will reach their end. 2ly. We see, that God may permit the
Persecution to last a long time, for the filling up of the number of his
Witnesses. And 3ly. We may see that the Lords People may ly under an
uninterrupted Persecution for a while, to force them to Self-denial, and
Heavenly mindedness, for when Persecution relents, they begin to make the World
their Home again.

Next, It tells us, that Persecutors, when they inflict the greatest Miseries
upon the Lords People, they do it with great Contempt, they count them as Sheep
for the slaughter. Their Power makes them proud. 2ly. The Saints mean condition
in the World, makes them contemn them. 3ly. The Pretenses they have for the
justness of their Persecution makes them think light of them.

Use, Saints would bear this contempt, and would comfort themselves with this,
that in Gods sight their Blood is precious.

Observe next, That the People of Gods Trials, tempts them to quite their love
to Christ; it appears, because, unsound Professors quite their Love under such
Dispensations, Mat. 24.12. They are strong Temptations to break our Love,
because, it is usual with us to judge of Christ's Love, by his external
favorable Dispensations toward us, as also they tempt us to cast away our
confidence, and so they tend to weaken our Love.

Use Is, that we should fortify our Love to Christ, under these Dispensations
of Affliction, because it is much put at, and this may be done by living by
Faith, and upon the Hope of Heaven, and by studying Self denial to our Ease and
Interests in the World. 2ly. By this ye may know, whether your Troubles or
Afflictions hurt you, or benefit you, whether they do crush or increase your
love; Encre^ed Love has Zeal with it, for the Public Good, Repentance for
formerly committed Guilt, and much Longing after Communion with God; when Love
is weakened by Crosses, it makes us dislike the Lords Way, because of the
Cross, and ^ue our Religion, because the Lord disappoints our foolish
Expectations from the World.

As for the last thing, That over all these Crosses the Saints are more than
Conquerours, It will appear if ye consider the Advantage that the Church has in
general, of all those Afflictions and Persecutions. 1st. Because it tends to
the Churches purifying from Hypocrites, Ezekiel. 20^ 38 2ly. It contributes to the
Churches Unity, Acts 4.32. 3ly, It contributes to the Addition of near Members
to the Church. 1 Cor. 16.9. 4ly. Truth is more cleared and confirmed, by the
diligence and painfulness of the persecute Members of the Church. 5ly. The
Enemies of the Church, are convinced more in these times of Gods owning of the
Church, Rev. 3.9 6ly. Persecution makes way many times for the Churches
Resurrection, Mic. 4.10. The Reason of this Deliverance is, because God dwells
in his Church, Psalm. 46.5. The Bush was not burnt, because God dwelt in it,
Exodus 6.

Use, This may satisfy us as to that Providence of God, in putting his Church
under Persecution. 2ly. It reproves them that repine at this Providence, and
scarr at it.

But 2ly. Private Christians are more than Conquerours in their Persecutions;
if ye look to the Advantage they meet with under that Dispensation. As 1st.
They are more purged from sin, Dan 10.35. Isa. 4.4. Their Faith is more
established in the Doctrine of the Gospel, Acts 2.42. Greater affection to the
Means of Grace, Ibid. More of the Joy of the Holy Ghost, Acts 13. last. They
are more weaned from other Helps, and lean to God, Psalm. 44.8. Their Love is
warmed to Christ, 1 Pet. 1.7, 8. They have a more Public Spirit, Psalm. 137.
And 2ly. As their Advantage is greater, so Satan is much disappointed of his
intendment by Persecution, whereby he intends to ruin the People of Gods
Faith, but that fails him; to make them rue their Religion, and others be
hardened in their rejecting of it, and so does that fail him also; and likeways
that of his, to make the Saints Life bitter with Persecution, but the sweet Joy
they meet with, makes him get a disappointment there. The Reason why the People
of God are more than Conquerours is, because of the influence of Christ's Life
upon them, 2 Cor. 4.8, 9.

From this, that they are said to be more then Conquerours, We may see, that
the People of God have their own difficulty in this Contest, and no wonder
because of the greatness of their Afflictions, that they are without
Interruption, and of long continuance and without the appearance of an outgate,
Isai. 42.27. They are chastisements for Sin, Heb. 12. They surprise them, as
they did Job, they irritate our Corruptions, therefore called Temptations, they
are such Crosses as readily we would never choice therefore our Self-denial is
most tried with them where there is an conquest, there there has been a
contest. This tells us, that the Christians Life is not idle, but a fighting
Life under the Cross, it is much to the Christian to overcome his Unbelief
Impenitence, Selfishness.

Use 2d. Of Consolation, Albeit the Christian has his own difficulty in this
Fight, yet he is more than a Conqueror, that is, his Victory is not dubious,
but manifest; for albeit he has his own sin of Unbelief and Impenitence, yet
the Devil is evidently disappointed, and this Victory cannot be lost again, it
is a sure continuing Victory; for whatever scaith the Church, or the People of
God may receive by a particular Assault from a Cross, yet it is very sure, they
shall have the full and absolute Victory in the close.

Verse 38. For I am persuaded, that neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor
Principalities, nor Powers, nor Things present, nor Things to come.

Verse 39. Nor Height, nor Depth, nor any other Creature, shall be able to
separate us from the Love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.


HEre the Apostle brings in his own persuasion of Gods Love in Christ Jesus,
that others may imitate him; for this persuasion is for Imitation, as appears
by his making the constancy of Gods Love not a peculiar privilege to himself,
but common to him with others, see Verse last, He proposes I say this
persuasion of Gods Love in its constancy, to clear, that Believers need not
fear the want of Assistance to make them overcome all their Tribulation;
constant Love, will make constant Assistance for constant Victory. And this
persuasion is not conjectural, but a certain Assurance, as appears by the Greek
word here translated Persuaded, 2 Timothy 1.12. 2ly. His particular enumeration of
these things, that might make an alteration of Gods Love toward him, And by
the Ground of this persuasion, It Is the love of God in Christ, and therefore
must be constant.

First then consider, How God persuades his People, of his Love. 2ly. When he
does it. And 2ly. How Gods People may come by this persuasion.

First, He does persuade them, by giving them a Spirit of Filial Prayer. v.
15.16. 2ly. By enableing them to apply the promises, Ephesians. 1.13. 3ly By letting
them see, that Christ dyed for them in particular. Romans 5.8. 4ly. By assureing
them of through-bearing Grace, 1 Timothy 4.18. 2 Timothy 4 12 see the Text. 5ly. By
persuading them of the pardon of their Sin, Psalm. 22.5. Hosea 14.4. And 6ly By
discovering the reality of their Grace, under its great Trials And 7ly. By
leting them see their Election and their Effectual Calling.

2ly. As for the time, in which he gives this persuasion. 1st, It is when they
are deeply humbled for their own Sins, and the Sins of others, Dan. 9. This is
to keep them from fainting, and to persuade them their Humiliation is accepted
of God. A 2d. time is at their Conversion, Ephesians. 1, 13. And this is to engage
them to the way of God, finding it sweet and to comfort them under the mean
measures of their Mortification. A 3d. Time is, When they are under pressures
of Wrath, Psalm. 32.5. Because their Faith cannot be kept up under the External
Promise, as David's Faith could not be kept up by the Promise made by Nathan. A
4th, Time is, When they want the Ordinances, and that grieves them, Psalm. 63.3
A 5th, is, under the Cross, Rom: 5, 3.5. That they may contemn the hard
Censures of Men, and that they may know, that even Godliness wants not its
advantage, even in that Lot. A 6th, Time is, When he puts them to some hard
Task, Joshua 1.2, 3, 4, 5. A 7th, Time is, When he is about to let the Devil
loose to Tempt them, Matthew. 3. last, Compared with 4 1. and 2. An 8th. Time is,
When they pursue it earnestly, by extraordinary Diligence.

Directions, How to come at it, are. 1st. Labor for Sincerity, Psalm. 36.10.
2ly. Entertain the motions of the Spirit, and give them ready Obedience, Rev.
3.20. 3ly. Be tender of your walk from Love to God. Jo. 14.21. 4ly. Be much in
Loving your Brethren, Jo. 15.10.12. 5ly. Beware of Declining, Jude 20.21. 6ly.
Be much in Exercising Grace. Cant. 5, 1. 7ly. Beware of hardness of Heart,
Isai. 65.14. Beware of deadness of Spirit, Psalm: 85.5 6. Beware of Graces
decay, and Corruptions grouth, Isai: 66.6.

We should endeavor after this persuasion of Love, Because we can neither bear
our Cross, nor be willing to dye without it; we cannot with confidence and
courage look to the Obstructions that ly in the way of our Salvation, See the
Text. Without it we cannot serve God from Love, and our duty will not be sweet,
without it.

For the Evils, that seem to obstruct the Love of God, The first of them is
Death; where we see that the beloved Believer must go through Deaths Trial.
2ly. When it is so, he is tempted to doubt of the Love of God. 3ly: Tho he be
tempted to doubt of Gods Love, he should be confident of it, notwithstanding of
Death.

For 1st. They must go through Death, for hereby he will try their Faith of an
other Life, by putting this Veil of Death 'twixt it and us. 2ly: To conform them
to Christ, who by Death entered to Life. 3ly. He will keep Election and
Reprobation as a secret in this life. 4ly, To testifies his Displeasure at
Original Sin, Rom, 8, 11. And becau^ Death here is meant of Death inflicted by
persecut^ on, therefore they must go through it, 1st. Tha^ they may be
Witnesses to his Truth, and rend^ Persecutors inexcusable for rejecting of it.
2^ For the Trial of their Self-denial, Love and Faith

And if this be so, Then the People of God should labor to prepare for Death;
and for this effect labor first for Self-denial, Luke 14, 26. 2ly. Labo^ for
Sobriety, that with ease ye may part with the Worlds Contentments. 3ly. Labor
for a Heavenly life, that ye may be willing to dye, that (...) may get more of
it. 4ly, Labor to be wearied (...) a Body of Death, Rom: 7, last. 5ly. Labor
for the Faith of Immortality, 2 Cor: 5, 2.

Second Observation is, It is hard to believe God Love in Death. 1st. Because
it is a Cross we have a strong Aversation from; It being the dissolution of
Nature, and a parting with our dearest Enjoyments. 2ly, It appears to have
something of God^ displeasure engraven on it, Isai: 38. 3ly, It Is a separation
from Communion with God by Ordinances, ibid, v, 11. 4ly, It Is attended with the
clearest conviction of guilt, and represented as an immediate forerunner of
Judgment.

Use is, That we would not wonder, to see the People of God hardly put to it at
Death.

Next, the Lords People should not question his Love, Because 1st, He has
appointed all to Dye, and so cannot say that he loved none: 2ly, Christ has
Dyed, to take away the Sting out of thy Death, and to sympathise with thee in
it.

Use is, That we would endeavor to believe the love of God even even in Death;
And for this effect, first remember the experience of Gods goodness to thee in
thy life, Psalm: 23. 2ly, Consider, that tho thou dye, thou may have fellowship
and Communion with God, and more after then before, Phil 1, 23, 2 Cor: 5.8.
3ly, Consider the goodness of that God, that has the keeping of thy Soul, he
is Faithful* 1 Pet. 4, last And a powerful Keeper, 2 Timothy: 1, 12. 4^y, Consider
God is present with his People at Death, Psalm: 23. 5ly, Take up Death as the
Scripture represents it, As a Rest, Rev: 15, 13. From the labor and toil of
Duty, From bearing Crosses on our Names, Persons, and Goods, from the Cares of
the World, from the fears of committing sin, and of coming Crosses, from doubts
of Gods Love, and fighting against Temptations, from Vexation and seeking
Contentments in this World, and from Griefs from our Self-disappointments, and
from the Challenges of our Consciences. And lastly, It is a Rest from sinning.
6th, Direction, Labor for the Testimony of your Sincerity, as Hezekia had, for
ye cannot have the Testimony of Perfection. 7ly, Ly not under unrepented Guilt.
8ly, Labor for the Earnest of the Spirit, that it may be a pledge of your
Immortality 1 Cor. 5, 5. 9ly, Be not diffident of Divine Providence, for them
that you leave behind you, For when you look on Death as untime^ous, it makes
you suspect Gods love in it. And 10ly, Labor for the firm hope of the
Resurrection of the Body.

The next Evil that the Apostle Enumerates, As that which threatens to separate
him from the love of God, is Life, which is taken here for all the Contentments
of this present Life; And this suppose that these Contentments are Temptations
to aliena^ us from God, and so to separate us from his Love 2ly, We see the
Lords People are sufficiently fu^nished against that Temptation of the
Contentment of this life, for we see the Apostle is very confiden^ that they
will not have Power to make God alter^ love from them, That is, they will not
have Power^ alienate them from God.

And first, In that the Apostle ranks this in the second place, It tells us,
That the Apostle suppose it is a great difficulty to overcome the Temptation of
the Contentments of this life; And this will appear to be true, if ye consider,
the these Contentments have a sensible present certainty, which makes us prefer
them to the thing of another life, which are to come, and cannot be seen, but
believed. 2ly, The Contentment they offer is suitable to our Corruption. 3ly.
At the first view they offer Happiness, as they did to Solomon 4ly, We are
under necessity to use these Contentments, and readily the use of them ensnares
us, and the necessity of our using them makes us forget our selves, when our
heart is too much taken away by them. 5ly, We would willingly have Happiness to
ly in them, as appears by our trying them after disappointments, Solomon tried
Wisdom again and again, Eccl. 2, 12, Our desire that Happiness should be in
them, makes us hardly believe that it is not in them. 6ly, The Contentments of
this life are very various; and our deceitful heart, tho we have experience of
the emptiness of some, yet it bids is try others, this made Solomon turn
himself from one thing to another. 7ly, There are many Folks that are drawn
away with the Contentments of this life, and that makes the Temptation hardly
overcome. 8ly. We have the easy opportunity of enjoying them, and that proves a
great snare to us; they may easily be had by some, whereas spiritual Comforts
require more diligence to obtain them. 9^y. The heart of Man must be defended
by spiritual Enjoyments against this snare, and many times the Christian lies
out of these, partly through Gods Desertions, and partly through his own Sin,
Mis-belief, Laziness, and unconstant pursuit of them.

Use, Wonder not then that this temptation carries so many away with it. 2ly.
It says to the Rich, that they should be afraid, for they are in the midst of
Temptation, 3ly. It says to the Poor, that they should be Content with their
Poverty, because they want the temptation, and not to repine. 4ly. It exhorts
all to be sober-Minded, and those that stand under this Temptation to be
humble, seeing it is so dangerous. 5ly. Seeing it is a Temptation that is so
hardly overcome, we would try whether we be overcome by it or not. And 1st. We
must try, whether we make use of these Contentments to satisfy our heart under
want of Communion with God. 2ly. We would try, whether or not we are so well
pleased with them, as we will desire to live in the World perpetualy, and make
it our home. 3ly. Whether we use them as helps to serve God, or rather as fuel
to our Lusts.

Observe 2ly. That God has provided sufficient security against the temptation
of the Worlds Contentments: As appears 1st. If ye consider, that he has clearly
revealed a Heaven, and an other Life, and has given them the security of a
promise for it, Heb 11, 13. 2ly, He has given them the first fruits of the
Spirit to make these tasteless to them, Psalm. 4, 7. 3ly Ordinarily he keeps them
from this Temptation^ either by denying them these Contentments, for n^ many
Rich are called, 1 Cor. 1, 30. Or by mixing something with them, if they enjoy
them, that man make them wersh to them, viz, Some spiritual Exercise about
their Soul-state, or some sad grieving cross, that sticks to them, that makes
their other Contentments wersh. 3ly, Some fear of the inconstancy of their Lot
as Job had, Job: 3, 26. Or lastly, He sets up a Light in the Mind, that
discovers the Vanity of all these Contentments to them.

Use, this tells us, that when the People of God are overcome with this
Temptation in less or more, they may blame themselves and not him. 2ly. It says
that we should be thanful to God for these things, that he gives us as
securities against this temptation: And for the first fruits of the Spirit, our
sticking Cross, and the fears of coming Crosses we should be thankful. 3ly.
Since he his provided their sufficient Securities for us, let us use all means
to preserve us from the scaith of this Temptation. And for this effect, build
up your selves in the Faith of the Truth of the Gospel. 2ly: Meditate much on
the Excellency of the Good therein offered. 3ly. Consider much the vanity of
all these Enjoyments, Consider their unsuitableness, emptiness, and
inconstancy, and how frequently ye have met with Disappointments from them.
4ly. Be busy at your Duty, that ye may not be ensnared by Idleness. 5ly. Take
head to your Heart, in the very first pursueing of these Contentments, that it
be not over eager; Regulate your Conversation, more by the word, then by the
Example of others; Meditate much on Old Age. Death, and Judgment, Eccles.
11.8, 9.10, 11. And lastly, Labor to live in the Enjoyments of Gospel-Comforts.

Motives to persuade to the use of these Directions. Are 1st. The Eager pursuit
of the Worlds Contentments loses our Time, and makes us neglect our Duty. 2ly.
It is an Sin, that breaks our peace with God. 3ly. It wears out the thoughts of
God, Death and Judgment, out of our Heart. 4ly, It makes Spiritual Content,
and Fellowship with God, appear less excellent in our Eye. And 5ly. It makes
our Cross more intolerable, when it comes on us.

The next thing that the Apostle says, that shall not separate us from the Love
of God, is Angels; And by Angels some here mean, Good Angels; not that these
can endeavor to separate us from the Love of God, but by way of supposition,
that tho they would, yet they could not effectuate it; For we may suppose
things, that will never be to clear an Truth, Gal. 1, 8. By Principalities and
Powers, are there meant Devils, Ephesians. 6, 12. Col. 2, 5. Called so, because of
their Power over the Inferior World, and therefore the Devil is called the
Prince of the Power of the Air. 2ly, For their Dominion over the Ungodly Men in
the World, Ephesians. 6, 12. Or 3ly. Here he may mean the most Mighty and Wickedest
of these Spirits; for certainly there are some of them more Mighty and Wicked
then other Matthew. 12, 45.

We may observe here that the Devils are gre^ Enemies to our Salvation, and
endeavor to separate us from Gods Love. The Devils Enmity against (...)
appears, In the Bodily Possession of the Saints, he possessing of
Mary-Magdalen, Luke. 13, 16. And his drawing some of them to Compacts with
himself 2 Chronicles. 33, 6. Next, it appears by his Accusations of them to God, Job
1, Zech. 2, 1, 2. As also by his Accusations of them to themselves, Luke 22,
31* 2 Cor. 2, 7, 11. And his Accusations of them to their Neighbors, it was he
that filled the Hearts of Job^ Friends with Surmises of his Hypocrisy, As also
he Accuses God to us, as he did to our first Parents Genesis 1.12. His Enmity
appears by his wronging their Goods, as in the instance of Job; it appears by
his tempting them to Sin. And that these Temptations come from him, and not so
much from Corruption. Appears 1st. From the nature of them; they are t^ such
Sins, as ordinarily our Corruption will not prompt us to, without him; such as
unnatural Uncleanness, inhumane Cruelties, denying of natural Verities. 2ly. It
appears from the impetuousness of them, they are so frequent; and come in so
thick, that they cannot well be resisted, 1 Chor. 21.4.

But, because Satan's Enmity here spoken of, (...) mainly meant of his
Temptations to draw us to Sin, therefore I shall speak somewhat as to these
Temptations, that the Love of God may be commended, and that in its constancy,
as making the Saints more than Conquerours over them. And First, I shall hold
out the subtilty of them, and that in these Three. 1st. His Subtilty appears in
the timeing of them. 2ly. In the manner of their Conveyance. 3ly. In the
External Baits, he holds out; to make them forceible.

As to the first, He times his Temptation when we are out of our Duty, 2 Samuel
11.12. 2ly. When we are not watchful, Ephesians. 6.10. 3ly. When we presume, Luke
22.33. 4ly, When our Armor is off us, Ephesians. 6, 13. 5ly. When we have got a
Victory, because then we are most secure, Ephesians. 6, 13.

2ly. His Subtility appears as to the manner of the Conveyance. 1st, If ye
consider the Instruments he makes use of to tempt us, They are persons either
that we love entirely, as our nearest Relations; as he tempted Adam by his
Wife, and Job by his; or he makes use of. Godly persons to tempt us, that they
may be less suspect, as he tempted Job by his Godly Friends to question his
Integrity, and Christ by Peter not to suffer, Matthew. 16. He tempts many Folks
to Error, by making use of Godly Folks, sometimes to propagate Error. 2ly.
His Subtilty appears in this, that he tempts many Folks to Sin under color of
necessity, as he tempted Christ to work a Miracle, to stanch his Hunger, Matthew.
4. Next he tempts them to Sin under Color of Duty, as he tempted the
Corinthians to Rigor, against the Incestuous Person under color of Zeal, 2
Cor. 2 11. 3ly, He tempts them to great Sins, upon the account, that the matter
of the Action is indifferent, tho the Principle from which, and the end to
which, makes it a grievous Sin, 1 Chronicles. 21.2.

Thirdly, From the nature of the Temptation, his Subtilty appears. As 1st. He
sends these Temptations on us, as have the advantage of the Lot that we are
under; he tempts us to Impatience and Despair under Adversity, and to the
denying of our Grace as he tempted Job: he tempts us to Sensuality, and
Contempt of our Neighbors under Prosperity, and (...) Pride under
manifestations of Gods Love, 2 Cor. 12, 8. 2ly. If ye consider that he suites
the Temptation to our Predominant, he tempted the Covetous Judas, with Money;
he tempts the Ambitious with Honor, and the sensual man with sensual pleasure
3ly. His Subtilty appears, in that he tempts People to lesser Sins First, And
then to greater; gradually to bring them to a defection, and e're he bring the
People of God to Commissions, he will tempt them to omission of Duty. 4ly, His
great Subtilty appears in this, that he frames his Temptations to make them
misbelieve Threatenings, that he may draw them to the actual contempt of Gods
Law; This he did with Eva.

Use is, If Satan be so subtle, we would labor to be in case to resist his
Temptations. And 1st. Let Grace never be out of Exercise, Ephesians. 6.11. 2ly* Be
very Watchful, 1 Pet. 5, 8. 3ly. Pray much, Ephesians. 6, 18 2 Cor. 12, 8. 4ly, Be
acquaint with his Devices, 2 Cor. 2, 11. 5ly. Let the Word of God dwell Richly
in you, Matthew. 4 Ephesians. 6, 17. 6ly. Resist him in the beginning, Ja. 4, 7, 1 Pet.
5, 10.

Observe 2ly, That tho Satan in his Temptations be strong and subtle, yet the
Christian may be sure of Victory. 1st. If ye consider, that he is a foiled
Enemy, Col. 2, 15. 2ly, The Victory of our Head over him is a good pledge of
our victory, Matthew. 4. 3ly. Christ has an Experimental Sympathy with the People
of God in these temptations. Heb. 2, 22. 4ly. He interceeds for them, Luke 22,
32. 5ly. Christ is stronger then he, 1 Jo: 4, 4, And there is a sufficiency of
Grace in him, to bear them through 2 Cor. 12, 1 Pet, 5, 10. 6ly. There is a
promise of Victory given to them, Genesis 3.16, Romans 16.20.

Use, If they be sure of Victory, the tempted Saints would not fret against
this their Lot of being troubled, with the Devils temptations; And that they
may be reconciled to this Lot, consider the Advantages of it. As first, It
cures their presumption, Luke 22, 32 2ly, It prevents their Pride and puts them
to Prayer, 2 Cor. 12, 8. 3ly, It helps them to an Experimental skill to succor
the tempted. 4ly. It gives them experience of the Power and Wisdom of God, who
can make them, that are Witless and Weak, to overcome a strong and Wise Devil.
2ly If the Victory be sure, it says they should not be discouraged under
temptation from Satan, but fight Manfully.

The next thing, the Apostle gives an defyance to, is things present, by which
he means present Crosses in his Lot; which tells us, that the Christian readily
never wants sad Crosses in his Life. That notwithstanding of these sad Crosses;
yet he may and ought to believe the continuance of Gods Love toward him.

For the First, that he never wants sad Crosses, so that always as one go^s
away an other comes appears from the recorded life of the Saints in Scripture,
See the Register of Jacobs Life and David's etc: And this God does, to try their
patience and submission by; 2ly, To make the World wersh, and to force them to
be Strangers in it; Jacobs Days were Evil that he might know, they were a
Pilgrimage, Gen: 47, 9. 3ly. To keep down their Pride. 4ly. To keep them
constantly under the Exercise of Repentance, for pas^ and present Guilt. 5ly,
That they may observe the Divine Providence of God, supporting them under al^
these Crosses, Genesis 48.13.

Use is, That People would be content with their present Crosses, seeing, if
they wanted these, they might expect others in their room. 2ly. Let never man
dream of an happiness in this life; its our expectation of a life, free of
Crosses, that makes us dream of Happiness here. 3ly. Live near God, that ye may
be able to be comforted, under the necessary Crosses that ye are subjected to.
4ly. Long to be away, with submission to Gods time, seeing that while you are
here away, you are never to be free of Crosses.

For the 2d. Thing, The present Crosses of the Saints should not make them
question Gods Love if ye consider, 1st. Their Head had an constant life of
Crosses. 2ly. Consider, that the Saints before us have had that life. 3ly. If
ye consider the Promise of Gods Presence with them, under the Cross, Isa 43.2.
4ly. If ye consider the Necessity and Profitableness of that Lot, it should not
make us question Gods Love, 1 Pet. 1.6. 5ly. In their nature they are but
Chastisements and Evidences of Love. Heb. 12.6.

Use is, That the People of God would keep up their Faith of Gods Love,
notwithstanding of their present Crosses, their neglect of this weakens their
Love to God, breaks their resolution to Obedience, makes their present Duty
unpleasant, and makes them undervalue their present Mercies, and be unthankful
for them.

Observe, The Apostle says, Things to come will not separate them from the Love
of God; where we see, that he had not only present Crosses to debate with, but
the fears of coming Crosses. 2ly. We see, that these fears of coming Crosses
made him not to doubt of Gods Love. From hence we see, that the saints may be
trysted with the fears of coming Crosses, besides all the present Crosses that
they are under: This the Lord does, for to make them use means for the
preventing of these Crosses. Rebecca feared that Esau should kill Jacob,
therefore she used Means to prevent it, Genesis 27.46. 2ly. He does it, to make
them digest the present Cross, that they are under the better; Rebecca was the
better content to want Jacob, that she feared his stay would endanger his Life,
Ibid. 3ly. To make them sensible of Gods Goodness, in keeping these Troubles
off them that they feared, Genesis 32.9, 10. 4ly. To keep them from Security, Job
3 26. 5ly. He makes use of the fear of the Cross, to inform them of the evil
that the inflicted Cross should reform; for if the fear do it, the Cross will
not be inflicted. 6ly. That when the Cross comes, they may be in better case to
bear it, and not be surprised with it.

Use, Seeing this is the Lot of the Saints, to be under fears of coming Crosses,
study to carry rightly under this Condition; and for this effect, be not
distrustfully anxious, Phil. 4, 6. 2ly. Let these fears send you to Prayer,
Genesis 32.9. 3ly. Be not unsensible of Gods Mercies under these fears, Ibid.
verse 10. 2ly. The fears of coming Crosses should not weaken our Faith of God
Love; For 1st. Whatever they be, they w^ work out your good, Romans 8.28. 2ly.
How^ver they be strong, your strength will grow a^cording to the strength of
the Cross, 1 Cor. ^ 13. 3ly. What ever aspect the Cross has, y^ the Lord has
many ways to deliver you from that you cannot foresee, 2 Pet. 2.9. The Lo^
knows how to deliver the Godly out of Tem^tations.

FINIS.

