SOME NECESSITY OF REFORMATION OF THE Public Doctrine of the Church of England.

Or a modest and brief REPLY TO Dr PEARSON'S Modest and Learned, No Necessity
of Reformation OF THE Public Doctrine of the Church of England. Directed to Dr
Pearson himself.

By William Hamilton Gent.

LONDON, Printed for John Sherley at the Sign of the golden Pelican in
Little-Britain, M.DC.LX.

TO HIS Reverend and worthy Friend JOHN PEARSON Doctor of Divinity AND To the
Courteous Readers both of him and me.
Reverend Sir,
I Am not so wise, as to account your Book unworthy of Answer, as some too
angrily do; nor can esteem it weakness, but the contrary rather a too great
sturdiness and stoutness, Christianly to have gone about, to show you, that you
mistook the Ministers meaning; because I cannot think so ill of your self, that
you would wilfully go so far aside from their meaning, as I am confident you
have done. And I am of opinion that he himself, who has thus forestald other
men's answers, as far as he could, with such a censure, should rather have
civilly replied himself where he found his Antagonist mistaken, which was but
Christian duty, and that which himself seems to acknowledge so, and promises in
another case. Yet I shall request of you, or any other of my courteous Readers,
to excuse what weakness they may find, upon any other account, seeing this
Answer was hasted, and after twice reading of your Book only, presently and ex
tempore poured forth, as you see. Ever since the Bishop of Armaghs recommending
me to your acquaintance with such a character; as he gave you, I have had a
reverent opinion of you, and found afterward sufficient cause not to change
it. Wherefore I entreat you, Sir, that you will satisfy the world heartily,
whether you can now think, you mistook the Minispers, or no; and to do them and
the truth so far right, as to let it be seen, that you did not, nor will not
intend any thing against the truth, nor ingenuity of mind, but for both; and
you shall anew obliege,

Sir, From my Chamber in Blackfriers, Land. Sept. 6. 1660. Your formerly
obliged Servant in the Lord, William Hamilton.

Some Necessity of Reforming THE PUBLIC DOCTRINE OF THE CHURCH of ENGLAND.
Reverend Sir,
WOuld to God, that many, who account themselves the only loyaller, sounder,
and orthodox Clergy, and Divines of England, were of your mind, and as heartily
and earnestly desired a full union with such persons, as those Ministers, who
offer the reasons, that you answer to, profess themselves to be: to wit, Such
as truly and unfeignedly will make good, That it is far from their thoughts
to oppose, or disparage orthodox Doctrine; a well composed Liturgy; Rites for
Decency and Order; Ordination of Ministers; Apostolical Episcopacy; or due
Rules of Discipline; because they are for all these, with truth; and against
rigid impositions, which may debar a Christian of any liberty, allowed him by
Christ: and that by their Oath and Covenant, as I take it, For if they will not
truly and unfeignedly make good all this, they are not worthy, with whom you
should desire a full union. You are much therefore to be thanked, Sir, by all
such men (a lover of whom I profess my self to be, though one of the meanest)
that you use your Pen with such brotherly temper and Christian moderation, as
that there comes not from you any provocation, or the least reflection either
upon their persons, their parties, or persuasions; but that you apply your self
wholly and solely to a due examination, and orderly discussion of their
reasons, weighing and trying them, whether they have force to infer their
conclusion, and in case they prove not of that validity, discovering and
declaring the insufficiency and weakness of them: which all Writers of
controversies, especially Divines, if they behave themselves therein like
Christians, should do; and which, by Gods assistance in this piece of mine, I
intend toward you. And therefore, Sir, I hope you will with that same
moderation and equity, that you have already shown to others, excuse me also,
if I am induced to think, that you have not fallen upon the best way of
satisfying the Ministers reasons, until you better rectify my judgment,
whereunto I promise that with all candor I will be ready.

For the conclusion propounded by the Ministers to be proved, being this, [
That there is a necessity of Reformation of the public Doctrine of the Church
of England.] This conclusion you think not sufficiently proved, but the
orthodox Doctrine of the 39. Articles disparaged, contrary to the Ministers
profession, That it was far from their thoughts to disparage orthodox
Doctrine, etc. For (say you, page 2.. 2.) after private satisfaction of mine
own conscience, entering into a further consideration, That it is an undoubted
disparagement, to be in a necessity of being reformed; -- least people -- might
hereby conceive some sinister opinion of the Doctrine of our Church, therefore
you thought it not unfit to give a public account of your private thoughts,
concerning this particular. What that satisfaction of your own conscience and
private thoughts concerning this particular, was, you set down, page 1.. 2. to
wit, That you found not any one reason, which could in the least persuade you,
[That there is any such necessity of a Reformation of the public Doctrine of
the Church of England:] and that consequently you did resolve, notwithstanding
what was yet brought to the contrary, to continue in the faith, which you had
hitherto professed, and not repent of your subscription to the Articles of the
Church of England: whereas I am confident it was never their mind to put you to
change your faith, which you had hitherto professed, unless that had been
Arminianism, or an allay of Popery.

Therefore I saw by this, that it was very like you mistook their meaning, and
differed from them in the state of the Question. For about stating of the
Question, or fixing the conclusion (as your self speak, page 3.. 2.) that you
were to oppose; To avoid all manner of misconception between you, you
distinguish between Reformation and Confirmation of the public Doctrine;
hinting withal, That they industriously confounded these in their Treatise,
contrary to what you conceived they should have done; and therefore that you
must as carefully distinguish them in your answer. And accordingly you make
your opposition distinct in two Conclusions. 1. That there is no necessity of a
Reformation of the public Doctrine of the Church of England, page 4. The
second is, That the Articles of Religion of the Church of England, are
established by the Law of England, p. 21, 22. In order to your fixing the first
conclusion, for avoiding of misconception still, you first lay down this
assertion, [That whether the public Doctrine be established indeed by Law; or
whether it be reputed only to be established, there is no necessity of the
Reformation of it.] This you briefly go about to prove, and do it indeed, where
you lay it down, page 3.. 2. according as you consider Doctrine, to wit
abstractedly from the publicknesse of it, and from being the Confession of the
Church of England; that is, considering the Doctrine in its self, which I
humbly conceive you should not have done. For though for my part, I think you
deserve great praise and thanks for being so distinct, candid, and clear, in
the way that you have taken, yet I doubt whether that was the way, fully to
oppose and contradict the Ministers meaning; you considering the Doctrine in
its self, and thereto applying a scholastical Dispute, and examination of their
reasons, as if they were brought against that; and they sufficiently disowning
both, if I understand them rightly. Therefore partly your distinguishing, where
they intended no distinction; and partly your not distinguishing, where they
would most have had distinction, have been so far from removing misconception
between you, that in my humble opinion, this has fixed a continued
misconceiving almost through the whole dispute.

That this may appear, I shall humbly propose my judgment to you, and them;
and leave it to both to be considered of, as either, or both shall think it
deserves in relation to truth and right, which I only seek. 1. Then I conceive,
that they speak of the public Doctrine of the Church of England, not as in its
self, but as aggregated with the due qualifications of it; publicknesse, and
the Church of Englands propriety in it; but not of the Doctrine considered in
its self, and abstractedly from these, as you do: because they held the
Articles of Religion, as the public and national confession of the Religion of
the Church of England; according to the Stat. 13. Eliz. speaking of the
Articles of Religion, as they concern the confession of the true Christian
faith, and the Dactrine of the Sacraments, i.e. as they hold forth the public
and national confession of the Church of England, and her Doctrine of the
Sacraments: And as thus considered, they held the Articles, rather to stand in
need of a Reformation, for their too much generalnesse (wherein always is
included doubtfulnesse, as to determining of controversies, which the Ministers
meant, according to that, Dolus est in generalibus) and defectivenesse, to make
a good and perfect enough confession of Faith for so famous a reformed Church
as England was, than for any unsoundnesse of them in themselves; which they
intended not to impugn. Secondly, they doubted of the establishment of the
Articles, as a sufficient enough confession of the Church of England; and in
what notion the Church was to be taken, when they are so called and accounted
her confession: which distinction of Church, that they desired, they have not
yet obtained; and so the doubtfulnesse of the Articles, or at least the
defectivenesse of them, as the confession of the Church of England in the best
and rightest notion of it, is not yet removed. For a public confession of a
National Church, is much concerned in the undoubted establishment it has from
a right and sufficient authority; and as much concerned in the right and best
notion of the Church, whose confession it is said to be: and as long as the
establishment is doubtful, or defective and insufficient, or the authority
doubtful, or defective, and insufficient; so long must the publicknesse of
that confession, and so far will it be doubtful and defective, or
insufficient. And as long as the Church is doubtful or defective, and not taken
in a right enough notion, whose confession it is said to be; so long will the
confession be subject to much imperfection, and but an individuum vagum, a
vulgivagous thing, that can lay no certain claim either to right father or
mother here below. For these therefore, and more particular considerations, the
Ministers thought it necessary to be reformed; or in a state of necessity to be
reformed.

By this time, Sir, I believe you perceive, how I think they have stated the
Question in their mind and meaning. Their stating of the Question appears to me
by their Conclusion, which they laid down, to be proved; and by their manner of
proving of it; and setting down their main scope, and work that they intended.
Their conclusion (which we have set down before) we take in their meaning, to
be equivalent to his; [ It is needful that the Church of England have, and
hold forth a more distinct and perfect form of her truly, and rightly so
called, National confession of faith, and of her Doctrine of the Sacraments,
than the thirty nine Articles amount to.] Their manner of proving it will
appear, when we answer your particulars, from which for brevities sake, and
avoiding repetitions, we will abstain here, and defer to set down until
then. Their main scope, and work, that they intended, they show not to have
been an opposing the Doctrine of the thirty nine Articles, as considered in it
self, seeing, 1. They told you, That the assembly at Westminer approved that,
as so considered, and thought it fit to be retained; but with all to be more
fully cleared, and explained, for exclusion of Arminianisme, and other like
errors; and to have more added to it, which it should have had, for bearing the
reputation of a sufficient National confession; with pertinent
Scripture-proofs, to manifest that the very Articles themselves, and all the
rest, are all evidently grounded upon the Word of God: whereas the Articles
wanted these; there being no Text of Scripture produced in them, to make out
any one of them. This is clear enough evidence, that the Ministers intended not
to impugn the Doctrine of the thirty nine Articles, as in it self considered.
See page 17. of their Book last Impres. and. 1, 2. at the end of each. 2. In
their Epistle to the Parliament, They sufficiently told any, that they intended
no such opposition to the thirty nine Articles, while they professed their work
chiefly was, out of the Laws, which they, as Ministers were bound to take
special notice of; and out of the Books, said to be by those Laws settled, to
make good these two things. 1. That (so far as they could apprehend) nether
the Articles of Religion, the Books of Common Prayer, or Ordination; the
Jurisdiction of Bishops claimed before 17o Car. 1. nor so much as their being,
as Bishops, sithence; nor the Canons so, much contended for, are indeed
established by Law. 2. That none of these, as they now stand, (meaning of the
Articles in particular, as they are commonly held of themselves to be a
sufficient sum, or Confession public, of the Doctrine of the Church of
England,) ought to be confirmed, and settled. But all with submission, say they.
And before immediately, they seem sufficiently to insinuate, that they intended
no impugnation of the Doctrine in the Articles, as in its self considered;
because say they, We offer no polemicall discourse, or theological debates,
proper for a Divinity-Schoole, or Synod; but only what we humbly conceive more
suitable to a Parliament. But had that been their drift, theologically to
impugn the Doctrine of the thirty nine Articles, as in it self considered, and
as you take them to oppose it, and accordingly answer them, as if they had;
this could not have been true, which they here say. Wherefore I conclude, that
you state not the Question, as they intended, nor answer them according to
their meaning, and therefore your resolved treating of No necessity of
Reformation, as a Divine, to whom it properly appertains, to speak of
Theological Doctrines, and your earnest contending for the faith of the
Church, in that Scripturall sense (not ecclesiastic) as you speak it, which
you profess, page 4.. 1. and which takes up the most part of your Book, might
wholly have been spared, as not contradicting the Ministers, as you may see by
their plain and open profession to the Parliament. Yet I confess, if you looked
only to the first Impression, which wanted the Epistle to the Parliament, (as I
take it, for I certainly remember not; nor have it now by me) their scope, and
way that they held, being thereby less clear, you were the more excusable, if
you mistook their meaning; they being nothing so clear and accurate therein
(if I have taken them right) as they might have been: for which ingenuous and
harmless freedom, I hope both of you will pardon me, who truly love and honor
you both, as I think you well deserve.

Their conclusion then to be proved, was this: There is a necessity of
Reformation of the public Doctrine of the Church of England. The appendage, as
you call it, which they thereto added, I take to be an explication only of the
publickness of the Doctrine of the Church of England, as they conceived it
doubtful and defective, for the establishment, and Authority establisher, and
the property and proprieter, or whose public Doctrine and confession it was;
and for the too great generality of it, and want of much that it should have,
to sustain the name and nature of a sufficient public Confession of faith, or
public Doctrine, of so eminent a Church, as England is; and therefore in these
respects, and so far to be reformed. I thus therefore, according to the
former stating of the question, form their argument.

What is commonly received for the public Doctrine, or Confession of faith of
the Church of England, ought not to be too general and doubtful, whether for
exclusion of errors, or for public establishment, and authority establisher;
or for the owners, or those whose Confession it is called; or defective and
imperfect, for want of ought, that it should have, for a sufficient and
creditable Confession of so eminent a Church, whether in points, or heads of
matter; or distinctness, definitness, specialty, and clearness both of matter,
and manner, or expression; or Scripturall proofs and evidences; but if it be
doubtful, or defective in any, or all of these respects, in so far it ought
to be reformed. But the Doctrine contained in the thirty nine Articles, is
commonly received for the public Doctrine, or Confession of the Church of
England; and yet is doubtful and defective in all, or most of the foresaid
respects. Therefore the Doctrine of the thirty nine Articles, commonly held to
be the public Doctrine, or Confession of the Church of England, ought to be
reformed in all the respects aforesaid. The major proposition neither is, nor
needed to be formally expressed; not needed any thing to the probation of it, it
is so clear in its self. But if any part of it must needs be proved, it will be
the last clause; to wit, [ but if it be doubtful, or defective in any, or all
these respects, in so far it ought to be reformed.] for probation whereof,
the next Section will suffice. The minor, or assumption is fully enough
expressed, though not formally, but sparsedly; and the first part needs no
probation, to wit, That the Doctrine contained in the thirty nine Articles, is
commonly received for the public Doctrine, or Confession of Faith, of the
Church of England; not do you any way question it. But if it needed proof, the
Stature of 13. Eliz. joined to common estimation, proves it enough. The second
part of the assumption is also expressed; and as it only needed proof, so it is
proved, and to it only all the proofs directed. Yet before I show in
particular, how the proofs are pertinent and concludent; I think needful, to
avoid repetition, to premise some generals once for all.

The difference being such as it is between you, in stating the question, there
must needs be difference also in sundry others notions and things, between the
Ministers and you. For they have a far other notion of reformation, of
doubtfullness, of defectiveness, of necessity of reformation, than you have, or
use; and therefore in these also you do not truly oppose one another. They
mean but a reformation of the Doctrine, in as far as doubtful and defective,
or of the doubtfullness and defectiveness of it, as they understand them, and
go about to prove them; not as you take them. Again, A necessity of reforming,
but not so great, and internal to the Doctrine its self, as you would put upon
the Ministers, and make common to them with Papists, somewhat invidiously I
confess, but to be excused, as unavoidably arising from your mistaking of their
meaning; but a necessity of precept or duty only (which binds us to reform the
least things, that we know, or ought to know, to be amiss) to reform the
doubtfullness, and defectiveness of it, in general, and in particulars, as by
them proved: which you might well know, and understand, to have been the
opinion of many unconforme Ministers of sundry Counties of England, still
professing themselves Ministers of the Church of England, (and not separating
from it, as Brownists and Barrowists did) or semi-separating from her, (as
semi-brownists and semi-barrowists, the Independents did, and do; at least some
of them) before now, as well at this time, had you looked into their doings; as
it seems you did not, by what you profess, page 3.. 1. of your Book. Again, For
defectiveness, they are far from the notexson of it, that you would put upon
them; and so arguing, as you present them. Defective to them is, not that, to
which something may be added; but to which something should be added, for the
dignity, office, and end, or ends, that it sustains; or that which wants
something, that it ought to have, for the foresaid respects, or the like: which
is indeed the true notion of it. For it is an undeniable maxim, or axiom,
shining by its own light, That whatsoever is defective, ought to be, or is
necessary to be reformed. And by these notions thus explained, and rescued from
misprision, the last part of the major proposition is made undeniably clear.
Therefore the major (as we said) needed no proof, but a right taking, and
understanding of these terms.

Here now I might stay, and needed not to answer any more, where there is so
wide a mistake, that runs through most of your Book, and hinders it to meet
with their meaning. Yet I will show particularly how they prove their
assumption; and at the same time consider your observations, and answers in
particular, as much as shall seem needful, where by their stating of the
question will also appear, (as we marked before, and referd to this place to
be observed) seeing it is to be supposed, that their proofs were framed,
according to the meaning of the conclusion they had to infer, if such
application can be made of them as here we show, that it not only can easily,
but should and must.

1. Then in the first two Paragraphs, where they speak to the doubtfullness of
the public establishment of the Articles by Law only, though their proofs were
so far good, as to prove a doubtfullness indeed of that establishment or
confirmation, both to themselves, and many others, had not you helped; yet I
ingenuously confess, that you have almost satisfied me in this, from page 20.
of your Book to the end; and therefore have nothing to reply to this point,
save what is said at the place that specially concerns the 20th Article, and in
some measure the establishment; and so the thirty fourth Article about the
Homilies, nor almost to any thing in all that space of your Book, but very
little, which will fall to be spoken, about their own objection and answer to
it; till when we refer it.

2. In the third Paragraph, and first sub-Paragraph, or sad consequence, they
so speak to the doubtful generallness of the Articles, as too much adhered to,
and abused; and to the want of a sufficient clearness, specially, and
definiteness to exclude Arminianism by, which most in the time Car. 1. would
have fastened upon them; and to the abusing and seducing of the King, so far as
to countenance this course, and discountenance the opposers of it; that would
have vindicated the Articles from it, but were hindered by the Kings
Declaration, and Proclamation; that they indeed sufficiently conclude and prove
a necessity of the Articles being reformed after that, from such doubtfullness
and defectiveness, as made them unable readily and easily enough to exclude and
condemn Arminianisme, and such like errors; and fit to be made a snare of, for
godly, orthodox, and constant Ministers and Preachers of the Truth: to which I
find not, that you have any way sufficiently answered. All the answer you have
given to this, page 7. of your Book,. 2. is, That the Ministers 3.. only recite
part of the Declaration of 10. Car. 1. prefixed to the Articles: and that is
there recited only (say you) to show the inconveniences supposed to flow from
it. As yet therefore there is nothing brought (say you) to manifest the
doubtfullness of the Doctrine, and if there shall appear to be anything, it
must be contained in the seven sad consequences, which are mainly and directly
intended against the Declaration of that pious King --,but obliquely strike at
the Articlse themselves, and the Doctrine contained in them. But by your good
leave, Sir, the Declaration is not recited there, only to show the
inconveniences supposed to flow from it; but chiefly from the too great
generallness, and doubtfullness of the Articles, whereof the Bishops strove to
make that advantage, or abuse, to seduce the King, to father Arminianisme upon
them, as their true and genuine sense, and consequents. Nor is there any other
main, and direct intention against the Kings Declaration here, as is somewhat
individuously again insinuated upon mistake of the Ministers, than there is
against the Statute 13. of Eliz. (which was none, nor do you there complain of
any such) as the Ministers own Prolepsis, and their answers make clear. Also
their words to the Parliament in their Epistle, shows that their main and
direct intention is rather against the Books of Articles, Common Prayer,
Ordination, etc. than against the Laws, or Declarations, etc. but indeed
against neither of these directly, and as in themselves; but against the
publickness, or public establishments of the Books, as conceived to be given
by those Laws, and Declarations, etc. but indeed not given, nor furnished to
the Books by them, as the Ministers think. And whereas you say, as yet there
was nothing brought to manifest the doubtfullness of the Doctrine, you mean as
considered in its self; which was not their intent to do, further than we have
shown, against the too great generalnesse and indefinitenesse of them, and the
like before rehearsed. This Argument therefore of the Ministers is sufficiently
concludent of a necessity of reforming these Articles, as an imperfect
confession only, of the Church of England, and not answerable to her worth and
place, that she deserves amongst the reformed Churches; and stands firm and
unshaken for ought, that you have replied. For we cannot suspect that you so
slightly past it over, cunningly and upon design to favor Arminianisme, and
say nothing against it; but upon mistake, as we have said, of the Ministers
meaning; though some perhaps will be apt to think that you favor Arminianisme,
since in all your Book, you have no expression disfavouring it, though you had
often occasion to open your mind.

Thirdly, Again, in the first and second Subparagraph or sad consequences, the
Ministers speak more to the unjust, and too much urging of the generalnesse and
doubtfulnesse of the Articles, and show two or three absurds, or
inconveniences, that follow on it: whereby is sufficiently concluded a
necessity so far to reform them, which you by your answers, page 7.. 3. and
4. no way remove or meet with; requiring the doubtfulnesse of the Doctrine in
its self to have been proved, as it abstracts from this too much generality,
which the Ministers intended not; but you expressly profess to be that only you
look to page 8. and saying nothing to this doubtfulnesse by their generality,
and unfitness to anticipate errors, to which only they spoke, and you should
have answered, and showed how by the Articles, as influenced on by the Kings
Declaration, Arminianism could be excluded. How they could be cleerer,
certainer, and more evident, than any part of Gods Word, or fundamentallest
Doctrine in it, which both needs, and admits interpretation and application,
and rejects it not, as needless, notwithstanding of its certainty, evidence,
perspicuity. How the Articles were not thus idolized in a sort, and preferred
far to the Scripture, while no Minister shall have the liberty to interpret any
one of them, which is not only allowed him, but required of him in his
Ordination, to interpret Scripture it self withal: while their Doctrine is
supposed certainer, evidenter, persbicuouser, than any fundamental the
certainest, evidentest, perspicuoufest in all the Scriptures. The notoriousness
of the proceeds mentioned, much concerned the Ministers proof, and
doubtfullness of Articles, which they meant, and not that which you misconceive
they should have meant, and proved: and if their Narration had been false, it
could no ways have proved their intent. What therefore you subjoyne, that the
contrivance of the Articles by such generality and indefiniteness, gives a
testimony of the great wisdom, and moderation of the Church, which in points
doubtful, and controverted, has propounded only that, which with no sober man
can be matter of doubt, or subject of controversy; if you mean it, that they
should not be so far reformed, as the Assembly of Westminster did, by
explication, and addition to them (though retaining themselves) you thereby
condemn the procedures of a wiser Church than your own, the Church Universal,
in her best oecumenick Councels of Nice, Chalcedone, etc. which thus reformed
the Apostles (vulgarly so called) Creed its self, by explaining it, and adding
to it their own, and Athanasius's Creeds, to the exclusion of Arrianisme, and
other Heresies: and therefore it is meet, you be desired to explain your self
about Arminianisme, which you so far obliquely at least, and afar off
plead for.

4. In the third sub-paragraph or sad consequence, the doubtfullness of the
generality and indefiniteness of the 20. Article is spoken to, and of its
publiqueness, 1. As it is called the Doctrine of the Church, and yet what is
meant by the Church, is not in the Articles explained, but left general and
doubtful; (nor might it be inquired after, or labored to be explained, as the
Articles were stated in their publiqueness by that Declaration, and
Proclamation of the Kings) and therefore also all the publiqueness, and
authority that they could have from the Church, must remain doubtful, till it
be known, whether it came from the Church, habente potestatem, to give them
publiqueness and authority; or from the right Church, having just and undouted
power to make and authorize with a sufficient ecclesiastic publiqueness and
authority, such Articles of Religion, as a Confession of her faith. 2. For as
much as it left doubtful (beside the former respects influencing this part
also) and general only, what rites she may ordain, suppose the Church were
distinctly explained, and set forth. And 3. How far her authority extends, in
controversies of faith; with an absurdity that follows upon adherence to, or
urgeing that doubtful generality, and indeterminateness of the Articles,
according to considerations aforesaid. To all which you answer nothing, but
that the Doctrines of that Article, as considered in themselves, are undoubted
truths: Which is true enough, but nothing to Rhombus, as we have often said.
For the Ministers speak of the doubtfullness as proceeding from their too great
generality, and unfitness to exclude errors by; and of their doubtfullness of
publiqueness, and authority; and therefore though the Article take not away the
liberty of right interpretation in these respects, yet the publiqueness of it,
as flowing from that Declaration, and depending on it, does: and the the
Article it self gives not that due sense of its self fully enough, pro rata sua
portione, for its own ratable proportion, that is requisite for a present
Confession of faith, and sufficient obviation of errors; and therefore is so
far under a necessity of reformation, and being supplied. Thus also does this
Section of the Ministers stand firm, against any thing that you have answered,
as I suppose, I have here sufficiently shown. But yet concerning this 20.
Article, I have this further to add about the doubtfullness of it (and it may
make the rest also the more suspected) that when Mr Burton accused it, that it
was interpolated, and a clause added to it, that the true and best Copies had
not; Bishop Laud in the Star Chamber (when they were about to Pillory Burton)
in his speech, as I take it, June 14. 1637. could not deny that some Copies
wanted it; but says, that he sent to the public Records in his Office; and
had returned him under his Officers hand, who was a public notary, the 20.
Article with the affirmative clause in it, that other Copies wanted; and that
there also the whole body of the Articles, was to be seen. Then he says, it
was likest that the pure faction themselves, (i.e. the Puritans) did rather
take away that clause from the Copies that want it, because it is known (says
he) who did then ride the Church; (meaning Leicester, as I think, a great
favourer of Nonconformists, and a favorite of the Queens) rather than that any
did add it to the Copies Recorded, etc. But first, If the Articles will not
give us a good enough description of their Church, Bishop Land will give us
this; That she was one that might be ridden by any great favorite of the
Prince: and so neither so respective to God, nor her King, whatever she
pretended, as Bucephalus was to Alexander, which neither of his greatest
favorites could ride, though the one was Philobasileus, and the other
Philalexander, by Alexanders own Confession. 2. It has often been found that
Bishops, and their servants, or favorers, have falsified Copies, and Records
of that nature; witness the Bishop of Rome; but never was proved, I think that
Non-conformists and Puritans did it. Moreover the Bishops reason fails him,
because this diversity of Printed Copies, as to that clause controverted, was
in the very year, wherein they were agreed upon, that is, 1562. i. e. the 4. or
5. of Eliz. long before Leicester could ride the Church, or any for him (so
far as I can learn) in favors of the Puritans, as to that time. And is it a
thing likely, that so soon after the Convocation Puritans durst, or would do
such a thing, and pass so quietly away with it, and without noise made by the
Bishops, as that diversity of Copies was past over, if the Bishops had not made
the diversity themselves, to their own advantage, or some of theirs for them,
by their privity and allowance? 3. Since the Act 13. Eliz. or of Anno. 1571,
referres only to a Printed Book of Articles 1562, the same year wherein they
were agreed upon, but specifies not what Printed Copy of that year; the Act
leaves it therefore doubtful, whether it has confirmed that affirmative
clause, which the Bishops said that his Records had, seeing in that very year
there were two printed Editions of the Articles, one in English, and another in
Latin, whereof the one had the clause, and the other wanted it: and by this
not specifying the Impression that it follows, as undoubtedly incorrupt, it
leaves some doubt upon the rest, that they might be corrupt, as well as this,
before that Act confirmed them. Yea, it leaves a great doubt, whether there
were any better Copy to be followed, than that they referred to, since it is not
like the Parliament would refer to a printed Copy, if they had known of any
Autograph. And what if both the Bishop and his Officer egregiously imposed upon
the Star Chamber, and neither his Office, nor he had any thing to show but that
printed Copy which Burton complained of, subscribed with the hands of the
Bishops and lower house of Convocation, at diverse times? I have heard as much,
and I believe some honest Puritans can and will make it good, that during the
long Parliament, and sitting of the Assembly at Westminster, when that Office
was searched, That Mr Seldom employed therein, could find no other.

5. In the fourth Sub-Paragraph, or sad consequence, is spoken to the
doubtfullness of the 34. Article, both in respect of the undefinite
generallness of traditions, and what is meant thereby; and what by Church, as
before; and what by common authority: as also in respect of the uncertainty of
traditions, in reference to the publiqueness, or authority of the Articles,
laid upon them by the Declaration, which the Convocation and Clergy, by the
power granted to them, might absurdly abuse, etc. To this you answer nothing
according to the Ministers mind, saving that to me, you vindicate that Article
sufficiently, frow the strangeness of the expression, which they glanced at.

6. In the fifth Sub-paragraph, is spoken to the doubtful and too general,
and indefinite allowance and admitting of both Books of Homilies, to contain a
godly and wholesome Doctrine, necessary for the times by Article 35. whereby as
the Homilies, and all that is in them, is approved for godly and wholesome
Doctrine; so it is manifest that hereby men must subscribe to false Doctrines,
as by two instances is proved at large. Here, although you have made a long and
learned defense of the two Books of Homilies; yet, as it is clear, that the
Ministers understand that clause of the 35. Article far otherwise, than you
do; so I am not fully satisfied by you, that they understand it amiss. For with
them, To contain a godly and wholesome Doctrine, necessary for the times; is
all one, as to contain nothing but godly and wholesome Doctrine, that is
necessary for the times, etc. Wherein, because I am not fully enough resolved
on either side, I shall but Quaere from you as follows. When the Article
says, the Books of Homilies contain a godly and wholesome Doctrine, etc. means
it one particular and definite Doctrine only, or more? One can not be said;
because it is acknowledged by your self, that one part only of some of them,
contain two; and every Homily must at least contain one. Besides, if one should
be said, amongst so many contained there, it could not be determined which is
it. But if more than one, whether all, or not? if not all, what, and how many
are excepted? but if all; how shall we know how many Doctrines are contained in
them? yea, how many Doctrines every Homily contains? and why not all, and every
part of each of them, that is assertive, and uttered by affirmation, or
negation, is not to be thought such a Doctrine, in the sense that the Article
speaks in, and the Ministers understand it? seeing, if it had not spoken in
this sense, but in that whereby you interpret it, it would seem that it would
not have then spoken in the singular, but plurally, [ godly and wholesome
Doctrines, etc.] your self also makes a false Doctrine, and a false Assertion
equivalent terms. And if thus understood, does not the Article call something a
godly and wholesome Doctrine, which is, false Doctrines; and does it not bind
Ministers to subscribe false Doctrines? But if you will not understand the
Article thus, but to speak of the theames, or chief Subject, or Subjects only
of Homilies, how do you prove this to be the Articles meaning? the Act
affirming the Articles, and by them the Homilies, expounds not the Doctrine,
nor distinguishes it thus; and ubi lex non distinguit, non est distinguendum.
Does not the Law therefore leave this doubtful? Yea, do not you your self
prove de facto, in your differing thus from the Ministers, and in understanding
so queintly by a godly wholesome Doctrine, many godly wholesome Doctrines, but
not all that are in the Homilies, to be such, that the Article in so far is
doubtful in its self, and needs an Explication or Reformation; since those
words, though few, are of great consequence, and bind to the subscription of
the whole two Books of Homilies? But thiswith submission to such as shall show
me more light.

7. In the sixth subparagrap, or sad consequence, they prove more than
doubtfulnesse, or a bare defectivenesse of the 37. Article, not as in its self
considered, but as influenced upon by the Declaration, printed with the
Articles that were only to be used as the public and authorized ones; to wit,
an absurd impertinency, and unsuitablenesse to the time of his then Majesty
reigning, with as absurd consequences of it (so powerful were some then to
abuse his Majesty's goodness) while by the Declaration, as that Article was
thus printed [ The Queens Majesty has the chief power in the Realm of England]
so it must still be read in the time of Car. 1. her Successor, and not
altered, by substituting [ the Kings Majesty] in place of the [ Queens Majesty]
or else the Minister reading [ the Kings Majesty] must be deprived; yea, if in
reading it [ the Queens Majesty] he take it not in the sense of the very letter
of it; than which what could be more absurd? Since every Minister was thus to
read it after his induction, and well too if he escaped an Oath, whether he had
in all points read it so, or no; and whether he kept not to all the very words
of the Articles, in reading of them. Now what you answer to this, though it be
elaborate and learned, as considering the Articles, and the Doctrine therein
contained, in themselves only, and not as influenced on by the Declaration
aforesaid; yet because the Ministers consider them only here as so influenced
in their publicknesse and authority by the Declaration aforementioned,
therefore you may easily perceive how little you contradict them, or refute
their proofs of what they intended; namely, that the Articles and Doctrine
thereof, as to the publicknesse of their authority, and as to their
authorization, were not only in a necessity to be reformed from some
doubtfulnesse and defectivenesse, that became not a Confession of Faith of so
eminent a Reformed Church, as England; but also from impertinency and
unsuitablenesse to the times that followed the Queens death. In the end
therefore of your Answer to this consequence, your desire ( That all the
Ministers of England would acknowledge, That it is the undoubted Doctrine of
the Church of England, That to the Kings of England their heirs, etc. does
appertain, as the 37. Article expresses it) might have been spared, and was no
ways needful, seeing this was by the Ministers no way questioned, nor
intended to be questioned, as your desire insinuates.

8. In the 7th and last subparagraph more is also proved, than the
doubtfulnesse of the Articles, or of the Doctrine in them; Yet not as in
themselves, but as influenced by that Declaration, and the power in it given to
the Bishops and Clergy in Convocation, to put what sense they should see meet
upon the Articles, so they could but persuade his Majesty thereto, by abusing
his goodness, as they did to the countenancing of Arminianisme, directly
contrary to his Father King Jameses mind, and the Churches too in his time, and
giving out of Arminianism for the public Doctrine of the Church of England,
and of the Articles of Religion) even that thus we might either have no settled
Doctrine of the Church at all; or under the generality of the Articles, and the
goodness of the Prince abused, much Popery, and other errors brought in, as
well as Arminianisme was, the Doctrine being made variable by that Declaration
from time to time, as far as the Bishops could persuade the King, that their
Novations were agreeable to the established form, as they had persuaded him
that Arminianisme was, though undoubtedly it was not to the established form
in King James's time; and though Car. 1. professed in that same Declaration, He
would endure no varying or departing from the established form, in the least
degree: so cunning and subtle were they to impose upon his Majesty with their
pretenses. It was not therefore the King, that is there suspected of unsetling
the Church, but the Bishops accused of abusing and deluding him to the
unsetling of the Doctrine before then established, or thought to be established
(and by your self proved to be so) and the ingrafting upon it the new Doctrine
of Arminianism (or so much, if you will, and more, of older Lutheranisme, for
they were driving also at a Corporal Presence in the Sacrament, as is well
known) as it is notorious that they were doing, contrary to the known Doctrine,
and meaning of the Articles, as received by King James, and both Church and
Kingdom of England, in his time, notwithstanding any assurance the words of
that Declaration might seem in the word of a King to give to the contrary.
Therefore, Sir, without offense give me leave to ask of you these few things,
and to entreat your answer to them. Whether in, and by these words of the
Declaration [ The settled continuance of the Doctrine and Discipline of the
Church of England now established] or by any other part, or all of that
Declaration, you conceive that Arminianisme was then included in the settled, or
established form of Doctrine of the Church of England; or any part of
Arminianisme, in any part, or all of that Doctrine of the Church of England, or
Articles, Homilies, etc? If yea; then the King there promises by the word of a
King, never to endure any varying, or departing from Arminianism, in the least
degree. And being it is certain, that in King James's time Arminianisme was no
part of the established Doctrine of the Church of England, how came it after
that to be so, unless it were by this Declaration its self? And if so, how
cunningly was his Majesty deluded, and what assurance did his word of a King
give, whilst by the very Declaration, and word of a King, whereby is promised
he would endure no varying, or departing from the established form, in the
least degree: he did establish a varying and departing from it, in an high
degree? But if you say, That at the time, when this Declaration was emitted,
Arminianisme was not a part of the established Doctrine of the Church of
England, nor included in the meaning of it; then also, what assurance, I pray
you, did the Kings Declaration give, or his word of a King, that he would
endure no varying, or departiag from the before settled and established Doctrine
of the Church of England (or so esteemed to be) in the least degree, when it is
notorious, that by that very Declaration, and a Proclamation of the Kings, the
Bishops were bringing in Arminianisme, as fast as they could, and fathering it
upon the Articles, and had seduced the King to the countenancing of all this,
and discountenancing (to say no worse, whereas it might be called persecuting)
all that opposed them, or would have vindic ated the Articles, or other Books
of the supposed Doctrine established of the Church of England, from
Arminianisme, and from their other innovations?

9. After this is moved an Objection by the Ministers themselves against what
they had said to the doubtfulnesse of the Articles, or other inconveniences of
them, or by them, as influenced or concerned by the Declaration aforesaid in
their publicknesse, or public establishment; to this sense, as I take it. What
ever influence the Declaration may have upon the generalnesse, doubtfulnesse,
and drawablenesse of the Articles to countenance Arminianism, or produce other
sad consequencesto orthodox Ministers, or other absurdities and impertinencies.
there is an easy cure for all this, etc. as follows in the words set down by
the Ministers themselves. This Ellipsis in the Objection, which was not
expressed, but implied, and supposed by what had been said before; being thus
supplied and expressed, it will easily appear, That the Ministers Answer to their
own Objection makes no ways unnecessary, and of none effect, all that they had
said before to the doubtfulnesse of the Articles, as influenced on by the
Declaration: (for so did they speak, and not against the Declaration its self)
but leaves all that, as it was, and finds out another cause also of much the
like effects; for as much, as though that Declaration be taken away, yet the
Statute of the 13. of Elizab. requiring subscription, leaves the case little
better than the Declaration did, both as to the doubtfulnesse and drawablenesse
of the Articles, to countenance Arminianisme, or other such errors and
innovations, and to occasion and produce thereby, and other ways much
mischief, and sad inconveniences to orthonox Ministers, especially, if
subscription be still continued, and required to them. Therefore the meaning of
these words of theirs [ This will signify nothing] ought not to be so far
strained, as you seem to do; but this is the native and true import and meaning
of them: that the taking away of that Declaration, is nothing in comparison of
what is expected, and should be obtained, considering the premises, and
considering that the Stat. of the 13. of Elizab. is little better than the
Declaration, etc. Now this Answer of theirs is largely proved. 1, In two
Paragraphs immediately following the Objection, not by arguing against the
judgment of two eminent Lawyers, as you suppose; but by showing that these
eminent Lawyers prove this of the 13. Stat. of Eliz. which they affirm of it;
in the first of the two Paragraphs aforesaid, and then by other Arguments in
the second of them. 2. It is proved also in and by the proof of the
defectivenesse of the Articles. For the inconvenience and mischief will be the
greater (say they) if we should be tied to those Articles alone, though never
so sound (to wit, as in themselves considered) that is, without other additions
and supplies, which they ought to have (not only may have, as you wrongly take
the Ministers) for taking away their general, doubtful, and indefinite
uncertainty in many things, wherein they ought to be more definite and certain,
especially for a Confession of so famous a Church and Kingdom, amongst the
Reformed, as England is. And so much of the doubtfulnesse of the Articles, as
to their publicknesse, and as containing the public Doctrine, or Confession of
Faith of the Church of England; which they have proved firmly, as far as we
have shown, though not so much the doubtfulnesse of the Articles in themselves
(saving as to their too great generality, and indefinitenesse, which both may
be called theirs, as in themselves; and theirs also, not so much in themselves,
as in reference to errors, and novations, that by them should be excluded) as
in reference to their publicknesse and establishment by public Authority. Here
then let us esteem, That the Ministers by way of supposition, give the
Articles, were confirmed by this Statute, but grant not that they are, and so
do not contradict themselves, nor give sufficient enough ground to argue
against them, ad hominem, or ad homines; though the legal establishment by Law
were proved, and so the undoubtednesse of the public authority; yet this is
nothing to take away, but rather to make worse the generalnesse, and
doubtfulnesse of the Aritcles thereby, and drawablenesse of them to countenance
Arminianisme, and like novations; and occasion mischief to orthodox Ministers,
if subscription be still required.

10. Now though I have set down both their Arguments (which you divide) in one
compounded Syllogism, concerning both the doubtfulnesse, and defectivenesse of
the Articles; and that because themselves reduce their defectivenesse but to a
medium of proving their doubtfulnesse; yet because you divide one from the
other, and that is not material to be stood upon; I shall here set down their
argument of the defectivenesse of the Articles, as I think themselves would
have framed it, had they divided it from the other, and as they would have
differed from you, in setting it down, thus. Whatsosoever public Doctrine
commonly holden for the National Confession of Faith of the Church of England,
wants any thing considerable, that it ought to have, whether in points, and
heads of matter; or sufficiently clear, definit, and special explication of
them, to exclude dangerous errors and novations by, that have been, and may be
still labored to be fastened upon it, as its true meaning; or in Scripturall
grounds and proofs of it; ought to be, or is in a necessity of being so far
Reformed. But the Doctrine contained in the 39. Articles, is commonly holden
for the public Doctrine, or National Confession of the Church of England, and
yet wants something considerable, which it ought to have, or is defective in
all the three foresaid respects. Therefore the 39. Articles, or public
Doctrine contained in them, ought to be, or is in a necessity of being reformed
in all the foresaid respects. The major neither is, nor needed to be formally
expressed, not yet any thing to be brought for the proof of it, it is so manifest
in its self, when thus proposed. The Assumption is both expressed (though not
formally, yet materially enough) and proved also, as to the second part of it,
which only needed proof, though you, lay all the stresse upon the major,
because you frame the Argument otherwise, than they would have done. But of
this in the close.

11. Their first proof of defectivenesse, I think, concludes strongly enough
for a Reformation of the Articles, and for an enumeration of the Canonical
Books of the New, as well as of the Old Testament, because the description by
you mentioned, and your reasons for it, is not sufficient enough to excuse the
want of an enumeration, because some of the Reformed Churches, as Lutherans
namely, have questioned, and as I take, do so still, some of the Epistles,
which others of the Evangelicks do not. Neither ought the Council of Trents
enumerating the Canonical Books of the New Testament, make us affect a
needless differing from them in that, wherein we differ not indeed; since it
is no shame to imitate that which is truly laudable, even in our greatest
opposites, but our duty rather to praise it, and to come up as near to them, as
conveniently we can. It was more invidious therefore than material, to entreat
the Ministers of sundry Counties, that they would not prefer the Council of
Trent to the Articles of the Church of England, where nothing material could be
objected to either: since the defectivenesses that the Ministers desire to be
reformed, though not so material, weighty, and internal to the soundness, or
unsoundnesse of the Articles, as you would have them only to look at; yet both
material, and necessary enough for the cleernesse, certainty, and specialnesse
of a National Confession of a Reformed Church, when Reformed and Evangelicks
differ from them therein.

12. Their second proof concludes strongly a necessity of reforming the
Articles, at least so far as the Assembly at Westminster did. And in your
Answer to this proof, you pass by the maine thing intended by the Ministers,
and insisted on, and lay hold only on a word spoken but in the by, and by way
of amplification, and there you dwell, without answering a word to the drift of
the Argument. It is certain Arminianisme was a Novation and alteration of
Doctrine, that was labored to be defended by, and fathered upon the Articles,
Homilies, etc. though wrongfully, as appears by King James, and the Church of
his times opposing to it, and countenancing the Synod of Dort, and its
procedures and definitions against it. It is certain secondly, that
considering what mischief this bred, it was very necessary, that the general,
and doubtful indefinitenesse of the Articles, as to those Arminian Novations,
matters so rerequiring it, as they did then, should have been helped, and
supplied some way, as the Assembly of Westminster after did, with their honor
preserved, from being altered in corpore, or in themselves. Whence we conclude,
That they were in a necessity of Reformation in this sort at least; to which
you answer nothing, and we wonder thereat; and hope it is not out of any favor
to Arminianisme.

13. Neither am I satisfied with your answer to the Ministers third proof of
defectiveness, because you seem to me to strain their words beyond their scope.
For their meaning to me is not, That the Articles have nothing at all of these;
but not enough, or sufficient of them, which is a nothing comparatively to what
they should have; because indeed they want sundry heads of matter, or Doctrine
sufficiently explained, that they should have; nor have the Articles any proofs
from Scripture, which yet certainly they should have, as they stand in the
place of a Confession of Faith, unless the Convocation would have men to
resolve their Faith into their Dictates, or Articles; nor in the heads of
matter, which they have, have they sufficient Explication, definiteness, and
specialty, to exclude contrary pernicious errors, that pretend to impe
themselves on their generality, and grow kindly, and truly out of them.
Secondly, When it is said, [ All which the Scripture teaches, as necessary, as
appears by comprizing most of them in the Apostles Creed,] the meaning is not,
1. That those, that are comprised in the Apostles Creed, vulgarly so called, are
comprised there with sufficient Explication, as they ought to be in the public
Doctrine, or Confession of a National Church, especially in these times, and
considering the weighty Controversies, that are agitated about most, or many of
them. 2. When most of them are said to be comprised in the Apostles Creed, the
meaning is not, That most of them are comprised there formally, or in terminis,
but by the likeness of necessarinesse to that of some of those, which are
there formally, and interminis, though the Ministers expressions for this, be
not so clear, as I could have wished. Yet charity, and not only possibility
that they may, but probability that they are to be taken so, makes me so
understand, and expound them. Wherefore I conclude upon the whole, That the 39.
Articles are in a necessity of reformation, such at least, as the Assembly at
Westminster has applied unto them.

14. And now to draw to an end, I shall close the whole with two Observations
more; which shall serve instead of a Recapitulation. Whereas page 5. of your
Book,. 1. after your putting their first Argument into form, you remarke, that
the minor proposition, on which (according to your framing the Syllogism) the
reason mainly depends, has no formal proof annexed to it; but in stead of
proving the doubtfullnesse of the Doctrine contained in the Articles, (which
can be the only case, say you, of a necessity of Reformation of Doctrine;
though we have seen the contrary) the doubtfullnesse of the Confirmation of the
Articles, is only insisted upon: And whereas page 6. after putting into form
their second Argument, you deny the major, and insist on that only, according
to your framing the Reason, as that on which all the stresse lay, though it
have no proof annexed to it, as you frame it, and take it: This methinks, Sir;
might have made you suspect, that you apprehended them not aright; since it was
not so easily to be supposed; that they would be so impertinent, and incoherent
in their purpose, as the way that you understood them, would have made them to
be; and that in an address of that weight to no less and meaner Arbiters,
than a Parliament of England.

15. And lastly, Page 4.. 3. you observe, That the Ministers say not, [ All the
public Doctrine of the Church is contained in the 39. Articles.] 2. [ That
whatsoever public Doctrine of the Church is not contained in the 39. Articles,
is not so much as pretended to be in a necessity of Reformation. So that if
there be any Doctrine not contained in the Articles, (as I conceive, say you,
they will confess there is,) that Doctrine is not only clear from all their
exceptions, but will serve also to invalidate something of them, (to wit, of
the exceptions, as I take it,) when they are brought against the rest:] to wit,
which is in the Articles, it I understand this aright. To which I say, 1. That
I remember none of that Doctrine, which you bring from any other Book, than the
Articles, to invalidate any thing of the exceptions, that are brought against
the Articles. 2. That most of their exceptions brought against the Articles,
are neitheir brought against them, as their Doctrine is abstractly considered
in its self, nor as it is only contained in them, but as it is commonly
received to be chiefly contained in them; and therefore they are brought also
against any other Doctrine, contained in the Book of Common Prayer Ordination,
etc. especially the two Books of Homilies, and Canons, in reference to the two
aforesaid considerations, as themselves sufficiently express in their Epistle
to the Parliament ubi supra, and in their first sad consequence, by the two
instances in the Books of Homilies; and the other Books are afterward spoken
to, in the following points of worship, etc. unless we say, that in them is no
public Doctrine, because in some conderation distinct from Doctrine, as
proposed in the Articles; which I think none will say. 3. That the advantage
therefore that you would make by these Observations, will not be great, as it
seems to me. But be that, as it may be, may not the Ministers pretend to a like
advantage from you, in this manner? 1. It is not said by the Reverend Dr.
Pierson; No necessity of Reformation of the public Worship, Rites,
Church Government, Discipline, etc. but only of the public Doctrine of the
Church of England. 2. That of whatsoever we have showed a necessity of
Reformation, and is not so much as pretended by the Reverend Doctor to be
defended, is not only clear from any defense he has made, but may also serve
to invalidate something of his defense of the public Doctrine, and reasons of
denying it to be in a necessity of Reformation. Therefore to conclude, Sir, I
would earnestly entreat you, after this Answer, or some like made unto your
self, by your self in your own mind, upon better review of the Ministers
Reasons, or by some others verbal bearing it upon you, that you would heartily
confess; That the Ministers also in sundry Counties took it for granted, that
there is no difference between them and the Articles, rightly understood, or
defenders of them, in matter of Doctrine, especially as in its self considered.

FINIS.

