QVAKERS Principles Quaking: OR, Pretended Light proved Darkness, and
Perfections found to be greatest Imperfections.

In an Answer to a written Paper, subscribed with the Name of THOMAS HOLME, and
scattered through the Country about Liver-pool in Lancashire.

Modestly Propounded by Ralph Hall, an affectionate Lover of Truth, Admirer of
sincere saving Light, ardent desirer of perfection.

Isa. 5.20. Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil, that put darkness
for light, and light for darkness, that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for
bitter.

Jude 10. These speak evil of what they do not know.

LONDON: Printed by R. I. and are to be sold by Edm. Paxton, near Doctors
Commons, and Tho. Parkhurst, over against the great Conduit in Cheapside. 1656.

Unto the Christian Reader, especially the Inhabitants about Liverpool, and
Walton in Lancashire.
Courteous Reader:
IF thou have been in any measure sensible of the World, age, and time of the
Church, in which we have our being, and seriously observant of the
Dispensations of Providence suitable to the season, thou can not but have
seen Gods severity, and Satan's subtilty as much acted as in any Age of the
World; Gods severity in perm^tting, and silently indulging; Satan's subtilty, in
seducing the simple, and such as embrace not the truth in the love of it, 2
These. 2.10. and subjecting the Church to exceeding great disorder and
confusion, and that under the specious pretenses of Light, Reformation, and
Liberty; Gods severity in setting aside the Authority both in Church and State,
which should have been as an hook in the nostrils, and bridle to the tongue of
evil instruments; Deceivers, going about to deceive, and compassing all places
to decry the Truth and Ordinances of God; Gods severity in withdrawing his
discerning and establishing Spirit, and giving men up to the vanity of their
minds, to strong delusions, nay and to a reprobate sense, not to distinguish
between good and evil, false and true, but to be carried Captive at the
pleasure of the Prince of Darkness, and to determine this sad estate, an estate
of glorious and Saint-like liberty; yet in all this Gods severity has not so
much appeared as in the late upstart Quakers, by whom the Devil comes in
stealingly into the Field, setting aside his usual subtilties in down and
direct terms, to damn all Sacred Order and Ordinances of God, under no pretense
taking with a rational man, much less an understanding Christian, Whilst the
bare wordie outcry of a light within you (without any the least discovery of
its form, matter or property, nay with the concomitancy of the most palpable
acts and effects of positive darkness that can be imagined) is the chief and
only way, the sum and all of the arguments urged to call from the Church,
truth, and Ordinances of the Gospel, unto a mere Frenzy, and fanatic spirit
of railing and reproach, yet now to us, how do they prevail too too much with
too too many?

Concerning these unhappy Quakers many things have been written, not so much in
order to their conviction, who neither own, nor acknowledge any common or
certain rule, nor yet with any meekness and silent submission yield their ears
to instruction, nor yet are sound in mind, but have subdued that very rational
power with which God and Nature has endued some, unto that sad and delusive
power with which they are possessed, insomuch that we may say of them, as one
in another case, Hoc genus hominum ridere soleo non odisse, they are to be
pitied, not hated; they are to be prayed for, not preached unto; for the Devil
which possesses them, is such as can be cast out by no other means save
fasting and prayer; and indeed amongst other grounds of our compassion, this is
not the least, that they enjoy too much liberty, to express and increase their
madness, that though their spirits are subject to a Bedlam temper and
disposition, men will not show them so much pity as to subject them to Bedlam
Discipline.

But these things were written for the prevention of others, who by Gods grace
are yet sound, not only in the faith, but mind, that they may be defended
against the force of so simple a delusion, which must needs prevail more by
enchantments then enlightening arguments, the which they do not at all urge,
and therefore pretend to be ruled by a light within them, and appeal to no
other Judge save the light within them, and so by an obscure kind of Chemistry
resolve all into light, which is no other than the very word light, without any
formal being, or properties peculiar to real light. For to expostulate with
thee (Courteous Reader) concerning this their so much cried up light within
them, consider, is it light proper, or Metaphorical? Is it in it self by way of
substance a body of material light, or something that in its operation does so
much resemble light, that it is so denominated? if the former, the Sun and
Moon, those material substantial lights of Heaven are of no use to them, and
much charge expended in Candlelight will be by them spared; nay and their very
being and motion must be conviction and direction to all such as live but under
their Horizon: but if the latter, viz. Metaphorical light, for their
convincing, directing Principles and power, then is their light, the light of
Nature, or grace? if the light of Nature, what have they above others, how can
they cry up perfection? have they any thing that is not common to men as men?
(viz. some sparkl^ngs of light which escaped the sad blast of man's fearful
^all) the which dictateth several directions to duty to men, and some toward
God discovers some things as false, and evil, other things as true, and good
to be embraced, and pursued; if this be the light they call men to follow and
obey, what have they that Turks, Jews, and Pagans do not enjoy? Why should they
boast of perfection? is not this light too weak to discover and comprehend the
deep things of God, and mysteries of Salvation? yet by the principles of this
light they preach to others, the purest whereof is, Do as you would be done by,
owe no man any thing, repent, and the like moral precepts; as also by their
practice whereon they ground their imagined perfection, proudly chalenging men
to charge them with dishonesty or disorder in the use of the Creature (from
which they superstitiously abstain) This seems to any rational man to be the
light they do so much advance, and pretend unto.

If this be the light they cry up, I say it is a light though a weak one, it
will distinguish objects, and dictate Duties, though darkly; and I heartily
wish that pretenders to higher light would more observe this than they do; sure
I am, the justice of Aristides and Fabricius may reprove the injustice and
dishonesty of many Christians, enjoying this light, enlarged and made more
bright by the light of the Gospel, and if but according to the principles of
this light they would reduce men to Moral virtues, let them rightly display
the beams thereof, and I shall desire they may meet with many Proselytes, but
whilst they publish this light to others, I cannot but observe they darken it
themselves, they darken it by their disorderly expressions, declaring things in
general terms, not defining the nature of them; does not the incongruity of
their expression, the inconsistence of their Sentences, each one other
multiplying words in an undigested, immethodical heap, leave all men in the
dark, what they mean by their light, whilst they are to them that hear plain
barbarians, A vox and praeterea nihil, and does not Nature teach to speak in
order, and method, Principles in which to be instructed? does it not count him
the most elegant Orator who speaks so distinctly and plainly, that the beams of
light from him may be seen and acknowledged by all? did not Nature call
Heraclitus (...) the dark Philosopher, for rendering Obscura per obscuriora,
losing a Principle in a cloud of obscure insignificant words? nay and does not
their practice (which should be the clear comment on their Principles) render
them much more dark, or rather distasteful as acts of darkness, so detected by
the very light of Nature; what will you say to their altogether decrying Gods
outward Worship? does not Nature it self direct to some acts of Worship, to an
acknowledged Deity? only their light renounceth it. Is it Light that leads to
the disrespect of all superiors, neither to give them honor in words or
gesture? was not the Fifth Command engraven on the heart by Nature? Teaches it
no^ all men in the World to observe that order which God has set among men,
and give to every man that civil honor that is due unto them, by reason of
age, place, or quality? The light of Nature blusheth at their rude Language and
behavior? and bespeaks them beasts of darkness, rather than subjects of any
distinguishing light; Does the light of Nature give liberty for women to be
common controulers, and ordinary speakers? Is not silence the duty imposed, and
Property adorning that Sex? will not the Heathen reject the Religion which is
enforced with feminine voice and style? find you them not without natural
affection to their Husbands, and Children? not only in a neglect of their time
and callings in idleness, following the pretended light within them, but also
wickedly leaving them, and wandering from Country to Country, from Nation to
Nation, in a rabid and savage way, to advance the pretended light within them?
these and the like acts of most gross and palpable darkness are so obvious to
every observant eye, that they seeing them cannot but blush if Natures weak and
vitiated eye be but half open, and I cannot think that there needed any more
pregnant or persuasive argument to stay thee from closing with their delusions,
than a plain Historical representation of their works of darkness, so directly
contrary to the light of Nature.

But their light pretends it self to be that of Grace, and if so, how was it
acquired how is it approved? They have indeed by Providence been cast into
Gospel Times, and places, and so know the Scripture, and its phrases, but by it
they gained not this Light; for the Scripture, they disown and decry, they must
needs then have it by some extraordinary infusion, and this certainly is not
from the spirit of Truth and Light; for besides that it enlightens us, in and
by the Scriptures it brings into the soul a Light that does clearly discover
the object, and irradiate the Organ, a Light that does dispel all disorder and
confusion, distinguishing things that differ, defining things that exist,
declaring duties, and detecting sins, with a conviction irresistible; it is to
be feared, nay positively affirmed, that this Light, so full of confusion,
darkness, and disorder, is no other than the enlightnings of the Prince of
Darkness, darting out Scripture words without either sense or reason, and
suited to the seducement of a people to whom by providence Scripture Language
is grown natural, that no delusion will down with them that savours not of it.

This will appear more certain, if you consider how this Light is approved, and
here consider what are the properties of it, what object does it discover? what
duty does it direct? what real evil does it detect and convince of? as to the
former, it does not so much as pretend to them, by either propounding any
object, or prescribing any duty more than the Light, without description, and
heeding it without any rules of direction; so that it gives you no center, or
ground to hope, no counsel to the soul, nay so far is this Light from
directing unto, that it diverts the soul from every duty, the subjects of it,
sanctify no Sabbaths, seek not God at any time in prayer, crave not so much as
a blessing on their meat and drink; but in a word, throw off every act of
religion as a work of darkness; the only property of Light to which it does
pretend is that of reproving and convincing of evil, and if the matter
reproved, and manner of reproving bespeak it not to be positive darkness, let
the sons of Light judge.

1 As to the matter reproved, Is it not generally the very Worship of God, and
duties of Christianity, that the which every rational enlightened Christian
must needs see to be prescribed by Jesus Christ, and declared in the
Scriptures? Is it not the Sabbaths, solemn assemblies of God and his people? Is
it not Prayer, Reading, Hearing, receiving the Sacraments, etc. even all the
practices of Piety they decry, insomuch that we cannot but see them obnoxious
to that sad woe denounced against such as call good evil, evil good; light
darkness, darkness light; in a word, they decry those things that Satan durst
not have spoken against, had he not prepared the spirits of men by a spirit of
Skepticism, having brought them to such an equipoiz, that a very calling light
darkness, and darkness light may cast the scales, so that indeed we have cause
to say of their reproofs, as Augustine in another case, Nos non curamus de eis
qui reprehendunt quae non comprehendunt, We regard not their reproofs, for they
blame what they do not understand, and are justly to be branded with the
Apostles note of Seducers, They speak evil of things they do not know, Jude 10.

2 As the matter of their reproof, so the manner in which they manage it,
manifests it to be darkness, enmity at light, for they condemn as Judge
without any convincing Arguments, or Demonstrations; thou lie being their
form of reproof, and only forcible reason of conviction; they are confused,
blaming every thing, but convincing of no one; the whole fabric of Religion is
the cloud of darkness they strike at, they distinguish nothing at denoted
guilty, and to be demolished. They cursedly rail, rather than convincingly
reprove, for it may be said of them as Munster notes of the monstrous men in
India, Non loquntur sed latrant, they do not speak but bark; by positive
Assertions, reproachful Epithites, railing Speeches, conquering the modest and
civil, and indeed by their black mouths become like the Basilisk, killing the
Birds of the Air in their very flight, by their very breath; for if once reason
begin to traverse their black Indictments, thou art Carnal, Antichristian,
Devils, and the like, must stay the Process, and confirm the sentence.

Many ways I might manifest the darkness of their pretended light, but I must
not now stand on an History of them, but leave them to the view of their
carriage, the witness of such who have been seduced by them, and the writings
of such as have withstood them, amongst which I here commend to thee this small
Tract, written in a plain, simple, and rustic style, like unto its Author, a
plain simple countryman, in a private Calling, possessing an honest heart, and
public spirit, filled with zeal to plead the Cause of Truth to his power, and
to prevent his Countrymen and Neighbors from being seduced by this Fanatic
Generation, and following a plain Ignis fatuus into a wild Wilderness of
pretended light within; only before I part with thee, give me leave to
prescribe to thee these few Rules for thy preservation.

1 Set Reason in its Throne, I mean not reasons Dictates, which yet as thou art
a man thou must observe and follow, though they are too short to guide thee to
Heaven; but the rational faculty and power of discerning, discoursing, and
determining things which God and Nature has given thee; for observe, the Devil
blindes this Eye, and dethrones this Judge, when he advances this pretended
light: when you are mad you may be brought to any thing.

2 Stick close to Scripture, as the Light unto thy feet, and Lanthorn to thy
paths, by this the light exhibited by Christ and his Apostles was manifested,
and by this the Spirit of Light will be judged; whilst Reason does sit Judge,
see that it sentence by the Law of Scripture; therefore in the right use of
Scripture see that thou do own and embrace,

First, Scripture sentences, not words, this sort of men do speak words, and
but words, leaving sentences, and so making the Word of God of none effect.

Secondly, Sense of Scripture, not merely sentence, the sentence may be
figurative, and to be understood otherwise than the words do simply show, as,
This is my Body, and other like expressions do evidence.

Thirdly, Sense rationally inferred, as well as positively asserted, reasoning
from the Scripture is suitable to an enlightened rational being.

Fourthly, Sense plainly flowing from the scope and circumstances of the text,
not strained by allusion unto Allegories, and the like.

3 State to the Soul standing Principles of Christianity, see some things to be
true, and out of all controversy not to be admitted to debate, but retained
with all resolution against all temptation, know that a Sceptick is a Quakers
Gentleman Usher.

4 Shun their Society, especially solemn Assemblies; how should thou choose
but learn a lesson in the Devils School if thither thou resort day by day? if
their air be infectious, and Enchantments only Spiritual, (which on good
ground, and I believe experience too, are found to be natural,) can thou
accompany with them without danger? it was once the Churchesery, Cant. 1.7. Why
should I turn aside by the flocks of thy companions?

5 Sue by fervent prayer for the spirit of a sound mind; now that thou art fallen
into a fanatique age, prize the many helps thou have to keep thee in thy wits,
and know that spirit of sobriety is the blessing of God, but thereby effected,
in special use this Tract unto its especial end, and that thou by it, and helps
of the like nature may be delivered from the error of the wicked, is and shall
be the constant prayer of

Thine, in and for the truth of the Gospel: Zach. Crofton.
April 17. 1656.
THE QUAKERS Paper truly copied out, as it was by them written, and sent to the
Ministers and People, in, and about Walton, and Liverpool: To which the
following Treatise is an Answer.
To the Priests and people of Walton and Liverpool, and thereabouts.
FOr as much as there was a Dispute, at the Greave-house near Walton, betwixt
the people called Quakers, and the aforesaid Priests before mentioned: In which
Dispute the Priests was to prove the lawfulness of receiving of Tithes which by
Scripture they could not do, but one Scripture they brought in for their own
ends, which makes nothing for their purpose, in Luke 11.42. to prove the
receiving of Tithes, for this was before he was sacrificed up, when he said,
Woe unto ye Pharisees, for ye tithe Mint and Rue, and all manner of Herbs, and
pass over judgment, and the love of God; These ought ye to have done, and not
to leave the other undone.

Now let all people who have any understanding, consider and see, whether this
be any ground or command for the Priests to take Tithes of the people after his
being sacrificed up, for he said, These ought ye to have done, but he gave no
commandment to continue in them, for he was the end of the Priesthood, and the
end of the Law, by which the Priests took Tithes, for the Priesthood being
changed, there was of necessity a change of the Law, and a disanulling of the
Commandment going before, as Heb. 7.12.18. But in the time of the Law they was
to take Tithes of the people according to the Law, Heb. 7.5. and those that did
not bring their Tithes into the Storehouse whilst that Law and Commandment
was of force, robbed God, Mal. 3.8.10. And the Lord commanded that all the
Tithes should be brought of the increase, and laid up, and the Levite, because
he had no part nor inheritance with the people, and the stranger, and the
fatherless, and the widows should come and eat, and be satisfied, Deuteronomy. 14.28,
29. And this was in the first Priesthood, and before Jesus Christ was
sacrificed up, the unchangeable Priesthood, Heb. 8.1. The everlasting Treasure,
Col. 2.3. In whom dwells all fullness, verse. 9. Who has blotted out the
handwriting of Ordinances, and took it out of the way, and nailed them to the
Cross, triumphing over them, verse. 14, 15. Then the Apostle denied all
Ordinances that were hand written, and said the Law was changed, and the
Priesthood was changed, Heb. 7.12. and the Commandment disanulled, so the Law
now being changed, by which the Priesthood was made, and the Commandment
disanulled, by which they took Tithes of the people, of God himself, and the
handwriting of Ordinances blotted out, therefore who art thou O man that goes
about to build again, set up, allow, write for, and uphold that which God put
down, disanulled, and blotted out, and nailed to the Cross? Gods enemy thou
art, whoever thou be, for the earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof,
Psalm. 24.1. And all are commanded to honor God with their substance, who are
his Stewards, Prove. 3.9. Take heed how ye dishonor him by giving his goods to
his open Enemies, who uphold, and maintain that which he has disanulled, and
witnessed against, for you that do so, are unprofitable Stewards, and he will
call you to an account of your Stewardship; And he that is unjust in the
least, is also unjust in much, Luke 16.10, 11. And if ye be not righteous in
the unrighteous Mammon, who will commit to your trust the true riches? And if
ye have not been faithful in that which is another man's, who shall give you
that which is your own, he that has an ear to hear, let him hear and
understand.

And if your Priests will take Tithes as they did in the time of the Law, see
ye do the office of the Priests that took Tithes, they kept a Storehouse, and
the widows, and the fatherless, and the strangers which was within the Priests
gate was fed; And if they do thus, they must own themselves to be Ministers of
the Law, and not of the Gospel; And if they do not thus, they rob the poor, the
fatherless, the widows, and strangers, and neither are Priests of the Law nor
Gospel; so from the Law and Gospel do we shut them, who are neither in the
steps of them, who were under the Law, nor in the steps of Christ's Ministers,
who was the end of the Law, so from being Ministers of either Law or Gospel,
ye have cleared your selves, and shut your selves out by your practices.

And thou Priest Fogge of Liverpool, who said, They that hold forth the way of
perfection, holds not the way of God; but from under this thou can not get,
but under the condemnation must come; for the way of God is perfect, which way
is Jesus Christ, for, says he, I am the way, the truth, and the life, no man
comes to the Father, but by me. So thou that says, The way of perfection, is
not the way of God, art out of the way of God, and thy condemnation thou must
own: So confess thy error to the people, who have spoken against Christ, who
is the way of God, and the way to God, which way is perfect, and indures for
ever.

So for the simple ones sake have I given this forth, who was at the meeting,
and received not satisfaction, because of the disorder that day; That they
might come to see their Teachers, who has long deceived them, taking their
goods from them, contrary to the Law of God written in men's hearts; so with the
light which comes from Christ which convinces you of sin, shall you see them
to be, such as the Prophet speaks of, and says, Put into their mouths, and
they cry, Peace, Peace, but put not into their mouths, and they prepare War
against you, Mat. 3.5.

And this is fulfilled by many of the Priests of England this day, who sue many
at the Law, and cast many into prison, because they put not into their mouths:
so, to the light of Christ in you all, take heed, which is your way and
Teacher, and from all false ways, and Teachers does lead.

Given forth by him, whom in scorn is called QUAKER, Thomas Holme.

QVAKERS Principles quaking.
Friend and Friends,
I Have perused your written Paper directed to the Priests, (as you are pleased
to call them) and people in and about Walton and Liverpool, and you add in one
Clause of it, that for the simples sake you sent it forth, it was my purpose
that one of those simple ones should return you an Answer and I humbly beg upon
the bended knees of my Soul, that the Answer I shall return may be so full of
Gospel simplicity, that God may have the glory, my duty may be discharged, and
your judgments rightly informed, and then I doubt not but some of you, at
least, will consider from whence you are fallen Rev. 3.3. and repent, and do
your first works, and so prevent the Lords coming against you in fury, and in
wrath, for I seriously profess, I look upon it as a very dangerous piece, to
break our selves off, and rent our selves from the Church of God, for as Genesis
9.1, etc. Noah's Ark was a clear Figure and Type of the Church of God, so Noah's
Dove is a clear emblem of such as through affectation of new and unknown paths
do stray from the Church of God, and forsake the assemblies of the Saints, as
the manner of some is, Heb. 10.25. And I pray you observe with me what became
of Noah's Dove whilst she was out of the Ark, and you shall find she found no
rest for the sole of her foot till she returned to the Ark, Genesis 9.9. and Noah
took her in again; and let me tell you this Scripture (as well as other
Scriptures) Romans 15.4. was written for our learning; consider what I say, and
the Lord, if it be his good pleasure, give you understanding, 2 Timothy 2.7.

But before I come to the Answer of your Paper, let me tell you at what I very
much wonder, viz. That you should make use of the Scriptures to prove what your
deluded Fancies would hold forth, and yet will not acknowledge them to be the
Word of God; I know what you are ready to say, viz. That Christ is the Word,
and I through Gods mercy know it as well as you, and am I bless God, able in
some measure to distinguish between the Word of God, and God the Word; yet let
me tell you, if I did not believe really that Jesus Christ and the Scriptures
speak one and the same thing, or that Jesus Christ the internal Word, and the
Bible, or Book of God, the external word, were both one, I would as soon prove
my Tenants from the Turkish Alchoron as from the Scriptures, which were
Blasphemy for me once to imagine.

And now to the answer of your Paper, in which I have observed, and seriously
considered three things; 1. From whence it came. 2. To whom it is directed; and
3. The subject matter of it, which indeed savours so much of railing and
reproach, than I dare not answer you in your own Language, least I should
betray my self not to be guided by the Spirit of God, which is a spirit of
meekness.

But to the First of these, viz. from whence it came, I have only this one word
to say, viz. it came from a people that I look upon as objects of much pity,
not of envy; a people that I have sometimes been very intimate with, at least
some of you; A people with whom I have taken sweet counsel when we have walked
to the House of God together, as friends; a people that I have dearly loved
with Christian love, a people that I have often prayed with, and shall not yet
cease to pray for, Luke 10.20. Luke 15.4, 5, that as many of you as have your
names written in Heaven, may be brought back upon the shoulder of Gods power to
the Fold of Christ, from whence ye are gone astray, 1 Pet. 2.25. and thus much
I am confident of, with which I will conclude, that if it please God to grant
me my request at this point, there will be joy not only in Heaven at your
return, Luke 15.7. but matter of praise and glory to God in the Soul of him,
that will not cease to pray for you; though some of you lately professed, he
durst not pray for me, because I was (as he said) Gods enemy; but I am
confident sometimes he and I professed our friendship with God, and our love to
God, both with one joint consent; I bless God I am the same still, and if he be
not, let him seriously consider which of us are fallen from our own
stedfastness, 2 Pet. 3.17. and so declared our selves to be Gods enemy.

And now I shall proceed to the Second Particular that I observed in your
Paper, viz. The persons to whom it was directed, namely to the Priests, (as you
are pleased to call them) and the people in and about Walton, and Liverpool,
and especially written for the sake of the simple.

As to the name Priest, I should not be troubled at it at all, were it not
given by you to the Ministers of the Gospel, as a brand of reproach; for indeed
I find it to be one of those honorable Titles, that God has given to the
dispencers of his Word and Ordinances in all Ages. They are sometimes called
the Lords Priests, Exodus 19.6. 2 Chronicles. 6.41. sometimes the Lords Pastors, Ier.
3.15. sometimes the Lords Shepherds, Cant. 1.8. sometimes the Watchmen of
Israel, Ezekiel. 3.17. Isa. 61.6. and many other honorable Titles God is pleased
to put upon his Priests that he clothes with his Righteousness, Psalm. 132.16.
and appoints to wait at his Altars, 1 Cor. 9.13. But you will say, These are
legal Titles given under the Law, but we are not under the Law, but under
Grace, and the Gospel of grace. To which I shall have occasion to speak more
fully, when I come to the subject matter of your Paper, I shall only say in
this Section with a learned man, whose Works I lately saw, that the cause why
many are so ignorant of Christ and his Apostles, is, because they are no better
acquainted with Moses and Aaron. But if we look into the Gospel as well as the
Law, we shall find no less honorable Titles given to the Ministers of the
Gospel, than of old time was given to the dispencers of the Law; we find a
Catalogue of them in Ephesians. 4.11. they are there called Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists, Pastors, and Teachers; and though their names be here differently
expressed, yet their honorable Work is the same, viz. for the perfecting of
the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of
Christ, which is the Church.

And here is one thing observable, viz. That God is pleased both under the Law,
and under the Gospel to give one and the same name to the Dispencers of his
Word and Ordinances, I mean Pastors, if we compare this, Ephesians. 4.11. with Jer.
3.15. and not only in point of name, but office also, as shall by the
assistance of God further appear in the next Section. But further, they are
called Christ's Disciples, Joh. 13.5. the Preachers of the Gospel, Matthew. 16.15.
2 Cor. 4.5. and with which I will conclude, they are called the Lords
Ambassadors, 2 Cor. 5.20. nay the Lord gives them the honorable title of
Angels, Rev. 3.1. etc.

These things considered, may we not conclude with our Saviors own words, He
that hears you hears me, and he that despises you despises me, and he
that despises me, despises him that sent me, Luke 10.16. from which sentence
the Lord keep me, and the whole Israel of God. I have now for brevities sake
done with one of the Parties to whom you direct your Paper, viz. the Priests,
(as you call them) and for the People, I confess I have not had opportunity to
speak with many of them since I saw your Paper, but as many of them as I have
had any conference with about it, I assure you the greatest number of them
looked upon your Paper as such an empty inconsiderate Piece, that they
concluded it was not worthy answering, yet as you say, it was written for the
sake of the simple; I assure you, it is for their sakes that are endued with
the humble simplicity that is in Christ that I undertook this present answer.

And now come we to the subject matter of your Paper, which Centers it self in
these two things; 1. Concerning the lawfulness, or unlawfulness of giving, and
receiving of Tithes; and 2. Concerning perfect here, in the body, or whilst we
continue in the body.

To the First of these, viz. concerning Tithes, I would gladly know, whether
you will acknowledge the whole Scripture to be the Word of God or no, I mean
the whole Bible, the Old Testament and the New; if you will acknowledge the
whole, I shall need say no more for the lawfulness of giving, and receiving of
Tithes, than you have said against the lawfulness thereof; for you have cited
several Scriptures that make full for them, as that in Deuteronomy. 14.22, 23.
compared with Mal. 3.8. and 10. in that of Deuteronomy, the Lord takes care,
and gives charge not only concerning the bringing in of Tithes, but for the
true bringing in of them, as though the Lord were resolved not to abate them
any thing of that proportion that he had commanded, not only in relation to the
quantity but quality also; so at the twenty third verse, Thou shall eat before
the Lord thy God in the place that the Lord shall choose to place his Name
there, not only the tithe of thy Corn, but of thy Wine, and of thine Oil, and
of the firstlings of thy Flocks, and of thy Herds, etc. and the reason of all
is added, viz. That thou may learn to fear the Lord thy God, not only during
this year and the next, etc. but always; nay, the Lord takes care, as I may
say, concerning such excuses as some, like your selves, might make against the
punctuality of this performance, in relation to the distance of the place that
the Lord should choose, from the place of some of the peoples residence. Some of
the people might say, I hope I may be excused; alas, the way is too far, and
the burden that I am to bear is too heavy for me to carry so long a journey,
may not I be dispensed with? No, says the Lord, if the burden be too heavy,
and the journey too long, then shall thou in such a case turn thy Tithes into
Money, and shall bring thy due proportion in Money in thy hand. As if the Lord
had said, I will not abate thee any thing, neither will I be put off with any
excuses, or pretenses that thou can make, but that which I require thou shall
truly perform; but you will say this is Law, why then let us take a step
further, and see what the Prophets say to it, and here again you have answered
your selves, Mat. 3.8. will a man rob God, it should seem by this text that
your opinion is no new thing, but as old as this Prophecy, for the very same
color that ye pretend, the Lord intimates to be this peoples pretense, viz.
Wherein have we robbed thee? why says the Lord, in Tithes and Offerings; and
me thinks there is abundance of emphasis in the tenth verse, by you likewise
quoted, Bring ye in all the Tithes into the storehouse, that there may be
meat in my House, and prove me now herewith says the Lord of Hosts, if I will
not open windows in Heaven, and pour down such a blessing as there shall not be
room to receive it; as if the Lord had said, Do ye pretend a scarcity of the
fruits of the earth, so as ye cannot spare the Tithe that I require of you?
why you may thank your selves, for your unwillingness to pay them, that the
increase of your Fields, and of your Flocks and Herds is so slender, or that I
have blessed your increase no better; but prove me now, bring in the full of
your Tithes, keep nothing back, and see if I will not so bless your increase,
as that not only your Barnes, and your Wine-presses, and your Stalls, etc. shall
be full, but there shall not be room to receive them. And were it not to hold a
Candle to the Sun, I might add many more Scriptures both out of the Law, and
Prophets, that would speak the same thing. As also of the largeness and
bountifulness of the provision that God made for his Ministers that waited at
his Altars even under the Law. And have we any grounded reason to produce, why
God should be straiter handed in his allowance of maintenance for his Ministers
that he has employed in more excellent work; for so is Gospel-work, when it is
compared with Legal-work?

But you are ready to take me here at my own word, and to reply, that all that
I have said concerning Tithes is Legal, and from the Law, though you know it is
partly from the Law, and partly from the Prophets. But you will say again, the
Law and Prophets are all one, yea and so say I too; and further I affirm, That
Moses, and the Prophets, and the Gospel are all one in substance, and in effect
the very same thing, they are all the word of one and the same immutable and
unchangeable God; I might prove this abundantly, but for brevity sake this one
Scripture shall serve for, and instead of many; and methinks it might, it is so
full, Heb. 1.1, 2, God who at sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke in
times past to our Fathers by the Prophets, has in these last days spoken to us
by his Son, whom he has appointed to be heir of all things, by whom also he
made the Worlds.

I pray you observe with me, God, one and the same God, spoke, spoke one and
the same word, yea at sundry times, and in diverse manners, to our Fathers by
the Prophets, to us by his Son, but to both, one and the same word. So then we
may conclude, the immutable God, who was yesterday to our forefathers, to day
to us, and the same for evermore, has spoken a Word, and left us a Word like
himself, unchangeable in the substance of it, though changeable in the
administration of it, according to the good pleasure of God the speaker of it,
yet the same Word spoken to his people, whether in old time by his Prophets, or
in the fullness of time by his Son, Gal. 4.4, 5. or in the declining of time by
the Ministers of the Gospel; so then we see how dangerous a thing it is for us
to separate, or put asunder what God has so joined together, that it is no
more two but one, I mean his whole entire and individual word; and if this be
granted, the controversy is easily decided.

But you say further, This Law so much insisted upon, together with the
Priesthood of it, is changed, and the Commandment disannulled, and this you
bottom upon Heb. 7.12. and 18. the very same words that you mention in your
Paper, I confess is here the Scripture-word, yet let me tell you, if we should
take every word in Scripture in the bare letter of it, not weighing the sense
and meaning of the Spirit of God in the Scriptures, such absurdities would
follow as you and I little think of; for instance one amongst many, it were
easy for me to prove that you have no faith, or for you to prove that I have
none, if we only look upon the letter of one text of Scripture, and our
Saviors own words, Matthew. 17.20. Verily I say unto you, if you have faith as a
grain of Mustard Seed, ye shall say to this mountain, be thou removed hence to
yonder place, and it shall remove, and nothing shall be impossible to you.
Observe, Faith as a grain of Mustard Seed, which our Savior elsewhere says is
the least of Seeds, yet if so small a quantity of faith be in you, Mountains
shall remove out of one place into another; but which of us can speak this word
of faith so, as a mountain of stone, or earth, shall thus remove. I bless God I
know how to understand this Scripture better, but I say, if we take this
Scripture in the letter of it, who has any faith at all? when so small a
quantity of it will do so great a work.

Therefore I say, the sense and scope of the Spirit of God must be inquired of
in all Scripture readings, or else there are many things in the very Epistles
of the Apostle Paul, that are hard to be understood, which the unlearned and
unskilful do wrest to their own destruction, as they also wrest all other
Scriptures, 2 Pet. 3.16. and therefore let us enquire into the meaning of this
change of Law and Priesthood, and of this disanulling of the Commandment, and
we are right at this point, or else not. As for the change of the Priesthood,
it is in relation to the manner of Administration, not in point of Office; for
though the Sacrifices of Burnt Offerings be taken out of the way, being nailed
to the Cross of Christ, yet there remains the Sacrifice of Prayer and
Supplication, with giving of thanks, 1 Timothy 2.1. to be offered up upon the
Altar, the Lord Jesus Christ, which is to God a Sacrifice of a sweet smelling
savor, Ephesians. 5.2. and indeed is the sum and substance of all Burnt Offerings.
So David, Thou requirest not Sacrifice, else would I give it thee, thou
delightest not in Burnt Offerings; but, the sacrifice of God is a contrite
spirit, a broken and a humble heart O God thou will not despise, Psalm. 51.17.
So if I should instance in all the particular injuctions of the Ceremonial Law
it self, we should find only the manner of Administration changed, not the
matter, substance, and equity of any one of them; for instance in one of the
meanest of them, There was a Law of diverse washings of hands, and cleansing of
cups and vessels, etc. These are all taken away in respect of the manner of
them; but the substance and equity of these yet remain, Wash thy heart O
Jerusalem, how long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee, Jer. 4.14. and
Isa. 1.16. And our Savior taking notice of the strictness of the Pharisees
about these washings, says, Ye make clean the out side of the cup and platter,
but the inside is full of filthiness and uncleanness, Mat. 23.25, 26. And so
David, I will wash my hands in innocence, so will I compass thine Altar, O
Lord, Psalm. 26.6. By all which Scriptures, we see that the sum and substance
of all the Law, even of the Ceremonial part it self remains unchangeable,
though the manner of Administration be not only changed, but disanulled, and
taken out of the way; as the lesser light, to wit, of a Candle, is swallowed up
of the greater light, to wit, the Sun.

Thus we see how the Priests work is changed, viz. in point of Administration
only, and so the Priests are changed in point of their Administration-work;
but in respect of the order of the Priesthood, it is not changed; For Christ is
a Priest for ever after the Order of Melchisedeck, so that from everlasting to
everlasting, the Priesthood in point of substance, is one and the same for ever.

I might instance in the Sacraments of old, under the Law, and make it out that
the sum and substance of them, not only remain the same, but are more lively
held forth in those two Sacraments that Christ has instituted, and left to
continue in his Church to his second coming, 1 Cor. 11.26 Mat. 28.19, 20. And
what is held forth in the Gospel, Israel had under the Law, though more
obscurely held forth; Yet they did all eat the same spiritual meat, and did all
drink of the same spiritual drink, for they drank of that spiritual Rock that
followed them, which Rock is Christ, 1 Cor. 10.2, 3, 4. And Christ says of
Abraham, That he rejoiced to see Christ's day, he saw it, and was glad, Joh.
8.56.

But you say further, the Commandment is disanulled, I shall say so too, if
you mean the rigor and curse of it, in relation to the Covenant of Works, so as
that it is not now, Do this and live, in the same circumstantial manner as it
was under the Law; but the equity, sum, and substance remains to this day,
viz. In manifesting our obedience to the Gospel of Christ, as before to the Law
of God; not, as I said even now, in the same circumstantial manner, but in
another equivalent to it, viz. in repentance, faith, love, and new obedience,
without which no salvation; and in truth, when I seriously consider the Law and
Gospel, I find the Law to be nothing else but Gospel foretold, and the Gospel
nothing else, but the Law fulfilled; where lies now the disanulling of the
Commandment, except in the sense before mentioned; for as to the total
annihilating, disanulling, or destroying the Law, our Savior disclaims it in
his own words, I came not to destroy, but to fulfill the Law, Matthew 5.17. And
the Apostle Paul having spoken largely to these forementioned distinctions,
lest any should (as you seem to do) mistake him, and from his own words utterly
abrogate, and make void, and useless the Law, he says in plain words, Do we
then destroy the Law? God forbid, we rather establish the Law; Romans 3.31. And
in truth, I find our blessed Lord and Savior, so far from destroying the moral
Law, that he rather sets a sharper edge upon it, and makes it of greater force,
and more binding in reference to the strict observance of it; for says he, It
has been said of old, Matthew. 5.27.28. thou shall not commit adultery; but I
say unto you, he that shall look upon a woman, so as to lust after her, has
committed adultery with her already in his heart: And whereas Moses suffered
the putting away of wives upon dislikes, and disagreements, Christ tells us, If
any man put away his wife for any cause, save for the cause, and in the case of
Fornication has broken the Law, and he that shall marry her that is divorced
committed Adultery, Mat. 5.32. And though these things, and others of the like
nature, were not so expressly set down in the Moral Law, yet they were fully
included in the Commandment; by all which we plainly see the harmony and
agreement between Law and Gospel.

And thus having briefly, yet plainly explained, wherein the Law and Priesthood
is changed, and the Commandment disanulled, I proceed to the great question in
controversy, viz. concerning the lawfulness, or unlawfulness of giving and
receiving Tithes; and that as briefly and plainly as I can.

Now as we have seen the equity of the Law of God held forth in the Gospel in
some cases; so we may, if we will, see it held forth in this very case of
Tithes, 1 Cor. 9.14. Even so has the Lord ordained, That they that preach the
Gospel, should live of the Gospel. I would gladly have any of you, to show me
where and when this Ordination of God by the Apostle here cited, was made
manifest. I know you could, if you would; but in regard you cast off the Law as
useless, I pray you see how you differ from the mind of the Apostle; you need
not to go far for this, only cast your eye upon the 9. verse. of the forecited
Chapter, and you shall see. It is written, says the Apostle, in the Law of
Moses, and here at this 14. verse. Even so has the Lord ordained, as if the
Spirit of God foreseeing such a generation of men as you are, going about to
rent and tear one part of the word of God from another, he here joins them in
such an inseparable bond, as the whole world is never able to unloose, and not
only so, but draws all that is necessary to be received of us, in point of
comfortable maintenance of the Ministry, into an entire doctrinal conclusion,
viz. That those that preach the Gospel should live of it, is Gods own
Ordinance; and this he proves by Scripture from the 25. of Deuteronomy. 4. and having
thus proved it by Scripture, he argues it from several reasons drawn first from
the equity of it, verse. 7. Who goes a warfare at any time, at his own charges?
who planteth a vineyard, and eats not of the fruit thereof? or who feeds a
flock, and eats not of the milk of the flock? But further? If we have sown
unto you spiritual things, is it a great matter if we reap your carnal things?
verse. 11.

Again do we not know, That they that Minister about holy things, live of the
things of the Temple, and they that wait at the Altar, are partakers with the
Altar? verse. 13. But you may perhaps say, This was so in the time of the Law?
but ought it so to be now? yea says the Apostle, Even so has the Lord
ordained, that they that preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel; as if he
should say, It not only was so, but still remains to be Gods own Ordinance,
even so has the Lord ordained.

Secondly, He argues it from his power and authority, Am I not an Apostle,
verse. 1. Have we not power to eat and drink, etc? verse. 4. have other Apostles
this power, and am I, and Barnabas only exempted from this power? I tell you
nay, or say I this only as a man, or of my self, or for my own ends? sure I do
not, but the Lord says it as well as I, Is it not written in the Law of Moses,
Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn; Or
again, does the Lord here only take care so Oxen a indeed he does out of his
fatherly care and providence provide for man and beast, Psalm. 36.6. all which I
very well know, yet I tell you, the Lord speaks not this only out of his care
of Oxen, but for our sakes, for my sake, and for the sake of all those that God
shall call to be Ministers of the Gospel; and doubtless he says it altogether
for our sakes, That he that ploweth may plow in hope, and he that thresheth may
be partaker of his hope, verse. 10. And though the Apostle for the good and
increase of the Church of God, and for the gaining of some that out of
carnality of heart might argue against being at charges upon the Ministers of
the Gospel, that labor in the Word and Doctrine, I say, for the gaining of
their souls, he sometimes forbears the exercise of his power, and rather
labors with his hands; yet he fully asserts this power to be put into his.
hand, to forbear working in a secular employment, and to receive wages for
Gospel-work, such as might be his livelihood and living, so as to live of the
Gospel, verse. 14. Neither does the Apostle only assert the lawfulness of
taking wages for Gospel-work, but also acknowledges, that himself had taken
wages; I robbed other Churches, taking wages of them to do you service. It
seems to me the Apostle Paul sometimes met with people as unwilling to part
with wages for Gospel-work, as many are in these days, and in such a case, he
laid by the exercise of his power, and made use of such as were more willing to
minister to him, of the good things that they had, that by his lenity and
gentleness, he might gain the refractory; himself says, He became all things
to all men, that by all means he might gain some, verse. 22. But his power he
asserts to the utmost, if others be partakers of this power over you, are not
we rather? though we have not made use of this our power, but suffered all
things, lest we should binder the Gospel, verse. 12. his aim being to gain,
and to win more upon men's hearts hereby, and to see the number of Christ's flock
increased, that he made himself servant to all, that was yet free from all,
verse. 19.

But it may be you will grant that the Ministers of the Gospel ought to receive
wages for Gospel-work, and to live of the Gospel, though this is more than many
will grant; yet what makes all this for receiving of Tithes? to this I have
only two words to say, and I pray you observe them both.

First, It is clear to me, That the duty of paying a competent allowance to
Gods Ministers, such as they may live on, by what has been already said, and
much more that might have been said for it, though the way, form, and kind in
which this wages ought to be paid, is not so clear from the New Testament, as
it is from the Old, and I hope where a duty is enjoined in one part of the word
of God, and the manner of performance said nothing of in that part of the word,
yet in another part of the same word it is expressly set down; It must needs be
safer to walk by the subscribed Rule, than either to walk without Rule, or to
cast off duty.

And indeed for all you say, that Scripture, Luke 11.42. makes nothing to the
purpose concerning the matter in hand; yet in my apprehension, it makes much
for the payment of Tithes: for our Savior blames not the Pharisees for taking
of them, but that they only eyed the profits and benefits that came by them,
and neglected the weightier things of the law, viz. judgment, and love, etc.
for says he, This ought ye to have done, and not to have left the other undone.

And whereas you say this was before Christ was offered up, I grant it is true,
but shall we therefore conclude that Christ would speak so favorably of a
thing, whilst he continued in the World, that he would condemn and abandon
when he came to his Father? were not this as much in effect as to force Christ
to deny himself in point of his Deity, and to make both him, and his Word
mutable and changeable, from which assertion the Lord keep all that expect
Salvation in by and through the Lord Jesus Christ.

And thus far I have admitted of your sense of this Scripture, Luke. 11.42,
viz. That the Pharisees receive Tithes, Thy. sense you seem ^o ^avo^r in your
Paper.
and if it be taken in this sense, it is clear our Savior blames them not for
taking of them, but that they only looked upon the profits that came by them;
but if we consult with Mat. 23.23. we shall find the Pharisees rather paid
Tithes than received them, which sense I rather take to be the true and
ingenuine sense of these Scripture; for the Pharisees were not all Priests, if
any of them were so, but rather a separated Sect of people alone by themselves,
very singular for external performances, but little regarded the weightier
things of the Law, viz. Judgment, and the Love of God, etc. Now if we take it
in this sense, our Savior blames not the Pharisees for paying of Tithes, but
in that they concluded, this being done, there was no more to do: but now let
us join and compare these two Scriptures together, and what will be the result,
but clearly and plainly this? viz. That neither the taking nor giving of Tithes
was by our Savior condemned, but rather approved of to be a duty, only resting
in the external performance of this duty is by Christ reproved and condemned,
for says he, This ought ye to have done, and not to have left the other
undone.

Besides, Abraham (in whose loins Levy was) paid Tithes to Melchisedeck before
the Law was given, Genesis 14.20. and Heb. 7.4. and Christ is a Priest for ever
after the order of Melchisedeck; so then, the order of the Priesthood was
before the Law, and continued after the Law, even for ever. And if it was a
Spiritual Rite before the Law, as it must needs be, else the Patriark Abraham
in whose lions Levy was, would not have paid them; but it is clear, he paid
them, Heb. 7.10. by which it plainly appears Tithes are a Spiritual Rite,
belonging to a spiritual and unchangeable Priesthood; and if so, they must
needs of Divine right belong to the servants of Melchisedecks order; but the
Ministers of the Gospel are Servants of Melchisedecks order, therefore to them
of Divine right Tithes belong; for Christ is a Priest nor after the Order of
Aaron, but after that unchangeable Order of Melchisedeck. And methinks that
pract^ce of Jacob, Genesis 28. is full for this present purpose, he was going
about a weighty business, in pursuance of a command received from Isaac his
Father. God is with him, and in his journey appears to him in a Dream, lets
him see a Ladder reaching from earth to Heaven, upon which the Angels ascended,
and descended; Jacobs eyes are opened, and he cries out, The Lord is in this
place, and I knew it not, verse. 16. He is terrified at the Lords presence, and
says, How dreadful is this place? it is none other but the House of God, and
the gate of Heaven, verse. 17. And observing these things, he vows a vow, verse.
20. saying. If the Lord will be with me, and keep me in this way that I go, and
will give me bread to eat, and raiment to put on, so that I come again to my
fathers house in peace, then shall the Lord be my God, and this stone which I
have set up for a pillar (mentioned before in verse. 18.) shall be Gods House,
and of all that thou shall give me, I will surely give the tenth unto thee. It
is clear to me from this Scripture, that Jacob acknowledges a tenth part of
his substance to be of Spiritual right due unto the Lords House, and he enters
into a vow to perform his duty herein. And if it was a Spiritual right
belonging to Gods House, it must needs of Divine right belong to Gods Servants
that wait upon the service of his house; these servants not being servants to
such a Priesthood as was subject to change (for Aarons Priesthood was not
then erected) but servants to an unchangeable Priesthood, even after the Order
of Melchisedeck which ends not, for Christ continues a Priest for ever after
the same Order, all along in these Scriptures held forth, viz. the order of
Melchisedeck. See for this Heb. 7.16. and 17. who is made not after the Law of
a carnal Commandment, but after the power of an endless life, for he
testifies, Thou art a Priest for ever after the Order of Melchisedeck. So then
we see it pleased the most wise God, whose is the earth, and the fullness
thereof, to appoint such a proportion as the tenth part, both before the Law,
and under the Law, and never after expressly to take it off. Who art thou, oh
man, that dare say it is an unmeet proportion, unless thou will acknowledge thy
self to be wiser than God?

But since the legal proportion is displeasing to some, I desire those that are
displeased therewith, strictly to observe the charge of the Apostle Paul, who
was an Apostle to the Gentiles, and I doubt not but all truly godly Ministers
of the Gospel will be well satisfied; the charge is this, Let him that is
taught in the Word, communicate to him that teaches, in all good things, Gal.
6.6. now Tithes are good things, they are the fruits (...) ^ne earth, which
fruits are called precious fruits, Jam. 5.7. And in truth the Apostle gives not
this charge without good cause, for the Ministers are commanded to give
themselves to study to approve themselves unto God, Workmen that need not to
be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth, 2 Timothy 2.15. and their care
ought to be laid out for the Churches of God, 2 Cor. 11.28. so as that it must
needs follow they cannot lay out such care for their Temporal provision as
others, whose call is not so immediately to the Lords work as theirs is. And it
seems to me the good Lord of the house, who cares for his, 1 Pet. 5.7. took
special care that they that minister in the Word and Doctrine should be
comfortably provided for without this care, though I confess it was to Timothy
that Paul writ, when he affirmed, that if any provide not for his own,
especially for them of his own house, he has denied the Faith, and is worse
than an Infidel, 1 Timothy 5.8. and 18. that text formerly mentioned, Deuteronomy. 14.22.
and Deuteronomy. 25.4. is again quoted by the Apostle, as if he would again, and
again, couple Law and Gospel together, to speak one and the same thing in point
of comfortable provision, for the Ministers of the Gospel, and argues it from
good reason, viz. The labourer is worthy of his hire, and proves this Argument
from our Saviors own words, Mat. 10.10.

And but once more, with which I will conclude this Section, I find our Savior
promising ample reward to any that shall put forth a charitable hand toward
any of his Ministers in a case of being fallen into poverty, Matthew. 10.42.
Whosoever shall give to drink a cup of cold water to one of these little ones
in the name of a Disciple, shall not lose his reward; and at verse. 41. more
pregnant to our present purpose, He that receives a Prophet in the name of a
Prophet, shall receive a Prophets reward. I may say on the contrary, he that
shall take from a Prophet the right of a Prophet, as he is a Prophet, or he
that shall refuse to give entertainment to a Prophet into his house, or into
his heart, as a Prophet, may expect a Prophets Curse, and what that is you may
see, if you please to turn to Zech. 11.17. But you may perhaps say, If this
provision be made for the M^nisters, how should they fall into poverty? and
yet let me tell you such a thing once was, and Gods great care put forth
concerning it, 2 King. 4.1. etc. the Prophet was dead, and had left Wife and
Children in debt, but (which is worth our observing) rather than the Prophets
debts shall be unpaid, the Lord will work a Miracle, viz. empty vessels shall
be filled with Oil, and the Oil shall be sold, and the Prophets debts paid.
Thus we see Gods provision made for his Servants the Ministers cleared from the
Word of God, both out of the Old Testament and the New; the Old sets out the
proportion, viz. the tenth part; the New is silent as to the proportion, but
full for a comfortable furnishing of them with all good things; his care is
held forth for them, to the working of a Miracle, his promise made to any that
shall receive them, and minister to them, though but in a Cup of cold water;
and if any yet out of a sinister end shall plead, that it is not by all this
clear that they ought to receive Tithes. I have only one word more to say, and
so conclude.

Secondly, It is not only clear by Scripture, but the Law and customs of
Nations has made choice of this proportion, and of our Nation amongst the rest
it has been, and still is established by the Laws of the Land, and methinks
upon very good ground, in regard a way more agreeable to Gods Word could not be
found. Besides, which way could a more equal way be imagined, for does not the
Minister as well as the people in this thing, depend upon Gods blessing, or
cursing the earth; whether his allowance shall be more, or less; plentiful, or
scarce; so as both Minister and people shall be in one capacity, either to
bless God for plenty, or to wrestle with God in times of famine and scarsity,
for the removal of the Judgment. Now seeing it is thus agreeable to the Law of
God, and Nations, and so full of equity, who art thou O man that dare so
desperately set thy self against both the Law of God and man, sure I am in my
own experience, since I knew the right hand from the left, I never observed any
that made a scruple of pretended conscience of paying Tithes, but they fell by
little and little, not only to the denial of all maintenance to the Ministers,
but even to the despising of them; though they cannot but know, that he that
despises them, despises their Lord and Master the Lord Christ. I profess, I
cannot conceive any reason why you should with such vehemence set your selves
against the maintenance of the Ministry, unless it be either; First, to bring
them into reproach and ignominy, and so make them contemptible that God
commands us to account worthy of double honor, and so on set purpose
contradict God 1 Timothy 5.17 or Secondly, which indeed I rather judge to be the
ground of it, viz. The cunning policy of Satan, that knows well enough that
this Doctrine will be readily received of all that (out of mere covetousness)
are loath to part with that which God requires, and it may be your deluded
fancy to make use of this Doctrine, to increase the number of your Proselites,
for there is not a covetous worldling but he will be ready to join with you in
this Doctrine, seeing so fair a pretense made for it, viz. a case of Conscience,
though he shall one day know, that this very Conscience shall rise up in
Judgment and condemn him as a mere covetous wretch; I remember toward the
close of your great Argument against Tithes, you draw toward what you chiefly
aim at, and by your own rate of Argument go about to argue the Dispensors of
Gods Word and Ordinances to be neither Ministers of Law, nor Gospel, and usurp
to your selves that power that was proper, and peculiar to the Apostles of
Christ, and indeed is now to the Ministers of the Gospel, 1 Timothy 1.20. viz.
That great power of Excommunication, for say you from the Law and Gospel do we
shut them, which is indeed the highest degree of Excommunication; but you have
utterly disenabled your selves from having any thing to do in this matter, by
breaking your selves off, and renting your selves from the mystical Body of
Christ, which is his Church, in whose hand this power lies, 1 Timothy 1.20. with 1
Cor. 5.4, 5. and whereas you add, That the Ministers had excluded themselves,
if you mean those of them that gave you the meeting; I utterly deny it, for
they have not rent themselves from the Church, neither has the Church cast
them off, you afterward enjoin them Confession and Repentance, and indeed I
do, and they will acknowledge it a necessary duty; for the best of Gods people
have sin enough to make confession of, and to be humbled for, except those
like your selves, who say they are whole, and need not the Physician; but let
me tell you, if I hear a man crying out, Keep at a distance, come not near, for
I am holier than thou, Isa. 65.5. I would get as far from that man in
judgment and practice as I could, though I would be as near to him in
affection, as I durst for fear of displeasing God.

I cannot but before I leave this point answer you in one of your reproachful
expressions, that you make use of in your Paper, I call it reproachful, because
you would from it cast reproach upon Gods Ministers, otherwise I acknowledge
the words you bring in are the words of a Prophecy, and are these, Put into
their mouths, and they cry peace, peace, but put not into their mouths, and
they prepare war, Micha 3.5. and this you say is fulfilled in many of the
Priests of England, who as you say, Sues many at the Law, and casts many into
Prison, because they put not into their mouths.

I confess, I know not one president of this nature, but if any be, I hope
there is not a godly Minister in England that would steer this course toward
any that were not well able to pay their dues, and indeed for those that are
well able to pay, but out of a refractory gainsaying, and contradicting mind
will not pay; I think the Minister should sin if he did not Sue such at Law,
and my reasons are those two F^^st, s^e should sin in tollerating an evil
example, that all covetous wretches would be ready to follow. Secondly, He
would hereby frustrate that great end, for which the Law was made and ordained.
The Law was not made for the good and gentle, and obedient, but for the
stubborn, refractory disobedient, and lawless, that can and will not answer to
their duty, so as to perform it.

It is true, it is desired that Christian Brethren would dwell so together in
love and unity, each one striving who should go before another in ready
performance of every just and equal thing, that there needed no going to Law,
according to that we read, 1 Cor. 6.1. etc. most of which Chapter is laid out
on this very thing. But whilst we live in this world, there will be Tares
among the Wheat, there will be such men as Christians could not live amongst
were it not for the Law; for all you so much disclaim the necessity of it, and
not only so, but the very use of it.

But further, I have thus much to say in vindication of godly Ministers, they
both preach against, and often times deny themselves in point of their own
right, to avoid this unchristian work of going to Law, and utterly set
themselves against any that shall go about to fleece the Flock of Christ, and
neglect the performance of their duty; and in their Sermons upon occasion,
preach against careless Shepherds, blind Watchmen, and dumb Dogs, as you
can; yet for all this, if there be any that are not faithful in discharge of
their Office, as Moses was faithful in all his house, Numb. 12.7. shall we for
such a ones sake condemn all the Lords Ambassadors? God forbid, we might as
well condemn all the twelve Disciples, and Apostles of Christ, because one of
them was a Devil, which none that fears God, dare assert.

And now if any be not yet satisfied in this point, I refer him to the Labors
of a learned Divine in his time, viz. Bishop Hall, who in a little Treatise of
his, called, Practical Cases of Conscience, does at large resolve the great
Controversy about Tithes. And shall proceed to the other great Query mentioned
in your Paper, and so take leave with you, and all of your Opinions till you
return again, to the owning of the Truth of God, laid down in the Scriptures,
and submit to order, and break your selves off from disorder and confusion,
which tends to every evil work, Jam. 5.16.

And now to your Second great Question concerning Perfection, I must first lay
down your own words, and then answer them, for I desire to be faithful, and not
to wrong you in a syllable; your words are these; And thou Priest, Fogge of
Liverpool, who said they that hold forth the way of perfection, holds not the
way of God; but from under this thou can not get, but under the Condemnation
must come, and your reason is annexed, viz. for the way of God is perfect,
which way is Jesus Christ, for says he, I am the way, the truth, and the life,
no man comes to the Father but by me; but before I come to the Answer of this,
from under the just censure of false accusation you cannot get (I use your own
Language) for Mr. Fogge was far from denying the way of God to be perfect, or
from denying Christ to be the way, the truth, and the life. But his Argument
was, that neither you, nor any man, nor woman upon earth, had attained to
perfection, so as to be absolutely perfect in this life. And for all he brought
in many pertinent Scriptures to make good what he said, yet you stick not so
far to abuse him, that you bury them all in silence, not mentioning one of
them. I cannot conceive why you should do so, unless it be your aim to hold him
forth to the world, to be so sottish, that he could not make good his Argument
against yours; but blessed be God, there were many ear witnesses that day, but
had there been none but your selves, and that you should make your boast
thereof, yet I am confident no man endowed with reason, would give credit to
you in such a thing; his abilities being better known than your own, I shall
pass by that disorder, that you truly acknowledge was that day, which was the
occasion that many received not satisfaction: For in truth, I know not how such
a thing (as Order) could be expected from a people, that have cast off both
order and decensie, 1 Cor. 14.40.

I shall now proceed to the direct Answer of your Question, viz. Whether
perfection be attainable in this life, yea, or no? you say it is: I say it is
not; except we take along with us these following limitations, or (as I may
call them) these steps to, or degrees of perfection. I shall for your and my
own better understanding, acknowledge four degrees of pefection, and
acknowledge three of them attainable in this life, and the fourth unattainable;
all which, I shall by the assistance of God, make clear by Scripture, and that
very briefly.

First, There is an imputative perfection, that is, when the perfection of
Christ is imputed to a man; and this was doubtless Jobs case, he was a perfect
man in Gods account, Job 1.8. because God had in the eternal Decree of his
unchangeable love, imputed the perfection of Christ to him, he laying hold
thereon by faith, as it is written, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to
him for righteousness, Genesis 15.6. and Romans 4.3. which is all one with
perfection; for that man that is perfectly righteous, is a perfect man, but
there is none in himself; and from himself righteous, no not one, Romans 3.10.
There is none that does good, no not one, verse. 12. And therefore whoever thou
art that boastest of standing upon the feet of thy own perfection, I say unto
thee (in the name of the Lord) if thou stand at all, thou stand by faith,
be not high minded, but fear, Romans 11.20.

Secondly, There is perfection in part, This is it the Apostle Paul owneth, 2
Cor. 13 9 10. For we know in part, and prophecy in part, but when that which
is perfect is come, then that which is imperfect shall be done away. And if any
ask when this shall be? the same Apostle makes answer 1 Cor. 15.54. When this
corruptible has put on incorruption, and this mortal, has put on immortality,
then shall be brought to pass the saying that was written, Death is swallowed
up in victory, Hos. 13.4. For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and
this mortal must put on immortality. And the same Apostle speaking of our
bodies, says, It is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory; it is sown in
weakness, it ^s raised in power; it is sown a natural, but is raised a
spiritual body. Now tell me where is the spiritual body, till it be raised from
the dead? But I believe, and am fully persuaded that though my body be sown in
death a vile body, it shall in the resurrection be made like unto Christ's
glorious body, Philip. 3.21.

Thirdly, There is a comparative perfection; a man may be said to be a perfect
man, in comparison of others that have not received the earnest of their
inheritance, and of such we read, Prove. 12.26. The righteous man is more
excellent than his neighbor, Ephesians. 1.14. And indeed it is true, every godly
man is more righteous, more excellent, and more perfect than his neighbor; for
none but the truly godly walks before God, in uprightness of heart. And that
man that has an upright and sincere heart, is in Gods account a perfect man.
So Noah and Abraham are said to be perfect men, Genesis 6.9. and 17.1.

Fourthly, and lastly, There is an absolute perfection, as I said before, when
we the members shall be made like Christ our head, Col. 1.18. when we shall be
glorified together with him, Romans 8.17. when these vile bodies shall be made
like unto his glorious body. When all the remainders of corrupt nature shall be
consumed in Gods furnace (I mean the grave) but whilst we continue in the body,
we are said to be absent from the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.8.

This absolute perfection then is not attainable here in this life, which is
the thing I am now to prove, and by Gods assistance shall do it,

First, By Scripture.

Secondly, By undeniable Argument, and so draw to a conclusion.

And first for the first, I might fill up much room with places that would
speak fully to this point; but as our Savior says, In the mouth of two or
three witnesses, every word shall be established. I shall bring in two or three
which I hope may suffice.

And first, Job that was a perfect man in the sense I before mentioned, viz. in
Gods account, yet in your sense he utterly disclaims it, Job 9.20. If I
justify my self, my own mouth shall condemn me. And after Job had been as it
were expostulating with God, and pleading his own inno^^ncy and integrity, and
as it were, Gods hard dealing with him, and had in the bitterness of the
anguish of his soul cursed the day of his birth, etc. I say, after all this,
when Job comes to himself, he cries out against himself, I abhor my self, and
repent in dust and ashes, Job 42.6. If Job had been perfect, what needed he to
have repented; but further, we find the Apostle Paul disclaiming perfection in
himself, Phil. 3.12, 13. Not as though I had already attained, or were already
perfect, but I follow after, etc. And at verse. 14. Brethren, I count not my
self to have apprehended, but this one thing I do, forgetting those things that
are behind, and reach forth toward those things that are before, etc. And at
verse. 15. Let as many as be perfect be thus minded; as if the Apostle had said,
The highest degree of perfection that I have attained to, is to be sensible of
my own imperfection.

Secondly, He not only disclaims perfection in himself, but fully asserts that
both Jew and Gentile are all under sin, and there is none righteous, no not
one, there is none that does good, no not one, etc. Romans 3.9, 10. See further
for this, Isa. 64.6. But we are all as an unclean thing, and all our
righteousnesses are as filthy rags, and we all do fade as a leaf, and our
iniquities like the wind, has taken us away. And what more plain against your
doctrine of perfection, then these Scriptures?

But secondly, I shall prove it by Argument.

1 If we could attain to be absolutely perfect men, and free from sin, we
should be freed from death; if Adam had not sinned, he had not dyed, In the
day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely dye, Genesis 2.17. And the wages
of sin is death, Rom 6.23. From whence I argue, no work, no wages; no sin, no
death; But it is appointed unto all men once to dye, and after death to come to
judgment: And why so? Because all have sinned, Rom 5.12. As by one man sin
entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men, for
that all have sinned. Sure then our perfection as well as our portion, is in
reversion. So at verse. 5. If we have been planted together with him in the
likeness of his death, we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection.
Observe, as we are in the one, we shall be in the other.

2 If we were perfectly free from sin, we should be free from temporal
punishments and afflictions, which are the fruits and effects of sin, otherwise
God were unjust. But the best of Gods people are daily liable to temporal
afflictions, therefore short of perfection.

3 If we were perfect, we could not sin at all, But in many things we offend
all, James 3.2. And if we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and
there is no truth in us, 1 John 1.8.

4 If we were perfect here, we should have the end of our hope here; But if in
this life only, Christians had hope, they were of all men most miserable, 1
Cor. 15 19.

5 And lastly, If we could attain to absolute perfection here, we should enjoy
our glorious and eternal rest here; but the Apostle was of another judgment;
For, says he, Doubtless there remains a rest to the people of God, Heb 4.9.
Job likewise agrees with the Apostle, Job 3.7. and that holy man of God (John
the Divine) heard other news, and that from Heaven too, Rev. 14.13. I heard a
voice from heaven saying unto me, Write, from henceforth, blessed are the dead
that dye in the Lord, even so, says the Spirit, for they rest from their
labors, and their works follow them. So then our rest is in heaven, doubtless
our perfection is not here.

But I remember you pleaded hard for perfection, that time the Ministers gave
you the meeting at the Greave-house from these two Scriptures, viz. How shall I
that am dead to sin live any longer therein? and again, As the tree falls so it
lies; from whence you truly inferred, that as Death leaves a man, Judgment is
sure to find him; both which are the truths of God being rightly understood.
As to the first of these, viz. How shall I that am dead to sin live any longer
therein? it is true, I cannot, so as to make it my trade and living, nor yet so
as to live in the least known sin, with allowance of my self therein, nor yet
(as the Scripture phrase is) to tumble and wallow therein; as the Sow that is
washed does in the mire. But hence to assert, that he that is dead to sin is
freed from sin, will not follow, for God knows many are the secret sins of the
best of Gods people, and therefore David, a man after Gods own heart cries out
unto the Lord, Lord cleanse me from my secret sin; and not only so, but he
prays earnestly that God would keep him, that presumptuous sins might not
prevail over him, Psalm. 19.13. sure I am, David was sensible of his own
imperfection.

But Secondly. As the Tree falls, so it lies; or, As Death leaves us, Judgment
is sure to find us. For that man or woman that does not here in this life by
faith make good his propriety and interest in the Lord Jesus Christ, shall
never have benefit by him in the Life to come; for says he, He that believes
on me, has eternal life, but he that believes not is condemned already, Joh.
3.16, 18. I freely acknowledge living and dying in unbeleef, renders a man
truly miserable; for as there is no praising of God in the Grave, so there is
no actings of faith there, but As the tree falls so it lies; but it follows not
hence that we are perfect here, unless it be by faith in the Son of God, and in
that sense I shall be of your judgment, for all Gods people as well as Job, do
know that their Redeemer lives, and that they shall see him at the last day,
not with other, but their own eyes; and indeed Christ is perfection it self.

I have only Three things more to admonish you of, else I shall fall too short
of a full answer to your Paper; First, one is concerning that Law, that you say
is written in men's hearts, by which only they are to be guided. Secondly,
Concerning that light you say is within a man, to which only he is to look; and
Thirdly, Concerning your railing, reviling, and unchristian Language that you
ordinarily put forth, in both your speakings and writings; I am resolved to
clear my self in the sight of God, of all malice and envy in what I shall say
to these, and what I do speak, to speak in faithfulness.

And first, The Law written in men's hearts, it must needs be, either First the
Law of God; or Secondly, The Law of Nature; or, Thirdly, No Law at all, but a
delusion of Satan; I shall be far from judging any of you, and as free in
desiring you to judge your selves, that you be not judged of the Lord. Mistake
me not, I know all men and women shall come to Judgment; but my meaning is, if
we judge our selves, we shall not be so judged, as to be condemned of the Lord.
But to the matter in hand, If the Law you speak of be the Law of God, it cannot
be repugnant to the Law of God, lest as a standing Rule for men to walk by, to
the end of the world. I need not prove what I mean here, viz. Gods immutable
and unchangeable Word, the Scriptures, which have been so clearly proved to be
one with God, that I need not say any more than what I have already said; but
this I affirm, that whatever pretended color you put upon it, if it be not Law
and Testimony proof, I shall give no credit to it, for to the Law, and to the
Testimonies, if they speak not according to this word, it is because they have
no light in them, Isa 8.20.

Secondly, If it were the Law of Nature, for all there might be differences in
judgment, there would not be in Natural affection, and therefore disciphering
out some, that Satan had gotten into his power, so as to be led Captive by
him at his will, he sets this mark or brand upon them, that all men might know
them, viz. without Natural affection. Again, if it were the Law of Nature, it
would lead us to acts and expressions of Human Civility, for the best of Gods
Saints were always ready to give civil Language, and modest expressions to the
worst of Gods enemies, even to their Persecutors; nay, our blessed Savior
speaking to Judas, says, Friend, betrayest thou me with a kiss? Matthew. 26.49,
50. But you dare not afford Civil deportment, and Language to godly and holy
men, no not to the Ministers and Ambassadors of the Lord Jesus Christ, for
fear of offending against this Law, you say men ought to be guided by; but the
good Lord guide me by his Law written in the Scriptures, and if it be his will
give you both will, and skill to judge aright of that Law written within, and
if it be not according to Gods Law, to look upon it as the delusion of the
strong man armed, that will be sure to keep the House, till a stronger than he
come in his power and throw him out, Mark 3.27.

I come now to the Second Admonition, concerning that Light you say is within a
man, to which he only is to look, I conceive it must either be, First, The
light of Nature; or, Secondly, The light that comes by the illuminating Spirit
of God, or else no light at all, but darkness put for light, Isa. 5.20.

But for the first of these, viz. The Light of Nature, you utterly disclaim it,
for you are no more Natural, but Spiritual, and that not only in part, but in
perfection. I say as I said before, I judge you not, you stand and fall to your
own Master. But that you and I may the better judge our selves, and of this
light within us, I conceive it will be our wisdom to try of what kind it is, by
observing whither it leads us; and

First, If it lead us with joy and delight to the Assemblies of the Saints, to
the place where God has promised his more special presence, to the Church of
God, the ground and pillar of truth, 1 Timothy 3.15. I should then look upon it,
as sometimes David did, Even as a Lanthorn to my feet, and a light unto my
paths, Psalm. 119.105. but if any man's soul draw back, Gods soul will have no
pleasure in that man; and, If any man put his hand unto the Plow, and look
back, he is not apt to the Kingdom of God; But it may be you will object the
thing I aim it, viz. The joining of your selves to our Churches you dare not
do, because there is corruption in them. I answer, it is truly desired of all
Gods people, that there were none. But we know there will be Tares among the
Wheat; though the Servants of the Lord of the Harvest would gladly have them
plucked up, and weeded out, yet it is the Lord of the Harvest his Decree, that
they shall grow together till the Harvest, not that he has an eye upon the
Tares, but lest whilst his servants going about to pluck up the Tares, should
pluck up the Wheat also, Mat. 13.28, 29, 30.

Secondly, If this light lead us to the embracing of Gods whole, entire, and
individual word, in the love of it, if it lead us to close with Christ in sweet
communion in those his Ordinances, that are by him appointed, not only for the
begetting, but also increasing and strengthening of Faith, and all other Graces
of his Spirit, I mean the Sacraments of the New Testament, so as we can receive
Soul-refreshment, and Grace-strengthening thereby; I say, if this light lead us
this way, I should be assured it were the Spirit of God, otherwise I cannot but
look upon it, as a delusion of Satan, to which God had in Justice given me up,
because I would not embrace him in the tenders of his love in the Gospel, and
because I would not receive his Word in the love of it, he had given me up to
believe a Lie, and to hearken to the Father of Lies, who though he transform
himself into an Angel of Light, yet goes about by all deceiveableness of
unrighteousness to delude poor souls, to their utter destruction and perishing.
I therefore desire that you and I might b^ careful to try the spirits, whether
they be of God or no, for many false spirits, as well as false Prophets, are
gone out into the world, 1 John 4.1.

I have but one word more, and I have done, methinks it should not be the work
of the Spirit of God to revile Gods Ministers* and ^oyse S^^vants, for indeed I
find it ranked amongst the works of the flesh, Gal^th. 5.21. And elsewhere
the Spirit of God ranks Revilers amongst such as shall not inherit the
Kingdom, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. and indeed your inhuman Raylings, false and slanderous
Accusations, unchristian Judgings, and Censures that you ordinarily pass upon
all that are not of your Opinions, what do they but render you to be a people
that take to your selves that boldness that an Angel of God durst not do, when
he was to deal in dispute with the Devil of Hell? for says the Text, He durst
not bring against him a railing accusation, but said, the Lord rebuke thee,
Jude 9. I pray observe what a strange expression the Holy Ghost makes use of
here; an Angel of God, an Archangel, the best of Created Creatures, disputing
with the Devil, worse than the worst of men, yet durst not, I say, durst not
bring against him a railing accusation; but it is too apparent, that men below
the Angels of Heaven dare bring railing accusations against those that are
far enough above Devils, For God made man a little lower than the Angels,
Psalm. 8.5, 6. If I had not just occasion to blame you for your railing
accusations against them, that cannot be denied to be your Fellow Creatures, if
no more could be said for them. But your bolt is shot against Gods choycest
Servants, and which I desire may be seriously considered, Satan is called, The
Accuser of the Brethren, Revel. 12.10. these things considered, I desire you
and I may in good earnest examine our selves, and if we find our selves
guilty, judge our selves, and a far as you are found in fault, I heartily
with (if it be the good pleasure of God) you may be truly sensible of it, and
return, and join your selves to the Communion of the Saints in the Public
Ordinances of God, that we may have as sweet Fellowship and Communion with the
Father and the Son, and with one another, as ever we had before your going out
from us, by which you have declared your selves not to be of us, for had you
been of us, doubtless you would have continued with us, 1 John 2.19.

And, with which I will conclude, if either you, or any man, or men, teach
otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and the Doctrine which is according to godliness, (let him pretend as
much humility as he can) He is proud, knowing nothing, but doting about
questions, and strifes of words, whereof comes envy, strife, raylings, evil
surmisings, 1 Timothy 6. ^, 4. I desire this, and all other Scriptures that are
written, may be as effectual to you, as sometimes the read^ng of the
thirteenth Chapter to the Romans was to Saint Augustine, and it shall rejoice my
heart.

I charge you, that this Epistle be seriously read of all that you account to
be the holy Brethren.

FINIS.

