IOSEPHI HALL NORVIC EPISCOPI VERA EFFIGIES REVERENDI DO.NI


The Shaking of the Olive Tree.

THE Remaining Works Of that Incomparable PRELATE JOSEPH HALL, D. D. Late LORD
BISHOP of NORWICH.

WITH SOME SPECIALTIES OF DIVINE PROVIDENCE IN HIS LIFE. Noted by His own Hand.
Together with His HARD MEASURE: Written also by Himself.

Heb. 11.38. -- Of whom the World was not worthy.

John 6.12. (...).

LONDON, Printed by J. Cadwel for J. Crook, at the Ship in S. Paul's
Churchyard. 1660

CHRISTIAN READER.
WE present thee here with some scattered Relics of a departed Saint, void of
the superstition of those of Rome, as those of Rome are void of their divine
operation: These few drops of Ink from the Authors pen, will work saving
miracles, when the pretended blood of the Baptist so shrined and adored at
Naples, shall blush at its weakness: That account which thou have here, of the
Life of the Reverend Author, from his own hand, is exceedingly too short, and
modest, yet durst we not presume to make any additions to it, for many reasons:
Our Relation to him would but impair the credit of our most sincere relations
of him, as too partial and flattering; and indeed the attempt is too hard, and
high for us, where his own accurate pencil has begun a draught of himself, to
continue it with the same Elegancy and Decorum. And besides, where this meek
Moses has drawn a vail over his own shining face, in his pourtraict of
himself, It seems to us undecent, to take it away, though to discover more of
his splendor, especially to the weak, and prejudiced eyes of this Age and
Generation, who cannot endure innocence it self, when habited in a Rochet. We
remember what Seneca says (and it is in his De Ira too) they are affecti
oculi, quos candida vestis obturbat, happy is it for him, that the blackest
Stigma that can be fastened upon him, is that his robes were whiter then his
Brethrens, that only the coat of our Joseph has drawn their envy upon him, the
Man Dr. Hall was not the object of their distaste, but the Bishop. To satisfy
these tender eyes, they have here this great Aaron stripped of all his Priestly
Ornaments, and laid open to them, only in these few winding sheets, spunne, and
woven, with his own hand. In the narrative of his life, his pen breaks off with
his outward pressures, wherein all the Losses and indignities he suffered did
so little trouble him, as to some eminent Commissioners (who desired to know
his suffering condition, and made fair overtures of some little reparation) he
replied that of Seneca, Qui se habet, nihil perdidit. God had no sooner
withdrawn his hand from visiting him with those outward trials, then he began
to exercise him, by sore afflictions of the body, in his continually increasing
pains of the stone and strangury, which for many years held him, and pursued
him to the death, yet could not these great impediments take him off from being
active, both in Press and Pulpit: His intellectuals and senses continued
strong, and fresh to the last, his head continued Gold, and his heart of
refined Silver, when all the rest of his body was half clay.

His sense of the sad, and divided condition of the Church, was to his end
passionatly tender, professing all willingness to live, though in the midst of
his exceeding pains and torments, so he might be any way instrumental to the
making up of the breaches of it, and putting it in due frame and order; But
since all his endeavors with men so little prevailed, he never ceased
wrestling with God to this purpose, setting apart one day in every weak through
the Year, for fasting and humiliation with his Family, not that he sought his
own Interests, to be restored to that Episcopal height, and greatness of which
he had been divested: All those who truly knew him, can witness with us, his
abundant contentment in his retreat to a private life, as not a misery, but a
blessing to him, We know, when in the height of all his honors he was ready
enough to such a secession, could he fairly, and handsomely have retired. And
now that impetuous storm, which beat him off from the course of his public
employments, though it battered his vessel, and tore his sails; yet it did but
drive him to the quiet haven where he would be; justly could he take up the
words of holy Nazianzen (in this and many other things his parallel) who when
hotly opposed, and thrust from his See of Constantinople, could say, A retired
life, everwas, and now is dearly affected by me, though they drive me from my
chair, they cannot drive me from my God.

Among many worthy men, who received Ordinaon to the Ministry from his hands,
we cannot but mention one, in whom he take great comfort, as being a notable
precedent for the rest of our learned, and religious Gentry to follow; It was
Mr. Gipson Lucas, an Esquire of good estate, a great Commissioner, and Justice of
Peace in the County of Suffolk, who found his Spirit and Conscience so wrought
upon, as after good deliberation, and consultation with others, he came to this
Reverend Father for Ordination, as refusing to take it from any hands, where
his did not precede, which he received, (good proof being given of his
abilities) according to his desire, and he who entered Nayoth before this aged
Samuel, like Saul in his scarlet (for that was his habit) returned from him a
Sackcloth Prophet, continuing a diligent and zealous preacher of the Gospel. To
return to the Reverend Author; his retreat from the World though he were
hotly, and constantly charged with furious onsets of his sharp diseases, yet
was it answerable to his life, solemn, and staid, with a composed, and heavenly
temper of spirit. The stream was deep, which could run clear and calmly,
through so craggy and crooked a Channel, without a murmr. After his
prevailing infirmities had wasted all the strengths of nature, and the Arts of
his learned and excellent Physician D. Brown of Norwich (to whom under God, we
and the whole Church are engaged for many Years preserving his life as a
blessing to us) after his Fatherly reception of many persons of Honor,
Learning and Piety, who came to crave his dyeing prayers and benediction: One
of which (A Noble person) he saluted with the words of an ancient Votary, Vides
hominem mox pulverem futurum, after many holy prayers, exhortations, and
discourses, he rouzed up his dying Spirits, to a heavenly Confession of his
Faith, which ere he could finish, his speech was taken from him, so that, we
cannot here insert it. After some struglings of nature, with the agonies of
death, he quietly, gradually, and even insensibly gave up his last breath.

And now, how can we forbear to cry sadly after him, O our Father, our Father,
the Chariots of Israel, and the Horsemen thereof. Theodorets Lamentation over
Chrysostom may be taken up over Him, (...): Though ye have ten thousand
Instructers in Christ (says the Apostle) yet have ye not many Fathers, and if
we had many Fathers, yet not many such as He.

We find great Elogies deservedly given to many, eminent in their several
Ages, both Philosophers and Divines. For the first fort

Thucidides gives this Character of Pericles, (...).

Of Socrates, Eunapius, that he was (...).

Of Pythagoras, Lipsius, Ejus singula sententiarum frusta gemmas habent.

Of Homer, Halycarnasseus, (...).

Of Demosthenes, that he was (...).

Of Seneca, Plus aliquid semper dicit, quam dicit.

For the second sort, those who justly obtained to be honored with the name of
Fathers of the Church

Ignatius for his piety was called (...)^

Athanasius for his strenuousness in disputation was called (...).

Of Chrysostom it was said, that he was Theatrum quoddam divinae eloquentiae,
in quo Deus abunde videri voluit, quid posset vitae sanctitas, cum vi dicendi
conjuncta.

Of Clemens Alex. that he was Inter eloquentes sum doctus, inter doctos sum
eloquens.

Upon S. Basil the Great, Nazianzen bestowed this Epitaph (...).
Sermo tuus tonitru, vitaque sulgur erat.


Of S. Jerome, Caussinus, Blandum facundiae nomen, and summus in omnibus artifex.

Of Hilary S. Jerome, Lucifer Ecclesiarum, pretiosus lapis, pulchro sermon
universa loquitur, and si semina aliqua secus viam cecidisse potuissent, tamen
ab eo messis exorta est magna.

Of S. Cyprian (who had the name of Cicero Christianus) Discernere nequeas
utrumne oration in eloquendo, an facilior in explicando, an potentior in
persuadendo suerit.

Of S. Bernard, Heinsius, Cujus ego meditationes rivum Paradisi, ambrosiam
animatum, pabulum Angelicum, medullam pietatis vocare solco.

We need not rob these great names of their due Honor, to add unto his, Let
his discerning Readers be Judges, of what magnitude and luster this Light in
Gods Church was. And though we protest against the Insolency of extolling
him, and so making our selves Judges of what he was Master of, yet this we
must add, to do him right, never were excellencies better set in a mind more
abhorrent from Haughtiness. How meek his temper was, his many Irenical Tracts
do show. Truly Thuanus his judgment of Melancthon fits so well with him, as
if it had been presaged of him, Maximum in eo tranquilitatis erat ac quietatis
studium, ut nisi de necessariis contendendum non putaret, and what follows
also he had experience of, Humanitatem exterorum and diversa sentientum, suorum
vero and eandem doctrinam profitentium acerbitatem expertus and reprehensionem,
ob rixarum and contentionum fugam.

A specimen of his sound moderation we give thee in his Letters to those three
eminent Divines of Bremen, Crocius, Heerbrandus, and VVillius, who each sent
their papers to him, and made him the Vmpire of some dissatisfactions betveen
them, which was so done to their mutual acquiescence, that they jointly and
severally sent him their Letters of Thanks. And toward the desired
Reconciliation of the Lutherans and Calvinists, what a good expedient was
offered by the concurrent Judgment of this Reverend Father with his Brethren
of blessed Memory, BP. Morton. B. Davenant.
the World does vvitness, in the [Sentent. 4. Theologorum] seconded by his
active solicitations of that work. But while he was so devoted to the Peace
and Unity of the Church, and did so eagerly pursue the things that made for it,
He was no less stout and zealous to defend the due power of it in its decent
Rites: Witness his faithful discharge of the negotiation vvherevvith he was
entrusted by K. James into Scotland, pointed at by himself, and that proof of
it in his Letter to Mr. Struthers, one of the Preachers of Edinburgh after his
return from thence, which we would not be so injurious to suppress, though our
discretion may be questioned for publishing what is now so out of date. We
pretend not to have gathered up all the Fragments of his choice Provisions that
nothing might be lost, we know and bewail the loss, and miscarriage of many
precious and most important Papers, and can only labor to forget them, as the
Owners of the rich Treasures buried in the bottom of the Sea must do. These
which we have preserved, do exhibit, if thou have been conversant with his
other Works (as who has not) thou will attest them genuine.

That Tract of his, The Via media mentioned by himself (written after his
return from the Synod of Dort) he made account was buried in perpetual silence;
his tenderness of the Misconstruction of some who would cry it down for the
very design of it, and his Obedience to the Royal Edict (which inhibited the
meddling in those Controversies) easily prevailing with him to suppress it. But
what? Should we let it lie by the walls, till some other false, obtruded Copy
do enforce us to bring it forth, for the Vindication of it self? Or should we
be so accessory to the unhappiness of the Church of God, as to withhold it from
her, in this Age especially, which has revived and blown up again those almost
dead Coals of Controversy, the dangerous heat whereof did occasion that Synod.
If the eager Defendants of each side shall proceed (as yet they do) will it not
be bitterness in the latter end? Is it not needful that some judicious
Moderator should interpose, and make them see, that the Reciprocation of this
Saw, does but divide what might be one entire piece, and make dust in doing it?
Is it not good sober Counsel, to persuade each part (after so many passes made
already) to draw breath, and consider what they do? Bella geri placuit nullos
habitura triumphos. That their true Gallantry is not in re-inforcing what makes
them Opposites, But how without any loss of necessary Truth, both may sit down
satisfied; as happy is in these differences we may say, Is not the whole land
before us? There is room enough for both to walk safely, and there is no
necessity of parting or going asunder. This Reverend Author shows a middle
way, wherein both may walk as Friends, the path being broad enough, and the way
good, (the bushes and briars of needless subtilties being wisely avoided.) For
this discovery all good and sober men will bless the Memory of this Author.
And if he shall suffer in the Opinion of hotter heads, as too lukewarm and
temperate, yea as a close Abetter of Arminianisme, because he hears it speak,
and does not spit Fire and Brimstone upon it, we enter this protestation; He
was no Remonstrant, but against the Monster Smectymnuus. And let any observing
Reader judge, what does he more then propose the Theses of the Remonstrant
Opponents, and the Orthodox Defendants, showing by collation of what is written
by both, how they meet, and differ, how also those differences are stated, and
arbitrated by Reverend and Learned Bishop Overall on one side, and our Divines
on the other. As for this Author himself, to prevent thy hard censure of his
leaning to Arminius, we refer thee to the passages which thou will meet with,
wherein he claims the liberty of reserving his own Judgment, and more
especially to page 387. where in the close of the Tract his unbyassedness is
clearly professed. Now Reader, after thy quarrel with us taken off, for our
thus long withholding the good in these Remains from thee, when it was in the
power of our hands to give them forth, (for which we plead our long mocked
Expectation of a promised, and delayed Reimpression of all the Authors
scattered Tracts, to be reduced into a Volume, in which these were meant to be
included) we dismiss thee with this blessing, and we think it blessing enough,
May the Spirit of this Reverend Father rest upon thee, and may thou be but as
Sound in thy Judgment, and Religious in thy Affections, as he was, and as
Blessed in the End, as he now is.

The Heads of what is here Collected.
A Sermon Preached before K. James at Hampton Court in September 1624. on
Philip. 3.18, 19. Fol. 1 Christian Liberty laid forth, in a Sermon at
White Hall, 1628. on Call, 5.1. Fol. 19 Divine Light and Reflections, in a
Sermon at White Hall on Whitsunday 1640. on 1 John 1.5. Fol. 33 A Sermon
Preached at the Cathedral of Exceter upon the Pacification betwixt the two
Kingdoms, September. 7. 1641. on Psalm. 46.8. Fol. 48 The Mischief of Faction
and the Remedy of it, a Sermon at White Hall on the second Sunday in Lent,
1641. on Psalm. 60.1. Fol. 65 A Sermon Preached at the Tower, March 20. 1641. on
James 4.1. Fol. 84 A Sermon Preached on Whitsunday, June 9. 1644. in Norwich,
on Ephesians. 4.30. Fol. 101 A Second Sermon, in prosecution of the same Text in
Norwich, July 21. 1644. Fol. 127 A Sermon on Easter Day at Higham, 1648. Fol.
185 A Sermon Preached on Whitsunday, at Higham, 1652. on Romans 8.14. Fol. 140 The
Mourner in Sion, on Ecclesiastes 3.4. Fol. 154 A Sermon Preached at Higham, July
1, 1655. on 1 Pet. 1.17. Fol. 192 The Women's Vail, or a Discourse concerning
the necessity or expedience of the Close-covering of the Heads of Women. Fol.
265 Holy Decency in the Worship of God. Fol. 253 Good Security, a discourse, of
the Christians Assurance. Fol. 261 A plain and familiar explication of Christ's
presence in the Sacrament of his Body and Blood. Fol. 287 A Letter for the
Observation of the Feast of Christ's Nativity. Fol. 296 A Letter to Mr. William
Struthers one of the Preachers of Edenbourgh. Fol. 306 Epistola D. Baltasari
Willio, S. T. D. Fol. 317 Epistola D. Lud. Crocio, S. T. D. Fol. 321 Epistola
D. Herman. Hildebrando, S. T. D. Fol. 331 Reverendissimo Marco Antonio de Dom.
Archiep. Spalatensi Epistola discessus sui ad Romam dissuasiva. Fol. 394 A
Modest Offer. Fol. 336 Certain irrefragable Propositions, worthy of serious
Consideration. Fol. 348 The way of peace in the five busy Articles commonly
known by the name of Arminia. Fol. 353 A Letter concerning the falling away
from Grace. Fol. 389 A Letter concerning Religion. Fol. 401 Resolutions for
Religion. Fol. 405 A Letter concerning the frequent injection of Temptations.
Fol. 411 A consolatory Letter to one under Censure. Fol. 414 A short answer to
the Nine Arguments, which are brought against the Bishops sitting in
Parliament. Fol. 417 For Episcopacy and Liturgy. Fol. 421 A speech in
Parliament. Fol. 425 A speech in Parliament in defense of the Canons made in
Convocation. Fol. 428 A speech in Parliament concerning the power of Bishops in
Secular things. Fol. 432 Anthemes for the Cathedral of Exceter. Fol. 435
OBSERVATIONS Of some Specialties of DIVINE PROVIDENCE In the Life of JOS.
HALL, BISHOP of NORWICH.
Written with his own Hand.
NOt out of a vain affectation of my own Glory, which I know how little it can
avail me, when I am gone hence; but out of a sincere desire to give glory to my
God, (whose wonderful Providence I have noted in all my ways) have I recorded
some remarkable passages of my fore-past life: what I have done is worthy of
nothing, but silence and forgetfulness; but what God has done for me, is
worthy of everlasting and thankful Memory.

I was born Julii 1. 1574. at five of the clock in the Morning, in
Bristow-Park, within the Parish of Ashby de la Zouch, a Town in
Leichestershire, of honest and well allowed Parentage: my Father was an Officer
under that truly Honorable and Religious, Henry Earl of Huntingdon, President
of the North, and under him had the Government of that Market Town, wherein the
chief Seat of that Earldome is placed; My Mother Winifride, of the House of the
Bambridges, was a woman of that rare Sanctity, that (were it not for my
Interest in Nature,) I durst say, that neither Aleth, the mother of that just
Honor of Clareval; nor Monica, nor any other of those pious Matrons, anciently
famous for Devotion, need to disdain her admittance to comparison; She was
continually exercised with the affliction of a weak Body, and often of a wounded
Spirit, the Agonies whereof, as she would often recount with much passion;
professing that the greatest bodily sicknesses were but Flea-bites to those
Scorpions, so from them all, at last she found an happy and comfortable
deliverance, and that not without a more then ordinary hand of God; For on a
time being in great distress of Conscience, she thought in her Dream, there
stood by her a grave Personage, in the Gown, and other Habits of a Physician,
who enquiring of her estate, and receiving a sad and querulous answer from her,
took her by the hand, and bad her be of good Comfort, for this should be the
last Fit that ever she should feel of this kind, whereto she seemed to answer,
that upon that condition, she could well be content for the time, with that, or
any other torment: reply was made to her, as she thought, with a redoubled
assurance of that happy issue of this her last trial; whereat she began to
conceive an unspeakable joy; which yet upon her awaking left her more
disconsolate, as then conceiting her happiness imaginary, her misery real; when
the very same day, she was visited by the reverend, and (in his time) famous
Divine, Mr. Anthony Gilby, under whose Ministry she lived; who, upon the
Relation of this her pleasing Vision, and the contrary effects it had in her,
began to persuade her, that Dream was no other then Divine, and that she had
good reason to think that gracious premonition was sent her from God himself,
who, though ordinarily he keeps the common rode of his proceedings, yet
sometimes in the Distresses of his Servants, he goes unusual ways to their
relief; hereupon she began to take heart, and by good Counsel and her fervent
prayers, found that happy prediction verified to her, and upon all occasions in
the remainder of her life, was ready to magnify the mercy of her God in so
sensible a deliverance: what with the trial of both these Hands of God, so had
she profited in the School of Christ, that it was hard for any friend to come
from her Discourse no whit holier; how often have I blessed the memory of those
divine passages of experimental Divinity, which I have heard from her mouth!
what day did she pass without a large task of private devotion, whence she
would still come forth with a Countenance of undissembled mortification: Never
any lips have read to me such feeling Lectures of piety; neither have I known
any Soul, that more accurately practiced them, then her own; Temptations,
Desertions, and Spiritual Comforts were her usual Theme. Shortly, for I can
hardly take off my Pen from so exemplary a subject, her Life and Death were
Saint-like.

My Parents had from mine Infancy devoted me to this sacred Calling, whereto,
by the blessing of God, I have seasonably attained; for this cause I was
trained up in the public School of the place; After I had spent some years
(not altogether indiligently) under the Ferule of such Masters as the place
afforded, and had near attained to some competent ripeness for the University;
my Schoolmaster, being a great Admirer of one Mr. Pelset, who was then lately
come from Cambridge, to be the public preacher of Leicester; (a man very
eminent in those times, for the same of his Learning, but especially for his
sacred Oratory) persuaded my Father, that if I might have my Education under so
excellent and complete a Divine, it might be both a nearer, and easier way to
his purposed end, then by an Academical Institution; The motion sounded well in
my fathers ears, and carried fair probabilities, neither was it other then
fore-compacted betwixt my Schoolmaster and Mr. Pelset, so as on both sides it
was entertained with great forwardness.

The Gentleman, upon essay taken of my fitness for the use of his studies,
undertakes within one seven years, to send me forth, no less furnished with
Arts, Languages, and grounds of Theoricall Divinity, then the carefullest Tutor
in the stricktest College of either University; Which that he might assuredly
perform, to prevent the danger of any mutable thoughts in my Parents, or my
self, he desired mutual bonds to be drawn betwixt us: The great charge of my
Father, (whom it pleased God to bless with twelve children) made him the more
apt to yield to so likely a project for a younger son; There, and now were all
the hopes of my future life upon blasting; the Indentures were preparing, the
time was set, my suites were addressed for the journey; What was the issue? O
God, thy Providence made and found it, Thou know how sincerely, Anno
Aetatis. 15o.
and heartily, in those my young years, I did cast my self upon thy hands; with
what faithful resolution, I did in this particular occasion resign my self
over to thy Disposition, earnestly begging of thee in my fervent Prayers, to
order all things to the best, and confidently waiting upon thy Will for the
event; Certainly, never did I in all my life more clearly roll my self upon the
Divine Providence, then I did in this business; and it succeeded accordingly;
It fell out at this time, that my elder brother having some occasions to
journey unto Cambridge, was kindly entertained there, by Mr. Nath. Gilby,
Fellow of Emanuel College, who, for that he was born in the same Town with me,
and had conceived some good opinion of my aptness to Learning, inquired
diligently concerning me; and hearing of the Diversion of my Fathers purposes
from the University, importunately diswaded from that new course, professing to
pity the loss of so good hopes. My Brother, partly moved with his words, and
partly won by his own eyes, to a great love, and reverence of an Academicall
life, returning home, fell upon his knees to my Father, and after the report of
Mr. Gilbies words, and his own admiration of the place, earnestly besought him,
that he would be pleased to alter that so prejudicial a resolution, that he
would not suffer my hopes to be drowned in a shallow Country-channel; but that
he would revive his first purposes for Cambridge; adding in the zeal of his
love, that if the chargeableness of that course were the hinderance, he did
there humbly beseech him, rather to sell some part of that land, which himself
should in course of Nature inherit, then to abridge me of that happy means to
perfect my education.

No sooner had he spoken those words then my Father no less passionately
condescended, not without a vehement Protestation, that whatsoever it might
cost him, I should (God willing) be sent to the University; neither were those
words sooner out of his lips, then there was a messenger from Mr. Pelset
knocking at the door, to call me to that fairer bondage, signifying, that the
next day he expected me, with a full dispatch of all that business; To whom my
Father replied, that he came some minutes too late, that he had now otherwise
determined of me, and with a respective message of thanks to the Master, sent
the man home empty, leaving me full of the tears of joy for so happy a change;
indeed I had been but lost, if that project had succeeded, as it well appeared
in the experience of him who succeeded in that room, which was by me thus
unexpectedly forsaken? O God, how was I then taken up with a thankful
acknowledgment, and joyful admiration of thy Gracious Providence over me; And
now I lived in the expectation of Cambridge; whither ere long I happily came,
under Mr. Gilbies tuition, together with my worthy friend Mr. Hugh Cholmley,
who, as we had been partners of one lesson from our Cradles, so were we now for
many years partners of one Bed; My two first years were necessarily chargeable,
above the proportion of my Fathers power, whose not very large Cistern, was to
feed many pipes besides mine; His weariness of expense was wrought upon by the
Counsel of some unwise friends, who persuaded him to fasten me upon that School
as Master, whereof I was lately a Scholar; Now was I fetched home with an heavy
heart, and now this second time had mine hopes been nipt in the blossom, had
not God raised me up an unhoped Benefactor, Mr. Edmund Sleigh of Darby (whose
pious memory I have cause ever to love and reverence) out of no other relation
to me, save that he married my Aunt, pitying my too apparent dejectedness, he
voluntarily urged, and solicited my Father for my return to the University, and
offered freely to contribute the one half of my maintenance there, till I
should attain to the degree of Master of Arts, which he no less really and
lovingly performed; The condition was gladly accepted, thither was I sent back
with joy enough, and ere long, chosen Scholar of that strickt and well ordered
College: By that time I had spent six years there, now the third year of my
Bachelarship, should at once both make an end of my maintenance, and in respect
of standing, give me a capacity of further preferment in that house, were it
not that my Country excluded me, for our Statute allowed but one of a shire to
be fellow there, and my Tutor being of the same Town with me, must therefore
necessarily hold me out; But O my God, how strangely did thy gracious
Providence fetch this business about! I was now entertaining motions of remove;
A place was offered me in the Island of Garnsey, which I had in Speech and
Chase; It fell out that the Father of my loving Chamberfellow, Mr. Cholmley, a
Gentleman that had likewise dependence upon the most Noble Henry Earl of
Huntingdon, having occasion to go to York, unto that his Honorable Lord, fell
into some mention of me; That good Earl (who well esteemed my Fathers Service)
having belikely heard some better words of me then I could deserve, made
earnest enquiry after me, what were my Courses; what my Hopes; and hearing of
the likelihood of my removal professed muoh dislike of it; not without some
vehemence, demanding why I was not chosen Fellow of that College, wherein by
report I received such approbation; answer was returned, that my Country
debarred me; which being filled with my Tutor, whom his Lordship well knew,
could not by the Statute admit a second, the Earl presently replied, that if
that were the hinderance he would soon take order to remove it; whereupon his
Lordship presently sends for my Tutor Mr. Gilby unto York, and with proffer of
large conditions of the Chaplainship in his house, and assured promises of
better provisions, drew him to relinquish his place in the College to a free
Election: No sooner was his assent signified, then the days were set for the
public (and indeed exquisite) examination of the Competitors; By that time two
days of the three allotted to this Trial were past, certain News came to us
of the inexpected Death of that incomparably Religious and Noble Earl of
Huntingdon, by whose loss my then disappointed Tutor must necessarily be left
to the wide world unprovided for, upon notice thereof I presently repaired to
the Master of the College, Mr. Dr. Chaderton, and besought him to tender that
hard condition to which my good Tutor must needs be driven if the Election
proceeded; to stay any farther progress in that business, and to leave me to my
own good hopes wheresoever, whose Youth exposed me both to less needs, and more
opportunities of Provision; Answer was made me, that the place was pronounced
void however, and therefore that my Tutor was divested of all possibility of
remedy; and must wait upon the Providence of God for his disposing elsewhere,
and the Election must necessarily proceed the day following; then was I with a
cheerful unanimity chosen into that Society, which if it had any equals, I dare
say had none beyond it, for good order, studious carriage, strickt government,
austere Piety, in which I spent six or seven years more with such contentment,
as the rest of my life has in vain striven to yield; Now was I called to
public Disputations often, with no ill Success; for never durst I appear in
any of those Exercises of Scholarship, till I had from my Knees looked up to
Heaven for a blessing, and renewed my actual dependence upon that Divine Hand;
In this while two years together was I chosen to the Rhetoric Lecture in the
public Schools, where I was encouraged with a sufficient frequence of
Auditors; but finding that well applauded work somewhat out of my way, not
without a secret blame of my self for so much excursion, I fairly gave up that
task in the midst of those poor Acclamations to a worthy Successor Mr. Dr. Dod,
and betook my self to those serious studies, which might fit me for that High
Calling whereunto I was destined; wherein after I had carefully bestowed my
self for a time, I took the boldness to enter into Sacred Orders; the Honor
whereof having once attained, I was no Niggard of that Talent which my God had
entrusted to me, preaching often as occasion was offered, both in Country
Villages abroad, and at home in the most awful Auditory of the University. And
now I did but wait where and how it would please my God to employ me: There was
at that time a famous School erected at Tiverton in Devon, and endowed with a
very large Pension, whose goodly Fabric was answerable to the reported
Maintenance; the care whereof, was by the rich and bountiful Founder Mr.
Blundel, cast principally upon the then Lord chief Justice Popham: That
faithful Observer having great interest in the Master of our House, Dr.
Chaderton, moved him earnestly to commend some Able, Learned and discreet
Governor to that weighty charge, whose Action should not need to be so much as
his Oversight: It pleased our Master out of his good Opinion to tender this
condition unto me, assuring me of no small advantages, and no great toil, since
it was intended the main load of the work should lie upon other shoulders; I
apprehended the motion worth the entertaining: In that severe Society our times
were stinted, neither was it wise or safe to refuse good Offers: Mr. Dr.
Chaderton carried me to London, and there presented me to the Lord chief
Justice with much testimony of Approbation; the Judge seemed well apay'd with
the choice, I promised Acceptance, He the Strength of his Favor: No sooner had
I parted from the Judge, then in the Street a Messinger presented me with a
Letter, from the right Virtuous and Worthy Lady (of dear and happy Memory) the
Lady Drury of Suffolk, tendering the Rectory of her Halsted then newly void, and
very earnestly desiring me to accept of it; Dr. Chaderton observing in me some
change of Countenance, asked me what the matter might be; I told him the Errand,
and delivered him the Letter beseeching his advice; which when he had read, Sir
(quoth I) me thinks God pulls me by the Sleeve, and tells me it is his will I
should rather go to the East then to the West; Nay (he answered) I should
rather think that God would have you go Westward, for that he has contrived
your engagement before the tender of this Letter, which therefore coming too
late may receive a fair and easy Answer: to this I besought him to pardon my
dissent, adding, that I well knew that Divinity was the end whereto I was
destined by my Parents, which I had so constantly proposed to my self, that I
never meant other, then to pass through this VVestern School to it; but I saw
that God who found me ready to go the farther way about, now called me the
nearest and directest way to that sacred end; The Good man could no further
oppose, but only pleaded the distaste which would hereupon be justly taken by
the Lord chief Justice, whom I undertook fully to satisfy; which I did with no
great difficulty, commending to his Lordship in my room, my old Friend and
Chamber-fellow Mr. Cholmley, who finding an answerable acceptance disposed
himself to the place; So as we two, who came together to the University, now
must leave it at once. Having then fixed my foot at Halsted, I found there a
dangerous Opposite to the Success of my Ministry, a witty and bold Atheist, one
Mr. Lilly, who by reason of his Travails, and Abilities of Discourse and
Behavior, had so deeply insinuated himself into my Patron, Sir Robert Drury,
that there was small hopes (during his entireness) for me to work any good upon
that Noble Patron of mine; who by the suggestion of this wicked Detractor was
set off from me before he knew me; Hereupon (I confess) finding the obduredness
and hopeless condition of that man, I bent my prayers against him, beseeching
God daily, that he would be pleased to remove by some means or other, that
apparent hindrance of my faithful Labors, who gave me an answer accordingly:
For this malicious man going hastily up to London, to exasperate my Patron
against me, was then and there swept away by the Pestilence, and never returned
to do any farther Mischief; Now the coast was clear before me, and I gained
every day of the good Opinion and favorable respects of that Honorable
Gentleman, and my worthy Neighbors: Being now therefore settled in that sweet
and civil Country of Suffolk, near to S. Edmunds-Bury, my first work was to
build up my house which was then extremely ruinous, which done, the uncouth
Solitariness of my life, and the extreme incommodity of that single
Housekeeping, drew my thoughts after two years to condescend to the necessity
of a Married estate, which God no less strangely provided for me; For walking
from the Church on Monday in the Whitson-week, with a Grave and Reverend
Minister, Mr. Grandidg, I saw a comely and modest Gentlewoman standing at the
Door of that house where we were invited to a wedding-dinner, and enquiring of
that worthy Friend whether he knew her, Yes (quoth he) I know her well, and
have bespoken her for your wife; when I further demanded an account of that
Answer, he told me, she was the Daughter of a Gentleman whom he much respected,
Mr. George Winniff of Bretenham, that out of an opinion had of the fitness of
that Match for me, he had already treated with her Father about it, whom he
found very apt to entertain it, advising me not to neglect the opportunity; and
not concealing the just praises of the Modesty, Piety, good Disposition, and
other Virtues that were lodged in that seemly Presence; I listened to the motion
as sent from God, and at last upon due prosecution happily prevailed, enjoying
the comfortable Society of that meet Help for the space of forty nine years: I
had not passed two years in this estate, when my Noble Friend Sir Edmund Bacon,
with whom I had much intireness came to me, and earnestly solicited me for my
Company in a Journey by him projected to the Spa in Ardenna, laying before me
the Safety, the Easiness, the Pleasure, and the Benefit of that small
Extravagance, if opportunity were taken of that time, when the Earl of Hertford
passed in Embassy to the Archduke Albert of Bruxells; I soon yielded, as for
the reasons by him urged, so especially for the great desire I had to inform my
self ocularly of the State and practice of the Romish Church; the knowledge
whereof might be of no small use to me in my Holy Station; Having therefore
taken careful order for the Supply of my Charge, with the Assent and good
allowance of my nearest Friends, I entered into this secret Voyage; we waited
some days at Harwich for a wind, which we hoped might waft us over to
Dunkerk, where our Ambassador had lately landed, but at last having spent a
Day, and half a night at Sea, we were forced for want of favor from the wind,
to put in at Quinborow, from whence coasting over the Rich and pleasant Country
of Kent, we renewed our shipping at Dover, and soon landing at Calais, we
passed after two days by Wagon to the strong Towns of Graveling, and Dunkerk,
where I could not but find much hor^or in my self to pass under those dark,
and dreadful prisons, were so many brave Englishmen, had breathed out their
Souls in a miserable Captivity. From thence we passed through Winnoxberg, Ipre,
Gaunt, Courtray, to Bruxells, where the Ambassador had newly sat down before
us, That Noble Gentleman in whose Company I traveled, was welcomed with many
kind Visitations, amongst the rest there came to him an English Gentleman, who
having run himself out of breath in the Inns of Court, had forsaken his
Country, and therewith his Religion, and was turned both Bigot and Physician,
residing now in Bruxels; This man after few interchanges of Complement with Sir
Edmund Bacon fell into a Hyperbolical predication of the wonderful miracles
done newly by our Lady at Zichem, or Sherpen heavell, that is Sharp hill; by
Lipsius Apricollis; the credit whereof when that worthy Knight vvittily
questioned, he avovved a particular miracle of cure wrought by her upon
himself; I coming into the room in the midst of this Discourse (habited not
like a Divine, but in such color and fashion as might best secure my travel,
and hearing my Countrymans zealous and confident Relations, at last asked him
this question, Sir (Quoth I) put case this report of yours be granted for true,
I beseech you teach me what difference there is betwixt these miracles which
you say are wrought by this Lady, and those which were wrought by Vespasian by
some Vestalls by Charms and Spells; the rather for that I have noted, in the
late published report of these miracles, some Patients prescribed to come upon
a Friday, and some to wash in such a well before their approach; and diverse
other such Charm-like observations; The Gentleman not expecting such a question
from me, answered, Sir I do not profess this kind of Scholarship, but we have
in the City many famous Divines, with whom if it would please you to conferr,
you might sooner recieve satisfaction; I asked him whom he took for the most
eminent Divine of that place, he named to me Father Costerus, undertaking that
he would be very glad to give me conference, if I would be pleased to come up
to the Jesuits College: I willingly yielded; In the afternoon the forward
Gentleman prevented his time to attend me to the Father, (as he styled him,)
who (as he said) was ready to entertain me with a meeting; I went alone up with
him; the Porter shutting the Door after me, welcomed me with a Deo gratias; I
had not stayed long in the Jesuits Hall, before Costerus came in to me, who
after a friendly Salutation, fell into a formal speech of the unity of that
Church, out of which is no Salvation, and had proceeded to leese his Breath,
and labor; had not I (as civilly as I might) interrupted him with this short
Answer; Sir, I beseech you mistake me not; My Nation tells you of what Religion
I am; I come not hither out of any doubt of my professed belief, or any purpose
to change it, but moving a question to this Gentleman, concerning the pretended
miracles of the time, he pleased to referr me to your self for my Answer, which
motion of his I was the more willing to embrace, for the fame that I have heard
of your learning and worth, and if you can give me satisfaction herein, I am
ready to receive it: Hereupon we settled to our places, at a Table in the end of
the Hall, and buckled to a further discourse; he fell into a poor and unperfect
account of the difference of Divine miracles and Diabolical; which I modestly
refuted; from thence he slipped into a Choleric invective against our Church,
which (as he said) could not yield one miracle; and when I answered, that in
our Church, we had manifest proofs of the ejection of Devils by fasting and
prayer, he answered, that if it could be proved, that ever any Devil was
dispossessed in our Church, he would quit his Religion. Many questions were
incidently traversed by us; wherein I found no satisfaction given me; The
conference was long and vehement; in the heat whereof, who should come in but
Father Baldwin, an English Jesuit, known to me, as by face (after I came to
Brussells) so much more by Fame; he sat down upon a bench, at the further end
of the table, and heard no small part of our Dissertation, seeming not too well
apaid, that a Gentleman of his Nation, (for still I was spoken to in that
habit, by the style of Dominatio vestra) should depart from the Jesuits
College no better satisfied: On the next morning therefore he sends the same
English Physician to my Lodging, with a courteous compellation, professing to
take it unkindly, that his Countryman should make choice of any other, to
conferr with, then himself, who desired both mine acquaintance and full
satisfaction. Sr. Edmund Bacon, in whose hearing the message was delivered,
gave me secret signs of his utter unwillingness to give way to my further
conferences, the issue whereof (since we were to pass further, and beyond the
bounds of that Protection) might prove dangerous, I returned a mannerly answer
of thanks to F. Baldwin; but for any further conference, that it were bootless,
I could not hope to convert him, and was resolved, he should not alter me, and
therefore both of us should rest where we were. Departing from Brussells we
were for Namur's, and Liege: in the way we found the good hand of God, in
delivering us from the danger of free-booters, and of a nightly entrance
(amidst a suspicious convoy) into that bloody City. Thence we came to the
Spadane waters, where I had good leisure to add a second century of Meditations
to those I had published before my journey; After we had spent a just time at
those medicinal wells, we returned to Liege, and in our passage up the River
Mosa, I had a dangerous conflict with a Sorbonist, a Prior of the Carmelites,
who took occasion by our kneeling at the receipt of the Eucharist, to persuade
all the company of our acknowledgment of a Transubstantiation; I satisfied the
cavil, showing upon what ground this meet posture obtained with us: the man
grew furious upon his conviction, and his vehement associates began to join
with him, in a right down railing upon our Church, and Religion; I told them
they knew where they were, for me, I had taken notice of the security of their
Laws, inhibiting any argument held against their Religion established, and
therefore stood only upon my defense, not casting any aspersion upon theirs,
but ready to maintain our own, which though I performed in as fair terms as I
might, yet the choler of those zelots was so moved, that the paleness of their
changed countenances, began to threaten some perilous issue, had not Sir
Edmund Bacon, both by his eye, and by his Tongue, wisely taken me off; I
subduced my self speedily from their presence, to avoid further provocation;
the Prior began to bewray some suspicions of my borrowed habit, and told them,
that himself had a green Satin suit once prepared for his travells into
England, so as I found it needful for me, to lie close at Namur's; from whence
traveling the next day toward Brussels in the company of two Italian
Captains, Signior Ascamo Negro and another, whose name I have forgotten; who
enquiring into our Nation and Religion, wondered to hear that we had any Baptism
or Churches in England; the congruity of my Latin, (in respect of their perfect
Barbarism) drew me and the rest into their suspicion, so as I might overhear
them muttering to each other, that we were not the men we appeared, straight
the one of them, boldly expressed his conceit, and together with this charge,
began to inquire of our condition; I told him that the Gentleman he saw before
us, was the Grandchild of that renowned Bacon, the great Chancellor of
England, a man of great birth and Quality, and that my self, and my other
companion, travailed in his attendance to the Spa; from the train, and under
the Priveledge of our late Ambassador, with which just answer I stopped their
Mouths.

Returning through Brussels we came down to Antwerp, the paragon of Cities;
where my curiosity to see a solemn procession on St. John Baptists Day might
have drawn me into danger (through my willing unreverence) had not the hulck of
a tall Brabanter, behind whom I stood in a corner of the Street, shadowed me
from notice; Thence down the fair river of Scheld, we came to Vlushing, where
(upon the resolution of our company to stay some hours, I hasted to Middleburgh
to see an ancient Colleague; That visit lost me my passage; ere I could return,
I might see our ship under sail for England, the Master had with the wind
altered his Purpose, and called aboard with such eagerness, that my Company
must either away, or undergo the hazard of too much loss: I looked long after
them in vain, and sadly returning to Middleburgh waited long, for an
inconvenient and tempestuous passage.

After some year and half, it pleased God in expectedly to contrive the change
of my station; My means were but short at Halsted; yet such as I often professed,
if my then Patron would have added, but one ten pounds by year (which I held to
be the value of my detained due) I should never have removed; One morning as I
lay in my bed, a strong motion was suddenly glanced into my thoughts of going
to London; I arose and betook me to the way, the ground that appeared of that
purpose, was to speak with my Patron Sir Robert Drury, if by occasion of the
public Preachership of St. Edmunds Bury, then offered me upon good conditions,
I might draw him to a willing yieldance of that parcel of my due maintenance,
which was kept back from my not over-deserving predecessor; who hearing my
er^and dissuaded me from so ungainfull a change, which had it been to my
sensible advantage, he should have readily given way unto; but not offering me
the expected encouragement of my continuance; with him I stayed, and preached on
the Sunday following; That day Sir Robert Drury, meeting with the Lord Denny,
fell belike into the commendation of my Sermon; That religious and Noble Lord
had long harbored good thoughts concerning me upon the reading of those poor
pamphlets which I had formerly published; and long wished the opo^tunity to
know me: to please him in this desire, Sir Rob. willed me to go, and tender my
service to his Lordship, which I modestly and seriously deprecated; yet upon
his earnest charge went to his Lordships gate, where I was not sorry to hear of
his Absence. Being now full of Cold and Distemper in Drury Lane, I was found
out by a friend, in whom I had formerly no great interest, one Mr. Gurrey Tutor
to the Earl of Essex; P. Henry.
he told me how well my Meditations were accepted at the Princes Court; and
earnestly advised me to step over to Richmond, and preach to his Highness: I
strongly pleaded my indisposition of body, and my inpreparation for any such
work, together with my bashful fears, and utter unfitness for such a presence;
my aversness doubled his importunity; in fine, he left me not till he had my
engagement to preach the Sunday following at Richmond: he made way for me to
that awful Pulpit, and encouraged me by the favor of his Noble Lord the Earl
of Essex: I preached; through the favor of my God, that Sermon was not so well
given as taken; In so much as that Sweet Prince, signified his Desire to hear
me again the Tuesday following, which done, that labor gave more contentment
then the former, So as that gracious Prince, both gave me his hand and
commanded me to his Service, My Patron seeing me (upon my return to London)
looked after by some great Persons, began to wish me at home, and told me that
some or other would be snatching me up, I answered that it was in his power to
prevent, would he be pleased to make my maintenance, but so competent as in
right it should be, I would never stir from him: instead of condescending, it
pleased him to fall into an expostulation of the rate of competencies,
affirming the variableness thereof, according to our own estimation, and our
either raising or moderating the causes of our expenses; I showed him the
insufficiency of my means, that I was forced to write books to buy books:
Shortly, some harsh and unpleasing answer, so disheartened me that I resolved to
embrace the first opportunity of my remove; Now whiles I was taken up with these
anxious thoughts, a messinger (it was Sir Robert Wingfield of Northhamptons
son) came to me from the Lord Denny, (now Earl of Norwich) my
after-most-honourable Patron, entreating me from his Lordship to speak with
him; No sooner came I thither, then after a glad, and Noble welcome, I was
entertained, with the earnest offer of Waltham. The conditions were like the
mover of them, free and bountiful; I received them, as from the munificent
hand of my God; and returned full of the cheerful acknowledgments of a
gracious providence over me; Too late now did my former Noble Patron relent,
and offer me those terms which had before fastened me for ever; I returned
home happy in a new Master, and in a new Patron; betwixt whom, I Divided my
self and my labors, with much comfort and no less acceptance; In the second
year, of mine attendance on his Highness, when I came for my Dismission, from
that monthly service, it pleased the Prince to command me a longer stay, and
at last upon mine allowed departure, by the mouth of Sir Thomas Challoner, his
Governor, to tender unto me a motion of more honor and favor then I was
worthy of; which was, that it was his Highness pleasure, and purpose, to have
me continually resident at the Court as a constant attendant, whiles the rest
held on their wonted vicissitudes; for which purpose his Highness would obtain
for me such preferments as should yield me full contentment: I returned my
humblest thanks, and my readiness to sacrifice my self to the service of so
gracious a Master, but being conscious to my self of my unanswerableness to so
great expectation, and loath to forsake so Dear and Noble a Patron, who had
placed much of his Heart upon me, I did modestly put it off, and held close to
my Waltham; where in a constant course, I preached a long time, (as I had done
also at Halsted before) thrice in the week, yet never durst I climb into the
Pulpit, to preach any Sermon, whereof I had not before in my poor, and plain
fashion, penned every word in the same Order, wherein I hoped to deliver it,
although in the expression I listed not to be a slave to Syllables.

In this while my worthy kinsman, Mr. Samuel Barton Archdeacon of Gloucester,
knowing in how good terms I stood at Court, and pitying the miserable
condition of his Native Church of Wolverhampton, was very desirous to engage me
in so difficult, and Noble a service, as the redemption of that captivated
Church; For which cause he importuned me to move some of my friends, to solicit
the Dean of Windsor, (who by an ancient annexation is Patron thereof, for the
grant of a particular Prebend, when it should fall vacant in that Church,
answer was returned me, that it was fore-promised to one of my fellow
Chaplains; I sat down without further expectation; some year or two after,
hearing that it was become void, and meeting with that fellow Chaplain of mine;
I wished him much joy of the Prebend; He asked me if it were void; I assured him
so; and telling him of the former answer delivered to me in my Ignorance, of
his engagement, wished him to hasten his Possession of it. He delayed not; when
he came to the Dean of Windsor, for his promised dispatch, the Dean brought him
forth a Letter from the Prince, wherein he was desired, and charged to reverse
his former engagement (since that other Chaplain was otherwise provided for)
and to cast that favor upon me; I was sent for, (who least thought of it) and
received the free Collation of that poor dignity, It was not the value of the
place, (which was but ninetene Nobles per annum) that we aimed at, but the
freedom of a goodly Church, (consisting of a Dean and eight Prebendaries
competently endowed) and many thousand souls, lamentably swallowed up by
wilful Recusants, in a pretended Fee-farme for ever; O God, what an hand had
thou in the carriage of this work! when we set foot in this suit (for another
of the Prebendaries joined with me) we knew not wherein to insist, nor where to
ground a complaint, only we knew that a Goodly Patrimony was by sacrilegious
conveyance detained from the Church. But in the pursuit of it such marvelous
light opened it self inexpectedly to us, in revealing of a counterfeit seal,
found in the ashes of that burned house of a false Register; in the
manifestation of ^asures, and interpolations, and misdates of unjustifiable
evidences, that after many years suit, the wise and honorable Lord Chancellor
Ellesmere upon a full hearing, adjudged these two sued for Prebends, clearly to
be returned to the Church, until by common law, they could (if possibly) be
revicted; Our great adversary Sr. Walter Leveson, finding it but loss and
trouble to struggle for litigious sheaves, came off to a peaceable composition
with me of 40 l. per annum for my part, whereof ten should be to the discharge
of my stall in that Church, till the suit should by course of Common law be
determined; we agreed upon fair Wars. The cause was heard at the Kings Bench
Bar; where a special verdict was given for us; Upon the death of my partner
in the suit, (in whose name it had now been brought) it was renewed; a Jury
empannelled in the County; the Foreman (who had vowed he would carry it for Sr.
Walter Leveson howsoever) was before the day, stricken mad, and so continued;
we proceeded with the same success we formerly had; whiles we were thus
striving, a word fell from my adversary, that gave me intimation, that a third
dog would perhaps come in, and take the bone from us both; which I finding to
drive at a supposed concealment, happily prevented, for I presently addressed
my self to his Majesty, with a Petition for the renewing the charter of that
Church; and the full establishment of the Lands, Rights, Liberties, thereto
belonging; which I easily obtained from those Gracious hands; Now Sr. Walter
Leveson, seeing the patrimony of the Church so fast and safely settled: and
misdoubting what issue those his crasie evidences would find at the Common law,
began to incline to offers of peace, and at last drew him so far, as that he
yielded to those two many conditions, not particularly for my self, but for the
whole body of all those Prebends which pertained to the Church; First that he
would be content to cast up that Fee-farm, which he had of all the Patrimony of
that Church, and disclaming it, receive that which he held of the said Church
by lease, from us the several Prebendaries, for term, whether of years, or
(which he rather desired) of Lives. Secondly that he would raise the
maintenance, of every Prebend, (whereof some were but forty shillings, others
three, pounds, others four, etc.) to the yearly value of thirty pounds to each
man, during the said term of his Lease, only for a monument of my labor and
success herein, I required that my Prebend might have the addition of ten
pounds per annum, above the fellows; We were busily treating of this happy
match for that poor Church; Sr. Walter Leveson was not only willing but
forward; The then Dean Mr. Antonius de Dominis, Archbishop of Spalata, gave
both way and furtherance to the dispatch, all had been most happily ended, had
not the scrupulousness, of one or two of the Number, differed so advantageous a
conclusion; In the mean while Sr. Walter Leveson dies, leaves his young Orphan
Ward to the King, all our hopes were now blown up; An office was found of all
those Lands, the very wonted payments were denied, and I called into the Court
of Wards, in fair likelihood, to forgo my former hold, and yielded
possession: but there, it was justly awarded by the Lord Treasurer, then Master
of the Wards, that the Orphan could have no more, no other right then the
Father: I was therefore left in my former state, only upon public complaint,
of the hard condition wherein the Orphan was left, I suffered my self to be
over-intreated, to abate somewhat of that evicted composition: which work
having once firmly settled, in a just pity of the mean provision, if not the
Destitution of so many thousand souls, and a desire, and care, to have them
comfortably provided for in the future, I resigned up the said Prebend to a
worthy Preacher, Mr. Lee, who should constantly reside there, and painfully
Instruct, that great and long neglected people; which he has hitherto
performed, with great mutual contentment and happy success: Now during this 22
years which I spent at Waltham; thrice was I commanded and employed abroad by
his Majesty in public service.

First in the attendance of the Right Honorable Earl of Carlisle, (then Lord
Viscount Doncaster) who was sent upon a Noble Embassy, with a gallant retinue
into France; whose enterment there, the Annalls of that Nation will tell to
posterity, In the midst of that service was I surprised with a miserable
Distemper of body; which ended in a Diarrhaea Biliosa, not without some
beginnings and further threats of a Dysentery; wherewith I was brought so low,
that there seemed small hope of my recovery, Mr. Peter Moulin (to whom I was
beholden for his frequent visitations) being sent by my Lord Ambassador, to
inform him of my estate, brought him so sad News thereof, as that he was much
afflicted therewith, well supposing his welcome to Waltham, could not but wont
much of the heart without me: Now the time of his return drew on, Dr. Moulin,
kindly offered to remove me, upon his Lo^dships departure, to his own house,
promising me all careful tendance; I thankt him, but resolved, if I could but
creep homewards to put my self upon the Journey. A Litter was provided, but of
so little ease; that Simeons penitential lodging; or a malefactors stocks, had
been less pena^l: I crawled down from my close Chamber into that carriage, In
qua videbaris mihi efferri, tanquam in sandapila, as Mr. Moulin wrote to me
afterward; that Misery had I endured in all the long passage, from Paris to
Deep, being left alone to the surly Muleters, had not the providence of my good
God brought me to St. Germans, upon the very minute of the setting out of those
Coaches, which had stayed there upon that mornings entertainment of my Lord
Ambassador, How glad was I that I might change my seat, and my company; in the
way, beyond all expectation, I began to gather some strength, whether the fresh
Air, or the desires of my home revived me, so much, and so sudden reparation
ensued, as was sensible to my self; and seemed strange to others; Being shipped
at Deep the Sea used us hardly, and after a Night, and a great part of the Day
following, sent us back well wind-beaten, to that bleak haven whence we set
forth, forcing us to a more pleasing land-passage, through the Coasts of
Normandy and Picardy; toward the end whereof, my former complaint returned
upon me, and Landing with me, accompanied me to, and at my long Desired home;
In this my absence, it pleased his Majesty, graciously, to conferr upon me the
Deanery of Worcester, which being promised to me before my Departure, was
deeply hazarded whiles I was out of sight, by the Importunity and underhand
working of some great ones; Dr. Field, the learned and worthy Dean of
Gloucester, was by his potent Friends put into such assurances of it, that I
heard where he took care for the furnishing that ample house; But God fetched it
about for me, in that absence and Nescience of mine; and that Reverend, and
better Deserving Divine, was well satisfied with greater hopes; and soon after
exchanged this Mortal estate, for an Immortal and Glorious; Before I could go
down through my continuing weakness, to take possession of that Dignity, his
Majesty pleased to design me to his Attendance into Scotland; where the great
love, and respect that I found, both from the Ministers, and People, wrought me
no small envy, from some of our own, upon a commonly received supposition, that
his Majesty would have no further use of his Chaplains, after his remove from
Edenborough, (for as much as the Divines of the Country, whereof there is great
store and worthy choice, were allotted to every station) I easily obtained,
through the Solicitation of my ever Honored Lord of Carlisle, to return with
him before my fellows. No sooner was I gone, then suggestions were made to his
Majesty of my over plausible Demeanure and doctrine to that already prejudicate
people, for which his Majesty, after a gracious acknowledgment of my good
service there done, called me upon his return to a favorable and mild
account; not more freely professing what Informations had been given against
me, then his own full Satisfaction, with my sincere and just answer; as whose
excellent wisdom well saw, that such winning carriage of mine could be no
hinderance to those his great Designs; At the same time his Majesty having
secret notice, that a Letter was coming to me from Mr. VV. Struther, a Reverend
and Learned Divine of Edenborough, concerning the five points, then proposed,
and urged to the Church of Scotland; was pleased to impose upon me an earnest
charge, to give him a full answer in satisfaction to those his modest Doubts;
and at large to declare my Judgment concerning those required Observations,
which I speedily performed with so great approbation of his Majesty, that it
pleased him to command a transcript thereof, as I was informed, publicly read
in their most famous University; The effect whereof his Majesty vouchsafed, to
signify afterward, unto some of my best friends, with allowance beyond my
hopes.

It was not long after, that his Majesty finding the exigence of the affairs,
of the Nether-Landish Churches to require it; both advised them to a Synodicall
decision, and by his incomparable wisdom, promoted the work; My unworthiness
was named for one of the Assistants of that honorable grave and reverend
meeting, where I failed not of my best service to that woefully distracted
Church; By that time I had stayed some two Months there, the unquietness of
the Night^, in those Garrison Towns, working upon the tender disposition of my
Body, brought me to such weakness through want of Rest, that it began to
disable me from attending the Synod, which yet as I might, I forced my self
unto as wishing that my Zeal could have discountenanced my infirmity; where in
the mean time, it is well worthy of my thankful remembrance, that being in an
afflicted and languishing condition, for a fortnight together with that
sleepless distemper, yet it pleased God, the very Night before I was to preach
the Latin Sermon to the Synod, to bestow upon me such a comfortable refreshing
of sufficient sleep, as, whereby my spirits were revived, and I was enabled
with much vigor and vivacitie to perform that service; which was no sooner
done then my former complaint renewed upon me, and prevailed against all the
remedies that the counsel of Physicians could advise me unto; so as after long
strife, I was compelled to yield unto a retirement (for the time) to the Hague,
to see if change of place and more careful attendance, which I had in the
house of our Right Honorable Ambassador, the Lord Carleton (now Viscount
Dorchester) might recover me; But when notwithstanding all means, my weakness
increased so far, as that there was small likelihood left of so much strength
remaining, as might bring me back into England, it pleased his gracious
Majesty, by our Noble Ambassadors solicitation, to call me off, and to
substitute a worthy Divine Mr. Dr. Goade in my unwillingly forsaken room.
Returning by Dort, I sent in my sad farewell to that grave Assembly, who by
common vote sent to me the President of the Synod, and the Assistants, with a
respective and gracious valediction; neither did the Deputies of my Lords the
States neglect (after a very respectfull complement sent from them to me by
Daniel Heinsius) to visit me; and after a Noble acknowledgment of more good
service from me, then I durst own, dismissed me with an Honorable retribution,
and sent after me a rich Medall of Gold, the portraicture of the Synod, for a
precious Monument of their respects to my poor endeavors, who failed not
whiles I was at the Hague, to impart unto them my poor advice, concerning the
proceeding of that Synodicall meeting; The difficulties of my return in such
weakness were many and great; wherein, if ever, God manifested his special
Providence to me, in overruling the cross accidents of that passage, and after
many dangers and despairs, contriving my save arrival.

After not many years settling at home, it grieved my soul, to see our own
Church begin to sicken of the same disease which we had endeavored to cure in
our Neighbors; Mr. Montagues tart and vehement assertions, of some positions,
near of kin to the Remonstrants of Netherland, gave occasion of raising no
small broil in the Church; Sides were taken, Pulpits every where rang of these
opinions; but Parliaments took notice of the division, and questioned the
Occasioner; Now as one that desired to do all good offices to our dear and
common Mother, I set my thoughts on work, how so dangerous a quarrel might be
happily composed; and finding that mis-taking was more guilty of this
dissension, then mis-believing; (since it plainly appeared to me, that Mr.
Montague meant to express, not Arminius, but B. Overall, a more moderate and
safe Author, however he sped in delivery of him;) I wrote a little project of
Pacification, wherein I desired to rectify the judgment of m^n, concerning this
misapprehended controversy; showing them the true parties in this unseasonable
Plea; and because B. Overall went a midway, betwixt the two opinions which he
held extreme, and must needs therefore somewhat differ from the
commonly-received tenet in these points, I gathered out of B. Overall on the
one side, and out of our English Divines at Dort on the other, such common
propositions concerning these five busy Articles, as wherein both of them are
fully agreed; All which being put together, seemed unto me to make up so
sufficient a body of accorded Truth, that all other questions moved
here-abouts, appeared merely superfluous, and every moderate Christian, might
find where to rest himself, without hazard of Contradiction: These I made bold
by the hands of Dr. Young the worthy Dean of Winchester, to present to his
Excellent Majesty, together with a humble motion of a peaceable silence to be
enjoined to both parts, in those other collateral, and needless
disquisitions: which if they might befit the Schools of Academicall disputants,
could not certainly sound well from the Pulpits of popular Auditories: Those
reconciliatory papers fell under the eyes of some Grave Divines on both parts,
Mr. Montague professed that he had seen them, and would subscribe to them very
willingly; others that were contrarily minded, both English, Scottish, and
French Divines, proffered their hands to a no less ready subscription; So as
much peace promised to result, out of that weak and poor enterprise, had not
the confused noise of the misconstructions of those, who never saw the work,
(crying it down for the very Names sake) meeting with the royal edict of a
general Inhibition, buried it in a secure Silence. I was scorched a little with
this flame, which I desired to Quench; yet this could not stay my hand from
thrusting it self, into an hotter fire.

Some insolent Romanists (Jesuits especially) in their bold disputations
(which in the time of the treaty of the Spanish Match, and the calm of that
Relaxation were very frequent,) pressed nothing so much, as a Catalogue of the
Professors of our Religion to be deduced from the primitive times, and with the
peremptory challenge of the impossibility of this Pedigree dazeled the eyes of
the simple; whiles some of our learned men, undertaking to satisfy so needless
and unjust a demand, gave, as I conceived, great advantage to the Adversary; In
a just Indignation to see us thus wronged by mis^stateing the Question betwixt
us, as if we, yielding our selves of an other Church, Originally and
fundamentally different, should make good our own erection upon the Ruins,
yea, the Nullity of theirs, and well considering the Infinite and great
inconveniences, that must needs follow upon this defense, I adventured to set
my pen on work; desiring to rectify the Opinions of those men, whom an
ignorant zeal had transported, to the prejudice of our holy Cause, laying forth
the Damnable corruptions of the Roman Church, yet making our game of the
outward visibility thereof, and by this means putting them to the probation, of
those newly obtruded corruptions which are truly guilty of the breach betwixt
us; The drift whereof, being not well conceived, by some spirits, that were not
so wise as fervent, I was suddenly exposed to the rash censures of many well
affected and zealous Protestants, as if I had in a Remission to my wonted zeal
to the Truth attributed too much to the Roman Church, and strengthened the
adversaries hands and weakened our own; This envy I was fain to take off by my
speedy Apologeticall advertisment, and after that by my Reconciler, B. Morton.
B. Davenant. Dr. Prideaux. D. Primrose.
seconded with the unaminous Letters of such Reverend, Learned, sound Divines,
both Bishops and Doctors, as whose undoubtable authority, was able to bear down
calumny it self; which done I did by a seasonable moderation provide for the
Peace of the Church, in silencing both my defendants and challengers, in this
unkind and ill-raised quarrel; Immediately before the Publishing of this
Tractate, (which did not a little aggravate, the envy and suspicion) I was by
his Majesty raised to the Bishopric of Exceter, having formerly (with much
humble Deprecation) refused the Sea of Gloucester earnestly proffered unto me;
How beyond all expectation it pleased God to place me in that Western charge;
which (if the Duke of Buckinghams Letters, he being then in France, had arived
but some hours sooner) I had been defeated of; and by what strange means it
pleased God to make up the Competency of that provision, by the unthought of
addition of the Rectory of St. Breok within that Diocese, if I should fully
relate, the Circumstances, would force the Confession of an extraordinary hand
of God in the disposing of those events, I entered upon that place, not without
much prejudice and suspicion on some hands; for some that sat at the stern of
the Church, had me in great Jelousie for too much favor of Puritanisme; I soon
had intelligence who were set over me for espialls; my ways were Curiously
observed, and scanned; However I took the resolution to follow those courses
which might most conduce to the Peace and happiness of my New and weighty
charge; finding therefore some factious spirits very busy in that Diocese, I
used all fair and gentle means to win them to good order; and therein so
happily prevailed, that (saving two of that numerous Clergy, who continuing in
their refractoriness fled away from censure,) they were all perfitly reclaimed;
so as I had not one Minister professedly opposite to the anciently received
orders (for I was never guilty of urging any new Impositions) of the Church in
that large Diocese; Thus we went on comfortably together, till some persons of
note in the Clergy, being guilty of their own negligence and disorderly
courses, began to envy our success; and finding me ever ready to encourage
those whom I found conscionably forward, and painful in their places, and
willingly giving way to Orthodox and peaceable Lectures in several parts of my
Diocese, opened their mouths against me, both obliquely in the Pulpit, and
directly at the Court; complaining of my too much Indulgence to persons
disaffected, and my too much liberty of frequent Lecturings within my charge.
The billows went so high, that I was three several times upon my knee to his
Majesty, to answer these great Criminations, and what Contestation I had with
some great Lords concerning these particulars, it would be too long to report;
only this; under how dark a Cloud I was hereupon, I was so sensible, that I
plainly told the Lord Archbishop of Canter. that rather then I would be
obnoxious to those slanderous tongues of his misinformers, I would cast up my
Rochet; I knew I went right ways and would not endure to live under undeser^
^pi^^ons; what messages of caution I had from (...) of my ^^ry Brethren, and
what expostulatory Letters, I had from above, I need not relate; Sure I am I
had Peace, and comfort at home, in the happy sense of that general unanimity,
and loving correspondence of my Clergy, till in the last year of my presiding
there, after the Synodicall oath was set on foot, (which yet I did never tender
to any one Minister of my Diocese) by the incitation of some busy interlope^s
of the neighbor County, some of them began to enter into an unkind
contestation with me, about the election of Clerks of the convoca^ion; whom
they secretly, without ever acquainting me with their desire or purpose (as
driving to that end which we see now accomplished) would needs nominate and set
up in Competition to those, whom I had (after the usual form) recommended to
them; That they had a right to free voices in that choice, I denied not; only I
had reason to take it unkindly, that they would work underhand without me, and
against me; professing that if they had before hand made their desires known to
me, I should willingly have gone along with them in their election; It came to
the Poll; Those of my Nomination carried it, The Parliament begun; After some
hard tugging there, returning home upon a recess; I was met on the way, and
cheerfully wellcom'd with some hundreds: In no worse terms, I left that my once
dear Diocese: when returning to Westminister, I was soon called by his Majesty
(who was then in the North) to a remove to Norwich: but how I took the Tower in
my way: and how I have been dealt with since my repair hither, I could be
Lavish in the sad report, ever desiring my Good God, to enlarge my heart in
Thankfulness to him, for the sensible experience I have had of his fatherly
hand over me, in the deepest of all my Afflictions, and to strengthen me, for
whatsoever other trials, he shall be pleased to call me unto: That being found
faithful unto the Death, I may obtain that Crown of life, which he has
Ordained for all those that Overcome.

Bishop HALL'S HARD MEASURE.
NOthing could be more plain, then that upon the Call of this Parliament, and
before, there was a general Plot and Resolution of the Faction to alter the
Government of the Church especially, the height and insolency of some
Church Governors, as was conceived, and the ungrounded imposition of some
Innovations upon the Churches both of Scotland and England gave a fit Hint to
the Project: In the vacancy therefore before the Summons, and immediately after
it, there was great working secretly for the Designation and Election as of
Knights and Burgesses, so especially (beyond all former use) of the Clerks of
Convocation; when now the Clergy were stirred up to contest with, and oppose
their Diocesans, for the choice of such men as were most inclined to the favor
of an Alteration. The Parliament was no sooner sat, then many vehement
Speeches were made against established Church Government, and enforcement of
extirpation both root and branch. And because it was not fit to set upon all at
once, the resolution was to begin with those Bishops which had subscribed to
the Canons then lately published, upon the shutting up of the former
Parliament, whom they would first have had accused of Treason; but that not
appearing feisible, they thought best to indite them of very high crimes and
offenses against the King, the Parliament, and Kingdom, which was prosecuted
with great earnestness by some prime Lawyers in the House of Commons, and
entertained with like fervency by some zealous Lords in the House of Peers;
every of those particular Canons being pressed to the most envious and
dangerous height that was possible. The Archbishop of York (was designed for
the report) aggravating Mr. Maynards criminations to the utmost, not without
some Interspersions of his own. The Counsel of the accused Bishops gave in such
a demurring Answer as stopped the mouth of that heinous Indictment: when this
prevailed not, it was contrived to draw Petitions accusatory from many parts of
the Kingdom against Episcopal Government, and the Promoters of the petitions
were entertained with great respects; whereas the many petitions of the
opposite part, though subscribed with many thousand hands, were slighted and
disregarded. VVithall, the Rabble of London, after their petitions cunningly
and upon other pretenses procured, were stirred up to come to the Houses
personally to crave justice both against the Earl of Strafford first, and then
against the Archbishop of Canterbury, and lastly against the whole Order of
Bishops; which coming at first unarmed were checked by some well-willers, and
easily persuaded to gird on their rusty Swords, and so accoutred came by
thousands to the Houses, filling all the outer rooms, offering soul abuses to
the Bishops as they passed, crying out No Bishops, No Bishops; and at last,
after diverse days assembling, grown to that height of fury, that many of them,
whereof Sir Richard Wiseman professed (though to his cost) to be Captain, came
with resolution of some violent courses, in so much that many Swords were drawn
hereupon at Westminster, and the Rout did not stick openly to profess that they
would pull the Bishops in pieces. Messages were sent down to them from the
Lords, they still held firm both to the place and their bloody resolutions. It
now grew to be Torch-light, one of the Lords, the Marquess of Hartford came up
to the Bishops Form, told us that we were in great danger, advised us to take
some course for our own safety, and being desired to tell us what he thought
was the best way, counseled us to continue in the Parliament House all that
night; for (says he) these people Vow they will watch you at your going out,
and will search every Coach for you with Torches, so as you cannot escape.
Hereupon the House of Lords was moved for some Order for the preventing their
mutinous and riotous meetings; Messages were sent down to the House of Commons
to this purpose more then once, nothing was effected; but for the present (for
so much as all the danger was at the ^i^ising of the House) it was earnestly
desired of the Lords that some care might be taken of our safety: The motion
was received by some Lords with a smile, some other Lords, as the Earl of
Manchester, undertook the protection of the Archbishop of York and his company
(whose shelter I went under) to their lodgings; the rest, some of them by their
long stay, others by secret and far-fetch't passages escaped home. It was not
for us to venture any more to the House without some better assurance; upon our
resolved forbearance therefore, the Archbishop of York sent for us to his
lodging at Westminster, lays before us the perilous condition we were in,
advises for remedy (except we meant utterly to abandon our Right, and to desert
our Station in Parliament) to petition both his Majesty and the Parliament,
that since we were legally called by his Majesty's writ to give our Attendance
in Parliament, we might be secured in the performance of our Duty and Service
against those Dangers that threatened us; and withal to protest against any
such Acts as should be made during the time of our forced Absence, for which he
assured us there were many Presidents in former Parliaments, and which if we
did not, we should betray the Trust committed to us by his Majesty, and
shamefully betray and abdicate the due right both of our selves and
Successors. To this purpose in our presence he drew up the said petition and
protestation, avowing it to be legal, just and Agreeable to all former
Proceedings, and being fair written sent it to our several Lodgings for our
Hands, which we accordingly subscribed, intending yet to have had some further
Consultation concerning the delivering and whole carriage of it. But ere we
could suppose it to be in any hand but his own, the first News we heard was,
that there were Messingers addressed to fetch us in to the Parliament upon an
Accusation of high Treason. For whereas this Paper was to have been delivered,
first to his Majesty's Secretary; and after perusal by him to his Majesty,
and after from his Majesty to the Parliament, and for that purpose to the Lord
Keeper, the Lord Littleton, who was the Speaker of the house of Peers; all
these professed not to have perused it at all, but the said Lord Keeper willing
enough to take this Advantage of Ingratiating himself with the House of Commons
and the faction, to which he knew himself sufficiently obnoxious, finding what
use might be made of it by prejudicate minds, reads the same openly in the
house of the Lords: and when he found some of the faction apprehensive enough
of misconstruction, Aggravates the matter as highly offensive, and of dangerous
consequence; and thereupon not without much heat and vehemence, and with an ill
Preface* it is sent down to the House of Commons; where it was entertained
hainously, Glynne with a full mouth crying it up for no less then an high
Treason; and some comparing, yea preferring it to the Powder Plot. We poor
souls (who little thought that we had done any thing that might deserve a
chiding) are now called to our Knees at the bar, and charged severally with
high Treason, being not a little astonished at the suddainness of this
Crimination, compared with the perfect Innocence of our own Intentions, which
were only to bring us to our due places in Parliament with safety and speed,
without the least purpose of any man's offense; But now Traitors we are in all
the haste, and must be dealt with accordingly; For on January 30 in all the
extremity of Frost, at Eight a Clock in the dark Evening, are we voted to the
Tower; Only two of our Number had the favor of the black Rod by reason of
their Age, which though desired by a Noble Lord on my behalf, would not be
yielded, wherein I acknowledge, and bless the Gracious providence of my God, for
had I been gratified, I had been undone both in body and Purse; the rooms being
strait, and the expense beyond the reach of my estate: The news of this our
crime and imprisonment soon flew over the City, and was entertained by our
well-willers with ringing of Bells and Bonfires; who now gave us up (not
without great Triumph) for lost men railing, on our perfidiousness, and
adjudging us to what foul Deaths they pleased; and what scurrile and malicious
pamphlets were scattered abroad, throughout the Kingdom, and in foreign parts,
blazoning our Infamy, and exaggerating our treasonable practices? what
insultations of our adversaries was here? being caged sure enough in the Tower,
the faction had now fair oportunities to work their own designs, they
therefore taking the advantage of our restraint, renew that bill of theirs,
(which had been twice before rejected since the beginning of this Session) for
taking away the votes of Bishops in Parliament, and in a very thin house easily
passed it: Which once condescended unto, I know not by what strong
importunity, his Majesty's assent was drawn from him thereunto; we now instead
of looking after our wonted Honor must bend our thoughts upon the guarding of
our lives, which were with no small eagerness, pursued by the violent Agents of
the Faction. Their sharpest wits and greatest Lawyers were employed to advance
our Impeachment to the height; but the more they looked into the business, the
less crime could they find to fasten upon us: In so much as one of their
Oracles, being demanded his judgment concerning the fact, professed to them,
they might with as good reason accuse us of Adultery: Yet still there are we
fast; only upon petition to the Lords obtaining this favor, that we might have
counsel assigned us; which after much Reluctation; and many menaces from the
Commons, against any man of all the Commoners of England that should dare to be
seen to plead in this case against the representative body of the Commons, was
granted us; the Lords Assigned us five very worthy Lawyers, which were
nominated to them by us; what trouble and charge it was to procure those
eminent and much employed Counselors to come to the Tower to us, and to
observe the strict laws of the place, for the time of their ingress, regress,
and stay, it is not hard to judge. After we had lain some weeks there, however
the house of Commons, upon the first tender of our Impeachment had desired we
might be brought to a speedy trial, yet now finding belike how little ground
they had for so high an Accusation, they began to slack their pace, and
suffered us rather to languish under the fear of so dreadful Arraignment. In
so much as now we are fain to Petition the Lords that we might be brought to
our trial: the day was set, several summons were sent unto us; the Lieutenant
had his warrant to bring us to the Bar; Our impeachment was severally read; we
pleaded not guilty Modo and forma, and desired speedy proceedings, which were
accordingly promised, but not to hastily performed. After long expectation
another day was appointed for the prosecution of this high charge. The
Lieutenant brought us again to the Bar, but with what shoutings and
exclamations and furious expressions of the enraged Multitudes, it is not easy
to apprehend; being thither brought and severally charged upon our Knees, and
having given our Negative Answers to every particular, Two Bishops, London and
Winchester, were called in as witnesses against us, as in that point, whether
they apprehended any such cause of fears in the tumults assembled, as that we
were in any danger of our Lives in coming to the Parliament; who seemed to
incline to a favorable report of the Perils threatened, though one of them was
convinced out of his own Mouth, from the Relations himself had made at the
Archbishop of Yorks Lodging. After this Wild and Glyn made fearful
declamations at the Bar against us, aggravating all the Circumstances of our
pretended Treason to the highest pitch. Our Counsel were all ready at the Bar
to plead for us in Answer of their clamorous and envious suggestions; but it
was answered, that it was now too late, we should have another day, which Day
to this Day never came; the Circumstances of that day's hearing were more
Grievous to us then the substance; for we were all thronged so miserably in
that strait room before the Bar, by reason that the whole house of Commons
would be thereto see the prizes of their Champions played; that we stood the
whole afternoon in no small torture; sweating and struggling with a Merciless
Multitude, till b^ing dismissed we were exposed to a new and greater danger.
For now in the dark we must to the Tower, by Barge as we came, ard must shoot
the Bridge with no small Peril. That God, under whose Merciful Protection we
are, returned us to our safe Custody: There now we lay some weeks longer,
expecting the summons for our Counsails answer; but instead thereof our
Merciful Adversaries, well finding how sure they would be foiled in that unjust
charge of Treason, now under pretenses of remitting the height of rigor, wave
their former Impeachment of Treason against us, and fall upon an Accusation of
high Misdemeaners in that our Protestation, and will have us prosecuted as
guilty of a Praemunire: although as we conceive the law has ever been in the
Parliamentary proceedings, that if a man were impeached, as of Treason, being
the highest crime, the Accusant must hold him to the proof of the charge, and
may not fall to any meaner Impeachment upon failing of the higher. But in this
case of ours it fe^l out otherwise, for although the Lords had openly promised
us, that nothing should be done against us, till we and our Counsel were heard
in our defense, yet the next News we heard was, the house of Commons had drawn
up a bill against us, wherein they declared us to be Delinquents of a very high
Nature, and had thereupon desired to have it enacted that all our spiritual
Means should be taken away: Only there should be a Yearly allowance to every
Bishop for his maintenance, according to a proportion by them set down; wherein
they were pleased that my share should come to 400 p. per annum: this bill was
sent up to the Lords and by them also passed, and there has ever since lain:
this being done, after some weeks more, finding the Tower besides the
Restraint, chargeable; we petitioned the Lords that we might be admitted to
bail; and have liberty to return to our Homes the Earl of Essex moved, the
Lords assented, took our bail, sent to the Lieutenant of the Tower for our
discharge: How glad were we to fly out of our Cage? No sooner was I got to my
Lodging, then I thought to take a little fresh Air, in St. James his Park; and
in my return to my Lodging in the Deans yard, passing through Westminister
Hall, was saluted by diverse of my Parliament acquaintance, and welcomed to my
liberty, whereupon some that looked upon me with an evil eye run into the
House, and complained that the Bishops were let loose, which it seems was not
well taken by the house of Commons, who presently sent a kind of expostulation
to the Lords, that they had dismissed so heinous offenders without their
knowledge and consent; Scarce had I rested me in my lodging, when there comes a
Messinger to me with the sad news of sending me and the rest of my brethren
the Bishops back to the Tower again; from whence we came, thither we must go;
and thither I went with an heavy (but I thank God not impatient) heart. After
we had continued there some six weeks longer, and earnestly Petitioned to
return to our several charges, we were upon 5000 l. Bond dismissed, with a
clause of Revocation at a short warning, if occasion should require. Thus
having spent the time betwixt New years Even and VVhitsontide in those safe
walls, where we by turns preached every Lords Day to a large Auditory of
Citizens, we disposed of our selves to the places of our several abode.

For my self, addressing my self to Norwich, whether it was his Majesty's
pleasure to remove me, I was at the first received with more respect, then in
such times I could have expected; there I preached the day after my arivall to
a numerous and attentive people; nether was sparing of my pains in this kind
ever since, till the times growing every day more impatient of a Bishop,
threatened my silencing. There though with some secret Murmurs of disaffected
persons, I enjoyed peace till the ordinance of sequestration came forth, which
was in the latter end of March following, then when I was in hope of receiving
the profits of the foregoing half year; for the maintenance of my family, were
all my Rents stopped and diverted, and in the April following came the
sequestrators viz. Mr. Sothertou Mr. Tooly Mr. Rawly Mr. Greenewood, etc. To
the Palace and told me that by virtue of an ordinance of Paraliment they must
seize upon the Palace, and all the estate I had, both real and personal, and
accordingly sent certain men appointed by them (whereof one had been burnt in
the hand for the mark of his Truth,) to apprize all the goods that were in the
house, which they accordingly executed with all diligent severity, not leaving
so much as a dozen of Trenchers, or my Childrens pictures out of their curious
Inventory. Yea they would have apprized our very wearing clothes, had not
Alderman Tooly and Sheriff Rawley (to whom I sent to require their Judgment
concerning the Ordinance in this point) declared their opinion to the contrary.
These goods, both Library and household stuff of all kinds, were appointed to be
exposed to public sale. Much inquiry there was when the goods should be
brought to the Market; but in the mean time Mrs. Goodwin, a religious good
Gentlewoman, whom yet we had never known or seen, being moved with compassion,
very kindly offered to lay down to the Sequestrators that whole sum which the
goods were valued at; and was pleased to leave them in our hands for our use,
till we might be able to repurchase them, which she did accordingly and had the
goods formally delivered to her by Mr. Smith and Mr. Greenwood, two
Sequestrators. As for the books, several Stationers looked on them, but were
not forward to buy them; at last Mr. Cook, a worthy Divine of this Diocese,
gave bond to the Sequestrators, to pay to them the whole sum whereat they
were set, which was afterward satisfied out of that poor pittance, that was
allowed me for my Maintenance; as for my evidences they required them from me,
I denied them, as not holding my self bound to deliver them: They nailed, and
sealed up the door, and took such as they found with me.

But before this, the first noise that I heard of my trouble was, that one
Morning, before my servants were up, there came to my Gates one Wright, a
London Trooper, attended with others, requiring entrance, threatening if they
were not admitted to break open the Gates; whom I found at my first sight
struggling with one of my Servants for a Pistol, which he had in his hand; I
demanded his business at that unseasonable time; he told me, he came to search
for Arms and Ammunition, of which I must be disarmed; I told him I had only two
Muskets, in the house, and no other Military Provision; he not resting upon my
word searched round about the house, looked into the Chests, and Trunks, examined
the Vessels in the Cellar; finding no other VVarliek furniture, he asked me
what Horses I had, for his Commission was to take them also; I told him how
poorly I was stored, and that my age would not allow me to travel on foot; In
conclusion he took one Horse for the present, and such account of another, that
he did highly expostulate with me afterward, that I had otherwise disposed of
him.

Now not only my Rents present, but the Arrerages of the former Years which I
had in favor forborne to some Tenants, being treacherously confessed to the
Sequestrators, were by them called for, and taken from me; neither was there
any course at all taken for my maintenance; I therefore addressed my self to
the Committee sitting here at Norwich, and desired them to give order for some
means, out of that large Patrimony of the Church, to be allowed me. They all
thought it very just, and there being present Sr. Tho. VVoodhouse, and Sr. John
Potts, Parliament men; it was moved, and held fit by them and the rest, that
the Proportion which the Votes of the Paliament had pitched upon, viz. 400 l.
per annum; should be allowed to me. My Lord of Manchester, who was then
conceived to have great power in matter of these Sequestrations, was moved
herewith; He apprehended it very just and reasonable, and wrote to the
Committee here to set out so many of the Manors belonging to this Bishopric
as should amount to the said sum of 400 l. annually; which was answerably
done under the hands of the whole Table. And now I well hoped, I should yet
have a good Competency of maintenance out of that plentiful Estate which I
might have had: But those hopes were no sooner conceived then dashed; for before
I could gather up one Quarters Rent, there comes down an Order from the
Committee for Sequestrations above, under the hand of Sergeant Wild the
Chairman, procured by Mr. Miles Corbet, to inhibit any such allowance; and
telling our Committee here, that neither They, nor any other had Power to allow
me any thing at all: But if my Wife found her self to need a Maintenance; upon
her Suit to the Committee of Lords and Commons, it might be granted that She
should have a fifth part, according to the Ordinance, allowed for the
sustentation of her self, and her Family. Hereupon she sends a Petition up to
that Committee, which after a long delay was admitted to be read, and an Order
granted for the fifth part: But still the Rents and Revinues both of my
Spiritual and Temporal Lands were taken up by the Sequestrators both in
Norfolk, and Suffolk, and Essex, and we kept off from either allowance or
account. At last upon much pressing, Beadle the Solicitor, and Rust the
Collector, brought in an Account to the Committee, such as it was; but so
Confused and Perplexed and so utterly unperfect, that we could never come to
know what a fifth part meant: But they were content that I should eat my books
by setting off the Sum, engaged for them out of the fifth part. Mean time the
Synodalls both in Norfolk and Suffolk, and all the Spiritual profits of the
Diocese, were also kept back, only Ordinations and Institutions continued a
while. But after the Covenant was appointed to be taken, and was generally
swallowed of both Clergy and Layety, my power of ordination was with some
strange violence restrained; For when I was going on in my wonted course (which
no Law or Ordinance had inhibited) certain forward Volunteers in the City,
banding together, stir up the Mayor and Aldermen and Sheriffs to call me to an
account for an open violation of their Covenant. To this purpose diverse of them
came to my Gates at a very unseasonable time, and knocking very vehemently,
required to speak with the Bishop; Messages were sent to them to know their
business, nothing would satisfy them but the Bishops presence, at last I came
down to them, and demanded what the matter was; they would have the gate
opened, and then they would tell me; I answered that I would know them better
first: If they had any thing to say to me I was ready to hear them; they told
me they had a writing to me from Mr. Mayor, and some other of their
Magistrates; the paper contained both a challenge of me for breaking the
Covenant, in ordaining Ministers; and withal required me to give in the Names
of those which were ordained by me both then and formerly since the Covenant:
My answer was that Mr. Mayor was much abused by those who had misinformed him,
and drawn that paper from him; that I would the next day give a full answer to
the writing, they moved that my answer might be by my personal appearance at
the Guild Hall; I asked them when they ever heard of a Bishop of Norwich
appearing before a Mayor, I knew mine own place, and would take that way of
answer which I thought sit, and so dismissed them, who had given out that day,
that had they known before of mine ordaining, they would have pulled me and
those whom I ordained out of the Chapel by the Ears. VVhiles I received
nothing, yet something was required of me; they were not ashamed after they had
taken away, and sold all my Goods and personal estate, to come to me for
assesments, and monthly payments for that estate which they had taken, and
took Distresses from me upon my most just denial, and vehemently required me
to find the wonted Arms of my Predecessors, when they had left me nothing:
Many insolences and affronts were in all this time put upon us. One while a
whole rabble of Volunteers come to my Gates late, when they were locked up, and
called for the porter to give them entrance, which being not yielded, they
threatened to make by force, and had not the said gates been very strong they
had done it: Others of them clambred over the walls, and would come into mine
house, their errand (they said) was to search for Delinquents, what they would
have done I know not, had not we by a secret way sent to raise the Officers for
our Rescue: Another while the Sheriff Toftes, and Alderman Linsey, attended
with many Zealous followers, came into my Chapel to look for Superstitious
Pictures, and Relics of Idolatry, and send for me, to let me know they found
those VVindowes full of Images, which were very offensive, and must be
demolished: I told them they were the Pictures of some ancient and worthy
Bishops, as St. Ambrose, Austin, etc. It was answered me, that they were so
many Popes; and one younger man amongst the rest ( Townsend as I perceived
afterward) would take upon him to defend that every Diocesan Bishop was Pope,
I answered him with some scorn, and obtained leave that I might with the least
loss, and defacing of the windows give order for taking off that offense, which
I did by causing the heads of those Pictures to be taken off, since I knew the
Bodies could not offend. There was not that care and moderation used in
reforming the Cathedral Church bordering upon my Palace. It is no other then
Tragical to relate the carriage of that furious Sacrilidge, whereof our eyes
and ears were the sad witnesses, under the Authority and presence of Linsey,
Tofts the Sheriff, and Greenwood; Lord, what work was here, what clattering of
Glasses, what beating down of VValls, what tearing up of Monuments, what
pulling down of Seats, what wresting out of Irons and Brass from the Windows
and Graves! what defacing of Arms, what demolishing of curious Stone-work,
that had not any representation in the World, but only of the cost of the
Founder, and skill of the Mason, what toting and piping upon the destroyed
Organ pipes, and what a hideous triumph on the Market day before all the
Country, when in a kind of Sacrilegious and profane procession, all the Organ
pipes, Vestments, both Copes and Surplices, together with the Leaden Cross,
which had been newly sawne down from over the Green-Yard Pulpit, and the
Service books and singing books that could be had, were carried to the fire in
the public Market place; A lewd wretch walking before the Train, in his Cope
trailing in the dirt, with a Service book in his hand imitating in an inpious
scorn the tune, and usurping the words of the Letany used formerly in the
Church: Near the public Cross, all these monuments of Idolatry must be
sacrificed to the fire, not without much Ostentation of a zealous joy in
discharging ordinance to the cost of some who professed how much they had
longed to see that Day. Neither was it any news upon this Guild-day to have
the Cathedral now open on all sides to be filled with Muskatiers, waiting for
the Majors return, drinking and tobacconing as freely as if it had turned
Alehouse. Still yet I remained in my Palace though with but a poor retinue and
means; but the house was held too good for Me: Many messages were sent by Mr.
Corbet to remove me thence; The first pretense was, that the Committee, who now
was at charge for an House to sit in, might make their daily Session there,
being a place both more public, roomy, and chargelesse. The Committee after
many consultations resolved it covenient to remove thither, though many
overtures, and offers were made to the contrary: Mr. Corbet was impatient of my
stay there, and procures and sends peremptory messages for my present
dislodging, we desired to have some time allowed for providing some other
Mansion, if we must needs be cast out of this, which my wife was so willing to
hold, that she offered, (if the charge of the present Committee house were the
things stood upon) she would be content to defray the sum of the rent of that
house of her fifth part; but that might not be yielded; out we must and that in
three weeks warning by Midsommerday then approaching, so as we might have lain
in the street for ought I know, had not the Providence of God so ordered it,
that a Neighbor in the Close, one Mr. Gostlin, a Widower was content to void
his House for us.

This has been my measure, wherefore I know not, Lord thou know, who only
can remedy, and end, and forgive or avenge this horrible Oppression.

Scripsi May 29. 1647. JOS. NORVIC.

A SERMON Preached at HAMPTON COURT TO KING JAMES In Ordinary attendance in
September 1624.
By JOS. HALL Dean of Worcester.
Philip. 3.18. 18. For many walk of whom I have told you often, and now tell
you even Weeping that they are the cross of Christ.

19. Whose end is destruction, etc.


MY Text you see is but a Parenthesis: yet necessary and essential, though not
to the sentence foregoing; yet to Christian warning and instruction. It is
enclosed like some good Garden, for singular use, a Garden, wherein there are
both Flowers, and Weeds; Flowers of Apostolical virtue; and Weeds of Philippian
wickedness. For I know not whether these words bewray more worth in the true
Apostle, then unworthiness in the false: this censure of his does no less
grace himself, then it branded them; so we have met with some pictures, which
if you look one way, show us a comely face, if another way, an Owl, or an Ape,
or some deformed visage. Look first at the Apostles gracious carriage in the
managing of this sharp reproof, and ye whom it concerns, imitate it; and then
turn your eyes to the view of the damnable courses of these Philippian
Seducers, and learn to abhor their ways, and fear their hell:

The fidelity of the Apostle is commended by his warning; by the frequence; by
the passion of it; His warning, I have told you: The frequence, I have told you
often, The passion; I now tell you weeping.

To begin with the first. As wisdom has eyes to note evils, so faithfulness
has a tongue to notify them: We are by our profession the Seers of God in
respect of our Eyes, and we are the Prophets of God in respect of our tongues,
it must be our care, to make use of both titles, we are blind guides, if we
see not: we are dumb Dogs, if we give not warning of what we see; as good no
eyes, as no tongue. There was in the North part of Jerusalem the Tower of the
Furnaces, Nehem. 3.11. wherein it seems there was continual fire kept for the
Way-mark of Travelers; that flame was both vocal and real; admonishing the
passenger of his errors, and guiding him in his course; such we either are or
should be: like to John Baptist, who was a Burning, and a Shining light,
Burning for his own zeal, Shining for the Direction of others; direction, as in
example of life, so in precepts of Doctrine: we should not be like Dyals on a
wall, or Watches in our pockets, to teach the eye, but like clocks and larums,
to ring in the ear: Aaron must wear Bells, as well as Pomegranates; Yea louder
then so, the Prophets voice must be a Trumpet, whose sound may be heard far
off, Hos. 8.1.

God will never thank us for keeping his counsel, he will thank us for
divulging it: and that St. Paul knew well enough, when in his farewell to the
Elders of Ephesus, he appealed to their Consciences, that he had kept back
nothing that was profitable unto them, but had declared unto them all the
counsels of God, Act. 20.20, and 27. Our Savior therefore bids us not to run
into corners and whisper his messages, but to get us unto the house top, and to
make the highest roof and battlements our Pulpit. Woe therefore to those
Sigalion-like statues, who taking up a room in Gods Church, sit there with
their fingers upon their mouths, making a trade of either wilful or lazy
silence; smothering in their breasts the sins and dangers of Gods people. It is
a witty and good observation of Gregory, that the Prophet prays, set a door
before my lips; a door not a wall, he would not have his tongue mur'd up for
all occasions, but so locked, that it may be seasonably let loose and free,
when the convenience or necessity of his own Soul, or others require it; The
neglect or restraint of which liberty shall lie heavy upon many a Soul; Surely
the blood of all those souls that have miscarried through their unfaithful
silence, cries loud to Heaven against them, and shall one day be required at
their hands.

If I shall see a blind man walking toward some deep pit, or deadly precipice,
if I do not warn him of it, and prevent his fall, I am not much less guilty of
his death, then if I had thrust him down: It is a clear and familiar case that
of Ezekiel 33.7, etc. Son of man, I have set thee for a watchman to the House
of Israel, therefore thou shall hear the word at my mouth, and warn them of it;
When I say to the wicked, O wicked man, thou shall surely dye. If thou do
not speak to warn the wicked from his way, that wicked man shall dye in his
iniquity, but his blood will I require at thine hand. A sleeping Sentinel is
the loss of a whole City, the forfeiture of his own life is the least piece of
the mischief he is guilty of; Oh therefore ye, that are the watchmen of the
Lord rouse up your selves; and as you desire to avoid so many vengeances as
there are souls lost by your drouziness, and taciturnity, bestir your tongues,
in giving warning to Gods people of their spiritual dangers, as our Apostle,
does here; I have told you, and now tell you again. Thus much for the warning;
now the Frequence follows, I have told you often.

Not once, not seldom had the Apostle told his Philippians of these inordinate
walkers, but often: St. Paul feared not the slander of a Tautology; Rather like
a constant workman he beats still upon the same anvil; There can never be too
much warning of that, whereof there can never be enough heed. Nice ears are all
for variety of Doctrines, as palates of meats; Quousque eadem; what still the
same over and over? Is the note of both: How scornfully do these Gluttons look
at the often entrance of the same standing dishes: St. Paul hates to feed this
wanton humor, and tells them this single diet is safe for them, and to himself
not grevious, and therefore not fearing their surfeit of so wholesome a service,
he still sets before them the same mess: I have told you often, and now tell
you again. We tell over the same numbers in the counting of our coin, and are
not weary of it: In our recreations, we spend the night after the day at the
same game, and complain not of satiety; why should we who profess our selves
spiritual so soon nauseate at the iteration of good counsels. Perhaps if we
would seek Athens in our City, we should not lose our labor; There is an itch
of the ear, which St. Paul foresaw would prove the disease of the latter times,
that now is groan epidemical; an itch after news, even in Gods chair, new
Doctrines, new dresses: and surely it must needs be confessed, that of latter
years there was much fault in this kind; too many Pulpits were full of curious
affectation of new quirks of wit, new crochets of conceit, strange mixtures of
opinions: In so much as the old and plain forms were grown stale, and
despicable; let me tell you I still feared this itch would end in a smart.
Certainly there cannot be a more certain argument of a decayed and sickly
stomach, then the loathing of wholesome and solid food, and longing after fine
quelque choices of new and artificial composition; For us; away with this vain
affectation in the matters of God; surely if ought under Heaven go down better
with us then the savoury viands of Christ, and him crucified, of faith and
repentance, and those plainly dressed, without all the lards and sauces of
humane devices, (to say no worse) our souls are sick, and we feel it not. Oh
ye foolish Israelites with whom too much frequence made the food of Angels
contemptible. If Onions and Garlic had grown as risely in the Wilderness, and
Manna had rained down no where but in Egypt, how would ye have hated those rude
and strong Salades, and have run mad for those celestial delicates; The taste of
Manna was as of Wafers made with Honey, Exodus 16.31. now what can be sweeter
then honey? Yet says the Wise man, the Full dispiseth an honey comb; I doubt
there are too many thus full; full of the World, full of wicked nature, of
sinful corruptions; and then no marvel if they despise this food of Angels;
but for us my brethren, Oh let us not be weary of our happiness, let not these
dainties of Heaven lose their worth for their store; every Day let us go forth
of our tents and gather; and while we are nourished, let us not be cloyed with
good; else, God knows a remedy, he knows how to make the Word precious to us,
precious in the want, because it was not precious to us in the Valuation. He
that has told us, how precious Peace is by the sense of a woeful War, can soon
show us, how precious his word was by a spiritual famine; which God for his
mercies sake avert from us.

I might here have done with the frequence, but let me add this one
consideration more, that often inculcation of warning, necessarily implies a
danger: There is much danger in a contagious conversation; evil is of a
spreading nature: sin as leaven, yea old leaven, fowres the whole lump where
it lies; yea it is a very plague that infects the Air round about it; If (as
the entrances of sin are bashful) it begin with one Angel, it infects
legions, let it begin with one Woman, it infects all the mass of Mankind; One
person infects a Family; one Family a whole Street, one Street a whole City,
one City a whole Country, one Country a whole World; yea it runs like powder in
a train, and flies out suddenly on all sides: Look about you, and see, whether
you need any other witnesses then your own eyes; Do ye not see daily, how
drunkenness does in this participate of the nature of that liquor which causes
it, that it is not easily contained within it is own bounds; The vice as well as
the humor is diffusive of it self; how rarely have you ever seen a solitary
drunkard; no the very title which is mis-given to this sin, is good Fellowship;
Mark if oaths where lewd men are met, do not fly about like squibs on a wheel,
whereof one gives fire to another, and all do as it were counter-thunder to
Heaven: on bold swearer makes many, and the land mournes with the number. Look
at the very Israelitish Stews; They assemble by troops into the harlots
houses, Jer. 5.7. And for heresies and erroneous opinions in religion the
Apostle tell us it is a Gangrene 2 Timothy 2.17. whose taint is both sudden and
deadly; Let it be but in the finger, if the joint be not cut off, or there be
not an instant prevention, the whole arm is taken, and straight the heart; It
is a pregnant comparison of the Father, that the infection of heresy is like
the biting of a mad dog; you know the dog, when he is taken with this furious
distemper, affects to bite every living thing in his way; and what ever he
bites, he infects, and whomsoever he infects (without a present remedy) he
kills, not without a spice of his own distemper; I would we had not too
lamentable experience of this mischief every day; wherein we see one tainted
^ith Popery, another with Socinianism, another with Antinomianism, another with
Familism, and all these run a madding after their own fancies, and affect
nothing so much, as to draw others into the society of their errors and
damnation.

Take heed to your selves for Gods sake, ye that stand surest in the confidence
of your settled judgment, grounded knowledge, honest morality; the pestilent
influences of wicked society are not more mortal, then insensible; In vain
shall ye plead the goodness of your heart, if ye be careless of the wickedness
of your heels, and elbowes; St. Paul thought it a sentence worthy to borrow
from an Heathen Poet, and to feoffe it in the Canon; evil conversation
corrupts good manners: As therefore Moses said in the case of Korah, and his
company, so let me say in the case of others wickedness, whether it be in
matter of judgment, or practice, Depart I pray you from the tents of these
wicked men, and touch nothing of theirs, lest ye be consumed in all their sins.
Number. 16.26. It is worth your observing, that in that great rebellion, and
dreadful judgment the sons of Corah dyed not, 2 Chronicles. 26.11. They had surely
a dear interest in their Father, yet their natural interest in a Father, could
not feoffe them in their Fathers sin; though they loved him in nature, yet they
would not cleave to him in his rebellion; they forsook both his sin, and his
tents, and therefore are exempted from his judgment; If we love our selves let
us follow them in shunning any participation with the dearest of sinners, that
we may also escape the partnership of their vengeance. This for the frequence,
the passion follows, I tell you weeping.

And why weepest thou, O blessed Apostle? What is it that could wring tears
from those eyes? Even the same that fetched them from thy Savior more then
once: The same that fetched them from his Type David, from the powerful prophet
Elisha, 2 Kings 8.11. In a word from all eyes that ever so much as pretended to
holiness, Grief for sin, and compassion of sinners. Let others celebrate St.
Peter's tears; I am for St. Paul's; both were precious, but these yet more; Those
were the tears of penitence, these of charity; those of a sinner, these of an
Apostle; those for his own sins, these for other men's: How well does it become
him who could be content to be Anathema for his brethren of the circumcision,
to melt into tears for their spiritual uncircumcision; Oh blessed tears, the
juice of a charitable sorrow, of an holy zeal, a gracious compassion: Let (...)
man say, that tears argue weakness; even the firmest marble weeps in a
resolution of Air; He that shrinks not at the Bear, Lion, Goliath, Saul, ten
thousand of the people that should beset him round about, yet can say, Rivers
of waters run down mine eyes, because they keep not thy law, Ps. 119.136. what
speak I of this, when the omnipotent son of God weeps over Jerusalem, and makes
his tears the preface of his blood; Nay rather these tears argue strength of
piety, and Heavenly affections; To weep for fear is childish, that is
unbeseeming a man; and to weep for anger is womanish and weak; to weep for mere
grief is humane; for sin, Christian; but for true zeal and compassion is
Saint-like and divine; every one of these drops is a pearl. Behold the precious
liquor which is reserved as the dearest relic of Heaven in the bottles of the
Almighty; every dram whereof is valued at an eternal weight of glory; even a
cup of cold water shall once be rewarded; and behold every drop of this warm
water is more worth, then many cups of cold; weep thus awhile, and laugh for
ever; sow thus in tears, and be sure to reap in joy: But woe is me, what shall
I say to those men that make themselves merry with nothing so much as sin;
their own, or others, whether their act, or their memory. I remember of old the
fool that made the all sport in the play was called the Vice; and surely it is
no otherwise still; vice is it, that makes the mirth in this common theater of
the world; were it not for quaffing, ribaldry, dalliance, scurrile profaneness,
these men would be dull, and (as we say) dead on the nest: These things are the
joy of their life, yea these are all the life of their joy. Oh God that
Christians and Devils should meet in the same consort; that we should laugh at
that, for which our Savior wept, and bled; that we should smile at that upon
earth, whereat God frowns in Heaven, and make that our delight, wherewith the
holy spirit of God is grieved. Woe be to them that thus laugh, for they shall
weep, and wail, and gnash.

St. Paul weeps to tell of men's sins; tears do well in the pulpit: as it is in
the buckets of some pumps, that water must first be powered down into them, ere
they can fetch up water in abundance, so must our tears be let down to fetch up
more from our hearers; the chair of God can never be better fitted then with a
weeping Auditory; I remember holy Augustine speaking of his own Sermons, says,
that when he saw the people did show contentment and delight in their
countenances, and seemed to give applauses to his preaching, he was not
satisfied with his own pains, but when he saw them break forth into tears, then
he rejoiced, as thinking his labors had sorted to their due effect. I have
heard some preachers that have affected a pleasantness of discourse in their
Sermons, and never think they have done well, but when they see their hearers
smile at their expressions; But here, I have said of laughter, thou art mad,
and of mirth what do thou? Surely jiggs at a Funeral, and laughter at a
Sermon, are things prodigiously unseasonable: It will be long (my beloved) ere
a merry preacher shall bring you to Heaven; True repentance (which is our only
way thither) is a sad and serious matter; It is through the valley of Bachah,
that we must pass to the mount of God; the man with the writers inkhorne in
Ezekiel, marks none in the forehead but mourners; Oh then mourn for the
abominations of Jerusalem, ye that love the peace of it, and would be loath to
see the ruin and desolation of it, and your own in it, weep with them that
weep, yea weep with them that should weep, as our Apostle does here. That which
is said of the Israelites, that they drew water in Mizpeh, and powered it out
before the Lord, 1 Samuel 7.6. is by some interpreters taken of the plentiful
water of their tears; which is so much the more likely, because it is joined
with fasting and public humiliation: Oh that we could put our eyes to this use
in these sad times into which we are fallen, how soon would the heavens clear up,
and bless us with the comfort of our long wished for peace: wordly and carnal
men, as they have hard hearts, so they have dry eyes: dry, as a Pumicestone,
incapable of tears: but the tender hearts of Gods children are ever lightly
attended with weeping-eyes; neither can they want tears, whilst even other men
abound with sins; though themselves were free. And if good men spend their
tears upon wicked wretches, how much more ought those wicked ones to bestow
tears upon themselves; it is their danger and Misery that Gods children are
affected withal, whilst themselves are insensible of both; Woe is me, could
their eyes be but opened that they might see their own woeful condition, they
could not love themselves so ill, as not to bewail it; could they see the
frowns of an angry God bent upon them, could they see the flames of Hell ready
to receive them, they could not but dissolve into tears of blood; Oh pity your
own souls, at last, ye obdured sinners; be ye feelingly apprehensive of your
fearful danger, the eminent danger of an eternal damnation; and weep day and
night before that God whom ye have provoked; wash away your sins with the
streams of penitence; The fire of hell can have no power where it finds these
sovereign waters; Blessed are they that weep now, for they shall laugh, Luc.
6.21. We have not yet done with St. Paul's tears; See I beseech you, who were
the objects of this sorrow of his: the false teachers of the Philippians, the
rivals and adversaries of the Apostles Ministry; whether the Simonians, (that
is, the Disciples of Simon Magus, as some have thought) or rather the Judaizing
Christians, whom before he calls Dogs, and the Concision; men that were not
more for Christ, then for Moses: men not more false in opinion then foul in
conversation, rebrobate persons, spightful enemies to him, and the gospel; yet
even these are the men whom St. Paul bedewes with his many tears. So far should
Gods charitable Children be from desiring, or rejoicing in the destruction of
those who profess hostility against them (though even lewd, and ungodly
persons) as that they should make this the matter of their just sorrow and
mourning: St. Paul had a deeper insight into the state of these men, then we
can have into any of those goodliest men who fall into our notice, and enmity;
for he saw them (as it were) in Hell already, he looked upon them as vessels of
wrath, for he adds, whose end is perdition: yet he entertaines the thoughts of
their sinful miscarriages with tears; Every man can mourn for the danger, or
loss, or fall of a good man, of a friend: but to be thus deeply affected with
either the sins, or judgments of wicked persons is incident to none but a
tender and charitable heart. Gods children are of the diet of their heavenly
Father, who would have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the
truth, 1 Timothy 2.4. Have I any pleasure at all that the wicked shall dye, says
the Lord God, and not that that he should return from his ways and live?
Ezec. 18.23. And to be sure, he binds it with an oath; As I live, says the
Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked
turn from his ways and live; turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for
why will ye dye, O house of Israel. Ezec. 33.11. Those that sport in the sins,
and rejoice in the perdition of their brethren, let them see of what spirit
they are. But I have dwelt longer then I meant in the Apostles fidelity, in his
warning, and the frequence, and passion of it.

Turn your eyes now, I beseech you, to a loathsome object, the wickedness of
these false teachers of the Philippians; described by their number, motion,
quality, issue: Their number many, their motion walk, their quality, enemies to
the cross of Christ, their issue destruction.

We begin with their Number, Mark I beseech you the inference: The charge of
the Apostle in the words immediately preceding, is, that the Philippians should
mark those who walked holily, as they had the Apostles for examples: and now he
adds, For many walk inordinately; see then from hence, that the rarity of
conscionable men should make them more observed, more valued; If there be but
one Lot in Sodom, he is more worth then all the souls of that populous and
fruitful Pentapolis: If there be but some sprinkling of Wheat in a chafe
heap, we winnow it out, and think it worth our labor to do so: some grains,
or if but scruples of precious metals are sifted out of the rubbish of the
oar and dust. It is excellent that our Apostle has in this Epistle the 2.
Chapter v. 15. That ye may be blamless in the midst of a froward and perverse
generation, among whom ye shine as lights in the world: Mark, if there be but
light held forth in a dark night, how do the birds come flying about it, how do
the eyes of men though afarr off fix upon it; when as all the space betwixt us
and it (which is all wrapped up in darkness) is unregarded; such are, and such
should be good men amongst a world of wicked ones; so much more eminent, and
esteemed, by how much the fewer they are. Paucity is wont to carry contempt
with it; See, say the Philistims, when they saw Jonathan, and his Armor-bearer
come toward them, how the Israelites creep out of their holes; and proud
Benhadad when he heard of some few of Israel coming forth against him, can say,
Take them alive, whether they come for peace, or whether for war take them
alive, 1 King. 20.18. What is an handful of gainsayers upon any occasion? We
are apt to think, that the stream should bear down all before it; Do any of the
Rulers believe in him; that is argument enough: But it must not be so with
Christians; here one is worthy to be more then a thousand; if he be a man that
orders his conversation aright, that goes upon the sure grounds of infallible
truth, though there be none other in the world besides him that follows after
righteousness, that man is worthy of our mark, of our imitation; if there be
but one Noah in an age (all flesh having corrupted their ways) it is better to
follow him into the Ark, then to perish withal the world of unbelievers: Here
are these Many opposed to Us, Paul and Timothy; It is not for us to stand upon
the fear of an imputation of singularity; we may not do as the most, but as the
best; It was a desperate resolution of Rabbodus the barbarous and ignorant Duke
of Prisons, that he would go to Hell because he heard the most went that way;
Our Saviors argument is quite contrary, Enter in at the straight gate: for
wide is the gate, and broad is the way that leads to destruction, and many
there be which go in thereat; Matthew. 7.13. And St. Paul's argument here to the
same purpose, Many walk inordinately, therefore be ye followers of us.

We have an old saying, that Cases that rarely happen are neglected of
Lawgivers: The news of a few Enemies is entertained with scorn; Many are
dreadful, and call upon our best thoughts, for their preventation, or
resistance. The World is apt to make an ill use of multitude: On the one side
arguing the better part by the greater: on the other side arguing mischief
tolerable because it is abetted by many. The former of these is the Paralogisme
of fond Romanists; The other of time-serving Politicians. There cannot be a
worse, nor more dangerous Sophistry then in both these.

If the first should hold, Paganism would carry it from Christianity, for it
is at least by just computation five to one: Folly from Wisdom, for surely,
for every wise man the World has many fools; Outward calling should carry it
from election, for many are called, few are chosen: Hell from Heaven, For
strait is the gate, and narrow is the way that leads unto life. Thou shall
not follow a multitude to do evil, says God; But if any have a mind to do so,
and shall please himself with company in sinning, let him consider what
abatement of torment it will once be to him, to be condemned with many; woe is
me, that shall rather aggravate his misery; the rich glutton in hell would have
his brethren sent to, that his torment might not be increased with the
accession of theirs.

If the latter should take place, that which heightens evils should plead for
their immunity; so none but weak mischiefs should receive opposition: Strong
thieves should live, only some poor pettylarcons and pilferers should come to
execution; Nothing should make room for justice but inbecellity of offense;
Away with this base pusillanimity: Rather contrarily, by how much more head
wickedness has gotten, so much more need it had to be topped. A true
Herculean Justice in Governors and States is for Giants, and Monsters; A right
Sampson is for a whole host of Philistims; The Mountains must be touched till
they smoke, yea till they be levelled. Set your faces ye that are men in
authority against a whole faction of vice; and if ye find many opposites, the
greater is the exercise of your fortitude, and the greater shall be the glory
of your victory. It was St. Paul's encouragment (that which would have
disheartened some other) a large door and effectual is opened to me, and there
are many adversaries, 1 Cor, 16.9. And if these Devils can say, My Name is
Legion for we are many; let your powerful commands cast them out, and send
them with the swine into the deep, and thence into their chains.

These many sit not still, but walk, they are still in motion: Motion whether
natural or voluntary; Natural, so walking is living ((...)) Thus we walk even
while we sit, or lie still: Every minute is a new pace; neither can any thing
stop our passage; whether we do something or nothing, we move on by insensible
steps toward our long home; we can no more stand still then the Heavens, then
time. Oh that we could be ever looking to the house of our age: and so walk on,
in this vale of tears, that we may once rest for ever. Voluntary, so the wicked
ones walk like their setter the Devil, who came from compassing the Earth, Job.
1. Wickedness is seldom other then active. It is with evil as with the
contagion of Pestilence, those that are tainted long to infect others; False
Teachers make no spare of their Travails by Sea or Land to make a Proselite:
Could Sin or Heresy be conjured into a circle, there were the less danger;
now they are so much more mischievous, as they are more Erraticall: How happy
should it be since they will needs be walking, that by the holy Vigilancie of
power and authority, they may be sent to walk their own rounds in the regions
of darkness.

Yet further; walking implies an ordinary trade of life; It is not a step, or
one pace that can make a walk; but a proceeding on, with many shiftings of our
feet: It is no judging of a man by some one action; Alas, the best man that is
may perhaps step aside, by the importunity of a temptation, and be mis-carried
into some odious act; Can you have more pregnant instances then David, the man
after Gods own heart, and Peter, the prime Disciple of our Savior; But this
was not the walk of either; It was but a side-step: their walk was in the ways
of Gods commandment, holy and gracious; No, look what the course of men's lives
are, what their usual practice; and according to that judge of them; If they
be ordinary Swearers, profane Scoffers, Drunkards, Debauched persons, their
Walk is in an ill way to a most fearful end. Pity them, labor to reclaim
them, and to stop them that they fall not into the precipice of Hell: but if
their course of life be generally holy, and conscionable, it is not a
particular mis-carriage that can be a just ground of the censure of an
inordinate walking, which our Apostle passes here upon these mis-living
Philippians; Many walk.

This for their Motion; their Quality follows, Enemies to the cross of
Christ; What an unusual expression is this? Who can but hate every thing that
concurs to the death of a Friend, whether Agents, or Instruments. And what was
the Cross, but the Engine of the Death of him, whom if we love not best, we
love not at all? surely, We love thee not, O Savior, if we can look with any
other then angry eyes, at Judas, Pilate, the Cross, Nails, Spear. or what
ever else was any way necessary to thy murder: They were thine enemies that
raised thee to the Cross, how can they be other then thy Friends, that are
enemies to that thy most cruel, and indigne crucifixion. When we consider
these things in themselves, as Wood and Metal, we know they are harmless: but
if from what they are in themselves, we look at them with respect to men, to
thee, we soon find why to hate, why to love them. We hate them as they were
employed by men against thee, we love them as they were improved by thee for
man: as the instruments of men's malice and cruelty against thee, we hate them:
we love them as they were made by thee, the instruments of our redemption: Thy
Cross was thy death: It is thy death that gives us life; so as therefore we
cannot be at once enemies of the Cross, and friends of thee crucified:

As Christ himself, so the Cross of Christ has many false friends, and even
those are no other then enemies; unjust favors are no less injurious then
derogations; he that should deify a Saint should wrong him as much, as he that
should Divellize him; Our Romanists exceed this way, in their devotions to the
Cross; both in overmultiplying, and in over-magnifying of it. Had the wood of
the Cross grown from the day that it was first set in the Earth, till now, and
borne crosses; that which Simon of Cyrene once bore, could not have filled so
many carts, so many ships, as that which is now in several parts of Christendom
given out and adored for the true cross of Christ; yet the bulk is nothing to
the virtue ascribed to it: The very wood (which is a shame to speak) is by them
Sainted and deifyed, who knows not that stale hymn, and unreasonable rhyme of
Ara crucis, lampas lucis, sola salus hominum.
Nobis pronum fac patronum quem tulisti dominum,


Wherein the very tree is made a mediator to him, whom it bore, as very a
Savior as he that died upon it. And who knows not that by these Bigots, an
active virtue is attributed not only to the very wood of the cross, but to the
Airie and transient form and representation of it; A virtue of sanctifying the
creature, of expelling Devils, of healing diseases; conceits crossely
superstitious, which the Church of England ever abhorred, never either
practiced, or countenanced; whose cross was only commemorative, and
commonitive, never pretended to be any way efficacious; and therefore as far
different from the Romish cross, as the fatal tree of Christ from that of
Judas; Away then with this gross and sinful foppery of our Romanists; which
proves them not the friends but the flatterers of the Cross; flatterers up to
the very pitch of Idolatry; and can there be a worse enemy then a flatterer?
Fie on this fawning, and crouching hostility to the cross of Christ; such
friendship to the altar is a defiance to the sacrifice.

For these Philippian Pseudapostles; Two ways were they enemies to the Cross
of Christ; in their doctrines, in their practice. In Doctrine; whiles they
joined circumcision, and other legalities with the cross of Christ; so by a
pretended partnership detracting from the virtue and power of Christ's death:
Thus they were enemies to Christ's death as this; In practice, following a loose
and voluptuous course, pampering themselves, and shifting off persecution for
the Gospel; Thus they were enemies to the cross of Christ, as theirs: Truth
has ever one face: There are still two sorts of enemies to the cross; The
erroneous, the licentious; The erroneous in judgment, that will be
inter-commoning with Christ in the virtue and efficacy of his passion; The
licentious in life; that despise and annihilate it. In the first, how palpable
enemies are they to the cross of Christ, that hold Christ's satisfaction upon
the cross imperfect without ours: Thus the Romish Doctors profess to do; Their
Cardinal passes a flat non expiat upon it, boldly: Temporalem poenam totam
nisi propria satisfactione cooperante non expiat. lib. 4. de paenit. c. 14..
Neque vero. Our penal works (says Suarez) are properly a payment for the
punishment of our sin; And which of the Tridentine faction says otherwise?
What foul Hypocrisy is this, to creep and crouch to the very image of the
cross, and in the mean time to frustrate the virtue of it; Away with these
hollow and hostile complements; how happy were it for them if the cross of
Christ might have less of the^r knees, and more of their hearts; without which
all their adorations are but mockery; certainly, the partnership of legal
observations was never more enemy to Christ's cross, then that of humane
satisfactions; For us; God forbid that we should rejoice in any thing, but in
the cross of Christ, with St. Paul: Our profession roundly is; The cross is our
full redemption; let them that show more say so much: else for all their
ducking, and cringeing, they shall never quit themselves of this just charge,
that they are the enemies of the cross of Christ.

The licentious, secondly, are enemies to the cross of Christ; and those of two
sorts; whether carnal revolters, or loose-livers; The first, in shifting off
persecution, by conforming themselves to the present world; they will do any
thing rather then suffer; caring more for a whole skin, then a sound soul;
Mere slaves of the season, whose poesy is that of Optatus; Omnia pro tempore,
nihil pro veritate; All for the time, nothing for the Truth. Either ditty will
serve, Hosanna, or Crucifige. Such was that infamous Ecebotius; such was Spira,
such those in the primitive times, that with Marcellinus would cast grains of
incense into the Idols fire, to shun the fire of a Tyrants futy; such as will
bow their knees to a breaden God, for fear of an inquisitors fly; and kiss the
toe of a living Idol, rather then hazard a suspicion; the world is full of such
shufflers: Do ye ask how we know? I do not send you to the Spanish trade, or
Italian travails, or Spa-waters, The tentative Edict of Constantius descryed
many false hearts; And the late relaxation of penal laws for religion
discovered many a turn-coat; God keep our great men upright, if they should
swerve it is to be feared, the truth would find but a few friends: Blessed be
God; the times profess to patronize true religion; If the wind should turn,
how many with that noted time-server would be ready to say, Cantemus domino,
etc. let us sing unto the Lord a new song. There is no Church lightly without
his wethercock: For us, my beloved, we know not what we are reserved for; let
us sit down, and count what it may cost us; and as those who would carry some
great weight upon a wager, will be every day heaving at it to inure themselves
to the burden, before they come to their utmost trial, so let us do to the
cross of Christ: let us be every day lifting at it in our thoughts, that when
the time comes we may comfortably go away with it; It was a good purpose of
Peter, though I should dye with thee I will not deny thee; but it was a better
grounded resolution of St. Paul, I am ready not to be bound only, but also to
dye for the name of the Lord Jesus, Act. 21.13. Let us in an humble confidence
of Gods mercy in upholding us fix upon the same holy determination; not
counting our life dear unto us, so as we may finish our course with joy. Thus
we shall not be more friends to the cross of Christ, then the cross will be
to us, for if we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him.

Besides carnal revolters, loose livers power shame upon the cross. Christ's
cross is our redemption, Redemption is from sin, and death; whiles therefore
we do wilfully sin, we do (what in us lies) frustrate the cross, and make a
mock of our redemption; every true Christian is with St. Paul crucified
together with Christ 2. Galat. 20. his sins are fastened upon that tree of shame
and curse with his Savior, the mis-living Christian therefore crucifies Christ
again; each of his willing sins is a plain despite to his Redeemer; The false
tongue of a professor gives in evidence against the Son of God: the hypocrite
condemns Christ, and washes his hands; the proud man strips him, and robes him
with purple: the distrustful plats thorns for the head of his Savior; the
drunkard gives him vinegar and gall to drink, the oppressor drives nails into
his hands and feet; the blasphemer wounds him to the heart; woe is me, what an
heavy case are these men in? we cannot but think those that offered this bodily
violence to the Son of God were highly impious, Oh, thou say, I would not
have been one of them that should have done such a fact for all the world: but,
O man, know thou, that if thou be a wilful sinner against God in these kinds,
thou art worse then they: He that prayed for his first crucifiers, curses his
second; they crucified him in his weakness; these in his glory: they fetched
him from the garden to his cross; these pull him out of heaven; surely, they
cannot be more enemies to the cross of Christ, then Christ is to them; who by
him shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the
Lord, and from the glory of his power, 2 Thessal. 1.9. as it also follows in
my Text, whose end is destruction.

A woeful condition beyond all thoughts; like unto that Hell wherein it is
accomplished, whereof there is no bottom; had the Apostle said only, whose end
is death: the doom had been heavy; but that is the common point whereat all
creatures touch, in their last passage, either way; and is indeed the easiest
piece of this vengeance; it were well for wilful sinners, if they might dye; or
if they might but dye: Even earthly distresses send men to sue for death; how
much more the infernal; there are those that have smiled in death, never any
but gnashed in torments; that distinction is very remarkable which our Savior
makes betwixt killing and destroying; Matthew. 10.28. Killing the body,
destroying body and soul; (...) and (...); Men may kill; God only can destroy;
there are gradations even in the last act of execution; expressed in the Greek,
which our language does not so fully distinguish; (...) is to kill, (...)
implies violence in killing; (...), cruelty in that violence, but (...), an
absoluteness and eternity of torment. Killing is nothing to destroying; the
body is but mere rubbish to the soul; and therefore (to put these together)
killing the body is nothing to destruction of the soul; Alas, here is every
circumstance that may add horror and misery to a condition; suddenness of
seizure, degree of extremity, impossibility of release; suddainness; They shall
soon be cut down as the grass, says David, Ps. 37.2. yea, yet sooner then so;
as the fire licks up the straw, Esa. 5.24. and more suddenly yet; as the
Whrilewind passes, so is the wicked no more, Prove. 10.25. Shortly, they are
brought to desolation in a moment, Psalm. 73.19.

As for the degree of extremity, it is far beyond all expressions, all
conceptions of the creature; the wrath of God is as himself infinite; as the
glory of his Saints is such (as St. Paul that saw it tells us) that it
transcends all conceit, and cannot come out of the mouth, cannot enter into the
heart, so the vengeance prepared for his enemies is equally incomprehensible;
the Rack, the Wheel, the Gibbet, the Fire are fearful things; but these fall
within our thoughts; woe unto that soul that must suffer what it is not capable
to conceive. Even what we men can devise, and do apprehend is terrible; those
very torments that men prepare for men, are such as we shrink at the mention
of, tearing, fleying, broaching, broyling, etc. what shall those be which an
angry God has prepared for his enemies?

But though the torment were extreme for the time, yet if at last it might have
an end, there were some possibility of comfort; alas, we shrug at the thought
of burning, though in a quick fire; but to think of man's being a whole hour in
the flame, we abhor to imagine; but to be a whole day in that state how
horrible does it seem. Oh then, what shall we say to those everlasting
burnings? To be, not days, or months, or years, but thousands of millions of
years, and millions of millions after that, and after that for all eternity,
still in the height of these unconceivable tortures, without intermission,
without relaxation? Oh the gross Atheism of carnal men, that do not believe
these dreadful vengeances! Oh the desperate security of those men who profess
to believe them, and yet dare run into those sins which may and will plunge
them into this damnation! Is sin sweet? Yea, but is it so sweet, as Hell fire
is grievous? Is it profitable? But can it countervail the loss of the
beatifical vision of God? Oh mad sinners, that for a little momentany
contentment cast themselves into everlasting perdition; let the drink be never
so delicate and well-spiced, yet if we hear there is poison in it, we hold off;
let Gold be offered us, yet if we hear it is red hot, we draw back our hands,
and touch it not; Oh then, why will we be so desperately foolish, as when a
little poor unsatisfying pleasure is offered us, though sauced with a woeful
damnation for ever and ever, we should dare to entertain it at so dear a rate.
Have mercy upon your own souls, my dear brethren, and when the motions of evil
are made to you; check them with the danger of this fearful damnation; from
which the God of all mercies graciously deliver us all; for the sake of the
dear Son of his love Jesus Christ the righteous; to whom, etc.

CHRISTIAN LIBERTY Laid forth, in a SERMON Preached to his late MAJESTY at
WHITE HALL, In the time of the Parliament holden anno 1628.
By JOS. B. of EXON.
Gal. 5.1. Stand fast therefore in the Liberty wherewith Christ has made you
free.


AS if my tongue and your ears could not easily be diswonted from our late
Parliamentary language; you have here in this text Liberty, Prerogative, the
maintenance of both; Liberty of Subjects that are freed; Prerogative of the
King of glory that has freed them; maintenance of that liberty, which the
power of that great prerogative has achieved; Christian liberty, Christ's
liberation, our persistence; Stand fast in the Liberty wherewith Christ has
made you free.

Liberty is a sweet word; the thing it self is much sweeter; and men's
apprehensions make it yet sweeter then it is! Certainly if liberty and life
were competitors, it is a great question whether would carry it, sure I am, if
there be a life without it, yet it is not vital; Man restrained is like a wild
bird shut up in a cage; that offers at every of the grates to get out, and
grows sullen when it can find no evasion; and till stark famine urge it will
not so much as feed for anger to be confined. Neither is the word more sweet
then large; There are as many liberties as restraints; and as many restraints
as there are limitations of superior commands; and there are so many limits of
commands as there are either duties to be done, or sentences to be undergone:
There is a liberty of the parts, and a liberty of the man:

There is a drunken liberty of the Tongue, which being once glibbed with
intoxicating liquor runs wild through Heaven and earth, and spares neither him
that is God above; nor those which are called Gods on Earth; the Slanderer
answered Pirrhus well; I confess I said thus, O King; and had said more if more
Wine had been given me; treason is but a Tavern-dialect; Any thing passes well
under the Rose; it is not the man but the liquor, not the liquor but the
excess that is guilty of this liberty.

There is an audacious and factious liberty of this loose filme; which not only
ill-tutor'd Scholars take to themselves under the name of libertas
prophetandi, pestering both Presses and Pulpits with their bold and brainsick
fancies; but unlettered Tradesmen, and tatling Gossips too; whith whom deep
questions of Divinity, and censures of their Teachers are grown into common
table-talk; and peremptory decisions of Theological problemes is as ordinary
almost, as backbiting their neighbors.

There is a profane liberty of Atheous swaggerers which say, disrumpamus
Vincula; let us break their bonds: Not religion only, but even reason and
humanity seem fetters to these spirits; who like the Demoniack in the Gospel,
having broken all their chains find no freedom but among the noysom graves of
hateful corruptions.

There is a disloyal liberty of those rebellious spirits, which despise
government; and hold it a servitude to live within the range of wholesome
laws, there is no freedom with these unquiet dispositions, but in the bold
censures of authority, in the seditious calumniations of superiors, and in
their own utopical prescriptions. Every thing is good to these men save the
present, and nothing save their own* though all these are not so much
liberties, as licentiousness.

Besides these, there are civil liberties of Persons, Towns, Incorporations,
Countries, Kings, Kingdoms; good reason these should be mutually stood upon;
Religion was never an enemy to the due orders, and rights of policy; Gods book
is the true Magna charta that enacts both King and People their own: He that
has set bounds to the wide Ocean, has stinted the freest liberty; but these
liberties are not for the pulpit; It is the Christian liberty wherewith we have
to do; that alone has scope enough both for our present speech and perpetual
maintenance.

This Christian liberty stands either in immunity from evil, or enlargement to
good; The immunitie is from that which is evil in it self, or that which is
evil to us: In it self, Sin, Satan: Sin, whether in the fault, or in the
punishment; the punishment, whether inward, or outward: Inward, the slavery of
an accusing conscience; Outward, the wrath of God, Death, Damnation. Evil to
us, whether burdensome traditions, or the law; the Law, whether Moral, or
Ceremonial; Moral, whether the obligations, or the curse: Enlargement to good;
whether in respect of the creature, which is our free use of it, or whether in
respect to God; in our voluntary service of him; in our free access to him:
Access whether to his throne of grace, or our throne of glory. I have laid
before you a compendious tablet of our Christian liberty; less then which is
bondage; more then which is looseness. Such abundant scope there is in this
allowed freedom, that what heart soever would yet rove further, makes it self
unworthy of pity in loosing it self. Do we think the Angels are pent up in
their Heavens, or can wish to walk beyond those glorious bounds? Can they hold
it a restraint, that they can but will good; like to our liquorous first
parents that longed to know evil? Oh the sweet and happy liberty of the sons of
God? All the world besides them are very slaves, and lie obnoxious to the
bolts, fetters, scourges of a spiritual cruelty; It is hard to beat this into a
carnal heart; no small part of our servitude lies in the captivation of our
understanding; such, as that we cannot see our selves captive. This is a
strange difference of misprison; the Christian is free, and cannot think
himself so; the the worldling thinks himself free, and is not so. What talk we
to these Jovialists? It is liberty (with them) for a man to speak what he
thinks, to take what he likes, to do what he lists; without restriction,
without controlment: Call ye this freedom, that a man must speak and live by
rule; to have a guard upon his lips and his eyes; no passage for a vain word or
look, much less for a lewd; to have his best pleasures stinted, his worse
abandoned; to be tasked with an unpleasing good, and chid when he fails. Tush,
tell not me; To let the heart loose to an unlimited jollity, to revell
heartily, to feast without fear, to drink without measure, to swear without
check, to admit of no bound of luxury, but our own strength; to shut out all
thoughts of scrupulous austerity, to entertain no guest of inward motion, but
what may sooth up our lawlesness. This is liberty; who goes less is a sla^e to
his own severe thoughts. Get thee behind me Satan, for thou savourest not the
things of God: If this be freedom, to have our full scope of wickedness, Oh
happy Devils, Oh miserable Saints of God. Those though fettered up in chains of
everlasting darkness can do no other but sin; these in all the elbow-room of
the Empyreal heaven cannot do one evil act; yea the God of Saints and Angels,
the Author of all liberty should be least free, who out of the blessed
necessity of his most pure nature is not capable of the least possibility of
evil. Learn, O vain men, that there is nothing but impotence, nothing but
gieves and manicles in the freest sins; some captive may have a longer chain
then his fellows; yea some offender may have the liberty of the Tower, yet he
is a prisoner still. Some Goal may be wider then some Palace: what of that? If
Hell were more spacious then the seat of the blessed, this does not make it no
place of torment. Go whether thou will, thou resolved sinner, thou carriest thy
chain with thee; it shall stick as close to thee as thy soul; neither can it
ever be shaken off, till thou have put off thy self by a spiritual
regeneration, then only thou art free.

It is a divine word, that in our Liturgy, Whose service is perfect freedom;
St. Paul says as much, Romans 6.18.20. Being freed from sin ye are made servi
justitiae, the servants of righteousness: What is liberty but freedom from
bondage, and behold our freedom from the bondage of sin ties us to a sure
liberty, that is our free obedience to God: Both the Orator and the Philosopher
define liberty by Potestas vivendi ut velis, but withal, you know he adds,
quis vivit ut vult, nisi qui recta sequitur. See how free the good man is; he
does what he will, for he wills what God wills, and what God would have him
will; in what ever he does therefore he is a free man; neither has any man
free will to good but he: Be ambitious of this happy condition, O all ye noble
and generous spirits, and do not think ye live till ye have attained to this
true liberty. The liberty wherewith Christ has made us free; So from the
liberty, we descend to the perogative. Christ's liberation.

Here is the glorious prerogative of the Son of God, to be the deliverer or
redeemer of his people; They could not free themselves; the Angels of heaven
might pity, could not redeem them; yea alas, who could, or who did redeem
those of their rank, which of lightsome celestial spirits, are become foul
Devils? Only Christ could free us, whose ransom was infinite; only Christ did
free us, whose love is infinite; and how has he wrought our liberty? By force,
by purchase, By force in that he has conquered him, whose captives we were; by
purchase, in that he has paid the full price of our ransom, to that supreme
hand whereto we were forfeited: I have heard Lawers say, there are in civil
Corporations three ways of freedom; by Birth, by Service, by Redemption; By
Birth, as St. Paul was free of Rome; by Service, as Apprentises upon expiration
of their years; by Redemption, as the the Centurion, with a great sum purchased
I this freedom. Two of these are barred from all utter possibility in our
spiritual freedom; for by Birth we are the sons of wrath; by service we are
naturally the vassals of Satan; It is only the precious redemption of the Son
of God that has freed us.

Whereas freedom then has respect to bondage, there are seven Egyptian Masters
from whose slavery Christ has freed us. Sin, an accusing Conscience, danger of
Gods wrath, tyranny of Satan, the curse of the Law, Mosaicall Ceremenies,
humane Ordinances; see our servitude to, and our freedom from all these by the
powerful liberation of Christ.

1. It was a true word of that Pythagorean, Quot vitia, tot domini, sin is an
hard master: A master? Yea a tyrant; let not sin reign in your mortal bodies,
Romans 6 14. and so the sinner is not only servus corruptitiae, a drudge of
corruptions 2 Pet. 2.19. but a very slave sold under sin, Romans 7.14.

So necessitated to evil by his own inward corruption that he cannot but grind
in this Mill, he cannot but row in this Gally: For, as posse peccare is the
condition of the greatest Saint upon earth, and Non posse peccare is the
condition of the least Saint above, so non posse non peccare is the condition
of the least sinful unregenerate; as the prisoner may shift his feet but not
his fetters; or as the snail cannot but leave a slime track behind, it which
way soever it goes: Here is our bondage; where is our liberty; Ubi spriritus
domini, ibi libertas; where the spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty, 2 Cor.
3.7. Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death; I
thank my God through Jesus Christ. So then Christ has freed us from the
bondage of sin.

An accusing conscience is a true task-master of Egypt; it will be sure to whip
us for what we have done, for what we have not done: Horror of sin, like a
sleeping Mastive, lies at our door. Genesis 4.7. when it awakes it will fly on our
throat. No closer does the shadow follow the body, then the revenge of
self-accusation follows sin; walk Eastward in the morning the shadow starts
behind thee, soon after it is upon thy left side; at noon it is under thy feet;
lie down it coucheth under thee, toward even it leaps before thee; thou can
not be rid of it, whiles thou have a body, and the Sun light; no more can thy
soul quit the conscience of evil; This is to thee instead of an Hell of Fiends
that shall ever be shaking fire brands at thee, ever torturing thee with
affrights of more pains then thy nature can comprehend, Soeva conturbata
conscientia, Wisd. 17.11. If thou look to the punishment of loss, it shall say
as Lysimachus did, how much felicity have I lost, for how little pleasure: If
to the punishment of sense it shall say to thee as the Tyrant dreamed his heart
said to him out of the boiling caldron (...); I am the cause of all this
misery: Here is our bondage, where is the liberty? Having our hearts sprinkled
from an evil Conscience, Heb. 10.22. Sprinkled, with what? Even with the blood
of Jesus, verse. 19. This, this only is it that can free us: It is with the
unquiet heart as with the troubled Sea of Tiberias; the Winds rise, the Waters
swell, the billows roar, the ship is tossed, Heaven and Earth threat to meet;
Christ does but speak the word, all is calm; so Christ has freed us Secondly
from the bondage of an accusing conscience.

The conscience is but Gods Bailiff; It is the displeasure of the Lord of
Heaven and Earth that is the utmost of all terribles; the fear of Gods wrath is
that strong wind that stirrs these billows from the bottom; set aside the
danger of divine displeasure and the clamo^rs of conscience were harmless; this
alone makes an Hell in the bosom: The aversion of Gods face is confusion, the
least bending of his brow is perdition Ps. 2. ult. but his totus aestus, his
whole fury, as Ps. 78.38. is the utter absorption of the creature;
excandescentia ejus funditur sicut ignis; His wrath is poured out like fire,
the rocks are rent before it, Nahum 1.6. whence there is nothing but ((...)) a
fearful expectation of judgment, and fiery indignation, which shall devour the
adversaries, Heb. 10.27. Here is the bondage, where is the liberty? Being just
fyed by faith we have peace with God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. So then
Christ has freed us thridly from the bondage of the wrath of God.

As every wicked man is a Tyrant, according to the Philosophers position; and
every Tirant is a Devil among men: so the Devil is the Arch-tyrant of the
creatures; he makes all his Subjects errand vassals, yea chained slaves, 2 Timothy
2. ult. That they may recover themselves from the snare of the Devil who are
taken captive by him at his will: lo here is will, snares, captivity, perfect
tyranny. Nahash the Ammonite was a notable Tyrant, he would have the right eyes
of the Israelites put out, as an eminent mark of servitude; so does this
infernal Nahash blind the right eye of our understanding; yea, with the
spightful Philistim, he puts out both the eyes of our apprehension and
judgment, that he may gyre us about in the Mill of unprofitable wickedness;
and cruelly insult upon our remediless misery. And when he has done, the
fairest end is death, yea death without end; Oh the impotency of earthly
tyranny to this; the greatest blood-suckers could but kill; and livor post
fata, as the old word is; but here is an homicida ab initio; and a fine too;
ever killing with an ever-living death, for a perpetual fruition of our
torment. Here is the bondage; where is the liberty? Christ has spoiled
principalities and powers, and made a show of them, openly triumphing over them
in the same cross, Colos. 2.15. By his death he destroyed him that has the
power of death, tke Devil, Heb. 2.14. So then Christ has freed us fourthly,
from the bondage of Satan's tyranny.

At the best, the law is but a hard Master, impossible to please, (...) says
St. Paul: but at the worst, a cruel one; The very courtesy of the law was
jugum, an unsupportable yoke, but the spite of the law is (...) a curse.
Cursed is every one that continues not in all that is written in the book of
the law to do it, Gal. 3.10. Do you not remember an unmercifull steward in the
Gospel that catches his bankrupt fellow by the throat, and says, Pay me that
thou owe me; so does the law to us; we should pay and cannot; and because we
cannot pay, we forfeit our selves; so as every mothers son is the child of
death. Here is our bondage; where is our liberty? Christ has redeemed us from
the curse of the law, being made a curse for us; Oh blessed redemption, that
frees us from the curse. Oh blessed redeemer, that would become a curse for us
that the curse of the law might not light upon us; so Christ has freed us
fifthly, from the bondage of the law.

Moses was a meek man, but a severe Master; His face did not more shine in Gods
aspect upon him, then it lowred in his aspect to men; His ceremonies were hard
impositions; Many for number, costly for charge, painful for execution. He
that led Israel out of one bondage, carried them into another: From the bondage
of Egypt, to the bondage of Sinai; this held till the vail of the Temple rent;
yea till the vail of that better Temple, his sacred body, his very
heart strings did crack a sunder, with a consummatum est; And now (...), Christ
is the end of the law, Romans 10.4. Now the law of the spirit of life has freed
us, Romans 8.2. You hear now no more news of the ceremonies of prefiguration,
they are dead with Christ; ceremonies of decency may and must live; let no man
now have his ear bored thorough to Moses his post; Christ has freed us sixthly
from the law of ceremonies.

Our last Master is humane Ordinances; the case of our exemption where from is
not so clear; concerning which I find a double extreme of opinion; The one
that ascribes too much to them, as equalling them with the law of God; the
other that ascribes too little to them, as if they were no tie to our
obedience: The one holding them to bind the conscience no less then the
positive laws of God; the other either sleighting their obligation, or
extending it only to the outward man, not the inward: we must learn to walk a
midway betwixt both; and know that the good laws of our superiors, whether
civil or ecclesiastical, do in a sort reach to the very conscience; though not
primarily and immediately as theirs, yet mediately and secondarily as they
stand in reference to the law of God with our obedience to his instituted
authority; and therefore they tie us in some sort besides the case whether of
scandal, or contempt. Where no man can witness, there is no scandal; where is
no intention of an affront to the commanding power, there is no contempt, and
yet willingly to break good Iaws without all witness, without all purpose of
affront is therefore sin because disobedience; For example, I dine fully alone
out of wantonness, upon a day sequestered by authority to a public fast; I
dine alone, therefore without scandal; out of wantonness, therefore not out
of contempt; yet I offend against him that sees in secret, notwithstanding my
solitariness, and my wantonness is by him construed as a contempt to the
ordainer of authority. But when both scandal and contempt are met to aggravate
the violation, now the breach of humane laws binds the conscience to a
fearful guilt. Not to flatter the times, (as I hope I shall never be blurred
with this crimination) I must needs say this is too shamefully unregarded;
Never age was more lawless; Our forefathers were taught to be superstitiously
scrupulous in observing the laws of the Church, above Gods; like those
Christians of whom Socrates the historian speaks of, which held fornication as
a thing indifferent, de diebus festis tanquam de vita decertant, but strive for
an holy day as for their life; we are leapt into a licentious neglect of civil
or sacred laws, as if it were piety to be disobedient. Does the law command a
Friday fast; no day is so selected for feasting; let a schismatic or popish
book be prohibited, this very prohibition endears it; let wholesome laws be
enacted against drunkenness, idleness, exactions, unlawful transportations,
excess of diet, of apparel, or what ever noted abuse: commands do not so much
whet our desires, as forbiddances: what is this but to baffle and affront that
sacred power which is entrusted to government: and to profess our selves not
Libertines, but licentiate of disorder. Far, far is it from the intentions of
the God of order, under the style of liberty to give scope to these unruly
humors of men; the issue whereof can be no other then utter confusion. But if
any power (besides divine) in Heaven or Earth shall challenge to it self this
privilege, to put a primary, or immediate tie upon the conscience, so as it
should be a sin to disobey that ordinance, because it is without relation to the
command of the highest, let it be anathema; our hearts have reason to be free
in spite of any such Antichristian usurpation, whiles the owner of them has
charged us, not to be ( thus) the servants of men 1 Cor. 7.23. so Christ has
lastly freed us from the bondage of humane ordinances.

Lo now ye have seen our liberation from a whole heptarchy of spiritual
tyranny; Stand still now awhile, Honorable and beloved, and look back with
wondering and thankful eyes upon the infinite mercy of our deliverer; sin
beguiles us, conscience accuses us, Gods wrath is bent against us, Satan
tyrannizes over us, the law condemns us, insolent superstition inthralls us,
and now from all these Christ has made us free. How should we now erect altars
to our dear Redeemer, and inscribe them Christo liberatori; how should we from
the altars of our devoted hearts, send up the holy sacrifices of our best
obediences, the sweet incense of our perpetual prayers. Oh blessed Savior,
how should we, how can we enough magnify thee; no not, though those celestial
Choristers of thine should return to bear a part with us in renewing their
gloria in excelsis, glory to God on high; Our bodies, our souls are too little
for thee; Oh take thine own from us, and give it to thy self, who have both
made and freed it. To sum up all then; we are freed from the bondage of sin
by the spirit of Christ; from an accusing conscience by the blood of Christ,
from the wrath of God by faith in Christ, from the tyranny of Satan by the
victory of Christ; from the curse of the law by the satisfaction of Christ;
from the law of ceremonies by the consummation of Christ; from humane
ordinances by the manumission and instruction of Christ; and now stand fast in
all these liberties wherewith Christ has made you free; And so from the
liberty, and prerogative, we descend to the maintenance of this liberty, Stand
fast.

Is it any boot to bid a man hold fast our once recovered liberty; did ye ever
hear of a wild bird that once let out of the cage wherein she has been long
enclosed would come fluttering about the wires to get in again. Did ye ever see
a slave, that after his ransom paid, and his discharge obtained would run back
and sue for a place in his Gally. Casuists dispute whether a prisoner (though
condemned) may upon breach of prison escape; and the best resolve it
affirmatively; so Caietan, Soto, Navarre, Lessius, others: Their reason is; For
that he is not sentenced to remain voluntarily in bonds, but to be kept so;
neither is it the duty of the offender to stay, but of the keeper to hold him
there: hence chains and fetters are ordained, where otherwise twists of towe
were sufficient: but never any Casuist doubted, whether a prisoner would be
glad to be free; or once well escaped would or ought to return to his gaol;
that self love which is engraffed in every breast will be sure to forbid so
prejudicial an act. God himself has forbiden to deliver back the slave that
is run from his Master Deuteronomy. 23.15. Hagar thought it an hard word, Return to
thy Mistress and be beaten, Genesis 16.9. If Noah's Dove had not found more refuge
then restraint in the Ark, I doubt whether it had returned with an
Olive Branch. O then what what strange madness possesses us that being
ransomed by the precious blood of the Son of God, paid down for us upon the
cross, we should again put our neck under the servile yoke of sin, Satan, Men:
The two first shall go together; indeed they cannot be severed; where ever sin
is, there is a Devil at the end of it; why will we be the servants of
corruptions, 2 Pet. 2.19. Servants both by nature and by will: The Philosophers
dispute whether there be servus natura, divinity defines it clearly, servi
eratis peccati, ye were the servants of sin; Romans 6.19. though not more by
nature then by will; contrary to the civil condition, there is no servitude
here but willing. St. Paul's thesis, his servants ye are to whom ye obey, is
reduced, by our Savior, to this hypothesis; He that does sin is the servant of
sin, Joh. 8.33.

Do we then obey the filthy lusts of our brutish sensuality, how high soever we
look, we are but vassals: and our servitude is so much more vile, as our master
is more despicable: A Princes vassal may think himself as good as a poor
freeman, but a slaves slave goes in rank with a beast; such is every one that
endrudgeth himself to any known sin. In whose eyes a vile person is contemned;
says the Psalmist: A vile person, who is that? Be not deceived, it is not the
habits that makes a man vile, but the conditions. No rags can make the good man
other then glorious; no robe can make the lewd man other then base; when we see
and hear of high titles, rich coats, ancient houses, long pedegrees,
glittering suites, large retinues, we honor these (and so we must do) as the
just monuments, signs, appendances of civil greatness; but let me tell you
withal; the eyes of God, his Saints, and Angels look upon any of you as a vile
person, if his sin be his Master: as they say of Lewis the eleventh, that he
was the slave of his Physician Corterius, but a tirant to others; so nothing
hinders but that ye may be the commanders of others, and yet (the while)
vassals to your own corruptions. It is the heathen, man's question: Blush, O ye
Christians, blush for shame to hear it, An ille mihi liber cui mulier imperat?
Shall he go for a freeman that is a slave to his Curtizan; that is at the
command of her eyes, and hangs upon the doom of her variable lips? Shall he go
for a freeman that is at the mercy of his cups, whether for mirth or rage?
Shall he go for a freeman that is laden with fetters of Gold, more servile to
this metal, then the Indian that gets it? Shall he go for a freeman that is
ever fastened upon the rack of envy or ambition? Hate this condition, O all ye
Noble and Generous Courtiers; and as ye glory to affect freedom, and scorn
nothing so much as the reputation of baseness, abhor those sins that have
held you in a miserable and cursed servitude; Stand fast in the liberty
wherewith Christ has made you free.

Lastly what should we, or why do we inthrall our consciences to the sinful
yoke of the corrupt ordinances of men? That which the legal ceremonies were to
the Jews, Popish traditions are to us; yea more and worse; Those ceremonies
were prefigurations of Christ to come; these traditions are defigurations, and
deformations of Christ exhibited; Those were of Gods prescribing, these of that
homo delinquentiae, as Tertullian construes it. That man of sin; see what a
style here is, as if he were made all of impiety, and corruption. That which
Rehoboam said of himself, we may justly borrow here; The Popes little finger is
heavier then Moses his loins; From these superstitions and Antichristian
impositions Christ has freed us by the clear light of the glorious Gospel of
his Son Christ Jesus; Oh stand fast now in the liberty wherewith Christ has
made you free. Give leave, I beseech you, Most gracious Sovereign, and ye
honorable and beloved Christians to my just importunity; if in these cold,
slippery, backsliding times, I press this needful exhortation with more then
common vehemence.

Has the Gospel of Christ freed us from the Idolatrous adoration of Daniels
Maazim, a breaden God; and shall any of us so far abdicate, not our religion
only, but our reason; as to creep, crouch, and to worship that which the baker
makes a cake, and the Priest makes a God? Crustum pro Christo, as he said? And
if Israel play the harlot, yet Oh why will Judah sin? If the poor seduced souls
of foreign subjects, that have been invincibly noursled up in ignorance and
superstition (whose woeful case we do truly commiserate with weeping and
bleeding hearts) be carried hood-wink't to those hideous impieties (which if
they had our eyes, our means they would certainly detest) shall the native
subjects of the Defender of Faith, who have been trained up in so clear a light
of the Gospel begin to cast wanton eyes upon their glorious superstitions; and
contrary to the laws of God, and our Sovereign, throng to their exoticall
devotions? What shall we say Increpa Domine; Master rebuke them: And ye to whom
God has given grace to see and bewail the lamentable exorbitances of their
superstitions, settle your souls in the noble resolution of faithful Joshua, I
and my house will serve the Lord. Stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ
has made you free.

Has the Gospel of God freed us from the worship of stocks, and stones; from
the mis-religious invocation of those who we know cannot hear us; from the
sacrilegious mutilation of the blessed sacrament; From the tyrannical
usurpations of a sinful vice-god; From the dangerous relyance upon the
inerrable sentence of him that cannot say true; from the idle fears of
imaginary Purgatories; from buying of pardons, and selling of sins; shortly,
from the whole body of damnable Antichristianisme: and shall our unstable
mouths now begin to water at the Onions and Garlic of our forsaken Egypt; Oh
Dear Christians, if ye love your solus, if ye fear hell, stand fast in this
liberty wherewith Christ has made you free: What mercy soever may abide
well-meaning ignorance, let the wilful revolter make account of damnation. I
cannot without yearning of bowels think of the dear price that our holy
forefathers stak't down for this liberty of the Gospel; no less then their
best, and last blood; And shall we their unthrifty progeny lavish it out
carelessly in a willing neglect; and either not care to exchange it for a
plausible bondage, or squander it out in unncecessary differences? Do but cast
your eyes back upon the fresh memory of those late flourishing times of this
goodly kingdom, when pure religion was not more cheerfully professed, then
inviolably maintained: how did we then thrive at home, and triumph abroad? How
were we then the terror, the envy of Nations? Our name was enough to affright,
to amate an enemy: But now, since we have let fall our first love, and suffered
the weak languishments and qualmes of the truth under our hands, I fear and
grieve to tell the issue. Oh then suffer your selves, O ye noble and beloved
Christians, to be rouzed up from that dull and lethargick ind^fferencie,
wherein ye have thus long slept, and awake up your holy courages for God, and
his sacred truth: And since we have so many comfortable and assured engagements
from our pious Sovereign, Oh let not us be wanting to God, to his Majesty, to
our selves in our utmost endeavors of advancing the good success of the
blessed Gospel of Christ. Honor God with your faithful, and zealous
prosecutions of his holy truth, and he shall honor you: and besides the
restoration of that ancient glory to our late-clouded Nation, shall repay our
good Offices done to his name with an eternal weight of glory in the highest
heavens; to the possession whereof, he that has ordained us, in his good time
mercifully bring us, for the sake of the Son of his love Jesus Christ the just;
To whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost one infinite God be given all praise
honor and glory now and for ever. Amen.

DIVINE LIGHT, AND REFLECTIONS. IN A SERMON Preached to his MAJESTY at WHITE HALL
On Whitsunday. 1640.
By JOS. EXON.
1 John 1.5. God is Light.


IF ye mark it, your very Calender, so as the wisdom of the Church has
contrived it, is a notable Catechism. And surely, if the plain man would but
ply his Almanac well, that alone would teach him Gospel enough to show him
the history of his Savior; If one day teach another, all days would teach
him; There should he see his blessed Saviors conception Annuntiated by the
Angel. March 25. Forty weeks after that he should see him born of the Virgin
accordingly, at the feast of the Nativity; eight days after that circumcised,
on New years day; then visited and adored by the Sages, in the Epiphanie; then
presented into the Temple, on the day of Purification; then tempted and fasting
forty days, in Lent; He should see him ushered in by his forerunner, the
holy Baptist, six Months before his Nativity; attended by his twelve Apostles
in their several ranks, and Thomas the last, for his unbelief: And, at last,
after infinite and beneficial miracles, he should see him making his Maundy
with his disciples on the Thursday, and crucified on Good- Friday; he should
see that on Easter Morning, God the Father raises up his Son Jesus from the
dead (Act, 5.30.) On Ascension day God the Son mounts up to Heaven in glory,
Act. 1.9. On Whitsunday God the holy Ghost descends upon the Apostles. Act.
2.3.4. And his belief in all these summed up in the celebration of the blessed
Trinity, the Sunday following.

I shall not over-labour to reduce the Text to the day? Fire and light have so
near affinity that they are scarce ever separated; The same Spirit of God who
appeared as this day in the shape of fiery tongues to the disciples may be now
pleased by my tongue to manifest himself to your souls in light: And as that
fire was very lightsome, else it could not have been seen in the daytime; so
may this exhibition of light be accompanied with a fire of holy zeal both in my
tongue, and your hearts. In my last Sermon at the Court I gave you the
Character of man, I shall now endeavor to give you some touches of the
Character of God;

There is nothing in this world so much concerns a man as to settle his heart
in a right apprehension of his God; which must be the ground of all his piety
and devotion; without which all his pretenses of Religion are so nothing worth,
as that in them, God is made our Idol, and we the mis-worshippers of him;
without which shortly, our whole life is misspent in error and ignorance, and
ends in a miserable discomfort: Whence it is that this dear disciple makes it
the sum of all the Apostolical mission, which he had from his Lord and
Savior, to inform the World what to think of God; This then is the message
which we have heard of him, and declare to you, that God is light. Would ye
know the message which the Apostles received from Christ; would ye know the
message which they delivered from Christ to the World, it is in these three
syllables of my Text. God is light.

It is not possible that our finite conceit should comprehend God essentially,
as he is in himself; No motion of our weak humanity can thus reach his
infiniteness; our ambition must be only to conceive of him, according to those
expressions which he has made of himself; wherein it has pleased his wisdom
to condescend to our shallow capacity, by borrowing from those creatures which
come nearest to his most pure, simple, spiritual nature; Amongst which none is
more proper, or more frequent then this of Light; Not only therefore has it
pleased God to express those Heavenly spirits of his by the title of Angeli
lucis, Angels of Light; not only has the Son of God, God and man justified
himself Lux mundi, the Light of the World, but God absolutely, and indistinct^y
in respect of persons vouchsafes to make himself known to us by this name,
That God is Light: Hereupon it is, that even in this sense the children of God
are called the Sons of Light; because he is Light, whose Sons they are; But
that of the Athanasian Creed is most pregnant, that the eternal Son of God, God
the Son, is God of God; Light of Light: Neither does our Apostle here say, God
is resembled by Light; But, as our Savior said of God, God is a Spirit, so
here, our Apostle, God is Light: How then is God Light? Far be it from us that
according to the stupidity of the Manichees, we should take this literally of a
sensible and material Light; that is but a creature, though indeed the first,
and exceeding glorious, but yet a creature, and therefore infinitely below the
purity and perfection of the Creator; but sure God would have us by this to be
led to the conceit of the transcendent glory of his incomprehensible Deity; and
would have us when we think of him to be put in mind of admiring an increated,
immateriall, super-intelligible uprightness of a glory, so much above all
spiritual natures, as the Light is above the bodily and visible; whereupon it
is that when the spirit of God by his Apostle describes the habitation of God,
he does it in these terms that he dwells in a Light that none can approach
unto; and when he describes the Heaven of the elect, 1 Timothy 6.16.
he calls it, the inheritance of the Saints in Light; so as when that place of
bliss, and the God whose presence makes it such, come into our thoughts,
Coloss. 1.12.
we must elevate our thoughts above this dark sphere of mortality; and
represent unto our selves a glorious lightsomnesse, as much above this
material Light, as Light is above Darkness; abandoning that gloomie and base
opacity of conceit, wherewith our earthly minds are commonly wont to be
overclouded; for surely it is easy and familiar to observe, that the higher we
go, the more Light we shall find; In the center of the Earth there is nothing
but perfect darkness; nearer the upper region of that great body where any
overture is made; there is a kind of imperfect twilight; In this lower air
there is a better Light, but mixed with foggs and Vapors, In the higher
regions, there are less mists, and more clearness, yet not without some
dimness of exhalations; In the starry Heavens, a purer Light, yet not without
some eclipses; In the empyreall, nothing but pure and perfect Light; justly
therefore are our hearts lift up with our eyes to a contemplation of a Light
above those Heavens more pure and excellent then theirs. Away then with all
dull and darksome imaginations when we address our selves to the throne of
Grace; and let us adore an infinite Spirit dwelling in an unaccessible Light,
attended with millions of Angels of Light, and glorified spirits of his Saints
in a Light unspeakable and glorious; this shall be the first glimpse of our
enlightened understanding when we would comfortably appear before God; In which
regard I fear many of us Christians are much defective in our holy devotions,
speaking unto God, and thinking of him, sullenly and sadly, as shut up in some
remote and unknown darkness on the other side of the World, or at least
without the lively apprehension of that wonderful radiance of glory wherewith
he is invested; misconceiving herein of that Deity whom we implore; who has
revealed himself unto us by the name of Light.

And surely, as none but an Eagle can look upon the Light of the Sun; so none
but the confirmed eyes of an illuminated Christian can behold God in this
notion of his celestial splendour; which we must so labor to attain unto, and
settle in our minds, as that we should no more think of the blessed Deity
without the conceit of an infinite resplendence, then we can open our eyes at
noonday without an incurrence and admission of an outward Light.

But this, how ever requisite to be conceived, and done, is not the main drift
of our Apostle; who goes not about here so much to make any description of God,
or prescription of the ways of our understanding, or representation of his
glorious presence, as to lay the grounds of our holy disposition, and pure and
Heavenly carriage before him: For so is the Light here affirmed of God, as the
darkness is disavowed of him; and both of them are mentioned with an intention
of drawing in an exhortation to that purity which we should affect and the
avoydance of all the state and works of spiritual darkness which we should
abhor. God then is Light, as in himself, so in relation to us; and this
predication of Light serves to infer our conformity to God in this behalf: It
is not for us therefore to inquire so much into those absolute terms wherein
God stands with himself, as what he is in pattern unto us: Thus is he Light,
either qualitatively, or causatively;

The Light has a quality (for it matters not to search into the essence of it,
and indeed, it is more then we can do to find it out) of clearness, of purity:
Of clearness for the use of manifestation; Of purity, and untaintedness in
respect of any mixture of corruption; In both these is God Light. Causatively
in that he is the Author of all Light; communicating it to his Creatures in
what kind soever; not without reference to the diffusive quality of Light in
the illuminating of this vast body, and dilating it self to all the World in an
instant: In these three regards therefore is God Light here; 1. Of absolute
clearness in his infinite knowledge and wisdom. 2. Of exact purity in the
perfect rectitude of his will. 3. Of gracious diffusion, in the communicating
of himself to his Creatures, and to us in special; so, as to inlighten us with
competent knowledge in our understanding, and sincere disposition of our will
and affections; And because God is thus Light, all that will claim to partake
of him, must be in their measure, clear in understanding, pure in will and
affections, diffusive of their knowledge and graces to others.

These three qualities of clearness, purity, diffusion, together with three
answerable reflections upon us shall be the matter of our following discourse,
and challenge your best attention,

Those things which (whether in nature or art) are wont to pass for the
carriages of Light have in them sometimes, at least in respect of our sight,
some kind of dimness and opacity. The candle has his snuff, the fire his
smoke, and blackness of indigestion, the Moon her spots, the very Sun it self,
his Eclipses; Neither is it said that God is lightsome, but light it self in
the abstract, then which nothing can be convinced more clear, and piercing; and
therefore it is purposely added for the further Emphasis, In him is no
darkness; Oh the infinite clearness of the Divine knowledge, to which all
things lie open, both past, present, and to come; which does not only reach in
one intuition to all the actions, motions, events of all Creatures that have
been, are, shall be; but which is infinitely more then all these, extends to
the full comprehension of himself, his whole Divine nature and essence; to
which the World (though full of innumerable varieties) is less then nothing:
The Sun is a goodly globe of Light; The visible World has nothing so glorious,
so searching; and yet there are many things lie hid within the bosom of the
Earth and Sea which his eye never saw, never shall see; Neither can it ever see
more then half the World at once; darkness the while enwraps the other; nor
indeed of any much lesser (if round) body; And though it give light unto other
Creatures, yet it gives not light to it self; like as our eye sees all other
objects, but it self it cannot see. And though it enlighten this material
Heaven both above and below it self, as also this lower Air and Earth, yet the
Empyreal Heaven transcends the beams of it, and is filled with a more glorious
illumination: But, God, the Light of whom we speak, who is the Maker of that
Sun, sees the most hidden secrets of Earth and Hell; sees all that is done in
Earth and Heaven at one view; sees his most glorious self; and by his presence
makes Heaven. Most justly therefore is God Light, by an eminence.

Now the reflection of the first quality of Light upon us, must be our clear
apprehension of God, the World, and our selves; and by how much more exact
knowledge we shall attain unto of all these, by so much more do we conform our
selves to that God who is Light: and by how much less we know them, so much
more darkness there is in us, and so much less fellowship have we with God; If
the eye have not an inward Light in it self, let the Sun shine never so bright
upon it, it is nevertheless blind, What are we the better for that which is in
God, if there be not an inward Light in our Souls to answer and receive it? How
should we love and adore God if we know him not? How shall we hate and combat
the World, if we know it not? How shall we value and demean our selves, if we
know not our selves? Surely the want of this Light of knowledge is the ground of
all that miserable disorder which we see daily break forth in the affections,
in the carriages of men. I know the common word is, that we are fallen into a
knowing age; such as wherein our speculative skill is wont to be upbraided to
us, in a disgraceful comparison of our unanswerable practice; our forward
young men outrun their years, and bragg that there is more weight in the down
of their chins then in the gray beards of their aged Grandsires; Our artificers
take upon them to hold argument with, and perhaps control their Teachers;
neither is it any news for the shop-board to contest with the schools, every
not Knight, or Rook only, but Pawn too, can give check to a Bishop; The Romish
Church had lately her Shee-Preachers, till Pope Urban gagged them; and our
Gossips now at home, in stead of dresses, can tattle of mysteries, and censure
the Pulpit in stead of neighbors: Light call you this? No these are fiery
flashes of conceit, that glance through vain minds to no purpose, but idle
ostentation, and satisfaction of wild humors, without stability, or any
available efficacy to the soul: Alas we are wise in impertinencies; ignorant in
main truths; neither does the knowledge of too many go any deeper then the verge
of their brains, or the tip of their tongue: I fear true solid knowledge is not
much less rare, then when our unlett'red Grandfathers were wont to court God
Almighty with false Latin in their devotions; For did the true Light shine into
the hearts of men in the knowledge of God, the World, themselves, how could
they, how durst they live thus. Durst the lewd tongues of men rend the holy
name of God in pieces with oaths and blasphemies, if they knew him to be so
dreadful, so just, as he has revealed himself? Durst the cruel oppressors of
the World grind faces, and cut throats, and shed blood like water, if they were
persuaded that God is a sure revenger of their outrages? Durst the goatish
adulterer, the swinish drunkard wallow in their beastly uncleanness, if they
knew their is a God to judge them, an Hell to fry in? Durst the rebellious
seditionary lift up his hand against the Lords Anointed; and that under a
color of religion, if the fool had not said in his heart, There is no God?
Could the covetous fool so admire and adore his red and white Earth? could the
ambitious so dote upon a little vanishing honor, as to sacrifice his soul to
it, if he knew the World? could the proud man be so besotted with self-love, as
that he sees his God in his glass, if he knew himself? Surely then the true
Light is as rare as it is precious; and it is as precious as life it self; yea
as life eternal; This is eternal life to know thee, and whom thou have sent
Jesus Christ; What were the World without Light, and what the soul without the
Light of knowledge? We condemn Malefactors to darkness, that is one great part
of the horror of their durance; Jo. 17.^.
and by how much more heinous their crime is, so much darker is their dungeon;
Darkness of understanding then is punishment enough alone; as it is also the
entry into hell, which is described by blackness of darkness. None but savage
Creatures delight in darkness; Man naturally abhorres it in all things; If our
eyes be dim, we call for glasses, if our houses be dark, we make windows, if
the evening grow dark we call for lights, and if those lights burn dim, we call
for snuffers, and shall we avoid darkness in every thing, except our souls,
which is our better, and more Divine part? Honorable, and beloved, as we love
and tender those dear souls of ours, let us labor to furnish them with the
Light of true and saving knowledge; What is this Gospel which shines thus daily
and clearly in your faces, but the Vehiculum lucis the carriage of that
heavenly Light to the World; Send forth thy Light and thy Truth, says the
Psalmist. Thy Word is Truth, says our Savior; that word of truth then is the
body of that Light which God shows to men: Oh let it not shine upon us in
vain; let us not trample upon the beams of it in our floor, as that foolish
woman that St. Austin speaks of, did to those of the Sun, with a Calco
Manichorum Deum. But now, while God gives these happy opportunities, let us
enlarge our hearts to receive it with all joy and thankfulness: And if Moses
by conferring with God but 40 Days and Nights in the delivery of the law, had
a glorious brightness in his face; Oh let us that more then forty years have
had conversation with God in his Gospel shine with the resplendent beams of
heavenly knowledge; And if the joys of heaven are described by Light, surely
the more lightsome our souls are here, the nearer they come to their
blessedness. Light is sown from the righteous, says the Psalmist; Lo here is
the seed-time of Light, above, is the harvest: If the Light of saving knowledge
be sown in our hearts here, we shall be sure to reap the crop of heavenly glory
hereafter. And this is the first quality of Light with the reflection of it
upon us. The next follows which is purity.

Of all the visible Creatures that God has made, none is so pure and simple as
the light; it discovers all the foulness of the most earthly recrements, it
mixeth with none of them, neither is possibly capable of the least corruption;
some of the best Interpreters therefore have taken this metaphor of Light to
implie the purity and perfect goodness of God; In whom as there is an infinite
clearness of understanding, so also an infinite rectitude of will; in so much
as his will is the rule of all right; neither does he will ought because it is
good, but therefore it is good because he wills it. Goodness has no less
brightness in it then truth, and wickedness as it is never without error, so
it is no less dark then it; Justly therefore is God all light, in that he is
all pure and good; and the reflection of this quality upon us must be our
holiness; For this is the will of God even our sanctification; The more holy
then we are, the more we conform to him that is Light; The way of the just is
as the shining Light, that shines more and more; as contrarily; sins are the
works of darkness, the mover of them is the Prince of darkness the agents of
them are the Sons of darkness, and their trade is walking in darkness, (as it
follows in my text) and the end of them is utter darkness. Whiles he says
then, Be Holy as I am Holy, he does as good as say, Be ye Light as I am Light;
Ye were darkness, but now (it is Gods own phrase) Lux estis, ye are Light in
the Lord, says St. Paul to his Ephesians; justly therefore does it follow walk
as children of the Light; In right ways, with straight stepps: And surely if
God be Light, and we darkness, what interest can we claim in him? For what
communion is there betwixt Light and darkness. Oh the comfortable and happy
condition then of those that are in God, they are still in Light; Truly the
light is sweet, says wise Solomon, and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to
behold the Sun; As on the contrary it is a woeful and disconsolate estate to
live in any sin; this is no other then to be dungeon'd up in a perpetual
darkness; The Egyptians were even weary of themselves for a three days
darkness; how irksome had it been to have lived always so? I have read a book
of one Haitonus a monk of the order of the Praemonstratenses, a Cozen, as he
says, of the then King of Armenia, written some 340 Years ago, set forth by
one Nic. Salcon and dedicated to Pope Clement the 5th. where with much
confidence he affirms that in the Country of Georgia there was a certain
province called Ham^en, of three days journey about, so palpably dark
continually, as that no man could see his hand in it; that the inhabitants of
the borders of it might hear many times in the woods, the noise of men crying,
of horses neighing, of cocks crowing, but no man durst venture to go unto it,
because he could not find the way out again; which he says with much
earnestness that he saw; Neque Credidissem, says he, nisi propriis oculis
perspexissem; reporting it to have been a miraculous judgment upon some Persian
persecutors of the Christians in that place: I list not to inquire into the
likelihood of the story; it might be some temporary judgment (as that was upon
Egypt for the time) and now long since vanished; but imagine ye the truth of
that which he dares with so deep protestations avow; and conceive the condition
of all wilful sinners; who live shut up in a region of thick darkness; whence
they can no more get out, then they can be capable of any comfort within; and
when they have wearied themselves in those wretched mazes of vanity, they are
shut up in the utter darkness of the dreadful pit of eternal Death. Oh then
that willing sinners, be they never so gay and glorious, could but apprehend
the misery and horror of their own estate in this behalf, certainly it were
enough to make them either mazed, or penitent. For what is darkness but a
privation of Light? Now God is Light; And sin deprives us of Gods presence and
shuts us out from the face of God; and if in his presence be the fullness of
joy, then in his absence is the fullness of sorrow, and torment; neither have
the Schools determined amiss, that the pain of loss is more horrible then the
pain of sense; so as that darkness which our sin causes in the alienation,
and absence of the Lighr of Gods countenance is without his great mercy, the
beginning of an utter exclusion from the beatificall face of God, and of that
utter darkness of hell. For us, as we profess our selves the Children of the
Light so let us walk in the Light: And what Light is that? Thy law is a Light
to my feet, says holy David; Lo this is the Light wherein we must walk; that
so walking in the Light of his law, we may happily enjoy the light of his
countenance, Ps. 36.10.
and may come at the last to the light of his glory; so, in his Light we shall
see Light.

This, of the second quality of the Light, and the reflection of it; The third
and last follows. It is this which Learned Estius thinks to be mainly driven
at in this place, That God is therefore Light, because he is the Fountain and
cause of Light to all Creatures that do enjoy it; and indeed what Light is
there which is not from him; Natural, Moral, Divine? For the natural; It was
he that said, Fiat Lux; Let there be Light; in the first day; It was he that
recollected that diffused Light into the body of the Sun in the fourth day;
that goodly Globe of Light receives from him those beams of Light which it
communicates to the Moon, Stars, Sky, and this other inferior World. What
Light of intellectual or moral virtue ever shined in the heart of any man,
but from him?

The Spirit of man is the Candle of the Lord searching all the inward parts of
the belly. Prove. 20.27.
What Light of Divine knowledge or holiness ever brake forth upon any Saint or
Angel, but from his blessed irradation, and (...). Justly therefore is he Pater
luminum the Father of Lights; and as the child oft-times resembles the Father,
this quality the Light has from God, that it is wondrously diffusive of it
self; reaching forth it self largely in very quick and instantanie motions to
all those things which are capable of it; Other Creatures, though beneficial,
yet impart themselves more sparingly unto us: The Earth yields us fruit, but it
is only perhaps once a year, and that not without much cost and angariation,
requiring both our labor, and patience; The Clouds do sometimes drop fatness,
but at great uncertainties; other whiles they pour down famine upon our heads;
the Sea yields us commodities both of passage and sustenance, but not without
inconstancy and delays and oft-times takes more in an hour then it gives in an
age; his favors are local, his threats universal; But the Light is
bountiful in bestowing it self freely with a clear, safe, unlimited largess
upon all Creatures at once, indifferently, incessantly, beneficially.

The reflection of this quality upon us should be our diffusivenesse; That we
should so be lights, as that we should give light; so have light in our selves,
that we should give it unto others. The Prophet Daniel, who was a great
Philosopher and Astronomer in his time, tells us of a double shining, or light,
The one as of the Firmament, the other as of the Stars; The one a general
Light dispersed through the whole or body of the Sky, the other a particular
one, compacted into the bodies of those starry globes which are wont to be
called the more solid piece of their Orb; Thus it is in the Analogy of the
spiritual light There is a general Light common to Gods Children; whereof our
Savior; Let your Light shine so before men, that they may see your good works
and glorify your father which is in Heaven: Thus the great Doctor of the
Gentiles exhorts his Philipians, Philip. 2.15.
that they be blameless and harmless, the Sons of God without rebuke, in the
midst of a crooked and perverse Generation, among whom (says he) ye shine as
lights in the world.

There is a particular light propper to several vocations especially those
that are public and encharged with the care of others, whether spiritual, or
civil.

Of the one you know what our Savior said in the Mount, Vos estis lux mundi;
of the other you know what God said in David's case, I have ordained a Lamp for
mine Anointed: Ps. 132.17.
that is a glorious successor.

To begin with the latter; Princes and Governors are and must be Lights by an
eminence; for God is Light, and he has called them Elohim: Exodus 22.28.
Gods: So as they must imitate God in shining to the World; sending forth the
rays both of good example; and of Justice and Judgment into the eyes of their
People: An ordinary Starlight is not enough for them, they are the
Vicegerents of him who is Sol j^stitiae, Malac. 4.2.
the Sun of Righteousness; they must fill the world therefore with their
glorious beams, and give so much more light, as their Orb is higher, and their
Globe more capacious: And blessed be God, what beams of light our Sun sends
forth of Temperance, Chastity, Piety, Mercy and Justice, let Malice it self
say, let even Rebellion it self witness.

Now if he be the Sun, you great ones are our Stars, as you receive your Light
from him, the light of your honor, and good example, so whilst you keep the
one of them to your selves; so you must communicate the other to your
inferiors. And if in presence his light dim, or extinguish yours, yet the
World affords you darkness enough abroad to shine in: Oh shine you clearly in
the dark night of this evil World, that the beholders may see and magnify your
brightness, and may say of one; there is a Mars of truly heroical courage,
there is the Mercury of sound wisdom and learning, there the Jupiter of
exemplary honor and magnificence, there the Phosphorus of Piety, and
ante-lucan devotion; and may be accordingly sensible of beneficial influences
to your Country: Far be it from any of you to be a fatal Sirius or Dog Star,
which when he rises yields perhaps a little needless light, but withal burns
up the Earth, and inflames the air, puts the World in a miserable combustion;
Far be it from you to be dismal and direful comets, that portend nothing but
horror and death to the earth; or, if your light be of a lower accension; far,
far be it from you to be any of those ( ignes fatui) that do at once affright
and seduce the poor travailer, and carry him by lewd guidance into a ditch;
Such, such, alas there are: give me leave to complain (where can I do it better
then at a Court, the professed Academy of honor?) That a strange kind of loose
debauchednesse has possessed too many of the young Gallants of our time (I
fear I may take in both sexes) with whom modesty, civility, temperance,
sobriety are quite out of fashion, as if they had been suits of their
Grandsires wardrobe.

As for Piety and Godliness, they are so laid by, as if they were the cast rags
of a despised frippery. He is no brave Spirit with too many that bids not
defiance to good orders, that revells not without care, spends not withour
measure, talks not without grace, lives not without God. Woe is me, is this the
fruit of so long and clear a Light of the Gospel? Is this to have fellowship
with the Divine Light? Now the God of Heaven be merciful to that Wild and
Atheous licenciousnes, wherewith the World is so miserably overrun: and strike
our hearts with a true sense of our grievous provocations of his name; that our
serious humiliations, may fore-lay his too-well-deserved judgments: In the mean
time, if there should be any one such amongst you that hear me this Day (as
commonly they will be sure to be farthest off from good counsel) let Wise
Solomon School him for me, Rejoice O Young man in thy youth, and let thy heart
cheer thee up in the days of thy Youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart,
and in the sight of thine eyes, but know thou that for all these things God
will bring thee to judgment: And let me add this, if he be not for the light,
he shall be for the fire; for the same Spirit of God, which tells him here that
God is Light, tells him elsewhere (which he shall once feel, though he will not
believe) that our God is a consuming fire.

Now in the second place for us of the holy Tribe, we are stars too: And if not
Stars, Revel. 1.16, Yet Candles, Matthew. 5.13. However; Lights we must be, and
that both in Life, and Doctrine: If the first, there are stars of several
magnitudes, some goodly and great ones that move in Orbs of their own; others
small, and scarce visible in the Galaxy of the Church, but all are Stars, and
no Star is without some light: If but the Second; there are large Tapers, and
Rush-candles, one gives a greater light then the other, but all give some:
Never let them go for either Stars, or Candles that neither have nor give
light: And woe is me, if the Light that is in us be darkness, how great, how
dangerous is that darkness. Blessed be God, we have a learned, able, and
flourishing Clergy, as ever this Church had, or (I think I may boldly say) any
other since the Gospel looked forth into the World; there have not been clearer
Lamps in Gods Sanctuary since their first lighting then our days have seen;
yet why should we stick to confess that which can neither be concealed, nor
denied, that there are some amongst so many whose, wicke is too much for their
Oil, yea rather whose snuff is more then their Light; I mean, whose offensive
lives shame their holy Doctrines, and reproach the Glorious Gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ; these as we lament, so we desire to have top't by just censures;
but hear you, my worthy brethren, do not you, where you see a thief in the
Candle call presently for an extinguisher: for personal faults do not you
condemn an holy calling: Oh be you wisely charitable, and let us be exemplarily
holy.

Lastly, for you Christian hearers; think not that this Light may be put off to
public and eminent persons only: Each of you must shine too, at the least
tanquam faces, Philip. 2. If they be as Cities up-an Hill the meanest of you
must be as Cottages in a Valley though not high-built, yet wind-tight, and water
tight. If they be Beacons, you must be Lanterns; every one must both have a
light of his own, and impart it to others. It is not a charge appropriated to
public Teachers that the Apostle gives to his Hebrews, Exhort one another
daily while it is called to day, least any of you be hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin. Heb. 3.13.
Even the privatest person may shine forth in good counsel: he that is most
obscure, may, and must do good works in his place, and improve his graces to
others good: These, these, my beloved, are the light which we must both have
and give; not to have, were to have no fellowship with God; to have and not to
give it were to ingrosse, and monopolize grace which God cannot abide: Has any
of you Knowledge? Let him communicate it, and light others Candle at his. Has
any man worldly riches, let him not be Condus but Promus, to do good, and
distribute forget not; Has any man Zeal? Zeal, I say, not fury, not frenzy;
let him not glow only but shine; let him say with Jehu, Come see my Zeal for
the Lord: Has any man true piety and devotion; let him, like a flaming brand
enkindle the next; thus, thus shall we approve our selves the Sons of that
infinite and communicative Light; thus shall we so have fellowship with the
God, who is Light; that shining like him, and from him here in Grace, we may
shine with him hereafter, above, in everlasting glory; which the same God grant
to us for the sake of the Son of his love, Jesus Christ the righteous to whom
with thee, O God the Father, and thy blessed Spirit, one infinite and
incomprehensible Lord, be given all praise, honor and glory now and for ever.
Amen.

A SERMON Preached in the Cathedral at EXCETER, UPON The solemn Day appointed
for the CELEBRATION OR THE PACIFICATION Betwixt the Two KINGDOMS. Viz. September.
7. 1641.
By JOS. EXON.
PSALM. 46.8. Come, behold the Works of the Lord, what Desolations He has made
in the Earth. He makes wars to cease unto the ends of the Earih, etc.


IT was doubtless upon the happy end of some war, and the renovation of an
established peace, that this gratulatory Psalm was penned, and therefore fits
well with our occasion. My text then is an earnest invitation to a serious and
thankful consideration of the great works of God in his contrary proceedings
with men; Desolations of war and restaurations of Peace: we are called first
to a general survay of Gods wonderful works: and then to a special view of
the works of his justice first, (what desolation he has made upon Earth) then
of his mercy; in composing all the busy broils of the World; He makes wars to
cease unto the end of the Earth. These must be the subject both of our eyes,
and of my tongue, and your ears at this time.

We must then behold the works of the Lord, but that we may behold them we must
come; and that we may both come and behold them, we are invited to both: Come
and behold. We are naturally full of distractions; ready to mind any thing but
what we should; unless we be called we shall not come, and unless we come and
behold, we shall behold to no purpose: that which our Savior says of Martha
is the common case of us all, we are troubled about many things: One is carking
about his household affairs, another is busying his thoughts with his
lawsuits, another is racking his mind with ambitious projects; another is
studying which way to be revenged of his enemy; and some other, perhaps, rather
then want work will be troubling themselves with matters of State or other men's
affairs that concern them not, (...) busy Bishops in other men's diocese we
had need to be called off from these vain unmeet avocations, ere we offer to
behold the works of God; else it will fall out with us as it does ordinarily
with our bodily sight, that whiles we have many objects in our eye we see
nothing distinctly at all. Away therefore with all the distractive, yea
divulsive thoughts of the World; and let us Come and behold the works of the
Lord: as the Vulgar has it in the next verse, vacate and videte. Come then
from thy counting house thou from thy shop-board, thou from thy study, thou
from thy bar, thou from the field, and behold the works of the Lord. Indeed,
how can we look beside them? What is there that he has not done? What thing is
it that he has not created; or what event can befall any of his Creatures
which he has not contrived? Or what act can fall from any Creature of his
wherein he is not interested? So as unless we will wilfully shut our eyes, we
cannot but behold the works of the Lord: But there is more in this charge then
so; as these works are not meant of the ordinary occurrents, so it is not a
mere sight that is here called for; but a serious and fixed contemplation: It
is not (...), but (...); that is (...), as I remember Beza distinguishes upon
an other occasion; a bending of our eyes upon this holy object: Solomon the Son
interprets his Father David, Eccles. 7.13. Consider the work of God: This
beholding therefore is with mental eyes, and not with every sudden glance,
but with deep considerations, so to see them as both the Hebrew and the English
phrase elsewhere to lay them to heart.

Wherefore has God set us here on this greatstage of the world, but that we
should be spectators of the marvailous acts that are here done.

1. Surely, they are worth beholding; for they are all like his; well becoming
his infinite power, wisdom, justice: So has God done his wondrous works that
they ought to be had in perpetual remembrance: Beauty and excellence is
abstractive where ever it is: There is not one act of either his creation or
administration wherein there is not the footsteps of an omnipotence, and an
infinity of providence? Every thing works according to his ability: As the man
is, so is his strength: and as his strength, so his actions: Alas, we weak
creatures produce weak and feeble, and imperfect acts, neither can we possibly
do other; for such as the cause is, such must the effects needs be: God
therefore, who is all power, justice, wisdom, goodness, must needs produce
acts answerable to such an agent: therefore behold the works of the Lord.

2. Wherefore were our eyes given us, but for this very purpose they were not
given us for the beholding of vanity; not for the ensnaring or wounding of the
soul; but for the use and honor of the Creator; and wherein is that attained,
but in the beholding of the works of the Lord: hence it is that they can behold
all things but themselves; and discern those things worst, which are closest to
them; and see, not by sending forth any virtue from themselves, but by
intromitting of those species which are sent in to them; shortly, that God who
has made all things for himself, has in the making of this most excellent and
useful piece had an eye to his own glory in our beholding of his works; which
if we neglect to do, we do, what in us lies, frustrate Gods purpose and
intention in creating them.

3. Add to this, that the Lord delights to have his works beheld; for he knows
the excellency and perfection of them, and knows that the more they are seen
and noted, the more honor will accrue to the Maker of them: like as some
skillful Artizan (some exquisite Limner or Carver) when he has made a
Masterpiece of his Art, he does not hide it up in some dark corner where it
may not be seen; but sets it forth in the best light, and rejoices to have it
seen and admired: Thus does the Almighty; when the Creature was first made
because there was no other eyes to see it, he looked upon it with great
complacency, and rejoiced in his own handywork; It being the Epiphonema to
every days work when he comes to the relation of the particularities of his
workmanship, And God saw that it was good; and in a recapitulation or winding
up all; God saw every thing that he had made; and behold, it was very good,
Genesis 1.31. But when the Angels were created, and saw the glorious handy work of
God, they did presently applaud the marvailous works of their Maker; when the
morning Stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy, Job
38.7. And when after that, man was created, he joined with those glorious
spirits in viewing and magnifying the works of his Creator. And so he should
do. God was well pleased that he should do so. Alas we men who are conscious to
our own infirmity, let pass many things from us which we care not how little
they are viewed and scanned; for we know there may be flawes found in our best
performances, which at the first blush appear not; we hear sometimes a
discourse, which as it passes through the ear sounds well, and seems to carry a
good show of exquisiteness, which if it be set down and come to an accurate
examination, may be found defective in this point, in that redundant, here
mis-placed, there inconsequent; even course tapestry may afarr off show well;
which when it comes to be close viewed discovers an homeliness in texture and
faults enough both in shapes and colors: But as for the works of God, In
wisdom have thou made them all; says the Prophet: The more they are scanned,
and tried the more pure and precious they will appear; and as Solomon expresses
it, Man shall find nothing after him, Eccl. 7.14. And the God that knows this,
loves that we should in all humble and modest-diligence search into, and behold
his works.

4. There is great reason that we should carefully behold the works of the
Lord, because none but we can do it; of such infinite variety of Creatures,
there is none but the rational and intelligent, viz. Angels and men, that can
so much as take notice of what God has done, no not of themselves; that sense
whereby they are led cannot reach so high as a thought; what is before them,
they see so far as their downward eyes will reach, and make toward that which
serves their appetite, and avoid what they apprehend may hurt them, but as for
their Maker, or for their own condition, or their fellow Creatures, they are
not capable of any glimpse of knowledge thereof: And even of reasonable
Creatures, what a World is there that are as insensible of the works of God as
if they were utterly insensate; Pagans, Infidels, Worldlings that are carried
by no other guide then mere bruit Creatures are; and affect no other light then
that of sense; Alas, what is it to them what God does, or what he does not? How
much then does it concern us whom God has illuminated with any measure of
knowledge, and furnished with any measure of grace to be inquisitive into the
works of God, and to give glory to him in all his actions.

5. This shall not be so much advantage to God (alas what can we add to the
infinite?) as benefit to our selves: it is here as with those that dig in some
precious mine, the deeper they go, the richer they are: hence it is that the
most contemplative have been noted for most eminent in grace, and surely it is
their fault if they be not so; for they should be the best acquainted with God,
and with their own duty: shortly then, seeing the works of God are so
excellent, and well-worth beholding; since our eyes were given us for this use,
since God delights to have his works viewed; since there are so few that are
capable of giving this glory to God; since in beholding the works of God we do
most advantage our selves both in knowledge and holiness; let us as we are here
invited, Come and behold the works of the Lord.

His works; in all the variety of them; not some one work, but all; as the
works of his creation, so of his administration too; the diverse, yea contrary
proceedings of God therein; in the changes of his favors and judgments; I
confess there is and may be some one work of God so marvelous that it is able
and worthy to take up all our thoughts; but we may not suffer our hearts to
dwell in any one work of his, but enlarge them to more; we may not rest in the
contemplation of his mercy only, but we must look to his judgments; else we
shall grow secure we may not rest in the view of his judgments only without
meet glances at his mercy, else we shall grow to an heartlesse distrust and
despair; As we say in our philosophy; Composita nutriunt, only compounds
nourish; those things which are merely simple can give no nutriment at all; so
it is in spiritual matters, there must be a composition in those objects of
contemplation, whereby we would feed and benefit our souls; our resolution for
our thoughts, must be the same that the Psalmists were for his song Of mercy
and judgment will I sing.

Now, that we may descend to the particularities; the Psalmist begins at
judgment. What desolations, etc. This is the right method; as in the very being
of both, judgment leads the way to mercy; so in the meditation and view of
both: As it was in the Creation; The Evening and the Morning were the first
day; The darkness of the night led in the brightness of the morning; and as
the Prophets word was post tenebras lucem; when we are humbled, and astonished
with the consideration of Gods vengeance upon sinners, then, and not till then
are we meet for the apprehensions of his wonderful mercies: In this regard it
is truly verified that the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and his
judgments are they that make him feared; It is the thunder and rain that
prepares the hearts of Israel for Samuels good counsel, 1 Samuel 12. It is with
the hearts of men as with the Earth and the seasons of the fruits thereof; If
there be too much ease in the winter, and the Sun send forth gleames of heat
toward the entrance of the spring it brings forth the blossoms hastily, which
after by later frosts are nipped in the head and miscarry; but if there be
kindly frosts and colds at the first that hold in the juice of the plants, they
are in due time drawn forth by seasonable heates, and prosper; First therefore
let us be wrought upon by the meditation of judgments; and then we shall be fit
for the beneficial applicatications of mercy.

We are then here first invited to a Tragical sight, we are carried into the
Camera dimorte, to see the ghastly visage of deaths, and desolations all the
World over, then which nothing can be more horrible and dreadful, you are
called out to see piles of dead carcasses, to see whole basket fulls of heads
as was presented to Jehu; a woeful spectacle, but a necessary one; See
therefore what desolations the Lord has wrought in all the Earth: Desolations
by wars; how many fields have been drencht with blood, One would wonder that
so many should have had a b^ing upon Earth.

Our Florignes tells us that in the year 665. there was so great a mortality in
this Island, that men run up by troops to the tops of the rocks, and cast
themselves into the Sea.


and composted with carcasses; how many Millions of men have been cut off in
all ages by the edge of the sword? Desolations by famine wherein men have been
forced to make their bodies one another Sepulchers, and mothers to devour
their children of a span long: Desolotions by plague and pestilence, which has
swept away as our story tells us 800000. in one City: Desolations by
inundations of Waters, which have covered the faces of many Regions, and rinsed
the Earth of her unclean inhabitants: Desolations by Earth quakes which have
swallowed up whole Cities, and those great and populous. Desolations wrought by
the hand of his Angels; as in Egypt, in the tents of the Assyrians, 185000. in
one night in the camp of Israel in David's pestilence; Desolations wrought by
the hands of men in Battails and massacres; Desolations by Wild-beasts, as in
the Colonyes of Ashur planted in Samaria: Desolations by the swarms of
obnoxious and noisome creatures, as in Egypt, and since in Africa, He spoke the
word, and the Grasshoppers came and Caterpillars innumerable. Ps. 105.34.
Insomuch as in the consulship of M. Fulvius Flaccus, after the bloody wars of
Africa, followed infinite numbers of Locusts, which after devouring of all
herbs and fruit were by a sudden wind hoysed into the African sea; infection
followed upon their putrefection, and thereupon a general mortality, in number
fourscore thousand dyed, upon the Sea coast see twixt Carthage and Utica above
200000. Desolations every way; and by what variety of means soever, yet all
wrought by the divine hand: What desolations he has wrought; whoever be the
instrument, he is the Author. This is that which God challenges to himself,
neither will he lose the glory of these great executions. We men have a rule in
the course of public administations, and we think a politic one, that all
matters of favor Princes should derive from themselves, but all acts of
harshnesse and severity they should put off from their persons to subordinate
agents; God will not stand upon such points, he rather professes to lay claim
to all the memorable acts of vengeance upon sinful Nations and People: Isreal's
revolt under Jeroboam is owned by him in his message to Rehoboams Captains:
Ashur is the rod of his wrath: He slew great Kings, and overthrew mighty Kings;
He hisseth for the Fly of Egypt, and for the Be of Assyria, I say 7.13. Thou
have scattered thine enemies abroad with thy mighty arm, Ps. 89.11. Good
reason that God should claim the propriety of these Acts; For they are the
noble effects and proofs of his vindicative justice; Justice renders to all
their own: Public Desolations are due to public wickednesses. And if this
should not be done, how would it appear that God took notice of the notorious
sins of a people, or were sensible of their provocations? As in outward
Government if there were no Assizes or Sessions to judge and punish malefactors
how could we think other but that all were turned lawless, and that no respect
is given to law or justice; the Wiseman could observe that because judgment is
not speedily executed upon wicked men, the hearts of men are set in them to do
evil. But surely, if it were not executed at all, men would turn Devils: But
now that God calls sinful Nations to account for their iniquity by exemplary
judgments men are ready to say with the Psalmist, Doubtless there is a God
that judges the Earth, Ps. 58.18. God will be glorified even for hell it self
Topheth is ordained of old. Isa. 30.33.

2. Even these desolatory judgments are a notable improvement of his mercy:
There cannot easily be a greater proof of his respects to his own, then in
sweeping away their enemies. Which smote Egypt with their first born, for his
mercy indureth for ever; which overthrew Pharaoh and his Host in the sea, for
his mercy indureth for ever: which smote great Kings, and slew mighty Kings for
his mercy indureth for ever; Sihon King of the Amorites, and Og the King of
Basan, for his mercy indureth for ever. Ps. 139.

Neither is there a greater demonstration of his mercy in his strokes then in
his warnings; for surely God intends by these examples of his just vengeance,
to deterr all others from following the footsteps of those wicked men, whom he
thus plagues: as good Princes and Magistrates do so order their executions that
paena ad paucos, terror ad multos: some may smart, all may fear. It is
excellent and pregnant which the Apostle has, 1 Cor. 10.11. Now all these
things happened unto them for ensamples; and they are written for our
admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come. See I beseech you, God
has further drifts in his executions of judgments then we can imagine; he
intends them not only for acts, but patterns; he means not so much to punish,
as to teach, every judgment it is a new lesson, and to teach not the next
successions, but all generations of men to the end of the World; and if we do
not make this use of his terrible proceedings, we shall be much wanting both to
him and our selves: and no marvel if we be whipped for dull non-proficients in
Gods School if we be not taught fear and obedience by his so many judgments.

We need not cast our eyes much back to the view of former ages (though there
we may meet with worlds of examples) let us but look at the present estate of
our miserable neighborhood; of the woeful ruins of Germany; once and in our
time, one of the most rich, and flourishing countries of the Christian world,
famous for goodly Cities, for a plentiful soil, for frequence of trafique, for
the seat of the Empire, now wasted with the miseries of a long and cruel war,
wallowing in blood, buried in rubbidge and dust: Oh see the desolations that
God has wrought in this part of the earth, and pick out of them (as we well
may) pity, fear, thankfulness. Pity and just commiseration of the grievous
sufferings of that desolate Nation; fear of that just hand of God which has
thus humbled them, and might no less deservedly have fallen as heavily upon us:
thankfulness for those gracious immunities which he has given us hitherto,
from their evils; and merciful respites of repentance for those sins which
have called down these judgments upon them.

And this is the former particular object which the Psalmist calls our eyes
unto; worthy of our view; but yet not the main and intended subject of this
days discourse; rather the other that now follows, the cessation of arms,
and the blessing of peace, He makes Wars to cease in all the World, etc.
however the sight and due meditation of the miseries of war and the vastations
that follow upon it may be a good preparative to us for setting a true value
upon the benefit of peace.

For us, Alas, we had rather a threatening then a sense of war, our neighbors
entered into our borders not with a public denunciation of an offensive war,
but with a profession of defense. And if some blood were mutually shed, in the
passage it was not out of a professedly hostile intention on either part (which
had it been, might easily have proceeded to a far greater slaughter) but out of
the sudden apprehensions of the intervening crosses of each others purposes:
And if the long abode in those our quarters have been not a little chargeable
to us, yet it has been without any violent and bloody prosecution on either
part; and now thanks be to God, they are passed away in peace: But even this
little glimpse of a dry war is enough to show us the woeful misery of a war
denounced, prosecuted, executed to the height of cruelty; where there are
nothing but intentions of killing, spoiling, desolation: The anguish of this
very touch is sufficient to make us sensible of the torment of the full shock
of a destructive war: Out of the sense whereof let us look at this great work
of contrary mercy which is here set forth unto us: He makes wars to cease unto
the ends of the earth.

Wherein we have an intimation no l^sse of the wonder then the benefit of
peace: It is a work of power mixed with mercy that he so restraines the spirits
of men that they are composed to peace. Desolation is not a work of so much
power as peacemaking is; naturally every man has the seeds of war and qu^rrell
sown in his heart, and they are apt to come up on every occasion. Through pride
men make contention, says Wise Solomon: From whence are wars among you, come
they not from hence, even of your Lusts, that war in your Members, says St.
James 4.1. Lo, the outward wars come from the inward; The unquiet thoughts of
the heart arising from ambition, from malice, and envy, and desire of revenge,
are those which are guilty of these general affrayes and bloodsheds of the
World; and what heart is free from these? Every man naturally has a tyrant in
his bosom: We are all by nature thorns or nettles, and cannot be touched
without some stinging or pricking: when there were but two Brothers in the
World, one of them rises up against the other, and dashes his brains out:
Surely as we do all partake of Adam our Grandfather, so we have too much of our
great Uncle, his Eldest Son Cain, naturally affected to violence and slaughter:
Hence in the next age after the deluge Nimrod was a mighty hunter, Genesis 10.
pursuing men, doubtless, no less in his tyranny, then beasts in his game: And
ever since, Lord; how has the World been overrun with battails and murder!
Here one Prince finds his Territories too straight, and has a mind to
enlarge himself with the Elbow-room of the neighboring Region; There, another
scorns to be incroached upon by an injurious usurpation, and repells a less
violence with a greater: Here one pretends to the title of a Crown, wherein he
has no more interest then he can hew out with the sword; There another under
color of aid, thrusts himself into that throne which he pretended to succor:
here one picks quarrels with the defect of justice done to his subjects, and
makes sudden embargoes, and unwarned inroads into the adjoining Country: There
another takes advantage of the violation of leagues, and colors his ambition
with the fair name of a just Vindication: Here one, if he can have no other
ground will make religion a stalking horse to his covetous and ambitious
intrusion; it is bellum Domini, a sacred war that he manages; for the reducing
of Heretics to the unity of the Church; or punishing their perfidiousnesse:
There, another will plant the Gospel with the sword-point amongst Infidels,
and massacres millions of Indians to make room for Christianity; It is a rare
thing, if where great Spirits, and great power are met in any Prince, he can be
content to fit still, and not break forth into some notable breaches of public
peace. And where once the fire of war is kindled, it is not easily quenched,
yea it runs as in a trayn, and feeds it self with all the combustable matter it
meets withal on every side; and therefore it is a marveilous work of the power
and mercy of God, that he makes war to cease. And this he does, either by an
over-powering victory, as in the case of Hezekiah and Sennacherib; which should
seem to be the drift of this Psalm, whereof every passage imports such a
victory and triumph as the conquered adversary should never be able to recover.
Or by tempering, and composing the hearts of men, restraining them in their
most furious carriere, and taming their wild heats of revenge; and inclining
them to terms of peace. This is a thing which none but he can do; the heart of
man is an unruly and head strong thing: it is not more close then violent; as
none can know it, so none can overruled it, but he that made it; It is a rough
sea; he only can say, here shall thou stay thy proud waves: Shortly then,
public peace is the proper work of an Almighty and merciful God: His very
title is Deus pacis, the God of peace, Romans 15.33. and 16.20. Heb. 13.20. so as
this is his peculium: yea it is not only his, for he owes it; but his, for he
makes it, I make peace and create evil, I the Lord do all these things, Esa.
45.7.

That malignant Spirit is in this his professed opposite; that he is the great
makebate of the World; Laboring to set all together by the ears; sowing
discord betwixt Heaven and Earth, betwixt one piece of Earth against another,
Man against Man, Nation against Nation; hence he has the name of Satan, of
(...), of Diabolus; of (...); as whose whole endeavor is enmity and
destruction? Contrarily, the good God of Heaven, whose work it is to destroy
the works of the Devil, is all for peace: he loves peace he commands it, he
effects it, He makes wars to cease.

This is his work in the kind; and so much more his work in the extent; To the
ends of the Earth; by how much more good any work is, by so much more it is
his, and by how much more common any good is, by so much better it is: Even the
pax pectoris, the private and bosom peace of every man with himself is his
great and good work; for the heart of every man is naturally as an unquiet sea,
ever tossing and restless: troubled with variety of boistrous passions; he
only can calm it; the peace of the family is his; he makes men to be of one
mind in an house, without whose work there is nothing but jarres and discord
betwixt husband and wife; parents and children, masters and servants; servants
and children with each other; so as the house is made if not an hell for the
time, yet a purgatory at the least: the peace of the neighborhood is his,
without whom there is nothing but scolding, brawling, bloodsheds, lawing: that
a City is at unity in it self, not divided into sides and factions, it is the
Lords doing: for many men, many minds; and every man is naturally addicted to
his own opinion; hence grow daily destractions in populous bodies.

That a Country, that a Nation is so, is so much more his work as there are
more heads and hearts to govern: But that one Nation should be at unity with
another, yea that all Nations should agree upon an universal cessation of
arms, and embrace peace, A domino factum est hoc and est mirabile, it must
needs be the Lords doing so much more eminently, and it is marveilous in our
eyes: Faciam eos in gentem unam, was a word fit only for the mouth of God: who
only can restrain hands, and conjoyne hearts, as here, He makes wars to cease
unto the ends of the Earth.

Now wherefore serves all this, but for the direction of our recourse, for the
excitation of our duty and immitation; for the challenge of our thankfulness?

In the first place, are we troubled with the fears or rumors of wars? are we
grieved with the quarrels and dissensions that we find within the bosom of
our own Nation or Church? would we earnestly desire to find all differences
composed, and a constant peace settled amongst us? we see whether to make our
address, even to that omnipotent God who makes wars to cease unto the ends
of the earth, who breaks the bow, and snappeth the spear in sunder. And
surely if ever any Nation had cause to complain, in the midst of a public
peace, of the danger of private destractions, and factious divisions, ours is
it; wherein I know not how many uncouch Sects are lately risen out of Hell to
the disturbance of our wonted peace; all of them eagerly pursuing their own
various fancies, and opposing our formerly received truth: what should we do
then but be take our selves in our earnest supplications to the God of peace,
with an Help Lord; never ceasing to solicit him with our prayers, that he would
be pleased so to order the hearts of men, that they might incline to an happy
agreement; at least to a meek cessation of those unkind quarrels wherewith the
Church is thus miserably afflicted.

But secondly, in vain shall we pray, if we do nothing: Our prayers serve only
to testify the truth of our desires; and to what purpose shall we pretend a
desire of that which we endeavor not to effect: That God who makes wars and
quarrels to cease, uses means to accomplish that peace which he decrees; And
what are those means but the inclinations, projects, labors of all the
well-willers to peace? It must be our care therefore to immitate, yea to second
God in this great work of peacemaking; The phrase is a strange but an
emphaticall one that Deborah uses in her song; Curse ye Meroz, said the Angel
of the Lord, curse ye bitterly the inhabitants thereof; because they came not
to help the Lord, to help the Lord against the mighty: Judge. 5.23. Lo, what a
word here is, To help the Lord: what help needs the Almighty, or what help can
our weakness afford to his omnipotence? Yet, when we put our hands to his, and
do that, as instruments, which he, as the author requires of us, and works by
us; we help that Lord which gives us all the motions both of our wills and
actions: so must we do in the promoting of peace, and the allaying of
quarrels: when an house is on fire we must every one cast in his pail-full to
the quenching of the flames. It is not enough that we look on harmlesly with
our hands in our bosoms; No, we add to that burning, which we endeavor not to
quench:

We must contribute our utmost to the cessation of these spiritual and
intellectual wars: which shall be done

1. By withdrawing the fuel of contention; mitigating what we may the grounds
of dissension; those grounds are the matters controverted; these, our Christian
charity, and love of peace will teach us either to decline, or to abate and
lessen by all fair interpretations; according to that of the blessed Apostle,
Charity thinks not evil; bears all things, believes all things, hops all
things, endures all things, 1 Cor. 18.5.7. So when Isaacs Servants found the
Philistims to st^ive with them for their two wells of Esek, and Sitnah, they
did no^ stand upon points with them, but removed and dug another which was
out of the reach of the strife, and called it Rehoboth; elbow-room: Genesis 26.22.
And thus the Servants of Isaac made the Philistim quarrels to cease, though by
Abimelecs own confession, Isaac was much mightier then himself. Genesis 26.16.
Thus when the main difference grew betwixt Reuben and Gad, and the half tribe
of Manasseh, and the rest of Israel concerning the altar beyond Jordan, a fair
construction stinted that strife, which might have embroyled both parts in a
bloody war. Thus it was in the Synod of Ephesus, betwixt our good Bishops
Cyrill and Theodoret, whose differences had like to have rent the Church in
pieces, but upon better understanding were alay'd: Thus it was in the more
general and dang^rous quarrel bewixt the East and West Churches concerning
the (...) and (...) subsistences, and essence in the Trinity, had not holy
Athanasius interposed, showing them their own, unknown, and unacknowledged
accordance: would God I could give this phrase to these times: we should not be
in the condition we are. How many are rather apt to cast oil then water upon
this flame; to enlarge rather then heal this wound of the Church?

2. By giving seasonable counsels of peace; so the Father of the faithful to
his nephew, Let there be no contention between me and thee, and thy herdmen and
my herdmen, for we are brethren, Genesis 13.8. So Moses to the contending
Israelites; wherefore smitest thou thy fellow, Exodus 2.12. So the wise woman of
Abel to Joab: Thou seek to destroy a city and a Mother in Israel: why will thou s^ allow up the inheritance of the Lord? 2 Samuel 20.19. So Abner the Son of
Ner, after he had set the two armies together by the ears by the pool of
Gibeon, yet at last moves for a retreat, calling to Joab whose men he had
challenged; Shall the sword devour for ever, know thou not that it will be
bitterness in the latter end, how long shall it be then, 2 Samuel 2.26. Oh for
these counsails of peace in these distracted times; how beautiful would their
feet be that should bring these glad tidings of peace: Alas m^n are more ready
to clap their hands (as boy^s are wont to do in dog-fights) and to say Eia
Socrates, Eia Zantippe: How much more justly may we take up that word of the
Psalmist; Woe is me that I so^ourne in Mesech, that I dwell in the tents of
Kedar; my soul has long dwelt with him that hates peace, I am for peace, but
when I speak, they are for war. Ps. 120.5, 6, 7.

3. By opposing and restraining the known make-bates of the Church and State.
If Corah and his Company rise up against Moses and Aaron, God takes the
quarrel in hand, and they are swallowed up of the earth; If Sheba the Son of
Bicri blow a trumpet of sedition he must be speedily pursued to the gates of
Abel, 1 Samuel 20. Would God those were cut off that trouble you, says the
charitable Apostle: Neither know I whether this be a greater act of Justice or
of Mercy: of Justice, in respect of the delinquents; or of mercy to the Church
and Commonwealth. Woe is me, with what words should I bewail the d^plorable
estate of these late times in this behalf; Let me appeal to your own eyes and
ears; I know I speak to judicious Christians: Tell me whether ever you lived to
see such an inundation of libellous scandalous malicious pamphlets as have
lately broke in upon us: not only against some particular persons which may
have been faulty enough, but against the lawful and established government it
self, against the ancient, allowed, legal forms of divine worship. Certainly
if we love the peace of this Church and kingdom, we cannot but lament, and to
our power oppose these insolences: If Reformation be the thing desired, and
aimed at; let not that man prosper which does not affect it, pray for it, bend
his utmost endeavors to accomplish it, but is this the way to a Christian
reformation, to raise slanders, to broach lying accusations against the
innocent, to callumniate lawful and established authority? God forbid; these
are the acts of him that is the manslayer from the beginning; the holy God
hates to raise his kingdom by the aid of the Devil. Be as zealous as you
will, but be withal just, be charitable and endeavor to advance good causes by
only lawful means. And then let him come within the compass of this Curse of
Meroz, that is not ready to assist and second you.

4. By cherishing the moderately affected; and encouraging those that intercede
for peace; as those who do the noblest offices both to the Church and
Commonwealth; if we meet with a man that can truly say with the woman of Abel,
ego sum ex colentibus pacem (as Tremelius turns it) 2. Sam. 20.20. I am one of
them that are peaceable and faithful in Israel; make much of such; To the
Counselors of peace shall be joy, Pro. 12.20. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem
(says the Psalmist) they shall prosper that love thee, certainly, thus it
should be; but alas we are fallen upon times wherein it is cause enough for a
quarrel to plead for peace; too well fulfilling that of the Psalmist; They
speak not peace, but they devise deceitful matters against them that are quiet
in the Land, Ps. 35.20. A man in this case is like the shepherd that would
part the fray betwixt his two rams: they both met together upon his bones, and
send him halting out of the field. The God of peace in his good time remedy
these distempers; but in the mean time let us comfort our selves in the
conscience of our happy endeavors with that of St. James, The fruits of
righteousness are sown in peace, of them that make peace. James 3. ult

And thus much for our duty in seconding and immitating this act of God, in
making this cessation of wars; by withdrawing the feuell of contention; by
giving seasonable counsails of peace, by opposing known make-bates, by
cherishing the peaceable minded.

We descend to our third use proper for this day, which is the challenge of our
thankfulness. And surely, wheresoever God vouchsafes to bestow this mercy
(that he causes wars to cease unto any nation) he looks for no less, and we
shall be foulely ungrateful if we disappoint him: whereto we shall the better
be excited, if we shall consider first the miseries of war; and then the
benefits and comforts of peace. The former of these may be talked of, but can
never be thoroughly conceived by any but those that have felt them. I could
tell you of sieging and famishing, sacking, and spoiling, and killing, and
ravishing, and burning, of weltring in blood, and a thousand such tragical
calamities of war; but I had rather the spirit of God should describe them in
his own expressions; These Sword without, and terror within shall destroy both
the Young Man and the Virgin, the suckling also with the Man of gray hairs,
Deuteronomy. 32.25. And Jeremy, Every battle of the warrior is with confused noise,
and garments rolled in blood, but this shall be with burning, and with fenell
of fire. Jer. 9.5. Not to press those passionate descriptions of Esaias, and
Nahum; that one of the Prophet Azariah the Son of Obed shall shut up all. Chro.
15.6. In those times there was no peace to them that went out, nor to him that
came in, but great vexations were upon all the Inhabitants of the Countries;
and Nation was destroyed of Nation, and City of City, for God did vex them with
all adversity; Mark but the foot of this report; upon the mention of war
straight it follows, God did vex them with all ad^ersity; surely there is no
adversity incident unto a Creature, which does not inevitably attend a war: and
as all wars are thus woeful and hideous, so much more the intestine, and
domestical, those that are raised out of our own bowels, these are beyond all
conceit, dreadful and horrible. As therefore we do in our ordinary prayers put
all these together (which are the effects, and concomitants of war) From
plague, pestilence and famine, from battle and murder, and from sudden death,
good Lord deliver us; so good reason have we to put them into the tenor of our
hearty thanksgiving, that God has graciously delivered us from the fury of all
these, in that he caused wars to cease to the ends of our Earth.

As for the benefits of peace, if we were not cloyed with them by their long
continuance, we could not but be heartily sensible of them; and know that all
the comforts we enjoy either for Earth, or for Heaven, we owe to this
unspeakable blessing of Peace; whereto if we add the late accession of further
strength by the union of our Warlick neighbors, and the force of a strong and
inviolable league for the perpetuation of our peace and unity, there will need
no further incitements to a celebration of this day, and to our hearty
thankfulness unto the God of peace; who whiles he has made woeful desolations
in all the Earth besides, yet has caused wars to cease unto our ultima the
ends of our Earth, and has broken the bow and cut the spear in sunder: Oh then
praise the Lord, O Jerusalem, praise thy God of Sion; for he has strengthened
the bars of thy gates, and blessed thy children within thee; Ps. 147.12.13.
He makes peace within thy borders, and fills thee with the finest of the
wheat; To that good God of all glory peace and comfort; Father, Son, Holy
Ghost, one infinite God in three most glorious persons, be given all praise
honor and glory, as is due from Heaven and Earth, from Angels and Men, from
this time forth and for evermore. Amen.

THE MISCHIEF OF FACTION, And the REMEDY of it. Laid forth in a SESMON Before
his MAJESTY In the COURTYARD AT WHITE HALL On the Second Sunday in Lent. 1641.
By JOS. EXON.
PSALM. 60.2. Thou have made the Earth to tremble, thou have broken it; heal
the breaches thereof, for it shakes.


MY text is a complaint, and a suit; a complaint of an evil, and a suit for a
remedy: An evil deplored, and an implored redress. The evil complained of is
double; the concussion or unsettlement of the state of Israel, and the division
of it; For it has been the manner of the prophets, when they would speak high,
to express, spiritual things by the height of natural allusions, fetched from
those great bodies of Heaven, Sea, Earth; the most conspicuous and noted pieces
of Gods Almighty workmanship. It were to no purpose to exemplify, where the
instances are numberless? Open your Bibles where you will in all the
Sapienciall or Prophetical books, your eyes cannot look beside them: And thus
it is here; I suppose no man can be so weak, as to think David intends here a
philosophical history of Earthquakes; although these dreadful events, in
their due times, and places are worthy of no less then a prophets, either
notice, or admiration. But here it is not in his way; It is an Analogicall,
moral, or political Earthquake that David hear speaks of, and so our usual,
and ancient Psalter Translation takes it well; whiles for ((...)) the Earth, it
reads the Land, by a just Synecdoche; and for making the Earth to tremble,
reads, moving the Land; and for broken, reads divided, and for breaches, sores;
so as by comparing of both translations, The Earth is the Land; the tremblings
are the violent motions of it, whether by way of action, or passion, the
divisions thereof are breaches, and those breaches sores, which the hand of God
both makes and heals. Shortly then, here is first an Earthquake, such as it
is; 2ly. The effects of that Earthquake, breaches or sores, 3ly. The author
of both, Thou have made the Earth to tremble, thou have broken it. 4ly. The
remedy of both, with the author of it; Heal thou the Sores or breaches, and
Lastly, the motive of the remedy, for it shakes.

The Text falls into these parts so naturally, that there is none of you who
hear me this day, but were able to divide it for me; which I shall desire to
follow with all perspicuous brevity, and profitable enforcement.

And first; hear and consider that the motions of the distempers, or public
calamities of States are Earthquakes; either or both, For this Earthquake is
either out of a fear or sense of judgment or out of the strife of contrary
affectations; the one we may call a passive, the other an active Earthquake;
Earthquakes we know, are strange and unnatural things; There is no part of
all Gods great Creation save the Earth, that is ordained for rest, and
stability; The waters are in perpetual agitation of flux and refluxes; even
when no wind stirs they have their neap, and spring tides.

The air cannot stand still, whiles the Heavens whirle about. The Heavens or
any part of them never stood still, but once, since they were made; but the
Earth was made for fixednesse, and stability: Hence ye find so often mention of
the foundations of the Earth; and the style of it is, nescia moveri, the Earth
that cannot be moved; and that stands fast for ever; And therefore for the
Earth to move, it is no less prodigy then for the Heavens to stand still.
Neither is it more rare then formidable; If we should see the Heavens stand
still but one hour, we should (as we well might) expect a dissolution of all
things: neither has it less horror in it to feel the Earth stagger under us.
Whose hair does not start up at this trepidation; and the more a man knows,
the more is his astonishment, He hangs the Earth upon nothing, says, Job.
Job 26.7.
For a man to feel the Earth that hangs upon nothing (but as some vast ball in
the midst of a thin yielding air) totter under him, how can his soul choose but
be possessed with a secret fright and confusion? Me thinks, I tremble but to
think of such a trembling.

Such are the distempers and public calamities of States, though even of
particular Kingdoms; but so much more as they are more universal; they are
both unnatural and dreadful. They are politickly unnatural; For as the end
of all motion is rest, so the end of all civil and spiritual agitations is
peace and settlednesse. The very name of a State implies so much; which is we
know a stando, from standing, and not from moving; The man riding upon the red
Horse which stood upon the myrtle trees, Zachar. 1.11. describes the condition
of a peaceful government; Behold all the Earth sits still, and is at rest;
and Micah, They shall sit still every man under his vine and figtree, Micah 4.4.
and none shall make them afraid. Particular men's affairs are like the Clouds,
public government is as the Earth; The Clouds are always in motion, it were
strange for any of them to stand still in one point of the air; so it were to
see private men's occasions void of some movings of quarrels or change; the
public State is, or should be as the Earth a great and solid body, whose chief
praise is settlednesse and consistence: Now therefore when public stirs and
tumults arise in a well ordered Church or Commonwealth, the State is out of
the socket, or when common calamities of war, famine, pestilence seize upon it,
then the hearts of men quake and shiver within them; then is our prophets
Earthquake which is here spoken of: Thou have made the Earth to tremble.

To begin with the passive motions of public calamities; they are the shakings
of our Earth. So God intends them, so must we account them, and make use of
them accordingly: what are we, I mean all the visible part of us, but a piece
of Earth? besides therefore that magneticall virtue which is operative upon all
the parts of it, why should, or can a piece stand still, when the whole moves?

Denominations are wont to be not from the greater but the better part; and the
best part of this Earthen World is man; and therefore when men are moved, we
say the Earth is so, and when the Earth in a generality is thus moved, good
reason we should be so also: we must tremble therefore, when God makes the
Earth to do so. What shall we say then to those obdured hearts, which are
nowhit affected with public evils. Surely he were a bold man that could sleep
whiles the Earth rocks him, and so were he that could give himself to a stupid
security when he feels any vehement concussations of government, or public
hand of Gods afflictive judgment. But it falls out too usually, that as the
Philosopher said in matter of affairs, so it is in matter of calamities,
Communia negliguntur. Men are like Jonas in the storm, sleep it out, though it
mainly concern them: surely, besides that we are men, bound up each in his own
skin, we are limbs of a community; and that body is no less entire, and
consistent of all his members then this natural; and no less sensible should
we be of any evil that afflicts it; If but the least toe do ache, the head
feels it; but if the whole body be in pain much more do both head and feet
feel it. Tell me, can it be that in a common Earthquake any house can be
free, or is the danger less because the neighbors roofes rattle also? Yet too
many men, because they suffer not alone, neither are singled out for Vengeance,
are insensible of Gods hand: Surely such men as cannot be shaken with Gods
judgment are fit for the center, the lowest parts of the Earth, where there is
a constant and eternal unrest, not for the surface of it which looks toward
an Heaven, where are interchanges of good and evil.

It is notable and pregnant which the prophet Esaias has, hear it all ye secure
hearts, and tremble. In that day did the Lord of Hosts call to weeping, and
mourning, and baldness, and girding with sackcloth, and behold joy and
gladness, slaying of Oxen, and killing of Sheep, eating Flesh, and drinking
Wine; And what of that? Surely this iniquity shall not be purged till you die,
says the Lord God of Hosts. What shall we say to this, honorable and beloved;
wherefore has God given us his good creatures, but that we should enjoy them?
Does not Solomon tell us there is nothing better then that a man should Eat,
and Drink, and make his soul enjoy good in his labor. Eccles. 2.24. And why
is God so incensed against Israel for doing what he allows them? Know then
that it is not the act but the time that God stands upon. Very unseasonableness
is criminal, here and now comforts are sins; to be joviall when God calls to
mourning, to glut our maw when he calls to fasting, to glitter when he would
have us sackcloth'd and squalid, he hates it to the death; here we may say with
Solomon, Of laughter thou art mad, and of mirth what is this thou do? He
grudges not our moderate, and seasonable jolities, there is an Ope-tyde by his
allowance, as well as a Lent. Go thy ways; Eat thy Bread with joy, and drink
thy wine with a merry heart, for now God accepts thy work. Lo Gods
acceptance is warrant enough for our mirth: Now may his saints rejoice, and
sing, but there is a time to mourn, and a time to dance. It was a strange
word that God had to the Prophet Ezekiel, that he would take away from him his
wife, the comfort of his life, and yet he must not mourn, but surely when he
but threats to take away from us the public comforts of our peace, and common
welfare; he would have us weep out our eyes: and does no less hate that our
hearts should be quiet within us, then he hates that we should give him so just
cause of our disquiet. Here the Prophet can cry out, Quis dabit capiti meo
aquas? And how does the mournful prophet now pour out himself into
Lamentations, How has the Lord covered the daughter of Sion with a cloud in
his anger, and cast down from heaven to the earth the beauty of Israel. Lament.
2.1. Oh that our hearts could rive in sunder at but the dangers of those
public Judgments which we have too well deserved; and be less sensible of our
private concernments; then should we make a right use of that dreadful hand of
God, of whom our prophet here, thou have made the Earth to tremble.

This for the passive Earthquake of public calamities; now for the active of
public stirs and tumults; with these the land is moved too; and this quaking
is so much more unnatural for that men are here the immediate troublers of
themselves, whereas in the other they are moved by the immediate hand of God:
And here alas, what shall we say to those men that take pleasure in the
embroyling of States? that with Nero can sing to see the City on fire, that
love to dance upon a quaking earth: Yea that affect to be actors in these
unkindly motitations. That great Mathematician braggart could vainly say, give
me a place where to set my foot, and I will move the earth; that which that
proud Engineer would do by Art, these men will do by wickedness, that and more,
for they will be moving that earth which they cannot but tread upon. I remember
Georgias Agricola (who when I was a young man was noted for the most accurate
observer of these under ground secrets of nature) tells us most probably, that
the secondary and immediate cause of an Earthquake is a certain subterraneous
fire kindled of some sulphurous matter within the bowels of that vast body,
and increased by the resistance of the ambient coldness, the passages whereof
being precluded and blocked up by the solid and cold matter of the earth, it
rages, and roars, within those dark hollowes, and by the violence of it, as
murmuring to be thus forceably imprisoned, shakes the parts about it, and at
last makes way by some dreadful Vesuvian-like eruption: Such is the
mis-kindled heat of some vehement spirits: this, when it lights upon some
earthy, proud, sullen, headstrong disposition, and finds it self crossed by
an authoritative resistance, grows desperately unruly; and in a mad
indignation to be suppressed is ready to shake the very foundations of
government; and at last breaks forth into some dangerous rupture, whether in
Church or State: Let no man think I intend to strike at a wise, holy,
well-governed zeal; no, I hug this in my bosom, as the lively temper of
grace, as the very vital spirits of religion; I wish there were more of that
in the World; I speak of the unruly distempers of male-contented persons, and
of the furies of Anabaptism and Separation. Let such men think what they will
of themselves, Solomon has past his doom upon them, Prove. 6.14. Homo nequam
miscet contentiones, as Tremelius turns it: He is no better then a wicked man
that hatcheth divisions; how ever they may slight this contentious humor, I
dare confidently say, a private murderer shall make an easyer answer then a
public disturber, even Apostolical charity can wish, would to God they were
cut off that trouble you, And more then so, whereas they would not be more
stirring then their neighbors, if they did not think themselves wiser, he that
is wiser then they gives them their own. It is an honor for a man to cease
from strife, but every fool will be meddling, Prove. 20.3. So then a quarrelsome
man in a parish, especially if he have gotten a little smattering of law, is
like a cholick in the guts, that tears, and wrings, and torments a whole
township; but a Seditionary in a State, or a Schismatic in the Church is like
a sulphurous fiery Vapor in the bowels of the Earth, able to make that stable
element reele again; worse then that Monster of Tyrants, who could say, (...);
when I am dead. Let Earth and fire jumble together; but this man says (...);
Let me live to see the earth totter, and with that shaking torn and divided;
which is the usual effect of the Earthquake, and the second head of our
intended discourse; Thou have broken or divided it:

I come not hither to astonish you with the relation of the fearful effects
which Earthquakes have produced in all ages, as it were easy to do out of
histories and Philosophical discourses; where you may see Rocks torn in
pieces, Mountains not cast down only but removed, Hills raised not out of
Valleys only, but out of Seas, Fires breaking out of Waters, Stones and Cinders
belched up, Rivers changed, Seas dislodged, Earth opening, Towns swallowed up,
and many other such hideous events: Of which kind our own memory can furnish us
with too many at home; although these colder climates are more rarely infested
with such affrightfull accidents. It is more properly in my way to show you the
parallel effects of the distempers and calamities in States, and Churches. To
begin therefore with the active breaches; whom should I rather instance in,
then that woeful heart-burning of Corah the Son of Levi, and of Dathan, and
Abiram, the Sons of Reuben? No sooner were they enflamed with an envious rage
against Moses and Aaron, then 250. Princes of the Assembly, famous in the
Congregation, men of renown, rise up in the mutiny against their Governors;
and these draw with them all the Congregation of Israel to the door of the
Tabernacle of the Congregation; What is the Issue; After Moses his proclamation
the people withdraws from their tents, the earth opens her mouth, swallows up
Corah and his Company, withal that pertained to them, and they go down quick
into the pit. What a shriek do you think there was, when they found themselves
sinking into that dreadful gulf; as for the 250. Reubenites, fire came out
from the Lord and consumed them: Lo, the two terrible effects even of material
Earthquakes, opening and burning, which we shall find spiritually happening in
all commotions of this nature. Look at the rebellion of Jeroboam; the
male-contented multitude when their petition speeds not, cries out, What
portion have we in David, neither have we inheritance in the Son of Jesse, to
your tents O Israel, took to thine own house, David; What was the effect?
Israel departed to their tents; only Juda stuck to Rehoboam, there is the
division: The stones fly about the ears of Adoram, and become his sudden Tomb,
and drive their Liege Sovereign to his chariot; there is the fire of violence.

So upon the harsh proceeding of Innocent the 4th. against Frederick the
Emperor; Maxima partialitas populorum subsetu^a est, as Tritemius tells us;
There was such a division of the people as lasted in the computation of that
Author no less then 260. years: not without the effusion of much blood; those
which took the Popes part were called Guelfes, those which took the Emperors,
Gibellines; here was (...) indeed with this Roman Earthquake. What should I
overlay you with instances. Will ye see the like effects in the Church? I could
tell you of those Eastern Earthquakes caused by the Arrians, Donatists,
Circumcellians; of those of Province, and the bordering parts, wherein so many
thousand honest and inoffensive Albigenses were overwhelmed. I could tell you
of the Parisian massacres, and many other such tragical acts; take that one
whereof Binius himself can tell you; Pope Urban the 6th, coming to his
Episcopal chair would be correcting the loose manners of the Cardinals, they
impatient of his reformation flew out to Anagina, chose and set up another for
an Antipope Clement 7th. and thereupon perniciosissimum schisma, a most
pernicious schism ar^se, which could not be stinted of 36. years, or as
Fasciculus temporum says, of 40. years; in all which time says he, even the
most learned, and conscientious men knew not who was the true Bishop of Rome,
cum gravi scandalo totius Cleri, and grandi jactura animarum. In the mean time
what woeful work do you think there was, what discontented murmurs, what
roaring of Bulls, what flashes of reciprocal anathema's, what furious
side-takings, what plots, what bloodsheds?

Here at home what deadly divisions have our intestine Earthquakes brought
forth, how have whole fields, whole Countries been swallowed up with the
unhappily raised Barons wars, with the fatal quarrels of the two Roses.
Blessed be God, our land has had rest for many years, ever since that happy
and auspicious union, and blessings, and peace be ever upon that gracious head,
and royal line in whom they are united. I say we have had a long and happy
peace, although perhaps it is no thank to some body: for had that sulphurous
mine taken fire (as it was very near it) this State in all likelihood had not
been shaken only, but quite blown up; those goodly piles and therein the
Monuments of ancient Kings had been, together with the yet stirring limbs of
dying Princes, buried in their own ruin, and rubbish; Deus omen.

It is a dangerous thing (honorable and beloved) for a man to give way to a
secret coffeehouse, or to the first offers of sedition: Curse not the King
no not in thy thought, Curse not the Rich in thy Bedchamber, Eccles. 10. ult.
That great Lawyer said well, if Treason could be discovered but in the heart,
it were worthy to be punished with death: For how ever slight and force-lesse
these beginnings may seem, they bring forth at last no less then public
distraction, and utter subversion; what a poor despicable beginning had the
Scirifii, two Brothers in Barbary, who desired nothing of their Father but a
Drum and an Ensign, but with them they made shift to overrun the two
Kingdoms of Fez and Morocco: what a small snow-ball was that which cursed
Mahomet began to roll, which since has covered all the valleys, yea and
Mountains of the East; what a poor matter is a spark lighting on the tinder,
and yielding a dim blew light upon the match; yet if once it has light the
candle, it soon kindles a fire able to burn a World; yea, what can be less
considerable then a little warm Vapor fuming up in some obscure cell of the
Earth; had it had but the least breathing out, it had vanished alone without
noise or notice; but now the enclosure heightens the heat, and the resisting
cold doubles it, and now it having gathered head, grows so unruly, that it
makes the Earth to tremble at the fury of it, and tears up Rocks, and
Mountains before it in making vent for it self: Of this nature is a mutinous
spirit; he needs no other incentive then his own disposition; and by that
alone, enraged with opposition, is able to inflame a world: so wise Solomon, As
coals are to burning coals, and wood to fire; so is a contentious man to
kindle flrife. Prove. 26.21. It has been always therefore the wisdom of
Churches and States by an early suppression to prevent the gathering of these
hot and headstrong Vapors, by the power of good laws, by careful executions,
and so they must do still; if they desire to have peace. If we would have our
Earth stand still we must not stand still, but must seasonably with all speedy
Vigilance, disperse those unquiet, and turbulent fumes which rise up in it; But
forasmuch as these mischiefs are first hatched within, and notice cannot be
taken of them till they have got a dangerous head, since no man keeps the Key
of a man's own heart but himself, the true way of a perfect prevention is for
men to work upon their own souls in secret, to suppress the first rising of
male-contented, and mutinous thoughts in their own breasts, to settle in
themselves a true valuation of peace, and a just sense of the mischiefs of
contentions. How have we seen Churches, and States like a dry unliquor'd Coach
set themselves on fire with their own motion? How have we seen good timber
rotted with but the droppings of a small chink? Yea how have we seen goodly
ships sinking with but a leak; It was a wise observation of Erasmus; sunt quae
neglecta non laedunt; exagitata graves suscitant tragedias; There are things
which do no hurt to be let alone, but when they are urged breed no small stirs.
It was an absurd and ridiculous mistake of the vulgar Translation of that Luc.
15. as Salmeron himself observes in his prolegomena; Mulier perdidit drachmum,
accendit lucernam and evertit domum, instead of everrit, The Woman lost her
groat, lighted a candle, and overthrew the house, instead of sweeping: See how
one letter may mar a sense: but truly so it is; Many a one in but the seeking
of a sorry groat, lights the candle, and sets the house on fire; would to God
we had not too much experience of this mischief; No less mistaken, but to
better purpose, is that Psalm. 107.4. where they read Effusa est contentio super
principes, whereas the true word is effusa est contemptio; He powers contempt
upon Princes, (...) as Apollinaris, or as the Septuagent (...). The moral may
be too good. Where there are quarrels and contentions, there will soon be
contempt, shame, Annihilation: It was our Saviors word, An house divided
cannot stand: If this then be a fearful judgment which is here specified, that
there is a division of the Land, Let our hearts abhor to be guilty of bringing
it upon our selves; woe be to those by whom the offense comes; England had wont
to be Anglia, quasi (...), as Capgrave derives it, intus gloriosa; So we found
it in the blessed times of our long peace, and so let us leave it to the
succeeding generations. Far be from us that which Bernard speaks of his time,
Omnes suum stomachum sequntur; that every man should follow his own stomach,
and his own brain. Away with all peevish humors of contention if we love our
selves, our Land, our Church, Let us as the Apostles charges, study to be
quiet. Thus much for the active breaches; The passive breaches which follow
upon those Earthquakes of judgment are those grievous Vastations which have
followed upon the public calamities of any Nation; for these are called
Breaches too, as Perez Vzzah; and the hand upon the wall wrote Baltazars
Upharsin. If the Earth could quiver only for a time, and cease again without
any sensible breach, it were no great matter; but as there is no thunder in the
cloud without an eruption of lightning, so there is no Earthquake lightly
without some fearful rupture. The judgments of God never return empty handed;
they still bring what they were sent for. Those three great executioners of
God, sword, famine, pestilence, what woeful havoc have they made in the World?
I could show you very wide breaches that these have made wheresoever they have
come; I could tell you out of Josephus of so many Jews slaughtered at
Jerusalem and the bordering parts, as you would wonder the World should yield
so many men, I could tell you of Eighteen hundred thousand in one Year swept
away (as it is said) in one City, Cairo, with the pestilence; what need I
travel so far off when we have so many and miserable instances nearer home;
Here in England, as our Florilegus or Matthew of Westminster tells us, in the
Year 665* there was so great a mortality that men run up by troops to the
rocks, and cast themselves into the Sea. Do but look back, and recollect those
bills of death which in our two last heavy visitations astonished the press;
Do but look about at both Germanies and their bordering neighborhood, and see
what gaps the sword has made in those yet bleeding territories: Oh the woeful
breaches that have followed these late Earthquakes of Christendom; the very
examples whereof one would think should be enough to teach us both fear and
thankfulness; when the Israelites round about saw Corah and his company
devoured of the Earth, they run away at the cry of them, and said lest the
Earth swallow us up also.

I cannot blame them, they had reason; the same jaws of the Earth might have
yawned wider, and taken them in too. So let us do (Honorable and beloved) yea
why should not the care of our own safety prevail so far with us, as to force
us, since we see the lamentable breaches that are made in our neighbor
Nations, to run away trembling from this gulf of Gods deserved judgments; and
shall I tell you how we may run away to purpose? Run away beforehand from those
sins which have drawn down these judgments on them, and will otherwise do the
like upon us; so shall we be sure to escape the avenging hand of God, who alone
it is that moves the earth, and makes these breaches; which is the third head
of our discourse; Thou have made the earth to tremble, thou have divided or
broaken it.

Who or what ever be the means, he is the author of these movings, of these
breaches; as in nature, the immediate causes of an Earthquake are those
Subterraneous heats which we mentioned, yet it is God the prime cause that sets
them on work, in causing both them and their agency; so it is in these
analogical motions; Men may be the immediate actors in them, but he that
actuates the orders, overrules these means, is God, to him must be ascribed
these stirrings, these breakings: whether by a just but efficacious permission,
as sins, or by a just immission as punishments. This is Gods claim, the
prerogative of the King of Heaven, Is there any evil in the City and I have
not done it? Surely none, except we will detract from his omnipotence, none
against him, none without him, none but by him, his infinite power, justice,
wisdom, mercy, knows when and how to scourge one, to chastise a second, to
warn a third, to humble a fourth, to obdure a fifth, to destroy a sixth;
shortly, to break some, and move all; Oh the infinite varieties, and inevitable
certainties of Gods vengeance upon sinful Nations. Does Israel walk with God,
they are the miraculous pr^cedent of favors to all ages and people: Do they
fly off in Mutinies and Idolatries, God has plagues, fiery serpents, mighty
enemies to execute his wrath upon them. Does Solomon hold right with his God?
Never Kingdom so flourished, in plenty and peace; Is his heart turned from the
Lord God of Israel? straightwayes the Lord stirred up an adversary to Solomon,
Hadad the Edomite; and after him, 1 K* 11.9. v. 14.
the wicked Son of Nebat the Ephrathite, verse. 26. and which is worthy of
singular observation, when that rebel Jeroboam had drawn away the ten Tribes
of Israel from their allegiance to the Son of Solomon, and Rehoboam had
gathered together an hundred and fourscore thousand men of Judah and Benjamin
to fight against the revolted Israelites; the word of God came to Shemaiah the
man of God, Speak to Rehoboam and say; Ye shall not go up nor fight against
your brethren; for this thing is from me. Lo who it is that moves the Earth and
divides it; we may look (as humane wisdom teaches us to do) at the secondary
caus^s; and find them guilty of the public evils; this man's illimitable
ambition, that man's insatiable covetousness; the cruel oppressions of these
great ones, the mutinous dispositions of those inferiors; violence in one, in
another Faction, but if we look not at the first mover of all these lower
wheels, we are but (...) not seeing things afarr off; we do but as the Dog
snarle at the stones, neglect the hand, we are like some fond spectators, that
when they see the puppets acting upon the ledge, think they move alone not
knowing that there is an hand behind the curtain that stirs all their wires.
Upon the sight we do well and wisely by all politic provisions to meet with or
prevent all those peccant humors, which may occasion a public distemper; to
curb the lawless insolence of some, the seditious machinations of others, the
extortions cruelties of some, the corrupt wresting of justice in others: the
giddiness of some, others quarrelsomenesse; but when all is done if we do not
make our peace with God, we do nothing; it is but a reckoning without our host,
a remedy without ease: Oh then, in all either our sense or fear of evils, let
us have our recourse to that Almighty hand which orders all the events of
Heaven and Earth, and work him by our true repentance to a gracious cessation
of vengeance; else what do we with all our endeavors, but as that fond man who
wearies himself lading out the channel with a shallow dish, whiles the Spring
runs full, and unchecked. Vain man, can he possibly hope to scoppet it out so
fast as it fills: let him take order with the well head from whence it issues,
if that be filled up, the channel dries alone: When the Paralytick was with
much labor let down through the roof to our Saviors cure, what said he: Son
thy sins be forgiven thee; Alas, the poor man came not for pardon, he came for
cure; but that great unfailing Physician knew that he must begin here; If the
sins were gone, he knew the palsy could not stay behind them: If ever we think
to be rid of judgments we must begin whence they begin; He it is that can both
strike and case, wound and heal again; which is the next and must be for fear
of your overtiring the last subject of our discourse; heal thou the sores or
breaches thereof.

That great and ineffable name of God consisting of four letters, which we now
call Jehovah, no man knows what it was or how pronounced; but being abridged
to Jah, the Grecians have been wont to express it by (...) which signifies to
heal, the sense whereof is answered by that name which the Heathens gave him,
Jupiter, as juvans pater. This healing then is a proper, kindly, and natural
act of God, whereas the other, as dividing, striking, wounding, commoving, are
a^ it were forced upon him by men: Surely else, he that is essential unity
would not divide; he that is stability it self, would not move, he that is
salus ipsa, would not wound, he that is all mercy would not strike: we do as it
were put this upon him, and therefore he cries out; Why will ye die O house of
Israel? but when we shall return to our selves and him, and be once capable of
mercy and cure, how does he hasten to our redress. The Son of righteousness
shall arise with healing in his wings, Mal. 4.2. Lo, here is healing for his
act, and wings for his haste. Those breaches which are made in the earth by the
shaking of it are as so many wounds, gashes or sores in a vast body, and both
of these resemble those either divisions or calamities, which fall out in the
bodies of Churches or States; the hand that made them must, can, will only heal
them. Heal thou the breaches; And how does he heal them in matter of calamity?
First, by removing the grounds of it; Surely, the great and true sores of the
Land, are the sins of the Land, which till it please him to heal by working us
to a serious repentance, in vain shall we complain of our breaches which follow
them. These are (...), a noisome sore and grievous, Rev. 16.2. Not only in the
Knees and Legs, Deuteronomy. 28.
but in the very bowels and vitallest parts, as Jeroboams was, 2 Chro. 21. Woe
is me how full we are of these sores ( Longae pacis mala) we are; what an
Ulcerous body are we grown, like to that great pattern of misery that was totus
ulcus, all but one botch, I would not be querulous, but I must say so; What
shall I say of our blasphemies, prophanesses, uncleanesses, drunkennesses,
oppressions, sacriledges, lawless disobediences, contempt of Gods messengers,
and all that rabble of hellish enormities, enough to shame Heaven, and confound
Earth. These are sores with a witness; Alas, these like to David's, run, and
cease not; they are besides their noysomnesse (...) sure and old sores. But yet
stay my brethren; we are not come to that pass that Jehoram, was that the
Wound is incurable; or to the State of the Sareptans Son, that there was no
breath left in him; but like Eutichus rather, bruised but yet breathing, And
still, still there is balm in Gilead; let our Wounds be never so deep,
repentance may, can, will recure them, let not us think onwards to heal Gods
people with good words; this is the way to fester them within; No let us who
are Gods Chirurgions make use of the probe of Wise Austere judgment; let us
gage the sore to the botome, and tent it home with the applications of the Law;
let us take off the proud flesh with the corrosiving denunciations of vengeance
to the impenitent sinners; and then when it is thoroughly drawn let us lay on
the sovereign emplaisters of the most precious and meritorious mercy of our
blessed Redeemer. Thus, thus must all our spiritual sores be healed; and oh,
that we could obtain of our own hearts to address our selves to a saving use
of these sure remedies: how happy were both for our souls and for our Land,
whose sores yet lie dangerously open; how soon would our justly provoked God
take off his heavy judgments? Is it an Enemy that would afflict us? He can put
a hook into the Nostrils, and a bridle into the Lips of the proudest Assyrian
at pleasure: Is it a Pestilence? He can call in the destroying Angel, and bid
him Smite no more: Is it Famine? He can restore to us the years that the Locust
has eaten, the Canker-worme, and the Caterpiller; The Floores shall be full of
Wheat, and the Fats overflow with Wine and Oil. In matter of division,
secondly; the way to his cure must be by composing all unkind differences, and
uniting the hearts of men one to another; the hearts even of Kings, much more
of Subjects are in his hand, as the Rivers of Waters, and he turns them which
way soever he pleases; sometimes dreadfully forward to a right down opposition,
sometimes side-ways to a fair accommodation, sometimes circularly bringing them
about to a full condescent and accordance.

But as we commonly say the Surgeon heals the wound, and yet that the
Plaster heals it too, the Surgeon by the plaster; so may we justly here,
it is God that heals, and the means heal: God by the means, and the means by
and under God, and surely when we pray or expect that God should heal either of
these breaches, we do not mean to sue to him to work miracles, this were (as
St. Austin said truly in the like case) to tempt God, but we beseech God to
give and bless those means whereby those breaches may be made up. As for the
calamitous breaches, those we wish may be healed, so far as the arm of flesh
can reach by the vigilance and ower of Soveraignity, by the prudence of wise
Statesmen by the sage Council of the State and Kingdom, by wholesome
provisions of good Laws, by careful and just executions. As for quarrellous
and discontented breaches, there are other Remedies to heal them; the Remedies
must be as the causes of them from within. Let the first be a resolution of
confining our desires within the due bounds, not affecting mutual
encroachments, or unnecessary innovations: Not Encroachments first, Good Lord,
what a stir these two great wranglers Meum, and Tuum make in the World; were it
not for them, all would be quiet: Justice must do her part betwixt them both;
holding the balance even with a suum cuique, and says with the Master of the
vineyard (...); Take that which is thine own, and go thy way, Mat. 20.14.
remembering in all states that heavy word of the Apostle: But he that does wrong
shall receive for the wrong which he has done; and there is no respect of
persons, Colos. 3. ult. It is but right that wrong should receive a payment in
whose hands soever it be found; and if this retribution fail sometimes with you
men of might, whom earthly greatness may perhaps for a time bear out in hard
measures to your impotent inferiors, yet there is no respect of persons above,
except this be it, potentes potenter punienter.

Not innovations secondly: It is that which Job finds out as one of the
hainousest sins of his time, Some remove the Landmarks; a thing which God has
given strict charge against Deuteronomy. 19.4. and we from Moses fetched it into our
Lenten Curses, Cursed be he that removes his neighbors Landmarks, Deuteronomy.
27.17. even in this case, (...) is a sure rule; The old way says the Prophet
is the good way: every novelty carries suspicion in the face of it; It was a
good question of the Church in the Canticles, why should I be as one that
turns aside to the Flocks of the companions? The wisdom of great Statesmen
have still taken it for a just principle, that of Plato, (...) ye have heard of
Landmarks, but ye see how it is with Sea-marks if they should be changed, it
is the wrack of every vessel, either Rocks would dash them, or shelves swallow
them; And as innovations do not well in way of change, so not in way of
addition; that which Tertullian said of faces, I may say of main truths, A
diabolo sunt additamenta; and if Terpander do but add but one string more to
his harp the instrument is broke, and he censured; In regard of both; if it be
the great and glorious style of God, that in him is no shadow by changing;
surely those well settled Churches and States come nearest to his perfection
that alter least; And if with Lipsius we shall say; Quid si in melius, I must
answer, that in every change there is a kind of hazard; it is a wise word
therefore of our Hooker, that a tolerable sore is better then a dangerous
Remedy.

The second Remedy must be a discreet moderation in the pursuance of our
apprehended right: How many good matters have been marred with ill handling;
The debtor did owe to the rigorous steward an hundred pence; no doubt the dept
was due, he might justly claim it; but to lay hands on the man, and to offer to
pluck it out of his debtors throat, this is justly taxed for a foul cruelty;
Many an honest Corinthian was injured by his wrangling neighbor, and had
justissimam causam litigandi; yet for Christians to go to law before infidels,
this the Apostle taxes for a sinful piece of Justice; why rather suffer ye not
wrong says the Apostle; This is durus serms, says some brangling parishioner
that fetches up his poor Minister every Term for trifles, yet in St. Paul's
judgment a slight injury is better them a scandalous quarrel.

The third is a meek complying with each other, relenting (so far as we may
with all possible safety) on either part, if the difference be between
unequalls, charitable and merciful on the superiors part, humble and submiss
on the inferiors. Abraham and Lot fall upon a difference; Abraham is the
better man, he is the Uncle, Lot but the Nephew; yet Abraham seeks the peace
and follows it with him, whom one would think he might have commanded.

Good David had done his Master and Father in Law no wrong, unless it were tu
pugnas ego vapulo; and yet after good demonstration of his loyalty, how humbly
does he beg a reconcilement at the hands of Saul; Wherefore does my Lord the
King pursue after his servant; Now therefore, let my Lord the King hear the
words of his Servant, If the Lord have stirred thee up against me, Let him
accept an offering. Harsh contestations never did good; The ball rebounds from
the floor to the face of him that throws it, whereas a look of wool falls
without noise, and lies still: Those that would take birds imitate their
language, do not scare them with shouting: Bitter oppositions may set off, but
cannot win either an hollow friend, or a known Enemy.

The fourth and last must be a charitable construction of each others acts and
intentions; There is nothing in the World which may not be taken with either
hand; whether the right hand of favor, or the left of malice. We see the Son
of God himself, in whom the Prince of this World could find nothing, yet was
exposed to mis-construction. Does he dispossess Devils, it is by Magic; by
Beelzebub the Prince of Devils? Does he frame himself (other then his
forerunner) to a sweetly-sociable conversation with men for their conversion?
Behold a glutton, a wine bibber, a friend of Publicans and sinners: Mat. 11.19.
Does his chosen vessel, St. Paul desire to comply with the Jews in purifying
himself with the Votaries in the Temple? Act. 21.28.
he is cried out on for an enemy to the law, for a profaner of the holy place;
away with him he is not worthy to live.

Good Lord what uncharitable censure are men apt to pass upon each other; let
a man be strict and austere in moral and divine duties though never so
peaceable, he is a Puritan, and every Puritan is an Hyppocrite: Let him be more
free, and give more scope to his conversation though never so conscionable he
is a Libertine; let him make scruple but of any innovated form, he is a
Schismatic; let him stand for the anciently received rites and government, he
is a time-serving Formalist; This is a Diotrephes, that an Aerius, this a
scorner, that a flatterrer: In the mean time who can escape free? Surely, I
that tax both shall be sure to be censured of both: shall be? yes am, to
purpose; and therein I joy, yea and will joy: What? a neuter, says one, what
on both sides, says another; This is that I looked for; yes truly brethren, ye
have hit it right; I am and profess to be as the terms stand, on neither, and
yet of both parts; I am for the peace of both, for the humor of neither; how
should the mortar or cement join the stones together if it did not lie between
both? And I would to God not you only that hear me this day but all our
brethren of this Land were alike-minded; we should not have such libellous
presses, such unquiet pulpits, such distracted bosoms; for the truth is, there
is no reason we should be thus disj^ined, or thus mutually branded; This man is
right, ye say, that man is not right; this sound, that rotten; And how so, dear
Christians? What? for ceremonies and circumstances, for rochets, or rounds, or
squares; let me tell you; he is right, that has a right heart to his God, what
forms soever he is for: The Kingdom of God does not stand in Meats, and
Drinks, in Stuffes, or Colors, or fashions; in Noyses, or Gestures; it stands
in Holiness and Righteousness, in Godliness and Charity, in Peace and
Obedience; and if we have happily attained unto these, God does not stand upon
nifles, and niceties of indifferencies, and why should we? Away then with all
false jelousies, and uncharitable glosses of each others actions and estates;
Let us all in the fear of God be entreated in the bowels of our dear Redeemer,
as we our Selves, our Land, our Church, the Gospel, to combine our counsels
and endeavors to the holding of the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace,
and labor, and study not how to widen or gall, and ranckle, but how to salve
and heal these unhappy sores of the Church and State by confineing our desires
within the due bounds, free from encroachments, from innovations; by a discreet
moderation in all our prosecutions, by a meek relenting even in due challenges,
by a fair and charitable construction of each others acts, and intentions; and
lastly by our fervent persuasions and prayers; and so many as are thus minded,
peace be upon them, and upon the whole Israel of God, this day and for ever
Amen.

A SERMON Preached at the TOWER: March. 20. 1641.
By JOS. NORVIC.
JAMES 4.8. Draw nigh unto God, and he will draw nigh to you; Cleanse your
hands ye sinners, and purge your hearts ye double minded.

9. Be afflicted, and mourn, and weep, etc.


I Have pitched upon this Text, as fit for both the time and the season; both
of them sad and penitential; and such, as call us to devotion, and
humiliation; both which are the subjects of this Scripture:

There is no estate so happy (if it could be obtained) as that of perfect
obedience; but since that cannot be had, partly through the weakness, and
partly through the wickedness of our nature, for there is a ((...)) an
impossibility upon it, Romans 3. the next to it is that of true repentance; which
is no other then an hearty turning from our evil ways, and an endeavor of
better obedience; and this estate is here recommended to us, under a double
Alegory, the one, of our drawing nigh to God; the other, of our cleansing and
purging; In the former whereof, the sinner is represented to us in a remote
distance from God; in the other, as foul and nasty, both in his heart, and his
hands; and the remedy is prescribed for both: of his remoteness; drawing nigh
to God; of his foulness, Cleansing and purging; the former is enough to take
up our thoughts at this time: Wherein ye have a duty enjoined, and an
inducement urged, the Duty, draw nigh to God, the Inducement; God will draw
nigh to you.

To begin with the former, the duty of drawing nigh implies something, and
requires something; it implies a distance, and requires an act of approach:

It implies a distance, for we cannot be said to draw near, if we were not afar
off; The sinner therefore is in a remote distance from God, and that in respect
of both terms; both as of God, and as of the sinner.

Of God, first, the sinner then is aloof off from God, not from the presence of
his essence, and power; so he would be afar off, and cannot; Whether shall I go
from thy presence, or whether shall I flee from thy Spirit? If I go up to
Heaven thou art there, and if (as our new Translation has it) I make my bed in
hell; (an uneasy bed God knows that is made there) yet there thou art also: Ye
the Devils themselves could not have their being but from God; for their being
is good though themselves be wicked; that they are spirits they have from God,
that they are evil Spirits (and so Devils) is from themselves: And their
companions the woeful reprobate souls would fain be further off from God, if
they could: They shall in vain call to the Rocks and Mountains to cover them
from his presence; he cannot be excluded from any place, that fills and
comprehends all things: How then is the sinner aloof off from God? From the
holiness of God; from the grace and mercy of God, from the glory of God: From
the holiness of God, he is no less distant then evil is from good, which is
no less then infinitely: There is no local distance but is capable of a
measure (for an actual infinite magnitude is but an atheous paradoxe in
philosophy:) If it be to the Antipodes themselves, on the other side of the
earth, we can have a scale of miles that can reach them: yea of furlongs, of
paces, of feet, of barley corns; but betwixt good and evil there is no
possible, no imaginable proportion; and as from the holiness of God, so from
the grace and mercy of God, he is no less distant then guilt is from
remission, which is also no less then infinitely; for the sinner, as he is and
continues such, is utterly incapable of remission; It is true that Gods mercy
is over all his works, but the sinner is none of them; By him were made all
things that were made, John 1. but God never made the sinner, God made the man;
but it is the Devil and man's free will that made the sinner, indeed sin is
nothing else but the marring of that which God has made; sin therefore without
repentance may never hope for remission; when repentance comes in place it
cease in Gods imputation to be it self, but without it there is no place for
mercy: Many sorrows, says the Psalmist, shall be to the wicked, Psalm. 32.10.
but he that trusts in the Lord, mercy shall compass him about: Lo sorrows
and torment are for the wicked, mercy only for the penitent and faithful; The
sinner may flatter himself (as our nature is apt to do, ( Men's sibi saepe
mentitur) with a vain hope of better, but he that is truth it self has said
it; There is no peace says my God to the wicked, tribulation and anguish on
every soul that does evil, he that hardens his heart shall fall into evil.

And as he is a aloof off from Grace as the way, so from Glory as the end; here
is indeed ((...)) a great gulf and unmeasurable, betwixt the Sinner and
Heaven; One is not so much as within the ken of the other; without holiness
there is no seeing of God, says St^ Paul, Hebr. 12.14. no not so much as afar
off; unless it be for an aggravation of torment; Much less may any unclean
thing enter there; Look as impossible as it is for a man that has this clogg
of flesh about him, to leap into the Sky; so impossible it is, for the soul
that is clogged with sin, ever to come within the verge, within the view of the
third Heaven, which is the presence of the Lord of Glory.

This for the distance in respect of God; will ye see it in respect of the
sinner himself; He is aloof off from God in his thoughts, in his affections, in
his carriage and actions. In his thoughts first, which are only evil,
continually; He never thinks of God, but when he feels him punishing; and,
then; not without a murmuring kind of regret, Psalm. 10.4.
and indignation; no not even whiles he swears by him, does he think of him;
God is not in all his thoughts, says the Psalmist, that is by an usual
Hebraisme, God is not at all in his thoughts; for otherwise (unless it be
virtually, and reductively) there is no man whose thoughts are altogether taken
up with the Almighty; the sinners, never) nay, he strives to forget God; and
when the notion of a God is forced upon him, he struggles against it; and says
to the Almighty Depart from me. And even this alone shows how he stands in
respect of his affections: He loves not God, no not whiles he promerits him
with his favors. It is the Title that St. Paul gives to wicked men Romans 1.^0.
that they are, (...); God-haters; One would think this should not be incident
into a man; for nothing but evil is the object of hatred; and God is absolute
goodness it self; yet such is the cankered and corrupt nature of the sinner,
that apprehending God, sub ratione mali, he hates him, who is in himself
infinitely amiable; and as he says in his heart there is no God, so he wishes
in his heart there were no God; He is never well therefore whiles he has any
thing to do with God; whiles he is in his company; or in the company of those
that he thinks belong to him, his conscionable servants, and whiles he is
employed in any of his services, he stands upon thorns: Thus the sinner is in
his affectations aloof off from God; and for his carriage and actions, they are
answerable to both the other; All his life is nothing else but a departing from
the living God, and therefore he must needs at last be far off; Look to all
his ways, you shall find how diametrally contrary they are to Gods; Gods ways
are direct ones: the sinners are oblique, and crooked: God has chalked out his
ways in the Ten words of his royal law, the sinner turns his back upon every
one of them, and walks point blank opposite: God commands an holy and
religious disposition toward his Majesty: the sinner gives himself over to a
wild and loose profaneness; to a lawless course of godlesnesse, and walks as
without God in the world; God commands all reverent, and awful usage of his
name: the sinner tears it in pieces with his oaths, and blasphemies: God
commands all dutiful obedience to authority, not for fear only, but for
conscience sake: the sinner is ready to say, disrumpamus vincula; let us break
their bonds, and cast their cords from us: God commands all sobriety, chastity,
temperance, the sinner runs into all excess of riot: Finally, God commands all
charity, and justice, to our neighbor, the wicked heart is merciless, and
cares not upon whose ruins he raises his own advantages; so every way, both
in his thoughts, affections, and actions, the sinner is afarr off from God* Now
the moral and civil man hears this and turns it off, as nothing concerning
him, he is as near to God as the best: and indeed in some sense he is so, St.
Paul could say to his Athenians, He is not far from every one of us: Every
creature has equally his living, moving, being from God; but as for any
relation to God, in respect of holiness, of grace and mercy, of glory; this
man is as far off as Earth is from Heaven, yea as Heaven is from Hell. For,
even by nature, we are the best of us, the Sons of wrath. And if we had no more
then even our birth sin, this alone would estrange us sufficiently from God;
but besides this, our actual sins set us off yet further; and if we had no
sins of commission (as we have numberless, for in many things we sin all, yea
in all things we sin all) yet those of omission cannot but put us into an utter
distance; for if the moral man could be supposed to do nothing actually
against Gods will, yet his thoughts are not upon him, being wholly taken up
with the World; his affections are not toward him, being wholly set upon the
World, and these earthly things; his best actions are not regulated by the
royal law of righteousness, but by the rules of civility and common humanity;
and the end which he proposes to himself in them is, not the glory of God, but
his own honor or advantage. And therefore both the wicked man, and the mere
moral man are aloof off from God; and therefore out of the benefit of Gods
favor and protection; even as we know that those which live under the two
poles, are out of the comfortable reach of the Sunbeams; or those
Antichthones which are on the other side of the globe of the Earth, are now
whiles it is day with us. Please your selves therefore ye sinful and natural
men, with the spiritual condition wherein ye stand; God is no otherwise near
to you, but to plague and punish you, Ye can never receive any glimpse of true
comfort in your souls, whiles you so continue, and therefore as ye tender your
own present and eternal welfare, stir up your selves, to take this divine
Counsel of the Apostle, Draw nigh unto God; And so from the distance employed,
we descend to the approach enjoined; which we shall consider as it has respect
to the presence of God; and to the motion of man: To the presence of God, in
relation to his Ordinances, and to his Spirit;

First then, we draw nigh unto God, when we attend upon him in his worship and
service; for God is where he is worshipped, and where he reveals himelf; In
this regard, when Cain was banished from the presence of God, it was not so
much an exile, as an excommunication; Hence is all the legal service called
appearing before the Lord; So David, when shall I appear in thy sight, Psalm.
42.2. and can find in his heart for this cause, to envy the sparrowes and
swallows as herein happier then himself; Thus Jacob of his Bethel, God was
here and I knew it not! Then therefore do we draw nigh unto God, when we come
into his house; when we present our selves to him in our prayers, whether
private or public, when we attend upon him in his word, whether read, or
preached; in his holy Sacraments, in all religious exercises; And those that do
willingly neglect these holy services, they are no other then aloof off from
God; and certainly, (whatsoever they may think of it) this estate of theirs is
very dangerous; for if the worst piece of hellish torment be that of loss: and
utter departing from the presence of God, then surely our voluntary Elongation
of our selves from his presence must needs be a fearful introduction to an
everlasting distance from him: Let our Recusants (whether out of heresy or
faction) make what slight account they please of these holy assemblies, Surely
the keeping away from the Church is the way to keep out of Heaven: Auditus
aspectum restituit, as Bernard well, It is our hearing that must restore us to
the sight of God.

This in relation to his Ordinances, that to his spirit follows; we do then,
Secondly, draw nigh to God, when upon our conversion to him, we become the
receptacles and entertainers of his good Spirit: For God is undoubtedly where
he breathes into the soul holy desires, where he works Heavenly grace in the
heart; This presence follows upon the other, or accompanies it: For, when we
do carefully and conscionably, wait upon Gods ordinance, then his Spirit
offers, and conveighs it self into the heart; these are Vehiculum gratiae, the
carriage of grace into the soul; Never any scorner, or profane person has any
sense of this presence; This is that David speaks so passionately of; Oh cast
me not away from thy presence, and take not thine holy spirit from me; It
troubled him, as before, to be kept from Gods ordinances; but it troubled him
an hundred times more to be cast out from this (more entire) presence; Cant.
5.6.7.
the Church in the Canticles, when she misses her welbeloved, how impatient she
is? How she runs about the City? How she hazards her self to the blows of the
watchmen; and will take no rest till she have recovered him? These spiritual
desertions are the saddest things that can befall to a man: For, there is a
spiritual familiarity of sweet conversation betwixt God and his, which it is a
death to forgo: they enjoy each other, live in each others sight, impart their
counsels each to other: So then, we draw near to God, when repenting us of our
former aberrations from him we renew our covenants with him, put our selves
into an awful acknowledgment of him; still seeing him that is invisible; when
we grow into dear (though trembling) acquaintance with him; taking pleasure in
his company, interchanging our dulce susurrium cum Deo, as Bernard speaks, and
indevouring to be in all things approved of him; This must needs be a very
comfortable and blessed condition; Oh happy, thrice happy are they that ever
they were born, who have truly attained to it; It is a true rule in philosophy,
that every natural agent works by a contaction, whether bodily, or virtuall;
which the weaker, or further off it is, the efficacy of the operation is so
much the less; As when we are cold, the fire heates us, but not except we come
within the reach of it; If we stand aloof off it warmes us so feebly, that we
are little the better for it; but if we draw close to the hearth, now it
sensibly refreshes us; even thus also does God himself please to impart
himself to us; How ever there is infinite virtue in the Almighty, not
confinable to any limits; Luc. 8.45.
yet he will not put it forth to our benefit, unless we thus draw near to him;
who touched me, says our Savior, when the bloody-fluxed woman fingred but the
hemme of his garment; Lo, many thronged him, but there was but one that touched
him; and upon that touch, Virtue went out from him to her cure. He might have
diffused his virtue, as the Sun does his beams at a distance, to the furthest
man; but as good old Isaac, that could have blessed his Esau in the field, or
in the forest, yet would have him to come close to him for his benediction: So
will God have us to draw nigh to him, if ever we look for any blessing at his
hands, according to the charge here given, Draw nigh unto God.

Now then, that from the respect to the presence of God, we may descend to
consider the motion of man: There are many ways of our appropinquation to God:
this People (says God) draws nigh me with their lips, but their hearts are
far from me: This is an approach that God cannot abide: this lip-walk may
advance us to hell for our hypocrisy, but it can never promove us one step
toward Heaven: God cannot abide mere talkers of religion: let them say Lord,
Lord: he shall answer them, I know you not; Depart from me ye workers of
iniquity: There are three ways of our drawing nigh to God, which he accepts of
from us, On our feet, on our hands, and on our knees: On our feet first: Keep
thy foot, Eccles. 5.1.
says Solomon, when thou go into the house of God: what are the feet of the
soul, but the affections? Then do we therefore draw nigh to God, when we are so
affected to him as we ought; when we come to him with the foot of fear, Fear
the Lord all his Saints, says the Psalmist: Serve the Lord in fear, Ps. 2.
Fear God and depart from evil, says his Son Solomon Prove. 3.7. when we come
to him with the foot of love; I sought him whom my soul loves, says the
Spouse, Cant. 3.1. when with the foot of desire, As the embossed heart pants
for the rivers of waters, so does my soul for thee, O God: Ps. 42.1. with the
foot of joy, I rejoiced when they said, Come let us go up to the house of the
Lord: with the foot of confidence; In the Lord put I my trust, how then do ye
say to my soul, Flee hence as a bird to the hills?

And as we must draw nigh to God on the feet of our affections, so also, upon
the hands of our actions; even as Jonathan and his armor-bearer climbed up the
rock with feet and hands: this is done, when we perform to God all holy
obedience; when we serve him as we ought, both in our devotions, and our
carriage; and this is the best and truest approximation to God; Walk before me,
says God to Abraham, and be upright; Master, says Peter, if it be thou, Joh.
21.17.
bid me come unto thee; and after that, when he heard it was the Lord, he girt
his fishers coat to him, and casts himself into the Sea, to come to Christ;
without this reality of action, all our profession is but idle pretense: I
remember our Countryman Bromiard tells us of one, who meeting his neighbor
coming out of the Church, asked him; what is the Sermon done? Done? said the
other, No; It is said, it is ended, but it is not so soon done, And surely, so
it is with us; we have good store of Sermons said, but we have but a few done;
and one sermon done, is worth a thousand said, and heard; For, not the hearers
of the law, but the doers of it are justified; and if ye know these things,
blessed are ye if ye do them: Glory, honor, and peace to every one that
works good, Romans 2.10.

Now, that we may supply both those other approaches on our feet and hands, we
must in the third place, draw nigh to God on our knees, in our earnest
supplications to him, for his enabling us to them both: does any man want
wisdom (and this is the best improvement of wisdom that may be, Ja. 1.4.
to shelter our selves under the wings of the Almighty) let him ask of God, who
gives liberally, and upbraideth no man; let us sue to him with all holy
importunity; Oh that my ways were made so direct that I might keep thy
statutes: Teach me O Lord the way of thy statutes, Ps. 119.
and I shall keep it to the end: O stablish thy word in thy servant that I may
fear thee: Thus let us seek the Lord early, and fervently; and power out our
hearts before him; It is not for us to fear that we can offend in an over-bold
access to the throne of Grace, in bouncing to hard at his mercy-gate; for, Lo,
his goodness has invited us, and animated, our bashfulnesse.

When Moses approached to the burning bush, he hears Come not near; for he
came out of curiosity and wonder, not out of devotion; but, God calls us to
this approach, Ho, every one that thirsts come, Come to me all ye that
travel and be heavy laden and I will refresh you; and therefore we cannot come
with too much confidence, nor fail of success in coming; It is an holy and
well grounded expostulation, which the Psalmist has; How long will thou be
angry with thy people that prays? implying that whiles we can pray, we may
make just account of favor, and protection; So then, upon the feet of our
affections, upon the hands of our actions, upon the knees of our devotions we
must draw nigh unto God; But that we may do so; Our care must be, that the
hindrances of our approach may be removed; And, first of all: we must draw off
from the World; that is like a rock of Lodestone, that draws our Iron hearts
to it, and holds them close to it self; so as it is not easily quit; It is like
the Father of the Levites Concubine, that holds us on with a pleasing
entertainment, till there be a danger of mis-carriage in the return; But ye
remember what the Psalmist says, Hearken O Daughter, and consider, Thou must
leave thy Fathers house; we must in our affections leave the World, if we would
betake our selves to God: Tush, (ye are ready to say) we shall hold in with
both, and do well enough. Be not deceived, Brethren, The love of the world is
enmity with God: Ye cannot serve to Masters, God and Mammon: one of them you
must forsake: Abraham must leave his Ur of the Chaldees, his native Country,
and his Fathers house, if he will have the clear vision of God; The Israelites
must go out of Egypt, ere they can offer an acceptable sacrifice to God; we
must with Elisha, forsake our teame if we will be fit attendants for a Master
that is raped up to Heaven; we must forsake our nets and follow Christ if we
will be meet Disciples of his.

In the second place, we must give strong denyalls to our own corrupt desires:
These are like some leaden weights, that hang upon our heels, and keep us from
mounting up into our Heaven; these, like to Potiphars wanton wife hang upon
Joseph's sleeve to draw him unto folly, and they must be shaken off if ever we
would draw nigh unto God: If Father, or Mother, or Wife, or Child lie in thy
way, per calcatum Vade patrem, trample upon thy Fathers breast in thy passage to
thy Father in Heaven: Our self-love, and self-respect lies like an huge
mountain betwixt God and us; we must either by the power of our faith, say to
this Mountain, be thou removed and cast into the midst of the Sea; or else we
must climb over it by the painful practices of a constant and effectual
mortification. Shortly, as men, peregrinamur a domino, we are here absent from
the Lord, 2. Cor. 5.6. but, as sinners, we are with the prodigal, gone into a
far Country, quite out of the Ken of our Fathers house, and there having spent
our patrimony, and debauched our selves, we are feeding upon the husks of
vanity. Oh let us take up at the last, serious resolutions to return home,
though by weeping cross, and put our selves into our way; we shall be sure
that our indulgent Father will epsy us afar off, and meet us in our passage,
and welcome us with a kiss: according to this word in my Text, Draw nigh to
God, and he will draw nigh to you: And so from the duty enjoined, we descend to
the Inducement proposed.

But indeed, what needs any inducement at all; There are actions that carry
their reward in their mouth; such is this we have in hand: It is a great honor
to us wretched Creatures, that we may be allowed to draw nigh to the Lord of
glory: If there do but an earthly Prince come ever, though we have no relation
to him at all, yet what pressing there is to see him, so as there is need of
Ushers, or whifflers to stave off the multitude; but if our own would allow all
his subjects to repair to his Court with expectation of favor and countenance
from him, what thronging would there be to his gates, what ambition to enter?
And, Lo, the God of Heaven gives us this gracious liberty of a free access,
and yet withal backs it with a strong motive of advantage; He will draw nigh
unto you: And indeed what inducement can there be equally powerful to this,
that God will draw nigh to us. There is nothing in us but want, misery,
infirmity, deformity; there is nothing in God, but perfection, and glory; and
therefore, for us vile wretches to draw nigh to him, what can it be other then
an honor too high for us; but for him to draw nigh to us, what can it be but a
kind of disparagement to him? Ye know what a construction was set upon our
Savior for this very point, that he did eat and drink with Publicans and
Sinners; and how the proud Pharisee censured him, when that humble penitent
made an ewre of her eyes, and a towell of her hair for the feet of Christ; Luc^
7.39.
Oh, says he if this man were a Prophet, he would have known what manner of
woman this is that touches him, for she is a sinner: as if the suffering
himself to be touched by a sinner were disgrace enough; and yet the God of
Heaven will descend to us so low, as notwithstanding our extreme sinfulness
and unworthiness to draw nigh unto us.

God will be so to us, as we are to him; As face answers to face, so does God
to us: when ye look upon your glass, if you smile upon it, it will smile upon
you again, if you frown, it will so do also: even so does God with us; with the
pure thou will be pure, with the merciful, thou will be merciful; with the
froward thou will show thy self froward; If thou run away from God, he will run
away as fast from thee, if thou draw nigh unto God, he will draw nigh to thee.

And how will God draw nigh unto us: In his Ordinances, In his Audience, in his
Graces, In his Aid and Salvation.

In his Ordinances; For God has graciously as it were tied his presence to
them, as under the law, so no less under the Gospel; when Jethro, Moses his
Father in Law took a burnt offering, and sacrifice for God; Aaron came, and all
Israel with him to eat bread with Moses his Father in Law, before the Lord,
Exodus 18.12. where was that but before the Testimony of his presence, the
Cloudy Pillar? And that is very pregnant which God has Exodus 29.40. This shall
be a continual burnt offering throughout your Generations, at the door of the
Tabernacle of the Congregation, before the Lord, where I will meet you, to
speak there with thee. Lo; God meets us in the holy Assemblies; Meets us? yea
stays with us there: Zach. 2.10. The prophet speaking of the days of the
Gospel; Sing and rejoice (says he) O Daughter of Sion; for, Lo, I come and
will dwell in the midst of thee, says the Lord: Contrarily, when he withdrawes
from any people the ordinary means of salvation he is truly said to depart from
them: but this, perhaps, not at once, but by degrees; as in Ezekiels vision he
removes first to the threshold, and from thence to the door of the Eastgate;
and this I would have you know to be done, not only in a mere silence, but in a
corruption of doctrine: not only when faithful mouths are stopped, but when
men's mouths are lawlesly opened, to the venting whether of popish fancies, or
satyricall invectives against authority, for you may not think that all
discourses are preaching, or all preaching Gospel: when men preach themselves
and not Christ, when they utter their own impetuous fury, and not the glad
tidings of peace, how shall we call this the message of God? No, God was not in
the wind, he was not in the fire: he was in the soft voice; And he that walks
betwixt the golden Candlesticks does not go away only when the light is quite
out, but when the snuff burns unsavourily in the socket; Shortly, where the
sincere milk of the Gospel is given to Gods babes; and the solid meat of true
Orthodox and saving doctrine is set before the stronger men, there God visits
his people in mercy, and is drawn nigh to them in his holy Ordinance.

Secondly in his audience, we use to say, out of sight out of mind; and those
that are out of distance what noise so ever they make, are not heard; The
ravished Virgin in the field, says God, cried out, and there was none to save
her. Deuteronomy. 22.27. but when we come near, the least groan and sigh is heard;
Thus God, who is never but with us, is said to come near us, when he gives
proof to us that he comes not only within the ken of our necessities, but
within the hearing of the softest whisperings of our prayers.

So David every where; The Lord has heard my supplication, the Lord will hear
my prayer, Ps. 6. The Lord will hear me when I call upon him: The tender mother
is never away from the bedside of her sick child, but if she perceive the
disease to grow dangerous, now she is more attentive, and lays her ear to the
mouth of it, and listens to every breathing that it fetches; so does our
heavenly father to us; The Lord is nigh to all that call upon him, says the
Psalmist: Nigh them indeed, for he puts into them those holy desires, which he
graciously hears, and answers. Contrarily, when that sweet singer of Israel
finds some stop made of his audience, he is then in another tune: Wherefore
hidest thou thy face, and forgettest our affliction, and our oppression, Psalm,
44.24. still measuring Gods nearness to us by his regard, and (as it were)
re-ecchoing to our prayers.

A third, and yet nearer, and happier approach of God to us, is, in his Grace
and favor; in the other two (as in his word and in our prayers) he may come
near us, little to our avail. He speaks to many in his word that hear him not,
or that hear him to their further judgment: Our gospel is howsoever a sweet
savor to God, yet a savor of death unto death to many a soul, woe be to thee
Chorazin, woe be to thee Bethsaida:

He hears many speak to him in their prayers, but for their own punishment; and
sometimes will not hear, in mercy to the petitioner; the Devil sues to enter
into the Swine, and is heard; Paul sues to be freed from the buffets of the
messenger of Satan, and is (mercifully) not heard; the Israelites have Quails
according to their desires, but sauced to them with a vengeance; But this third
appropinquation of God, is never other then cordial, and beneficial. It is a
sweet word, I will dwell amongst the Children of Israel, and will be their
God, Exodus 29.45. Yea this is true happiness indeed that God will so dwell
with us as to be ours. St. Paul told the Athenians most truly ( non long ab
unoquoque) he is not far from every one of us; how should he, when in him we
live, and move, and are? but little are we the better for these general
favors, (which are common to all his creatures) if we do not find in our
selves a special interest in the presence of his Spirit: If he only call on us
as a passenger, or lodge with us as a stranger, or sojourne with us as a guest,
this can be small comfort to us, nor any thing less then his so dwelling with
us, as that he dwell in us, and that, not as an inmate, but as an owner: Know
ye not that Christ dwells in you, says St. Paul, unless ye be Reprobates:
Know ye not that ye are the Temples of the living God; his Temples, for a
perpetual inhabitation of which he has said, Here shall be my rest for ever:

Whereupon there will be sure to follow the fourth degree of his
appropinquation, which is our aid, and sweet experience of his merciful
deliverance. It was out of a full sense of Gods goodness, that holy David
breaks out into that heavenly Epiphonema, The Lord is nigh unto them that are
of a broken heart, and saves such as be of a contrite Spirit; many are the
afflictions of the righteous, but the Lord delivers him out of them all,
Psalm. 34.18, 19. His salvation is nigh to them that fear him, that glory may
dwell in our Land, Psalm. 85.9.

So then, the sum of all is this, that if we draw nigh unto God, he will be
sure to draw nigh to us, in his Ordinances, in his Audience, in his Graces, in
his Aid.

But, what shall we say to the order of these two approaches? One would have
thought he should have said; God draws near to you, therefore draw you near to
God: For surely, his approach to us is the cause that we come near to him, and
not our approach to him causes him to come near to us: Do not think that God
and man strain courtesy, who shall begin, or that man has any power to draw
to God, but from God: The true order of our regeneration is that Cantic. 1.4.
Draw me and I shall run after thee. There have been contrary heresies in the
Church concerning this point. The Manichees held man in all things dragged by a
necessity of destiny: The Pelagians held man led altogether by his will, so as
that can alone enable him to do good, and to feoffe him in blessedness: And
our Semipelagian Papists go not much less, save that they suppose some help
given to the will, which it can thus improve.

The Orthodox Church still has gone, and does go a midway betwixt these; so
ascribing all to grace, that it destroys not nature, teaching us (as Bernard
well) that we will is from nature, that we will good and well, is from grace.

But if it stick with you that we are bidden to draw nigh to God, and therefore
we can do it; else the exhortation were vain and reason-lesse; know that these
charges show us what we should do, not what we can do; and that he who bids us,
can and does together with the word of his invitation, enable us to do what he
requires; his Spirit working with his word effects what he commands; As a
mother, or nurse bids the child come to her, but reaches forth a finger to
uphold it in the walk: If therefore Wisdom say in the Proverbs 1.17. I love
them that love me: yet St. John must comment upon Solomon, prior dilexit; he
loved us first, else we could never have loved him, 1 John 4.19. It is true,
that in order of time, there is no difference betwixt Gods working, and our
willing our conversion, so soon as it is fire it burns, and if it burns, it
is fire: but in order of nature Gods work is before ours, as the cause before
the effect. As we therefore say sensibly, blow the fire and it will burn;
implying that our blowing does not make it to be fire but helps to intend the
heat where fire is; so does the Spirit of God say here; draw nigh to God and he
will draw nigh to you; Our first motion of drawing to God is the work of God;
he that thus draws our will to him, upon our pliant obedience to his will,
thus graciously seconds, and rewards his own work in us; so if we draw nigh to
him, by his co-working grace, he will draw nearer still to us by his perfecting
grace.

And oh, how happy a condition is this, whosoever has by Gods mercy attained
unto it. What can that man want who injoyes him that possesses all things? In
thy presence is the fullness of joy, says the Psalmist: as contrarily, in his
estranging of himself from us, there is nothing but grief and horror. It is
with God and the Soul, as betwixt the Sun and the Earth: In the declining of
the Year, when the Sun draws afar off from us, how does the Earth mourn, and
droop: how do the Trees cast off the ornaments of their leaves and fruit, how
does the Sap of all Plants run down to the root, and leave the bare boughs
seemingly fear and dead; But at the approach of it, in the rising of the
Spring, all things seem revived; the earth decks her self in her fresh
abiliments of blossoms, leaves, flowers, to entertain those comfortable heats
and influences: so and more is it in the declining or approach of this
all-glorious Sun of righteousness; In his presence there is life and
blessedness, in his absence nothing but dolor, disconsolatenesse, despair; if
an earthly King do but withdraw himself from us for a time, we are troubled;
how much more if the King of glory shall absent himself from us in displeasure.
Surely, nothing but our sins can estrange him from us; our miseries do rather
attract him to us; our sins are only they that separate between God and us:
That we may therefore shut up in some application; there is the same reason of
a particular soul, and of a whole Church; one of these is but an abridgment of
the other, there is therefore the same consideration of Gods absence from, or
presence with both: And certainly, if sins can alienate a people from God, and
God from a people, we have cast our selves miserably aloof from him; For which
of his commandments have we not shamefully violated; woe is me, how is our
patient God affronted by us every day? By our atheous profanesse, by our
frequent oaths, and blasphemies, by our wilful disobediences, by our pride,
excess, drunkenness, uncleanesse, usury, cozenages, oppressions, lying,
slanderous detractions (as if we would utterly casheere the ninth commandment
out of the Decalogue)? Yea, what evil is there under Heaven that we can wash
our hands of? But withal, we are so much the further off from God, by how much
we either were, or or should have been nearer; of a people that knew not God,
that could not know him, no other could be expected: Had we had the Gospel of
the Kingdom locked up from us, and been kept hoodwink't from the knowledge of
his royal Law; the times of such ignorance God had not regarded; But now that
we have had so clear a light of Gods truth shining in our faces; and such
importunate solicitations from God, to reclaim us from our wicked ways, by his
Messengers, rising early and suing to us; and yet have (as it were) in spite
of Heaven continued, and aggravated our wickednesses: Alas, what excuse is
there for us? how can we do other then hang down our heads in a guilty
confusion, and expect a fearful retribution from the just hand of God?

Thus have we done to God, and whilst we have gone away from him, has he done
other to us? Has he not given too just testimonies of withdrawing his
countenance from us? Has he not for these many years crossed us in our public
designs both of war and peace? Has he not threatened to stir up evil against
us out of our own bowels? Nay, which is worse then all this has he not given
us up to a general security, obdurednesse, and insensiblenesse of heart; so as
we do not feel either our own sins, or our dangers, or relent at all at his
judgments? Alas, Lord, thou art too far off from us, and we have deserved it;
yea, we have too well deserved that thou should turn thy face away from us
for ever, that thou should draw near to us in thy vengeance who have so
shamefully abused thy mercy. But, what shall we say? Whatsoever we be, we know
thou will be ever thy self; a God of mercy and compassion, long suffering, and
great in kindness and truth; so bad as we are could we have the Grace to draw
nigh to thee in an unfeigned rerepentance, thou would draw nigh to us in mercy
and forgiveness: Could we turn away from our sins to thee, thou would turn
away from thy judgments to us: Lord what can we do to thee without thee? Oh, do
thou draw us unto thee, that we may come. Do thou enable us to draw nigh unto
thee, upon the feet of our affections, upon the hands of our actions, upon the
knees of our prayers, that so thou may draw nigh to us in thine Ordinances,
in thine Audience, in thy grace and mercy, in thine Aid and Salvation. All this
for thy mercy sake, and for thy Christ's sake; to whom with thee, O Father, and
thy good Spirit, one infinite God, be given all praise, honor, and glory now
and for ever. Amen.

A SERMON Preached on WHITSUNDAY June 9. 1644. in the GREEN-YARD OF NORWICH
By JOS. B. of N.
EPHESIANS. 4.30. And grieve not the holy Spirit of God, by which ye are sealed to
the day of Redemption.


IT was a rule of some wise Heathen of old, That he was a great Master of
Morality, that had learned to govern his Tongue, his Gut, his Concupiscence;
these three; And well might it be so, when Christianity has so far seconded
it, as that the Spirit of God has singled out one of these for a Trial of the
rest: He that offends not with his Tongue is a perfect Man, James: 2.2. So as
that triplicity is reduced to an Unity; and indeed if a man have attained to
an exact government of this loose, and busy filme, which we carry in our
mouths, it is a great argument of his absolute Mastership over himself in the
other particulars, whereupon it is that the Apostle has hedged in my Text,
with this Charge; Before my Text, inhibiting all corrupt Communication; after
it, all bitterness, and Clamor and evil speaking, and betwixt both,
enforcing this vehement, and Heavenly dehortation: And grieve not the holy
Spirit: Intimating in the very contexture of the words, that that man can never
hold good terms with the Spirit of God, (what profession soever he makes) that
lets his tongue loose to obscene and filthy Communication, or to bitter or
spightfull words against his Brethren, and in these words dissuading us, both
from this, and all other before mentioned particularities of wickedness, by an
argument drawn from unkindnesse, look to it, for if you shall give way to any
of these vicious courses, ye shall grieve the holy Spirit of God, and that will
be a shameful, and sinful ingratitude in you, forasmuch as that holy Spirit
has been so gracious unto you, as to Seal you to the day of Redemption, a
motive, (which how slight soever it may seem to a carnal heart, and by such a
one may be past over, and pisht at, in imitation of the careless note of
Pharaoh, Who is the Spirit of God, that I should let my Corruptions go?) yet to
a regenerate man (to such our Apostle writes) it is that irresistible force
whereof Nahum speaks, that rends the very Rocks before it, Nahum. 1.6. And
indeed an ingenuous Spirit is more moved with this, then with all outward
violence. The Law of Christ both constraines, and restraines him, constraines
him to all good Actions, and restraines him from all evil: The good Patriark
Joseph, when his wanton Mistress solicited him to her wicked lust, Behold
(says he) My Master has committed all that he has to my hand, there is none
greater in his house then I, neither has he kept back any thing from me, but
thee, because thou art his wife, how then can I do this great wickedness, and
sin against God, Genesis ^^.8.9. wherein ye see, he has a double Antidote for her
poisonous suggestion, the one, his Masters favor and trust, which he may not
violate, the other, the offense of his God: Joseph knew he could not do this
wickedness, but he must bring plagues enough upon his head, but that is not
the thing, he stands upon so much, as the sin against God. A Pilate will do any
thing rather then offend a Caesar; that word, thou art not Cesars friend if thou
let him go (John. 19.12.) strikes the matter dead: Thou art not Gods friend if
thou entertain these sins, cannot; but be prevalent with a good heart, and bear
him out against all Temptations: and this is the force of our Apostles
inference here, who after the enumeration of that black Catalogue of sins, both
of the whole man, and especially those of the Tongue, infers, And grieve not
the holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are Sealed to the Day of Redemption: The
Text you see is a dehortatory charge to avoid the offense of God, wherein we
have the Act, and the subject, the Act, Grieve not, the subject; set forth by
his Title, by his Merit; his Title, The holy Spirit of God; his Merit, and our
obligation thence arising, By whom ye are sealed to the day of Redemption: the
subject is first considerable, both in Nature and Act: as that, the knowledge
and respect whereof does both most dissuade us from the offense, and aggravate
it, when it is committed, The holy Spirit of God: which when we have shortly
meditated on apart, we shall join together by the Act inhibited in this holy
dehortation.

That this is particularly to be taken of the third person of the blessed
Trinity, to whom this day is peculiarly devoted, there can be no doubt; for
both the Title is his, The holy Spirit of God, not absolutely, God, who is an
holy Spirit, but the holy Spirit of God; and the effect attributed to him is no
less proper to him; for as the contriving of our Redemption is ascribed to the
Father, the atchieving of it to the Son: So the Sealing, confirming and
applying of it to the Holy Ghost. There are many Spirits, and those holy, and
those of God, as their Creator, and Owner, as the enumerable Company of Angels,
and the Spirits of Just Men made perfect Hebr. 12. but this is set forth, as
Zanchius notes well, with a double Article, ((...)) that holy Spirit, by a
transcendent eminence, by a singularity, as that which is alone, The holy
Spirit of God.

Now, why the third Person should specially be denominated a Spirit, a title no
less belonging to the Father, and the Son, to the whole absolute Deity, as
being rather Essential, then Personal, or why an holy Spirit, since Holiness
is as truly Essential to the other Persons also, as their very being: Or, why
being coequal and coessential, with God the Father, and the Son, he should be
called the Spirit of God, though they might seem points incident into the Day;
yet, because they are Catechetical heads, I hold it not so fit to dwell in
them, at this time. Only by the way, give me leave to say, that it had been
happy both for the Church of England in general, and this Diocese in
particular, that these Catechetical Sermons had been more frequent then they
have been; as those which are most useful, and necessary for the grounding of
Gods People in the principles of saving Doctrine; and I should earnestly exhort
those of my Brethren of the Ministry, that hear me this day, that they would in
these perilous and distractive times, bend their labors this way, as that
which may be most effectual for the settling of the Souls of their hearers in
the grounds of true Religion, that they may not be carried about with every
wind of Doctrine ((...)) in the Cockboat of men's fancies, as the Apostle
speak;; but this by the way; I shall now only urge so much of the Person, as
may add weight to the dehortation from the Act, Grieve not the holy Spirit of
God, and every notion of it adds a several weight, as a Spirit, as the Spirit
of God: as the holy Spirit of God.

It is a rule not capable of contradiction; that by how much more excellent the
Person, so much more heinous is the offense done to him: As to offend an
Officer is (in the eye of the Law) more then to offend a private Subject, a
Magistrate, more then an inferior Officer, a Peer more then a Magistrate (for
that is Scandalum Magnatum) a Prince more then a Peer, a Monarch more then a
Prince: Now in very nature, a Spirit is more excellent then a Body, I could
send you higher, but if we do but look into our own breasts, we shall find the
difference: There is a Spirit in Man, says Elihu, Job 32.8. The Spirit of Man
is as the Candle of the Lord, says Wise Solomon, Prove. 20.27. without which
the whole House is all dark, and confused: Now, what comparison is there
betwixt the Soul, which is a Spirit, and the Body which is Flesh, even this,
which Wise Solomon instanceth in, may serve for all, The Spirit of a Man
sustains his infirmities, but a wounded Spirit who can hear? Lo, the Body helps
to breed infirmities, and the Spirit bears them out; to which add; the Body
without the Spirit is dead, the Spirit without the Body lives more: It is a sad
word of David, when he complains: My bones are vexed: Ps. 6.2. and cleaves to
my skin, Psalm. 102.5. yet all this is tolerable, in respect of that; My Spirit
fails me, My Spirit is overwhelmed within me, my heart within me is desolate,
Psalm. 143.4. they were sore strokes that fetched blood of our blessed Savior,
but they were nothing to these inward torments that wrung from him the bloody
sweat in his Agony, when he said my soul is ((...)) heavy unto the Death; could
we conceive that the Body could be capable of pain, without the Spirit, (as
indeed it is not, since the Body feels only by the Spirit) that pain were
painlesse; but this we are sure of, that the Spirit feels more exquisite pain
without the Body in the state of separation from it, then it could feel in the
former conjunction with it, and the wrong that is done to the Soul, is more
heinous, then that which can be inflicted on the Body: By how much then more
pure, simple, perfect, excellent the Spirit is whom we offend, by so much more
grievous is the offense; to offend the Spirit of any good Man (one of Christ's
little ones) is so heinous, that it were better for a man to have a millstone
hanged about his neck, and to be cast into the bottom of the Sea, Mat. 18.6.

To offend an Angel (which is an higher degree of spirituality) is more then to
vex the Spirit of the best man; Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy Flesh to sin,
neither say before the Angel that it was an error: Eccles. 5.6. Hence St. Paul
heightens his adjuration to Timothy, I charge thee before the Elect Angels, 1 Timothy 5.21. And giving order for the decent demeanure of the Corinthian Women in
the Congregation, requires, That they should have power on their head, because
of the Angels, 1 Cor. 11.10.

To offend therefore the God of Spirits, the Father of these spiritual Lights,
must needs be an infinite aggravation of the sin, even so much more as He is
above those his best Creatures; and there cannot be so much distance betwixt
the poorest worm that crawles on the Earth, and the most glorious Archangel of
Heaven, as there is betwixt him, and his Creator: One would think now, there
could be no step higher then this; yet there is; our Savior has so taught us
to distinguish of sins, that he tells us, All manner of sin and blasphemy shall
be forgiven unto men, but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be
forgiven, Matthew. 12.31. and Marc. 3.29. Not that we can sin against one Person,
and not offend another; for their essence is but one; but this sin is singled
out, for a special obstruction of forgiveness, for that it is done against the
illumination, and Influence of that Grace, whereof the Holy Ghost is the
immediate giver, and worker in the Soul, who is therefore called the Spirit of
Grace: hereupon is Stevens challenge to the stiff-necked Jews, Act. 7.51. Ye do
always resist the holy Ghost: And his charge to Ananias, Why has Satan filled
thy heart to lie to the Holy Ghost, Act. 5.3. Ye see then how this charge
rises, and what force is put into it, by the condition of the Person. A
Spirit, the holy Spirit, the holy Spirit of God, enough to make way for the
consideration of the Act inhibited: Grieve not the holy Spirit of God:

Grieve not, etc. How incompatible are the terms of this charge? That which
makes the sin (as it is set forth) more sinful, may seem to make it
impossible; If a Spirit, how is it capable of passion? and if it be impassible;
how can it be grieved? Alas, we weak mortals are subject to be hurried about
with every blast of passion: The Almighty is above all the reach of these
unquiet perturbations, Lo, that God, which mercifully condescended (because his
infinite glory transcends our weakness) to speak unto us men, by man, and by
Angels in the form of Men, speaks to us men in the style, and language of Men:
Two ways then may the Spirit of God be said to be grieved, in Himself, in his
Saints; in himself by an Anthropopathie (as we call it;) In his Saints by a
Sympathy; the former is by way of Allusion to humane passion, and carriage; so
does the Spirit of God upon occasion of men's sins, as we do, when we are
grieved with some great wrong or unkindnesse. And what do we then? First we
conceive an high dislike of, and displeasure at the Act; Secondly, we withdraw
our countenance and favor from the offender; Thirdly, we inflict some
punishment upon the offense; and these are (all of them) dreadful expressions
of the grieving of Gods Spirit; even these three, displeasure, aversion,
punishment: For the first, Esaias expresses it by vexation, Esaias 63.10. A place
so much more worthy of observation, for that some judicious interpreters, as
Reverend Calvin, Zanchius, Pagnine, and Cornelius a Lapide think very probably,
that this text is borrowed from thence (...)


And they rebelled and vexed the Spirit of his holiness: Where such an Act is
intimated, as compriseth both grief and Anger, surely, we do not think it safe
to irritate the great; and if it be but a man a little bigger then our selves
we are ready to deprecate his displeasure; but if it be a man, that is both
great and dear to us, with whom we are fallen out, how unquiet are we (if we have
any good nature in us) till we have recovered his lost favor; do ye not see
with what importunity good David seeks to appease the wrath of his incensed
Father in Law; none of the best men and causelessly provoked? Let my Lord the
King hear the words of his Servant: If the Lord have stirred thee up against
me, let him accept an offering; but if they be the Children of men, cursed be
they before the Lord: And even Joseph's Brethren, (though so ill-natured, that
they could eat and drink, whilst their Brother was crying in their pit) yet at
last (as doubtless they had done ere then) they come with humble prostrations,
and passionate Supplications to their Brother, Genesis ult.
we pray thee forgive the trespass of the Servants of thy Fathers God: what
speak I of these? Even Absalom himself, (though he soon after carried a Traitor
in his bosom) how earnestly he sued for his restoring to his fathers long
denied presence, and out of his impatience, caused Joab to pay dear for the
delay? Oh then, how should we be affected with the sense of the displeasure of
the holy Spirit of our good God, who as he is our best friend, so he is a most
powerful avenger of wickedness: Surely, we do so vex, and sadden him with our
grievous provocations, that he cries out, and makes moan of his insufferable
wrong this way, Thou have made me to serve with thy sins, and wearied me with
thine iniquities, Esa. 43.24. and Amos 1.13. Behold I am pressed under you as a
cart is pressed, that is full of Sheaves; even so full that the Axeltree
creaks, and bends and cracks again. It must needs be a great weight that the
Almighty complains of; and surely so it is: could our offenses be terminated
in men, and not strike God thorough them, we might well say, that all the
outrages, and affronts that we could put upon a world of men, were nothing to
the least violation of the infinite Majesty of God; and so does the God
against whom they are committed take them; by how much more tender the part is,
so much more painful is the blow; the least wipe of the eye troubles us more
then a hard stroke upon the back; it is easy to observe, that the more holy the
person is, the more he is afflicted with his own, and with others sin: Lot
vexed his righteous Soul with the unclean conversation of the Sodomites; David's
eyes gusht out rivers of waters, because men kept not the Law, how much more
then shall the holy God (from whom these good men receive these touches of
Godly indignation) be vexed to see and hear our profanations of his name and
days, our contempt of his Servants and ordinances, our debauched lives, our
malicious and oppressive practices, our wilful disobediences, our shameful
excesses, and uncleanesses, our uncharitable censures of each other, and all
that World of wickedness, that we are overborne withal; grief is never but an
unpleasive passion, the rest have some life and contentment in them. Not only
love, and joy (which uses to dilate and cheer the heart) but even hatred it
self, to a rancorous stomach, has a kind of wicked pleasure in it; but grief
is ever harsh, and tedious; one of St. Augustins two tormentors of Mankind.
Dolor et Timor.
And shall our hearts tell us, That we have grieved the good Spirit of God by
our sins, and shall not we be grieved at our selves that we have grieved him?
How can there be any true sense of heavenly love, and gratitude in us, if we be
not thoroughly humbled, and vexed within our selves to think that we have
angered so good a God? How can we choose but roar out in the unquietness of our
souls, with the holy Psalmist, There is no soundness in my flesh because of
thine Anger, neither is there any rest in my Bones because of my sin; for mine
iniquities are gone over my head, as an heavy burden they are to heavy for me
to bear, Ps. 38.3, 4. Certainly, it is a sign of a graceless Soul to be
secure, and cheerful under a known sin: that Man that can sleep soundly after
a murder, that can give merry checks to his Conscience after an act of
adultery, or theft, or any such grievous crimes, has an heart insensible of
goodness, and may prove a fit brand for hell. This is that whereof Esaias
speaks, In that Day, did the Lord of Hosts call to weeping, and to mourning,
and to baldness, and to girding with sackcloth; and behold joy and gladness,
slaying of Oxen, and killing of Sheep, eating Flesh, and drinking Wine. Esa.
22.12, 13. But it follows next; Surely this iniquity shall not be purged till
ye die, verse. 14. these are they that say, we have made a covenant with death,
and with hell we are at an agreement, but it follows soon after; Their
covenant with death shall soon be disanulled, and their agreement with hell
shall not stand, Esa. 28.15.18.

Far, far be this disposition from us, that profess to love the Lord, let it
be with us, as with some good natured Children, whom I have seen, even after
their whippings unquiet, till with their continued tears and importunities they
have made their peace with their offended parent; And thus much for the
displeasure which is in this, grieving of the Spirit of God, which never goes
alone, but is attended by those two other consequent effects; Aversion and
Punishment.

As those therefore which scent an unsavory breath, turn their heads aside,
and those great and good guests, who find themselves ill used, change their
Inn; so does the holy Spirit of God, upon occasion of our wilful sins, turn
away his face, and withdraw his presence: In a little wrath I hid my face from
thee, says God, Esa. 54.8. This good David found, and complained of; Thou
turnedst away thy face and I was troubled, Psalm. 30.7. And again (as if he
feared, lest God would be quite gone, upon those his horrible sins of Adultery,
and Murder) he cries out passionatly; O cast me not away from from thy
Presence, and take not thine holy Spirit from me, Psalm, 51.11.

This is that which Divines call, spiritual desertion, A course which God
takes, not seldom, when he finds a kind of restiveness and neglect in his
Servants, or passage given to some heinous sin against the checks of
conscience, where he intends correction, quickening, and reclamation; the Spouse
in the Canticles, because she opened not instantly to her Beloved, finds her
self disappointed, I opened to my Beloved, but my Beloved had withdrawn
himself, and was gone, and my Soul failed me: Cant. 5.6. This is no other, then
we must make account of, and which (if we have any acquaintance with God, and
our selves) in our daily experience, we have found, and shall find, if we have
given way to any willing sin: in that very Act the Spirit is grieved, and in
that Act of grief subduced: neither can we ever expect comfort in the sense of
his return, or hope to have his face shine upon us again, till we have won him
to us, and recovered his favor, by an unfeigned Repentance.

Is there any of us therefore that has grieved and estranged the holy Spirit
from us, by any known offense, it must cost us warm water ere we can recover
him, and the light of his countenance upon us, neither let us be sparing of our
Tears to this purpose; let no Antinomian stop the floodgates of our eyes, let
no Popish Doctor prevail to the abatement of this holy sorrow; those men, out
of a profession of much outward rigor and austerity, do under hand by their
doctrine slacken the reins of true penitence to their clients: Contritio una
vel remissa, etc. One easy contrition is able to blot out any sin, if never so
heinous, says their learned Cardinal Toleth: and their Jesuit Maldonate, to
the same effect, Ad perfectionem Poenitentiae, etc. To the perfection of
penitence is required only a slight kind of inward sorrow, wherein I cannot
better resemble them, then to timorous, or indulgent Chirurgians, that think to
pleasure the patient, in not searching the wound to the bottom* for which
kindness, they shall receive little thank at the last; for the wound hereupon
festers within, and must cost double time, and pain in the cure; whereas those
solid Divines, that experimentally know what belongs to the healing of a
sinning Soul, go thorough stitch to work; Insomuch as Cardinal Bellarmine,
taxes it, as too much Rigor in Luther, Calvin, and Chemnitius, that they
require Magnam animi concussionem, a great concussion of soul, and a sharp and
vehement contrition of the penitent. For us, let us not be niggardly of our
sorrow, but in these cases, go mourning all the day long; See how the Spirit of
God expresses, Zachar. 12.10. They shall Mourn as one that Mourns for his
only Son, and shall be in bitterness, as one that is in bitterness for his
first Born. This is a Repentance never to be repented of, Blessed are they that
thus mourn, for they shall be comforted.

This aversion is punishment enough alone, and if it should be total, and
final, (as it is not to Gods own Children) it were the worst piece of Hell,
for the punishment of loss is justly defined worse then that of sense; but
withal, it is attended (as there is good cause) with sensible demonstrations
of Gods anger, and the smart of the offender, My wounds stink and are corrupted
because of my foolishness, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 38.5. I am weary of my
groaning, Psalm. 6.6. And if the most righteous cannot avoid this sore hand of
the Almighty where shall wilful sinners appear? These effects of Gods
displeasure then are such, as are worth trembling at; It is true, as that wise
Pagan said (a speech worthy to be written in Letters of Gold, and that which I
doubt not shall be in the day of Judgment laid in the dish of many Millions of
professed Christians) si Omnes Deos, hominesque celare possimus, nihil avare,
nihil injuste, nihil libidinose, nihil incontinenter faciendum: That if we
could hide our actions from God and men, yet we may do nothing covetously,
nothing unjustly, nothing lustfully, nothing incontinently. Who would not be
ashamed to hear this fall from an Heathen, when he sees how many Christians
live? but it is most true; A good man dare not sin, though there were no Hell;
but, that holy and wise God, that knows how sturdy and headstrong natures he
has to do withal, finds it necessary to let men feel that he has store of
Thunderbolts for sinners, that he has Magazins of Judgments, and after all, an
Hell of torments for the rebellious; and indeed we cannot but yield it most
just, that it should be so. If but an equal do grieve and vex us, we are ready
to give him his own, with advantage, and if an inferior, we fall upon him with
hand, and tongue, and are apt to crush him to nothing, and even that worm, when
he is trodden on, will be turning again; how can we, or why should we think,
that the great and holy God will be vexed by us, and pocket up all, our
indignities? If a Gnat or Flea do but sting thee, thou will kill it, and
think it good justice, yet there is some proportion betwixt these Creatures
and thee, but what art thou (silly nothing) to the Infinite? We men have
devised varieties of punishments for those that offend our laws: Artaxerxes his
decree mentions four sorts: Death, Banishmentt, Confiscation, Imprisonment,
Ezra: 7.26. And (which perhaps you will wonder at) commits the managing of
justice in the execution of them all, to Ezra the Priest: the Romans (as Tully
tells us) had eight several kinds of punishments for their delinquents:
Forfeiture, Bonds, Stripes, Retaliation, Shame, Exile, Servitude, and Death.
God has all these double over; and a thousand others: for the First which is
Forfeiture, here is the Forfeiture of no less then all, Take from him the
pound, says the Master concerning the unfaithful servant, Luc. 19.24. for the
Second, Bonds, here are the most dreadful Bonds that can be, even everlasting
chains of darkness, Jude: 6. for Stripes, here are many Stripes for the
knowing and not doing servant, Luc. 12.47. for Retaliation, it is here just and
home, it is just with God to render tribulation to those that trouble you, 2 Thessalonians. 1.6. for Shame, here is confusion of face, Da^. 9.8. for Exile, here is
an everlasting Banishment from the presence of God, Matthew. 25.41. for
Servitude, here is the most odious Bondage, sold under sin: Romans 7.14. for
Death; here is a double death, a temporal and eternal: these, and more then can
be expressed are the consequents of Gods displeasure: If thou love thy self
therefore, take heed, above all things, of grieving thy God with thy sins, and
if thou have done so, hasten thy reconciliation, agree with thine adversary in
the way, else tribulation and anguish upon every soul that does evil; thy
grieving of him, shall end in weeping, and wayling, and gnashing, for our God
is a consuming fire.

And here now (that I may turn your thoughts a little aside from a personal to
a national grieving of Gods Spirit) I am fallen upon the grounds of those heavy
judgments, under which we have lain thus long, groaning, and gasping, to the
pity, and astonishment of our late envying neighborhood; even the destroying,
and devouring sword; alas, my Beloved, we have grieved our good God by our
havnous sins of all sorts, and now we do justly feel the heavy effects of his
displeasure; we have warred against Heaven with our iniquities, and now it is
just with God to raise up war against us, in our own Bowels. It was the Motto
that was wont to be written upon the Scottish coin, as the emblem of their
Thistle, Nemo me impune Lacesset, None shall escape free, that provokes me;
Surely it is a word that well fits the Omnipotent, and eternal justice, and
power of Heavens; we have provoked that to wrath, and therefore could not hope
to avoid a fearful judgment; woe is me, we have made our selves enemies to God,
by our rebellious sins, therefore thus says the Lord, the Lord of Hoasts the
Mighty one of Israel: Ah I will ease me of my adversaries, and avenge me of
mine Enemies: Esa. 1.24.

Three things there are that aggravate the deep unkindnesse, that God has
taken at our thus Grieving of him: his Indearments, our Engagements, his
Expectation: were we a people that God had no whit promerited by his favors,
that he had done nothing for us, more then for the savage Nations of the World,
surely the God of Heaven had not taken it so deeply to heart; but now, that he
has been more kind to us, then to any Nation under Heaven, how does he call
Heaven, and Earth to record of the justness of his high regret, Hear O Heaven,
and hearken O Earth, for the Lord himself has spoken. I have nourished, and
brought up Children and they have rebelled against me: Esa. 1.2. and
excellently Jerem. 2.31. O generation, see the word of the Lord: have I been a
wilderness to Israel? a land of darkness; therefore it follows, Behold I will
plead with thee, ver. 35. Neither are his indearments of us, more then our
engagements to him; for what Nation in all the World has made a more glorious
profession of the name of God, then this of ours? What Church under the cope of
Heaven has been more famous, and flourishing? Had we not pretended to
holiness, and purity of religion even beyond others, the unkindness had been
the less: now, our unanswerablenesse calls God to the highest protestation of
his offense, Be astonished O Heavens, and be horribly afraid, be ye very
desolate, says the Lord, for my people have committed two evils; they have
forsaken me the Fountain of living waters, and have hewn them out Cisternes,
broken Cisternes that can hold no water, Jer. 2.11. And who is so blind as my
servant: Esa. 42.19. Now according to his Indearments, and our Engagements has
been his just expectation of an answerable carriage of us toward him: the
Husbandman looks not for a crop in the wild desert; but where he has Gooded,
and plowed, and Eared, and Sown, why should not he look for an harvest? And
this disappointment is a just heightner of his grief, what could I have done
more for my Vineyard that I have not done? I looked for grapes, and it brought
forth wild grapes. And now I will tell you what I will do to my Vineyard: I
will take away the hedge thereof, and I will lay it wast: Esa. 5.4, 5. Woe is
me, we do not hear, but feel God making his fearful word good upon us; I need
not tell you what we suffer; the word of Esaias is fulfilled here, It shall be a
vexation only to understand the report: Esa. 28.19. Alas we know it too well,
what rivers of blood, what piles of Carcasses are to be seen on all sides,
would God I could as easily tell you of the Remedy; and why can I not do so?
Doubtless, there is a remedy no less certain, then our suffering, if we had
but the grace to use it; too long, alas, too long have we driven off the
applying of our redress; yet even still there is Balm in Gilead, still there
is hope, yea assurance of help; if we will not be wanting to our selves: we
have grieved our God to the height, Oh that we could resolve to make our peace
with our provoked God at the last. Excellent is that of Esaias. 27.5. Let him
take hold of my strength, and make Peace with me, and he shall make peace with
with me. Oh that we could take hold of our strong Helper, who is mighty to
save; that we would lay hold on the strength of his mavelous mercies: Oh that
we could take Benhadads course here; as they said of the King of Israel much
more may I say of the God of Israel, He is a merciful God, let us put sackcloth
upon our loins, and ropes upon our heads, and go to the God of Israel, and
say, Thy servants say, I pray thee let us live, 1 K. 20.31. Oh that it could
greive us thoroughly, that we have greived so good a God: that we could by a
sound and serious humiliation, and hearty Repentance reconcile our selves to
that offended Majesty; we should yet live to praise him for his merciful
deliverance, and for the happy restoration of our peace, which God for his
mercies sake vouchsafe to grant us.

Thus much for the grieving of the holy Spirit in himself, by way of allusion
to humane affection; Now follows that grievance which by way of Sympathy he
feels in his Saints.

Anselme, Aquinas, Estius, and other latter Interpreters have justly construed
one branch of this offense of the Holy Spirit to be, when through our lewd,
despightful words or actions, we grieve and scandalize those Saints and
Servants of God, in whom that Holy Spirit dwells.

It is true (as Zanchius observes well) that it is no thank to a wicked man
that the Spirit of God is not grieved by him, even in person; he does what he
can to vex him; the Impossibility is in the Impassiblenesse of the Spirit of
God, not in the Will of the Agent: But although not in himself, yet in his
faithful Ones, he may, and does grieve him: They are the Receptacles of the
Holy Ghost, which he so possesses and takes up, that the injuries and affronts
done to them are felt, and acknowledged by him: As when an enemy offers to
burn, or pull down, or strip and plunder the house, the Master or Owner takes
the violence as done to himself; We are the Temples, the Houses wherein it
pleases the Spirit of God to dwell, what is done to us, is done to him in us;
He challenges as our Actions (The Spirit of God prays in us, Romans 8.26.) so
our Passions also; he is grieved in our grief; such an interest has God in
his, that as Christ the second person in the Trinity could say to Saul, why
persecutest thou me? So the Holy Ghost appropriates our injuries to himself. If
ye be reproached for the Name of Christ, happy are ye (says S. Peter) for the
Spirit of glory and of God rests upon you: on their part he is evil spoken
of, but on your part he is glorified, 1 Pet. 4.14. Lo, the Holy Spirit is
glorified by our sufferings, and is evil spoken of in our reproaches, the word
is ((...)) is blasphemed; so as (it is a fearful thing to think of) to speak
contumelious words against Gods children, is by the Apostles own determination,
no better then a kind of blaspheming the Holy Ghost.

See then and consider ye malicious and uncharitable men, your wrongs reach
further then ye are aware of; ye suffer your tongues to run riot in bitter
Scoffs, in spightful slanders, in injurious raylings against those that are
truly conscionable, ye think ye gall none but men, worse then your selves, but
ye shall find that ye have opened your mouths against Heaven: I speak not for
those that are mere outsides and visors of Christianity, making a show of
Godliness, and denving the power of it in their lives; I take no protection of
them, God shall give them their portion with Hypocrites; But if he be a true
child of God, one that has the true fear of God planted in his heart, and one
that desires to be approved to God in all his ways (though perhaps he differ
in judgment, and be of another profession from thee in some collateral matters,
(as the God of Heaven stands not upon such points) let him I say be one of Gods
dear and secret ones, whom thou revilest and persecutest, the Spirit of God
feels the Indignities that are offered to such a one, and will let thee feel,
that he feels them; make as slight as you will of scandalizing and wronging a
good man, there is a good God that will pay you for it.

What an heavy complaint is that, which the Apostle makes to his Corinthians,
concerning himself and his fellows: I think (says he) that God has set forth
us the Apostles last, as it were appointed to death, for we are made a
spectacle to the World, and to Angels, and to Men, 1 Cor. 4.9. and verse the
13. We are made as the filth of the world, the offscouring of all things unto
this day. Alas if this were the condition of the blessed Apostles to be thus
vilified, why should it seem strange to us, their unworthy successors, and
Disciples, if we be thought fit for nothing but to be cast upon the dunghill:
but these reproaches, however we may take coolly, and calmly, as that Stoic
Philosopher did, who whilst he was discoursing of being free from passions (it
being the doctrine of that sect, that a wise man should be impassionate) a rude
fellow spat purposely in his face, and when he was asked, whether he were not
angry; answered, no truly, I am not angry, but I doubt whether I should not be
angry at such an abuse; but there is a God that will not put up our contumelies
so, we strike his servants on Earth, and he feels it in Heaven, It is very
emphaticall which the Apostle has to this purpose, Coloss. 1.24. I fill up
(that which is behind) (...), the Asterings of the Afflictions of Christ in my
flesh: Intimating that there is one entire body (as it were) of Christ's
sufferings, part whereof he endured in his own person, and part he still
sustaines in his members, so as he cannot be free whiles they suffer, inasmuch
as ye did it to one of the least of my brethren, ye did it unto me, Mat. 15.40.
As the soul feels what is done to the body ( the Iron entered into his Soul,
says the Psalmist) so what is done to the faithful soul, God is sensible of,
and will revenge it accordingly, what shall be done to thee thou false Tongue,
says the Psalmist, even mighty and sharp Arrows with hot burning Coals:
Psalm. 102.3. Thou have shot thine Arrows, even bitter words against Gods
chosen ones, and God shall send thee sharper arrows of his vengeance, singing
into thy bosom; thy tongue has been set on fire with contention, and has
helped to kindle it in others, and now God shall fill thy mouth with hotter
coals of that fire which shall never be quenched. Oh then as we tender our own
safety, let us bind our Tongues, and hands to the good behavior, and resolve
with the holy Apostle, To give none offense, neither to the Jews, nor to the
Gentiles, nor to the Church of God: 1. Cor. 10.32.

Now as the holy Spirit of God both in himself and in his Children, is grieved
with our lewd speeches, and offensive carriage, so contrarily, God, and his
holy Spirit are joyed in our gracious speeches, and holy conversation, Luc.
15.10. I say unto you, there is joy in the presence of the Angels of God, over
one sinner that repents: Lo this is Gods joy and the Angels witness it, it
is the owner that has found the lost Groate, and that says Rejoice with me:
how does conscionable and godly behavior, and holy Communication make Music
in Heaven.

We have known many that have thought their time well bestowed, if they could
make a great Man smile ( Principibus placuisse, etc.) And perhaps their
facetious urbanity has not passed unrewarded; Oh what shall we think of moving
true delight to the King of glory: It was no small encouragement to the
Colossians, that the Apostle professes he was with them rejoicing, and
beholding their Order, Coloss. 2.5. What a comfort then must it needs be, that
the great God of Heaven is with us, and takes notice of our carriage, and
contentment in it, Revel. 2.2.
I know thy works, and thy labor, and thy patience, says the Spirit of God to
the Angel (or Bishop) of the Church of Ephesus: and Videndo vidi, says God to
Moses, concerning the Israelites, I have seen the afflictions of my people: it
is said of Anthony the Hermit, Let no man bogle at this, that I mention an
Hermit to this Congregation, (those first Eremites that went aside into the
Wilderness, to avoid those primitive persecutions, were holy men, great
Saints, and of a quite different alloy from those of the present Romish Church,
Mera Nominum Crepitacula) that when he was set upon by Devils, and buffeted by
them, as St. Paul was, 2 Cor. 12. (according to learned Cameran his
interpretation) after the conflict he cried out, O bone Jesu ubi eras? O Lord
Jesu where wast thou? and received answer, juxta te eram, etc. I was by thee,
and looked how thou would demean thy self in thy combat; who would not fight
valiantly, when he fights in the eye of his Prince?

It is the highest consideration in the World, this, how does God relish my
actions and me? The common rule of the World is, what will men say? what will
my neighbors? what will my superiors? what will posterity? and according to
their conceits we are willing to regulate our carriage: but a true Christian
looks higher, and for every thing he says or does, inquires after the censure
or allowance of God himself, still caring that the words of his mouth, and the
meditations of his heart may be accepted of his God: and if his heart tell him,
that God frowns at his actions, all the World cannot cheer him up; but he will
go mourning all the day long, till he have made his peace, and set even terms
between God and his Soul: but if that tell him all is well, nothing in the
world can deject and dishearten him; but he takes up that resolution which
Solomon gives for advice, Let thy Garments be white, and let no Oil be wanting
to thine head, go thy way, Eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy Wine with a
merry heart, for now God accepts thy works, Eccles. 9.7, 8. And this
consideration as it never can be unseasonable, so is a most fit cordial for
every honest and good heart, in these dismal times; we are in a sad condition,
and perhaps in expectation of worse, the sword is either devouring or
threatening, we are ready to be swallowed up with grief, or fear: what should we
now do? Dear Christians let every one of us look in what terms he stands with
his God, do we find the face of God clouded from us, let our souls refuse
comfort till we have recovered his favor, which is better then life; do we
find our selves upon our sound repentance, received to grace and favor of the
Almighty, and that he is well pleased with our persons, and with our poor
obediences, and that he smiles upon us in Heaven, courage, dear Brethren, in
spite of all the frowns and menaces of the World; we are safe and shall be
happy: here is comfort for us in all tribulation 2 Cor. 1.4. with that chosen
vessel, we are troubled on every side, yet not distressed; ^e are perplexed,
but not in despair; persecuted, but not forsaken; 2. Cor. 4.8.
cast down, but not destroyed; for which cause we faint not; but though our
outward man perish, 16.
yet the inward man is renewed day by day, for our light Affliction which is
but for a moment, works for us, 18.
a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory: to the full possession
whereof, the God that has ordained us, graciously bring us, for the sake of
the Son of his love Jesus Christ the righteous. To whom with the Father, and
the holy Ghost, three persons, and one glorious God, be given all praise
honor, glory, and dominion now, and for evermore.

A Second SERMON In prosecution of the same Text, PREACHED AT St. GREGORY'S
CHURCH IN NORWICH July 21. 1644.
By JOS. B. of N.
EPHESIANS. 4.30. And grieve not the holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed to
the day of Redemption.


WE have done with the Dehortation it self, and therein with the Act forbidden,
( Grieve not;) and with the title of the Subject, ( the Holy Spirit of God;) We
descend to the inforcement of the Dehortation, by the great merit of the Spirit
of God; ( whereby ye are sealed to the day of Redemption.)

Those that are great and good, we would not willingly offend, though mere
strangers to us: but if they be besides, our great friends and liberal
Benefactors, men that have deserved highly of us, we justly hold it a foul
shame, and abominable ingratitude, wilfully to do ought that might affront
them. It is therefore added for a strong disswasive from Grieving the Spirit of
God, that by him we are sealed to the day of redemption: All the world shall in
vain strive to do for us, what our great Friend in Heaven has done; our
loathness therefore to grieve him, must be according to the depth of our
obligation to him: Cast your eyes then a little upon the wonderful Benefit here
specified; and see, First, what this day of Redemption is: Secondly, what is
the sealing of us to this day: and Thirdly, why the sealing of us to this day
should be a sufficient motive to withhold us from grieving the Holy Spirit of
God. These three must be the limits of my Speech and your Atrention.

Redemption signifies as much as a Ransom; A Ransom implies a Captivity or
Servitude; There is a threefold Captivity from which we are freed; Of Sin, of
Misery, of Death: For the first, We are sold under sin, says our Apostle: No
Slave in Argier is more truly sold in the Market under a Turkish Pyrate, then
we are naturally sold under the Tyranny of sin; by whom we are bound hand and
foot, and can stir neither of them toward God; and dungeon'd up in the
darkness of our ignorance, without any Glimpse of the vision of God, For the
second; the very name of Captivity implies Misery enough; what outward evil is
incident into a man which bondage does not bring with it? Woe is me, there was
never so much captivity in this land since it was a Nation, nor so woeful a
Captivity as this, of brethren to brethren; Complaints there are good store on
both sides; of restraint, want, ill-lodging, hard and scant diet, Irons,
insultations, scorns, and extremities of ill usage of all kinds: and what
other is to be found in the whole course of this wretched life of ours, the
best whereof is vanity, and the worst infinite vexations; But Thirdly, if some
men have been so externally happy, as to avoid some of these miseries (for all
men smart not alike) yet never man did or can avoid the third; which is
obnoxiousness to death: By the offense of one, says the Apostle, judgment came
upon all men to condemnation Romans 5.18. Sin has reigned unto death, Ps. 21. It
is more then an Ordinance, a statute law in Heaven; Statutum est, etc. It is
enacted to all men once to dye, Heb. 9.27. This then is our bondage or
captivity, now comes our redemption from all these at once: when upon our happy
dissolution we are freed from sin, from misery, from death; and enter into the
possession of glory: thus our Savior, Lift up your heads, for the day of your
redemption draws nigh; thus says St. Paul, The creature it self also shall
be delivered from the bondage of corruption unto the glorious liberty of the
Sons of God. Romans 8.21. It is the same condition of the members of Christ,
which was of the head, that they overcome death by dying; when therefore the
bands of death are loosed, and we are fully freed from the dominion of the
first death, and danger of the second, and therein from all the capacity, not
only of the rule and power of sin, but of the life and in-dwelling of it; and
from all the miseries both bodily and spiritual that attend it; and when in
the same instant our soul takes possession of that glory, which shall once, in
the consociation of it is glorious partner, the body, be perfectly consummated:
Then, and not till then is the day of our redemption. Is there any of us
therefore that complains of his sad and hard condition here in the world;
pains of body, grief of mind, agonies of soul, crosses in estate,
discontentments in his families, suffering in his good name? let him bethink
himself where he is; this is the time of his captivity; and what other can be
expected in this case? Can we think there is no difference betwixt liberty and
bondage? Can the slave think to be as free as his Patron? Ease, rest, liberty
must be looked for elsewhere; but whiles we are here we must make no account of
other then these varieties of misery: our redemption shall free us from them
all. But now perhaps some of you are ready to say of the Redemption, as they
did of the Resurrection, that it is past already; and so indeed it is, one way;
in respect of the price laid out by the Son of God; the invaluable price of his
blood for the redemption of man; but so, that it must be taken out by, and
applied to, every soul inparticular, if we will have the benefit redound to us;
It is his Redemption before, it is now only our Redemption, when it is brought
home to us.

Oh then the dear and happy day of this our final redemption, wherein we shall
be absolutely freed from all the miserable sorrows, pains, cares, fears,
vexations which we meet withal here below, and, which is yet more, from all
the danger of sinning, which now every day adds to the fearfulness of our
account; and lastly, from the woeful wages of sin, Death, bodily, spiritual,
eternal; here is a redemption worth our longing for; worth our joying in: when
Joseph was fetched out of Pharaohs Gaol, and changed the nasty rags of his
prison for pure linen vestures; and his Iron fetters for a chain of Gold, and
his wooden stocks for Pharaohs second Charet ( Genesis 41.42.) do we not think he
must needs be joyfully affected with it? When Peter was called up from betwixt
his Leopards (as that Father terms them) and had his shackles shaken off, and
was brought through the Iron gates into the free and open street; or when
Daniel was called out of the lions den to the embracements of Darius, could he
choose but rejoice in the change? when Lazarus was called (after three days
entombing) out of his grave, and saluted his mourning sisters, and walked home
with his friends, could there be ought but the voice of joy and gladness among
them? But, alas, all these are but slight resemblances of the blessed
Redemption which is purchased for us, who are thus ransomed from sin, and
death: Rather, if we could imagine the soul of a Trajan fetched out of hell by
the prayers of Gregory, or of a Falconella by Tecla, according to the bold
legends of lying fablers, and now freed from those intolerable and
unconceiveable torments, we might apprehend in some measure what it is that is
wrought for our souls, in this merciful redemption; and what is the favor of
that deliverance, which we must long to have fully perfected: But, alas, what
shall I say to us? We are enslaved, and fettered, and we are loath to be free;
we are in love with our bonds, with our miseries, with our sins; and when death
comes like a good Ebed-molech to drag us up out of our dungeon, we are
unwilling to put the rags under our arme-pits, and to lay hold of that our
sure, and happy conveyance to the light and liberty of the Saints: Oh our
wretched unbelief that is guilty of this slackness of our desires; whereas if
we were what we profess our selves, we would think the time long till it be
accomplished, and say, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly; even so, come Lord Jesus,
come quickly, and make up our full redemption from misery, from sin, from
death, and bring us into that glorious liberty of the Sons of God,

This, for the day of our redemption; now Secondly let us see what this sealing
is to the day of Redemption. I find in Gods book three uses of a seal; 1. For
secrecy, 2. For peculiar designation. 3. For certainty and assurance.

For secrecy first; So God speaking of the condition of Israel, Deuteronomy. 32.34. Is
not this laid up in store, and sealed up among my treasures? So Esaias speaking
of a vision of his; It shall be as the letter of a book sealed; whereof one
shall say, Read this, the other shall answer, I cannot for it is sealed, Esa.
29.11. Yea this sealing argues a long reservation and closeness: Go thy way,
Daniel; for the words are closed up, and sealed to the time of the end. Dan.
12.9. and thereupon it is, that John is forbidden to seal up the book of his
prophecy; Revel. 22.10. for the time is ^igh at hand: so we are wont to do in
ordinary practice; that Closet which we would have no body go into, we seal up;
that bag which we would not have opened, and that letter which we would not
have seen by others, we seal up, and think it a great violation of civility to
have it opened; Hence is that sigillum confessionis (the seal of confession)
amongst the Romish Casuists held so sacred, that it may not in any case
whatsoever, be broken up: Insomuch as their great Doctor, Martinus Alphonsus
Vivaldus, goes so far as to say, Si penderet salus vel liberatio totius mundi
ex revelatione unius peccati, non esset revelandum, etiamsi totus mundus esset
perdendus, That if the safety of the whole World should depend upon the
revealing of one sin; it is not to be revealed, though all the World should be
destroyed; and adds, Imo propter liberationem omnium animarum totius mundi non
est revelandum, Though it were for the freeing of all the souls of the whole
World, it is not to be revealed, in his Candelabrum aureum: De sigillo; number
the 11th. A strange height of expression, to give the World assurance of the
close carriage of their auricular Confession; and that not without need; for
were it not for this persuasion their hearths might cool, and men would keep
their own counsel: and surely, not to meddle with their tyrannical
impositions upon the conscience, in their forced confessions, which we do
justly call carnificinam conscientiae; I should hold and profess, that if a man
should come in the anguish of his soul for some sin, to unload his heart
secretly to the bosom of his Minister, of whom he looks for counsel and
comfort, if in such a case that Minister should reveal that sin to any other
whosoever, no death were torment enough for such a spiritual perfidiousnesse:
all secrets are at the least sub sigillo fidei, under the seal of fidelity, and
therefore not to be revealed.

For peculiar designation; thus our blessed Savior speaking of himself, the
Son of man, adds, For him has God the Father sealed, Joh. 6.27. that is; has
designed him to the special office of his Mediatorship: So Revelation. 7.5. Of
the tribe of Juda were sealed twelve thousand; and so the name of the number of
the several tribes, to the whole sum of an hundred forty four thousand were
designed to Salvation.

But the chief use of the seal is for certainty and assurance; so Jezebel, to
make sure work with the Elders of Jezreel for the dispatch of Naboth, sealed it
with Ahabs seal, 1 Kings. 21. so the Jewish Princes, Priests, and Levites when
they had made their covenant, sealed it with their seals, Nehem. 9. the last
verse. Hence Hamans Order for the destruction of the Jews was sealed with the
Kings seal, Esth. 3.12. and the countermand for their preservation so sealed
also, Esth. 8.8. so Jeremy for his land at Anathoth, wrote and sealed, Jerem.
32.9. so the gravestone of Christ's Tomb was sealed, Matthew. 27.66. And still
this is our practice, that which we would make sure, and past all question, we
give not under our hand only, but our seal also.

In all these three regards of secrecy, peculiar designation, and certainty,
the Church is sons obsignatus, a well sealed up, Cant. 4.12. and she justly
prays, Set me as a Seal upon thine heart, and a Seal upon thine arm Cant. 8.6.

Let us take them severally into our thoughts: and first for the Secrecy; It is
a sure word which the Spirit of God has, 2 Timothy 2.19. The foundation of God
remains sure, having this seal; The Lord knows who are his; The Lord
knows and none but he; neither Man nor Angel: It is sealed on purpose, that
it may be concealed, and reserved only in the counsel of the most High: It is
therefore a most high and dangerous presumption in any man to pass a judgment
upon the final estate of another, especially to the worse part; This is no
other then to rush into the Closet of the Highest, and to break open his
cabinet, and to tear up the privy Seal of Heaven; an insolence that God will
not pass over unrevenged: It was a good answer that the Servant gave in the
story, who carrying a covered dish through the Street, and being asked what it
was, answered, It is therefore covered that thou may not know; and so it is
here; the final estate of every Soul is sealed, that it may be known only to
the God of Heaven: and if any man dare to pry into this Ark of God, with the
men of Bethshemesh, let him fear to be struck dead as they were, 1 Samuel 6. The
Romanists have taken too much boldness this way: there is one of their Saints,
St. Matilda, or St. Maude a Prophetess of theirs, which in her Revelations
professes that she would needs know of God what became of the Souls of four
men; Sampson, Solomon, (whom I must tell you the greatest part of the Romish
Doctors give out for a cast away, very injuriously, and uncharitably, since
that besides his being a type of Christ, and a penman of some part of holy
Scripture, his Ecclesiastes is a plain publication to all the World, of his
penance for his former miscarriages) Origin and Trajane: and received this
answer; What my pity has done with Sampson, I will not have known, that men
may not be encouraged to take revenge on their enemies: what my mercy has done
with Solomon I will not have known lest men should take too much liberty to
carnal sins: What my bounty has done with Origin I would not have known, lest
men should put too much confidence in their knowledge; What my liberality has
done with Trajan, I would not have known for the advancement of the Catholic
faith, lest men should slight the Sacrament of Baptism; a presumptious
question, and an answer answerable. So they have not stuck to tell us, that the
same day that their St. Thomas Becket dyed, there dyed in all the World three
thousand thirty and three; whereof 3000. went to Hell; thirty to Purgatory, and
three (whereof their Saint was one) to Heaven; sure I think much alike: I will
not weary you with their frenzies of this kind; they have bragged of some of
their Saints who have had this deep insight into the hearts of men, and
counsels of God, that they could tell by the view who should be saved, who
condemned; and some fanatic Spirits in our Church have gone so far as to take
upon them (as some vain Palmesters by the sight of the hand to judge of
fortunes) by the face, and words, and garb, and carriage of men to pass
sentence of reprobation upon other men's souls: what an horrible insolence is
this in any creature under Heaven, or in it? There may be perhaps grounds to
judge of a man's present condition; God does not call any man to stupidity, or
unreasonablenesse; If I see a man live debauchedly in drunkenness, in whoring,
in professed profanesse: If I hear him in his ordinary speeches to tear Gods
name in pieces with oaths and bsasphemies, I may safely say that man is in a
damnable condition; and must demean my self to him accordingly, forbearing an
entire conversation with him; with such a one eat not, says the Apostle; but
if I shall presume to judge of his final estate, I may incur my own
condemnation, in pronouncing his Judge not that ye be not judged: Perhaps that
man whom thou sentencest, is in the secret counsel of God sealed to life; and
shall go before thee to Heaven: who that had seen Manasses revelling in his
Idolatry, Magic, Murder, worshipping all the host of Heaven, polluting the
house of God with his abominable altars, using sorceries, and enchantments,
filling the streets of Jerusalem with innocent blood (2 Kings 21.) would not
have said there is a castaway? Yet howsoever the history of the Kings leaves
him in his sin, and dishonor, yet in the 2 Chronicles. 33. You find his conversion,
his acceptance, his prayer, and how God was entreated of him; verse. 19. So as
for ought we know, he lived a Devil and dyed a Saint. Who that had seen and
heard Soul breathing out threatenings, and executing his bloody cruelties upon
the Church of God, dragging poor Christians to their judgments and executions,
would not have given him for a man branded for hell? yet behold him a chosen
vessel, the most glorious instrument of Gods name that has been since Christ
left the earth: as thou love thy Soul therefore, meddle not with Gods seal;
leave that to himself: Thou may read the superscription of a man if thou will; and judge of his outside, but take heed of going deeper: look well to the
seal that God has set upon thine own soul; look for that new name which none
can read but he that has it; this is worth thine enquiry into; and God has
given thee the Characters whereby to decipher it; whom he did predestinate,
them also he called, and whom he called them also he justified, and whom he
justified, them also he glorified; that is, they are as sure to be glorified as
if they were glorified already, Romans 8.30. Read thine own name in the book of
life, and thou art happy; as for others, let thy rule be the judgment of
charity; and let Gods seal alone: Secret things belong to God; and things
revealed to us, and our children; but if thou will needs be searching into Gods
counsel, remember that of Solomon, as the Vulgar reads it, Prove. 25.27.
Scrutator Majestatis opprimetur a gloria; He that pries into Majesty, shall be
overwhelmed with glory.

Now, that from the Secrecy we may descend to the Peculiarity of Designation:
You know it in common practice in your trades and merchandise, that when a man
has bought a parcel of commodities he sets his mark upon them; to distinguish
them from the rest in the warehouse; so does our God; he sets a mark upon his
own, whereby they are plainly differenced from others: And this mark, besides
the stamp of his eternal decree, is true sanctification: By this then it is,
that we are known from the World: As upon some large plain, where there are
several flocks and herds feeding together, every one knows his own by his
mark. So the man with the writers inkhorne set a mark upon those which mourned
for their own sins, and the sins of their people, Ezekiel. 9.

It is therefore so far from truth, that our sanctification is no certain
proof of our sonship and of our interest in the covenant of grace; as, that
there is no other besides it: And indeed, what other can we insist upon?
Outward profession will not do it; many a one shall say, Lord, Lord, with a
zealous reduplication, which yet shall be excluded; And for pretended
revelations, they are no less deceitful; Satan oftentimes transforming
himself into an Angel of light; A Zidkijeh thinks he has the Spirit as well as
any Michaiah of them all: our books are full of the reports of dangerous
dulusions of this kind; whereby it has come to pass that many a one in stead
of the true David has found nothing but an image of clouts laid upon a bolster
stuffed with Goats hair, 1 Samuel 19.16. But this mark of real sanctification
cannot fail us: It will ever hold good that which St. Paul has, Romans 8. So
many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God: Nothing in this
World can so highly concern us as this, to see and know whether we be sealed to
the day of Redemption: Would we know how it may be evidenced to us; look upon
the impression that Gods Spirit has made upon our hearts and lives, if he have
renewed us in the inner man, and wrought us unto true holiness, to a lively
faith, to a sincere love of God, to a conscionable care of all our actions; and
to all other his good graces, doubtless we are so sealed, that all the powers
of Hell cannot deface; and obliterate this blessed impression.

But the principal and main use of this Seal is for certainty of performance.
If we have the word of an honest man, we believe it; but if we have his hand we
make our selves more sure: but if we have both his hand and seal we rest secure
of the accomplishing of what is given, or undertaken. How much more assurance
may we have, when we have the word of a God, whose very title is Amen, Rev.
3.14. and whose promises are like himself, Yea and Amen, 2 Cor. 1.20. Alas, the
best man is deceitful upon the balance; and his true style is, Omnis homo mend
ax, every man is a liar. But for this God of truth, Heaven and Earth shall
pass away, before one tittle of his word shall fail; but when that promise is
seconded by his Seal, what a transcendent assurance is here? It is the charge
of the Apostle Peter; Give diligence to make your calling and election sure, 2
Pet. 1.10. Sure, not in respect of God; whom no changes can reach; whose word
is, I am Jehovah; my counsel shall stand; but in respect of our apprehension;
not in regard of the object only, which cannot fail, but even of the subject
also: which if it were not fecible, sure the Spirit of God would not have
enjoined it, or imposed it upon us; The Vulgar reads ( Per bona opera) by good
works. And indeed it is granted by Beza, and Clamier, that in some Greek copies
it is ((...)) whereupon Bellarmine would fain take an advantage to prove his
conjecturall assurance; A strange match of words merely contradictory; for if
but conjecturall, how can it be assurance? and if it be assurance, how only
conjecturall? we may as well talk of a false truth, as a conjecturall assurance.

But that implication of Bellarmine is easily blown over, if we consider that
these Good works, do not only comprehend external works, as almsdeeds,
prayer, attendance on Gods ordinances, and the like: but also the internal
acts of the soul: the Acts of believing, the Acts of the love of God, the Acts
of that hope which shall never make us ashamed. These will evidence, as our
calling and election, so the certainty of both, and therefore are the seal of
our Redemption. Let foolish men have leave to improve their wits to their own
wrong; in pleading for the uncertainty of their right to Heaven; But for us,
let us not suffer our souls to take any rest till we have this blessed seal put
upon us to the assuring of our Redemption and Salvation; that we may be able to
say with the chosen vessel; God has sealed us, and given us the earnest of his
Spirit in our hearts, 2 Cor. 1.22. If we have the grant of some good lease, or
some goodly Manor made to us by word of mouth, we stay not till we have gotten
it under black and white; and not then, till we have it under seal; nor then
(if it be a perpetuity) till we have livery and seizin given us of it; and when
all this is done, we make account securely to enjoy our hopes; and shall we be
less careful of the main-chance, even of the eternal inheritance of Heaven?
Lo here all these done for us! Here is the word preaching peace and Salvation
to all that believe; here are his Scriptures the internal monuments of his
written word, confirming it; here is the seal added to it; here is the Livery
and Se^zin given, in the earnest of his Spirit, and here is sufficient witness
to all; even Gods Spirit witnessing with our Spirits that we are the sons of
God; Let us find this in our bosom and we are happy; neither let our hearts
be quiet till we can say with the chosen Vessel, I am persuaded that neither
life, nor death, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor height nor depth, nor any creature can be able
to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, Romans 3.
the last verse. Lo, this is not a guess, but an assurance ((...)) neither does
the Apostle speak of his own special revelation (as the Popish Doctors would
pretend) but he takes all believers into the partnership of this comfortable
unfailablenesse (nothing shall separate us) thus happy are we if we be sealed
unto the day of Redemption.

Having now handled the parts severally, let us (if you please) put them
together, and see the power of this inference or argument: ye are by the Spirit
of God sealed to the day of redemption, Oh therefore grieve not that Spirit of
God by whom ye are thus sealed. The Spirit of God has infinitely merited of
you; has done so much for you, as ye are not capable to conceive, much less
to answer in so Heavenly an obsignation; Oh then be you tender of giving any
offense to that good Spirit; Do not you dare to do ought that might displease
that loving and beneficent Spirit. Be not you so much your own enemies, as to
give just distaste to your good God. So as the force of the argument, as we
intimated at the first, lies upon an action of unkindnesse; affording us this
instruction, that the ground of Gods Childrens fear to offend must be out of
love and thankfulness; great is thy mercy that thou may be feared, says the
Psalmist; he does not say; great is thy mercy that thou may be loved; nor,
great is thy Majesty that thou may be feared; but great is thy mercy that
thou may be feared: base servile natures are kept in with fear of stripes,
but the ingenuous disposition of Gods dear ones is wrought upon by the tender
respect to the goodness and mercy of that God who has so infinitely blessed
it. It is an emphaticall expression that of St. Paul For the love of Christ
constrains us: 2. Cor. 5.14. Lo, here is a kind of force and violence offered
to the soul; but it is the force of love, then which nothing can be more
pleasing, neither will God offer any other; it can be no will that is forced;
God will not break in upon the soul; but wins it with those sweet solicitations
that are more powerful then those of fear: Men commonly run in a full carere
toward Hell, it were happy that any thing in the world could stay them; but
are there any of us that find a restraint upon our selves, in the midst of our
evil ways, so as we make a stop in this pernicious course of our sining?
whence is it? Is it out of a mere fear of the pains of Hell, of those eternal
torments that abide for sinners? This is little thank to them: Nature even in
brute Creatures will teach them to affect their own preservation; and to avoid
those things which will necessarily draw on their destruction; Balaams ass
seeing the Angels sword, will strive to decline it; every slave will tugg hard
to escape the lash: but is it in a sweet sense of the mercies of God, who has
done so much for thy soul? is it out of a conscience not to offend so holy and
munificent a God, who has purchased thee so dear, and sealed thee up to the
day of Redemption; now, thou have in thee a true generosity of spirit; this
argues thee to have the proper affections of a true child of God; for every
child of God is spiritually good natured; It is not so with our natural
children; A stomackfull Esau knows that his good Father cannot but be
displeased with his Pagan matches; yet he takes him wives of the Daughters of
Heth: Genesis 26.35. And an ambitious Absalom dares rise up in rebellion against
his tenderly-loving Father; but grace has other effects; the spiritual
generation of Gods faithful ones, are dearly affectionate to their Father in
Heaven, and apply themselves to all obedience out of mere love and duty. The
Son, and the slave are both enjoined one work (God be thanked we can have no
instance in this kind, that vassalage is happily and justly extinguished as
unfit to be of use amongst Christians) but where it obtains still, the Son
and the slave do one work, but out of different grounds; the Son to please his
Father; the slave that he may avoid the stripes of an imperious Master,
therefore the one does it cheerfully and willingly; the other grudgingly and
repiningly; the one of Love, and Gratitude, the other out of fear. This is a
point worthy of our serious consideration, as that which mainly imports our
souls, what are the grounds of our either actions, or forbearances; we endeavor
some good duties, we refrain from some sins; out of what principles? Some there
are that can bragg of their immunity from gross sins, with the proud Pharisee,
I am no fornicator, no drunkard, no murderer, no liar, no slanderer, no
oppressor; And I would to God every one of you that hear me this day could in
sincerity of heart say so; But what is the ground of this their pretended
inoffensiveness? If it be only a fear of Hell, and of the wrathful indignation
of that just Judge, thou can reap small comfort to thy Soul in this condition;
for this is out of mere self-love, and desire to escape pain and misery, which
is incident into the worst of creatures: Even the evil Spirits themselves are
afraid of tormenting, and deprecate the sending them back to their chains: But
if it be out of a gracious, and tender love to God; out of a filial fear of the
displeasure of a God that has done so much for thee, this argues the
disposition of a true child of God, and may justly administer comfort to thy
Soul, in the time of thy trial: Oh that we could every one of us lay before our
eyes the sweet mercies of our God; especially his spiritual favors; how freely
he has loved us, how dearly he has redeemed us; even with the most precious
blood of the Son of his love; how graciously he has sealed us up to the day of
our redeemption? and that we could make this use of it to be a strong
retractive from any, even of our dearest, and gainfullest sins; Carry this home
with you, dear brethren, I beseech you, and fail not to think of it upon all
occasions when ever you shall find your selves tempted to any sin whatsoever
of lust, of excess, of covetous desires, have this Antidote ready in your
bosoms, which good Joseph had; How shall I do this great evil and sin against
God; As good Polycarpus that holy Martyr, when for the preservation of his life
he was urged to renounce Christ, said; Fourscore and six years have I been his
servant, and he never did me hurt; and shall I deny my Soverain King that has
so graciously preserved me? If out of these grounds thou can check thy sins;
and can say; Lord I have been careful not to grieve thy good spirit, because
thou in thine eternal love have sealed me thereby to the day of my redemption,
be confident, that thy redemption is sealed in Heaven, and shall in due time be
manifested to thine investiture with the eternal glory and happiness which God
has prepared for all his; To the participation whereof, that God who has
ordained us, in his good time mercifully bring us, for the sake of the Son of
his love, Jesus Christ the just, to whom with the Father, and the blessed
Spirit one infinite and incomprehensible God be given all praise, honor, and
glory, now and for evermore. Amen.

A SERMON Preached on WHITSUNDAY, IN THE PARISH CHURCH OF HIGHAM, In the Year
1652.
ROMANS 8.14. For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of
God.


THis only day is wont to be consecrated to the Celebration of the descent of
the holy Spirit, and therefore deserves to be (as it is named) the true
Dominica in albis, Whit-sunday: white is the color of Innocence and joy in
respect of the first, this, together with the feast of Easter was wont in the
primitive times to be the solemn season of Baptism, and sacramental
Regeneration: in respect of the second, it was the season of the just Triumph
and exultation of the Church; which was as this day graced, confirmed, and
refreshed, with the miraculous descent of the promised comforter; in both
regards every Christian challenges an interest in it; as these who claim to be
the Sons of God by Baptism, the Sacrament of Regeneration, and to be endued and
furnished with the sanctifying gifts of that blessed Spirit, whose wonderful
descent we this day celebrate: which how can we do better then by inquiring
into what right we have to this holy spirit, and to that sonship of God, which
in our Baptism we profess to partake of: we are all apt upon the least cause to
be proud of our parentage. There are Nations (they say) in the world, whereof
every man challenges gentility, and kindred to their King; so are we wont to do
spiritually to the King of Heaven. Every one has the Spirit of God; every one
is the son of God. It is the main errand we have to do on the Earth to settle
our hearts upon just grounds, in the truth of this resolution; and this text
undertakes to do it for us, infallibly deciding it, that those, and none but
those, that are led by the Spirit of God, are the Sons of God.

So as we need not now think of climbing up into Heaven, to turn the books of
Gods eternal Counsel; nor linger after Enthusiasmes and Revelations, as some
fanaticall spirits use to do; nor wish for that holy Dove to wisper in our ear,
with that great Arabian impostour; but only look seriously into our own hearts
and lives; and try our selves thoroughly by this sure, and unfailing rule of
our blessed Apostle, So many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons
of God, let my speech, and your attention then be bounded in these three
limits: Here is First a privilege, To be the Sons of God. Secondly a
qualification of the privileged, To be led by the Spirit. Thirdly an
Universal predication of that privilege upon the persons qualified; So many
as are led by the Spirit of God are the Sons of God; I need not crave your
attention, the importance of the matter challenges it. To the first then; it is
a wonderful and inexplicable privilege, this, To be the Sons of God; no
marvel if every one be apt to claim; The glory of Children are their Fathers,
Prove. 17.6. How were the Jews puffed up with that vain gloriation that they
were the Sons of Abraham, and yet they might have been so; and have come from
hated Esau, or ejected Ismael: what is it then to be the Sons of the God of
Abraham? Ye know what David could say upon the tender of matching into the
blood royal; seems it a small matter to you to be the Son in Law to a King?
Oh what then is it to be the true born sons to the great King of Heaven? The
Abassins pride themselves to be derived from that Son whom they say the Queen
of Sheba had begotten of her by Solomon when she went to visit him; it is
enough that it was Princely though base; how may we glory to be the true and
legitimate issue of the King of glory? the great Lord in the Gospel is brought
in by our Savior in his parable to say, They will reverence my Son; and Amnons
wicked kinsman could say to him, Why art thou, the Kings Son, so sad? as if the
sonship to a King were a supersedeas to all whatsoever grief or
coffeehouse. Neither is there matter of honor only in this priveledg but
of profit too; especially in the case of the Sons of this Heavenly King, whose
Sons are all heirs, as ye have it v. 17. with men indeed it is not so: Amongst
Gods chosen people the first born carried away a double portion; but in some
other Nations, and in some parts of ours, the Eldest goes away with all; as on
the contrary others are ruled by the law or custom of Gavell kind and the like
institutions; where either the youngest inherit; or all equally; but generally
it is here with us contrary to that old word concerning Isaacs twins, the
lesser serves the greater. Johosaphat gave great gifts to his other sons, but
the Kingdom to the Eldest, Jehoram, 1 Chronicles. 21.3. so as the rest were but as
subjects to their Eldest Brother; in the family of the highest it is not so;
there are all heirs; all inherit the blessings, the honors: as all are
partakers of the Divine nature; and of every one may be said by way of
Regeneration, that which was eminently, and singularly said by the way of
eternal generation of the natural and coessentiall Son of God, Thou art my
Son, I have begotten thee; so all are partakers of those blessings, and happy
immunities which appertain to their filiation and what are they? Surely great
beyond the power of expression; for first in this name they have a spiritual
right to all the creatures of God? all things are yours, says the Apostle; A
spiritual, I say, not a natural, not a civil right, which men have to what
they legally possess; we must take heed of this error which makes an
Universal confusion where ever it prevails: all these earthly affairs are
managed by a civil right; which men have whether by descent, or lawful
acquisition: so as it is not for any man to challenge an interest, either ad
rem, or in re, in the goods of another; but Gods children have a double claim
to all they possess, both civil from men, and spiritual from God; The Earth
has he given to the Sons of men, says the Psalmist; and men by just conquest,
by purchase, by gift conveigh it legally to each other; Besides which they have
a spiritual right; for God has given all things to his Son as Mediator, and
in and by him to those that are incorporated into him; so as now in this regard
every child of God is mundi dominus, the Lord of the World, as that Father
truly said;

Secondly, they have in this name an interest in God himself (for what nearer
relation can there be, then betwixt a father and a son:) An interest in all his
promises, in all his mercies, in all that he is, in all that flows from him,
in his remission, protection, provision. Which of us earthly parents, if we
extinguish not nature in our selves, can be wanting in these things to the
children of our Loins? How much more impossible is it that he who is All love,
1 Job. 4.16. should be wanting to those that are his by a true regeneration.
Hence is that enforcement, which God uses by his Prophet, Can a woman forget
her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb;
yea they may forget, yet will not I forget thee: Behold I have graven thee upon
the palms of my hands, Esaias 59.15, 16.

Thirdly, hence follows an unquestionable right in attendance and Guardianship
of the blessed Angels, Psalm. 91.11. They are the little ones whereof our
Savior, Matthew. 18. the especial charge whom those glorious Spirits are deputed
to attend, Hebr. 1.14. And oh what an honor is this, that we are guarded by
creatures more glorious in nature, more excellent in place and office, then our
selves? What a comfortable assureance is this that we have these troops of
Heavenly Soldiers pitching their tents about us; and ready to save-guard us
from the malice of the principalities and powers of darkness?

Lastly in this name they have a certain, and unfailable claim to eternal
glory; For what is that but the inheritance of the Saints, Colos. 1. Who should
have your Lands but your heirs, and Lo, these are the heirs of God; and none
but they: Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you
(says our Savior) Matthew. 25.34. Many a one here is borne to a fair estate,
and is stripped of it, whether by the just disherson of his offended Father, or
else by the power, or circumvention of an adversary, or by his own
mis-government, and unthriftiness; here is no danger of any of these. On our
Fathers part, none, For whom he loves, he loves to the end: On our Adversaries
part, none, None shall take them out of my hand, says our Savior, The gates
of Hell shall not prevail against his: On our part, none; For whereby can we
lavish out our estate but by our sins, and he that is borne of God sins not;
sins not so as to incurr a forfeit; he may so sin as to be frowned on for
the time, to be chid, yea perhaps to be well whipped of his Father, not so as
to be unsonned, or dis-herited: For the seed of God remains in him; Lo whiles
he has the Divine seed in him he is the Son of God, and whiles he is a Son he
cannot but be an heir: Oh then the comfortable and blessed privileges of the
Sons of God! enough to attract and ravish any heart; for who does not effect
the honor of the highest parentage, not under Heaven but in it? who can be but
eagerly ambitious of the title of the Lord of the world, so closely yea to be
interessed in the great God of Heaven and Earth, by an inseparable relation to
be attended on by those mighty and majesticall Spirits; and lastly, to be
feoffed in the all-glorious Kingdom of Heaven, and immortal crown of glory?
None of you can be now so dull as not desire to be thus happy, and to ask as
the blessed Virgin when she was told of her miraculous conception, Quomodo fiet
istud? How shall this be? How may I attain to this blessed condition? This is a
question worth asking. Oh the poor and base thoughts of men! How may I raise my
house? how may I settle my estate? How may I get a good bargain? how may I save
or gain? how may I be revenged of mine enemy? whiles in the mean time we care
not to demand (what most concerns us) which way should I become the child of
God? But, would we know this, to which all the World is but trifles? surely it
is not so hard as useful, whose Sons we are by nature, we soon know too well.
It is not enough to say, our Father was an Amorite, and our Mother an Hittite,
or to say we are the children of this world, Luke 16.8. or a seed of falsehood,
Esaias 57.4. or yet worse the children of the night and darkness, 1 Thessalonians. 5.5.
worse yet, we are filii contumaciae the sons of wilful disobedience, as the
original runs, Ephesians. 2.3. and thereby yet worse, the sons of wrath, Ephesians.
2.2. and which is the height of all miseries, the Sons of death and eternal
damnation; how then, how come we to be the Sons of God? It is the Almighty
power of Grace that only can make this change: A double Grace; the Grace of
Adoption, the Grace of Regeneration: Adoption; God has predestined us to the
adoption of sons by Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 1.5. Regeneration; So many as received
him, he gave them this power or right to be made the Sons of God; those which
are borne not of blood, or the lust of the flesh, but borne of God, John 1.12,
13. and that which referrs to both, Ye are all the Children of God by faith in
Christ Jesus, Galat. 3.26. Shortly then if we would be Sons and Daughters of
God (for the case is one in both, the soul has no sexes, and in Christ there
is neither male nor female) we must see that we be borne again; not of water
only; so we are all sacramentally Regenerated, but of the Holy Ghost, If any
man be in Christ he is a new creature, 2 Cor. 5.17. we must not be the men we
were; and how shall that be effected? In Christ Jesus I have begotten you
through the Gospel, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4.15. He has begotten us by the
word of Truth, Jam. 1.18. This word is that immortal seed whereby we are
begotten to God; let this word therefore have it is perfect work in us, let it
renew us in the inner man; mortifying all our evil and corrupt affections, and
raising us up to a new life of Grace and obedience, then God will not shame to
own us for his; and we shall not presume in claiming this glorious title of the
Sons of God: But if we be still our old selves, no changlings at all, the same
men that we came into the World, without defalcation of our corruptions,
without addition of Grace, and Sanctification: Surely we must seek us another
Father, we are not yet the Sons of God: But me thinks ere I was aware I am
falling to anticipate my discourse, and whiles I am teaching how we come to be
the Sons of God, am showing how we may know that we are so; which is the drift
of this Scripture in the qualification here mentioned: So many as are led by
the Spirit of God, are the Sons of God.

It is not enough for us (my beloved) to be the Sons and Daughters of God,
unless we know our selves to be so: for certainly, he cannot be truly happy,
that does not know himself happy: How shall we therefore know our selves to be
the Sons of God? surely there may be many signs and proofs of it besides this
mentioned in my Text, or rather, many specialties under this general. As first,
Every Child of God is like his Father: It is not so in carnal Generation: we
have seen many Children that have not so much as one lineament of their
Parents; and as contrary to their dispositions as if they had been strangers to
their loins and womb: In the spiritual sonship it is not so, every Child of
God carries the true resemblance of his Heavenly Father; as he that has called
you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation: Because it is
written, Be ye holy for I am holy, 1 Pet. 1.15, 16. Well then, my Brethren,
try your selves by this rule; our Heavenly Father is merciful, are we cruel?
Our Father is righteous in all his ways, are we unjust? Our Heavenly Father is
slow to anger, are we furious upon every slight occasion? Our Heavenly Father
abhors all manner of evil: do we take pleasure in any kind of wickedness?
certainly we have nothing of God in us, neither can we claim any kindred with
Heaven.

Secondly, every Child that is not utterly degenerate, bears a filial love to
his Parents, answering in some measure that natural affection, which the
parent bears toward him; we cannot but know, that the love of God, our
Heavenly Father, toward us is no less then infinite, Psalm. 103.13. what return
do we make of love to him again? we can perhaps talk largely of our love to
God, but where is the proof of it? Did we love our Father in Heaven as
children, could we strange our selves from his interest? Could we endure to see
him wronged in all his concernments? to hear his sacred and dread name
blasphemed? to see his Ordinances trampled upon, his messengers contemptuously
used, his house and his day profaned? would we not spit at that son that would
put up such indignities offered to his carnal Father? And why will we lay claim
to a sonship of God, if we can swallow such spiritual affronts put upon our
God?

Thirdly, every not ill-natured, and ungracious son (as God has none such)
bears a kind of awful respect to his Father, both in what he does, and in what
he suffers. For his actions, he dares not to do any thing wilfully that may
work his Fathers displeasure; and even those things which he would not stick to
do before a stranger, yet before his Father he reverentially forbeares to do;
If I be a Father, where is my honor? Malac. 1.6. If then we be not awfully
affected to the presence of God, If we dare boldly sin God in the face; it
argues strongly that we have no filial relation to him: For his sufferings; A
child will receive that correction from the hand of a Father, which he would
never abide from a stranger: He that would be ready to repay blows to another
man, takes stripes from a Father, and answers them only with tears; Thus, if
we be the Sons of God; we do submissely undergo from his hand, what fatherly
chastisment he shall be pleased to lay upon us; but if we be ready to struggle,
and groyningly repine at his correction, it shows we do not acknowledge him
for our Father.

Lastly, a son as he is wholly at his parents disposing: so he depends upon his
Fathers provision, expecting such patrimony as his Father shall bestow upon
him; and waiting with patience for such childes-part as he can have no hope of
from a stranger. If we do so to our Heavenly Father, leading the life of faith
with him; casting our selves upon his gracious providence for all good things
of either World; and fixing our eyes upon that glorious inheritance which he
has purchased for us above, we do evidently show our selves to be the sons of
God; but what need we any other evidence of this blessed condition, then what
is here expressly laid down to our hands in my Text? So many as are led by the
Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God.

What is it then to be led by the Spirit of God? The original is ((...)) a
word, which every Grammarian knows to signify both agi, and duci, to be led,
or driven; so where it is said by one Evangelist that Christ was led into the
Wilderness to be temped, Mat. 4.1. Of another it is read; that he was driven,
Mark 1.12. And though the vulgar reads it here qui aguntur, yet our Rhemists
turn it, Those that are led; noteing in the margin, out of St. Augustines true
explication, that Gods children are not violently compelled against their
wills, but sweetly drawn, moved, and induced to do good; So as this word then
implies; both an act of Gods Spirit working in us; and our complying with that
act in an obedient and ready conformity thereunto: For wherever the Spirit of
God is, it is not idle and ineffectuall, but it is still directing and
inclining unto good; and whosoever is led by that Spirit, yields himself to the
motions and guidance; Acti agimus, as the old word is. In all leading
therefore, and so in this, there must be an hand to guide, and a foot to
follow; good motions on Gods part, and motions in good, on ours; both these
must go together, else there is no leading by the Spirit of God. It is not
enough that good thoughts are injected into us by the holy Spirit; yea it is so
far from availing us, as that a man is so much the worse for those good
motions he entertaines not, as the motions are more excellent, and divine; But
those good injections must be received, embraced, delighted in, and followed
home in a constant and habitual practice, with a resolute rejection, and
detestation of the contrary.

Besides that spirit of our mind ( Ephesians. 4.23.) which lodges in every breast,
every man is led by some spirit or other: One is led by a spirit of Error (1 Timothy 4.1.) and seduction in matter of understanding: Another by the spirit of
giddiness, Esa. 19.14. into wild fancies, and brainsick imaginations; another
is led by the Spirit of bondage, to slavish fears, and afflictive horrors, as
in the next verse to my Text; another, by the spirit of the World, 1 Cor. 2.12.
Another (and indeed all these) by the unclean Spirit, as he is usually styled,
in the Gospel; others which are all the regenerate are led by the Spirit of
God: when our Savior said to his too fiery Disciples, Ye know not of what
Spirit ye are, he implies that of some spirit they must needs be: now there are
those that pretend to be led by the spirit of God, and are not. St. Paul could
upon good warrant say, I trust I have the Spirit of God; that trust was
(however he modestly expresses it) no less then a certain knowledge; but a
Zidkijah on the other side in a false presumption can say, Which way went the
Spirit of God from me, to speak to thee?

I remember in the history of the Anabaptists of Munster, one of those
illuminated companions of John Becold, and Onipperdoling is said to have killed
his own natural Brother in the face of his parents; and professed to do it
upon a revelation from the Spirit, the night before; And what heresies, and
prodigious opinions have been set on foot, and maintained to the death under
pretense of the dictation and warrant of Gods Spirit, who can be ignorant? Let
us therefore enquire how a man may know, whether he be truly led by the Spirit
of God.

First then the Spirit of God leads no man but in a right way: and what is that
but the way of Gods Commandments? All other ways are ways of our own,
oblique and crooked, as deviating from the straight line of righteousness: In
them either we lead our selves, or Satan leads us; If any man be tempted; let
him not say that he is tempted of God; God moves to holy duties, to just and
charitable actions, and none but them; for he cannot be contrary to himself: Is
there any of us therefore that is carried on in a course of uncleanness,
excess, disobedience, oppression, or any other sin whatsoever; Alas, we are led
by a contrary spirit in the dark ways that lead to death and Hell. It were
blasphemy to father these sinful mis-leadings upon the holy Spirit of God.

Secondly, Gods Spirit leads no man but by a just rule; That rule is the word
of truth, in all matter of judgment that must direct us; uncertain and variable
Traditions, private and ungrounded Revelations, which are any way cross to
this recorded will of God are the deceitful guides of the spirit of error. If
then any frantic or superstitious person, shall pretend any other direction
then God has given us in his revealed will; well may I say of him, as St. Paul
dares say of an Angel from Heaven (if any such could be guilty of that offense)
Let him be Anathema.

Thirdly, Gods Spirit leads his sweetly and gently, disponit omnia suaviter,
not in a blustering and hurrying violence, but by a leasurely, and gracious
inclination; so in Elijahs vision; There was fire, wind, Earthquake, but God
was in none of them; these were fit preparatives for his appearance; but it was
the still soft voice, wherein God would be revealed, 1 Kings 19.12. Those that
are carried with an heady and furious impetuousnesse, and vehemence of passion
in all their proceedings, which are all rigor and extremity; are not led by
that good spirit, which would be styled the spirit of meekness; who was pleased
to descend not in the form of an Eagle, or any other soul of prey, but in the
form of a meek and innocent dove.

Fourthly, Gods Spirit leads on in a constant way of progression from grace to
grace, from virtue to virtue, like as the sun arises by degrees to his full
meridian; whereas passion goes by sudden flashes like lightning; whereof the
interruptions are as speedy and momentany as the eruptions; The very word of
leading implies a continuance; neither can they be said to be led on, that make
no proceedings in their way; if either therefore we go backward, or stand still
in goodness; if we promove not from strength to strength, we have no ground to
think we are led by the Spirit of God.

Lastly, Flesh and Spirit are ever opposite one to the other, and go still
contrary ways, and lead to contrary ends; If ye walk after the flesh, ye shall
dye, says our Apostle. Nature and Grace which have their hands in this
manuduction both ways, stand in perpetual opposition to each other; If
therefore we be led by our sensual appetite to do and affect that which is
pleasing to corrupt nature, we are led by that blind guide the flesh, and if the
blind lead the blind, it is no marvel if both of them fall into the pit of
perdition; but if we mortify our evil and corrupt affections; crossing and
curbing our exorbitant and sinful desires, and bringing them forceably under
the subjection of Gods Spirit: Now we may be assured to be led by the Spirit of
God.

Other particularities of discovery might be urged, whereby we might easily
judge of our own conditions; but these are enough whereby we may try our selves,
our guides and ways: It is clear then (to sum up these proofs of our
estate) that only they who walk in the ways of Gods commandments, who are
directed by the revealed Will and word of God; who are sweetly inclined by the
gracious motions of his Spirit; who go on in a constant fashion, through all
the degrees of grace and obedience; who restrain their own natural desires and
affections, submitting themselves wholly to the government of the Holy Ghost;
only they (I say) are led by the Spirit of God.

Five sorts of men there are, therefore, who, what challenge so ever they may
pretend to make, are not led by the Spirit of God.

First, those that go on in a known evil way; Lead me O Lord in the ways of
thy righteousness, says the Psalmist: Lo, they are only the paths of
righteousness in which God leads us; the rest are false ways, as the Psalmist
justly calls them, which every good heart, and much more the holy God utterly
abhors; woe is me that I have lived to see those days wherein any that looks
with the face of a Christian should maintain that sins are no sins to the
faithful; and that he is the holiest man that can sin the boldlyest, and with
the greatest freedom from reluctance: Did ever any man look for Heaven in Hell
before? Did ever any seek for the greatest good in the worst of evils? This is
not heresy, but mere Devilisme; wherewith yet, it seems, some ungrounded
souls, are woefully tainted; God be merciful to them, and reclaim them ere it
be too late from so damnable an impiety.

Secondly, those that are led by their own vain imaginations, and illusive
dreams in the ways of error; raising unto themselves new and wild opinions,
and practices, without any warrant from the written word of God.

Thirdly, those that are carried by passion, and distemper, though even in good
ways, turning a religious heat into fury, and uncharitable rage.

Fourthly, those that make no progress at all in good, but either decay in
grace, or thrive not.

And lastly, those that humor, and sooth up corrupt nature, careing only to
fulfill the lusts of their own flesh: All these, whereof God knows there are
too many in the World, yea in the Church of God making a fair flourish of
Christianity, are nothing less then led by the Spirit of God; and therefore
can lay no claim to the state or title of the Sons of God: which is inferred in
the connection of this qualification with the privilege: being the third head of
our discourse, So many as are led by the Spirit of God, are the Sons of God.

The Spirit of God, is God; neither is mention made here of the Spirit only, as
by way of exclusion of the other persons: No, what one does, all do, according
to the old maxim. All the external works of the Trinity are indivisible; it is
good reason then, that God should lead his own, and so he does: But here it
will be fit for us to consider How far this leading of Gods Spirit will argue
and evince this sonship, and whether every conduct thereof will do it?

There is a work of the Spirit of God at large; The Spirit of God fills all the
World, says the Wiseman, Wisdom 1.7.

Not so yet, as was the error of P. Abailardus in Bernard, That Gods Spirit is
anima mundi as the God of the World, not as the soul of the World: As in the
state of the first Tohu and Bohu, the Spirit of God sluttered upon the Waters,
as it were to hatch the creature which should be produced, Genesis 1.2. so does he
still fill the world for the preservation of this universse: But in this all,
he works in man especially; There is a spirit in man, says Elihu in Job 32.8.
and the inspiration of the Almighty gives them understanding; yet this is not
the leading of this holy Spirit, that we are in hand with; lower then this,
there are certain common graces wrought in men by the Spirit of God; as some
general iluminations in the knowledge of divine things; some good moral
dispositions, some restraints of evil inclinations and actions, which yet will
never reach to evince our sonship to God. How easily were it for me to name
you diverse Heathens which have been eminent in all these, and yet (for ought we
know) never the nearer to Heaven; yet lower, there are some special gifts of
the Spirit which we call Charismata, rare endowments bestowed upon some men,
excellent faculties of preaching, and praying; power of miraculous workings (as
no doubt Judas did cast out Devils as well as the best of his fellow-Apostles)
gifts of tongues, and of Prophecy and the like, which do no more argue a right
to the sonship of God, then the Manuaries infused skill of Bezaleel and
A^oliab could prove them Saints; yet, lastly, there may be sensible operations
of the Spirit of God upon the soul in the influences of holy motions into the
heart, in working a temporary faith, and some fair progress in an holy
profession, and yet no sonship; the world is full of such glow-wormes, that
make some show of Spiritual Light from God, when they have nothing in them, but
cold crudities that can serve for nothing but deceit.

Will ye then see, what leading of the Spirit can evince us to be the Sons and
Daughters of God; know then that if we will hope for a comfortable assurance
hereof: we must be efficaciously led by his sanctifying Spirit, first in matter
of judgment, secondly in our dispositions, and thirdly in our practice.

For matter of judgment, ye remember what our Savior said to his Disciples;
When the Spirit of truth is come he will lead you into all Truth, John 16.13.
That is into all saving and necessary truths; so as to free us from gross
ignorance, or main error: Whosoever therefore is enlightened with the true and
solid knowledge of all those points of Christian doctrine, which are requisite
for salvation, is in that first regard led by the Spirit; and in this behalf
has a just title to the sonship of God, as contrarily those that are grossly
and obstinately erroneous in their judgment of fundamental truths, let them
pretend to never so much holiness in heart, or life, shall in vain lay claim
to this happy condition of the Sons of God.

For our disposition secondly. If the holy Spirit have wrought our hearts to be
right with God in all our affections; if we do sincerely love and fear him, if
we do truly believe in him, receiving him as not our Savior only, but as our
Lord; If our desires be unfeigned toward him; If after a meek and penitent
self-dejection we can find our selves raised to a lively hope, and firm
confidence in that our blessed Redeemer; and shall continue in a constant, and
habitual fruition of him, being thus led by the Spirit of God, we may be
assured that we are the Sons of God; for flesh and blood cannot be accessory to
these gracious dispositions.

Lastly for our practice, it is a clear word which we hear God say by Ezekiel,
I will put my Spirit into the midst of you; and will by it cause you to walk in
my statutes, and keep my laws, Ezech. 36.27. Lo herein is the main crisis of a
soul led by the Spirit of God, and adopted to this heavenly sonship. It is not
for us to content our selves to talk of the laws of our God; and to make empty
and formal professions of his name.

Here must be a continued walk in Gods statutes; it will not serve the turn
for us to stumble upon some acceptable work, to step aside a little into the
paths of godliness, and then draw back to the World; no my beloved, this
leading of Gods Spirit must neither be a forced angariation (as if God would
feoffe grace and salvation upon us against our wills) nor some sudden
protrusion to good, nor a mere, actual, momentany, transient conduction, for a
brunt of holiness and away, leaving us to the sinful ways of our former
disobedience, and to our wonted compliances with the World, the Devil, and the
Flesh; but must be in a steady, uninterrupted, habitual course of holy
obedience; so as we may sincerely profess with the man after Gods own heart,
My soul has kept thy Testimonies, and I love them exceedingly, Psalm. 119.67.
Now then dear Christians lay this to heart seriously; and call your selves
sadly to this trial: What is the carriage of our lives? What obedience do we
yield to the whole law of our God? If that be entire, hearty, universal,
constant, perseverant, and truly conscientious, we have whereof to rejoice; an
unfailing ground to pass a confident judgment upon our spiritual estate, to be
no less then happy. But if we be willingly failing in the unfeigned desires and
indevours of these holy performances, and shall let loose the reins to any
known wickedness; we have no part nor portion in this blessed condition: Mark,
I beseech you, how fully this is asserted to our hands, in this (says the
beloved Apostle) the Children of God are manifest, and the children of the
Devil; whosoever does not righteousness is not of God, neither he that loves
not his brother, 1 John 3.10. Observe I pray you what test we are put to: ye
hear him not say who so talks not holily, or who so professes not godliness;
in these an hypocrite may exceed the best Saint; but whosoever does not
righteousness: withal see what a clause the Disciple of love superadds to the
mention of all Righteousness ( neither he that loves not his brother) surely
the Spirit of God is a Loving Spirit, Wisdom 1.6. and St. Paul has the like
phrase, Romans 15.30. To let pass then all the other proofs of our guidance by
the spirit: Instance but in this one: Alas my Brethren what is become of that
charitable, and christian carriage of men toward one another, which God
requires of us and which was wont to be conspicuous amongst Christian
compatriots. Woe is me, instead of that true and hearty love which our Savior
would have the Livery of our Disciple-ship, the badg of our holy profession,
what do we see but emulation, envy, and malice, rigid censures, and rancorous
heartburnings amongst men? In stead of those neighbourly, and friendly offices
which Christians were wont lovingly to perform to each other, what have we now
in the common practice of men, but underminings, oppressions, violence,
cruelty? Can we think that the Spirit of him who would be styled Love it self,
would lead us in these rugged, and bloody paths? No, no, this alone is too
clear a proof how great a stranger the Spirit of God is to the hearts and ways
of men; and how few there are that upon good and firm grounds can plead their
right to the sonship of God: Alas, alas, if these dispositions and practices
may bewray the sons of an holy God, what can men do to prove themselves the
children of that hellish Apollion, who was a manslayer from the beginning? For
us, my beloved: Oh let us hate and bewail this common degeneration of
Christians; and as we would be, and be acknowledged the sons of God, Let us put
on as the elect of God holy and beloved, bowels of mercy, kindness,
humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering, forbearing one another,
forgiving one another, if we have a quarrel against any; even as Christ
forgave us; and above all these things put on charity, which is the bond of
perfectness, Colos. 3.12, 13, 14. And lastly, forsaking the mis-guidance of
Satan, the World, and our corrupt nature which will lead us down to the
chambers of death, and eternal destruction, let us yield up our selves to be
led by the holy Spirit of God in all the ways of righteousness, and
holiness, of piety, justice, charity, and all manner of gracious conversation,
that we may thereby approve our selves the sons and daughters of God, and may
be feoffed in that blessed inheritance which he has laid up for all his; to
the possession whereof may he happily bring us who has dearly bought us, Jesus
Christ the righteous: to whom with the Father and the blessed spirit, one
infinite God, be given all praise, honor, and glory, now and for ever. Amen.

THE MOURNER IN SION.
ECCLESIASTES 3.4. [There is] a time to weep, and a time to laugh, a time to
mourn, and a time to dance.


I Need not tell you that Solomon was a wise man, his wisdom, as it was in an
extraordinary measure put into him by him that is wisdom it self; so was it in
a more then ordinary way improved by his diligent observation: his observation
was Universal of times, things, persons, actions, events: neither did he look
his experiments up in the closet of his own breast; but by the direction of Gods
Spirit laid them forth to the World in this divine sermon, which, not as a
King, but as a Prophet he preached to all posterity. Every sentence here
therefore is a dictate of the holy Ghost; it is not Solomon then, but a greater
then Solomon, even the holy Spirit of the great God that tells you there is not
a time only, but a season too, for every thing and for every purpose under
Heaven: that is (as I hope you can take it no otherwise) for every good thing,
or indifferent; as for evil things or actions, if men find a time, yet sure
God allows no season: those are always damnably-unseasonable abuses of times,
and of our selves: not to meddle with other particulars: our thoughts are now
by the divine providence pitched upon, a time to weep, and a time to laugh, a
time to mourn, and a time to dance, or rather only upon the time to weep and
mourn, for our time of laughing and dancing is past already: and perhaps we
have had too much of that in our former times; which makes the causes and
degrees of our now weeping and mourning, as more uncouth, so more intensive: we
must be so much deeper in our mourning by how much we have been more wild, and
wanton in our laughter, and dancing. To fall right down therefore upon our
intended discourse without any previous circumlocutions: There is a threefold
time of just mourning. 1. When a man is sensible of his punishments. 2. Of his
sins, 3. Of his dangers.

Of his punishments first, or rather which is more general, of his afflictions:
for all afflictions are not intended for punishments; some are fatherly
chastisments only for our good, whereas all punishments are afflictive; when
we are whip't then, when we smart with the rod, we have cause to weep, and if
in this case we shed no tears it is a sign of a graceless heart. It is time
therefore to mourn when we are pressed by sufferings, whether from the
immediate hand of God, or mediately by the hands of men; whether by private, or
public calamities; are we smitten in our bodies by some painful and
incurable diseases? Does the pestilence rage in our streets? Has God forbidden
us the influence of Heaven and cursed the Earth with barrenness? Has he broken
the staff of bread, and sent leanness into our souls? Has he humbled us with
the fearful casualties of fire or water? by wracks at Sea, by lightnings and
tempests by land? has he sent murrain amongst our cattle, and destroying
vermin into our barnes, and fields? now God tells us it is a time to mourn;
are we disquieted in our minds by some overmastering passions of grief, for
the miscarriages of children, for the secret discontents of domestical jars,
for unjust calumnies cast upon our good name? are we molested in our minds and
spirits with impetuous, and no less importune then hateful Temptations? now
it is a time to mourn: do we find in our souls a decay, and languishment of
grace, a prevalence of those corruptions which we thought abated in us? Do we
find our selves deeply soulsick with our sinful indispositions? Shortly, do we
find the face of our God for the time withdrawn from us? Now, now it is a time
to mourn.

If we turn our eyes to those evils which are cast upon us by the hands of men:
Do men find themselves despoyled of their estates, restrained of their
Liberties, tortured in their bodies? Do they find the woeful miseries of an
intestine war; killings, burnings, depopulations? do they find fire and sword
raging in the bosom of out Land? now it is a time to mourn. Were these evils
confined to some few persons; to some special families, they were worthy of the
tears of our compassion; for it is our duty to weep with them that weep; but
where they are universal, and spread over the whole face of any Nation, there
cannot be found tears enough to lament them.

Punishments then are a just cause of our sorrow and mourning; but to a good
heart sin is so much greater cause of mourning, by how much a moral evil is
more then a natural; and by how much the displeasure of an Almighty God is
worthy of more regard then our own smart: Does thine heart then tell thee that
thou have offended the Majesty of God by some grievous sin? now is thy time to
weep and mourn; as thou would for thy only son; Zechar. 12.10.
now it is time for thee to be in bitterness, as one that is in bitterness
for his first borne: Thy soul is foul, wash and rince it with the tears of thy
repentance; go forth with Peter, and weep bitterly. Do thou find in the
place where thou live that sin like some furious torrent bears down all
before it? now it is time for thee to mourn for the sins of thy people; and to
say as the holy Psalmist did, Psalm. 119 136.
Rivers of waters run down mine eyes, because men keep not thy law.

Lastly, as our sufferings and our sins make up a due time for our mourning, so
do our dangers also; for fear is no less afflictive then pain; yea I know not
whether there can be a greater pain then the expectation of imminent mischiefs:
Do we therefore see extremities of judgments hovering over our heads, ready to
fall down, like Sodoms fire and brimstone, from heaven upon us; now is it high
time to mourn for the anteverting of a threatened vengeance: shortly therefore,
to sum up all that we have spoken, whether we feel evils of punishment or fear
them; or be conscious of the evils of sin that have deserved them, we cannot
but find it a just time to weep and mourn.

And now to come home close to our selves; can any man be so wilfully blind as
not to see that all these are met together to wring tears from us, and to call
us to a solemn and universal mourning: What single men suffer, themselves best
feel; and our old word is, The wronged man writes in marble* I meddle not with
particulars: Our pains of body, our losses in our estate, our demestique
crosses, our wounds of Spirit as they are kept up in our own breasts, so they
justly call us to private humiliations; if we cast abroad our eyes to more
public afflictions; have we not seen that God has let his sea loose upon us
in diverse parts of our Land? as if for a new judgment upon us, he would retract
the old word of his decreed limitation; Hitherto shall thou come, but no
further, and here shall thy proud waves be stayed, Job. 38.11. Has not God
given us in diverse parts of our Nation a feeling touch of some of the Egyptian
plagues, in the mortality of our cattle, in the unusual frequencie of noisome
and devouring vermin: But woe is me, all these are but flea-bites in comparison
of that destructive sword that has gone through the Land, and sheathed it self
in the bowels of hundred thousands of brethren. Oh that my head were waters,
and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for the
slain of the daughter of my People, Jer. 9.1. Was there ever a more fearful
example of divine vengeance against any Nation then to be armed against each
other to their mutual destruction: that Christian compatriots, brethren, should
pour out each others blood like water in our streets, and leave their mangled
carcasses for compost in our Fields? That none but the sharper sword should be
left to be the arbiter of our deadly differences; that Fathers and Sons should
so put off all natural affection as to think it no violation of piety to cut
the throats of each other: Oh that we have lived to see the woeful havoc that
the hellish fury of war has made every where in this flourishing and populous
Island; the flames of hostile fury rising up in our Towns and Cities; the
devastation of our fruitful and pleasant Villages; the demolition of our
magnificent Structures, the spoils and ruins of those fabrics that should be
sacred, in a word, this goodly Land for a great part of it turned to a very
Golgotha, and Aceldama: These, these my brethren, if our eyes be not made of
pumices, must needs fetch tears from us; and put us into a constant habit of
mourning.

And if our punishments deserve thus to take up our hearts, where shall we find
room enough for sufficient sorrow for those horrible sins that have drawn down
these heavy judgments upon us?

Truly, beloved brethren, if we were wholly resolved into tears, and if every
drop were a stream, 1 Kin. 8.38.
we could not weep enough for our own sins, and the sins of our People: Let
every man ransack his own breast, and find out the plague of his own heart:
but for the present, let me have leave a little to lay before you (though it is
no pleasing object) that common leprosy of sin, wherewith the face of this
miserable Nation is overspread, whether in matter of practice, or of opinion:
For the former, should I gather up all the complaints of the Prophets which
they have taken up of old against their Israel and Juda, and apply them to this
Church and Nation, you would verily think them calculated to this our meridian;
as if our sins were thiers, and their reproofs ours: what one sin can be named
in all that black bedrole of wickedness, reckoned up by those holily querulos
censors, which we must not own for ours? Of whom do you think the Prophet
Esaiah speaks, when he says, Your iniquities have separated between you and
your God, and your sins have hid his face from you, that he will not hear; for
your hands are defiled with blood, and your fingers with iniquity, your lips
have spoken lies, your tongue has muttered perverseness? Esaias 59.2.3. Of whom
do ye think the Prophet Micah speaks, when he says, The rich men thereof are
full of violence, and the inhabitants thereof have spoken lies, and their
tongue is deceitful in their mouths? Micah 6.12. Do we think of Epicurisme
and self-indulgence? Whom do we think the Prophet Amos speaks of, when he
says, Woe be to them that are at ease in Zion, that put far away the evil
day, and cause the seat of violence to come near, that lie upon beds of Ivory,
and stretch themselves upon their couches, that drink wine in bowls, and
anoint themselves with the chief ointment, but they are not grieved for the
affliction of Joseph, Amos 6.1.3.4.6. Tell me, brethren, was there ever more
riot and excess in diet and clothes, in bellycheer, and back-timber then we
see at this day? Do we think of drunkenness and surfets? Of whom do we think
Esaias speaks, when he says, They have erred through Wine, and through strong
drink are out of the way; the Priest and the Prophet have erred through strong
drink (Indian smoke was not then known) they are swallowed up of wine, they are
out of the way through strong drink, they err in vision, they stumble in
judgment, for all tables are full of vomit and filthiness? Esaias. 28.7. Of whom
does the Prophet Hosea speak, when he says, Whoredom and Wine and new Wine
take away the heart? well may these two be put together, for they seldom go
asunder; but tell me, brethren, was there ever such abominable beastliness in
this kind as raigns at this day, since the hedge of all Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction was thrown open?

And if we think good to put these and some other of their damnable society
together; of whom do we think the Prophet Hosea speaks, when he says, The Lord
has a controversy with the Land, because there is no truth, no mercy, no
knowledge of God in the Land. By swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing,
and committing adultery, they break out and blood touches blood? Hos. 4.1.2.
Do ye think of perjury? Of whom do ye think the same Hosea speaks, when he
says; They have spoken words swearing falsely in making a covenant? Hos. 10.4.
Do we think of the violation of holy things and places? Of whom do we think the
Prophet Esaias speaks, when he says, Is this house which is called by my name
become a den of robbers in your eyes; behold even I have seen it, says the
Lord? Esaias. 7.11.

I could easily tire you (if I have not done so already) with the odious
parallels of our sins with Isreal's. Yet, one more, do we think of the bold
intrusion of presumptuous persons into the sacred calling, without any
commission from God? Of whom do we think the Prophet Jeremy speaks? The
Prophets prophesy lies in my name, I sent them not, neither have I commanded
them, nor spoke unto them: They prophesy unto you a false vision, and the
deceit of their own heart, Jer. 14.14. and again, I have not sent these
Prophets, yet they run, I have not spoken to them, yet they prophesyed. Jer.
23.21. To what purpose should I instance in more? as I easily might; as
practical atheism, falsehood, cruelty, hypocrisy, ingratitude, and in a word,
universal corruption: O England, England, too like to thy sister Israel in all
her spiritual deformities, if not rather to thy sister Sodom. Behold this was
the iniquity of thy Sister sodom, pride, fullness of bread and abundance of
idleness was in her, neither did she strengthen the hands of the poor and
needy, Ezechiel 16.49. Lo, thou art as haughty as she, and have committed all
her abominations; But that which yet aggravates thy sin, is thy stubborn
incorrigiblenesse, and impudence in offending: is it not of thee that the
Prophet Jeremy speaks, This is a Nation that obeys not the voice of the Lord
their God, nor receives correction? Jer. 7.28. For, O our God, have thou not
whipped us soundly, and drawn blood of us in abundance; yet, woe is me what
amendment have thou found in us? what one excess have we abated? what one sin
have we reformed? what one vice have we quitted? Look forth brethren into the
World, see if the lives of men be not more loose and lawless, their tongues
more profane, their hands more heavily oppressive, their conversation more
faithless, their contracts more fraudulent, their contempt of Gods messengers
more high, their neglect of Gods ordinances more palpable then ever it was:
Yea, have not too many amongst us, added to their unreformation an impudence in
sinning? Is it not of these that the Prophet speaks; Were they ashamed when
they had committed abomination? Nay they were not ashamed at all, neither could
they blush, therefore shall they fall among them that fall, in the time of
their visitation they shall be cast down, says the Lord? Jer. 8.12.

By this time I suppose you see how too much cause we have to mourn for those
sins of practice which have fetched down judgments upon us, turn your eyes now a
little to those intellectual wickednesses which we call sins of Opinion;
Opinion (think some of you now) alas what so great offense can there be in
matter of conceit, and in those results of ours ratiocination which we picht
upon in the cases of Religion? let me tell you, dear Christians, what valuation
soever you may please to set upon these capital errors of the understanding
set abroach for the seduction of simple souls, there is more deadly mischief,
and higher offense to God in them, then in those practical evils which honest
hearts profess to abhor; These, as they are the immediate sins of our
spiritual part; so they do more immediately strike at the God of Spirits in
his Truth, and holiness; and as Religion is the highest concernment of the
soul, so the depravation of Religion must needs be most dangerous, and
damnable. It is no marvel therefore if a truly-zealous Christian could even
weep his eyes out to see and hear those hellish heresies, and Atheous paradoxes
which have poisoned the very air of our Church wherein they were vented; One
beats the keys into the sword, or hangs them at the Magistrates girdle; so as
he suspends religion upon the mere will and pleasure of severaignty: One
allows plurality, or community of Wives; another allows a man to divorce that
wife he has upon slight occasions, and to take another: One is a Ranter,
another is a Seeker, a third is a Shaker: One dares question, yea disparage the
sacred Scriptures of God; another denies the Souls immortality, a third the
Bodies resurrection: One spits his poison upon the blessed Trinity; another
blasphemes the Lord Jesus, and opposes the eternity of his Godhead; One is
altogether for inspirations, professing himself above the sphere of all
Ordinances, yea above the blood of Christ himself; Another teaches that the
more villainy he can commit, the more holy he is; that only confidence in
sinning is perfection of sanctity; that there is no hell but remorse. To put an
end to this list of blasphemies the very mention whereof is enough to distemper
my tongue and your ears; One miscreant dares give himself out for God Almighty:
Another for the Holy Ghost; Another for the Lord Christ, Another (a vile
adulterous strumpet) for the Virgin Mary; O God, were there ever such frenzies
possessed the brains of men? as these sad times have yieled? Was ever the
Devil so prevalent with the sons of men? Neither have these prodigious wretches
smothered their damnable conceits in their impure breasts, but have boldly
vented them to the World, so as the very presses are openly defiled with the
most loathsome disgorgments of their wicked blasphemies: Here, here my dear
brethren, is matter more then enough for our mourning; If we have any good
hearts to God, if any love to his truth, if any zeal for his glory, if any care
for his Church, if any compassion of either perishing or endangered souls, we
cannot but apprehend just cause of pouring out our selves into tears for so
horrible affronts offered to the dread Majesty of our God, for so inexpiable a
scandal to the Gospel which we profess, for so odious a conspurcation of our
holy profession, and lastly, for the dreadful damnation of those silly souls
that are seduced by these cursed impostors.

Ye have seen now what cause we have of mourning for sins both of Practice and
Opinion.

It remains now that we consider what cause of mourning we may have from our
dangers: for surely fear as it is always joined with grief, so together with
it is a just provoker of our tears. And here if I should abridge all the holy
Prophets; and gather up out of them all the menaces of judgments which they
denounce against their sinful Israel, I might well bring them home to our own
doors and justly affright us with the expectation of such further revenge from
Divine Justice; for how can we otherwise think but that the same sins must
carry away the same punishments? The holy God is ever constant to his own most
righteous proceedings; if then our sins be like theirs, why should we presume
upon a dissimilitude of judgments?

Here then it is easy to descry a double danger worth our mourning for; the
one, of further smart from the hand of God for our continuing, and menacing
wickedness; the other of further degrees of corruption from our selves: For
the first, let that sad Prophet Jeremiah tell you, what we may justly fear.
They are not humbled even unto this day, neither have they feared nor walked in
my law; Therefore thus says the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel, Behold I
will set my face against you for evil, and to cut off all Judah, Jer.
44.10.11. and if ye will have particularities, have we not cause to fear that
he will make good upon us that fearful word, I have taken away my peace from
this people, says the Lord, even loving kindness and mercies? Jer. 16.5. This
is an ablative judgment, and that a heavy one too; will ye see a positive one,
more heavy then that? Behold I will utterly forget you, and I will forsake you,
and the City that I gave to you and your forefathers, and cast you out of my
presence. And I will bring an everlasting reproach upon you, and a perpetual
shame which shall not be forgotten. Jer. 23.39, 40. Will ye have the
specialities of his threatened judgments? Behold I will send upon them the
sword, the famine, and the pestilence; I will persecute them with all these,
and will deliver them to be removed to all the Kingdoms of the Earth to be a
curse, and an astonishment and an hissing, and a reproach among all Nations.
Jer. 29.17, 18. But enough, enough of these doleful accents of interminated
judgments, wherewith if I would follow the steps of the Prophets I might strike
your hearts with just horror: See now the no less danger that arises from our
selves; no less? Yea much greater; for the highest revenge of all other that
God takes of men, is when he punishes sin with sin: Let me therefore sadly and
seriously tell you, that there is just fear we are running apace into two woeful
mischiefs, Atheism and Barbarism: Oh that I were a false Prophet, and did not
see too much ground of this fear. The multiplicity of these wild opinions in
matter of Religion, if there be not a speedy restraint, can have no other
issue, but no Religion: And if we should live to see discouragements put upon
Learning and a substract on or diminution of the maintenance of studied
Divines, and an allowance of, or connivence at unlettered preachers; and no
care taken of any but some select souls, ignorance, confusion, and barbarity
will be the next news that we shall hear of from the Church of England.

Brethren, if we see not these causes of fear we are blind, and if seeing them
we be not affected with them, we are stupid.

Let this be enough to be spoken of those grounds that make a just time of our
mourning: now that our seasonable mourning may not be to no purpose; let us
inquire a little how this our mourning should be regulated for the due carriage
and conditions of it: And first for the quantity of it; it must be proportioned
to the occasion and cause upon which it is taken up: for to mourn deeply upon
slight and trivial causes, were weak and childish; like to those faint hearts
that are ready to swoun away for the scratch of a finger: on the contrary not
to mourn heavily upon a main cause of grief, argues an insensate and benumbed
heart.

If it be for some vehement affliction of body, good Ezekiah is a lawful
precedent for us, Like as a Crane, or a swallow so did I chatter; I did mourn
as a dove, mine eyes fail with looking upward: Isaiah 38.14. If it be for some
great public calamity, Jeremie tells you what to do; For this gird you with
sackcloth, lament and howl, for the fierce anger of the Lord is not turned back
from us, Jerem. 4.8. and Gods chosen People are a fit pattern; The Elders of
the daughter of Zion sit upon the ground and keep silence, they have cast up
dust upon their heads, they have girded themselves with sackcloth, the Virgins
of Jerusalem hang down their heads to the ground, Lament. 2.10. and the Prophet
beats them company in their sorrow, Mine eyes do fail with tears, my bowels are
troubled, my liver is poured upen the earth, for the destruction of the
daughter of my People, Lament. 2.11.

If it be for some personal and grievous sin that we have been miscarried
into: Holy David is a meet example for us; My bones, says he, waxed old,
through my roaring all the day long; for day and night thy hand was heavy upon
me; my moisture is turned into the drought of Summer, Psalm. 32.3, 4. and
elsewhere, My sore ran in the night, and ceased not, my soul refused to be
comforted; I complained, and my Spirit was overwhelmed, Psalm. 77.2, 3. Where
are those pandars of sin the Romish casuists, that teach the least measure of
sorrow, even mere attrition, is enough for a penitent. Surely, had the man
after Gods own heart thought so, he had spared many a sigh, and many a sobbe,
and many a tear that his sins cost him; and so must they do us, if ever we hope
to recover true comfort to our souls; and certainly could we be rightly
apprehensive of the dread Majesty of the most high God whom we move to anger
with our sin; and could consider the hainousness of sin whereby we provoke the
eyes of his glory; and lastly the dreadfulness of that eternal torment which
our sin draws after it, we could not think it easy to spend too much sorrow
upon our sins.

Lastly, if from our own private bosom, we shall cast our eyes upon the common
sins of the times, and places wherein we live, a taste whereof I have given you
in this our present discourse; where, oh where shall we find tears enough to
bewail them? now sackcloth and ashes, sighs and tears, weeping and wailing,
rending of garments, yea rending of hearts too are all too little to express
our just mourning. When good Ezra heard but of that one sin wherewith both
Priests and Levites, and the Rulers and People of Israel were tainted, which
was their intermarriage with the Heathen, so as the holy seed was vitiated with
this mixture, how passionately was he affected! Let himself tell you; When I
heard this thing (says he) I rent my garment and my mantle, and plucked off the
hair of my head, and of my beard, and sat down astonished until the evening
sacrifice, Ezra 9.3, 4. What would he have done think we, if he had seen so
many abominations, and heard so many and soul blasphemies of his Israel as we
have been witnesses of in these last times? This for the quantity.

Now secondly, for the quality of our mourning, we may not think to rest in a
mere sorrow, in a pensive kind of sullenness, Worldly sorrow causes death, 2
Cor. 8.10. For by the sorrow of the heart the Spirit is broken, Prove. 15.13.
and a broken spirit dries the bones, Prove. 17.22.

And this is one main difference betwixt the Christian mourner and the Pagan;
both equally complain, both are sensible of the causes of their complaint; but
the sorrow of the one is simply and absolutely afflictive, as looking no
further but to the very object of his grief; the other is mixed with diverse
holy temperaments: as with a meekness of Spirit, with a faithul reliance upon
God, yea even with some kind of joy it self; for, when we are bidden to rejoice
continually, Philip. 4.4. even the dismal days of our mourning, are not
excepted; Not so only, says the Apostle, but we glory in tribulations, Romans
5.3. Yea more then so, My brethen (says St. James) count it all joy when ye
fall into diverse temptations, James 1.2.

Thirdly, for the manner of our mourning: we cannot but take notice that there
is a solemn mourning, and there is a private and domestical; the solemn is by
public indiction of authority: That only Power that can command our Persons,
may command our humiliation and prescribe the circumstances of the Performance
of it: Niniveh it self had so much divinity as to know and practice this truth;
How strict a Proclamation was that of the King of that Heathen City; Let
neither man nor beast, herd nor flock taste any thing, let them not feed nor
drink water, but let man and beast be covered with sackcloth, etc. As for the
choice and punctuality of the time whereto this public mourning must be
limited, where should it rest but in the hand of sovereignty; whose wisdom is
to be presupposed such as to pitch upon the meetest seasons for this Practice:
It is very remarkable that we find recorded in the case of Isreal's Public
mourning, Nehem. 8.9, 10.

Then Nenemiah which is the Tirshatha, or governor, and Ezra the Priest, the
Scribe, and the Levites, that taught the People said unto all the People; This
day is holy unto the Lord your God; mourn not, nor weep; Go your way, eat the
fat, and drink the sweet, and send portions to them for whom nothing is
prepared: for this day is holy unto our Lord, neither be ye sorry; for the joy
of the Lord is your strength.

A consideration (if I may intimate it without presumption) meet to be tendered
to our Brethren of the neighbor Church, who are wont to cast their public
fasts upon the Lords day, contrary no less to the determination of the Councels
of the Evangelical Churches, then the practice of the Jewish: For what other is
this but Gods holy day; of which we may well take-up the words of the Psalmist,
This is the Day which the Lord has made, let us rejoice and be glad in it. As
it would therefore be utterly unseasonable to rejoice in a day of mourning: so
must it needs be to mourn in a day of rejoicing.

The rites and forms of public mournings may and were wont to vary according
to the usages of several Nations and Churches; how ceremonious the Jews were
in this kind I need not tell you; here was rending of garments, girding with
sackcloth, muffling of faces, prostration on floores, covering with ashes,
houling on the house-tops, cutting and tearing of hair, wringing of hands, and
all possible gestures that might express depth of passion; And so much of this
is imitable by us, as may in a grave Christian fashion testify our dejection
and true sorrow of heart upon the occasion of public calamities; this solemn
humiliation then being always joined with an afflicting the body by fasting
(for deep sorrow does both take away appetite, and disregards nature) so it
calls us for the time to an absolute forbearance, and neglective forgetfulness
of all Earthly comforts; In which regard the Popish mock-fasts which allow the
greatest dainties in the strictest abstinence; and the Turkish, which shut up
in an evening gluttony, are no better then hypocritical counterfeits of a
religious self-humbling: those habits then, those discourses or actions, those
contentments which are in themselves perhaps not lawful only, but commendable,
must now be avoided as unseasonable, if not sinful: How hainously did the
Almighty take this mis-timed pleasure and jollity at the hands of his people
the Jews? In that day (says Esaias) did the Lord God of Hosts call to weeping
and to mourning, and to baldness, and to girding with sackcloth: And behold
joy and gladness, slaying Oxen, and killing Sheep, eating flesh, and drinking
wine; let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye. And what was the issue?
It was revealed in mine ears by the Lord of Hosts, surely this iniquity shall
not be purged from you till ye dye, says the Lord God of Hosts, Esaias 22.12,
13, 14.

In matter of private mournings every man is allowed to be the arbiter of his
own Time, Place, Measure, manner of performance: always so, as that he keep
within the just bounds of piety, decency, discreet moderation; as Bernard well
advises in the like kind, so punishing a Rebel, that he do not destroy a
subject: Neither can I apprehend any reason, if we entertain a well grounded
sorrow, Mat. 6.16.
why we may not express it: Not in an hypocritical way of ostentation as the
vain Pharisees taxed by our Savior, which disfigured their countenances, and
did set a sour face upon a light heart, that they might appear unto men to
fast, but in a wise, sober, seemly, unaffected deportment: to instance in the
case of the death of those to whom we have the dearest relation; there can be
no case wherein mourning can be more seasonable; it is no less then a judgment
that God denounces against King Jehojakin, They shall not lament for him,
saying, Ah my Brother, or Ah Sister, they shall not lament for him, saying, Ah
Lord, or Ah his glory, Jer. 22.18. And it was an hard word that God spoke to
Ezekiel; Son of man, behold I take away from thee the desire of thine eyes with
a stroke; yet shall thou neither mourn nor weep, neither shall thy tears run
down, forbear to cry, make no mourning for the dead, etc. Ezekiel. 24.16. Lo such
a wise as it might have been, froward, disobedient, unquiet, it had been no
greatly difficult charge to have parted with her; but it seems Ezekiels was a
dear, pleasing, loving consort, even the desire of his eyes, and the comfort of
his life, and therefore to part with her without tears must needs be a double
grief to his Soul: as therefore it is unnatural and inhumane not to mourn for
Parents, Wives, Husbands, Brothers, Sisters, Children, Friends: so it cannot be
unmeet to testify our mourning even by our outward habit; I could never see a
reason why it should not be fit to wear blacks upon funeral occasions; Neither
Piety nor Charity is an enemy to civil ceremonies; This color and fashion is
not indecent, nor justly offensive, so as the mind be free from superstition
and over-nice curiosity; such, as Balsac jeers at in his vain French Lady, who
affected to have not her house only, but all the vessels and utensils that
belong to it put into that hew. Alexand. ab Alexandro. Genial. Dierum l. 3. c.
7.
If you tell me that the Heathens mourned thus; I must tell you that all did
not so; some Nations mourned in white, others in blew, others in purple, and if
all had done so, they are no ill patterns in matters of mere civilities;
besides that in reason this color is most proper for sad occasions, for as
white comes nearest to light, and black to darkness, so we know that light and
joy, darkness and sorrow are commonly used to resemble and express each other.

Well may we then outwardly profess our inward mourning for the dead; but yet
not beyond a due moderation; It is not for us to mourn as men without hope, as
the Apostle holily advises his Thessalonians: Our sorrow must walk in a
midway betwixt neglect and excess! Sarah was the first that we find mourned
for in Scripture; and Abraham the first mourner; now the Hebrew Doctors observe
that in Genesis. 23.2. where Abraham's mourning is specified, the letter which
is in the midst of that original word that signifies his weeping, is in all
their Bibles written less then all his fellows; which they who find mountains
in every tittle of Moses interpret to imply the moderate mourning of that holy
Patriark; surely, he who was the Father of the faithful did by the power of his
faith mitigate the sorrow for the loss of so dear a partner.

Thus much for the manner of our mourning: Now for as much as it is the mourner
in Sion, not in Babylon, whom we look after; In the fourth place the
inseparable concomitant of his mourning, must be his holy devotion; whether it
be in matter of suffering, or of sin; in both which our sorrow is ill-bestowed,
if it do not send us so much the more eagerly to seek after our God; Thus has
the mourning of all holy souls ever been accompanied: the greatest mourner that
we can read of, was Job, who can say, My skin is black upon me, and my bones
are burnt with heat. Job. 30.30. How does he lift up his eyes from his dunghill
to Heaven? and say; I have sinned, what shall I do to thee, O thou Preserver of
men? Job. 6.20. The distresses of David, and the depth of his sorrows cannot
be unknown to any man that has but looked into the book of God; and what are
his divine ditties but the zealous expressions of his faithful recourses to
the throne of grace? good Ezra tells you what he did, when he heard of the
general infection of his people with their Heathen matches; Having rent my
garments, and my mantle I fell upon my knees, and spread out my hands, unto the
Lord my God; and said, O my God I am ashamed, and blush to lift up my face to
thee, O my God, for our iniquities are increased over our heads, and our
trespass is grown up to the Heavens. Ezra. 9.5.6. And Daniel, a no less devour
mourner then he, lays forth himself in as holy a passion; I set my face unto
the Lord God to seek him by prayer and supplications, with fasting, and
sackcloth, and ashes; and I prayed unto the Lord my God, and made my
confession, and said; O Lord, the great and dreadful God, keeping the covenant
and mercy to them that love him, and to them that keep his commandments; we
have sinned, and have done wickedly, and have rebelled even by departing from
thy precepts and from thy judgments, etc. Hereupon it is that prayer is ever
joined with fasting in all our humiliations; without which the emptiness of
our mawes were but a vain and purposeless ceremony: as that which was only
taken up to whet our devotions, and to give a sharper appetite to pious duties:
So as he that mourns and fasteth without praying, is, as he that takes the
preparative but refuses the medicine that might bring him health; or as he that
toiles all day in the vineyard, and neglects to call for his wages.

This for the companion of our mourning; Fifthly, and Lastly, The attendant of
our mourning is the good use that must be made of it, for the bettering of the
Soul: for surely, affliction never leaves us as it finds us: if we be not
better for our mourning, we are the worse: He is an unprofitable mourner that
improves not all his sorrow to repentance and amendment of life; whether his
sin be the immediate object of his grief or his affliction; and this is both
the intention of our Heavenly Father in whipping us, and the best issue of our
tears: Thus it was with his Israel, Their days (says the Psalmist) did he
consume in vanity, and their years in trouble; when he slew them, then they
sought him; and they returned, and inquired early after God; us. 35.
And they remembered that God was their rock, and the high God their Redeemer.

To the same purpose is that of Jeremiah; In those days, and in that time,
says the Lord, the children of Israel shall come, they and the children of
Judah together, going and weeping, they shall go and seek the Lord their God;
they shall ask the way to Zion with their faces thitherward, saying, Come let
us join our selves to the Lord in a perpetual covenant that shall not be
forgotten: Jerem. 50.4.5.

Surely, as he were an unnatural parent that would scourge his child with any
other purpose then to correct and amend somewhat amiss in him; so is he no
better then an ungracious child, that makes a noise under the rod, but amends
not his fault.

Here then let mine eyes run down with tears, night and day, and let them not
cease for the obstinate unproficiency of the sons of my mother under the heavy
hand of my God, O Lord are not thine eyes upon the truth? thou have stricken
them, but they have not grived; thou have consumed them, but they have refused
to receive correction; they have made their faces harder then a rock, they have
refused to return. Jerem. 5.3. how sadly do thou complain of us under the
person of thine Israel? In vain have I smitten your children, they received no
correction, Jerem. 2.30. Notwithstanding all the fair warnings that thou have
given us. We run on resolutely in the course of our wickedness, as if those
paths were both safe and pleasing, giving thee just cause to renew thine old
complaint against the men of Judah and Jerusalem; Thus says the Lord; Behold I
frame evil against you, and devise a devise against you, Return ye now every
one from his evil ways, and make your ways, and your doings good; And they
said, There is no hope, but we will walk after our own devises, and we will
every one do the imagination of his evil heart. Jerem. 18.11.12. woe is me, who
sees not that after all the blood that thou have let out of our veins, we are
still full of the deadly inflammations of pride, and maliciousness? that after
we have drunk so deep of the cup of thy fury even to the dregs, we cease not to
be drunk with the intemperate cups of our beastly excess? and after strict
professions of holiness have run out into horrible blasphemies of thy sacred
name? So as we have too just cause to fear lest thou have decreed to make good
upon us that woeful word which thy Prophet denounced against thy
once-no-less-dear people, I will make this Land desolate, and an hissing, every
one that passes thereby shall be astonished, and hiss, because of all the
plagues thereof. Jer. 18.8.

Hitherto then I have showed you the just grounds of our mourning; afflictions,
sins, dangers, and applied them to our own condition, I have showed you the due
regulation of our mourning in the quantity, the quality, the manner of
performing it, the company that goes with it, and the train that follows it;
what remains now but that I should labor to persuade you all to be true
mourners in our Sion? were it my work to exhort you to mirth and jollity, the
task were both pleasing to undertake, and easy to perform; for we all
naturally affect to be delighted, yea I doubt there are too many Christians
that with the Epicure place their chief felicity in pleasure; but for sorrow
and mourning it is a sour and harsh thing, unpleasing to the ear, but to the
heart more; But, if, as Christians, we come to weigh both these in the balance
of the sanctuary, we shall find cause to take up other resolutions; will ye
hear what wise Solomon says of the point? Sorrow, says he, is better then
laughter; And it is better to go to the house of mourning, then to the house of
feasting. Eccles. 7.2, 3.
Lo, his very authority alone were enough, who, as a great King, had all the
World to be his Minstrell; but withal, he sticks not to give us his reason,
why then is sorrow better then laughter? [ For, by the sadness of the
countenance the heart is made better] look to the effects of both, and you
shall easily see the difference: sorrow calls our hearts home to God, and our
selves, which are apt to run wild in mirth; where did you ever see a man made
more holy with worldly pleasure? no, that is apt to debauch him rather; but
many a soul has been bettered with sorrow; for that begins his mortification,
recollecting his thoughts to a serious consideration of his spiritual
condition, and working his heart to a due remorse for his sin, and a lowly
submission to the hand that inflicts it.

And why should it be better to go to the house of mourning then to the house
of feasting? [ For this is the end of all men, and the living shall lay it to
his heart] The house of mourning has here principally respect to a funeral;
the death which is lamented for, being the end of all flesh, a man is here, and
thus, put feelingly in mind of his mortality* which in an house of feasting and
jollity is utterly forgotten: By how much then it is better for a man to have
his heart kept in order by the meditation of death, then to run wild after
worldly vanity; by so much is the house of mourning better then the house of
feasting.

But if this be not persuasive enough; hear what a greater then Solomon says,
Mat. 5.4.
Blessed are they that mourn; Lo, he that is the author, and the owner, and
giver of blessedness tells you where he bestows it, even upon the mourners; Did
ye ever hear him say, Blessed are the frolic and joviall? Nay, do ye not hear
him say the contrary; Woe be to you that laugh now? and though he needed not
(whose will is the rule of all justice, Luke 6.25.
and paramount to all reason) yet he is pleased to give you the reason of both;
Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted; and woe be to you
that laugh now for ye shall mourn and weep: Lo, joy and comfort is the end of
Mourners; and mourning and weeping is the end of mirth and Laughter: O Savior,
give me leave to wonder a little at this contrariety; That to which the
blessing is promised (which is mourning) is made the curse of laughter and joy:
for they shall mourn that rejoiced, and yet they that mourn shall rejoice.

Is it not partly for that necessary vicissitude which thou in thine infinite
wisdom have set of joy and mourning? so as no man can be always capable of
both these; but he that rejoices must have his turn of mourning (as Abraham
told the rich glutton in his torment, and he that mourns must have a time of
rejoicing; Or is it for the great difference that there is of the several
kinds of mourning and joy? for as there is a natural joy and sorrow which is
neither good nor evil but in it self indifferent, so there is a carnal sorrow
and joy which is evil, and a spiritual joy and sorrow which is good; there is
a temporal sorrow and joy enterchanged here, and there is an eternal joy or
sorrow reserved for hereafter: So then has thine infinite justice and wisdom
distributed thy rewards, and punishments, that the carnal and sinful joy is
recompensed with eternal sorrow and mourning; the holy and spiritual mourning
with eternal joy and blessedness. Do we then desire to be blessed? we must
mourn; do we desire to have all tears wiped hereafter from our eyes? we must
not then have our eyes dry here below. And surely, did we know how precious our
tears are in the account of the Almighty, we would not be niggardly of those
penitent drops; These, these, if we know not, are so many orient pearls laid
up in the Cabinet of the Almighty; Ps. 56.8.
which he makes such store of, that he books their number for an everlasting
remembrance; and lest one tear should be spilt, he reserves them all in his
bottle. Do we not remember that he has promised an happy and glorious harvest
for a wet seed-time? That those which sow in tears shall reap in joy? Ps.
126.5, 6.
that every grain which we sow in this gracious rain, shall yield us a sheaf of
blessedness: If then we believe this unfailable word of truth, who would not
be content to mourn awhile that he may rejoice for ever? Oh the madness of
carnal hearts, that choose to purchase the momentany pleasure of sin, with
everlasting torments, whiles we are hardly induced to purchase everlasting
pleasures, with some minutes mourning!

Neither is it the pleasure of the Almighty to deferr the retributory comforts
of his mourners till another World; even here is he ready to supply them with
abundant consolations; The sweet singer of Israel was experimentally sensible
of this mercy, In the multitude of the sorrows of my heart thy comforts have
refreshed my soul, Psalm. 94.19. Neither was the chosen Vessel any whit behind
him, in the experience and expression of this gracious indulgence of the
Almighty, 2 Cor. 1.3, 4.
Blessed be God (says he) even the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father
of mercies and the God of all comfort; who comfort us in all our
tribulations, that we may be able to comfort them which are in any trouble by
the comforts wherewith we our selves are comforted of God; what do I stand to
instance in the persons of some special favorites of heaven? it is the very
office of the Messiah, the perfect Mediator betwixt God and man, To proclaim
the acceptable year of the Lord; and the day of vengeance of our God, to
comfort all that mourn in Zion, to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of
joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness, Esa.
61.2.3. So as all Gods faithful ones may cheerfully expect the performance of
that cordial promise which the God of truth has made to his Israel; Their
soul shall be as a watered Garden, and they shall not sorrow any more at all;
then shall the Virgin rejoice in the dance, both young men and old together,
for I will turn their mourning into joy, and will comfort them, and make them
rejoice from their sorrow, Jerem. ^1.12, 13.

But if the justice of God have been so highly provoked by the sins of a
particular Nation, as that there is no remedy but the threatened judgments must
proceed against them; remember what charge Ezekiel tells you was given to the
man clothed in linen that had the writers inkhorne by his side; The Lord said
unto him, go through the midst of the City, through the midst of Jerusalem, and
set a mark upon the forheads of the men that sigh and that cry for all the
abominations that be done in the midst thereof, Ezekiel. 9.3, 4.

Lo, these marked Jews owe their life to their tears, if they had not wept for
their fellows, they had bled with their fellows; If their sighs could not
save their people from slaughter, yet they have saved themselves; their
charitable mourning is recompensed with their own preservation.

Oh then my brethren as we desire the joys of another World, and as we tender
our own comfort and safty in this; let us not be sparing of our tears; let them
flow freely out for our own sins first, and then for the sins of our people?
let not our mourning be perfunctory, and fashionable: but serious, hearty, and
zealous, so as that we may furrow our cheeks with our tears; Let our
devotions, that accompany our mourning be fervent and importunate as those that
would offer a kind of holy force to Heaven: wrestling with the Angel of the
covenant for a blessing; Let our amendment which should be the effect of our
mourning be really conspicuous to the eyes both of God and men: And finally
that our mourning may be constant and effectual, let us resolve to make it our
business, and for that purpose let us solemnly vow to set apart some time of
each day for this sad, but needful task: and which is the main of all) since
the public is most concerned in this duty, Oh that the trumpet might be blown
in Zion, fasts sanctified, solemn assemblies called that the Ministers of the
Lord, as the chief mourners might weep aloud in Gods sanctuary, Joel. 2.^5.
and say, Spare thy people, O Lord, and give not thine heritage to reproach,
wherefore should the enemies of thy Church say among the people, where is their
God? This were the way to reconcile our offended God, to divert his dreadful
judgments, to restore us to the blessings of peace; and to cause the voice of
joy and gladness to be once again heard in our land.

ON EASTER DAY, AT HIGHAM 1648.
1 COR. 5.7. For Christ our passover is sacrificed for us. Therefore let us
keep the feast.


THe feast; that is the passover of the Jews then expiring, or the Christians
Easter then succeeding; indeed I know not whether both be not alluded to; for
this Epistle is conceived to have been written by the Apostle some 24. Years
after our Saviors passion; ere which time it is more then probable that the
feast of Christ's resurrection was solemnly celebrated by the Christian Church;
this I am sure of, that no record in all history mentions the time when it
began to be kept; and therefore it is most likely according to Augustines
received rule to be deduced from the observation of the Apostles. There were
ancient and eager quarrels betwixt the Eastern and Western Churches about the
day whereon it should be kept; but whether it should be kept or no, there was
never yet any question since Christianity looked forth into the World: and as
that Pasche, so this Easter is justly the feast, for the eminency of it above
the rest; for if we do with joy and thankfulness according to the Angels
message solemnize the day wherein the Son of God, our blessed Redeemer being
born, entered the life of humane nature: how much more should we celebrate that
day, wherein having conquered all the powers of death and Hell he was, as it
were, born again to the life of a glorious immortality? But to leave the time,
and come to the Text. This (for) that leads it in, is both a relative, and an
illative; referring to what he had said in the foregoing words; and inferring a
necessary consequence of the one clause upon the other; Purge out the old
leaven; for Christ our passover is sacrificed for us; The whole Text is
Allegorical; alluding to the charge and duty of Gods ancient people, the
Jews, in the observation of their passover; who upon no less pain then
cutting off from the Congregation of Israel, must admit of no leavened bread to
be eaten or found in their houses during the whole seven days of this
celebrity, as you may see Exodus 12.17.18, etc. As therefore the ceremonial
passover would admit of no material leaven: So the spiritual passover may not
abide any leaven of wickedness, Purge therefore out the old leaven; For Christ
our passover is sacrificed for us.

The first work then that we have to do, is, to cast back our eyes to the
ground of this institution, and to enquire why no leaven might consist with the
Jewish passover; And we shall find that there was not the same reason of the
first observation of this ceremony, and of the following: The first was
Necessity; Devotion was the ground of the rest. Necessity first; for in that
sudden departure which they were put upon, there could be no leisure to leaven
their dough, as you may see, Exodus 12.39.

Devotion afterward in a grateful recognition both of their own servile
condition; and of the gracious providence of God: In the former they were
called to look back upon their old Egyptian servitude by their unleavned bread;
for this was ((...)) the bread of affliction as we turn it, or the bread of the
poor, as the word signifies, which they must now eat to put them in mind of
their hard and poor condition in Egypt under their evil task masters all their
lives after, as Deuteronomy. 16.3. to the same purpose it was that they must eat the
Lamb, not with sour herbs as it had wont to be turned; (for a sharp kind of
sowrenesse in sawces is esteemed pleasing and tastfull) but with bitter herbs,
yea, as the word is in the Original ((...)) cum amaritudinibus) with
bitternesses.

In the latter they were minded of a double providence of the Almighty: One,
that God was pleased to fetch them out of Egypt in an happy suddenness; even
when they had no leisure to make up their bach; The other that he sustained
them with this unleavened dough till he sent them Manna in the Wilderness. The
one was the bread of the poor, the other the bread of Angels. As therefore he
would have a pot of Manna kept in the Ark for a Monument of that miraculous
food wherewith he fed them in the desert; so he thought good to ordain this
observation of unleavened bread for a perpetual memorial of their provision
preceding it.

And this was not only a charge but a sanction, under the severe penalty
whether of excommunication, or death, or both: both for the authority of the
Commander, and for the weight of the institution; whereby God meant both to rub
up their memory of a temporal benefit past: and to quicken their faith in a
greater spiritual favor of their future Redemption from sin and death by the
blood of that true paschall lamb which should be sacrificed for them.

This is the ground of this institution. Now let us if you please inquire a
little into the ground of this al^usion to the leaven, the nature and
signification of this employed comparison here mentioned; and we shall easily
find that leaven has first a diffusive faculty; so it is taken both in the
good part, and the evil: in good, Mat. 1^ 33.
so the Kingdom of Heaven is compared to leaven, which a woman took and hid in
three measures of meal till the whole was leavned: Lo these same ((...)) were
more then a bushel of our measure, and one morsel of leaven seasons it all. In
evil, so here immediately before my Text in an ordinary Jewish proverb A
little leaven leaveneth the whole lump: Secondly it has in it self a
displeasing sowerness, in which regard it is an ill construction attributed
both to false doctrine, and to evil manners. To false doctrine: Mat. 16.6.
Take heed says our Savior of the leaven of the Pharisees; To ill manners; so
in the next words ye have the leaven of malice and wickedness.

So then here the very inference offers us these two necessary heads of our
discourse; 1. That sin, or the sinner (for it may be taken of either or both)
is spiritual leaven. 2. That this leaven must be purged out because Christ is
our passover, and sacrificed for us.

For the first: sin has the true qualities of leaven; both in respect of the
offensive sowreness, and of the diffusion. In the former nothing can be so
distasteful unto God, as sin; Indeed nothing can displease but it; as nothing
is so sweet and pleasing to him as the obedience of his faithful ones. If any
edible thing could be more offensive to the palate; Sin would be likened to it;
As indeed it is still resembled by whatsoever may be most abhorring to all the
senses: To the sight; so it is compared to filth, Esa. 4.4. Psalm. 14.3. to
beastly excrements; 2 Pet. 2.22. to spots and blemishes, 2. Pet. 2.13. to
menstruous and polluted blood, Ezec. 16.6. To the smell; so to a corrupted
ointment; to the stench of a dead carcass; what should I instance in the rest?
How should it be other then highly offensive to the Majesty of God, when it is
professedly opposite to divine justice? since all sin is the transgression of
the royal law; even the conscience which is Gods taster finds it abominably
loathsome; how much more that God who is greater then the conscience; who so
abhors it that (as we are wont to do to the potsherd which has held poisonous
liquor) he throws away and breaks the very vessel wherein it was: as he that
finds an hair or a coal in the daintiest bit, spits it out all. Did God find
sin in his Angels? he tumbles them down out of Heaven; Does he find sin in our
first parents? he hurles them out of Paradise; Yea, did he find our sins laid
upon the blessed Son of his love; of his nature? he spares him not awhit, but
lays load upon him till he roars out in the anguish of his Soul. Lo, he was
wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities, the
chastisements of our peace were upon him, and by his stripes we are healed,
Esa. 53.5.

And to whom should we rather conform our selves then to the most holy God?
what diet should we affect but his who is the rule of all perfection? How then
should we utterly abhor every evil way, how should we hate our sins with a
perfect hatred? And surely, the more ill savor and loathlinesse we can find in
our bosom sins, the nearer we come to the purity of that holy one of Israel,
our blessed Redeemer whose style it is, Thou love righteousness, and hate
wickedness. Ps. 45.7. Oh then be we perfect as our Father in Heaven is perfect;
Cleanse your hands ye sinners and purge your hearts ye double minded.

What shall we say then to the disposition of those men, that can find no
savor in any thing but their sins? No morsel goes down sweetly, merrily, with
them but this: woe is me, how do they cheer themselves with the hope of enjoying
their sinful pleasures? how do they recreate themselves with the memory of
their fore-passed filthiness? how do they glory in that licentious liberty
which they indulge unto themselves? how do they even when they are grown old
and past beastly action, tickle themselves with the wanton remembrances of
their younger bestialities? yea so has the delight in sin most woefully
besotted them, that they respect not friends, estate, children, health, body,
soul, in comparison of the bewitching contentment they find in their sins; Oh
poor miserable souls! Oh the wretchedest of all creatures, not men but beasts!
let me not seem either unmannerly, or uncharitable, to speak from the mouth of
Gods Spirit: you know the word Canis ad vomitum; The dog to his vomit; The
swine to it is mire: And if they will needs be dogs; how can they look for any
other but dogs intertainment? Foris Canes without shall be dogs, Revel. 22.15.
But for us dear Christians let me take up that obtestation of the Psalmist. Oh
all ye that love the Lord, hate the thing which is sin, Psalm. 97.10. let us
hate even the garment spotted with the flesh, yea let us hate our selves that
we can hate our sins no more: And if at any time through the frailty of our
wretched nature, and the violence of tentation we be drawn into a sinful
action, yet let us take heed of being leavened with wickedness, Purge out the
old leaven; for Christ our passover is sacrificed for us.

Now, as sin is leaven in respect of the sowring quality of it, so also in
respect of the diffusive: It began with one Angel and infected Legions; It
began with one Woman, it infected all the Generation of Mankind; let it take
hold of one faculty, it infecteth the whole soul and body; let it seize upon
one person in a family it corrupts the whole house; from thence it spreads over
the neighborhood; and taints whole Towns, Cities, Regions: as it is with
certain contagious diseases that have not been bounded with mountains or Seas:
It is very pregnant which St. Paul speaks of Hymeneus and Philetus whose word
(says he) will eat as does a canker or a gangrene, 2 Timothy 2.17. ye see how a
gangrene even from the least toe soon strikes the heart; and the canker from a
scarce sensible beginning consumes the gummes, eats through the cheek, eats down
the nose and will admit of no limits but deformity and death: thus it is with
sin whether intellectual or moral: Arianisme began in a family, spread over
the World. And Antinomianisme began in one Minister of this diocese and how
much it is spread, I had rather lament, then speak.

I doubt not but many of you who hear me this day have had lamentable proofs of
this truth: let there be but a drunkard, or a swearer in a family how soon has
this scabbed sheep tainted the whole flock; Grace and Godliness is not so
easily propagated: sin has the advantage of the proclivity of our wicked
nature. It has the wind and tide both with it, goodness has both against it:
health does not use to be taken from others, but sickness does.

Since your wickedness is of so spreading a nature, how careful should we be
to prevent, and resist the very first beginnings of sin; It is a 1000. times
more easy to keep the floodgates shut, then to drain the lower grounds when
they are once over-flown.

2ly. How shy and weary should we be of joining societies with the infectious,
whether in opinion, or in manners: A man that is an heretic reject, says St.
Paul, Tit. 3.10. If any man that is called a brother be a fornicator, or
covetuous, or a railer, or an idolater, or a drunkard, with such a one eat not,
1 Cor. 5.11. withdraw your selves from the tents of these men, etc. into their
secret, etc.

3ly. How much does it concern all public persons whether ecclesiastical or
civil to improve their authority to the utmost for the timely preventing of the
spreading of vice: and for the severe censure and expurgation of those whom the
Psalmist (as the original word signifies) calls leavened persons, Ps. 71.4. The
palpable neglect whereof has been a shameful eyesore to the conscientious
beholders, a soul blemish to the Gospel; and a just scandal upon the Church.
And though another man's sin cannot infect me unless I do partake with him in
it: yet a true Lot will vex his righteous soul with the unclean conversation of
the Sodomites; and even others sins may help to draw down judgments upon the
community wherein they live: good reason that all care should be taken for
purging out the old leaven, that so the old leaven being purged out the whole
lump may be holy.

So much of the first point, that sin is leaven; the second follows that this
leaven must be purged out if we would have any interest in Christ our passover
which is sacrificed for us: The inference you see does necessarily imply so
much In vain should any Jew talk of keeping a passover to God, if he would eat
the Lamb with Leavened bread; in vain should any Christian talk of applying
Christ to his soul, whiles his heart willingly retains the leaven of any known
sin.

Certainly this is a common, and a dangerous cozenage whereby millions of souls
cheat themselves into hell; they fondly think they may hold fair quarter with
Christ, and yet give secret intertainment to their sins, Demas thinks he may
embrace the present world and yet need not leave his hold of Christ; Ananias
and Sapphira will closely harbor an hypocritical sacriledg, and yet will be
as good professors as the best. A Simon Magus will be baptized Christian, yet a
sorcerer still: and many a one still thinks he may drink, and swear, and
debauch, and profane Gods ordinances; and rob Gods house, and resist lawful
authority, and lie and plunder, or slander his neighbor, and yet hold good
terms with a forward profession. Yea there are those that will be
countenancing their sins with their christianity, as if they were privileged
to sin because they are in Christ: Then which there can not be a more injurious
and blasphemous fancy. Certainly their sins are so much more abominable to God
and men by how much more interest they challenge in a Christian profession: yea
if but a bare intertainment of a known sin; it is enough to bar them out from
any plea in Christ.

Vain fools, now grossly do these men delude their own souls whiles they imagine
they can please God with a leavened passover; this is the way to make them and
their sacrifices abominable to the Almighty: It is to them that God speaks as
in thunder and fire, What do thou taking my covenant into thy mouth, seeing
thou hate to be reformed, and have cast my words behind thee, Psalm. 50.16,
17. To them it is that he speaks by his Prophet Esaias 66.3. He that kills an
ox as if he slew a man, he that sacrifices a Lamb as if he cut off a
dogs-neck: Shortly then my brethren, since we are now addressing our selves to
this Evangelical passover; if ever we think to partake of this Heavenly feast
with true comfort to our souls; Let us see that we have clearly abandoned all
the sour leaven of our sins: let us come with clear, and untainted souls to
this blessed feast; and say and do with holy David, I will wash my hands in
innocence, O Lord, and so will I go to thine altar, Ps. 26.6.

Thus long we have necessarily dwelt upon the inference, and contexture of this
scripture, we now come to scan this divine proposition as it stands alone in it
self; wherein our meditation has four heads to pass thorough: 1. That Christ
is a passover: 2. Our Passover. 3. Our Passover sacrificed. 4. sacrificed for
us.

To begin with the first. The word (...) which we find, is derived not from the
Greek (...), which signifies to suffer, as some of the Latin fathers out of
their ignorance of Language have conceived, but from the Hebrew ((...)) which
signifies a transition, well turned by our language into Passe-over: For here
was a double passover to be celebrated; 1. The Angel's passing over the houses
of the Israelites, when he smote all the first born of Egypt; and 2ly. Isreal's
passing out of Egypt. The word admits of many senses: sometimes it is taken for
the time of this solemnity, Act. 12.4. sometimes for the sacrifices offered in
this solemnity, Deuteronomy. 16.4. sometimes for the representation of the act of Gods
transition, Exodus 12.11. Sometimes for the Lamb that was then to be offered and
eaten, 2 Chronicles. 35.11. They killed the passover, and the Priests sprinkled the
blood from their hands: Thus is it taken in this place when it is said Christ
our passover is sacrificed for us. So as here is a trope or figure twice told;
First, the lamb is the passover, Secondly, Christ is that paschal Lamb.

You would think this now far-fetched, here was a double passing over. The
Angels passing over the Israelites, the Israelites passing out of Egypt; both
were acts, the one of God, the other of men; as for the lamb it is an animal
substance; Yet this Lamb represents this passover. This is no news in
sacramental speeches: The thing signed is usually put for the sign it self: My
covenant shall be in your flesh; that is, circumcision, the sign of my
covenant, the rock that followed them was Christ, 1 Cor. 10.4. that is Christ
was represented by that rock, This cup is the new testament, So here Christ our
passover: Genesis 17.13.
that is Christ represented by the Paschal-lamb. What an infatuation is upon
the Romish party, that rather then they will admit of any other then a gross
literal capernaiticall sense in the words of our Saviors sacramental supper,
This is my body, will confound Heaven and Earth together; and either by a too
forceable consequence endeavor to overthrow the truth of Christ's humanity, or
turn him into a monster, a wafer, a crum, a nothing. Whenas St. Austin has
told us plainly, sacramentaliter intellectum vivificabit: Take it in a
sacramental sense there is infinite comfort, and spiritual life in it. As for
his body St. Peter has told us the heavens must contain him till the time of
the restitution of all things, Acts 3.21. Yea when our Savior himself has
told us, the words that I speak are spirit and life. Jo. 6.

Now what a mavelous mercy was this of God to Israel, thus to pass over them
when he slew the firstborn of Egypt? There was not an house in all Egypt
wherein there was not mourning and lamentation; no roof but coverd a suddenly
made carcass: what an unlook't for consternation was here in every Egyptian
Family? Only the Israelites that dwelt amongst them were free to applaud this
judgment that was inflicted upon their tyrannous persecutors, and for their
very cause, inflicted: for this mercy are they beholden under God, to the blood
of their Paschal-lamb sprinkled upon their doorposts: Surely had they eaten the
lamb, and not sprinkled the blood, they had not escaped the stroke of the
destroying Angel; This was in figure; In reality it is so, It is by, and from
the blood of our redeemer sprinkled upon our souls that we are freed from the
vengeance of the Almighty. Had not he dyed for us, were not the benefit of his
precious blood applied to us; we should lie open to all the fearful judgments
of God, and as to the upshot of all, eternal death of body and soul: As then
the Israelites were never to eat the Paschal-lamb but they were recalled to the
memory of that saving preterition of the Angel, and Gods merciful deliverance
from the fiery furnaces of the Egyptians; so neither may we ever behold this
sacramental representation of the death of our blessed Savior, but we should
bethink our selves of the infinite mercy of our good God in saving us from
everlasting death and rescuing us from the power of hell.

This is the first figure; That the Lamb is the Passover. The sesecond
follows, That Christ is that Paschal-Lamb. Christ then being the end of the
Law, it is no marvel if all the ceremonies of the Law served to prefigure, and
set him forth to Gods people; but none did so clearly and fully resemble him as
this of the paschal Lamb: whether we regard, 1. the choice, 2. the
preparation, 3. the eating of it.

The choice whether in respect of the nature, or the quality of it: the nature,
ye know this creature is noted for innocent, meek, gentle, profitable: such was
Christ our Savior. His forerunner pointed at him under this style; Behold the
Lamb of God, what perfect innocence was here? No guile found in his mouth: Hell
it self could find nothing to quarrel at in so absolute integrity: What
admirable meekness? He is brought as a Lamb to the slaughter; and as a sheep
before her shearers is dumb, so opened be not his mouth, Esaias 53.7. Does his
own treacherous servant betray him to the death? Friend, wherefore art thou
come? Mat. 26.50. Do the cruel tormentors tenter out his precious limbs and
nail his hands and feet to the tree of shame and curse; Father forgive them for
they know not what they do: Oh patience and meekness incident into none but an
infinite sufferer!

2ly. The quality, Every Lamb would not serve the turn: it must be agnus
immaculatus, A lamb without blemish that must be paschal: Exodus 12.5. Neither
does it hinder ought that leave is there given to a promiscuous use either of
lamb or kid for the sacramental supper of the passover; For that was only
allowed in a case of necessity, as Theodoret rightly; and as learned Junius
well, in the confusion of that first institution; wherein certainly a lamb
could not be gotten on the sudden by every Israelitish housekeeper to serve
six hundred thousand men; and so many there were, Exodus 12.37.

This liberty then was only for the first turn as diverse other of those
ceremonious circumstances of the passover were, namely the four days
preparation, the sprinkling of the blood upon the doorcheeks, eating with
girded loins, and staves in their hands, which were not afterward required or
practiced.

The lamb then must represent, a most holy and perfectly sin-less Savior;
could he have been capable of the least sin even in thought he had been so far
from ransoming the World, that he could not have saved himself; Now his
exquisite holiness is such as that by the perfection of his merits he can and
does present his whole Church to himself glorious, not having spot or wrinkle
or any such thing; as holy and without blemish, Ephesians. 5.27. Can thou
therefore accuse thy self for a sinful wretch, a soul blemished with many foul
imperfections. Look up man, lo, thou have a Savior that has holiness enough
for himself, and thee, and all the World of believers: close with him, and thou
art holy and happy; Behold the immaculate lamb of God that takes away the sins
of the world, thine Therefore if thou can lay hold on him by a lively faith,
and make him thine.

This for the choice; the preparation follows: so Christ is the paschal lamb
in a threefold respect: in resemblance of his killing, sprinkling his blood,
and roasting.

1. This Lamb, to make a true passover, must be slain; So was there a necessity
that our Jesus should dye for us: The two Disciples in their walk to Emaus hear
this not without a round reproof from the mouth of their risen Savior; Oh
fools and slow of heart to believe all that the Prophets have spoken: Ought
not Christ to have suffered these things and to enter into his glory? Luc.
24.26. Ought not? there is necessity, the doom was in paradise upon man's
disobedience ( morte morieris) thou shall dye the death. Man sinned, man must
die, The first Adam sinned, and we in him; the second Adam must by death
expiate the sin: Had not Christ dyed, mankind must; had not he dyed the first
death, we had all dyed both the first and second; without shedding of blood
there is no remission, Heb. 9.22. Hereby therefore are we freed from the sense
of the second death, and the sting of the first to the unfailing comfort of our
souls; hereupon it is that our Savior is so careful to have his death and
passion so fully represented to us in both his sacraments: the water is his
blood in the first Sacrament; the Wine is his blood, in the second.

In this he is sensiby crucified before our eyes; the bread, that is his body
broken, the wine his blood poured out. And if these acts and objects do not
carry our hearts to a lively apprehension of Christ our true passover, we shall
offer to him no other then the sacrifice of fools.

Lo here then a sovereign antidote against the first death, and a preservative
against the second, the Lamb slain from the beginning of the World: why should
we be discomforted with the expectation of that death which Christ has
suffered; why should we be dismayed with the fear of that death which our
all-sufficient Redeemer has fully expiated?

2ly. In the first institution of this passover; The blood of the lamb was to
be sprinkled upon the posts and lintells of the doors of every Israelite: so
if ever we look for any benefit from Christ our Passover, there must be a
particular application of his blood to the believing soul; even very Papists
can say that unless our merits or holy actions be dyed or tinctured in the
blood of Christ, they can avail us nothing: but this consideration will meet
with us more seasonably upon the fourth head.

3ly. This passover must be roasted home, not stewed, not parboild; So did the
true paschall lamb undergo the flames of his Fathers wrath for our sins; here
was not a scorching and blistering but a vehement and full torrefaction; It was
an ardent heat that could fetch drops of blood from him in the garden; but it
was the hottest of flames that he felt upon the cross, when he cried out, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Oh who can without horror and
amazement hear so wosull a word fall from the mouth of the Son of God? Had he
not said, My Father, this strain had sunk us into utter despair: but now in
this very torment is comfort? He knew he could not be forsaken of him of whom
he says; I and my Father are one: he could not be forsaken by a sublation of
union, though he seemed so by a substraction of vision (as Leo well) the sense
of comfort was clouded for a while from his humanity, his deity was ever
glorious, his faith firm; and supplied that strong consolation which his
present sense failed of; and therefore you soon hear him in a full concurrence
of all Heavenly and victorious powers of a confident Savior say, Father, into
thy hands I commend my Spirit; In the mean while even in the height of this
suffering there is our ease, for certainly the more the Son of God endured for
us, the more sure we are of an happy acquittance from the Tribunal of Heaven,
the justice of God never punished the same sin twice over: By his stripes we
are healed; by his payment we are discharged, by his torments we are assured of
peace and glory.

Thus much of the preparation; The eating of it follows in the appendances,
the manner, the persons.

The appendances. It must be eaten with unleavned bread, and with sour, or
bitter herbs: Of the unleavened bread we have spoken enough before: For the
herbs, that nothing might be wanting, the same God that appointed meat,
appointed the sauce too, and that was a sallad of, not pleasing, but, bitter
herbs; herein providing not so much for the palate of the body, as of the soul;
to teach us that we may not hope to partake of Christ without sensible
disrelishes of nature, without outward afflictions, without a true contrition
of Spirit.

It is the condition that our Savior makes with us in admitting us to the
profession of Christianity; he shall receive an 100. fold with persecutions;
those to boot; that for his sake and the Gospells, forsake all, Mark 10.30. Sit
down therefore, O man, and count what it will cost thee to be a true Christian,
through many tribulations, etc.

Neither can we receive this evangelicall passover without a true contrition of
soul for our sins past; think not, my beloved, that there is nothing but
jollity to be looked for at Gods table. Ye may frolic it, ye that feast with
the World; but if ye will sit with Christ and feed on him; ye must eat him with
bitter herbs; here must be a sound compunction of heart (after a due self
examination) for all our sins wherewith we have offended our good God: Thou
would be eating the paschal lamb, but with sugar-sops, or some pleasing
sauce; it may not be so, here must be a bitterness of soul, or no passover: It
is true that there is a kind of holy mixture of affections in all our holy
services; a (...) Rejoice in him with trembling, says the Psalmist. It is and
should be our joy, that we have this lamb of God to be ours: but it is our just
sorrow to find our own wretched unworthiness of so great a mercy. Godly sorrow
must make way for solid joy and comfort: if there be any of you therefore that
harbors in your breast a secret love of, and complacency in your known and
resolved sins ( procul, O procul,) let him keep off from this holy Table; let
him bewail his sinful mis-disposition and not dare to put forth his hand to
this passover till he have gathered the bitter herbs of a sorrowful remorse for
his hated offenses; And where should he gather these but in the low grounds of
the Law? there they grow plenteously; lay the law then home to thy soul, that
shall show thee thy sins, and thy judgment School thee.

Yea, dear Christians, how can any of us see the body of our blessed Savior
broken, and his blood poured out; and withal think and know that his own sins
are guilty of this tort offered to the son of God the Lord of life, and not
feel his heart touched with a sad and passionate apprehension of his own
vileness, and an indignation at his own wickedness that has deserved and
done this? these are the bitter herbs wherewith if we shall eat this passover
we shall find it most wholesome, and nourishable unto us to eternal life.

The manner of the eating of it follows, in three particulars.

1. The whole lamb must be eaten, not a part of it. 2. Not a bone of it must be
broken. 3. In one house at once, nothing to be reserved, or carried out.
For the first; you find it not so in any other cookery or provision of this
kind: many a Lamb did the Jews eat in all the year besides, these were halved
and quartered as occasion served: but for the paschal Lamb it must be set on
all whole; the very entrayles must be washed and put into the roast, and
brought to the board in an entire dish: whosoever would partake of Christ
aright, must take whole Christ, not think to go away with a limme, and leave
the rest; that he should dividere mendacio Christum, as that Father speaks: as
in Gods demands of us he will have all or none; so in his grant to us, he will
give all or none; He would not have so much as his coat divided, much less
will he abide himself shall; There have been heretics, and I would there were
not so still; that will be sharing, and quartering of Christ, one will allow of
his humanity, not his eternal deity; another will allow his humane body, but
not his soul; that must be supplied by the deity; another will allow a divine
soul with a fantastic body; One will allow Christ to be a Prophet or a Priest,
but will not admit of him as a King: In vain do all these wretched mis-belevers
pretend to partake of Christ the passover, whiles they do thus set him on by
peecemeal: They are their own monstrous fancies which they do thus set before
themselves, not the true paschal Lamb, whom we do most sacrilegiously violate
instead of receiving, if our faith do not represent him to us wholly God and
Man, soul and body, King, Priest, and Prophet, here he is so exhibited to us,
and if we do thus believe in him and thus apply him to our souls, we do truly
receive him, and with him eternal salvation.

Two particulars follow yet more in the manner; then the persons allowed to
this banquet, no uncircumcised might eat thereof: Then in the next place we
should descend to the second head of our discourse that Christ is our Passover.
Then that he is our Passover sacrificed; and sacrificed for us.

Ye see what a World of matter yet remains and offers it self as in a thronge
to our meditations; but the long business of the ensuing Sacrament forbids our
further discourse, and calls us from speaking of Christ our Passover to
partaking of him; For which he prepare our souls that has dearly bought them,
and has given himself to be our true passover; To whom with the Father and the
blessed Spirit one infinite and incomprehensible God be all Praise, Honor, and
Glory, now and for ever.

Amen.
A SERMON Preached at HIGHAM NEAR NORWICH, ON SUNDAY July 1. 1655.
By JOS. HALL B. N.
The first Epistle of the Holy Apostle Peter, the first Chapter and the 17th.
verse If ye call on the Father who without respect of persons judges according
to every man's work, pass the time of your sojourning here in fear.


WHen our blessed Savior called Peter, and Andrew, his Brother, to their
disciple-ship, he did it in these terms; Follow me, Math. 4.17.
and I will make you Fishers of Men: And indeed, this was their trade and
profession: which they practiced constantly, John. 19.11.
and effectually: Neither doubt I to say that the great draught of Fish, which
Peter took up, (when he cast forth his net at the command of Christ after his
resurrection) was a type and emblem of that great Capture of souls, which he
should make soon after; Act. 2.41.
when at one Sermon he drew up no less then three thousand Souls; every
exhortation that he made was an Angle, or a casting net to take some hearers;
but these two holy Epistles are as some scene, or large drag-net to enclose
whole Shoales of believers; and this Text, which I have read unto you, is as a
row of meshes knit together, and depending upon each other: First, you have
here that our life is a sojourning on Earth, Secondly, this sojourning has a
time; Thirdly, this time must be passed; Fourthly, this passage must be in
fear; Fifthly, this fear must be of a Father: Sixthly, he is so a Father that
he is our Judge; Lastly, his judgment is unpartiall for he judges without
respect of persons, according to every man's work; all which may well be reduced
to these two heads; A charge and an enforcement; a duty and a motive to perform
it; The charge, or duty is, To pass the time of their sojourning in fear, the
motive, or enforcement, If we call on the Father, etc. The duty though last in
place, yet is first in nature, and shall be accordingly meditated of.

First therefore our life is but a sojourning here; our former translation
turns it a dwelling, not so properly; the word is (...): now (...), is to
dwell as a stranger or sojourner; so the French has it [ seiour temporel] so
near together is the signification of words of this nature, that in the Hebrew
one word signifies both a dweller and a stranger, I suppose, to imply that even
the indweller is but a stranger at home. But this (...) here does both imply an
home, and opposes it. The condition of every living soul, especially of every
Christian, is, to be peregrinus, as out of his own Country, and Hospes, as in
another. Think not this was the case of St. Peter only, who by the exigence
of his Apostleship was to travel up and down the World; for both it is
apparent that Peter (after the shifts of our Jesuiticall interpreters) had an
house of his own to reside in, Matthew. 8.14. and that he writes this to his
Countrymen the Jews; amongst whom (notwithstanding their dispersion,) there
were doubtless many rich owners; as there are still in many parts of the World
after all their disgraceful eliminations: the Father of the faithful was so;
Hebr. 11.13. and the Sons of that Father were so after him; Jacob speaks of the
days of his Pilgrimage; David was a great King; yet he confesses himself a
stranger upon Earth, and that this was hereditary to him; for he adds, as were
my Fathers; He had more Land then they; They had some few fields in Bethlehem,
he ruled from Dan to Beersheba, yet a professed stranger; wherein as he was a
type of Christ so an example of all Christians; as strangers and pilgrims
(says the Apostle) abstain from fleshly lusts; The faithful man is, according
to that of Bernard, the Lords servant; his neighbors fellow, and the Worlds
Master; All things are yours, says the Apostle, yet is he the while but a
sojourner upon his own inheritance; no worldly respects can free-denison a
Christian here; and of peregrinus make him civis.

No it is out of the power of all earthly commodities to naturalize him; for
neither can his abiding be here, if he should love the earth never so well,
neither shall he find any true rest, or contentment here below; if any wealthy
citizen upon the uncertainty of trade, shall have turned his shop-book, and his
bags into lands and mannours, and having purchased plentifully, and called
his land by his name, shall be so foolish as to set down his rest here and say,
Hic requies mea; soul take thy ease, he may well look that God will give him
his own; with a Thou fool, this night, etc.

It is true; the worldly man is at home in respect of his affections; but he
is, and shall be a mere sojourner in respect of his transitoriness. His soul is
fastened to the earth; all his substance cannot fasten himself to it: Both the
Indies could not purchase his abiding here; this is our condition as men, but
much more as Christians, we are perfect strangers and sojourners here in the
world; and if we be no other then such, why do we not demean our selves
accordingly?

If then we be but sojourners and that in a strange nation, here must be an
((...)) an unmedlingnesse with these worldly concernments, not that we should
refrain from managing the affairs of this present life; without which it were
no living for us upon earth; there is a difference betwixt ((...) and (...))
necessary business, and unnecessary distractions: A man that sojournes abroad
in a strange country finds himself no way interessed in their designs, and
proceedings: what cares he who rises, or falls at their Court? who is in favor
and who in disgrace; what ordinances or laws are made, and what are repealed;
he says still to himself, as our Savior said to Peter, Quid ad te? What is
that to thee? Thus does the Christian here; he must use the World as if he used
it not; he must pass through the affairs of this life, without being entangled
in them, as remembering who and where he is; that he is but a sojourner here.

Secondly, here must be a light address; no Man that goes to sojourn in a
strange Country will carry his lumber along with him; but leaves all his
household stuff at home; no, he will not so much as carry his stock of money or
Jewels with him: as knowing he may meet with dangers of thieves, and robbers
in the way, but makes over his money by exchange to receive it where he is
going, ye rich men cannot think to carry your pelf with you into Heaven; no,
it were well if you could get in your selves, without that cumbrous Load, it
may keep you out, ye cannot carry it in: if you will go safe and sure ways,
make over your stock by exchange that is, (as our Savior tells you) make you
friends of the unrighteous Mammon, 1. Tim. 6.19.
that when ye go hence they may receive you into everlasting habitations; those
riches which Solomon says have wings, and therefore may fly up, and (being
well used) may help to carry up your souls toward Heaven; if you clip their
wings may prove as clogs to weigh your souls down to Hell: dispose of them
therefore where you may be sure to find them with an happy advantage to your
selves, and do not think to keep them still in your hands, remembering that you
are but sojourners here.

Thirdly, if ye be but strangers and sojourners here, you must make account of
no other then hard usage in the world; it is the just Epithete of the world
which Julius Scaliger gives unjustly to London, Torva peregrinis; but we cannot
add that which follows, sed non and inhospita; for surely there is nothing to
be expected here but unkind and churlish intertainment; we know that God still
puts together the Stranger, the Widow, and the Orphan; these are every where
most exposed to wrong; as men are still apt to climb over the hedge where it is
lowest.

The good Shunamite, when the Prophet offered her the favor to speak to the
King for her, could say, I dwell amongst my own People; intimating, that while
she dwelt at home amongst her good Neighbors, she had no need of a Friend at
Court. But when she had been abroad sojourning in the land of the Philistims, 2
Kings. 8.
and in her absence was stripped of her house and Land, she is fain to come
with an humble petition in her hand, suing to be righted against the injurious
usurpation of her cruel oppressor: Do we therefore find harsh usage at the
hands of the World? are we spightfully entreated by unjust men, our reputation
blemished, our profession slandered, our goods plundered, our estates
causelessly empaired, our bodies imprisoned: and all indignities cast upon us,
and ours? let us bethink our selves, where and what we are: strangers and
sojourners here. And let us make no reckoning to fare any otherwise whiles we
sojourne in this vale of tears.

Lastly, if we be strangers and Pilgrims here, we cannot but have a good mind
homeward: It is natural to us all to be dearly affected to our home, and though
the place where we sojourne be handsomer, and more commodious then our own, yet
we are ready to say, Home is homely, and our heart is there, though our bodies
be away; and this is a difference betwixt a banished man, and a voluntary
Traveller; The exiled man has none but displeasing thoughts for his native
Country, would fain forget it, and is apt (as we have had too much proof) to
devise plots against it, whereas the voluntary Traveller thinks the time long
till he may enjoy his long desired home; and thinks himself happy, that he may
see the smoke of his own chimney; and if our lot be fallen upon a stony and
barren Ithaca, yet it is not all the glorious promises of a Calypso can
withdraw us from desiring a speedy return to it; beloved, we know we are
strangers here; our home is above. There is our Fathers house, in which there
are many mansions, and all glorious: If this earth had as many contentments in
it, as it has miseries and vexations, yet it could not compare with that
region of blessedness which is our only home: Oh then if we believe our selves
to have a true right to that abiding City, to that City which has foundations
where our Father dwells, why do we not long to be possessed of those glorious,
and everlasting habitations? we find it too true which the Apostle says, That
whiles we are present in the flesh we are absent from the Lord. 2 Cor. 5.
Why are we not heartily desirous to change these houses of clay for that house
not made with hands eternal in the heavens? we may please our selves in
formalities, but I must tell you it is no good sign if we be loath to go home
to our fathers house: Me thinks this word (here) should be emphatical; in deed
it is not in the original text, but it is both sufficiently employed, and would
seem to intimate a kind of comparison between the place of our sojourning, and
the place of our home. Here is trouble and toil, there is rest; Here is
disorder and sin, there perfection of order and holiness, Here we live with
men, yea beasts, yea, if (on some hands) I should say with incarnate Devils, I
should not be uncharitable, there, with God and his blessed Angels, and the
souls of righteous men made perfect: Here are continual changes and
successions of sorrow, there an eternity of unintermitted and unconceivable
joys; Ps. 42.1.
Oh then how can we choose but say with David, as the Heart pants after the
waterbrooks, Philip. 1.
so does my soul pant after thee O God; and with the chosen vessel, I desire to
depart hence and to be with Christ? This for our sojourning here.

Now, for the time of our sojourning.

Time is the common measure of all things, the Universal metwand of the
Almighty, Eccles. 3.1. There is a time for all things says wise Solomon, and
but a time; for the motions of time are quick and irrevocable, ye cannot think
of it but with wings; It is but a short word, a monosyllable; yet, whiles we
are speaking of it, it is gone. As for the Time of our sojourning; Moses
reckons it by years, Job by months, and those of vanity; old Jacob, and David
by days; the Apostle shuts it up closer; and calls the very age of the World,
hora novissima, the last hour: all imply a quickness of passage. It is a true
observation of Seneca, Velocitas temporis (says he) the quick speed of time is
best discerned when we look at it past, and gone, and this I can confirm to you
by experience. It has pleased the providence of my God so to contrive it, that
this day, this very morning fourscore years ago I was born into the World: a
great time since, ye are ready to say; and so indeed it seems to you that look
at it forward, but to me that look at it as past, it seems so short that it is
gone like a tale that is told, or a dream by night, and looks but like
yesterday. It can be no offense for me to say that many of you who hear me this
day, are not like to see so many Suns walk over your heads, as I have done;
yea, what speak I of this? there is not one of us that can assure himself of
his continuance here one day; we are all Tenants at will, and (for ought we
know) may be turned out of these clay cottages at an hours warning: oh then
what should we do but, as wise Farmers who know the time of their lease is
expiring, and cannot be renewd, carefully and seasonably provide our selves of
a surer, and more during tenure. I remember our witty Countryman Bromiard, tells
us of a Lord in his time that had a fool in his house (as many great men in
those days had for their pleasure) to whom this Lord gave a staff and charged
him to keep it till he should meet with one that were more fool then himself;
and if he met with such a one, to deliver it over to him.

Not many years after this Lord fell, sick, and indeed was sick unto death: His
fool came to see him, and was told by his sick Lord that he must now shortly
leave him; And whither will thou go said the fool? Into another World said his
Lord; and when will thou come again; within a month? No; within a year? No:
when then? Never. Never? and what provision have thou made for thy
intertainment there whither thou go? None at all: No, said the fool, none at
all? Here, take my staff; Art thou going away for ever, and have taken no
order nor care how thou shall speed in that other World whence thou shall never
return? take my staff, for I am not guilty of any such folly as this; and
indeed, there cannot be a greater folly, or madness rather, then to be so
wholly taken up with an eager regard of these earthly vanities, which we cannot
hold, as to utterly neglect the care of that eternity, which we can never
forego; and (consider well of it) upon this moment of our life depends that
eternity either way: My dear Brethren it is a great way to Heaven; and we have
but a little time to get thither; God says to us, as the Angel said to Elijah,
Up, for thou have a great journey to go; and if (as I fear) we have loytered in
the way; and trifled away any part of the time in vain impertinencies, we have
so much more need to gird up our loins, and to hasten our pace; our hearts,
our false hearts are ready like the Levites servant to show us the World, and
to say as he did of Jebus, Come I pray you let us turn in to the City of the
Jebusites and lodge there; Jud. 19.12.
Oh let us have his Masters resolute answer ready in our mouths, We will not
turn aside into a City of strangers, neither w^ll we leave till we have got the
gates of Gods City upon our backs.

Time is that whereof many of us are wont to be too prodigal; we take care how
to be rid of it; and (if we cannot otherwise) we cast it away, and this we call
Pass-time: wherein we do dangerously mistake our selves; and must know that
time is, as the first, so one of the most precious things that are: Insomuch as
there are but two things which we are charged to redeem, Time and Truth.

I find that in our old saxon language, a Gentleman was called an Idle-man,
perhaps because those who are born to fair estates are free from those toils
and hard labors which others are forced to undergo. I wish the name were not
too proper to over-many in these days, wherein it is commonly seen that those
of the better rank who are born to a fair inheritance so carry themselves as if
they thought themselves privileged to do nothing, and made for mere disport
and pleasure; But alas can they hope that the great God when he shall call them
to give account of the dispensation of their time and estate, will take this
for a good reckoning. Item, so many hours spent in dressing and trimming, so
many in Idle visitings, so many in gaming, so many in hunting and hawking, so
many in the playhouse, so many in the Tavern, so many in vain chat; so many in
wanton dalliance? No, no my dear Brethren, our hearts cannot but tell us how
ill an Audit we shall make upon such a woeful computation, and how sure we are
to hear of a Serve nequam, Thou evil Servant, and unfaithful; and to feel a
retribution accordingly.

Let us therefore in the fear of God be exhorted to recollect our selves, and
since we find our selves guilty of the sinful mispense of our good hours, let
us, whiles we have space, obtain of our selves to be careful of redeeming that
precious time we have lost; as the Widow of Sarepta, when she had but a little
oil left in her cruse, and a little meal in her barrel, was careful of
spending that to the best advantage: so let us, considering that we have but a
little sand left in our glass, a short remainer of our mortal life, be sure to
employ it unto the best profit of our souls; so as every of our hours may carry
up with it an happy Testimony of our gainful improvement: that so, when our
day comes, we may change our time for eternity: the time of our sojourning for
the eternity of glory and blessedness.

Thus much for the time of our sojourning; now as for the passage of this time,
I shall spare any further discourse of it, though this is a matter well worthy
of our thougts; and indeed we that live within the smoke of the City, have our
ears so continually inured to the noise of passing-Bels, that it is a wonder we
can think of any thing but our passing away, together with our time, unless it
be with us, as with those that dwell near the Cataract of Nilus, whom the
continual noise of that loud waterfall is said to make deaf. But since we are
fallen upon the mention of this subject, give leave I beseech you to a word of
not unseasonable digression. I have noted it to be the fashion here amongst
you, that when a neighbor dies, all his friends in several parishes set forth
their Bells to give a general notice of his departure; I do not dislike the
practice, it is an act of much civility, and fair respect to the deceased; and
if the death of Gods Saints be (as it is) precious in his sight, there is great
reason it should be so in ours, and therefore well worthy of a public
notification; But let me tell you that in other well-ordered places where I
have lived, it is yet a more commendable fashion, that when a sick neighbor is
drawing toward his end, the Bell is tolled to give notice of his dying
condition, that all within hearing may be thereupon moved to pour out their
fervent prayers for the good of that departing soul, suing for mercy and
forgiveness, and a clean passage of it to the approaching glory; if there be
civility and humanity in the former course there is more charity and piety in
this; but this by the way. This term of our passage is but, an English
expression, the original word is ((...)) which signifies rather our conversing:
passing this therefore, let us meditate upon the modification of this passage
of our time; which is said must be in fear.

Fear is an unwelcome and unpleasing word, and the thing more; for we commonly
say, that only evil is the object of fear; and that whom we fear we hate; and
perhaps, the Authors and Abettours of the uncomfortable doctrine of diffidence
and uncertainty of resolution in the spiritual estate of our souls, would be
glad of such an overture for the maintenance of those disheartening positions
which they have broached unto the World to this purpose, but their mouths are
soon stopped, with the addition of the name of a Father, which is abundantly
sufficient to sweeten this harsh sound of fear! so as this clause of the Text
may seem to be clearly commented upon by that of Romans 8.15. For ye have not
received the Spirit of b^ndage again to fear, but ye have received the Spirit
of adoption, whereby we try, Abba, Father; There are indeed, terrores Domini,
the terrors of the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.11. For such is the dreadful Majesty of the
infinite God, that his presence, even when he desires to appear most amiable,
overlaies our weakness; Jud. 13.22.
yea so awfully glorious is the sight of one of his Angels, that Manoah and his
wife thought they should dye of no other death; yea, and sometimes, like a
displeased Father he knits his brows upon his dearest (if offending) children:
the Man after his own heart could say, Thy terrors have I suffered with a
troubled mind: thy fierce wrath goes over me, Psalm. 88.15, 16. which he speaks
not only out of a true sense of his own misery, but as a just Type of him, who
in the bitterness of his agony did sweat drops of blood, and with him cried
out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? who yet was heard in that which
he feared; heard and freed, heard and crowned; thus sad may be the condition of
the best of Saints in the pangs of their trialls; which yet can be no other
then safe, whiles, with their Captain and Savior, they can say, My God, my
God, and may hear God say unto them; Fear not for I have redeemed thee, and
called thee by thy name, thou art mine, Esa. 45.1. That we may see then what
fear it is which is here recommended to us as an inseparable companion in this
our pilgrimage, know, that there is a base kind of fear incident into the worst
of men, yea beasts, yea Devils; the Devils believe and tremble (says the
Apostle) and we know the dog fears the whip, and the horse the switch, and the
slave fears the lash of his cruel Master, this is therefore called a slavish
fear which though it be not good in it self, yet may have this good effect in
wicked men to restrain them from those villainies which they would otherwise
commit; and certainly were it not for this, there were no living amongst men;
Earth would be Hell: there is besides a distrustful fear in unsettled hearts;
which is an anxious doubt lest God will not be so good as his word, and perform
those promises which he has made to us; this is highly sinful in it self, and
infinitely dishonorable and displeasing unto God; for, if an honest man cannot
endure to be distrusted, how hainously must the God of truth needs take it that
his fidelity should be called into question by false-hearted men: The fear that
we must ever take along with us, is double: A fear of reverence, and a fear of
circumspection; the first is that whereof Malachy 1.6. A Son honoreth his
Father, and a servant his Master, If then I be your Father where is my honor;
and if I be your Master where is my fear? And this fear consists in our awful
and trembling acknowledgment of his dread presence, in our reverentiall, and
adoring thoughts of his infiniteness: in our humble and holy desires to be
allowed of him in all things; this is that which wise Solomon more then once
tells us in the beginning, or (as the word rather signifies) the chief point of
wisdom, and which the Psalmist truly tells is accompanied with blessedness. The
latter which I call a fear of circumspection, is a due and tender regard to all
our ways, not without an holy jealousy over our selves in all our actions,
words, and thoughts, lest we might do, say, or think any thing that might be
displeasing to the Majesty of our God, whereof Solomon, Blessed is the Man that
fears always; but he that hardneth his heart shall fall into mischief, Prove.
28.14. Now, these two fears are as twins that are joined together in the bulk
of the body, inseparable; and are so comprehensive, that all Religion is
expressed by the name of fear; and (...) is rendered by Timoratus: indeed where
this fear is, there can be no other then a gracious heart: for this will be
sure to work in a man true humility, the Mother of virtues; when he shall
compare his dust and ashes, with the glorious Majesty of God, when he sees such
an Heaven roling over his head, such an Earth and Sea under him, how can he but
say, Lord, what is man? this will make him think himself happy that he may be
allowed to love such a God: that such a worm as he may be admitted to have any
interest in so infinite a Majesty, this will render him carefully conscionable
in all his ways, that he would not for a World do any thing that might offend
such a God, yea it will make him no less fearful of sin then of Hell: see
Gods own connection when he gives a Character of his Servant Job: A perfect and
an upright man, one that fears God and escheweth evil, Job. 1.8. Lo, he that
fears God will therefore eschew evil, will not dare to sin: if Satan shall lay
all the Treasures of the World at his feer, he will say in an holy scorn, Thy
Gold and thy Silver perish with thee; if all the philtr^s and wanton
allurements of a great and beautiful mistress shall lay seige to him, he will
say with good Joseph, Genesis 39.9.
How can I do this great wickedness and sin against God: But O God, who has
believed our report, and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? Is there
such a thing as the fear of the Lord amongst men? Can we think that the common
sins of the times can stand with the least scruple of the fear of the Almighty?
woe is me, what rending and tearing of the sacred name of God in pieces, with
oaths and blasphemies do we meet with every where? what contempt of his holy
Ordinances and Ministers?

What abominable sacriledges? what foul perjuries? what brutish and odious
drunkenness, and epicurean excess? what fraud and cozenage in trading? what
shameful uncleanness? what merciless and bloody oppressions; Oh where, then,
where is the fear of a God to be found the while? yea to such an height of
atheous boldness, and obduration are the russians of our time grown, that they
boast of it as their greatest glory, to fear nothing, Neither God nor Devil;
they feast without fear, they fight without fear, they sin without fear.

But hear this ye careless and profane epicures that say, Tush does God see
it? Is there knowledge in the most high? Hear this ye formal hypocrites that
can fashionably bow, to him whose face you can be content to spit upon, and
whom ye can abide to crucify again by your wicked lives; Hear this ye Godless
and swaggering roarers, that dare say with Pharaoh, Who is the Lord? You that
now bid defiance to fear, shall in spite of you learn the way to fear; yea to
tremble, yea to be confounded, at the terrors of the Almighty; Those knees that
are now so stiff, that they will not bow to God, shall once knock together;
those teeth, through which your blasphemies have passed, shall gnash, those
hands, that were lift up against Heaven shall shake, and languish. If ye were
as strong as Mountains, before his presence the Mountains fled, and the hills
were moved; If as firm as rocks, who can stand before his wrath: His wrath is
poured out like fire, and the rocks are broken before him; Nahum. 1.6. If as
the whole Earth, whose title is, That cannot be moved; The Earth trembled and
quaked, because he was angry, says the Psalmist; yea, if as wicked as Devils,
even they believe and tremble; and if when he does but thunder in his clouds,
the stoutest Atheist turns pale, and is ready to creep into a bench-hole; what
shall become of them, when he shall put forth the utmost of his fury and
revenge upon his enemies; Lo then, ye that now laugh at fear shall yell and
houle like hell hounds in eternal torments and God shall laugh when your fear
comes; ye that would not now so much as with Faelix quake at the news of a
judgment, shall irrecoverably shiver in the midst of those flames that can
never be quenched.

But for us, dear and beloved Christians, far be it from us, to be of that
iron-disposition; that we should never bow but with the fire; no, we have other
more kindly grounds of our fear; Great is thy mercy, says the Psalmist, that
thou may be feared; Lo, it is the amiableness of merits that must attract our
fear; it is a thing that mainly concerns us to look where and how fears are
placed; Far be it from us to bring upon our selves the curse of wicked ones, To
fear where no fear is; as this is the common condition of men. Alas, we are apt
to fear the censures and displeasure of vain greatness, whereas that may be a
means to ingratiate us with God; shame of the World; whereas that may be a
means to save us from everlasting confusion: poverty, whereas that may possess
us of a better wealth; death, whereas to the faithful soul that proves the
necessary harbinger to eternal rest and glory; in the mean time the same men
are no whit afraid of the displeasure of God, and their own perdition; wherein
they are like to foolish children, who run away from their parents, and best
friends, if they have but a mask or scarf over their faces, but are no whit
afraid of fire or water; Away with all these and the like weak misprisions; and
if we tender our own safety, let it be our main care to set our fears right;
which shall be done, if we place them upon our infinitely great and glorious
God, in that relation both of mercy and goodness, wherein he is here
recommended to us, as our Father, and that awful apprehension of Justice,
wherein he is set forth to us as an unpartiall judge of us, and all our
actions. Consider then (that from the duty we may descend to the motive) that
this fear is of a Father, and therefore a loving fear; but this Father is a
judge, and therefore it must be an awful love; how will these two go together,
a Father and a Judge? the one a style of love and mercy, the other of justice.
What ever God is, he is all that, he is all love, and mercy; He is all justice;
That which God is in the pure simplicity of his essence, we must imitate in our
compositions; namely to unite both these in one heart; He is not so a judge that
he will wave the title and affection of a Father; he is not so a Father, that
he will remit ought of his infinite justice, in any of his proceedings: upon
both these must we fasten our eyes at once; we must see the love of a Father to
uphold, and cheer us; we must look upon the Justice of a Judge that we may
tremble; and therefore putting both together we must rejoice in him with
trembling: Droop not, despair not, O Man, thou have a Father in Heaven: all the
bowels of mortal and Earthly parents, are straight to his: If Fathers, if
Mothers may prove unnatural; there is no fear that God should cast off his
mercy, for it is himself. Presume not, O Man; for this Father is a most just
Judge. It is for sinful flesh and blood to be partial: Fond parents are apt
so to dote upon the persons of their children, that they are willing to connive
at their sins; either they will not see them, or not hate them, or not censure
them, or not punish them; thus many a son may (according to the Apologue) bite
his Mothers ear when he is climbing up to the gallows, but the infinite
justice of the great and holy God cannot be either accessory, or indulgent to
the least sin of his dearest darling upon Earth; it is a mad conceit of our
Antinomian Heretics, That God sees no sin in his elect; whereas he notes and
takes more tenderly their offenses then any other; Hear what he says to his
Israel; Thee only have I chosen of all the families upon Earth, therefore will
I punish thee for all thine iniquities, Amos. 3.2. But let this be enough to be
spoken of the conjuncture of these two titles of God; A Father and a Judge: we
cannot hope in the remainder of our hour to prosecute both of them severally;
let us only touch at the former; it is a dear name, this of a Father: and no
less familiar. It is the first word of our Lords prayer; and in the first
clause of our Creed, that which is there the title of his personality in Divine
relation; is the same here in his gracious relation to us: Our Father; so he is
in the right of Creation [ He made us, not we our selves] in the right of
adoption; [ we have received the adoption of sons] Galat. 4.5. In the right of
regeneration, [ In that we are made partakers of the divine nature] 2 Pet. 1.4.
I could here lose my self, and yet be happily bestowed in the setting forth of
those infinite privileges, that we receive from the hands of our God, by
virtue of this happy sonship, but I shall balk this theme for the present, as
that we not long since largely prosecuted in your ears; and shall (as my Text
invites me) rather put you in mind how vainly we shall pretend a right to this
Father, unless we own him; for the words are [(...)] If ye call him Father as
Beza, and our former translation turns it; or (as it is, being a compound word
more properly rendered in our present version) If ye call upon the Father; where
you have a short, but true Character of a faithful Christian laid forth to
you; He is one that calls upon the Father: he says not upon God absolutely, in
the relation to that infinite power which made and governes the World; so Jews
and Turks pretend to do: but in the relation to his blessed paternity, as the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in him, ours.

Thus he that calls upon the Father professes himself a true Christian, so St.
Paul makes this one of the mottoes of Gods great S^al. Let every one that calls
upon the name of the Lord depart from iniquity; and David makes this the
pitch-brand (as it were) of wicked wretches, they call not upon God; surely,
there is no act we can do, argues more grace then holy invocation, or that
equally procures it. There are three motives of our calling upon the Father;
Our duty, our need, and our benefit: Our duty; for that God injoyns it, and
accounts it an especial part of his worship, They shall call upon me in the
day of their trouble and I will hear them, says God? Our need, for, as we are
of our selves destitute of all good things, so they are only to be derived to
us from Heaven by our prayers: Our benefit, for we are assured of all blessings
for suing for; Ask and have. In these regards I may truly say that man has no
grace nor goodness in him that prays not, both by himself and with his family:
let him never plead his disability to express himself in his devotion; I never
knew beggar yet that wanted words to express his wants; were we equallly
sensible of our spiritual defects we should find language enough to bemoan
them: this indevotion plainly bewraies a Godless heart, careless of his duty,
insensible of his need, regardless of his benefit, and wholly yielded up to an
atheous stupidity. On the contrary to pray well, and frequently is an argument
of a pious, and graciously disposed soul; Others may talk to God, and
complement with him, perhaps in Scripture terms which they have packt
together, and this may be the phrase of their memory and elocution, but to pour
out our souls in our fervent prayers, with a due apprehension of the majesty to
whom we speak, and a lively sense of our necessity, with a faithful
expectation of their supplies from Heaven, is for none but godly, and well
affected suppliants; these cannot call upon the Father without a blessing; It
is a notable and patheticall expostulation, which the holy Psalmist uses to the
Almighty, How long will thou be angry with thy people that prays; intimating
clearly, that it were strange and uncouth, that a praying people should lie
long under any judgment, and should not find speedy mercy at the hands of God:
Oh then that we could be stirred up to a serious and effectual performance of
this duty for our selves, for our Brethren, for the whole Church of God:
certainly we could not have been thus miserable, if we could have heartily
called upon the Father of mercies; and if we could yet ply Heaven fervently,
and importunately, with our faithful devotions, we should not fail of an happy
evasion out of all our miseries; and find cause to praise him for his gracious
deliverance, and his fatherly compassion renewed upon us, and continued to our
posterity after us; which our good God for the sake of the Son of his love
Jesus Christ the righteous, vouchsafe to grant unto us. Amen.

THE WOMEN'S VAIL: OR A DISCOURSE Concerning the NECESSITY, or EXPEDIENCE OF THE
CLOSE-COVERING OF THE Heads of Women. Intended to have been Preached in the
Cathedral at Exceter upon 1 Cor. 11.10. Occasioned by an offense unjustly taken
at a Modest Dress.
1 COR. 11.10. For this cause ought the woman to have power on her head because
of the Angels.


AS the Sacred Councels of the Church had wont to have their (...) and (...),
substantial canons and rituall constitutions; so has our blessed Apostle: as
in all his Epistles so in this; and as in other parts of it so in this Chapter,
here are main Canons for the essence of Gods service in the matter of the
Eucharist; here are Rules of order for the outward fashion of praying and
prophesying; these may be as variable as the other are constant, it is no more
possible to fit all Churches and Countries with one form, then to fit all
bodies with one suit, or all limbs with one size. Neither can I with learned
Beza, and Cappellus think that prophesying here is taken for the hearing of
prophesyes; these things were extraordinarily done till they were restrained.
In those Primitive times there were some women extraordinarily gifted by Gods
Spirit who took upon them to preach and pray publicly, which afterward St.
Paul forbad to his Timothy, 1 Timothy 2.12. They, exercising these manly
functions, presumed to take upon them manly fashions; whereas therefore
bare-headednesse was in Corinth, as also in all Greece and Rome a token of
honor and superiority, and covering the head a token of subjection; these
forward women usurp upon the fashions of their husbands; and will have their
faces seen as well as their voices heard; as the Jesuitesses of late time dared
both to attempt and practice, till the late restraint of Pope Urban curbed and
suppressed them; Our holy Apostle, who was zealously careful to reform even
Soloecismes in the outward deportment of Gods service, controlls this absurd
disorder; and, as the great Master of holy ceremonies, injoynes a modest vail
to the women, when they will show themselves in these acts of public
devotion: For this cause the women ought to have power on their head because of
the Angels.

Wherein your selves without me observe two remarkable heads of our discourse.
1. An Apostolical Canon. 2ly. The carriage or grounds of it. The Canon is
fully and home-charged, The women ought to have power on their head, The
grounds are double; one precedent, For this cause, The other subsequent;
Because of the Angels, which in the vulgar, and in St. Ambrose is brought in by
a Copulative, and or etiam propter Angelos. From the Canon it self in the
generality, you would (of your selves) in my silence easily infer, that
spiritual superiors must take care not only of the substantial parts of Gods
worship, but of the circumstantiall appendances of it; what is a meerer
ceremony then our clothes? what can seem of less consequence then a vail left
off, or put on; the head may be as good, and as full of holy thoughts bare or
covered; what is that (you would think) to the heart of our devotion? yet the
chosen vessel fears not to seem too scrupulous in laying weighty charges upon
us in so small, and (as we might imagine) unimporting a business. Certainly, my
beloved, though the Kings Daughter be all glorious within and there lies her
chief beauty, yet her clothing is of wrought Gold too. And if in the Tabernacle
(Gods first dwelling place upon Earth) it pleased him to give order for the
principal stuff of the vails, and curtains, and frame; for the matter and
form of the Ark, and Altars, and Tables of the Face-bread; yet he thought good
not to neglect the punctual directions for the Taches, Snuffers, Snuff-dishes,
beesomes, and the meanest requisites of that sacred Fabric: Justice and
Judgment which are the main businesses of the law must be chiefly regarded; but
yet even the tithing of mint and anyse and cummin may not be neglected: Had not
Simon the Pharisee meant an hearty welcome to our Savior, he had never
undergone the envy of inviting him to his house: but yet our Savior finds him
short of his due complements, of the hospital kiss of washing, and anointing:
Let no man say, what matter is to be made of stuffes, or colors, or postures?
God is a Spirit, and will be worshipped in Spirit and truth; these bodily
observations are nothing to that spiritual and infinite essence; what
Corinthian Gossip might not have said so to our Apostle? yet he sees the
respect of these circumstances so necessary, that the neglect of them may, yea
will mar the substance; and surely in all experience, were it not for
ceremonies what would become of state, government, conversation, religion? and
yet, of these there is great difference, some ceremonies are no less then
substance to others; and beside the latitude of their nature, they have one
aspect as they look toward an imposing authority, and another as they look
toward an arbitrary use; It is one thing what men take up out of will or
custom, another thing what they conform to out of duty and obedience; so as
what our superiors (to whom we must leave to see further then our selves) think
fit to injoyne us, out of their estimation of decency and order, is not now
left to the freedom of our election: it is for them to judge, it is for us to
obey; neither have we the like reason to censure them for imposing things
indifferent, which are found by them to conduce unto holy ends, that they have
to censure us for not observing them; herein they are wise and just, whiles we
are conceitedly refractory.

I know how little I need to press this to a people where I can find nothing
but an universal conformity; only this touch was needful if but to second and
revive those late meet and expedientorders which we lately commended to your
careful and Christian observation.

This from the general and confused view of this Apostolical charge: cast
your eyes now upon the particular injunction; The Woman ought to have power on
her Head, what is this power but a signification of her husbands power over
her? for it is worth observing that the Hebrew word which signifies a vail:
(...), signifies also power, (...) being derived from a root of that sense; so
as the meaning plainly is, The woman ought to wear that on her head, which may
import and testify that she is under her husbands power which is, as the
Valentinians read it not amiss in Irenaeus, (...) a vail, or covering; here
therefore ye have an evident Metonymy; the thing signified which is the
husbands power is put for that which signifies it, which is the woman's vail so
as this proposition then lies open to a double consideration; the one in
reference to the thing signified, which is the husbands power over the wife,
the other in reference to the sign implying it, which is the wifes vail or
covering of the head: of both briefly.

The first, that the husband has power over the wife, is so clear both in
nature, and reason, that I shall willingly save the labor of a proof; it is
enough that by her Creator she was made for an helper: and an helper does
necessarily argue a principal; it is enough, for matter of instiution, that he
who gave her a will appointed it should be subject to the will of her husband;
which how deep an impression it took in very Heathens appears clearly enough in
the Persian sages censure of Vashti Est. 1.

And that it may appear the liberty of the Gospel does no whit alter the case;
How do the blessed Apostles St. Paul and St. Peter redouble the charge of wives
be subject to your Husbands, Colos. 3. 1 Pet. 3. And inded how is the husband
the head if he be not both more eminent, and furnished with the faculty of
directing the whole body? A Virtuous woman says, Solomon, is the crown or
Diadem of her Husband, Prove. 12.3, Lo, she is the crown for the ornament of his
head, but if she be virtuous she does not affect to be the head: and if the
Crown be set upon the head (as the husband may give honor to the weaker
vessel) yet it is a pittyful head that is not better then the crown that
adornes it; but why urge I this? none but some mamish Monsters can question it,
and if there be any such that would fain read the words amiss, that the wife
has power over her head, they are more worthy to be punished by the whip of
authority, then by their neighbors shame, or my censure. But to say as it is,
they are rare complaints that we hear of in this kind; I would the contrary
were not more frequent; The man has power over the wife, and he knows it too
well; and uses it too boistrously; this sweet, gentle, and familiar power which
he should exercise over his other-self, is degenerated in the practice of too
many into a stern Tyranny; according to the old Barbarian fashion in Aristotle's
time which holds even still, their wives are their slaves: This is not for the
woman to have power on her head; but for the man to have power in his hand, for
the hand to have power on the body, an unmanly and savage power to the very
destruction of it self: This kind of cruelty cries unto me daily for redress;
and give me leave to cry out against it as the most odious and abominable
oppression that is incident into him that would be called a man; for the
deareness of the relation aggravates the violence; to strike a beast causelessly
is unmercifull; a slave, unchristian; a stranger, furious; a child unmanly, but
our own flesh monstrous; this is to do that which no man does says our
Apostle, Ephesians. 5.29.

There was in the time of Gregory 10th. (about 1275) (as our histories tell us)
a brood of mad heretics which arose in the Church, whom they called
Flagellantes, the whippers, which went about through France and Germany lashing
themselves to blood.

A guise, which though at the first cried down, is since taken up by some
mis-zealous penitents of the Romish Church, who do not only take pleasure, but
place merit, in blood; a lesson taken out, by both of them from the Baalites 1
K. 18. Men, rather more prodigal of their flesh then the lavishest of these
late zelots, surely what those Bigots did and do out of falsely named religion,
these husbands of blood (as Zipporah miscalled Moses) do out of a crabbed and
imperious cruelty, even draw blood of those bodies which a several kin
cannot difference from their own.

Far, far be this, more then Turkish, more then Paganish inhumanity from those
that would pass for Christians; for you my dear Brethren, let it be enough for
me to mention that gracious and needful charge of our blessed Apostle ((...))
Husbands love your wives, and be not bitter to them, Colos. 3.19.

Whiles their heads confess your power, take you heed least your power be
abused to vex their hearts, and to tyrannize over their bodies.

This for the power here signified of the Husband over the wife; we descend to
the signification of that power by the covering of the head: an ancient custom
and that which was practiced among all civil Nations; hence the Romans
expressed the woman's marriage by, nubere, which signifies to vail; whereupon a
cloud is termed nubes because it is, as a vail, drawn betwixt Heaven and our
sight: Neither doubt I but before all latinity was hatched this was alluded to
by Abimelech, Genes. 20.16. ( Hu ceseth gnenaiim) he is the covering of thine
eyes; said that Heathen King to Sarah concerning her husband; a covering which
both protects, and limits the eye: The Apostles charge then is that the woman's
head ought to be covered, to show that she is under another power; but how and
how far, and when this covering is required, will require a further
disquisition: which I shall the rather enter into, because I see some
religious, and well affected women carried away with Erroneous opinions
concerning this point; whose tender consciences have been abused by the
mis-interpretations of some ignorants to be drawn to hold that this covering
must be absolute; and total, and perpetual, so as if any hair at all be seen,
it is a violation of this charge and their duty; to which purpose they urge
that verse 15 as a full commentary upon this text, that the hair was given the
woman for a covering; and upon this ground they are apt to censure them who
take liberty to expose any of their hair, though never so moderately to others
view: I beseech you dear Brethren and Sisters misconstrue me not as one that
affect to be a Patron of ruffianly and dissolute fashions, of excess or
immodesty in this kind; these I hate from my soul; and must tell those vain
dames that where such bushes are hanged out, it is an argument that something is
exposed to sale; but as I would not have you inordinately wild, so I would not
have you scrupulously superstitious, in restraining the due bounds of lawful
Christian liberty, and placing sin where God never meant it; That I may
therefore lay some grounds of this my just determination, know first that in
the use of garments and these outward appendances of the body there is much
latitude and variety according to the several guises of Nations, and degrees
of persons: there are Countries the extremity of whose cold climate is such
that it is no boot to bid both sexes be covered, yea muffled up, for their own
safety; there are others so scorching that will hardly admit of any covering
either for head or body; there are some whose hair is so large, that is able to
hide them, there are others whose curled heads are alike short in both sexes,
and give no advantage to the covering of either: he that made these differences
of climates and people has not thought fit to confine them to one universal
rule, only contenting himself with a general prescription of decency which in
all Countries must be regulated according to the custom or convenience of the
place. For certainly these sacred ceremonies must follow the rule of the
civil, for that which is held a token of subjection to our Princes and other
superiors, in all Countries is so used in the service of the King above all
Gods: the Turks and all Mahumetans therefore not uncovering their heads to
their Bashaes, or their Grand Lord; keep their heads covered in their
devotions: and only by bowing or prostration testify their humble subjection
to God. The French Divines preach with their hats on, ours uncovered; both
pretend good reason; and custom for these contrary fashions; neither are either
of them to be censured as faulty, and exorbitant: and with us we hold the head
uncovered if the hat be off, though the cap be on: others make no difference if
there be ought at all on the head.

Consider, Secondly, that the hair was given by God both to Men and Women for
an ornament: for which cause though it pass in our account for no better then
an excretion, yet it was created together with Man and Woman in their first
Perfection; Were it not thus, surely Baldness would be held a Beauty, and no^
a Blemish; Neither would the Prophet Elisha have taken it for so heinous an
affront that the children cried, ascend calve. Neither would God have expressed
it, as an intimation of his severest judgment upon Israel; on every head shall
be baldness, Jer. 48.37. Neither would God have ordained it for a law to Israel
that he who was enamoured of a captive woman should first shave her hair to
take off the edge of his affection, Deuteronomy. 21.12. Neither would Nehemiah have
taken this revenge of the hair of hi^ mis-married Countrymen, Nehem. 13.25. It
was but a just question that Augustus Caesar asked his Daughter Julia, when she
had her white hairs pulled out daily: whether within a few years she had rather
be gray, or bald.

And our story tells us that when it was asked why the Spartans suffered their
hair to grow. Ageselaus answered, that was the cheapest ornament that belonged
to the body: In a word therefore if our hair were given for a deformity to us,
it could but be all hidden.

Let it be Thirdly considered that our Apostles main drift here is to give
order for the habiting of women in the public assemblies, and exercises of
their devotions, not for their ordinary and domestique attire.

Which appears plainly in the 5th. verse: Every Woman that prays or
prophesyeth with her head uncovered, dishonoreth her head; he says not, every
woman that walks abroad upon civil occasions, or, that stays at home upon
her household affairs, without a vail on her head, dishonors her head; and
verse 13. Judge in your selves, is it comely that a woman pray unto God
uncovered? It is a public prayer that is there meant, parallel to the
prophecy before mentioned; both which in these first times of the Church were
in extraordinary use; without the danger of a precedent to us, upon whom the
(...) of the Church, and the ends of the World are at once come. And if there
were no more proofs, my Text were enough, which injoynes the vayling of the
head is to be used because of the Angels; relating (as all interpreters give
it) to the public Congregations of the Saints of God, as we shall see in the
sequel.

Lastly it must be known that this covering of the head has principal
relation to the face, which is the best and most conspicuous part of the head;
so as it is supposed that the humility and modesty of the woman does most show
it self in the vayling of the face from the view of beholders; the back parts
of the head not giving so much cause of note and distinction, not so much
occasion of temptation to any eye; those therefore who by virtue of this place
would have all their hair hid, must much more, and upon better reason contend
that their face should be always covered; wherein one absurdity, and servile
inconvenience would easily draw on another.

Shortly then, it follows irrefragably from all this; that however the garish,
and wanton fashion of the woman's dissheveling her hair, and the lascivious
turning it into nets for the catching of fond and amorous eyes, be justly
forbidden both to grave matrons, and to chaste, and well governd Virgins, yet
that no law of God, or good reason disallowes such a moderate laying out of
some part of the hair, as may give a safe comeliness to the face, without the
just scandal of any wise beholder.

Neither does that other Text make ought for this fancy; where the Apostle tells
us that the woman's hair was given her for a covering; but rather evinces the
contrary.

The meaning is, it was given her for a covering, actively to cover her, not
passively to be covered by her.

For St. Paul intending to show how unseemly it was for women to show
themselves in public exercises, with a bare face, an open brow, an uncovered
hair before the multitude, fetches an argument from nature it self, which
plainly points her what she ought to do: in that it has furnished her with a
native vail, which is her hair: since therefore provident nature has given her
a long hair purposely to be a cover unto her, it therein shows how fit it is,
that her modesty and discretion should provide her such a covering for her head
when she will be opening her mouth in the public assembly, as may testify
her womanly bashfulnesse, and humble subjection.

To shut up this point therefore, there can be no just pretense from this, or
any other Scripture for this mis-raysed scrupulousness. Rather for the
contrary the holy Ghost seems to make, in that his Divine Epithalamion,
wherein he brings in Christ the Heavenly Bridegroom magnifying his bride the
Church with this sweet allusion. Behold, thou art fair my love, Behold thou art
fair, thou have doves eyes within thy locks; thy hair is as a flock of goats
that appear from Mount Gilead. Cantic. 4.1. Lo, the dove-like eyes of the
Church are within her locks; and her hair is not as an hidden flock, but
appears; and that in a glorious beauty. Let no well affected Christian bring
her self under the bondage of an observation which God never enjoined, or pass
a groundless and rash verdict upon others for that which God has never
forbidden; but with a due care of an holy outward decency, Let every one in the
fear of God look to the hidden Man of the heart, in that which is not
corruptible, even the Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit, which is in the
sight of God of great price. 1 Pet. 3.4. And so I have done with the Rule or
Canon of the Apostle: Come we now to the grounds of it; The former whereof has
reference to what he had concerning the eminent condition of the Man in respect
of the Woman; fetched from both the material and final cause: Material, the
woman is of the Man; Final, the woman is created for the man; not the
contrary; but because this point is coincident with that which we have formerly
touched, concerning the husbands superiority, I shall not need to renew my
discourse upon this subject, but choose rather to descend to that second
ground, which by the vulgar and some Fathers quoting the place, is brought in
by way of a copulative, And, because of the Angels: a ground so deep, that
great wits and judgments have professed not to fadom it: Quid hoc sit (says
learned Beza) nondum intelligo and our no less learned Cam^ron confesses, that
herein Interpreters differ, ut qui maxim. For those late writers which have
read the words ((...)) Because of the young Men, I must needs say they would
make a clear sense, if we might take their words for the use of any such word
in the Greek Tongue; which for my part I must confess never to have met with.
To pass over the improbable guesses of many; The words are taken by some in a
borrowed sense; by some others in a natural. In a borrowed sense by those
either who by Angels here understand Gods Ministers; or, as those that take it
for holy men of what ever profession.

These latter seem not to have any fair warrant for their interpretation,
since, however we find somewhere that the Saints shall be in a condition like
to the Angels, yet no where do we find them called Angels: the former want not
good probability for their construction; neither is it an unusual thing with
the Spirit of God to call his Ministers by the name of Angels. So Malachy 2.
(...) for he is the Angel or Messenger of the Lord: and of John the Baptist the
same Prophet can say Mal^c. 3.1. (...) I will send my messenger or Angel: yea
the very name of the Prophet that writes is no other then Malachy My Angel. And
ye know in the Apocalypse how often the prime Governors of the Church are called
Angels; whereupon St. Chrysostom (as I remember) makes the reason of that full
expression of St. Paul (If an Angel from Heaven, Galat. 1.) to allude unto this
distinction that even Gods Ministers are his Angels too, though upon Earth, a
title given them both in regard of their mission and of their near relation to
God; and of those qualities which these Men of God should imitate in those
blessed Spirits.

The very name is doctrinall, and teaches us both what God expects from us
both to himself and you; and what he expects from you to us; From us
faithfulness and diligence in his holy errands, whereabouts we are sent to
the World; from you, love and reverence to those Messengers which he imployes
about your Salvation; but, it was my meaning only to call to this sense at the
window in my passage; as that which I hold not within the compass of the
Holy-Ghosts intention; Doubtless the sense is natural and proper; not of men
by way of allusion; but of those which are Spir^ts, by essence: and yet even in
this sense there is some variety of judgment, whiles some take this to be
spoken of evil Angels, others of good; Those which apply this to evil Angels
are likewise in a double opinion; For some take it passively; least even those
Angels should be tempted; others actively, least they should take occasion to
tempt.

The former conceit is as gross as it has been ancient, of Tertullian and some
others, that even spirits (to whom they ascribe a kind of materiality) may be
taken with the immodest venditation of a fleshly beauty; to which purpose they
do ignorantly mistake that of Genes. 6.2. That the Sons of God saw the
Daughters of Men that they were fair; not considering the sequel, that they
took them wives of all that they chose; Surely, if ever spirits have affected
these fleshly sins, yet of married Spirits there was never dream in any sober
head.

This fancy is too absurd to merit a confutation: No doubt wicked spirits take
delight in drawing the Sons of men to inordinate affections, and beastly
practices; but that themselves place any pleasure in bodily obscenities is a
matter not easy to be believed; Or, if they should be obnoxious to those
carnal desires, that the interposing of a vail should any way avail to the
restraint of their wicked inclinations, and purposes it is too poor a thought
to enter into any wise understanding.

The other [ viz. least those Spirits should take this occasion of tempting]
might pass for current; if ever we could find in the whole body of the
Scripture where the evil spirits are absolutely called Angels without some
addition of distinction, (which is learned Camerons observation) except only
that one, 1 Cor. 6.3. where they are so styled for the greater honor of the
Saints that shall judge them: However, the truth of the proposition is
undeniable; that so we ought to habit, and order our selves, that we may not
give advantage to the evil Spirits either to our temptation, or their
prevalence: we may be sure those tempters will omit no occasion of winning us
to filthiness. Do you not think that when they see wanton dames come disguised
into Gods house, as it were into the box of the playhouse, with their breast
bare almost to the Navel, their arms to the elbow, their necks to the
shoulder-points, darting their lascivious eyes every way, and in their whole
fashion and gesture bewraying such lightness as might be able to debauch a
whole assembly, think ye not, I say, that they applaud themselves in so rich a
booty; as knowing that every eye that is transported, and every heart that is
fired with that immodest gazing-stock are so many spoils and trophies of their
Temptations? It is a true and seasonable word that holy Cyprian said to the
dames of his time that it was not enough for them to keep themselves from being
corrupted by others solicitations, unless they took care so to dress and deport
themselves that they might not be occasions of raising wanton thoughts in the
beholders; For surely, we can not free our selves from those sins wherein
others by our means (though besides our particular intentions) are ensnared;
there is much liberty, I confess, in matter of attire, but let me withal give
you St. Paul's Item to his Galathians; Brethren, ye have been called to liberty,
only use not liberty for an occasion to the flesh, but by love serve one
another, Galat. 5.13. When and how is our liberty an occasion to the flesh, but
when we do so pranck up and pamper our flesh as that we regard not therein any
others dangers; which when soever we are drawn to do, we may be sure we have so
wary and vigilant spirits to watch us, as that no advantage can be let fall
against our souls: as therefore wise and careful commanders do not only cast
how to impugn, oppress, and annoy an enemy, but also how to remove those
helps which might be advantageous to him in his siege, even to the demolishing
of Suburbs, and stopping up of Fountains, and the like; so must we do in this
spiritual warfare of ours; we must not only stir up our courage and indevors
to resist and vanquish tentations, but we must bend our utmost care upon the
prevention, and removal of whatsoever, in our apparel, carriage, diet,
recreations may be likely to give furtherance to their assault, or prevalency:
and in the whole practice of our lives so demean our selves as that we may,
according to the charge of the Apostle (...); not so much as give an occasion
to an adversary; 1 Timothy 5.14. wether of calumny, or of Triumph: oh that we
could be fearful of doing any unfit thing because of the evil Angels; we shall
be sure to hear of it again to our cost; even the most careless boys will be
afraid to offend in the face of the monitor, such are the evil Angels to us.
Be sure every unbeseeming and unlawful act that passes from us, is upon their
file; and shall once be urged against us to our shame and conviction; My
Brethren we would be loath to come under the power of their torment; as we
would avoid this fearful issue, let us be jealous of their suggestions, and
our carriage; and not dare to do ought that may be scandalous, Because of the
Angels.

Good use may be made (you see) even of this sense; but I take it our Apostle
intended here to intimate the presence of, and respect to the good Angels.

It is no a less comfortable then well-grounded point of Divinity, That none
of Gods Children upon Earth want the assidence and Ministration of those
blessed spirits, we have it from him that cannot fail us. Matthew. 18.10. and the
sweet singer of Israel had warbled out this Heavenly note before him; The
Angels of the Lord encamp about those that fear him, Ps. 34.7. And he that was
rapt up into the third Heaven and saw those wonderful Orders of Angels, can
tell us they are all ministering Spirits sent forth to Minister for them who
shall be heirs of Salvation: Heb. 1.14. Now these, as they guard and attend
every of Gods elect ones when they are singled and sequestered in the greatest
solitariness, so we can not think they leave their whether common or several
charges, when they assemble together for the exercises of piety and devotion:
so as the public meetings of Gods Saints can be no other then filled with
whole troops of Angels; This as it is a truth; so it was the received opinion
of the Jews, as Capellus pregnantly cites it out of the Sedar Tephilloth of
the Portugal Jews; in his learned Spicelegium; Coronam dant tibi Domine Deus
noster Angeli, turba illa superna cum populo tuo Israel hic inferne Congregato.
O Lord our God the Angels give glory to thee, even those Heavenly troops that
are assembled with thy Israel here below. Out of the reverend and awful
respect therefore that is due to these glorious (though invisible) beholders
there may no unseemly thing be done or admitted in the Church of God; and
therefore The Women ought to have power on their Heads because of the Angels;
and surely, my beloved, were we fully persuaded that now at this present, there
is within these walls a greater Congregation of Angels, then of Men and Women,
I suppose it could not but strike such an awe into us, as to make us at once
holily, mannerly and fervently devout: It is a great fault in us Christians
that we think of nothing but what we see; whereas that spiritual, and
intelligible World, which is past the apprehension of these Earthly senses, is
far greater, far more noble and excellent then all visible and material
substances. Certainly there is not one Angel in Heaven that has not more glory
then all this sensible World can be capable of: what should I tell you of the
excellency of their nature, the height of their offices, the Majesty of their
persons, their power able to confound a World, their nearness both of place and
of essence to that infinite deity; their tender love and care of mankind, any
of which were able and worthy to take up a whole lives meditation.

And if there be so much perfection in one, how unconceiveable is the
concurrent luster, and glory of many: had we eyes to see these invisible
supervisors of our behavior we could not, we durst no let fall any so much as
indecent gesture before such a presence. Quicken then (I beseech you) and
sharpen your eyes, dear and beloved Christians, to see your selves seen even of
them whom ye cannot see, and let your whole carriage be thereafter; he is not
worthy to claim more priveledge then of a beast, that can see nothing but
sensible objects: brute Creatures can see us; if we see nothing but our selves,
and then, wherefore serves our understanding, wherefore our faith? and if we
see invisible beholders why are we not affected accordingly; certainly it were
better for us not to see then, than, seeing, to neglect their presence.

What is then the honor, what the respect that we must give to the Angels of
God who are present in our holy assemblies: I must have leave to complain of
two extremities this way: There are some that give them too much veneration,
there are others that give them no regard at all: In the first are those within
the Roman Clientele; who are so over-curteous as that they give them no less
then the honor of adoration, of invocation, reviving herein the erroneous
opinion and practice of them which Theodoret held confuted by St. Paul in his
Epistle to the Colossians. It is the praise that Franciscus de Sales Bishop of
Genua gives to Petrus Faber, one of the first associates of Ignatius Loiola
that his manner was, whenever he came to any place he still made suit to the
Tutelar Angels, that presided there for their aid of converting the people from
heresy; and found great success in it: This imploration and worship is
ordinary; wherein they do that to the Angels, which the Angels themselves have
forbidden to be done: and yet I must needs say if any creature could be capable
of a religious worship, it is they; and if any creature were fit to be prayed
unto, it is they rather then the highest Saints of Heaven: for whereas it is
the just ground of our refusing to pray to the Saints that we cannot be sure of
their presence, and notice, (sure rather of the contrary) and therefore cannot
pray in faith; that ground is here justly removed, we are sure that the Angels
of God are present with us; we are sure that they hear us pray; but this is an
honor reserved as peculiar to the God of Angels, and to that one mediator
betwixt God and man, Jesus Christ, those Spirits hate to be made rivals to
their maker; neither have we learned that unreasonable modesty to sue to
wayters, when we are called up to supplicate the King.

The other extreme is of careless christians, that do no more think of Angels,
then if there were none; suffering their bodily eyes to be taken up with the
sight of their assembled neighbors, but never raising their spiritual eyes to
behold those spiritual essences which are no less present; and certainly I
fear we are all much to blame this way; and may justly tax our selves of an
unthankful, dull, irreligious neglect of these glorious Spirits; I find that
the Mohammedan Priests in their Morning and Evening prayer still end their
devotion with Macree Kichoon; Be Angels present: and the people shout out their
Amen: and shall our piety this way be less than theirs. Surely the Angels of
God are inseparably with us; yea whole cohorts, yea whole Legions of those
heavenly soldiery are now viewing and guarding us in these holy meetings, and
we acknowledge them not; we yield not to them such reverent and awful respects
as even flesh and blood, like our own, will expect from us. Did we think the
Angels of God were with us here, durst those of us which dare not be covered at
home (as if the freedom of this holy place gave them privilege of a loose and
wild licentiousness) affect all saucy postures, and strive to be more
unmannerly then their Masters?

Did we consider that the Angels of God are witnesses of our demeanor in Gods
house, durst we stumble in here with no other reverence then we would do into
our Barn, or Stable; and sit down with no other care then we would in an
alehouse, or Theater?

Did we find our selves in an assembly of Angels, durst we give our eyes leave
to rove abroad in wanton glances? our tongues to walk in idle and unseasonable
chat? our ears to be taken up with frivolous discourse? Durst we set our selves
to take those naps here whereof we failed on our pillow at home; certainly my
beloved, all these do manifestly convince us of a palpable unrespect to the
blessed Angels of God, our invisible consorts in these holy services.

However then it has been with us hitherto; let us now begin to take up other
resolutions; and settle in our hearts an holy aw of that presence wherein we
are; Even at thy home address thy self for the Church; prepare to come before a
dreadful Majesty of God and his powerful Angels; thou see them not; no more
did Elishaes servant till his eyes were opened: It is thine ignorant and gross
infidelity that has filmed up thine eyes, that thou can discern no
spiritual object; were they but anointed with the eye salve of faith, thou
should see Gods house full of heavenly glory, and should check thy self
with holy Jacob, when he awaked from his divine vision; Surely the Lord is in
this place and I knew it not; how dreadful is this place; this is no other but
the house of God, and this is the gate of Heaven, Genesis 28.16, 17. Oh then when
thou set thy foot over the threshold of Gods Temple tremble to think who is
there, lift up thine awful eyes, and bow thine humble knees, and raise up thy
devout and faithful soul to a religious reverence and fear of those mighty and
Majestical Spirits that are there; and of that great God of Spirits, whose both
they and thou art; and study in all thy carriage to be approved of so glorious
witnesses and overseeres. That so at the last those blessed Spirits with whom
we have had an invisible conversation here, may carry up our departing souls
into the heaven of heavens, into the presence of that infinite, and
incomprehensibly-glorious God, both theirs and ours, there to live and reign
with them in the participation of their unconceivable bliss and glory. To the
fruition whereof he that has ordained us, graciously bring us by the
mediation; and for the sake of his blessed Son Jesus; To whom with thee O
Father of Heaven, and thy co-eternall Spirit, three persons in one God, be
given all praise, honor, immortality now and for ever.

HOLY DECENCY IN THE WORSHIP of GOD.
By J. H. B. N.
I Know that a clean heart, and a right spirit is that which God mainly
regards; For as he is a Spirit so he will be served in Spirit; but withal,
John. 4.24.
as he has made the body, and has made it a partner with the Soul, so he
justly expects, that it should be also wholly devoted to him; so as the
Apostle, upon good reason, prays for his Thessalonians, that their whole
Spirit, and Soul, 1 These. 5.23.
and body may be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ;
and beseeches his Romans by the mercies of God that they present their bodies a
living sacrifice, holy acceptable to God. Romans 12.1.


Now as the body is capable of a double uncleanness; the one, moral; when it
is made an instrument, and agent in sin; the other natural when it is polluted
with outward filthiness, so both of these are fit to be avoided in our
addresses to the pure and holy God; the former out of Gods absolute command,
who has charged us to cleanse our selves from all filthiness both of the flesh
and Spirit; the latter out of the just grounds of Decency, 2 Cor. 7.1.
and expedience: for though there be no sinful turpitude in those bodily
uncleanenesses, wherein we offer our selves to appear before the Lord, our God;
yet there is so deep an unbeseemingness in them, as places them in the next
door to sin: Perhaps Gods ancient people the Jews were too superstitiously
scrupulous in these external observations; whose Talmud tells us of one of
their great Rabbis that would rather suffer under extremity of hunger and
thirst, then taste of ought with unwashen hands: as counting that neglect equal
to lying with an harlot; and who have raised a great question whether if any of
their poultry have but dipped their beak in the bowl, the water may be allowed
to wash in; forbidding to void the urine standing (except it be upon a descent
of ground) lest any drop should recoyle upon the feet; and in case of the other
evacuation, beside the paddle-staffe, and other ceremonies in uncovering the
feet, injoyning to turn the face to the South, not to the East or West, because
those coasts had their faces directed toward them in their devotions: what
should I speak of their extreme curiosity in their outward observances
concerning the Law; which no man might be allowed to read whiles he was but
walking toward the unloading of nature or to the Bathe, or near to any place
of annoyance; no Man might so much as spit in the Temple or before that sacred
Volumn, or stretch forth his feet toward it, or turn his back upon it, or
receive it with the left hand: no Man might presume to write it but upon the
parchment made of the skin of a clean beast: nor to write or give a bill of
divorce but by the side of a running stream: yea the very Turks as they have
borrowed our circumcision, so also religious niceties from these Jews, not
allowing their Alcoran to be touched by a person that is unclean.

But surely, I fear these men are not more faulty in the one extreme, then many
Christians are in the other; who place a kind of holiness in a slovenly
neglect; and so order themselves as if they thought a nasty carelessenesse in
Gods services were most acceptable to him: Hence it is that they affect homely
places for his worship; abandoning all magnificence, and cost in all the acts
and apendances of their devotion; clay and sticks please them better, then
Marble and Cedars; Hence it is that their dresses make no difference of
festivals; all stuffes, all colors are alike to them in all sacred
solemnities; Hence that they stumble into Gods house without all care or show
of reverence; and sit them down at his Table, like his fellows, with their hats
on their heads; Hence that they make no differnnce of coming with full panches
to that heavenly banquet; and that the very dogs are allowed free access and
leave to lift up their legs at those holy tables, In quibus populi vota and
membra Christi portata sunt, Optat. Milevit l. 6. where we partake of the Son
of God.

For the rectifying of which misconceits and practices, let it be laid down as
an undoubted rule; that it is a thing well-pleasing to God that there should be
all outward cleanliness, gravity, reverent and comely postures, meet furniture,
utensils, places, used and observed in the service of the Almighty: a truth
sufficiently grounded upon that irrefragable Canon of the Apostle: Let all
things be done decently and in order; whereof Order refers to persons, 1 Cor.
14 40.
and actions; decency to the things done, and the fashion of doing them:
disorder therefore and indecency, as they are a direct violation of this
Apostolic charge, so doubtless they are justly offensive to the Majesty of
that God whose service is disgraced by them, as for disorder it falls not into
our present discourse; in matter of indecency the main disquisition will be how
it may be judged, and determined; to know what is comely, has been of old noted
to be not more commendable then difficult; for the minds of men may be of a
different diet; one may approve that for decent which another abhors as most
unbeseeming: Suarum rerum nemo non mitis arbiter and pius judex, Petrarch. A
Cynick curre or some Turkish Saint may think it not uncomly to plant his own
kind in the open market place; and Xenophon tells us of a certain people,
(...). etc. Xenoph. de ^aeped. Cyr^. l 5.
called Mosynecians whose practice was to do all those acts in public which
other men men (placing shame in them) are wont to reserve for the greatest
secrecy? and contrarily: to do those things in private, which other Nations
thought fit for the openest view, and we find that the Stigmatical Saint of
the Church of Rome (who could say of himself that God would have him fatuellum
quendam) Dixit mihi Dominus quod volebat me esse unum fatuellum in hoc mundo,
Conform. Separator.
) thought it no shame to go stark naked through the streets of Assisium: So did
Theodore the Tailor and seven Men, and five Women Anabaptists strip themselves
and ran naked through Amsterdam, Guy de Bres. Idem fecit coram Episcopo
Assisii. lib. Conform. p. 211. But certainly there are unquestionable rules,
whereby decency may be both regulated and judged: 1 Cor. 11.13.14.16.
The great Doctor of the Gentiles when he would correct an indecent practice in
his Corinthians uses these three expressions, Judge in your selves is it comely?
Does not nature it self teach you? We have no such custom, nor the Churches of
God: Wherein he sends us for the determination of decency, to the judgment of
our right reason, undebauched nature, and approved custom; and surely, if we
follow the guidance of these three, we cannot easily err in our decision of
comeliness both in our carriage in humane affairs, and in the services of God;
all these will tell us that it is most meet that all outward cleanliness
gravity, modesty, reverence, should be used in all the actions of divine
worship; and will in form us that whatsoever fashion of deportment is held rude
and uncivil in humane conversation, is so much more indecent in divine actions,
by how much the person whom we deal with is more awful, and worthier of the
highest observance.

It is no other then an error therefore in those men who think that if they
look to the inward disposition of the soul it matters not in what posture, or
what loathsome turpitude the body appears before the Almighty; Even that
slovenly Cinick when he saw a woman bowing her self forward too low in her
devotion, could chide her for her unregard to those deities, which beheld her
on all sides; Our blessed Savior though he had good cheer at the Pharisees
house, yet he somewhat taxes his host for want of a due complement; Luc.
7.44.46.
I entered into thine house, thou gave me no water for my feet, mine head with
oil did thou not anoint, etc. He looks still for meet formalities of good
entertainment as well as the substance of the dishes: It was Gods charge that
no steps should be made to go up to his altar; Exodus 20 26.
lest the nakedness of the sacrificer should be discovered; for this cause it
was that he who made the first suit of skins for our first parents, ordained
linen breeches for his Priests in their ministrations.

God has no where commanded us to cut our nails, or our hair; but it were a
foul indecency not to do both: and if we would justly loath a man that should
come to our table like wild Nebuchadnezzar in the desert, with hair to his
wast, and claws on his fingers, how much more odious would this seem in a man,
that should thus thrust himself in to the Table of the Lord? and if our
displeasure would justly arise at that barbarous guest, which should come to
our board with his hands be smeared with ordure or blood, how can we think it
can be otherwise then ill-taken of the holy God, that we should in a beastly
garb offer our selves into his presence.

It is not only in regard of spiritual filthyness, that the evil Spirits are
called unclean; but even of external also; wherein how much they delight; we
may well appeal to the confessions of those Witches and Sorcerers, which upon
their conviction, and penitence have laid open the shameful rites of their
nightly meetings; Bod in Demonomania, etc. Augustine l. de Haeres. Philastr. de
Haeres.
Neither was it without cause that some of their prime agents in the ancient
Church were called (...) from those filthy fashions which were in use amongst
them. Gnostici borboritae quasi coenosi, ob turpitudinem in suis mysteriis, etc.

Contrarily, what pleasure the pure and holy God takes in the cleanness, both
of flesh, and spirit, is abundatly testified by to those many, and strict
injunctions of lotions, and purifications, which we find, upon every occasion
in his ancient law; and though those laws be not now obligatory, as being for
the substance of them ceremonial and typical, yet they have in them so much
tincture of an eternal morality, as to imply a meetnesse of decent
cleanliness in the services of God.

In the observation whereof it is meet for us to hold a middle way betwixt
superstition, and neglect; it is easy to note how in the former extreme, a
superstitious curiosity has crept into the Church of Rome; in so much as it
may well vye with the Jewish, Bartol. Gavant. part 5. de nitore and munditie
sacrae supellectris. Idem. Tit. ^alix. Tit. Canon^ mun^ra. V. Pr^cessio Ibid
Gavant Mo^esin. Scot. de orig. Papat. 9. Gavant. v. Ecclesia. Abradendi pa
ietis sic and Donatislae Optat. l. 6. Tit Cemiteria.
for multitude and niceness of observances; Their Altar-cloths must not be
touched but with a brush appropriated to that service; their corporals must
first (ere they be delivered forth) be washed by none but those that are in
sacred orders, in a vessel proper only to that use, with soap and lie; and
after with pure water, which after the rinsing, must be poured into the
sacrarium; their chalices must not be touched by one that is not in Orders: No
glove may be worn in their quire: No woman or lay man may make their host,
neither may any lay-person so much as look at that sacred wafer out of his
window; Their missal cushions may not be brought so much as for the Bishop to
kneel on: The Stones of a demolished Church may be sold to laymen, but with
reservation of uses: neither may so much as an house for the curate, be built
upon the same floor, but by the Popes license: Upon the burial of an heretic
within the precincts the Church must be reconciled, and the walls scraped: The
grass in the Churchyard may not be used to any passurage; their Agnus-Dei may
not be touched by a Layman, no not with gloves on, or with a pair of tongues:
What should I instance in more; a just volume would not contain the curious
scruples of their nice observances, in their vestments, consecrations,
sacramental rites; and indeed, in the whole carriage of their religious
devotions; in all which they bring themselves back under the bondage of more
then Judaical ceremonies: placing Gods worship in the ritual devices of men,
and bringing their consciences under the servile subjection to humane
impositions; That liberty wherewith Christ has made us free calls us to the
avoydance of this unjust excess: But withal our reverential fear of the God of
heaven, calls us to eschew in the other extreme all sordid incuriousness, and
slovenly neglect in his immediate services.

To which purpose let it pass for a sure rule that there is a kind of
Relative holiness in persons, things, times, places, actions: Relative, I say,
not inherent in themselves but in reference to their use, and destination; and
in the second place, that even this kind of holiness challenges a reverent
respect from us: A person whose profession is holy, by his solemn consecration
to God, should and ought to carry more veneration from us then every common
man. The holy elements in the sacrament, being now set apart to this divine
use, should be otherwise regarded of us then the common bread, and wine at the
Tavern: in respect of that blessed mystery whereto they are appropriated: Gods
holy day is held worthy of more respect from us, then all the days in the year
besides; and why should it not be so likewise in places and actions? Even in
our own houses we observe a decency, and different regard of rooms; holding it
unbeseeming that the businesses of the scullery should be done in our parlour,
or that our bedchamber should be made a larder: And can we think it less
uncomly to put Gods peculiar house to the use of a kitchen, or stable? Surely,
the service whereto it is ordained, and the name that it bears, ought to
privilege it from all either base, or profane employment.

As for sacred actions, as they have more life in then the outward
circumstances of time and place, so they do justly require more respect in the
managing of them; in our petitions, if we come to earthly princes upon our
knees, with an awful reverence; how much more ought we to do so to the King of
glory? In our receipt of the blessed Eucharist, our demeanure must be no other
then such as may become the guests of the great King of Heaven, and the
commensals of the Lord Jesus, of whom and with whom we do then communicate; in
hearing or reading the Divine Oracles, our deportment must be such, as may
argue our putting a difference betwixt the word of the ever-living God; and the
fallible dictates of mortal men like our selves.

And as it is in outward decency and cleanliness, so also in the matter of
cost, or handsomeness (at least) in the utensils and structures that belong to
God; wherein it is a marvel how much we in this last age of the world have
varied from our predecessors, in the first establishment of Christianity:
Nihil refert sive ex auro, sive ex ligno sit Templum; sive sit stabulum sicut
in Bethleem, sive regia domus sicut in Jerusalem. Luth. in Psalm. 122. They
thought nothing good enough for God Almighty, we think nothing too mean. Upon
the first noise of the Gospel, when the secular State was not their friend, the
poor Christians were glad to make any shift; if they could build their first
Oratories, or Churches of sticks (as at Glastenbury in the entrance of
Christianity) they were well apay'd: or if but the bare sky were their roof,
they were well enough contented; but when once Kings became nursing fathers to
the Church, what cost, what magnificence was sufficient for Gods temples? Even
as it was in the Elder times of Gods ancient people^ at the first there was a
stake pitched for the habitation of the Almighty; afterward there was a
Tabernacle erected, and God was pleased to dwell in Tents; but when Kings were
chosen by God to go in and out before his people, now a Statly Structure, one
of the wonders of the World, was raised unto God in Sion: in so admirable
beauty as dazeled the eyes of the World to behold it. When the Christian
Religion then had taken foot in the empire, what sumptuous monuments were
erected by that pious Constantine (in whom our Nation claims a just interest)
let histories speak; no stones were too precious, no metal was too costly for
that happy use; and so powerful influence had that example upon Christian Kings
and Princes, that each strove who should exceed other in the cost and splendour
of those holy fabrics, the riches of their dotation, the price of their sacred
vessels; and from them (as from the head to the skirts,) descended to the
Christian Nobility and Gentry; in such sort, that in a short space the face of
the earth was grown proud to be adorned with so many precious piles, and the
Church was grown glorious and happy with so bountiful endowments: and what
shall we think of it that the Kings of Tarshish and of the Isles did thus bring
presents, and the King of Sh^ba, and Saba did offer gifts? Was it well done,
Ps. 72.10
or might it not better have been spared? Surely, had those Godly Emperors,
Kings, Princes, Peers, Gentry, been of the mind of many modern Christians,
they had forborne this care and cost, and turned their magnificence into
another channel: But if this bounty of theirs were holy and commendable, as it
has been justly celebrated by all Christians, till this present age; how are
those of ours shamefully degenerated, who affect nothing but homlinesse and
beggary in all that is devoted to the Almighty; and are ready to say contrary
to the man after Gods own heart; 2 Samuel 24.24.
I will offer to the Lord my God of that which shall cost me nothing.

With what great state and deep expense God was served under the Law, no man
can be ignorant; for who knows not the costly furniture of the Tabernacle, the
rich habiliments of the Priest, the precious vessels for the sacrifices; and
after that the invaluable sumptuou^ness of the Temple, both without and within;
In the marbles, cedars, almuggim trees, brass, silver, gold, in the curious
celatures, and artificial textures? in regard of all which for matter and
form, what was this other then the glory of the whole earth? and as for the
very altar alone (Gods Ariel) that which went up there from, in smoke, both in
the daily sacrifices, and the solemn Hecatombs, upon special occasions, what
man could value? Besides the treble tithes, first fruits, oblations which were
perpetually presented to God for the maintenance of his Priesthood: O the
costly services of God under the Law! And do we think the same God is now of a
quite other diet, then formerly? Is all this mere ceremony? Is there not so
much morality in it as that it is meet the great God, who is the possessour of
Heaven and Earth, should be served of the best? that it is not for us to affect
too much cheapnesse, and neglective homeliness in our evangelical devotions?
Surely, nature it self calls to us for this respect to a deity, even the very
savage Indians may teach us this point of religion; amongst whom we find the
Mexicans, a people that had never had any intercourse with the other three
parts of the World, Eminent in this kind; what sumptuous, and stately Temples
had they erected to their Devils: How did they enrich their mis-called Gods
with Magazins of their treasure? And even still the most barbarous and brutish
of all those people that bear the shape of men have this principle bred in
them, that if they have ought better then other, it is for their God: a
principle so much advanced by imperfect Christianity; that the Abassins hold it
piacular to build their own houses of the same matter which is reserved for
their Churches; Jo. Pories descript. of Africa.
to the very fabric and use whereof they yield so much reverence as that their
greatest Peer alights from his horse when he comes but within view of those
sacred piles.

And if from those remote parts of the world we shall think fit to look
homewards; how just cause shall we find to wonder at the munificent piety of
our predecessors, who so freely poured out themselves into bountiful expense
for raising of the houses of God in our Island, and endowing them with rich
patrimony, that the prime honor of this Nation, all the world over, has ever
been the beauty of our Churches: Neither was it otherwise in all those parts of
the World where Christianity had obtained; How frequent was it for a wealthy
matron with Vestina, and for a great Nobleman with the Roman Tertullus, Regna
potius quam coenobia vir sanctis posteris reliquit, etc. Volaterran, to make
God their heir, Ex l^bro Portifie. Innocent. 1.
and to enrich his houses and services with the legacies of their jewels, and
possessions? Whereupon it came to pass that those structures and vessels which
at the first were but of mud, and meaner metals, according to the poverty of
the donors; soon after exchanged their homeliness for so glorious a
magnificence, as bleared the eyes of the heathen beholders; See, says that
enemy of Christ, in what vessels Mary's son is served; and Ammianus is ready to
burst with spite at the liberal provision of Gods ministers in comparison of
their neglective Paganism, Ut ditenter oblationibus matronarum, etc.

There may have been some in all ages, that out of a misgrounded humility, and
pretended mortification have affected a willing disrespect of all outward
accommodations both in their own domestic provisions, and in the public
services of God; such were St. Gallus of old; and in later Times, the two
famous Franceses of Assise, and of St. Paul: The first whereof, Gallus,
Wolafrid Strab. c. 18.
as the history reports, when a great Duke out of a reverent opinion of his
sanctity had given him a rich and curiously carved piece of plate; Magnoaldus
his Disciple who had the carriage of that precious vessel, moving that it might
be reserved for the sacred use of Gods table, received this answer from him:
Son remember what Peter said, Gold and Silver have I none; let this plate which
thou bear be distributed to the poor; for my blessed master Saint Colomb was
wont to offer that holy Sacrifice in chalices of brass; because they say, our
Savior was with brazen nails fastened to his cross; thus he in more humility
then wisdom; Lep, rosis ulcerosarum plagarum ruebat in Oscula. lib. Confor.
Fructu. Separatur. And for the other two; never man more affected bravery and
pride then they did beggary, and nastiness; placing a kind of merit in sticks,
and clay, in rags and patches, and slovenry; S. Franciscus circa mortem suam in
testamento suo scribi voluit quod omnes cellae and domus fratrum de lignis and
luto essent tantum, ad conservandam melius humilitatem and paupertatem. Libr.
Conform. p. 218. lib. 2. Fructu. 4. Conform. 16. Let these and their
ill-advised followers pass for Cynicks in Christianity; although now, what ever
the original rule of their sordid founder was; even those of that order can in
their buildings and furnitures emulate the magnificence of Princes; as if they
affected no less excess in the one extreme, then their patron did in the other,
Fratres omnes vilibus vestibus induantur; and possunt earepeciare de saccis and
aliis peciis cum benedictione Dei. Conform. l. 1. Fructu 9. p. 116. Wise
Christians sit down in the mean; now under the Gospel avoiding a careless or
parcimonious neglect on the one side, and a superstitious lavishnesse on the
other.

As for this Church of ours, there is at this time especially little fear of
too much; and if we be not more in the ablative, then our Ancestors were in the
dative case yet we are generally more apt to higgle with the Almighty; and in a
base niggardliness to pinch him in the allowances to his service; wherein we do
not so much wrong our God as our selves; for there is not in all the World so
sure a motive for God to give largely unto us, as that we give freely unto God:
2 Samuel 11, 16.
David did but intend to build God an house, and now in a gracious retribution,
God tells him by Nathan, The Lord will build thee an house, and will establish
thine house and thy kingdom for ever before thee: and contrarily in this it
holds as in all other pious bequests; 2 Cor. 9.6.
He that sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly: and if some particular ways
of the conveighance of our bounty were anciently ceremonial, Prove. 3.9.
yet we are sure this charge is perpetual, Honor the Lord with thy substance.
Had our blessed Savior been of the mind of these dry and pinching
Devotionists, he had surely chid Mary Magdalene, for the needless wast of that
her precious ointment, and have agreed with Judas how much better it migh have
been employed for the relief of many poor souls that wanted bread, then in
such a complement of unnecessary delicacy; Mat. 26.13.
but how kindly this seasonable expense was taken by our Lord Jesus, appears,
in that the memorial of this beneficence is ordained by him to have no narrower
bounds of Time or Place, then this blessed Gospel it self.

Shortly, as the honest and learned Gerson long since distingushed in matter of
Doctrine; so must we learn to distingush in matter of practice; some things are
of the necessity of devotion, others of the piety of devotion; and yet further,
in this second rank, some things are essential to the piety of devotion,
without which it cannot be at all, others are accidental without which it
cannot be so well; under this latter sort, expedience and decency both of
cleanliness and cost challenge a due place, and cannot justly be denied it: As
it is in our own case, some things are requisite out of the necessity of
nature, without which we cannot subsist; other things are requisite for the
convenience of our estate, without which we cannot maintain a well being; He
that has Bread and Drink, and Clothes, may live; but he that has not his
Linen washed and his meat cleanly dressed, and change of warm suits will
hardly live with comfort.

To the great marriage of the Kings son in the Gospel, all comers are invited;
yea the guests are fetched from the very high ways, Mat. 22.9.10.
and hedges, where there could be no probability of any choice Wardrobe, yet
when the King comes in, and finds a man without his wedding garment; he in
displeasure asks, Friend how came thou in hither; sufficienty intimating that
even comeliness of fashion and meet complement are worthily expected in the
solemn entertainments of God.

To conclude, if we have rightly apprehended the dreadful and glorious Majesty
of the great God; we shall never think we can come with reverence enough into
his holy presence; and it is no small appendance of reverence to have our very
bodies decently composed before him: and if we have well weighed the absolute
sovereignty of this great King of Glory; and the infinite largess of our
munificent God, who has given us our selves, and all that we have, or are, or
hope for, that has not grudged us ought in earth, or heaven; no not the dear
son of his love, and eternal essence; but has sent him out of his bosom for
our redemption: we cannot think all our little enough to consecrate to his
blessed name and service; and shall hold that evil eye worthy to be pulled out,
which shall grudg the fattest of his flocks, and herds to the altar of the
Almighty.

Now the app^ication of this whole discourse I leave to the thoughts of every
reader; who cannot but easily find how too much need there is of a monitor in
this kind; whiles the examples of a profane indecency so abound every where to
the great shame of the Gospel, and scandal of all ingenious minds. I forbear
to particularize; a volume would be too straight for this complaint:

It is not the blushing of my Nation, the derision of Foraigners, the advantage
of adversaries that I drive at, in these seasonable lines; it is the
reformation of those foul abuses, gross neglects, outward indignities,
notorious pollutions, which have helped to expose the face of this famous
Church, late the glory of Christendom, to the scorn of the nations round about
us; who now change their former envy at her unmatchable beauty, into a kind of
insulting pity of her miserable deformity Return, dear brethren, return to
that comely order, and decency which won honor and reverence to your goodly
forefathers.

After the main care of the substance of divine worship (which must be ever
holy, spiritual, answerable to the unfailing and exact rule of the eternal word
of God) let the outwatd carriage of Gods sacred affairs be (what may be)
suitable to that pure, and dreadful Majesty whose they are; let his now
neglected houses be decently repaired, Nequid p^ofanum Templo Dei ins^ratur,
^o^fe^sus sed^m qu^m inhabitat de^e^inquat* Cyprian de habit^* virg.
neatly kept, reverently regarded for the owners sake, and inviolably reserved
for those sacred uses to which they are dedicated; let his holy table be comely
spread; and attended with awful devotion, let them be clean both within and
without that bear the vessels of the Lord; let the maintenance of his altar be
free, liberal, cheerful; let Gods chair, the pulpit, be climbed into by his
chosen servants, with trembling, and gravity: briefly, let his whole service
and worship be celebrated with all holy reverence; this is the way to the
acceptance of God, and to honor with men.

Good Security: A Comfortable DISCOURSE OF The Christians Assurance of Heaven.
Grounded upon 2 Pet. 1.10. Give diligence to make your Calling and Election
sure.


IT shall be my only drift, and endeavor in this discourse to settle the
hearts of those who profess the name of Christ, in a main case of Christian
resolution concerning their present and final estate; the mean whereof is no
less comfortable and useful, then the extremes miserably dangerous: whiles one
is causelessly confident, and dies presuming; another is wilfully careless, and
perishes through neglect, both fearfully mis-carry, and help to fill up hell:
I shall desire to guide the wise Christian in a midway between both these, and
teach him how to be resolute without presumption; and to be awful without
distrust, how to labor for an holy security, and modest confidence. Ere we
descend to the matter; Three terms require a little clearing, what this
calling is? What election? What the sure-making of both?

As to the first; this cannot be taken of an outward calling: For we are sure
enough of that; wheresoever the Gospel is preached we are called outwardly;
neither are we much the nearer to be sure of that, for many are called, few
chosen, yea certainly this not answered shall aggravate our damnation; It is
therefore an inward and effectual calling that we must endeavor to make sure:
a call, not by the sound of the word only, but by the efficacy of the Spirit:
The soul has an ear as well as the body, when the ear of the soul hears the
operative motions of Gods spirit, as well as the ear of the body hears the
external sound of the Gospel: then are we called by God, when true faith is
wrought in the Soul, as well as outward conformity in our life; when we are
made true Christians as well as outward professors, then, and not till then
have we this calling from God.

Such then is our calling; the election is answerable to it; Not a temporal,
and external, to some special office, or dignity; whereof our Savior, Have not
I chosen you twelve. John. 6.70. and Moses his chosen, Psalm. 106. Not a
singling out from the most, to an outward profession of Christ, whereof perhaps
the Apostle, 1 These. 1.4. Knowing, beloved, that ye are elect of God, and the
Psalmist, Blessed is he whom thou choosest and causest to dwell in thy courts,
Psalm. 65.5. For notwithstanding this noble and happy privilege, little would
it avail us to be sure of this, and no more; no profession, no dignity can
secure us from being perfectly miserable, but an eternal election to glory;
whereof St. Paul, Ephesians. 1.4. God has chosen us in Christ before the
foundations of the World, that we might be holy, and blamlesse before him in
love; and to his Colossians, As the elect of God holy and beloved; such as to
whom saving Faith is appropriated, the style whereof is Fidus electorum, the
faith of the Elect, Tit. 1.1.

Such then is our calling, and elction. Now this calling, this election must be
made sure or firm, as the word ((...)) signifies: sure and firm, not on Gods
part who we know is unchangble in his nature, in his counsels. So as in that
regard our election (if it be at all is most sure, and surer cannot be; but on
ours, not only in respect of the object, which is the truth, and immutability
of the thing it self; but in respect of the subject too, the soul that
apprehends it; so sure that it cannot be falsified, cannot be disappointed.

It is not for us to expect such a certainty of knowledge in this point as there
is of Principles of Arts, or of those things whereof common sense assures us.
Our Schoolmen make distinction of a certainty, evident, and inevident: Evident,
which arises out of the clearness of the object it self; and the necessary
connection of the terms, as that the whole is greater then a part. Inevident,
which arises not so much out of the intrinsecal truth of the proposition it
self, as out of the veracity and infallibleness of the party that affirms it.
So both Divine and Humane faith receive their assurance from the Divine or
Humane authority whereon it is grounded; and this inevident assurance may be so
certain as to expel all prevailing doubt, though not all troubling doubt:
Neither need there any other for the Articles of our creed which we take upon
the infallible trust of him who is the truth it self, and can no more deceive
us then, not be.

This latter is the certainty, which we must labor to attain unto. In the
grant whereof our Romish Divines are generally too straightlaced, yielding yet
a Theological certainty which goes far but not home: although some of them are
more liberal, as Catharinus, Vega, Ruardus, Tapperus, and Pererius following
them, which grant that some holy men, out of the feeling and experience of the
power of Gods Spirit in them, may without any special revelation grow to a
great height of assurance; if not so as that they may swear they are assured of
this happy estate of grace, yet so, as that they may be as confident of it, as
that there is a Rome or Constantinople, which one would think were enough: but
the rest are commonly too sparing, in the inching out of the possibility of
our assurance by nice distinctions: Cardinal Bellarmine, makes six kinds, or
degrees of certainty; whereof three are clear, three obscure; the three first
are the certainty of understanding, the certainty of knowledge, the certainty of
experience; The first of them is of plain principles, which upon mere hearing
are yielded to be most true, without any traverse of thoughts: The second is of
conclusions, evidently deduced from those principles, The third is of the
matters of sense about which the eye, or ear is not deceived.

The three latter certainties which are more obscure are those of Faith, or
Belief, and the degrees thereof; The first whereof is the certainty of the
Catholic or Divine faith, which depending upon Gods authority cannot deceive
us. The second is the certainty of humane faith; so depending upon Man's
authority, and in such matters, as shut out all fear of falsehood, or
disappointment in believing them: as that there was an Augustus Caesar, a Rome,
a Jerusalem. The third is the certainty of a well grounded conceit which he
pleases to call conjecturall; raised upon such undoubted signs, and proofs,
as may make a Man secure of what he holds; and excludes all anxiety, yet
cannot utterly free him from all fear. This last he can be content to yield us;
and indeed in his stating, the question stands only upon the denial of the
certainty of a Divine faith in this great affair: we are ready to take what he
gives, so as then here may be a certainty in the heart of a regenerate Man, of
his calling and election; and such a one as shall render him holily secure; and
free from anxiety; Let the distinguisher weary himself with the thoughts of
reconciling certitude with conjectures; security with fear; let us have the
security, and let him take the fear to himself: Shortly then, whiles the
Schools make much ado of what kind of certainty this must be taken, whether of
faith, or of hope, or of confidence: surely, if it be such an hope and
confidence as makes not ashamed by disappointing us, both are equally safe; It
is enough if it be such a fiduciall persuasion as cannot deceive us, nor be
liable to falsehood.

But how far then reaches this assecuration?

So far as to exclude all fears, all doubting, and hesitation? Neither of these.

Not all kind of fear; for we are bidden to work out our salvation with fear
and trembling, Philip. 2. and to spend the time of our pilgrimage in fear, 1
Pet. 1. Not doubting, which the counsel of Trent would seem to cast upon our
opinion; we cannot be so senseless, as not in the conscience of our
infirmities, and manifold indispositions find our selves put to many plunges:
but yet so, as that by the power of our faith (which is the victory that
overcomes the World) at last we do happily recover, and find our selves freed
by a comfortable and joyful ^^uctation. If any Man could be so fond as to
think we stand so sure that we shall never shake, or move, he grossly
misconceives our condition; but if so sure that we shall never be turned up by
the roots, never removed, after we are fast planted, and grounded in the house
of God, he takes us aright; This is a certainty that we may, that we must,
labor to aspire unto; Common vetur sides, non excutitur, as Chamier well; We
must therefore give all diligence to make this effectual calling, this
eternal election thus sure unto us.

Mark in what order; first our calling, then our election: nor beginning with
our election first; it were as bold; as absurd a presumption in vain Men, first
to begin at Heaven, and from thence to descend to Earth. The Angels of God upon
Jacobs ladder both ascended and descended, but surely, we must ascend only
from Earth to Heaven by our calling, arguing our election; If we consider of
Gods working, and proceeding with us, it is one thing, there he first
foreknowes us, and praedestinates us, then he calls us, and justifies us, then
he glorifies us. Romans 8.29.30.

If we consider the order of our apprehending the State wherein we stand with
God, there we are first called, then justified, and thereby come to be assured
of our predestination, and glory. Think not therefore to climb up into Heaven,
and there to read your names in the book of Gods eternal decree, and thereupon
to build the certainty of your calling, believing, persevering; this course is
presumptuously preposterous: but by the truth of your effectual calling, and
true believing grow up at last toward a comfortable assurance of your
election; which is the just Method of our Apostle here, Make your calling and
election sure.

Mark then the just connection of these two; If the calling, then the election;
one of these does necessarily imply the other, many Thousands are outwardly
called, who yet have no right in Gods eternal election; here is as much
difference as between many and few; But where the heart is effectually called
home to God, by a true and lively faith applying the promises of God, and
laying effectual hold of Christ, there is certainly an election. Doubtless
there is much deceit and mis-prision in the World this way; every Faith makes
not an effectual calling; there is a ((...)) a Temporary, there is an inform,
there is a counterfeit Faith. Many a one thinks he has the true David, when it
is but an Image stuff't with goats hair; we know how deceitful Man's heart is,
and how cunning Satan is to gull us with vain shows that he may hold us off
from true and solid comforts. But if there be false says we know there are
true ones; yea there could not be false, if there were not a true one; so much
more must be our diligence to make sure work for our Faith, and by that, for
our calling, which ascertained will evince our election. As Men when they hear
there are many conterfeit slips, and much washed and clipped coin abroad, are
the more careful to turn over, and examine every piece that passes through
their hands. So then those whom God has thus joined, neither Man nor Devil can
put asunder, Our calling, and Election.

Three heads then offer themselves here to our present discourse. 1. That our
Calling and Election may be made sure. 2. That we must endeavor to make them
sure. 3ly. How and by what means, we may and must endevor to assure them.

As for the first of these, the very charge and command it self implies it. The
justice of God does not use to require impossible things from us; when
therefore he bids us g^^e diligence to do it; what does it imply but that by
diligence it may be done: what will our diligence do in a business that cannot
be done, should a man be bidden to take care that he fly well, or wa^k
steddily on his head, this would justly sound as a mockery; because he knows
they are not fecible: but when he is bidden to walk circumspectly, and to take
heed to his feet, it presupposes our ability, and requires our will to
perform it; and so does this precept here: Men are apt to employ their wits to
their own disadvantage; The Romish Doctors have been of late times very busy to
cry down the possibility of this certainty, (...), Pontificiam nos serio
damnamus and aversamur; and toto coelo errant qui hanc cum isto dogmate
confundunt; Alia est istaec perpetua dubitatio sive fluctuatio, qua statuunt
Pontificii n^minem in hac vita certitudine fidei certum esse posse se gratiam
apud Deum adeptum esse. Quid hoc ad praesentem quae^tionem? Quis nostrum hanc
Pontificiorum sententiam unquam approbavit? Imo ut huic calumniae mature obviam
iremus, in propositione sententiae nostrae, circa quint^m articulum, exserte
professi sumus, thesi 7. Vere fidelem, ut pro tempore praesente, de fidei and
conscientiae suae integritate certum esse posse, ita, and de sua salute, and
salutifera Dei erga ipsum benevolentia pro illo tempore certum esse posse, ac
debere; addentes insuper, Pontificiam sententiam nos hic improbare. Remonstr.
defens. 51. articuli. p. 338.
they, and none but they; for all Protestants of what profession soever,
disclaim this Doctrine; even those our brethren that follow the school of
Arminius, are herein (for the possibility of our present certainty,) with, and
for us; (...) Pontificiam (they are their own words) nos serio damnamus and
aversamur; this popish doubtfulness and irresolution we hate and condemn, etc.
So as only the Pontifician Divines are in this point opposite to us all (and
not all of them neither Catherinus is for us, and some others come close to us.

But the stream of them runs the wrong way; teaching that we may hope well, and
give good conjectures, and attain perhaps to a moral certitude of our present
acceptance, and future blessedness; but that no assurance can be had hereof,
nor none ought to be affected without a special revelation, as their St.
Anthony, St. Francis, St. Galla, and some few others have had; the contrary
whereof their Estius dare censure for perdita, and per^itrix haeresis. Why will
wise men affect to be thus much their own enemies? Is not salvation the best of
good things? Should not a man rather incline to wish himself well? What
pleasure then can it be for a man to stand in his own light, and to be
niggardly to himself where God has been bountiful? to stave himself off from
that comfortable certainty which God has left in his possibility to make good
to his own Soul?

Let us then a little inquire into the faisibleness of this great improvement
of our holy and Christian diligence; And cettainly, if there be any let in the
possibility of this assurance, it must be either in our present faith, or in
the perpetuation of it; for in the connection of a lively faith with salvation,
it cannot be; That he who effectually believes, and perseveres to the end shall
be saved, no man, no Devil can deny; all the doubt is whether the man can know
that he does thus believe, that he shall continue so to believe. And why should
there be any doubt in either of these? I am sure for the first; the chosen
vessel could say, I know whom I have believed, 2 Timothy 1. and speaks this not as
an extraordinary person, (an Apostle) but as a Christian; therein affirming
both the act of his faith, and the object of it, and his knowledge of both; for
whiles he says, I know whom I have believed, he does in effect say, I know
that I have believed, and I know what I have believed; God my Almighty Savior
is the object of my faith, my faith lays sure hold on this object, and I know
that my faith lays undoubted hold on this happy object. I know whom I have
believed; and why should not we labor to say so too? Some things the Apostle
did as a singular favorite of Heaven, of this kind were his raptures and
visions, these we may not aspire to imitate; other things he did as an holy
man, as a faithful Christian, these must we propose for our examples; and
indeed, why should not a man know he believes? What is there in faith (even as
we define it) but knowledge, assent, application, affiance, receiving of Christ,
and which of these is there that we cannot know? Surely there is power in the
soul to exercise these reflexe actions upon it self. As it can know things
(contrary to the fanatic skeptic) so it can know that it knows; These
inward acts of knowledge, and understanding are to the mind, no other, then the
acts of our sensitive powers are unto our senses, and a like certain judgment
passes upon both: as therefore I can know that I hear, or that I see, or
touch; so can I no less surely know that I do know, or understand.

And the object does no whit alter the certainty of the act; whiles a divine
truth goes upon no less evidence and assurance, why may not a man as well know
that he knows a divine truth, as an humane?

The like is to be said of those other specialties which are required to our
faith; Our faith assents to the truth of Gods promises; what should hinder the
heart from knowing that it does assent? Do not I know whether I believe a man
on his word? Why should I not know the same of God? when an honest man has by
his promises engaged himself to me to do me a good turn, do not I know whether
I trust to him, whether I make use of that favor in a confident reliance upon
the performance of it? the case is the same betwixt God and us; Only we may be
so much the more infallibly assured of the promised mercies of our God, by how
much we do more know his unfailingness, his unchangeableness.

Yea so fecible is this knowledge, as that our Apostle charge his Corinthians
home in this point, 2 Cor. 13.5. Prove your selves, whether ye be in the faith;
Try your selves, know ye not your own selves that Christ Jesus is in you
except ye be Reprobates; what can be more full? To be in the faith is more then
to believe; it intimates an habit of faith, that is more then an act; Now what
proof, what trial can there be of our faith if we cannot know that we have
faith? Surely a trial does ever presuppose a knowledge, If a man did not know
which were good gold, to what purpose does he go to the Test?

Now how dwells Christ in us but by Faith? So may they, so must they know
Christ to be in them, that if they have him not, they are reprobates: And if
they know not they have him, they can have no comfortable assurance against
their reprobation. See then how emphaticall and full this charge is; He says
not, Guess at your selves; but prove and try your selves: He says not, do ye
not morally conjesture? but, do ye not know: He says not, whether ye hope
well, but, whether ye be in the Faith; And that, not of the Faith of Miracles,
as Chrysostom, and Theophilact; nor of a Faith of Christian profession, as
Anselme; but such a Faith as whereby Christ dwells in our hearts; He says not,
Lastly, unless ye be faulty, and worthy of blame, but, unless ye be reprobates:
The place is so choakingly convictive, that there can be no probable elusion of
it.

The shift of Cardinal Bellarmine (wherein yet he would seem confident) is
worthy of pity; that the place has no other drift but to imply the powerful
presence of Christ amongst the Corinthians; strongly confirming the truth of
his Apostleship; whereby, if there were any faith at all in them, except they
were given up to a reprobate sense, they must needs be convinced of the
authority of his Ministry; for what was this to their being in the faith,
whereof they must examine themselves? or, who can think that to be in the faith
is no more then to have any faith at all? Neither does the Apostle say, that
Christ is among you, but in you; neither could the not knowing of Christ's
presence amongst them by powerful Miracles, be a matter of reprobation; so as
this sense is unreasonably strained to no purpose; and such as no judicious
spirit can rest in, and this act of our knowledge is taken for granted by him
that works it in us.

And indeed what question can there be of this act when God undertakes it in
us? The Spirit of God witnesses with our Spirits, that we are the Sons of God,
Romans 8.16. Can any Man doubt of the truth of Gods Testimony? Certainly, he that
is the God of truth cannot but speak truth; now he witnesses together with us.
Yea but you say, though he be true yet we are deceitful, and his Spirit does
but witness according to the measure of our receipt, and capacity, which is very
poor and scant, yea and perhaps also uncertain. Take heed, whosoever thou art,
least thou disparage God, whiles thou would abase thy self; he witnesses
together with us; The Spirit of truth will not witness with a lying Spirit;
were not therefore that witness of ours sure, he would check us, and not
witness with us: Now what witness can he give with us, and to us if we do not
hear him, if we do not know what he says; if we cannot be assured of what he
testifies? Let no Bellarmine speak now of an experiment of inward sweetness and
peace, which only causes a conjecturall, and not an unfailing certainty: The
Man has forgot that this Testimony is of the Spirit of adoption, whereby we do
not seem Sons, but are made so, and are so assured: and that it is not a guess,
but a witness; and Lastly that there can be no true inward peace out of mere
conjectures. Yea, here is not only the word of God for it; but his seal too;
and not his seal only, but his earnest; what can make a future match more sure
then hand and seal? and here we have them both. 2 Cor. 1.22. Who has sealed
us; Lo the promise was past before ( verse. 20.) and then yet more confirmed
((...)) verse. 21. and now past under seal (...). verse. 22.

Yea but the present possession is yet more, and that is given us in part by
our received earnest (...). Earnest is a binder; wherefore is it given but by a
little to assure all?

In our transactions with Men, when we have an honest Man's word for a bargain,
we think it safe; but when his hand and seal, infallible; but when we have
part in hand already, the contract is past, and now we hold our selves stated
in the commodity what ever it be. And have we the promise, hand, seal, earnest
of Gods Spirit, and not see it, not feel it, not know it?

Shortly, whom will we believe if not God, and our selves? No Man knows what
is in Man, but the Spirit of God, and the Spirit of Man that is in him, as St.
Paul to his Corinthians. Ye have heard Gods Spirit; hear our own; out of our
own mouth. Does not every Christian say, I believe in God, etc. I believe in
Jesus Christ; I believe in the holy Ghost; I believe the Communion of Saints,
the forgiveness of sins, and life Everlasting? And does he say he believes when
he believes not, or when he knows not whether he believe, or no, what a mockery
were this of our Christian profession? Or, as the Jesuitical evasion commonly
is, is this only meant of an assent to these general truths, that there is a
God, a Savior, a sanctifyer, Saints, remission, salvation, not a special
application of these several articles to the soul of him whose tongue
professes it? Surely then, the devil might say the creed no less confidently,
then the greatest Saint upon Earth: There is no Devil in hell but believes (not
without regret) that there is a God that made the World, a Savior that
redeemed it, a blessed Spirit that renewes it, a remission of sins, an eternal
Salvation to those that are thus redeemed, and regenerate; and if in the
profession of our faith we go no further then Devils, how is this Symbolum
Christianorum? To what purpose do we say our creed?

But if we know that we believe for the present, how know we what we shall do?
what may not alter in time? we know our own frailty and fickleness; what hold
is there of us weak wretches, what assurance for the future? Surely, on our
part, none at all; If we be left never so little to our selves, we are gone; on
Gods part enough; there is a double hand mutually employed in our holdfast;
Gods and ours; we lay hand on God; God lays hand on us; if our feeble hand
fail him, yet his gracious and omnipotent hand will not fail us: even when we
are lost in our selves, yet in him we are safe; he has graciously said, and
will make it good; I will not leave thee nor forsake thee: The seed of God,
says the beloved disciple Joh. 3. remains in him that is born of God; so as
he cannot ((...)) trade in sin, as an unregenerate, not lose himself in
sinning; so as contrary to Card. Bellarmines desperate Logic, even an act of
infidelity cannot mar his habit of faith; and though he be in himself, and in
his sin guilty of death, yet through the mercy of his God, he is preserved from
being swallowed up of death; whiles he has the seed of God, he is the Son of
God; and the seed of God remains in him always.

That of the great Doctor of the Gentiles is sweet and cordial, and in stead
of all to this purpose; Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall
tribulation (...) etc. I am fully persuaded that neither Death, nor Life, nor
Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to come,
nor height, nor depth, nor any other Creature shall be able to separate us from
the love of God, which is in Christ jesus our Lord. Romans 8.39. O divine oratory
of the great Apostle! Oh the heavenly and irrefragable Logic of Gods Penman!
it is the very question that we have now in hand which he there discusses; and
falls upon this happy conclusion, That nothing can separate Gods elect from his
everlasting love; he proves it by induction of the most powerful agents, and
triumphs in the impo^ence, and imprevalency of them all; and whiles he names
the principalities and powers of darkness, what does he but imply those sins
also by which they work?

And this he says not for himself only, (least any with Pererius, and some
other Jesuits, should harp upon a particular Revelation) but who shall
separate us? he takes us in with him; and if he seem to pitch upon his own
person in his ((...)) yet the subject of this persuasion reaches to all true
believers, That nothing can separate us from the love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord: Us, not as it is over-stretched by Bellarmine and
Vasquez, indefinitely, for those that predestinate in general, but with an
employed application of it to himself, and the believing Christians to whom he
wrote; The place is so clear and full, that all the miserable and strained
Evasions of the Jesuiticall gainsayers cannot elude it; but that it will carry
any free and unprejudiced heart along with it; and evince this comfortable
truth, That, as for the present, so for the future we may attain to be safe for
our spiritual condition.

What speak I of a safety that may be, when the true believer is saved already?
already past from death to Life; already therefore over the threshold of
Heaven. Shortly then our faith may make our calling sure; our calling may make
sure our election; and we may therefore confidently build upon this truth that
our calling and election may be made sure.

Now many things may be done, that yet need not, yea that ought not to be done;
This both ought and must be indeavored, for the necessity, and benefit of it.
This charge here as it implies the possibility, so it signifies the
convenience, use, profit, necessity of this assecuration, for sure if it were
not beneficial to us, it would never be thus forceably urged upon us; And
certainly there needs no great proof of this. For nature and our self-love
grounded thereupon easily invites us to the endeavor of feoffing our selves in
any thing that is good; this being then the highest good that the Soul of Man
can be possibly capable of, to be ascertained of Salvation, it will soon
follow, that since it may be done, we shall resolve it ought, it must be
indeavored to be done.

Indifferent things, and such as without which we may well subsist are left
arbitrary to us; but those things wherein our spiritual well-being consists
must be mainly labored for; neither can any contention be too much to attain
them; such is this we have in hand; without which there can be no firm peace,
no constant, and solid comfort to the Soul of Man; Three things then call us to
the endeavor of this assurance; our duty, our advantage, our danger.

We must do it out of duty; because our God bids us; Gods commands like the
Prerogatives of Princes must not be too strictly scanned; should he require
ought that might be losse-full, or prejudicial to us, our blindfold obedience
must undertake it with cherefulnesse; how much more then, when he calls for
that from us, then which nothing can be imagined of more, or equal behoof to
the Soul. It is enough therefore that God by his Apostle commands us to Give
diligence to make our calling and election sure; Our Heavenly Father bids us,
what sons are we if we obey him not? Our blessed Master bids us, what Servants
are we if we set not our selves to observe his charge? our glorious and
immortal King bids us, what subjects are we if we stick at his injunction? out
of mere duty therefore we must endeavor to make our calling, and election sure.

Even where we owe no duty, oftentimes advantage draws us on; yea many times
across those duties which we owe to God and Man; how much more where our duty
is seconded with such an advantage, as is not parallelable in all the World
beside.

What less, what other follows upon this assurance truly attained but peace
of conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost? in one word, the beginning of Heaven
in the soul.

What a contentment does the heart of Man find in the securing of any
whatsoever good? what a coil do mony-Masters keep for security of the sums
they put forth; and when that is taken to their mind are ready to say with the
rich Man in the Gospel, Soul take thy ease. Great venturers at Sea how
willingly do they part with no small part of their hoped gain to be assured of
the rest? How well was Ezekiah appaid, when he was assured but of fifteen
years added to his life? How does Babylon applaud her own happiness to her
self, when she can say, I sit as a Queen, I shall not be a widow, I shall know
no sorrow: It must needs follow therefore that in the best things assured there
must be the greatest of all possible contentments.

And surely, if the heart have once attained to this, that upon good grounds it
can resolve, God is my Father, Christ Jesus is my Elder Brother, the Angels are
my Guardians; Heaven is my undoubted patrimony, how must it needs be lift up,
and filled with a joy unspeakable and glorious? What bold defiances can it bid
to all the troops of worldly evils, to all the powers of Hell? with what
unconceiveable sweetness must it needs enjoy God, and it self? how comfortably
and resolutely must it needs welcome death, with that triumphant champion of
Christ, I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the
faith, and now from henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness, etc. 2. Tim. 4.7, 8. Out of the just advantage therefore of this
assurance we must endeavor to make our calling and election sure.

Neither is the advantage more in the performance hereof then there is danger
in the neglect. In all uncertainties there is a kind of afflictive fear, and
troublesome mis-doubt: Let a man walk in the dark, because he cannot be
confident where safely to set his steps, he is troubled with a continual
suspicion of a sudden mis-cariage, and therefore goes in pain; what can there
be but discomfort in that soul which knows not in what terms it stands with
God? Yet, whiles there is life, there may be hope of better; But if that soul
be surprised with an unexpected death, and hurried away with some sudden
judgment, in this state of irresolution, in how deplored a condition is it
beyond all expression? I cannot but therefore lament the woeful plight of those
poor souls that live and die under the Roman discipline, who when they have
most need of comfort in the very act of their dissolution are left pitifully
disconsolate, and given up by their teachers to either horror, or suspense.
Even the most Saint-like of them; (except his soul fly up in Martyrdom like
Gedeons Angel in the Smoke of his incense) may not make account of a speedy
ascent to heaven; insomuch as Cardinal Bellarmine himself, of whom our Coffin
dares write that his life was not stained with mortal sin, ( page 27.) He that
could call heaven Casamia; and whose canonization the Cardinals thought fit to
be talked of in his sickness; when Cardinal Aldobrandino desired him, that when
he came to heaven he would pray for him, answered, To go to heaven so soon is a
matter too great for me; men do not use to come thither in such have, and for
me, I shall think it no small favor to be sure of purgatory, and there to
remain a good while ( page 42.) (which yet (himself can say) differs not much,
for the time, in respect of the extremity of it, from hell it self) and to be a
good while there? O terror past all reach of our thoughts; And if the righteous
be thus saved, where shall the sinners appear?

For ought they can, or may know; hell may, but purgatory must be their
portion, heaven may not be thought of without too high presumption.

Certainly if many despair under those uncomfortable hands I wonder that no
more; since they are bidden to doubt, and beaten off from any possibility of
the confidence of rest and happiness.

But whiles I urge this danger of utter discomfort in our irresolution; I hear
our adversaries talk of a double danger of the contrary certitude; A danger of
pride, and a danger of sloth. The supposed certainty of our graces breeds pride
says their Cardinal; The assurance of our election, sloth, says their
Alphonsus a Castro, out of Gregory.

And indeed if this cordial doctrine be not well given, well taken, well
digested, it may, through our pravity, and heedlesness turn to both these
noxious humors; as the highest feeding soonest causes a dangerous Plethory in
the body. How have we heard some bold ungrounded Christians brag of their
assurance of glory, as if they had carried the keys of heaven at their Girdle?
How have we seen even sensual men flatter themselves with a confident opinion
of their undoubted safety; and unfailable right to happiness? How have we known
presumptuous Spirits that have thought themselves carried with a plerophory of
faith when their sails have been swelled only with the wind of their own
self-love? how many ignorant souls from the mis-prision of Gods infallible
election have argued the needlessnesse of their endeavors, and the safety of
their ease and neg-lect? As ye love your selves, sail warily, betwixt these
rocks and sands on either side.

But if these mischiefs follow upon the abuse of a sound and wholesome doctrine,
God forbid they should be imputed to the truth it self; as if that God who
charges us to do our endeavor to make sure work of our calling and election did
not well foresee the perils of these mis-takings; and if notwithstanding the
prevision of these errors his infinite wisdom has thought fit to injoyne this
task, how safe how necessary is it for us to perform it? Did these evils flow
from the nature of the doctrine, we had reason to disclaim it; but now that
they flow from the corruption of our nature, fetching evil out of good, we
have reason to embrace the doctrine, and to check our selves.

What a sclander is this? Does the known certainty of our graces breed pride?
Surely, did we challenge these graces for our own, there might be some fear of
this vice; but whiles we yield them to be Gods, how can we be puff't up; what a
madness is it in a Man to be proud of another glory? It is a great word of the
Apostle I can do all things, but when he adds, through him that strengthens me,
now, the praise is all Gods, and not his; now, he boasts all of God, nothing of
himself; No, presumption is proud, but faith is humble. There can be no true
faith without repentance; no repentance without self-dejection. Yea, the very
proper basis of all grace whatsoever is humility; much more of faith; since a
Man cannot so much as apprehend that he has need of a Savior, till he be vile
in his own eyes, and lost in his own conceit. Yea so far is the known
certainty of grace from working pride, as that it is certain there can be no
grace, where there is pride of grace; so as whiles Gregory can say Si scimus
nos habere gratiam, superbimus, If we know we have grace, we are proud; I shall
by a contrary inversion not fear to say; Si superbimus, scimus nos non habere
gratiam, If we be proud, we know we have no grace.

Sloth and security is the more probable vice; why may not the spiritual
sluggard say; If I be sure of my calling and election, and Gods decree is
unchangeable, what need I care for more? sit down, soul, and take thine ease;
ut quid perditio haec? To what purpose do thou macerate thy self with the
penal works of an austere mortification? what need thou toil thy self in
the busy labors of a constant devotion? what need these assiduous prayers,
these frequent sermonings, these importune communicatings? thou can be but
sure of thine election; thou art so already; sit down now my soul, and take not
thy ease only but thy pleasure; let thy self freely loose to those
contentments, wherein others seek and find felicity; Be happy here, since thou
can not but be so hereafter.

A Man might perhaps speak thus, but can a believer say so? Whose faith quells
the very thought of this pernicious security; and excites him more to a
careful endeavor of all good actions, then reward can the ambitious, or fear
the cowardly? Lo this Man will be sure to do so much more good, by how much he
is more sure of his election; and will be more afraid of sin, then another is
of hell; He well knows the inseparable connection betwixt the end, and the
means, and cannot dream of obtaining the one, without the other; he knows that
mortification of his corruptions, and the life and exercise of grace are the
happy effects of his gracious and eternal election. If he look to his calling,
he meets with that of the Apostle, We are called, not to uncleaneness, but to
holiness, 1 These. 4.7. If to his election; we are chosen that we might be holy,
and without blame before him in love, Ephesians. 1.3. Both calling and election
call him to nothing but holiness; and he will more busy himself in the duties
of piety, charity, justice, out of love, then a servile nature would out of
constraint; and will do more good, because he is elected, then a mercenary
disposition would do, that he might be elected; and will be more careful to
avoid sin, because he makes account of Heaven, then a slavish mind can, or will
be that he may avoid hell; Ezekiah has fifteen years promised to be added to
his life; he is sure God cannot deceive him; what then? does he say; though I
take no sustenance I shall live; let me take poison: let me run into fire or
water, or upon the sword of an enemy, fifteen years is my stint, which can no
more be abridged, then prolonged; I will never trouble my self with Eating, or
Drinking, I will rush fearlesly upon all dangers? none of these, he that knows
he shall live, knows he must live by means; and therefore feeds moderately,
demeans himself no less carefully that he may live, then any other whose life
is uncertain. It is for ignorant Turks to make so ill use of their
predestination, that because their destiny is written in their foreheads; they
need not regard danger, but may securely sleep upon the pillow of him that died
the day before of the plague: wisemen know that divine providence is no
exemption of our best care.

It cannot stand with a true favorite of Heaven to make so ill use of Gods
mercies, as to be evil, because he is good; to be secure, because he is
bountiful and unchangeable; what remains then? but that out of our duty to
the command, out of our sense of the advantage, out of our care to shun the
danger of the neglect, we should stir up our selves, by all means possible, to
make our calling and election sure. Away with our poor and petty cares
wherewith our hearts are commonly taken up: One cares to make his house, or his
coffers sure with bolts and bars; another cares to make his money sure by good
bonds and Counter-bonds; another his estate sure to his posterity by
conveyances and Fines; Another his adventure sure by a wary pre-contract; Alas
what sorry worthless things are these in comparison of eternity? And what a
slippery security is that which our utmost endeavors can procure us in these
transitory and unsatisfying matters? Oh our miserable sottishness if whiles we
are studiously careful for these base perishing affairs, we continue willing
unthrifts in the main and everlasting provision for our souls!

Religion gives no countenance to ill-husbandry, be careful to make your
houses sure; but be more careful to make sure of your eternal mansions; be
careful for your earthly wealth, but be more careful of the treasures laid up
in Heaven. Be careful of your estate here, but be more careful of that
glorious patrimony above.

Briefly, be careful to live well here, be more careful to live happily for
ever.

Ye have seen that we may, and that we must endeavor to make sure our calling
and election: Our next work is to show how and by what means they may, and must
be endeavored to be assured.

In some few Greek copies, which Rob. Steven had seen, or in two copies, as
Beza found it, or in Aliquo codice, as Mariana, there is an addition of words
to the text (...); By good works: The vulgar reads it thus, and the Council of
Trent cites it thus, and some of ours; so the text runs thus: Give diligence
that by good works ye may make your calling and election sure: I inquire not
how duly; but certainly there is no cause that we should fear, or dislike this
reading: good works are a notable confirmation to the soul of the truth of our
calling and election: Though Cardinal Bellarmine makes ill use of the place;
striving hereupon to infer that our certitude is therefore but conjectural,
because it is of works; For the solution whereof, justly may we wonder to hear
of a conjectural certitude. Certainly we may as well hear of a false-truth;
what a plain implication is here of a palpable contradiction? Those things
which we conjecture at, are only probable, and there can be no certainty in
probability. Away with these blind peradventures; had our Apostle said (and he
knew how to speak) guess at your calling and election by good works, his game
here had been fair; but now when he says: By good works endeavor to make your
calling and election sure, how clearly does he disclaim a dubious hit
I-misse-I; and implies a fecible certainty. And indeed what hinders the
connection of this assurance? Our works make good the truth of our faith, our
faith makes good our effectual calling, our calling makes good our election,
therefore even by good works we make our election sure. Neither can it hurt us,
that the Cardinal says we hold this certainty to be before our good works, not
after them; and therefore that is not caused by our good works. We stand not
nicely to distinguish how things stand in the order of nature; surely this
certainty is both before, and after our works, before in the act of our faith;
after in our works, confirming our faith; neither do we say this certainty is
caused by our good works, but confirmed by them; neither does this ((...))
imply always a thing before uncertain (as learned Chamier well) but the
completing and making up of a thing, sure before. To which also must be added
that these ((...)) good works must be taken in the largest latitude; so as to
fetch in not only the outward good offices that fall from us in the way whether
of our charity, justice or devotion, but the very inmost inclinations, and
actions of the soul, tending toward God; our believing in him, our loving of
him, our dreading of his infinite Majesty; our mortification of our corrupt
affections, our joy in the holy Ghost, and whatsoever else may argue or make us
holy: These are the means by which we may, and must endeavor to make our
calling and election sure. But to let this clause pass as litigious; the
undoubted words of the text go no less, If ye do these things ye shall never
fall; ((...)) these things, are the virtues precedently mentioned; and not
falling, is equivalent to ascertaining our calling and election. Not to
instance then, and urge those many graces which are here specified, I shall
content my self with those three Theological virtues (singled out from the
rest) faith, hope, charity, for the making sure our calling and election.

For faith, how clear is that of our Savior, He that believes in him that sent
me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but has
passed from death to life; Joh. 5.24. This is the grace by which Christ dwells
in our hearts, Ephesians. 3.17. and whereby we have communion with Christ, and an
assured testimony of and from him; For he that believes in the Son of God has
the witness in himself, 1 John 5.10. And what witness is that? This is the
record that God has given us eternal life, and this life is in his Son, verse
11. He that has the Son has life, verse. 12. See what a connection here is,
Eternal life first: this life eternal is in and by Christ Jesus; this Jesus is
ours by faith; This Faith witnesses to our souls our assurance of Life
Eternal.

Our hope is next, which is an ((...)) a thrusting out of the head to look for
the performing of that which our faith apprehends; and this is so sure a grace
as that it is called by the name of that glory which it expects, Colos. 1.5.
For the hope sake which is laid up for you in heaven, that is, for the glory we
hope for: Now both faith and hope are of a cleansing nature; both agree in
this, Purifying their hearts by faith, Act. 15.9. Every one that has this hope
purifyeth himself even as he is pure, 1 John 3.3. The Devil is an unclean
Spirit, he fowls wheresoever he comes, and all sin is nasty, and beastly:
Faith and hope (like as neat huswives when they come into a foul and sluttish
house) cleanse all the rooms of the soul; and make it a fit habitation for the
Spirit of God. Are our hearts lifted up then in a comfortable expectation of
the performance of Gods merciful promises? and are they together with our lives
swept and cleansed from the wonted corruptions of our nature, and pollutitions
of our sin? this is an undoubted evidence of our calling and election.

Charity is the last which comprehends our love both to God and man, for from
the reflection of Gods love to us, there arises a love from us to God again:
The beloved Disciple can say, We love him because he loved us first, 1 John
4.19. And from both these, resulteth our love to our brethren, which is so full
an evidence that our Apostle tells us, we know we are passed from death to
life, because we love the brethren, 1 John 3.14. For the love of the Father is
inseparable from the love of the Son; he that loves him that begets, loves him
that is begotten of him.

Shortly then, think not of a ladder to cl^mbe up into heaven to search the
books of God.

First look into your own lives; those are most open, we need no locks or keys
to them: the Psalmist in his fifthteenth, will tell you who is for that
blisseful Sion; are your lives innocent, are your works good and holy, do ye
abound in the fruits of piety, justice, Christian compassion? Let these be
your first trial, it is a flat and plain word of the divine Apostle, whosoever
does not righteousness, is not of God, 1 John 3.10. Look secondly into your own
bosoms, open to none but your own eyes, If ye find there a true and lively
faith in the Son of God, by whose blood ye are cleansed from all your sins; by
virtue whereof ye can cry, Abba Father; a sure hope in Christ purifying your
souls from your corruptions, a true and unfeigned love to your God and Savior
who has done so much for your souls, so as you dare say, with that fervent
Apostle, Lord thou know that I love thee, and in him, and for his sake, a
sincere love to his children, as such: Not as men, not as witty, wise, noble,
rich, bountiful, useful, but as Christians showing it self in all real
expressions: These, these are excellent and irrefragable proofs, and evictions
of your calling and election. Seek for these in your hearts and hands, and seek
for them till ye find them, and when ye have found them make much of them as
the invaluable favors of God, and labor for a continual increase of them, and
a growth in this heavenly assurance by them.

What need I urge any motives to stir up your Christian care and diligence? Do
but look first behind you, see but how much precious time we have already
lost? how have we loitered hitherto in our great work? Bernards question is fit
still to be asked by us of our souls, Bernarde, ad quid venisti? Wherefore are
we here upon earth? To pamper our Gut? To tend our hide? To wallow in all
voluptuous courses? To scrape up the pelf of the World, As if the only end of
our being were carnal pleasure, wordly profit? Oh base and unworthy thoughts!
What do we with reason if we be thus prostituted? It is for beasts, which have
no soul, to be all for sense. For us, that have ratiocination, and pretend
grace, we know we are here but in a thorowfare to another world, and all the
main task we have to do here in this life, is to provide for a better; Oh then,
let us recollect our selves at the last, and redeem the time; and over-looking
this vain and worthless World bend all our best endeavors to make sure work
for eternity.

Look secondly before you; and see the shortness, and uncertainty of this,
which we call a life; what day is there that may not be our last? what hour is
there that we can make account of as certain? And think how many Worlds the
dying Man would give (in the late conscience of a careless life) for but one
day more to do his neglected work? and shall we wilfully be prodigal of this
happy leisure and liberty, and knowingly hazard so woeful, and irremediable a
surprisall.

Look thirdly below you; and see the horror of that dreadful place of torment,
which is the unavoydable portion of careless and unreclaimable sinners;
consider the extremity, the eternity of those tortures, which in vain the
secure heart slightly hoped to avoid.

Look lastly, above you, and see whether that Heaven (whose outside we behold)
be not worthy of our utmost ambition, of our most zealous, and effectual
endeavors;

Do we not think, there is pleasure, and happiness enough in that region of
glory and blessedness, to make abundant amends for all our self-combats, for
all our tasks of dutyfull service, for all our painful exercises of
mortification? Oh then, let us earnestly, and unweariably aspire thither, and
think all the time lost, that we employ not in the endeavor of making sure of
that blessed and eternal inheritance; To the full possession whereof, he that
has purchased it for us by his most precious blood in his good time happily
bring us. Amen.

A Plain and Familiar Explication OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE IN THE SACRAMENT OF HIS
Body and Blood, Out of the Doctrine of the Church of ENGLAND. For the
satisfying of a Scrupulous Friend. Anno 1631.
THat Christ Jesus our Lord is truly present, and received in the blessed
Sacrament of his body and blood, is so clear and universally agreed upon, that
he can be no Christian that doubts it. But in what manner he is both present
and received is a point that has exercised many wits, and cost many thousand
lives; and such as some Orthodox Divines are wont to express with a kind of
scruple, as not daring to speak out; For me, as I have learned to lay my hand
on my mouth where God and his Church have been silent, and to adore those
mysteries which I cannot comprehend, so I think it is possible we may wrong our
selves in an over-cautious fear of delivering sufficiently-revealed truths;
such I take this to be which we have in hand; wherein as God has not been
sparing to declare himself in his word, So the Church of England our dear
Mother has freely opened her self in such sort as if she meant to meet with
the future scruples of an over-tender posterity.

Certainly there can be but two ways wherein he can be imagined to be present,
and received; either corporally, or spiritually: That he should be corporally
present at once, in every part of every Eucharistical Element through the
World, is such a Monster of opinion as utterly overthrowes the truth of his
humane body, destroys the nature of a Sacrament, implies a world of
contradictions, baffles right reason, transcends all faith, and in short,
confounds Heaven and Earth; as we might easily show in all particulars if it
were the drift of my discourse to meddle with those which profess themselves
not ours: who yet do no less then we cry down the gross and Capernaitical
expression which their Pope Nicholas prescribed to Berengarius; and cannot but
confess that their own Card. Bellarmine advises this phrase of Christ's
corporal presence should be very sparingly, and warily taken up in the hearing
of their people: but my intention only is to satisfy those Sons of the Church,
who, disclaiming from all opinion of Transubstantiation, do yet willingly
embrace a kind of irresolution in this point, as holding it safest not to
inquire into the manner of Christ's presence.

What should be guilty of this nice doubtfulness I cannot conceive, unless it
be a misconstruction of those broad speeches, which antiquity (not suspecting
so unlikely commentaries) has upon all occasions been wont to let fall
concerning these awful mysteries. For what those Oracles of the Church have
divinely spoken in reverence to the Sacramental union of the sign, and the
thing signified in this sacred business, has been mistaken, as literally and
properly meant to be predicated of the outward Element: hence have grown those
dangerous errors, and that inexplicable confusion which has since infested the
Church.

When all is said, nothing can be more clear, then that in respect of bodily
presence the Heavens must contain the glorified humanity of Christ until his
return to judgment. As therefore the Angel could say, to the devout Mary's
after Christ's resurrection seeking for him in his grave, He is risen, he is not
here; so they still say to us seeking for his glorious body here below: He is
ascended, he is not here; It should absolutely lose the nature of an humane
body if it should not be circumscriptible. Mar. 16.6.
Glorification does not bereave it of the truth of being what it is. It is a
true humane body, and therefore can no more according to the natural being even
of a body glorified, be many where is at once, then according to his personal
being it can be separated from that Godhead which is at once every where; Let
it be therefore firmly settled in our souls as an undoubted truth, That the
humane body of Christ in respect of corporal presence is in Heaven, whither he
visibly ascended, and where he sits on the right hand of the Father, and whence
he shall come again with glory: a parcel of our Creed which the Church learned
of the Angels in Mount Olivet; who taught the gazing disciples that this same
Jesus which was taken up from them into Heaven, shall so come in like manner as
they saw him go into Heaven, which was with wonderful glory and magnificence.
Far be it from us then to think that the blessed humanity of the Son of God
should so disparage it self, as where there is neither necessity nor use of a
bodily descent to steal down, and conveigh himself insensibly from Heaven to
Earth daily, and to hide up his whole sacred body in an hundred thousand
several pixes at once.

It is a wonder that superstition it self is not ashamed of so absurd and
impossible a fancy; which it is in vain for Men to think they can salve up with
a pretense of omnipotence: we question not the power of God, but his will: and
do well know he cannot will absolute contradictions, Deus hoc potenter non
potest, as one said truly.

That which we say of Christ's presence, holds no less of his reception; for so
do we receive him into us, as he is present with us, neither can we corporally
receive that which is bodily absent: although besides the common incongruity of
opinion, the corporal receiving of Christ has in it a further prodigiousness,
and horror: all the Novices of the Roman Schools are now ashamed of their
Popes Dentibus teritur, but when their Doctors have made the best of their own
Tenent, they cannot avoid St. Austins flagitium videtur praecipere; By how much
the humane flesh is and ought to be more dear, by so much more odious is the
thought of eating it, neither let them imagine they can escape the imputation
of an hateful savageness in this act, for that it is not presented to them in
the form of flesh, whiles they profess to know it is so, howsoever it
appears: Let some skilful cook so dress man's flesh in the mixtures of his
artificial hashes, and taste full sauces, that it cannot be discerned by the
sense, yet if I shall afterward understand that I have eaten it, though thus
covertly conveyed, I cannot but abhor to think of so unnatural a diet;
Corporally then to eat (if it were possible) the flesh of Christ, Joh. 6.63.
as it could (in our Saviors own word) profit nothing, so it could be no other
then a kind of religious Cannibalisme, which both nature and grace cannot but
justly rise against.

Since therefore the body of Christ cannot be said to be corporally present, or
received by us, it must needs follow that there is no way of his presence or
receipt in the Sacrament but spiritual, which the Church of England has
labored so fully to express both in her holy Liturgy, and
publickly-authorized homilies, that there is no one point of divine truth which
she has more punctually and plainly laid down before us: What can be more
evident then that which she has said in the second exhortation before the
Communion? thus,

Dearly beloved, forasmuch as our duty is, to render to Almighty God our
heavenly Father most hearty thanks, for that he has given his Son our Savior
Jesus Christ, not only to dye for us, but also, to be our spiritual food and
sustenance, as it is declared unto us, as well by Gods word, as by the holy
Sacraments of his blessed body and blood, etc. Lo, Christ is in this Sacrament
given to us, to be our spiritual food, in which regard also this sacrament is
in the same exhortation called a Godly and heavenly feast, whereto that we may
come holy and clean, we must search and examine our own consciences (not our
chops and mawes) that we may come and be received as worthy Partakers, of such
an Heavenly Table.

But that in the following exhortation is yet more pregnant, that we should
diligently try and examine our faith before we presume to eat of that bread,
and drink of that cup. For as the benefit is great if with a true penitent
heart, and lively faith we receive that holy Sacrament, (for then we
spiritually eat the flesh of Christ, and drink his blood, then we dwell in
Christ, and he in us, we be one with Christ, and Christ with us,) so is the
danger great if we receive the same unworthily. What terms can be more
express? it is bread and wine which we come to receive, that bread and that
wine is sacramental. It is our heart wherewith we receive that sacrament, it is
our faith whereby we worthily receive; this receipt and manducation of the flesh
of Christ is spiritually done, and by this spiritual receipt of him, we are made
one with him, and he with us; by virtue, then, of the worthy receipt of this
sacramental bread and wine we eat the flesh and drink the blood of Christ
spiritually; and there grows hereby a reciprocal union betwixt Christ and us,
neither is he otherwise one with us, then we are one with him, which can be no
otherwise then by the power of his institution, and of our faith.

And that no man may doubt what the drift and purpose of our blessed Savior
was in the institution and recommendation of this blessed sacrament to his
Church, it follows in that passage; And to the end that we should always
remember the exceeding great love of our master and only Savior Jesus Christ
thus dying for us, and the innumerable benefits which by his precious
bloodshedding he has obtained to us, he has instituted and ordained holy
mysteries as pledges of his love, and continual remembrances of his death to
our great and endless comfort: If therefore we shall look upon and take these
sacred elements as the pledges of our Saviors love to us, and remembrances of
his death for us, we shall not need, neither indeed can we require by the
judgment of our Church to set any other value on them: But withal that we may
not slightly conceive of those mysteries, as if they had no further worth then
they do outwardly show, we are taught in that prayer which the Minister
kneeling down at Gods board is appointed to make in the name of all the
communi^ants before the consecration, that whiles we do duly receive those
blessed elements we do in the same act, by the power of our faith eat the
flesh, and drink the blood of Christ; so effectual and inseparable is the
sacramental union of the signs thus instituted by our blessed Lord and
Savior, with the thing thereby signified; for thus is he prescribed to pray;
Grant us therefore gracious Lord so to eat the flesh of thy dear Son Jesus
Christ, and to drink his blood that our sinful bodies may be made clean by his
body, and our souls washed through his most precious blood; and that we may
ever dwell in him, and he in us.

Implying, that so does our mouth and stomach receive the bread and wine as
that in the mean time our souls receive the flesh, and the blood of Christ; now
the soul is not capable of receiving flesh and blood but by the power of that
grace of faith which appropriates it: But that we may clearly apprehend how
these Sacramental acts and objects are both distinguished, and united, so as
there may be no danger of either separation or confusion, that which follows
in the consecratory prayer, is most evident: Hear us O merciful father we
beseech thee, and grant that we receiving these thy creatures of bread and
wine, according to thy Son our Savior Jesus Christ's holy institution, in
remembrance of his death and passion, may be partakers of his most blessed body
and blood, who in the same night that he was betrayed, took bread, and when he
had given thanks he brake it and gave it to his disciples, saying; Take, eat,
this is my body which is given for you, do this in remembrance of me.

What more can be said? what come we to receive outwardly? The Creatures of
bread and wine? To what use? In remembrance of Christ's death and passion? what
do we the whiles receive inwardly? we are thereby made partakers of his most
blessed body and blood: by what means does this come about? By virtue of our
Saviors holy institution: still it is bread and wine in respect of the nature
and essence of it, but so that in the spiritual use of it, it conveyes to the
faithful receiver, the body and blood of Christ; bread and wine is offered to
my eye and hand, and Christ is tendered to my soul. Which yet is more fully (if
possibly it may be) expressed in the form of words prescribed in the delivery
of the bread and wine to the communicant. The body of our Lord Jesus Christ
which was given for thee, preserve thy body and soul into everlasting life, and
take and eat this in remembrance that Christ dyed for thee, and feed on him in
thine heart by faith with thanksgiving, etc. No gloss in the world can make the
words more full and perspicuous: So do we in remembrance of Christ's death take
and eat the sacramental bread with our mouths, as that our hearts do feed upon
the body of Christ by our faith, And what is this feeding upon Christ? but a
comfortable application of Christ and his benefits to our souls? Which is, as
the prayer next following expresses it, Then do we feed on Christ, when by the
blessed merits and death of our blessed Savior, and through faith in his blood
we do obtain remission of our sins, and all other benefits of his passion and
are fulfilled with his grace, and heavenly benediction: Or if we desire a more
ample commentary upon this sacramental repast, and the nourishment thereby
received, the prayer ensuing offers it unto us in these words, We most heartily
thank thee, for that thou have vouchsafed to feed us which have duly received
these holy mysteries with the spiritual food of the most precious body and
blood of thy Son our Savior Jesus Christ, and do assure us thereby of thy
favor and goodness toward u^ and that we be very members incorporate in thy
mystical body, which is the blessed company of all faithful people; and be also
heirs through hope of thy everlasting kingdom by the merits of the most
precious death and passion of thy dear Son. This then is to feed upon Christ:
Lo, the meat and manducation and nourishment are all spiritual, whiles the
elements be bodily and sensible, which the allowed homilies of the Church also
have labored in most significant terms to set forth; Thou must carefully
search and know (says the first sermon concerning the sacrament ( Tome 2.)
what dignities are provided for thy soul, whither thou art come, not to feed
thy senses and belly to corruption, but thy inward man to immortality and life,
nor to consider the earthly creatures which thou see, but the heavenly graces
which thy faith beholds; For this table is not, says Chrysostom, for
chattering jayes but for Eagles, who fly thither where the dead body lies. And
afterward, to omit some other passages, most pregnantly thus; It is well known
the meat we seek for in this supper is spiritual food, the nourishment of our
soul, a Heavenly refection, and not earthly, an invisible meat and not bodily,
a ghostly substance and not carnal; so that to think without faith we may enjoy
the eating and drinking thereof, or that that is the fruition of it, is but to
dream a gross carnal feeding, basely abjecting and binding our selves to the
elements and creatures; whereas by the advice of the council of Nice we ought
to lift up our minds by faith, and leaving these inferior and earthly things,
there seek it where the son of righteousness ever shines. Take this lesson (O
thou that art desirous of this table) of Emissenus a godly father, That when
thou go to the reverend communion to be satisfied with spiritual meats, thou
look up with faith upon the holy body and blood of thy God, thou marvel with
reverence, thou touch it with the mind, thou receive it with the hand of thy
heart, and thou take it fully with the inward Man. Thus that homily in the
voice of the Church of England.

Who now shall make doubt to say that in the Sacrament of the blessed
Eucharist, Christ is only present and received in a spiritual manner? so as
nothing is objected to our senses, but the Elements, nothing but Christ to our
faith; and therefore that it is requisite we should here walk with a wary, and
even foot as those that must tread in the midst betwixt profaneness, and
superstition; not affixing a deity upon the Elements on the one side, nor on
the other sleighting them with a common regard; not adoring the Creatures, not
basely esteeming their relation to that Son of God whom they do really exhibit
to us. Let us not then think it any boldness either to inquire or to determine
of the manner of Christ's presence in the Sacrament; and confidently to say,
that his body is locally in Heaven, spiritually offered to, and received by the
faith of every worthy communicant upon Earth; True it is that in our Saviors
speech, Joh. 6. to believe in Christ, is to eat his flesh and to drink his
blood, even besides and out of the act of this Eucharistical supper; so as
whosoever brings Christ home to his soul by the act of his faith, makes a
private meal of his Savior; but the holy Sacrament superadds a further degree
of our interest in the participation of Christ; for now over and above our
spiritual eating of him, we do here eat him Sacramentally also: every simple
act of our faith feeds on Christ, but here by virtue of that necessary union
which our Saviors institution has made betwixt the sign and the thing
signified, the faithful communicant does partake of Christ in a more peculiar
manner; now his very senses help to nourish his soul, and by his eyes, his
hands, his taste, Christ is spiritually conveyed into his heart; to his
unspeakable and everlasting consolation.

But to put all scruples out of the mind of any reader concerning this point;
Let that serve for the upshot of all, which is expressly set down in the 5th.
Rubric in the end of the Communion set forth as the judgment of the Church of
England both in King Edwards, and Queen Elizabeth's time, though lately upon
negligence omitted in the impression, In these words; Least yet the same
kneeling might be thought or taken otherwise, we do declare, That it is not
meant thereby that any adoration is done, or ought to be done either unto the
sacramental bread and wine there bodily received, or unto any real and
essential presence there being of Christ's natural flesh and blood; For as
concerning the sacramental bread and wine, they remain still in their very
natural substances, and therefore may not be adored; for that were Idolatry to
be abhorred of all faithful Christians; and as concerning the natural body and
blood of our Savior Christ they are in Heaven, and not here for it is against
the truth of Christ's natural body to be in more places then one, at one time,
etc. Thus the Church of England having plainly explicated her self, has left
no place for any doubt concerning this truth; neither is she any changeling in
her judgment, however some unsteddy minds may vary in their conceits; away then
with those nice scruplers, who for some further ends have endeavored to keep
us in an undue suspense, with a ( non licet inquirere de modo) and conclude we
resolutely that there is no truth in divinity more clear then this of Christ's
gracious exhibition, and our faithful reception of him in this blessed
Sacrament.

Babes keep your selves from Idols. Amen.
A LETTER FOR THE OBSERVATION OF THE FEAST OF CHRIST'S NATIVITY.
Sir, with my Loving Remembrance,
IT cannot but be a great grief to any wise and moderate Christian to see
zealous and well meaning souls carried away after the giddy humor of their new
teachers, to a contempt of all holy and reverend antiquity, and to an eager
affectation of novel fancies even whiles they cry out most bitterly against
innovations: When the practice and judgment of the whole Christian world ever
from the days of the blessed Apostles to this present age is pleaded for any
form of government or laudable observation, they are straight taught, That old
things are passed, and that all things are become new; making their word good
by so new, and unheard of an interpretation of Scripture, Whereby they may as
justly argue the introducing of a new Church, a new Gospel, a new Religion,
with the annulling of the old: And that they may not want an all-sufficient
patronage of their fond conceit, our blessed Savior himself is brought in, who
in his sermon on the mount controlled the antiquity of the pharisaical glosses
of the law; Ye have heard that it was said by them of old, thus, and thus, but
I say unto you, etc, as if the Son of God in checking the upstart antiquity, of
a mis-grounded and unreasonable tradition, meant to condemn the truely-antient
and commendable customs of the whole Christian Church; which all sober and
judicious christians are wont to look upon with meet respect and reverence: And
certainly whosoever shall have set down this resolution with himself to slight
those either institutions or practices which are derived to us from the
Primitive times, and have ever since been entertained by the whole church of
Christ upon earth, that man has laid a sufficient foundation of Schism and
dangerous singularity; and does that which the most eminent of the Fathers, St.
Augustine, charge with no less then most insolent madness. For me and my
friend, God give us grace to take the advice which our Savior gives to his
spouse, to Go forth by the footsteps of the Flock, and to feed our Kids beside
the Shepherds tents, (Cant. 1.8.) and to walk in the sure paths of incorrupt
antiquity. For the celebration of the solemn Feasts of our Saviors Nativity,
Resurrection, Ascension, and the coming down of the Holy Ghost, which you say
is cried down by your zealous lecturer one would think there should be reason
enough in those wonderful and unspeakable benefits which those days serve to
commemorate unto us; For, to instance in the late feast of the Nativity, when
the Angel brought the news of that blessed birth to the Jewish shepherds,
Behold, says he, I bring you good tidings of great joy which shall be to all
people; for unto you is borne this day a Savior. If then the report of this
blessing were the best tidings of the greatest joy that ever was, or ever could
be possibly incident into mankind, why should not the commemoration thereof be
answerable? Where we conceive the greatest joy, what should hinder us to
express it in a joyful festivity.

But you are taught to say, the day conferred nothing to the blessing, that
every day we should with equal thankfulness remember this inestimable benefit
of the incarnation of the Son of God, so as a set anniversary day is altogether
needless; know then and consider, that the all wise God, who knew it fit that
his People should everyday think of the great work of the creation, and of the
miraculous deliverance out of the Egyptian servitude, and should daily give
honor to the Almighty creator and deliverer, yet ordained one day of seven for
the more special recognition of these mavelous works; as well knowing how apt
we are to forget those duties wherewith we are only encharged in common without
the designment of a particular rememoration. Besides, the same reason will hold
proportionably against any monthly or annual celebration whatsoever; the
Jews should have been much to blame, if they had not every day thankfully
remembered the great deliverance which God wrought for them from the bloody
design of cruel Haman, yet it was thought requisite (if not necessary) that
there should be two special days of Purim set apart for the anniversary
memorial of that wonderful preservation: The like may be said for the English
Purim, of our November; it is well if, besides the general tie of our
thankfulness, a precise day ordaind by authority can enough quicken our
unthankful dullness to give God his own for so great a mercy; shall we say now,
it is the work of the year, what needs a day? As therefore no day should pass
over our head without a grateful acknowledgment of the great mystery of God
incarnate. So withal, the wisdom of the primitive Church (no doubt by the
direction of the holy Ghost) has pitched upon one special day wherein we
should entirely devote our thoughts to the meditation of this work, which the
Angels of heaven can not enough admire.

But you are told that perhaps we miss of the day since the season is
litigious, uncertain, unknown, and in likelihood other then our December; and
that it is purposely not revealed, that it may not be kept: As to the first, I
deny not, that the just day is not certainly known: The great Savior of the
World that would have his second coming without observation going before it;
would have his first coming without observation following it; he meant to come
down without noise without a recorded notice: Even in the second hundred (so
ancient we are sure this festivity is) there was question, and different
opinions of the season; the just knowledge and determination whereof, matters
nothing at all to the duty of our celebration: Most sure we are that such a day
there was; and no less sure, that it was the happiest day that ever looked
forth into the world; it is all one to us whether this day or that; we content
our selves with this, that it has pleased the Church for many hundred years to
ordain this day for the commemoration of that transcendent blessing; what care
we to stand upon those twelve hours that made up the artificial day wherein
this wonderful work was wrought? which we are sure cannot but be much changed
by so many intercalations; so long and constant a practice of the christian
church, upon so holy grounds is no less warrant to us then if an Angel from
heaven should have revealed unto us the just hour of this blessed Nativity

As to the second, Surely whosoever shall tell you that God did purposely hide
this day from us, that it might escape a celebration, as he concealed the
burial of Moses to avoid the danger of an idolatrous adoration, makes himself a
presumptuous commenter upon the actions of the Almighty. Where did God tell him
so? Or what revelation can he pretend for so bold an assertion? If this were
the matter, why then did not the same God with equal caution conceal the day of
the Passion, Resurrection, Ascension of our blessed Savior, and of the descent
of the Holy Ghost? the observation of all which days, is with no less
vehemence and upon the same danger cried down by these scrupulous persons.
Either therefore let him say that God would have these other feast days
observed because he would have them known to the world, or yield that he did
not therefore conceal the day of the Nativity of Christ, because he would not
have it observed.

But you hear it said, There is popery and superstition in keeping that day;
tell those that suggest so, that they cast a foul slander upon the Saints of
God in the primitive times, upon the holy and learned fathers of the Church who
preached, and wrote for, and kept the feast of Christ's Nativity with sacred
solemnity, many hundred years before popery was hatched; and that they little
know what wrong they do to religion and themselves, and what honor they put
upon that superstition which they profess to detest; in ascribing that to
popery which was the mere act of holy and devout Christianity.

But to color this plea, you are taught that the mystery of iniquity began
early to work, even in the very Apostlick times, and that Antichrist did
secretly put in his claw, before his whole body appeared.

Surely there is singular use wont to be made of this shift by those which
would avoid the countenance of all primitive authority to any displeasing (how
ever lawful and laudable) institutions and practices; So the Anabaptist tells
us that the Baptizing of children is one of the timely workings of the mystery
of iniquity; So the Blasphemous Nearrians of our time tell us that the mystery
of the blessed Trinity of persons in the unity of one Godhead is but an ancient
devise of Antichrist working underhand before his formal exhibition. Every
sect is apt to make this challenge; and therefore it behooves us wisely to
distinguish betwixt those things which Men did as good Christians, and those
which they did as engaged to their own private or to the more common interest
of others. what advantage can we conceive it might be to Antichrist, that
Christ should have a day celebrated to the memory of his blessed Birth; and
that devout Christians should meet together in their holy assemblies to praise
God for the benefit of that happy incarnation? and what other effect could be
expected from so religious a work, but glory to God, and edification to Men?
who can suppose that the enemy of Christ should gain by the honor done to
Christ? Away therefore with this groundless imagination; and let us be so
popish, so superstitious as those holy Fathers, and Doctors of the primitive
Church, famous for learning and piety, who lived and dyed devout observers of
this Christian festival.

But you are bidden to ask what warrant we find in the word of God (which is to
be the rule of all our actions) for the solemn keeping of this day? In answer,
you may if you please tell that questionist, that to argue from Scripture
negatively in things of this nature is somewhat untheological; Ask you him
again with better reason, what Scripture he finds to forbid it? for if it be
unlawful to be done which is not in Gods word commanded, then much rather that
which is not there forbidden cannot be unlawful to be done; General grounds of
edification, decency, expedience, peaceable conformity to the injunctions of
our spiritual governors are in these cases more then enough to build our
practice upon. If it be replied that we are enjoined six days to labor, and
forbidden to observe days and times, (as being a part of the Jewish
paedagogue, two common pretenses wherewith the eyes of the ignorant are wont to
be bleared) know that for the first, it is not so much preceptive as
permissive; neither was it the intention of the Almighty to intersperse the
command of humane affairs in the first Table of his royal law, wherein
himself and his service is immediately concerned; In such like expressions,
may, and, shall are equivalent, and promiscuously used; that instance is
clear and pregnant Genesis 2.16. The Lord, says the Text, commanded the Man,
saying, Eating thou shall eat of every tree in the Garden, which our last
version renders well to the sense, Thou may freely eat of every tree in the
Garden; And if the charge in that fourth commandment were absolute and
peremptory, what humane authority could dispense with those large shreds of
time which are usually cut out of the six days for sacred occasions? what
warrant could we have to intermit our work for a daily lecture, or a monthly
fast, or for an anniversary Fifth of November? and if notwithstanding this
command of God, it be allowed to be in the power of Man, whether Sovereign (as
Constantine appropriated it) or spiritual, to ordain the setting a part of some
set parcels of time to holy uses, why should it be stuck at in the requiring
and observing the pious and useful celebrity of this festival?

As for that other suggestion of the Apostles taxation of observing days and
times, any one that has but half an eye, may see that it has respect to
those Judaicall holy days which were part of the ceremonial law, now long
since out of date; as being of typical signification, and, shadows of things
to come.

Should we therefore go about to revive those Jewish feasts, or did we erect
any new day to an essential part of the worship of God, or place holiness in
it, as such we should justly incurr that blame which the Apostle casts upon the
Galatian, and Colossian false-teachers.

But to wrest this forbiddance to a Christian solemnity which is merely
commemorative of a blessing received, without any prefiguration of things to
come, without any opinion of holiness annexed to the day is no other then an
injurious violence.

Upon all this which has been said, and upon a serious weighing of what ever
may be further alleged to the contrary, I dare confidently affirm that there
is no just reason why good Christians should not with all godly cherefulness
observe this, which that holy father styled the metropolis of all feasts; To
which I add that those which by their example and doctrine slight this day,
causing their people to dishonor it with their worst clothes, with shops
open, with servile works, stand guilty before God of an high and sinful
contempt of that law^ul authority under which they live; for as much as by the
statutes of our land, made by the full concurrence of King and state, this day
is commanded to be kept holy by all English subjects; and this power is backed
by the charge of God, submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the
Lords sake.

If now after all this I should let my pen loose to the suffragant testimonies
whether of antiquity, or of modern divines, and reformed churches, I should
try your patience, and instead of a letter send you a volume; Let it suffice
that ever since the second hundred year after Christ, this feast has without
contradiction obtained in the church of God; and has received many noble
Elogies, and passionate inforcements from the learned and holy Fathers of the
church; amongst the rest that of Gregory Nazianzen is so remarkable that I may
not omit it; as that which sets forth the excess of joyful respect wherewith
the ancient Christians were wont to keep this day.

In his oration upon the day of the Nativity of Christ.
Let us (says he) celebrate this feast, not in a panegyrical but divine, not in
a worldly but supersecular manner; not regarding so much our selves or ours, as
the worship of Christ, etc. And how shall we effect this? Not by crowning our
doors with garlands, nor by leading of dances; nor adorning our streets, not by
feeding our eyes, not by delighting our ears with songs, not by effeminating
our smell with perfumes, not with humouring our taste with dainties, not with
pleasing our touch, not with silken and costly clothes, etc. not with the
sparkling of jewels, not with the luster of Gold, not with the artifice of
counterfeit colors, etc. let us leave these things to Pagans for their pomps,
etc. But we, who adore the word of the father, if we think fit to affect
delicacies, let us feed our selves with the dainties of the law of God, and
with those discourses especially which are fitting for this present festival.
So that learned eloquent father, to his auditors of Constantinople.

Whereto let me (if you please) have leave to add one or two practical
instances: One shall be of the good Emperor Theodosius lying now for eight
months under the severe censure of Bishop Ambrose; when the feast of the
Nativity drew near, what moan did that religious Prince make to his courtiers,
that he was by that reresolute Bishop shut out (for his blood-guiltiness) from
partaking with the assembly in that holy service; Histor. Tr^par. (...). ^. c 3^
and what importunate means did he make for his admission! had that gracious
Emperor been of the diet of these new divines, he would have slighted that
repulse; and gladly taken this occasion of absence from that superstitious
solemnity; or had one of these grave monitors been at his elbow, he might have
saved that pious Prince the expense of many sighs, and tears which now he
bestowed upon his abstention from that dearly affected devotion.

The other shall be an history of as much note as horror; Nicephor. l. 7. c. 6.
too clear a proof of the ancient celebration of this festival; It was under
the Tyranny of Dioclesian and his co-partner Maximinus, that twenty thousand
Christans, which were met to celebrate the feast of this blessed Nativity in
the large Church of Nicomedia, were made an Holocaust, and burnt, together with
that goodly Fabric, to ashes, on that day.

Lo, so great a multitude as twenty thousand christians, of all ages, of both
sexes, had not thus met together in a time of so mortal a danger, to celebrate
this feast, if the holy zeal of their duty had not told them they ought to keep
that day which these novellers teach us to contemn.

Now let these bold men see of how contrary a disposition they are to these
blessed Martyrs, which as this day sent up their souls (like to Manoahs Angel)
to heaven in those flames.

After thus much said; I should be glad to know (since reason there can be
none) what authority induces these gainsayers to oppose so ancient and received
a custom in the Church of God; you tell me of a double testimony cited to this
purpose, the one of Socrates the Historian; which I suppose is fetched out of
his 5th. book of Ecclesiastical story, chap. 21. where, upon occasion of the
feast of Easter, he passes his judgment upon the indifferent nature of all
those ancient feasts which were of use in the primitive times; showing that the
Apostles never meant to make any law for the keeping of festival days; nor
imposed any mulct upon the not keeping them, but left men to the free
observation thereof.

For answer whereunto, I do not tell you that this author is wont to be
impeached of Novatianisme; and therefore may seem fit to yield patronage to
such a client; I rather say that (take him at the worst) he is no enemy to our
opinion, or practice; we agree with him, that the Apostles would have men free
from the servitude of the Jewish observation of days; that they enacted no law
for set festivalls, but left persons and places so to their liberty in these
cases, that none should impose a necessity upon other; this were to be pressed
upon a Victor Bishop of Rome, who violently obtruded a day for the celebration
of Easter upon all Churches (supposing in the mean while an Easter universally
kept of all christians, though not on the same day) this makes nothing against
us, who place no holiness in the very hours, nor plead any Apostolical
injunction for days, nor tie any person or Church to our strict calender, but
only hold it fit out of our obedience to the laws both of our church and
kingdom, to continue a joyful celebration of a memorial day to the honor of
our blessed Savior.

But that other authority which you tell me was urged to this purpose, I
confess, does not a little amaze me; it was, you say, of King James our
learned Sovereign of late and blessed Memory; whose testimony was brought in
before the credulous people (not without the just applause of a Solomon-like
wisdom) as crying down these festivals, and in a certain speech of his
applauding the purity of the church of Scotland above that of Geneva for that
it observed not the common feasts of Christ's Nativity, and Resurrection, etc.
Is it possible that any mouth could name that wise and good King in such a
cause, whom all the world knows to have been as zealous a patron of those
festivals, as any lived upon earth? and if he did let fall any such speech
before he had any Down upon his chin, and whilst he was under the serule, what
candor is it to produce it now to the contradiction of his better experience,
and ripest judgment? Nay, is it not famously known that it was one of the main
errands of his journey into his native Kingdom of Scotland, to reduce that
church unto a conformity to the rest of the Churches of Christendom in the
observation of these solemn days? One of the five Articles of Perth.
and to this purpose, was it not one of the main businesses which he set on
work in the Assembly at Perth, and wherein he employed the service of his
worthy Chaplain Doctor Young, Dean of Winchester, to recall, and re-establish
these festivalls?

And accordingly, in pursuance of his Majesty's earnest desire this way, was it
not enacted in that Assembly that the said feasts should be duly kept?
Doubtless it was, and that not without much wise care and holy caution; which
act because it cannot be had every where, and is well worthy of your notice,
and that which clears the point in hand, I have thought good here to insert:
the tenor of it therefore is this.

As we abhor the superstitious observation of Festival days by the Papists,
and detest all licentious, and profane abuse thereof by the common sort of
professors; so we think that the inestimable benefits received from God, by our
Lord Jesus Christ his Birth, Passion, Resurrection, Ascension, and sending down
of the Holy Ghost, was commendably, and godly remembered at certain particular
days and times by the whole church of the World, and may be also now;
Therefore the Assembly ordaines, that every Minister shall upon these days
have the commemoration of the foresaid inestimable benefits, and make choice of
several and pertinent texts of Scripture, and frame their doctrine and
exhortation there to, and rebuke all superstitious observation, and licentious
profanation thereof.

I could (if it were needful) give you other proofs of King James his zeal for
these days; but what should I spend time in proving there is a sun in the
Heaven, and sight in that Sun? The name of that great King suffers for his
excess this way. Shortly then, the Church of God, his anointed, law,
antiquity, reason are for us in this point, and I doubt not but you will gladly
be on their side; away with all innovations and frivolous quarrels, we were
divided enough before, and little needed any new rents. The God of peace quiet
all these distempers, and unite our hearts one to another, and all to himself.

Farewell in the Lord.
TO My Reverend and worthily Dear Friend, Mr. WILLIAM STRUTHERS: One of the
Preachers of EDINBOURGH.
THe have of your Letters (my reverend and worthy Mr. Struthers) was not so
great, as their welcome, which they might well challenge for your name; but
more for that love and confidence which they imported: thus must our Friendship
be fed, that it may neither feel death nor age.

The substance of your Letter was partly Relation, and partly Request; For the
first; Rumor had in part prevented you, and brought to my ears those Stirs,
which happened after my departure; and namely, together with that impetuous
Protestation, some rude deportment of ill-governed Spirits toward his Majesty.
Alas! (my dear Brother) this is not an usage for Kings, they are the nurses of
the Church; if the child shall fall to scratching and biting the breast, what
can it expect but stripes and hunger? your Letter professes that his Majesty
sent you away in peace, and joy, and why would any of those rough-hewn Zelots
send him away in coffeehouse? But this was (I know) much against your heart,
whose often protestations assured me of your wise moderation in these things.
How earnestly have you professed to me, that, if you were in the Church of
England (such was your indifferency in these indifferent matters) you would
make no scruple of your ceremonies? yea, how sharp has your censure been of
those refractaries amongst us that would forgo their stations, rather then
yield to these harmeless impositions? So much the more, therefore, do I marvel
how any delator could get any ground from you, whereon to place an accusation
in this kind! But this, and the rest of those historical passages, being only
concerning things past, have their end in my notice; Let me rather turn my pen
to that part which calls for my advise, which, for your sake, I could well
wish, were worthy to be held such, as that your self and your colleagues might
find cause to rest in it: howsoever, it shall be honest and hearty, and no
other then I would, in the presence of God, give to my own soul! Matters (you
think) will not stand long at this point, but will come on further and press
you to a resolution! What is to be done? will you hear me counselling as a
friend, as a Brother? Since you foresee this; meet them in the way, with a
resolution to intertain them and persuade others. There are five points in
question: The solemn festivities: The private use of either Sacrament:
Geniculation at the Eucharist: Confirmation by Bishops. For these, there may be
a double Plea insinuated (by way of comparison) in your Letters; Expedience in
the things themselves; Authority in the commander: some things are therefore to
be done; because they are commanded: some others are therefore commanded;
because they are to be done: obedience pleads for the one, justice for the
other; If I shall leave these in the first rank, I shall satisfy, but if in
the second I shall supererogate; which if I do not, I shall fail of my hopes.

Let me profess to you seriously. I did never so busily and intentively study
these rituall matters, as I have done since your Letters called me unto this
task. Since which time (I speak boldly) I made no spare either of hours, or
papers, Neque enim magna exiliter, nec seria perfunctorie, as I have learned of
our Nazianzen; and besides, this, under one name, seemed a common cause, and
therefore too worthy of my care.

These are not (you know) matters of a day old, neither is it his Majesty's
desire, to trouble you with new coins, but to rub up the rusty and obliterate
face of the ancient. And surely, the more my thoughts were bent upon them, the
more it appeared to me, that his Majesty's intention is to deal with your
Church, as he has lately done with your Universities; From which, I know not
what indiscreet and idle zeal had banished all higher degrees; the name of a
School-Doctor was grown out of date; only one Graduate (that I heard of) at St.
Andrews, outlived that injury of times: Now comes his Majesty (as one born to
the honor of learning) and restores the Schools to their former glories: This
is no innovation (you will grant) but a renovation.

No other is that which his Majesty wishes to your Church: For, tell me I
beseech you (my dear Mr. Struther) do not you think that those which took upon
them the reformation of your Church went somewhat too far? And (as it is in the
fable) inwrapped the Stork together with the Cranes? I know your ingenuity
such, as you cannot deny it: This you will grant apparently in the
Church-patrimony (witness your own learned and zealous invective how miserably
spoiled) in the exauthoration of Episcopal office and dignity, in the
demolition of Churches, and too many other of this stamp; so violent was that
holy furor of piety: that hence it might well appear, what difference there is,
betwixt the orderly proceedings of princely authority, and popular tumult: And
why should you not yield me this in the business questioned?

Do but consider how far it is safe for a particular Church to depart from the
ancient and universal, and you cannot be less liberal: Surely no Christian can
think it a slight matter, what the church diffused through all times and
places, has either done or taught For doctrine or manners there is no
question, and why should it be more safe to leave it in the holy institutions
that concern the outward forms of Gods service? Novelty is a thing full of
envy and suspicion, and why less in matters of rite then doctrine? The Church
is the mother of us all, the less important those things are which (in the
power of a parent) she injoynes, the more hateful is the detrectation of our
observance; you remember the question of the Syrians wise Servant; Father, if
he had commanded thee some great matter would thou not have done it? True it
is, that every Nation has her own rites, gestures, customs, wherein it was
ever as free for it to differ from the rest of the World, as the world from it,
yet in the mean time the sacred affairs of God, have been ever acknowledged to
have one common fashion of performance, in those points especially wherein has
been an universal agreement, every face has his own favor, his own lines,
distinct from all others, yet is there a certain common habitude of countenance
and disposition of the forhead, eyes, cheeks, lips common unto all, so as who,
under this pretense of difference, shall go about to raise an immunity from
such ceremonies, do no other then argue, That because there is a diversity of
proportions of faces, we may well want a brow or a chin.

There is nothing that the pontificians do so commonly and with so much noise
upbraid us with, as our discession from the mother church, that is, as they
interpret, the Roman, neither is there any one amongst all the loads of their
reproaches that has wrought us more envy then this. And how do we free our
selves from the danger of this odious crimination, but thus (not to stand upon
the imperious title of motherhood) That since for order sake, we acknowledged
this primacy of the Western Church, we never departed one inch from the Roman,
save where she is perfidiously gone from God, and her self? Now, the cases
questioned are for the most part only such, as you will confess before the
suspicion of Antichristian Apostasy to have obtained each where in the church.
Begin if you please with the solemn festivities, turn over (I beseech you) the
histories of times, and places; you shall never find where these were either
newly appointed, or not constantly and continuedly observed in the church of
God. I confess with Socrates that neither Christ nor any Apostle enacted a law
for these, but withal, I must put you in mind, that what he denies to
constitution, he grants to custom, and, observatio inveterata (that I may
speak with Tertullian) praeveniendo statum facit.

As for the solemn feast of Easter which the Ancyran counsel called Diem
magnum, how hotly the Church (even then in her swathing bands) contended about
it, all the World knows. I speak nothing of the friendly differences of
Policarpus and Anacletus, nor of the Angel of Hermes; The East and West were in
this point fearfully divided; one part pleads a tradition from John and Philip,
the other from Peter and Paul, both sides fought long and sore; at last the
Roman Victor won the day, ( postquam Asiae Episcopos fulmine sacro perculisset)
Let Irenaeus deeply censure him as a furious disturber of the public peace; I
meddle with neither part: This strife at last well laid, is after revived by
the Syrian Divines? How strongly does the famous Nicene Council oppose it self
to these now Tesseradecatites (as those times called them) yea what other cause
was there (except the madnesses of Arrius and his followers, the Meletians and
Colluthians) of calling that venerable assembly together? after all this what
discourses passed betwixt Leo the first, Archbishop of Reme and Paschasinus
Lylibetanus, were needless to rehearse; and, how hot Chrysostom was in this
cause, need no other proof then, that, (as Socrates witnesses) he took away the
Churches from them which tied Easter to the fourteenth Moon. Now, then,
wherefore (I beseech you) was all this Asian conflict, wherefore this triumph
of Victor, wherefore this infamous brand of the Quartadecimani?

Wherefore were those paschal Letters of the ancient, or golden number, or the
calculations of the Bishops of Alexandria, or the curious determinations of the
Nicene fathers, or the nice reckonings of Leo and Paschasinus, if this might
have passed for lawful, with one breath to deny the day, and with one dash to
blot it out of the holy Calender? certainly the ancients knew not how to be
thus witty, neither durst they thus boldly cut that knot, in the untying
whereof, perhaps, they overspent their care and diligence. O ridiculous head of
antiquity, if this short course might have been safely held in those former
ages! Yea, tell me, I pray you, in all your readings, where ever you met with
any man (besides those whom the Church has held worthy the black mark of
heresy) who either denied all observations of this solemnity, or approved the
refusal of it by others? I can name you Aerius, a man blemished with more then
the scars of one heresy; And what (says he) is the Pasch, that you keep? you
are again addicted to Jewish fables; we must keep no pasch, for Christ our
pasch is offered for us, and I can show you Epiphanius flying in his face with
this just reply, Who is likely to know more of these matters? this seduced
wretch which is yet living in the World, or those witnesses which have been
before us, and had the tradition of the Church with them, which received from
their fathers, that which, their fathers received from their forefathers, and
still retains what they taught both for faith and tradition?

The same reason is there for the other feasts. Unto this of the Easter (that I
may speak in Leo's words to the Bishops of Sicily) is added the sacred
solemnity of Penticost in memory of the coming of the holy Ghost, which depends
upon the time of the paschal feast: Neither did Eusebius doubt to call this
festivitatum omnium principem; You know how honorable mention is made of it by
Gregory Nazianzen, The Jew (says he) keeps feast days, but according to the
letter; the Gentile keeps feast days, but according to the flesh; we keep
feast days also, but that we may say or do something according to the Spirit;
and soon after, The Hebrews keep their Penticost, and we keep it as we do some
other Jewish rites, but they Typically, we Mystically, we celebrate Penticost
for the coming of the holy Ghost, as the day set for the performance of this
promise and the fulfilling of our hope, and how great a mystery is this, how
sacred. -- I cannot therefore pass over that (...) of our Centurists which can
say there is scarce any express mention of any of the feasts in antiquity,
besides Easter; I may not admit all the bedroll that Polydore Virgill inserts
into the Apostolical solemnities, I had rather hold the midway between both.
That memorable place of Austin is to me in stead of a thousand witnesses,
neither need we care for other evidence whilst we have one so absolute, you
know where to find it, in the 118. Epistle to Januarius, Illa autem, quae non
Scripta sed tradita custodimus, quae quidem toto terrarum orb observantur,
dantur intelligi, vel ab ipsis Apostolis, vel plenariis conciliis (quorum est
in Ecclesia saluberrima authoritas) commendata, atque statuta retineri; sicut
quod domini passio, and resurrectio, and ascensio in coelum, and adventus de
coelo spiritus sancti, anniversaria solemnitate celebrantur, and si quod aliud
occurrerit; quod servatur ab universa, (quacunque se diffundit) Ecclesia.

But if these feasts could not show so ancient and noble a pedigree, what
hinders that the Church may not appoint certain days to the blessed memory of
these excellent benefits? Doubtless, this right she has heretofore challenged
to her self in lesser occasions, and I do not find any man that ever accused
her of rashness, or presumption, how solemn the days of Purim were to the
Jews, is known to all, denied of none, and their ((...)) feast of Dedication
(which Castalio affectedly calls Renovalia) set a part to the memory, not so
much of the temple, as the altar recovered from former profanation, our Savior
himself (you know) honested with his presence: look on the history of the
Maccabees (that book, if for matter of faith it be Apocryphal, yet has Canon
enough for matter of fact) you shall find that when Nicanor (the deadly enemy
of the Jews) was discomfited, and slain, a day was appointed by public
authority (next before Mardokees feast) to be kept anniversarily sacred unto
the memory of that deliverance and victory: and what other do we in this happy
Island, whiles we yearly celebrate those two blessed days, to the miracle of
the preservation of our King, Church, State, with the joy both of love, and
duty; then do the Streets of your Edenbourgh smoke with many thankful fires,
and your Arthures-seat flames with the bon-fires of your triumph and
exultation; and shall the days of Christ, wherein we were graciously delivered
from the jaws of hell, carry from us less joy and celebrity: Surely your
church shall abate nothing of her purity, in joining her self to all the rest
of the world, ancient and modern, in the observation of the feast of her
Savior.

As for the private administration of both the Sacraments; the difference of
time, or place, cannot be of that value, as that for it, the participation of
those divine mysteries should be neglected; there is a direct precept for
either sacrament, given by the heavenly author of both, and commended by the
hands of the Apostles to the succeeding Church, there is no precept of time or
place, and shall we omit that which Christ has commanded, for that which he
commanded not?

The holy mysteries are as the body, circumstances are as the clothes, it were
to be wished that a goodly beautiful body, should be fitly suited with clothes
of due colors and fashions, but if it should fall out (through extremity of
want) that there must be a meet elegancy lacking in the clothes, shall we
therefore despise the body, and cast it out for an unprofitable carcass? If
there did not a great necessity lie upon the sacraments, if there did not much
divine consolation flow from them, why would Christ leave them to his own
spouse the church as the precious pledges of his love? A necessity of the means
no man can deny, the necessity of the end is not undeservedly litigious. Indeed
God has not bound himself to any means (good reason his omnipotency should be
free) but he has thought good to bind us unto means; so as whosoever shall
wittingly and wilfully omit these saving institutions, is justly guilty of the
violation of so holy an ordinance, and withal of his own judgment. The
dilation of the sign of that old covenant you know how heavy it lay upon holy
Moses, and the voluntary neglect of that other Sacrament (beyond the double day
appointed) was wont (you know to be punished with no less then excision from
the Congregation of Israel, and is there less necessity, less use of the
Evangelical Sacraments?

To follow this instance a little further; tell me (I pray you) were not both
those ancient Sacraments accustomed unto private roofs? Of the Paschal dish
there can be no doubt, that holy feast was by the author of it destined to the
private families of his Israel: perhaps you will stick a little at the other. I
do not tell you of Abraham, of Zipporah; look but upon the forerunner of
Christ, you will find it likely, that his circumcision was within doors; his
mother Elizabeth was either present, or not far off at the ceremony (as it is
most probable) she changed his name, upon the act. Now it could not be, that
the eighth day of her childbirth could allow her to go forth, whose uncleanness
by the law pent her up for thirty days; But what do I urge this uncertainty?
still by the tradition of the Jews, either the Synagogue, or the chamber, is
indifferently allowed to this act. And why should the Sacrament of the new law
be so affixed to our Churches, that, not necessity it self should be able to
fetch these wholesome remedies home to our houses? sure I am the fathers of the
ancient Church were of another mind; who (before the fancy of opus operatum was
hatched) conceived such necessity of the Sacraments, that Cyprian can tell you
of Clinici, as well as Peripateitci, that others in case of extremity would
have no difference made of land, or water, house or way, bed or pavement. And
how is it that our liberty has made us more strict, or our straightness has
made us more free? more strict for the place, more free for the conceit of
necessity.

But if privacy be so opposite to the nature of a Sacrament, why may it not be
avoided, even in a parlour? for in such a case, the Church removes thither, the
walls (you think) conferr nothing, the people are by the order of the Church
commanded to assemble in a due frequence to the honor of either sacrament, so
as now I see not other difference but this; Those which, in the case of some
private fast, can be content for their preaching to change the Church into a
chamber, in the case of baptism, make dainty to change a chamber into a Church.

For geniculation in the Eucharist, I am deceived if ever ceremony could
complain of a more unjust displeasure, or plead better desert. For the
Antiquity of it, those that fetch it from Honorius, are ill heralds. They might
know that Averroes (an age before him) could say (in a misprision of the
gesture) Christiani adorant quod edunt; and the best of the Fathers many ages
before him, Nemo manducat nisi prius adoraverit; For the expedience, what
business can pass betwixt Heaven and Earth, God and Man, so worthy of
reverence, as that, wherein Man receives God; even the smallest gifts, we
receive from Princes upon our knees, and now, when the Prince of our peace
gives himself to us, shall we grudg to bow. I know the old challenge,
Artolatry. But shall others superstition make us unreverent? Shall not God have
our knees, because Idols have had the knees of others? But what do I press this
to you, who professed to me (if I remember well) your approbation hereof in our
English Congregations: The Sacrament is every where the same; Nothing but want
of use has bred a conceit of uncouthness in that, which custom would approve
and commend.

As for confirmation by Bishops; I need to say little, because it little
concerns you, as an action appropriate to superiors; neither (I think) do you
envy it to them. That the ceremony it selt is both of ancient and excellent
use, I know you will not deny; for the one, Melancton gives it the praise of,
Utilis ad erudiendos homines, and retinendos in vera agnitione Dei. For the
other, Zuinglius can assure you, Confirmationem tum fumpsisse exordium, eum
vulgo caeptum est infantes tingi. In regard of both, reverend Calvin wishes it
again restored to the Church, with no small fervency: all the doubt is in the
restriction to Bishops, wherein I will only send you to learned Bucer; signum
impositionis manuum, etiam soli episcopi praebebant, and non absque ratione,
sive enim sit foedus Domini baptizatis confirmandum; sive reconciliandi qui
gravius peccaverunt, sive ecclesiis ministri ordinandi, haec omnia ministeria
maxim decent eos, quibus ecclesiarum cura demandata est! This, as it was done
only at first, by the Apostles, in the case of the Samaritans, so from them was
by the Church derived to the Bishops, as Chrysostom directs, praepositis suis,
as Cyprian, and Austin speak; But what need I cite Fathers, or counsels for
that, which worthy Calvin himself both confesses, and teaches; Certainly
nothing but continuance and abuse has distasted these things, which (if time
had been their friend) never wanted that which might procure them grace and
respect from the World.

For their own sakes therefore, I need not doubt to say, that all these are
worthy of your good intertainment; much more then, when they come to you with
the billets of authority in their hands; were they but things in the lowest
rank of indifferency, the power that commands them, might challenge their
welcome, how much more then when they have an intrinsecall worthiness to speak
for them? Your Letter has well insinuated what the power of Princes is, in
things of middle natures; whereof your Apostles rule will eternally hold, not
for fear, but for conscience. Indeed, wherein is the power of royal authority,
if not in these things? Good and evil have their set limits, determined by God
himself, only indifferent things have a latitude allowed for the exercise of
humane commands, which if it might be resisted at pleasure, what could follow
but an utter confusion of all things?

This ground, as it has found just place in your own breast, so were very fit
to be laid, by all your public discourses, in the minds of the people, as that
which would not a little rectify them, both in judgment and practice.

There is no good heart whom it would not deeply wound, to hear of the least
danger of the dissipation of your Church; God in Heaven forbid any such
mischief, our prayers shall be ever for your safety; but if any inconvenience
should, on your parts, follow upon the lawful act of authority, see ye, how ye
can wash your hands, from the guiltiness of this evil. This is (I hope) but
your fear; Love is in this sense full of suspicions, and commnoly projects the
worst; It is Nazianzens advise, Dum secundo vento navigas, naufragium time,
tutior eris a naufragio, adjutorem tibi ac soci^m adjungens timorem. Far, far
is it from the heart of our Gracious Sovereign (who holds it his chief glory to
be amicus sponsae) to intend ought that might be prejudicial to your Church.
If his late journey, his laboursome conferences, his toylsome endeavors, his
beneficial designs have not evinced his love to you, what can do it? And can
any of yours think that this affection can stand with a will to hurt you? I
know nothing (if I may except his own soul) that he loves better then your
Church, and State, and if he did not think this a fruit of his love, he would
be silent; what shall he gain by this, but that advantage which he promises to
himself of your good, in your assimilation to other churches; a matter wherein
I need not tell you there is both honor and strength.

The mention whereof draws me (toward the closure of my long letter) whether
to an Apology, or interpretation of my self; belike some captious hearers took
hold of words spoken in some Sermon of mine that sounded of too much
indifferency in these businesses ( ubi bos herbam, vipera venenum, as he said)
as if I had opened a gap to a lawless freedom, in teaching that no church
should prescribe to other; that each should sit peaceably down with her own
fashions; but did I say (you that heard can clear me) that one Church should
not be moved with the good example of other? that there are not certain sacred
observations, which should be common to all churches? that though one Church
might not prescribe to other (because they are sisters) one King may not
prescribe to two Churches, whereof he is head? None of these, which I hate as
monstrous; examples may move, authority may press the use of things
indifferent, expedient, and it is odious to seem more holy then all others, or
to seem more wise then our heads.

You have my opinon at large (my loving and beloved Mr. Struther) how pleasing
it may be, I know not, how well meant, I know, if your letter were an history,
my answer is proved a volume, My love and desire of your satisfaction has made
me (against my use) tedious. How well were every word bestowed, if it might
settle you where I would; howsoever my true endeavor looks for your
acceptance, and my affections and prayers shall ever answer yours: who am

Your unfeignedly loving friend and Fellow Laborer, Jos. Hall.
Waltham Abbey. October. 3. Return my thanks and kind remembrance to those
worthy Gentlemen from whom you sent me commendations; and to your Wife and all
our Friends.



Clarissimo viro D. Baltasari Willio S. Theol. D. ET In Bremensi Ecclesia
Professori Celeberrimo Gratiam ac Pacem.
SI quam mihi misisti schedulam, censores tui perlegissent, (frater admodum
reverende) non opus fuisset, ut ego judicium hoc meum qualecunque,
interponerem; facile profecto illi (siquis pudor) quam tibi temere objectarunt
calumniam, and ultro revocassent: Tanto enim cum candore animi, tamque
irrefragrabilibus indiciis, te ab illis sive criminationibus, seu vero
impaectae haereseos suspicionibus quibuscunque, in hisce chartis Liberasti; ut,
post hujusmodi Apologiam, ipsa non habeat invidia, quod tibi deinceps objicere
possit, ede literas tuas, responso meo parces: quandoquidem tamen meam de
quibusdam commentariorum tuorum locis sententiam ita ardenter desideras, non
possum non tibi in re tantilla satisfacere: Hoc vero inprimis ora obturet
cavillantium, quod ejusmodi elegeris operis tui patronos; alios profecto
quaesivisses, si in Arminii, nedum Socini, castra transfugere voluisses: Non D.
Poliandrum, Walaeum, Thysium, Triglandum, sidera pridem in Dordraceno caelo
conspicua; quorum insuper censuris ista tua tam modeste subjeceris, aut
probanda, aut, si foret opus, corrigenda.

Loca quae offendiculo fuisse ais, examinavi sedulo; nihil prorsus est in prima
praefatione tua, quod vel obtorto collo trahi possit ad heterodoxam aliquam
gratiae divinae universalitatem stabiliendam; sed and illa in Zachar. 4.
ejusdem omnino census, nihil habent errori alicui affine: Ostendunt tantum
manifestum gratiae divinae, succedentibus seculis, erga Ecclesiam suam, in
Lunimis salvifici expansione one ampliore, clarioreque, specimen, and
incrementum; quo quid ver^us cogitari potest? Conquirunt profecto and fingunt
istic errores malevo^^, non inveniunt: Absolutam praedestinationem negat
praefatio posterior; sed, eo lensu, quo clarissimus collega tuus, D. Lud.
Crotius, Syntagmatis page 978. non sine respectu ad ipsam decreti executionem;
decreti inquis electionis; sundamentum Christus est, conditio salvandis
implenda; fides, and salvandis, dixisti implenda; non in eligendis praevisa,
and praer^quisita; quis sanus aliter dixerit?

Quae de reprobatione definiisti, non alia sunt quam quae a Theologis
Dordracenis, ex professo tradita sunt: Nec enim aliud est, Deum ex absoluta
voluntate neminem excludere a gratia, and aeterno exitio destinare, quam, Deum
neminem absque intuitu peccati damnare voluisse; culpam ergo reprobationis in
mortalium pertinacia and incredulitate haerere tutissime, verissimeque
determinasti.

Analysin quod spectat loci illius celeberrimi ad Romans 9. norunt Dordraceni
omnes, me non monuisse modo, sed and pro concione publica, obnixe etiam
efflagitasse, ut ad hoc ipsum examen, tota de praedestinatione controversia
revocaretur, ab utraque authorum Litigantium part tentatum est hoc palam:
subque praelo non uno; quo autem successu, silere mavelim. Certe dum alii
rigidiorem sectantur viam, in absolutam Dei potestatem, voluntatemque, absque
ulla ratione peccati, rejicientes plurimorum perditionem; alii libertatis
humanae Parasiti, ita sui juris faciunt homines ac si nulli omnino decreto
subjicerentur, utrinque satis periculose peccatur: deseritur, medium tenens,
veritas; quae tamena moderatis quibusque ingeniis officiose colitur: Quod tu
dum facis, tuto profitere te Synodi Orthodoxae Dordracenae Theologis,
nullatenus adversari; quoties enim quamque rotunde celeberrimi illi doctores
professi sunt, Deum neminem damnare aut damnationi destinare, nisi ex
consideratione peccati? ut Britanni nostri, Artic. 1. These. 5. Sed and fratres
Hassiercos multis hoc argumentis comprobasse palam est: Nec qui Theologorum
omnium, accuratius expressiusve istud docuerunt, quam Bremenses vestri; nec
abludit ipsa Synodi vox, quae reprobationem ipsam definiens, praeteritos eos
esse, ait, quos ex liberrimo, justissimo, irreprehensibili and immutabili
beneplacito in communi miseria in quam se sua culpa praecipitarunt,
praeteritionem, de relectionemque (Synodi verba agnoscimus) ac deinde, aeternae
propter suam infidelitatem, and alia peccata punitionis decretum quis sanus
inficietur? Distinctionem illam inter negativam reprobationem, sive non
electionem, and positivam, sive praeparationem poenae eorum qui in statu
corruptionis relicti, judicium sibi meritissimum accersunt, quis non libenter
agnoscat? Resistere nos nimis saepe, Gratiae divinae ad conversionem nostram
nos importune satis invitanti, urgentique, quis negit? Modo concedatur and
illud; esse quandam peculiarem gratiam sive per Dei sapientiam, sive per ejus
potentiam administratam; cui homo, qui per eam vocatur, non resistit, and quae
a nullo duro cord respuitur, quod tu (cum Theologis Leydensibus, (ut and illi
cum S. Augustino) rectissime asseruisti. Sed quid ego telam tuam retexo?
Oculatus oportet adversarius sit, qui in hisce novem de Reprobratione
sectionibus, quicquam invenerit, quod veritati divinae, sanctaeque charitati
non sit omni modo consentaneum.

Mitior Paulo fortasse videri potest illa, quae de sacrae caenae privata
administratione moveri Lis solet; quae tamen etiam Ecclesiis nostris, nescio
quas turbas fecerit. Hic scilicet unus est, ex quinque illis articulis
Perthanis Ecclesiae Scoticanae, a doctissimo Regum Jacobo: VI. pridem
propositis, multorum ex inde calamis satis superque agitatus: praeter nostros,
doctissimus Episcopus Berchinensis^, post illum, D. Johannes Forbesius, aliique
Theologi Aberdonenses, ingenia hic sua, magna cum Laud exercucrunt; Certe
miror ego, qua tandem freti ratione, privati quidam Theologi, saluberrimo huic,
sed and antiquissimo, receptissimoque in Ecclesia, mori sese opposuerint.
Unquam ne vetuit hoc privatim fieri Christus, aut Apostolorum quisquam? Facite
hoc, inquit Christus: Factum praecepit, non meminit loci: Institutio ipsa
salutaris est, temporis Locive circumstantia ita inter (...) merito collocanda,
ut tanti sacramenti essentiae nihil quicquam praejudicare debeat: Q^od si locum
spectare velimus curiosius, In caenaculo cepit caena sacra, non in templo;
intraque privatos, ut tu probe monuisti, Lares, ab Apostolis, discipulisque,
pro temporis ratione, celebrata; synaxis est, quis nescit? Ideoque Ecclesiae
Dei haud paulo congruentior: Si qua tamen postulet necessitas, sive multorum
communis sive privata postulantis, nulla dari potest ratio, cur Christianis
animis, praesertim cum morbis, morteque ipsa conflictantibus, ita gratum, and
efficax remedium non ultro suppeditetur: (...) est sanctis Patribus, Lasso
igitur, jamque in extremis agenti viatori, petenti in super, qua tandem pietate
denegetur? De tanti hujus sacramenti virtute, Christianus esse nequit qui
ambigat, non potest igitur non pium esse tam salutaris sacramenti desiderium,
cui ut tempestive satisfiat, caverunt, praeter citatos a te patres, authoresque
probatissimos, concilia etiam non pauca, Nicenum illud Oecumenicum, Can. 13.
Carthaginense quartum, Can. 76, 78. Vasense, 1. Can. 2. alia. Inter Ecclesias
vero reformatas a te commemoratas, certe nostrae Anglicanae non alia unquam
fuit, seu Lex, seu Praxis, (utpote quae hanc sibi regulam semper figendam
sensuerit, toties a scitissimo Rege Jacobo. p. in inculcatam) nihilo longius a
Romana discedere Ecclesia, quam illa a se, a primigenia puritate discessisse
deprehendatur. Graviter ergo, pie, ac prudenter quaestionem tu hanc (si quid
ego judicare possum) pertractasti, remque totam tanta cum moderatione ac
cautela determinasti, ut mirum sit, siquis vestrorum deinceps, in tam sano
vereque Theologico judicio non acquiescat.

Breviter, de re tota sic habeto; Consilium illorum, qui declarationem hanc
tuam, ut valde piam, Ecclesiaeque Dei perutilem, edendam, jurisque publici
faciendam censent, non possum ego non calculo me summopere comprobare. Non
parum ere fuerit Ecclesiae, ut hujusmodi extet exemplar candoris, and
equanimitatis Christianae, ut moderato qui sunt animo, habeant quod tenere
debeant, and qui temere maluerint contradicere post (...) tandem (...) videant
quod erubescere debuerint; Deus, pacis Author, Ecclesiam suam totam in concordi
veritate stabiliat.

Vale Frater venerande. A conservo tuo fideli ac benevolo. Jos. Exon.
Dat. e Pallatio Nostro Exon.
Reverendo in Christo Fratri, viro clarissimo, D. LUDOVICO CROCIO S. Theologiae
D. ET In Illustri Schola Bremensi Professori Gratiam ac Pacem.
QUam nobis olim Dordrechtum conciliavit amicitiam, mi Croci eam and recolere
saepius, and modis quibuscunque fovere quid ni senescentibus cordi sit? Video
te solum, ex collegis tuis superstitem: Evolasse reliquos, caelumque cum terra
jam diu commutasse, Nos vero quam diu hic sumus? Faelices interea, qui temporis
hoc quantulumcunque been agendo terimus; quod certe dum facimus, invidiam vel
comitem, vel saltem asseclam, fato quodam sustinere necesse habemus:

Pergant porro nostrae patientiae praecones (...), modo (...), beatos nos hoc
modo facient, dum vellent miseros:

Legi quantum pro tempore licuit, Syntagma tuum; egregium profecto opus, and te
dignum: Loca a te notata perpendi serio; ut libere loquar quod censeo,
occurrebant mihi multa paulo enucleatius quam ab aliis Theologis fieri solet,
in magno hoc praedestinationis mysterio explicata, (...) vero illa, quae tibi a
quibusdam objici quiritaris qua tandem ratione hinc elici possint, nullus
comperio; primum illud caput, vere profecto aureum de principiis humanae
salutis probe (uti par est) pensitatum and intellectum, ab omni te impacti
erroris suspicione facile liberarit: Utcunque enim universalem Dei (...) solito
before dilucidiusque depinxeris, (quae quidem nunquam poterit, me judice,
nimium depraedicari) cum tamen triplicem illam universalis dilectionis
limitationem insuper addideris, omne amoves Pelagianismi, Huberismique a tua
sententia periculum: Nec enim communis illa Dei misericordia, qua humano
praesertim generi been vult, and been placet, quicquam praejudicat speciali
illi benevolentiae, ac amori, quo electos suos gratiosissime prosequitur:
Fratribus quidem omnibus multiplicat Joseph fercula, Beniamini vero (...)

Tuta sunt hic omnia dum nos nihil nobis tribuamus, Dei misericordiae, in
Christo filio suo, totum salutis, and destinandae and impetrandae negotium
acceptum ingenue feramus: Quis vero tibi illa odiosa exprobraret nomina, quae
tu ubique conspuis and detestaris?

Haeret apud me illud, fateor, aliquantum, and explicatione quadam videtur
indigere, quod capite 6. de gratia vocationis sect. 16. occurrit; ubi formulam
faederis gratiae expositutus, ais, Peccatum Primorum parentum, atque adeo and
peccatum originis, tanquam opus Diaboli, hactenus destructum, ut Satanas
propterea nullum jus and potestatem in homines habeat; ita ut propterea nemo
necessario damnandus sit, nisi nova peccata accedant, quibus homines fiant
gratiae incapaces, ac denuo in plenam servitutem and possessionem Satanae
redeant. Semper enim mihi, sed and aliis visum est, promissum illud de
serpentis capite a femine mulieris conterendo, intelligi de victoria quam semen
illud benedictum reportarit sibi, ac electis suis; ut planius loquar non
universali quadam destructione peccati originis, quasi nullum jus in homines
habitum, sed in suos electos nullum; neque de originali illo peccato tantum,
sed and de omnibus quibuscunque satanae molitionibus construi debere: invidiam
tibi forsan aliquam creet ille locus; donec uberiore aliqua interpretatione
vindicetur: Quod ergo Pagina sequente subinsers.

Justificationem vitae, ita vi mortis Christi in omnes homines transiisse, ut
libertatem and jus ad vitam aeternam consecuti sint, nisi per novam
inobedientiam, and peccatum gratiam illam amittant: hoc plane animo a te
scriptum censeo, ut de sola possibilitate sub fidei habendae condition, istud
intellexeris; eo profecto se extendebat virtus vivificae illius mortis, ut qui
credunt a reatu originalis peccati certo liberentur: Ut quae non obstante
peccato sive originali, sive actuali quocunque, and jus ad vitam, and vitam
ipsam consequantur, utque reconciliabilit as quaedam humani generis eo usque,
hac ratione, obtineretur, quo quisque mortalium modo resipiscere sic credere
possit, salutem adipiscatur; id quod ^u ipse ubique videris inurere: Nihil ergo
certius est, quam quod mox subjicis, Christum omnium hominum salutem aliquo
modo quaesivisse, omnibusque ad eam aliquo modo profuisse, quaesivit hoc certe
beneficentissimus servator, quodque non invenerit in homines ipsos, non in
redemptorem cudenda est haec faba; Qui potest ergo salus esse quibusdam
simpliciter impossibilis, quam ille (quem penes est) omnibus, sub condition
ferio obtulerit: and reapse praestare (modo ipsi sibi non deforent) paratus
sit; impossibilis modo, sed and certa; quis hic non tacit ac humiliter
acquiescat; sententiam hanc vestram meminimus nos, Clarissimum D. Martimum
collegam tuum J. M. in Synodo Dordracena Thesibus suis illic exhibitis, aperte,
pleneque, explicasse, ut mirum sit suboriri modo quenquam, qui vos illi
suffragrantes tam sero erroris insimulet: Breviter quoque oculos conjicio,
illud video, and in hac desinam censura, nisi Lectori charitas deesset, non
deforet scripto fides.

Praefationem tuam quod attinet, quae de septem Asiaticis Ecclesiis commentari
libuit (qua in re concinit tibi, uti video, Doctissimus Collega tuus, D.
Willius, passim, in suis and proloquiis and commentariis) Laudo equidem velut
ingeniose satis, neque sine probabili aliqua very specie, a vobis dicta; solid
tamen, and ad mentem Evangelici scriptoris exarata, concedere nequeo; Illas
etenim ecclesias septem, esse typos quosdam historicopropheticos succedentium
sibi, ab illo aevo, ecclesiae conditionum, quis largiatur? Ta^c profecto
aliquid Brightmannus noster, aut Parkerus vigilans somniarit, nollem vobis
tantis viris excidisse, Cum palam sit, spiritum sanctum eas ipsas illius
temporis ecclesias, sed and earum episcopos, singulariter notasse. Personalia
sunt, ilicet, quae pastori cuique objiciuntur, nec ad caetum integrum, multo
minus ad Typicas, nescio quas, successiones detorquenda; sed and incurrunt in
se invicem, quae de unaquaque ecclesia praedicantur; nec cuiquam istarum soli
distinct competere possunt; ut per omnia tenere nequeat illa quam imaginamur,
analogia: Aurea scilicet illa, and Apostolica aetas, quam per Ephesiam
ecclesiam figurari vultis, uti non perdiderat (quantum nobis innotuit)
charitatem suam primam; ita, non prorsus immunis fuit, ab illis
persecutionibus, quae seculis sequentibus efferbuerunt; In Smyrnensi illa
ferrea (metallorum enim similitudine quadam haec omnia illustrare maluisti)
synagogae Judeorum jam tum Christianismo infestissimae non Ethnicorum furores
designantur.

Polemicam vero Pergamensem quod spectar, ipse Antipas Martyr, eo tempore, sine
dubio, notissimus, nominatim, velut recentissimae memoriae celebratur, ut certo
certius sit de re dudum praeterita locutum, cum spiritu, evangelistam, nec de
illo aevo, (cui tu istud confers) vere praedicare potest [Nomen meum retines,
non negasti fidem] cum totus fere orbis ad Arrianismum desciverit; Thyatirensi
devotae ac religiosae, quae a Carolo magno ad Carolum quintum interjecta est,
quam nullo jure imputatur, quod patiatur Jezebelem Prophetissam (
Hildebrandinam nempe ut tu interpretaris dominationam) seducere servos Dei;
quasi in ecclesiae illius, impotenter adhuc delitescentis, potestate fuisset,
Romanae Ecclesiae tyrannidem jam tum impedire aut coercere: Sardensis illa sive
politica, quae a Carolo quinto, hucusque extenditur, non tam episcopalis est
ais, quam Principalis; memineris tamen haec Angelo, id est Episcopo non
Principibus dicta fuisse; Illud vero visne ut merito competat Protestantium
caetui, [Nomen habes quod vivas sed mortuus es;] Moribunda corrobores?] Absit
ut haec tam gravia nostris aggeramus, nolo singulis insistere; praeter scopum
enim haec omnia, da veniam (colendissime frater) libertati huic meae: non
possum tibi in illa Asiaticarum Ecclesiarum interpretatione (re non admodum
gravi) consentire; utcunque vero praemissae hae fidem apud me parum invenerint,
conclusionem tamen tuam, ex animo amplector, and exosculor; hinc nempe sumpta
occasion tempestive ad concordiam Ecclesiis Evangelicis suadendam dilaberis:
Hoc ego tibi ac tuis inprimis gratulor, hoc precor, hoc urgeo; certe
qualiscunque tandem fuerit illa Sardensis, utinam, O utinam, Ecclesia Dei
nostro hoc aevo ad pacem se publicam (non seposito interim veritatis studio)
unanimiter componeret; video equidem, and gaudio vos professores, doctissimos
celeberrimosque, Bremenses pium hoc, Deoque Angelis and hominibus gratissimum
opus promovere paratissimos esse. Id quod non modo ex Duraeo meo studiosissimo
tanti beneficii parario, gratulabundus accepi, sed ex scriptis insuper vestris
facile persentisco: Dolet mihi interim, quod videam praeter iniquam temporum
conditionem quorundam pervicacem (...) sacrosanctum hoc caeptum aliquantum
remorari; humanum profecto est quod isti sapiunt.

Ita nempe dediti sunt quidam vel fuis, vel praeceptorum fuorum opinionibus,
partiumque studiis pertinaciter fovendis, ut ne verba quidem (rebus quantum
libet salvis) indulgere velint publicae paci, ac charitati: Sane, qui sic
affecti sunt, ubi precium unitatis Evangelicae plane videntur nescire, ita
aliquando sine dubio sentient quid sit (...), and Ecclesiam Dei suis manibus
(...) usque inquietare. Certe, si quod in Synodo Dordracena propositum fuit and
a Theologis exteris fervide satis expeditum, pariter obtinuisset, praecepta jam
diu fuisset omnis haec, quae modo vobis negotium facessit, contendendi ansa:
Memineris tu probe (mi Croci) ubi me nimis iniqua valetudo, invitum ab illo
Doctorum virorum consessu abripuisset, incidisse quaestionem, non hercle
intempestivam, Sessione 132. de Rejectione duriorum quarundam, and
incommodiorum locutionum, quae in nonnullis Reformatorum doctorum scriptis
passim reperiuntur, quae infirmioribus scandalum, adversariis calumniam
subministrare solent; Britanni nostri Theologi, toti in eo erant, sed and
Hassiaci, and vos etiam Bremenses, sani hujusce concilii rationibus paulo
acrius urgendis non defuistis; potiora ne dicam, an plura vicerent suffragia,
non disputo; certe rejectio illa phrasium incommodarum pro tempore rejecta est;
saltem omissa; ne quid pateretur Orthodoxa authorum, ita vel durius vel
inprudentius locutorum doctrina: Praesertim cum, praeter alias rations,
plurimi essent ex iis loquendi modis, qui dextre ac commode (modo charitas
adhiberetur) explicari possent, nempe sederunt ibi aliqui, de ecclesia Dei
alias benemeriti Theologi qui in hoc genere non nihil forte peccaverunt:
praeter alios etiam melioris notae primipilos, (modo (...)) quorum
existimatio^i hac ratione paululum indulgere visum est, absit vero ut ego tot,
tantorumque Theologorum (quorum memoriam revereri soleo) judicium vellicare
ausim, utinam tamen (fas enim mihi erit, etiam tam sero optasse) charitatis
pietatisque publicae ratio, eo usque apud doctissimos viros clarissimos fratres
nostros, valuisset, ut inter Doctrinae Orthodoxae incolumitatem, and phrase
incommodarum periculum, inter quorundam authorum existimationem, and communem
Christianae Reipublicae indemnitatem paulo accuratiorem distinctionem
adhibuissent. Quid enim? Opus ne habet Orthodoxa Doctrina hujusmodi fulcris?
Annon eo magis constat illa sibi and honorem suum eo magis inviolatum servat,
quo ab illis intutiorum locutionum excessibus liberior prodierit? Nonne palam
est hujusmodi duriusculas loquendi formas non paulum praejudicii creasse
veritati pacem vero publicam vel ex imo turbasse, quis non videt? En modo non
sine causa calumniari videntur adversarii, nos admisisse rerum illarum
solaecisimos, qui tam incommodis locutionum modis videntur inuri? Hinc causa
Dei non parum patitur and Damni, and opprobrii; sint vero ex illis loquendi
formulis, quaedam ab ipso spititu sancto, in sacris literis, aliquando
usurpatae: hinccine sequetur ut quae per sacram quandam hyperbolem exprimere
voluit Deus ea nos simplici sensu, velut axiomata Theologica tuto propinare
possimus orbi Christiano? Et parents and animam nostram odisse nos jubet
ali^ubi Deus; novimus quo sensu utrunque; jam si quis, hac authoritate fretus,
absolute, simpliciterque docuerit, officium esse Christiani cujusque abdicare
parents, suam ipsius animam proculcare, satin' sanus videbitur? Cultellum
aliquando gutturi applicare, jubet per Salomonem spiritus; quisquamne sobrius
hoc proprio and literali sensu faciendum suaserit? Indurate corda, and
excaecare oculos dicitur Deus, nos haec ipsi velut propria quaedam and
immediata effecta tribuemus, suus ergo relinquendus est Deo loquendi modus,
quod ille figurato quodam sermonis excessu exprimere maluit, non nobis illico
trahi debet in simplicis enuntiationis exemplar.

Sint harum phras^^n aliquae, quas sano sensu ipsi censores admiserint; sint
plurimae, quae dextre ac commode (modo charitas adhibea ur) explicari possint;
atqui interim, de sano illo sensu, inter parts lis erit vel maxima; and
charitas haec, ubi lites incalescere cae^erint, ubi locum invenit? Certe, qui
litigare mavolunt non solent ita benign cum adversariis agere, ut sensum
(siquis sit) controversae propositionis commodissimum, eruere velint: sic ergo
loqui tutum est, ut qui cavillari studet, (si fieri possit) locum non habeat
ubi aut uncum, aut pedem figat; Medeatur vero huic malo charitas, quaero tamen
jam meritissimo, utiliusne tollendis, an commode interpretandis hisce formulis
sese charitas exercuisset? Pateus est non procul a via, profundus and
itineranti periculosus; gratiusne opus fecerit viatori, qui illum rudere ac
lapidibus adobruat, an qui jusserit incolas, monere illac transeuntes, ne se
incauti praecipitent; morbus mihi minitatur, novi quo pharmaco possim ejus
dolorem lenire tandem, and mortis, alioqui forte secuturae, periculum evadere;
consultumne mihi erit sinere, ut malum hoc ingruat, and ingravescar, cui
tempestivo potuissem remedio occurrisse? Ego certe si res ageretur mea, curarem
cum primis noxios humores sive corrigi sive oportune expurgari; and cardiaca
deinde quibus natura contra hosts impetum corroboretur, subministrari, sic and
in illis, quae Ecclesiae periculum intentant, sive erroribus, sive parum tutis
dogmatibus, sive male sanis locutionibus factum oportuit, and ita proculdubio
fecissent gravissimi illi, Doctissimique Theologi, si istum, quem modo
cernimus, tollerantiae exitum, jam tum praevidere potuissent; ubi enim illi hac
ratione paci publicae litatum voluerunt, contra evenit, jurgiorum ac
discordiarum semina (quod maximopere delendum est) hinc inde, per agros
Ecclesiae infeliciter iacta, ubique pullulasse; neque deerit unquam (si quid
ego hariolari possum) contentionum materia, donec ista litium infausta seges
authoritate publica radicitus evelli possit; Quod uti fiat, exorandi sunt orbis
domini, ut conventu Doctorum Theologorum tempestive habito, communi consilio
(interveniente ipsorum imperio) tollantur ista sive calami, sive mentis (...)
qualiacunque.

Quod dum fieri possit, monendi rogandique sunt doctissimi quique viri frates
nostri Charissimi, eousque uti paci studeant omnes, ut posthabita verborum cura
rebus ipsis componendis operam suam toti impendant: Id nimirum solicitos nos
habet, ut veritas Dei in cordibus hominum (nobis suasoribus) locum invenire
possit; hoc vero, si quo suaviore, ac blandiore modo effici queat, nonne multo
gratius, aptabiliusque foret, quam ut rigidiore, ac duriuscula agendi ratione,
bilem, scandalumve infirmiori cuique moveremus: ulcus meum qui leviore
tractaverit manu, modo non minus cito sanaverit, dignus est quem amicius
excipiam. At at, nisi in re ipsa paululum haereremus non ita nimium de verbis
laborare precium operae duceremus: De ipsis quidem, fateor, notionum quarundam
momentis, aliquid litigii est, sed, quod vix cernat oculatus arbiter, vix curet
pacificus: Ad eundem video exitum veritatis Theologicae tendere utriusque
partis sententiam, non sine aliquo interim, in via, discrimine; non est quod de
unoquoque vestigio nimium soliciti simus quin post passus unius, alteriusve
divertiunculam idem omnino stadium emetimur, mollior placet huic semita, illi
calcata, vel silicea, recta ducit utraque ad metam eandem; quis istic jurgio
locus? quod si sua cuique (uti fit) placuerit sententia, nec quis cedere velit
alteri paulo aliter animi sui sensum exprimenti, litesque adhuc inter parts
infeliciter continuentur; illud ego fratribus meis cum primis suaserim (quod in
omnibus hujus generis controversiis tutissimum, utilissimumque semper expertus
sum) ut ad generaliores quasdam enuntiandi formulas confugiamus; neque ultra
terminos ita fixos, sinatur alterutrius partis discursus evagari; Quod de
doloso communiter dici solebat olim, liceat mihi de pacifico dicere; versatur
ille in generalibus; nec quid pensi habet ad specialissima quaeque descendere;
nempe, ex imis illis conceptuum humanorum fractionibus, ac divisiunculis, nimio
quam accuratis, oriri solent discordiae, inter illos, qui vel de proximis rerum
capitibus perpacate consentirent. Hac profecto ratione, plurimae, quibus orbis
Christianus misere conflictatur, lites sopirentur: Caute tamen istic, and non
sine summa fide, ac sana discretione procedendum est; ne forte, dum paci nimium
intenti sumus, veritatis integritatem vel violemus, vel inique supprimamus; ubi
ergo de ipsis Christianae fidei capitibus deque summa religionis quaestio est,
nihil non urgeri debet, in quo salus vertitur hominis Christiani, nihil istic
non momentosum, and quovis dignum certamine videri debet, sed ubi de Dogmatibus
quibusdam fere adiaphoris, deque tricis (uti fit) Scholasticis, a salutis sive
spe, sive periculo long alienis, disputatur, non est quod nimis anxie singula
disquiramus, and de minimis quibusque opinionum apicibus curiosius contendamus,
sat erit in generalioribus quibusdam exprimendi modis conspirasse.

Quod si qui sint opinionum suarum paulo tenaciores, qui de levissimis
quibusque controversiarum particulis veluti pro aris ac focis digladiari
malunt, valde expediens suerit, illud unum praecipue accurare, ut isti,
moderatis quibusque agendi rationibus, (si fieri possint) convincantur; inter
quas nulla mihi, serio cogitanti, occurrit probabilior, quam ut certae quaedam
figantur regulae Dogmaticae, irrefragabiles illae quidem and utrique parti in
confesso, ad quarum veluti examen utrorumque sententiae reducantur,
exiganturque: Certum est, enim, vera quaeque ubique (...); quae ergo inter se
comparata ab indubitate veris dissonare deprehenduntur, in falsi suspicionem
justissime incurrunt; Ut in hisce quas modo sub manibus habemus controversiis,
sunto, si placet, hujusmodi.

Fieri non potest ut voluntatis Dei quae omnium causa est,



omnis bonitatis, sapientiae, justitiae, fons and scaturigo, nihil potest ab
illo fluere, quod non perfect bonum, sapiens, justumque sit, in illius ergo
(...) humillime acquiescere debemus creaturae.

Sed and hinc necessario sequitur nihil boni inesse posse creaturae, nisi quod
ab ipso, boni omnis principio, inditum suerit, and ab ipso

Sed and hoc insuper; Deum non esse authorem peccati. Illud solebat
offendiculi, saepe praetendere, D. Tilenus, hospes olim meus, Florino, contra
hiscere ausit.

Deum neminem damnare nisi propter peccatum, damnatio enim actus est punitivae
justitiae, punitio autem culpam supponit;

Deum serio invitare omnes vbicunque terrarum ad fidem and penitentiam, and sub
illa condition, ad salutem: non eo solum animo

In re praedestinationis nihil nobis negotii esse debet cum arcanis

In actibus ad conversionem praeviis, bonisque motibus quos spiritus
De^ingerit, etiam nondum renatis, Deus neminem deserit, prius quam deseratur
ipse; sola ergo culpa sua ad regenerationem serio invitati gratia ulteriore
destituuntur, and spontanea infidelitate and contumacia pereunt.

Sed video me longius quam mihi proposueram excurrisse, vide quo me provexerit
pacis amor, ut ego ista tibi, Theologo exercitatissimo suggererem, huic tu
praesumptioni ignosces; and si quid erraverit festinatio mea, comiter
monstrabis: Perges denique been velle huic, quam tantopere boni omnes
expetimus, Paci, and Duraeum nostrum, fidissimum ejus proxenetam omni amore ac
studio, quod facis, prosequi and mutuis insuper precibus, piisque officiis
bear.

Tuum in Christo fratrem ac (...) fidelissimum. Jos. Exon.

Clarissimo Viro, Theologo gravissimo, D. HERMANNO HILDEBRANDO AD Sti. STEPH.
Ecclesiae BREMENSIS Pastori Vigilantissimo, Salutem ac Pacem.
INcumbat mihi licet plus modo quam cui ferendo par sim oneris (reverende
admodum in Christo frater) non potui tamen committere ut votis tuis tam piis,
tam pacificis deesse viderer: Ipse curabo ne nihil respondeam, ignosce tu, si
brevius.

Declarationem tuam trium Articulorum in conventu cleri Bremensis praelectorum,
gravem illam quidem, moderatam, solidam, vereque Orthodoxam quanta potui cum
cura perlegi, clausulasque singulas pensitavi sedulo; quoque accuratiori
trutinae singula subjecerim eo magis subiit animum, mirari quid illud tandem
sit, quod parum aequis, apud vos censoribus displicere possit; aut ubi demum
lateat illud, de quo quosdam ais immane quantum conqueri, Pelagianismi sive
(quod horribilius dictu) Socinismi virus. Fallor si qua istic occurrat phrasis,
aut vero syllaba, quae vel ex ipso sacro Scripturarum font, vel ex sanctorum
patrum rivulis, vel denique ex aliorum probatissimorum authorum (praesertim
vero Theologorum Dordracenorum) situlis parum petita sit: Absit vero ut quis
istorum cuiquam tam prodigiosae opinionis crimen impingere ausit. Cautius tu
quidem, and paulo mollius exprimere maluisti haec divinae veritatis arcana,
quam rigidiores quidam (sani licet) Theologi solent; quam tibi sive prudentiam,
sive moderationem ex animo gratulor: Ilicet haec recta est ad Christianam
concordiam via, hoc est quod vox clamantis in deserto praeconiata est olim,
parare semitam Deo pacis aspera in vias planas redigere: Ambulent alii, si
volunt, per dumos salebrasque, compla^emus nos (quantum possimus) sacros hosce
calls ut libero ac inoffenso pede coelum versus progredi liceat; quantum
cumque sane operae huic negotio posuerimus, arduum satis comperiemus hoc iter;
non est quod nos viam insuper silice sternamus, aut vepribus: Nesciunt profecto
qui ista criminantur, nesciunt, quantum de Templo Dei mereantur illi, qui seu
saxa seu trabes fabricae huic exaedificandae dolare, ac levigare norunt, modo
id, praesertim, absque nimio malleationis strepitu fieri possit; quod
gravitatem tuam admodum prudenter istic allaborasse sentio.

Quod ad rem ipsam attinet, quisquam ne sanae Theologiae candidatus est, qui
merito mortis Christi limits quosdam suos figendos censeat? nempe omnipotens
est, infinitaeque virtutis ille Dei filius, quibus ergo redimendis, and carnem
induere and sanguinem suum effundere voluit, iis ut non sufficiat, (quod sibi
praestituit) universis quam nimis sonare videtur (...). Generi autem humano
redimendo and (...) mortem suam intendisse benignissimum mundi redemptorem,
quoties quamque express docet Scriptura? Cum vero nemini sano displicere
possit haec spiritus sancti (ubi in sactis literis occurrit) Phraseologia, qui
fit quod nostro transcripta calamo parum arrideat; Illa certe distinctio inter
(ipso quidem actu) sufficientiam, effecientiamque mortis Christi, inter meritum
ex una part, and effectum eventumque Theanthropicae illius redemptionis, ex
altera; inter precium (...) infiniti, and salutarem ejus applicationem ita and
vera and necessaria est, ut absque illa fieri non possit, quin perperam de
magno mundi salvatore, deque mysterioso redemptionis negotio sentiamus: Certe
ita pro omnibus mortuus est Christus, ut parum interea profit omnibus ad
salutem: D. par. Judicio de 5. Art. Art. 20. Sent. Palate. Theol. Art. 2. prop.
4.
Non illo ergo in sensu pro omnibus mortuus est Christus quo doctissimus
Paraeus (cui concinunt and Theologi Palatini) vocem interpretatur, ubi ait mori
pro aliquo proprie esse, morte sua aliquem a morte liberare, seu ita mori
alicujus loco, ut ipse vivat; eo quidem modo haec loquendi formula, non meritum
modo sed et efficaciam universalem, effectumque commune mortis Christi
complecteretur, quod nemo sanus (cum Hubero) illi (quantum libet salvificae)
attribuendum judicarit: Hoc vero quod non fiat hominum certe culpa fit, non
servatoris. In Caelesti hoc meritorum Gazophylacio, sat repositum est Thesauri,
redimendis tot mundorum myriadibus, quot sunt hominum capita; quod si qui ita
sint vel socordi, vel praefracto ingenio, ut quanrumvis voce Evangelii moniti
ac incitati, nec movere pedem, nee manum exporrigere velint, petendo
reportandoque suo (quam libet ingenti) pretio, digni sunt ilicet qui captivi
moriantur; quid hic interum decedit infinitae redemptoris munificentiae? Sent.
de 5. Artic. ad Synod


Placere mihi solet heic Molinaei mei, viri clarissimi satis apta similitudo,
illustrandis, illuminandisque omnibus, datus est sol huic mundo; sunt tamen
caeci non pauci, sunt alii carcerum tenebris damnati, somno sepulti sunt alii:
Parum fruuntur isti omnes solis bene^^cio, quid hoc ad magnum illud ac
munificum luminare? Oculati quotquot sunt, subque dio vigilant gaudent hac
luce, illiusque radiis refocillantur; pariter se habet cum morte Christi, cujus
fructus (...) patescit quidem omnibus meritorie, non efficaciter: in se
sufficit omnibus; non omnibus interea sive ad remissionem sive ad salutem
applicatur; reconciliabile est hac ratione totum genus humanum; actu autem ut
reconcilietur, quiddam aliud insuper requiritur; impletio scilicet conditionis
gratuiti foederis, quae in fide recipientis consistit: Credunt autem
efficacissima virtute hujus salvificae mortis quotquot ad salutem ordinati
sunt; hanc vero exprimendi formulam quod parum far videantur Theologi
Palatini; hinc fit, quod Remonstrantium nonnullis (longius multo quam par erat
procedentibus) contra-venire istic studuerint, utpote qui non meritum modo sed
et efficaciam mortis Christi toti humano generi actu communicare videantur; re
tamen ipsa fratres Palatini de merito precioque mortis Christi infinito, Sent.
Palate. Theol de 5. art. Art. 2. propos. 2, and 3.
applicabili quidem universis (si possent credere) mortalibus, solis electis
salutariter applicato idem nobiscum sentiunt. Sed and eadem ipsa est
promissionum insuper divinarum extensio; per totum terratum orbem nemo homo
est, cui non istae libere promulgati, and possint and debeant; occurrat mihi
quivis vel Turca, vel Judaeus, vel Judus, quidni ego fidenter, and serio illi
dixerim. Ita O homo, pro te mortuus est Christus, ut si in ipsum credideris
certo salvaberis; sed and omnium eadem plane ratio est, quae unius: Quicquid
sit, ob defectum salutaris precii certum est neminem unquam periisse n^minem
unquam periturum; sic ergo (ut Theologi nostri Britanni plene and perspicue)
Christus pro omnibus mortuus est, ut omnes and singuli, mediante fide possint
virtute (...) hujus, remissionem peccatorum, and vitam aeternam consequi; Sic
pro electis mortuus est, ut ex merito mortis ejus, secundum eternum Dei
beneplacitum, specialiter illis destinato, and fidem infallibiliter obtin^ant,
and vitam eternam.

Breviter, ita primum hunc de morte, and merito Christi articulum tractasti ut
plane habeas scripturas, patres, scriptores quosque Orthodoxos, tibi pleno ore
suffragantes: sed and Ecclesia nostra Anglicana ita hic tota tua est, ac si
ipsissima illius verba suisses ubique mutuatus.

Secundum porro articulum (meo quidem judicio) dici vix potest solidiusne, an
modestius exegeris, si quis alius in tota Theologia, ille profecto de
reprobatione locus, lubricus est; in quo labi, and facile sit, and periculosum,
tu vero ita caute istic movisti pedem, ut neque blandiores decreti aestimatores
quicquam, quod culpent, invenire possint, nec severiores, quod desiderent; eo
magis mihi mirandum videtur quid illud sit, quod censurae suae praetendere
possint scitissimi cavillorum artifices: Dicam certe quod res est, totus iste
(uti a te explicatur) locus nihil aliud est, quam sententiarum Dordracenarum
accurata quaedam contractiuncula; in qua non sensum modo illibatum, sed et
plerunque, verba ipsissima satis curiose retinuisti: Qui sit ergo ut quibus
illa Synodus in pretio est, tam justa ac fidelis ejusdem displiceat epitome?
Certe ni tu digitum intendas ego quid haereat nullus inveniam. Enim vero, esse
quandam reprobationem, camque ab aeterno, quis dubitat? Sed and hanc
reprobationem, (qua omnipotentis Dei actum spectat) ejusdem esse quorundam
hominum quos decrevit Deus in communi miseria, in quam se sua culpa
praecipitarunt, relinquere; tandemque non tantum propter infidelitatem, sed
etiam caetera omnia peccata, ad declarationem justitiae suae damnare, and
aeternum punire; sic illi, culpa ergo and peccata, ita hic interveniunt, ut
positiva reprobatio absque his non sine summa injuria, Deo attribuatur: Hoc est
quod tu, ex Augustino, Fulgentio, Prospero, ex omnibus Ecclesiarum
confessionibus, ex Orthodoxis quibusque authoribus, facili negotio eviceris:
Meritissimo ergo inveheris in illorum explicationem, and rigidam and plane
iniquam, qui electioni liberae, and gratuitae reprobationem absolutam, ex mero
odio profectam opponendam censent: Ecquod enim odit Deus praeter peccatum? et
propter peccatum, non, in se, creaturam suam? Hoc sane seposito, vidit Deus
omnia quae fecerat, and bona pronuntiavit, quomodo vero se (...) praestaret
Deus si hominem, qua hominem odio haberet; Praeibis ergo and tu mihi verba
illa, quibus ego lubentissime assentior, ut sum pia, and suavissima illa vox
est, nos gratiuto ex mera misericordia, and beneplacito Dei fuisse electos in
Christo ad salutem, ita nec satis pia nec tolerabilis altera, Merito perire
alios, etiamsi in Adamo non essent perditi, quoniam Deus ita praefecit Christum
Ecclesiae suae caput, ut in eo servemur, non omnes, sed qui sumus electi. Quod
zelus hic tuus, ut and boni cujusque exardescat, non hercle miror; Quid enim
hoc aliud est, nisi tyrannidem quandam affingere misericordissimo Numini?
Absoluta ipsius in creaturam potentia quousque se extendat, nemo est qui
dubitet: illam vero ut in nos exerat, exerce atque Deus, qui cum ordinato jure
cum hominibus agere decreverit, toties dilectionem suam, desideriumque humanae
salutis protestatus est, durius est quam ut a quoquam Christiano cogitari
debeat; utinam vero odiosae hujusmodi loquendi formulae, aut nunquam pio
alicui, doctoque reformatae Religionis professori excidissent, aut si aliquando
temere (...) excesserint, aeternae oblivioni damnatae illico fuissent; Hujusce
surfuris sunt incommodae illae, ac incongruae locutiones, quas Theologi
Dordraceni, non pauci, rejici, corrigique voluerunt; quod and tunc temporis
factum fuisset, nisi quorundam existimationi forte plus nimio fuisset indultum;
Qua de re largius aliquanto scripsi ad Collegam tuum clarissimum D. Crocium;
Literas ille meas tecum sine dubio communicabit; in eadem vos navi estis
uterque, ejusdem consilii sorts ut sitis, par est. Interim, Analysis haec tua
(ut in hac resolvendi facultate praecellere te video) scopo loci illius optime
quadrare videtur, nec a quoquam merito impugnari potest: Ut Scriptura tota, ita
illa cum primis ad Romanos (quod patrum doctissimus olim) plena est sensibus;
vix dari potest ita certa loci alicujus resolutio, quin and alia satis commoda
possit, fortassis superadjici: suis alii litent sententiis, ego tuam hanc loci
contexturam and explicationem valde probo; si quis contra mussitet, dic illi
meo (si vis) nomine, carpere multo facilius esse quam emendare. Tu vero, vir
celeberrime, perge quod facis, sanctis hisce, piisque laboribus de Ecclesia Dei
been promereri; and (quod tibi ac tuis ex animo gratulor) (...), precibusque
tuis adjuva

Devotissimum tibi in Domino Fratrem ac Symmystam Jos. Exon.
Dat. in Pallat. nostro Exon.
A MODEST OFFER OF Some Meet CONSIDERATIONS TENDERED To the Learned PROLOCUTOR,
And to the rest of the ASSEMBLY of DIVINES Met at WESTMINSTER.
LEarned and Reverend Brethren; If you be now (as is supposed) upon the advice
of a Form of Church Government; I beseech you, in the fear of God, setting
aside all prejudice, to take into your sad thoughts these considerations
following.

It is (I perceive an usual Prayer of many Preachers well affected to your
Assembly, that God would now (after 1600 years universal practice of the whole
Church of Christ, upon earth) show you the pattern in the mount; as if, after
so long and perfect inquisitions, there could be any new discoveries of the
form that was, or should be; wherein, I suppose their well-meaning is not a
little injurious both to the known truth, and to you: for, what revelations can
we expect thus late: or what monuments of either Scripture, or history can now
be hoped to be brought to light, which your eyes have not seen, and former ages
have not inquired into: Surely, ye well know, there can be but these three
forms of Church Government, possibly devised; Either by Bishops, or by
Presbyteries, or by the multitude of several and select congregations: Every of
which, have both their abettors, and their adversaries; The first has all
times, and places, since the days of the blessed Apostles, till this age, to
stand for it; The second has the late persecuted, reformed Church of France,
(which never desired, or meant to make their necessitated form, a pattern for
others) the Netherlands, and Scotland, for precedents of it; The third has the
Ministers of New England, and their Associates, commonly styled by the name of
INDEPENDENTS, vehemently contending for it: The adversaries of every of these
are as well known, as their friends; and the pleas, which every of them makes
for it self, are as well known as either.

I suppose it is yet res integra; else, I should lay my finger upon my lips;
Both the Houses of Parliament, your Assembly, and the whole Kingdom, stand yet
free, and unengaged to any part: For the National Covenant (as it is
interpreted by some of your selves, and those other Divines whose allowed
Sermons have commented upon it) intends not to abjure, and disclaim
Episcopacie, as such; but only bends against the whole present fabric of
Government, as it is built on these Arches, these Pedestals; so as if it be
taken asunder from those (some of them, not necessary) appendances, you are no
way forstalled in your judgment against it; nor any other, that has lift up
his hand in this solemn Covenant.

That I may not urge the Latin Translation of the same Covenant, printed and
sent abroad to the Low Countries and France, and other Churches, which ran only
upon tyrannicum regimen Episcoporum; that only the Tyrannical Government of
the prelates, not their fatherly and brotherly preeminence, is there abjured.

Your wisdoms know well how to distinguish betwixt a Calling, and the abuses
of the execution thereof; betwixt the main substance of a Calling, and the
circumstantial and separable appurtenances thereunto; from which it may be
divested, and yet stand entire.

I should be a flatterer of the times past (which is not often seen) if I
should take upon me to justify, or approve of all the carriages of some that
have been entrusted with the keys of Ecclesiastical Government: or to blanch
over the Corruptions of Consistorial Officers, in both these, there was fault
enough, to ground both a complaint, and Reformation; and, may that man never
prosper, that desires not an happy Reformation of what ever has been, or is
amiss in the Church of God; but this I offer to your serious consideration,
whether Episcopacie, stripped of all circumstances that may be justly excepted
against, and reduced to the Primitive estate, may not be thought a form, both
better in it self, and more fit for this Kingdom and Church, then either of
the other.

How ancient it is, I need not appeal to any but your selves, who do well know,
that there was never yet any History of the Church, wherein there was not full
mention made of Bishops, as the only Governers thereof; neither can any learned
adversary deny, that they have continued, with the general allowance of Gods
Church from the very Apostolic times, until this present age. And whether it
can be safe, and, lie not open to much scandal, to exchange so ancient an
institution hitherto perpetuated to the Church, for a new, where no necessity
inforces us, judge ye.

How universal it is, being the only received government of all the Christian
Churches over the face of the whole earth, (excepting only this small spot of
our neighborhood) ye know as well, as the undoubted relation of the
Christianographie can tell you: and how unsafe it may be, to depart from the
form of all the Churches, that profess the name of Christ, (who do all submit
themselves to Bishops, or Superintendents, except the fore-excepted) I leave to
your grave judgment.

Besides, how Episcopacie is, and has long been settled in this Kingdom, and
(as it were) incorporated into it; and enwoven into the municipal Laws of this
Land, so as that it cannot be utterly removed, without much alteration in the
whole body of our Laws; is a matter well worthy of not the least consideration.

But, all these would yet seem light upon the Balance, if there were not an
intrinsecal worth in the institution it self, that might sway with you: The
covenant binds to the endeavors of such a Government, as is according to the
Word of God, and the example of the best Reformed Churches. And now, let me
appeal to your own hearts, and the hearts of all judicious and unprejudicated
Readers, whether the rules of Church Government, laid forth in the Epistles to
Timothy and Titus, do not suppose, and import that very proper jurisdiction,
which is claimed by Episcopacy at this Day: Which, if it were not intended to
be left as a perfect pattern to succession; the whole Church of Christ should
have been left in the dark, without any direction for the succeding
administration thereof: Those charges are plainly given, not to many, but to
one; and do most manifestly imply, not a party, but preeminence and power.

And if the example of the best Churches must carry it: What Church could be
more pure, and more fit for our imitation, then the Primitive? And that part of
it which immediately followed the Apostles of our blessed Savior Jesus Christ?
And do not you full well know, that our Histories, and unquestionable Authors
name the men, whom those Apostles, by imposition of hands, ordained to this
function? Do not Ignatius, Irenaeus, Tertullian, Polycrates, Egesippus,
Clemens, Eusebius, Jerome instance in those persons, who succeeded each other
in those first Sees? If you tell me of the difference betwixt the Episcopacie
of those first Ages of the Church, and that of the present times; I do
willingly yield it, but, withal, I must add, that it is not in any thing
essential to the calling, but in matters outward, and merely adventitious; the
abatement whereof (if it should be found needful) diminishes nothing from the
substance of that holy institution; What can be more express, then, in the
ancientest of them, the Blessed Martyr, Ignatius, the mention of the three
distinct degrees of Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons; encharged with their several
duties which were yet never intermitted and let fall to this present day; How
frequently, and vehemently does he in his genuine Epistles (twice in that to
the Ephesians) call for due subjection to the Bishops and the Presbytery? How
distinctly does he in his Epistle to the Magnesians, name their Bishop, Dama;
their Presbyters, Bassus, Appollonius, Stephanus? How does he in his Epistle Ad
Trallianos set forth the Bishop (...), and and the Presbytery, (...), etc. And
if any man shall be so unjustly scrupulous, as to call into question the credit
of this gracious Author, (reserved, no doubt, by a special providence, for the
conviction of the Schisms of these last times) therein out-doing Vedeliu^
himself, (who stoutly asserteth some of these Epistles, whiles he rejects
others as supposititious) let him cast his eyes upon the no less famous, and
holy Martyr, and Bishop, Polycarpus; Iren. advers. Haeres. l. 3. c. 3.
who (as Irenaeus, an unquestionable Author tells us, one, whose eyes beheld
that Saint) did not only converse with those that had seen Christ, but also was
by the Apostles constituted in Asia, Bishop of the Church of Smyrna. Let him,
if he can, deny Cyprian the holy Martyr and Bishop of Carthage, writing
familiarly to the Presbyters, and Deacons there; sometimes gravely reproving
them; sometimes fatherly admonishing them of their duties; in diverse of his
Epistles. Let him deny, that his contemporany Cornelius, Bishop of Rome,
acknowledges 46. Presbyters committed by the Catholic Church, to his charge:
Shortly, let him, if he stick at this truth, deny that there was any Christian
Church of old, any History.

All which duly considered, I would fain know what reason can be showed, why
that ancient, yea first government by the Bishop and his Presbytery, received,
and with all good approbation and success, used in the Primitive Church, and
derived (though not without some faulty omissions, and intertextures, which may
easily be remedied) until this present day, should not rather take place; then
a government lately, and occasionally raised up in the Church, for the
necessity, or convenience of some special places, and persons; without any
intention of an universal rule and prescription.

If you shall say that this Government by Bishops has been found, by sad
experience, hitherto, a block in the way of perfect Reformation, destructive to
the power of Godliness, and pure Administration of the Ordinances of Christ;
give me leave to answer; That, first, I fear, the Independent part, will be apt
to say no less of the Presbyterian; boldly pressing their defects, both in
constitution, and practice; and publicly averring, the exquisitely-reformed
way to lie betwixt the Episcopal, and Calvinian, which they have had the
happiness to light upon; neither want there those, who, upon challenge of
further illumination, tax those Semi-separatists, as coming far too short of
that perfection of Reformation, which themselves have attained.

Secondly, I must, in the fear of God, beseech you here to make use of that
necessary distinction, betwixt Callings, and Persons; for it oftentimes falls
out, that the Calling unjustly suffers for that, whereof only the Person is
guilty; Let the Calling be never so holy, and the rules of Administration never
so wise, and perfect; yet if the person, in whose trust they are, be either
negligent, or corrupt, or impotent in ordering his passions and carriage, it
cannot be but all things must go amiss, and much disorder and confusion must
needs follow to the Church of God; and if such has been the case in some late
times, why should the blame be laid upon the calling, which both is innocent,
and might have been better improved? Give me a Bishop (such there have been,
and such there are, let D. Potter the late Bishop of Carlisle, for instance, be
one) that is truly conscionable, pious, painful, zealous in promoting the
glory of God, ready to encourage all faithful Preachers, and to censure and
correct the lazy, and scandalous; careful of the due imposition of his hands;
meek and unblameable in all his carriage; and now tell me how the government of
such an one (regulated by the holy and wholesome Laws of our Church) can be
said to be obstructive to the success of the Gospel, or to destroy the power
of Godliness? certainly; if all be not such, the fault is in the men; their
Calling does not only admit of, but incites them to all virtue and goodness;
whereof if they be defective, let the Person take off the blame from the
Function.

Neither doubt I to affirm, that it may well be made good, that the perfectest
Reformation, which the Church of God can be capable of, here upon earth, may
consist with Episcopacy, so regulated, as it may be, if it please the High
Court of Parliament to pitch upon that course: And indeed how can it be
conceived, that the careful inspection of one constant, prudent, and vigilant
overseer, superadded to a grave and judicious Presbytery, should be any
hindrance to the progress of godliness? Especially, when he is so limited by
the bounds of good laws and constitutions, that he cannot run out, without the
danger of a just censure; There are already many excellent rules of Government,
if they were awaked, and actuated by full authority; and, where there is any
deficiency, more might be easily added to make the body of Church-Lawes
complete.

To give a taste of what may be effected, with very little or no alteration of
one Form of Government to another.

I remembered one of our Brethren of Scotland, in a Discourse tending to the
advancing of the Presbyterian way, tells us, that Dr. Montague, the late worthy
Bishop of Winchester, asked King James of blessed memory, (whose sweet
affability the world well knew) How it came about, that there were so few
heresies, and errors of doctrine, broached, and prosecuted, to the public
disturbance of the Church of Scotland? Unto which, the wise and learned King is
said to have returned this Answer; That every Parish has their Pastor, ever
present with them, and wa^ching ever them; That the Pastor has his Elders and
Deacons, sorted with him; That he, with them, once a week, meets at a set time
and place, for the censure of manners, or what ever disorder falls out in the
Parish; so as he, by this means, perfectly knows his flock; and every
abberration of them, either in matter of opinion, or practice: And lest any
Error, or Heresy may seize upon the Pastor; they have their Presbyteries,
consisting of several Shrivalties, which meet together in the chief Town or
City next to them, every week also once; and have there their exercise of
Prophesying; after which, the Moderator of the said meeting asks and gathers
the judgments of all the said Pastors, concerning the doctrine then delivered,
or, of any other doubtful point, that is then and there propounded; And if the
said Presbyters be divided in their opinions, then the question is, under an
enjoined silence, put over to the next Synod, which is held twice a year; unto
that all the Pastors of that Quarter, or Province, duly resort; accompanied
with their Elders; the Moderator of the former Synod begins the Action; then a
new Moderator is chosen for the present, or (as it seldom falls out) the last
Moderator, by Voices, continued.

Any Question of doubt being proposed, is either decided by that meeting, or
(if it cannot be so done) is, with charge of silence, reserved till the
National Synod, or General Assembly; which they hold every year once: Whither
come not the Pastors only, but the King himself, or his Commissioners; and
some of all Orders and Degrees, sufficiently authorized for the determining of
any controversy, that shall arise amongst them. Thus he. And certainly this
bears the face of a very fair and laudable course, and such, as deserves the
approbation of all the wel-willers to that discipline: But let me add, that we
either have, or may have, (in this very same state of things, with some small
variation) in effect, the same Government with us; only there wants some care
and life in their execution, which might, without much difficulty, be
redressed; Every Parish has, or by Law ought to have their Minister ever
present with them; and carefully watching over them. Instead then of their
Pastor, Elders and Deacons; we have in every Parish, the Minister, whether a
Rector, or Vicar; Churchwardens, Questmen, or Sidemen, and Overseers for the
Poor; and in places of any eminence, a Curate or Assistent to the Rector, who
is a Deacon at least; These may, and ought, and in some places do duly meet
together, every week, on a set day in their Vestry; and decide such differences
as happen amongst them; and may well be enjoined, to take notice of such abuses
and mis-demeanours, as are incident into their Parish, for their speedy
reformation, within the Verge of their own power.

In stead of their Presbyteries, consisting of several Pastors, we have our
number, and combination of Ministers, in the Divisions of our several Deanries;
under which are ranged all the Ministers within that circuit; Over whom the
Rural Dean (as he is called) is every year chosen, by the said Ministers of
that division, as their moderator, for the year ensuing; whose office (if it
were carefully looked unto, and reduced to the original institution) might be
of singular use to Gods Church; This Deanery, or Presbytery, consisting of
several Pastors, may be enjoined to meet together every month, or oftener (if
it seem fit) in some City or Town next unto them; and may there have their
exercise of prophesying, as I have known it practiced in some parts of this
kingdom; and as it is earnestly wished and recommended, by that
excellently-Learned Lord Verulame, late Lord Chancelour of England, in his
prudent considetions: and then, and there, may endeavor to decide any doubt,
that may arise in their several Parishes; either concerning the doctrine of
their Minister, or scruple in cases of conscience, and may trans^ct any
public business that may concern their whole division; But if any such
matter or question should arise, as their divided opinions cannot fully
determine; it may (under charge of silence) be put over to a more public
meeting; which is the Synodal assembly of the Clergy held twice a year, under
the moderation (hitherto) of the Archdeacon; and if there the question fail, of
a full determination, it is, or may be referred, (with like silence and peace)
to a Diocesan Synod, which may be held every year once; under the presidency of
the Bishop; and if yet the decision come not home, it may be referred to the
determining of a Provincial Synod, or yet higher, to a National: So as in these
cases of doubts, or errors, if men would not be wanting to themselves, nothing
needs to be wanting in the state we now stand in, to the safety, and happiness
of our Church.

For matter of ordination of Ministers; the former constitutions of our Church
have deeply enjoined the presence, and assistance of those, who, by their
original institutions, are the Presbytery of the Bishop, at, and in, the
examination, and allowance of the persons to be ordained; requiring also, the
joint-imposition of those hands, which attested the sufficiency of the said
Examinants; not without a severe sanction of two years suspension, of the act
of Ordaining, to pass upon any Bishop, or Suffragan, that shall be found
failing in any of the particulars; the qualification of those that are to be
ordained, is in our Canons already set forth, with much caution; for their age,
their degrees, their abilities, the testimony of their holy conversation;
neither need I doubt to affirm, that he, who (besides all other circumstances
of Education) is able to give a good account of his faith in Latin, according
to the received Articles of the Church of England, and to confirm the same by
sufficient testimonies, out of the holy Scripture, may be thought competently
fit, (for matter of knowledge) to enter upon the first step of Deaconship; which
the wisdom of the Church has (according to the Apostles rule) appointed (not
without a sufficient distance of time) in way of probation, to the higher order
of Ministry; forbidding to give both orders at once; and requiring, that he,
who is ordained Deacon, shall continue a whole year, at least in that station,
except, upon some weighty reasons, it shall seem fit to the Bishop, to contract
the time limited: and, lest there should be any subreption in this sacred
business, it is Ordered, that these Ordinations should be no other then solemn,
both in respect of time and place; neither ought they to be, nor in some places
are, without a public precognization of lawful warning affixed upon the
Cathedral Church door, where the said Ordination shall be celebrated; and over
and besides the charge, that none shall be admitted to be a Candidate of holy
Orders, but he who brings sufficient testimonials of his good life and
conversation, under the seal of some College in Cambridge or Oxford, or of
three, or four grave Ministers, together with the subscription and testimony of
other credible persons, who have known his life and behavior, by the space of
three years next before; it is well known to you, that before the act of
ordination there is public Proclamation made to the whole Assembly, that if
any man knows any crime or impediment in any of the persons presented, for
which he ought not to be ordained, that he should come forth and declare it
before any hand be laid upon his head, for his full admission.

Notwithstanding all which care of our dear Mother the Church of England; if it
shall be thought meet, that any further act of Trial, shall pass upon those,
which are suitors for Ordination, how easily may it be ordered, that at the
monthly (or, if need be, more frequent) meeting of the Ministers, within the
same Presbytery, or Deanery; they may be appointed to make trial of their gifts,
and undergo such further examination of their abilities, as shall be thought
requisite, ere they shall be presented, and admitted by the Bishop, and his
Presbytery to that holy sunction.

And whereas it is much stood upon, that it is meet the people, (whose souls
must have right in him, to whose trust they are committed) should have some
hand in their consent to that Pastor, by whom they must be fed; it must be
said, that besides their devolution of their right to the patron, who, as their
trustee, presents a Minister for them, it may be no prejudice at all to the
power which by Law and inheritance is settled upon the patron, that the person
whom his choice pitches upon, be appointed beforehand to preach, (for a trial)
to that Congregation to which he is so designed; and if either for his voice,
or other just exceptions he be found unmeet for them, that another, more fit
may be recommended by the said Patron to the place; but if through faction, or
self-will, or partiality, the multitude shall prove peevish, and fastidious,
they may, in such a case, be overruled by just authority.

As for matter of censures, it may not be denied, that there has been great
abuse in the managing of them, both upon Ecclesiastical persons, and others:
suspension of Ministers upon slight, and insufficient causes, both ab officio,
and beneficio, has been too rife in some places of latter times; and the
dreadful sentence of excommunication has too frequently, and familiary passed
upon light and trivial matters: How happy were it, if a speedy course may be
taken, for the prevention of this evil; In the conference at Hampton Court, a
motion was strongly made to this purpose, but without effect; if the wisdom of
the present Parliament shall settle some other way for the curbing of
contumacious offenses against Church Authority, it will be an act worthy of
their care and justice. In the mean time, as for this, and all other
Ecclesiastical proceedings, it may with much facility, and willing consent of
all parts, be ordered, that the Bishop shall not take upon him, to inflict
either this, or any other important censure, without the concurrence of his
Presbytery; which shall be a means (in all likelihood) to prevent any
inconvenience that may arise from the wonted way of Judicature.

As for the co-assession of a Lay-presbytery, in swaying these affairs of
Church Government; Ye well know how new it is; some of you might have been
acquainted with the man that brought it first into any part of this Island; and
what ground there is for it, either in Scripture, or antiquity, I appeall to
your judgment: Surely the late learned Author of the Counsel for the reforming
the Church of England, (although otherwise a vehement assertor of the French
Discipline) ingenuously confesses, that however those Protestants which live
under Popish Governors, have done wisely, in deputing some choice men,
selected out of their congregations, whom they call Elders, to share with their
pastors, in the care and management of Ecclesiastical affairs; Yet those
Protestant Churches which live under the government of Protestant Princes, may
with the safty of those respects, which mutually intercede betwixt Pastors and
People, forbear any such deputation: for as much, as the supreme Magistrate,
transferrs (for the most part) to himself, that which is the wonted charge of
those deputed Elders; concluding, that those men, do merely lose their labor
who so busily endeavor on the one side, to disprove the antiquity of the
Lay-Eldership; and, on the other, by weak proofs to maintain, (clean contrary
to the mind of the Apostle) that the text of Saint Paul (1 Timothy 5.17.) is to be
understood of Pastors, and Lay Elders; Thus he; with what fair probability, I
leave to your judgment.

Neither is it any intention of mine to meddle with any piece of that
government, which obtains in other the Churches of God; but only, to
contribute my poor opinion, concerning the now-to-be-setled affairs of our own.

What shall I need to suggest unto you the dangerous underworkings of other
Sects? secretly indevouring to spring their hidden mines to the overthrow both
of the one government, and the other; whereof, without speedy remedy, perhaps
it will be too late to complain; no doubt, the wisdom, and authority of that
great Senate (whom ye also serve to advise) will forthwith interpose it self to
the prevention of those mischiefs, which the variety of these heresies, and
sects (though some of them cloaked with the fairest pretenses) threaten to this
poor Church: It is no boot for me to tell you, that the less disunion there is,
the more ground of safety; and that where the holy purposes of Reformation may
be effected, with the least change, there must needs be the most hope of
accordance.

The rest to the wise application of the powerful and judicious; It is enough
for me to have thus boldly shot my bolt amongst you; and to have thus freely
discovered my honest, and well meant thoughts to so able judgments; What I want
in my poor indevours shall be supplied with my prayers, that God would be
pleased to compose all our miserable distractions, and to put an happy issue,
to the long and perilous agitations of this woefully tottering and bleeding
Church and Kingdom; Which the good God of Heaven vouchsafe to grant for his
great mercies sake, and for the sake of the dear Son of his love Jesus Christ,
the Just. Amen

Philalethirenaeus.
September. 12. 1644.
Certain IRREFRAGABLE PROPOSITIONS WORTHY OF SERIOUS CONSIDERATION.
By J. H. B. of EXON.
1.
NO man may swear, or induce another man to swear unlawfully.

2.
IT is no lawful Oath that is not attended with Truth, Justice, and Judgment,
Jer. 4.2. the first whereof requires that the thing sworn be true: the second,
that it be just: the third, that it be not undue, and unmeet to be sworn and
undertaken.

3.
A Promissory Oath which is to the certain prejudice of another man's right,
cannot be attended with Justice.

4.
NO prejudice of another man's right can be so dangerous and sinful, as that
prejudice which is done to the right of public and Sovereign Authority.

5.
THe right of Sovereign Authority is highly prejudiced, when private subjects
incroach upon it; and shall, upon suspicion of the disavowed intentions, or
actions of their Princes, combine, and bind themselves to enact, establish, or
alter any matters concerning Religion, without (and therefore much more if
against) the authority of their Lawful Sovereign.

6.
A Man is bound in Conscience to reverse and disclaim that which he was induced
unlawfully to engage himself by Oath to perform.

7.
NO oath is, or can be of force, that is made against a lawful oath formerly
taken; so as he that has sworn Allegiance to his Sovereign, and thereby bound
himself to maintain the right, power, and authority of his said Sovereign,
cannot by any second oath, be tied to do ought that may tend to the
infringement thereof: and if he have so tied himself, the Obligation is, ipso
facto, void and frustrate.

COROLLARIE.
IF therefore any sworn Subject shall by pretenses and persuasions, be drawn to
bind himself by Oath or Covenant, to determine, establish, or alter any act
concerning matter of Religion, without, or against the allowance of Sovereign
Authority, the act is unlawful and unjust, and the party so engaged is bound in
conscience to reverse and renounce his said act: Otherwise (besides the
horrible scandal which he shall draw upon Religion) he does manifestly incurr
the sin of the breach of the third and fifth Commandments.

Two, as undoubted Propositions concerning Church Government.
1.
NO man living, no History, can show any well-allowed and settled National
Church in the whole Christian World, that has been governed otherwise then by
Bishops, in a meet and moderate imparity, ever since the times of Christ and
his Apostles, until this present Age.

2.
NO man living, no record of History can show any Lay-Presbyter that ever was
in the whole Christian Church, until this present Age.

COROLLARIE.
IF men would as easily learn as Christian wisdom can teach them, to
distinguish betwixt callings and persons, betwixt the substance of callings,
and the not necessary appendances of them, betwixt the rules of Government, and
the errors of Execution, those ill-raised quarrels would dye alone.

Da pacem Domine. Amen. J. E.

VIA MEDIA. The way of Peace IN THE FIVE BUSY ARTICLES Commonly known by the
Name of ARMINIUS. TOUCHING 1. Predestination. 2. The Extent of Christ's Death.
3. Man's Free Will and corruption. 4. The manner of our conversion to God. 5.
Perseverance.
Wherein is laid forth so fair an Accommodation of the different Opinions as
may content both parts and procure happy accord.

By J. H. D. of Worcester.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCLX.

TO THE KINGS Most Excellent MAJESTY.
May it please your Majesty,
THere needs no prophetical Spirit to discern by a small Cloud, that there is
a storm coming toward our Church, such a one, as shall not only drench our
plumes, but shake our peace. Already do we see the Sky thicken, and hear the
winds whistle hollow afarr off, and feel all the Presages of a Tempest, which
the late example of our Neighbors bids us fear. It boots not to persuade your
Majesty to betake your self to your Chariot, to outride the shower, since your
gracious compassion would not be willing to put off the sense of a common
evil: Rather let me take boldness to implore your Majesty's seasonable
prevention: Only the powerful breath of your Sovereign authority can dispell
these Clouds, and clear our Heaven, and reduce an happy Calm. In the mean time
give leave to your well meaning Servants, to contribute their best wishes to
the common Tranquillity. I see every Man ready to rank himself unto a side,
and to draw in the quarrel he affects: I see no Man thrusting himself between
them, and either holding, or joining their hands for peace: This good (however
thankless) office I have here boldly undertaken, showing how unjustly we are
divided, and by what means we may be made, and kept entire. A project (which if
it may receive life, and light from your gracious eyes, and shall by your
Royal command be drawn into speedy practice) promises to free this noble and
flourishing Church from a perilous inconvenience. Let it be no disparagement to
so important a motion, that it falls from so mean a hand, then which, yet none
can be more syncerely consecrated to the service of your Majesty and this
Church, the mutual happiness of both which, is dearer then life to

Your Majesty's most humble, and faithful devoted Subject and Servant JOS. HALL.

THE First Article OF GODS PREDESTINATION.
1 WHatsoever God, who is the God of truth, has engaged himself by promise to
do, the same he undoubtedly has willed, and will accordingly perform.

2. There is no Son of Adam, to whom God has not promised, that, if he shall
believe in Christ, repent, and persevere, he shall be saved.

We must receive Gods promises in such wise as they be generally set forth to
us in holy Scriptures, and in our doings, that will of God is to be followed,
which we have expressly declared unto us in the Word of God.

Artic. of the Chu. 17. Est generalis, and conditionata voluntas, seu generalis
promissio Evangelica, etc. docens promissiones divinas fic amplectendas esse,
ut nobis in sacris literis generaliter propositae sunt.

D. Overal. de 5. Artic. in Belgio controversis. Art. 1. 3. This general, and
undoubted will of God, must be equally proclaimed to all Men through the World
without exception, and ought to be so received, and believed, as it is by him
published, and revealed.

Est quidem decretum hoc annuntiativum salutis omnibus ex aequo, and
indiscriminatim promulgandum. Theol. Britan. Dordrac. in Actis Synodi in
Thesibus heterodox.

These. 1. Gratiam communem and sufficientem in mediis divinitus ordinatis, si
homines verbo Dei Spirituique sancto deesse noluerint, etc.

D. Overal. Artic. 1. 4. All Men (within the Pale of the Church especially)
have from the mercy of God such common helps toward this belief, and
Salvation, as that the neglect thereof makes any of them justly guilty of their
own condemnation.

In Ecclesia, ubi juxta promissum hoc Evangelii, salus omnibus offertur, ea est
administratio gratiae quae s^fficit ad convincendos omnes impoenitentes and
incredulos, quod sua culpa voluntaria, and vel neglectu, vel contemptu
Evangelii perierint, and oblatum beneficium amiserint.

Theol. Britan. Dordrac. de Art. 2. These. 5. 5. Besides the general will of
God, he has eternally willed, and decreed to give a special, and effectual
grace to those, that are predestinate according to the good pleasure of his
will, whereby they do actually believe, obey, and persevere, that they may be
saved: so as the same God, that would have all Men to be saved, if they
believe, and be not wanting to his Spirit, has decreed to work powerfully in
some, whom he has particularly chosen, that they shall believe, and not be
wanting to his Spirit in whatsoever shall be necessary for their salvation.

Deinde in secundo loco, ut succurreret humanae infirmitati, etc. voluisse
addere specialem gratiam magis efficacem and abundantem, quibus placuerit
communicandam, per quam non solum possint, sed etiam actu velint, credant,
obediant and perseverent.

D. Overal. Art. 1. He has constantly decreed by his Counsel secret to us, to
deliver from curse and damnation those whom he has chosen in Christ out of
Mankind, and to bring them by Christ to everlasting salvation, as Vessels made
to honor; wherefore they which be called according to Gods purpose by his
Spirit working in them in due season, they through grace obey the calling, they
be justified freely, they be made sons of God by adoption, they be made like
the image of his only begotten Son, Jesus Christ, they walk religiously in good
works, and at length by Gods mercy they attain to everlasting felicity.

Art. of Relig. Art. 17. 6. It is not the prevision of faith or any other
grace, or act of Man, whereupon this decree of God is grounded, but the mere,
and gracious good will, and pleasure of God from all eternity appointing to
save those, whom he has chosen in Christ, as the head and foundation of the
elect.

7. This decree of Gods election is absolute and unchangeable and from
everlasting.

8. God does not either actually damn or appoint any soul to damnation without
the consideration and respect of sin.

Non ex praescientia humanae fidei, aut voluntatis, sed ex proposito divinae
voluntatis, and gratiae de his, quos Deus elegit in Christo liberandis and
salvandis.

D. Overal. Art. 1. Particulare decretum absolutum.

D. Overal. ibid. Predestination to life is the everlasting purpose of God,
whereby before the foundations of the world were laid, he has constantly
decreed, etc.

Article of Relig. 17. Deus nominem damnat, aut damnationi destinat, nisi ex
consideratione peccati.

Theol. Britan. Dordr. Artic. 1. de reprob. These. 5. Of Christ's Death.
DEus lapsi generis humani miseratus, misit filium suum, qui seipsum dedit
pretium redemptionis pro peccatis totius mundi.

Nemo mortalium est qui non possit vere, and serio per Ministros Evangelii
vocari ad participationem remissionis peccatorum, and vitae aeternae per hanc
mortem Christi.

Theol. Brit. Dordr. de 2 Art. These. 3. GOd pitying the woeful condition of man
fallen by his free will into sin, and perdition, sent his own Son, that he
should give him himself as a ransom for the sins of the whole World, so as
there is no living soul, that may not be truly, and seriously invited by his
faith to take hold of the forgiveness of his sins, and everlasting life by the
virtue of this death of Christ with certain assurance of obtaining both.

In hoc merito Christi sundatur universale promissum Evangelicum, juxta quod
omnes in Christum credentes remissionem peccatorum and vitam aeternam re ipsa
consequantur.

Theol. Britan. Dordrac. ibid. These. 4. 2. Upon this infinite merit of Christ's
death is grounded that universal promise, and covenant of the Gospel,
offering remission, and salvation to all Men through the whole World, if they
be not wanting to the receipt thereof.

Illud pretium quod solutum est pro omnibus, and quod omnibus credentibus certo
proficiet ad vitam aeternam, non proficit tamen omnibus, etc.

Theol. Brit. Dordr. de Art. 2. Explic. These. 3. 3. Notwithstanding this
infinite merit of Christ's death, the fruit and benefit thereof does not accrue
to all Men, but to those only who do apply the virtue of his death by faith.

Constat Christum proponendo Evangelium, etiam illam gratiam internam
administrasse, quae hactenus sussiciebat, ut ex eo quod non acceptarent, vel
rejicerent Evangelium just coargui possint infidelitatis.

Theol. Britan. ibid. in explicat. These. 5. In Ecclesia, and ubi salus omnibus
offertur, ea est administratio gratiae quae sufficit ad convincendos omnes
impoenitentes, and incredulos, quod sua culpa voluntaria, and vel neglectu, vel
contemptu evangelii perierint, ut supra.

4. Those within the Church especially, that do not reap this benefit by the
death of Christ perish manifestly by their own default, forasmuch, as God has
ordained, that wheresoever the gracious promise of the Gospel shall be
preached, there shall be, and is withal ordinarily so much supernatural grace
offered together with the outward means, as may justly convince the impenitent,
and unbelieving of a wilful neglect, if not a contemptuous rejection.

5. Besides this general promise of the Gospel, God has decreed to give a
special, more abundant, and effectual grace unto his elect, whereby they may
be enabled certainly, and infallibly to apply unto themselves the benefit of
Christ's death, and do accordingly believe, and persevere, and attain Salvation.

3. Supposita morte Christi pro omnibus hominibus, and intention Dei
conditionata de gratia promissionis Evangelicae generali, addit intentionem Dei
specialem de applicando beneficio mortis Christi per gratiam magis abundantem,
and efficacem absolute, certo and infallibiliter solis electis fine praejudicio
reliquorum.

D. Overal. ibid. Art. 2. The Third and Fourth ARTICLE Of Man's Corruption, His
Free Will, His Conversion to God, and the Manner of it.
OMnes consentiunt liberum arbitrium nihil boni posse sine gratia praeveniente,
comitante, subsequente, ita ut gratia teneat principium, medium, and finem, in
conversione, and fide, and omni opere bono.

D. Overal. ibid Art. 3. 1. Man's will since the fall has of it self no ability
to any Spiritual Act: every good motion of it must come from the Grace of God
preventing* accompaning, following it, yea naturally it is inclinable to all
evil.

In voluntate Scilicet lapsa est potentia passiva ad esse hoc supernaturale
extrinsecus adveniens recipiendum, non autem activa ad idem, vel per se, vel
cum alio producendum,

Theol. Brit. de Artic. 3. and 4. These. de conversione 2. Ipsam voluntatem
bonam faciendo vivisicat,

Epist. Synod. Episc. Afric. cit. ibid. 2. There is not therefore in the will
of the natural man any active power to work his own conversion: In the
regeneration God infuseth a new life, he quickens the will by making it good.

Sunt quaedam opera externa ab hominibus ordinary requisita priusquam ad
statum regenerationis, aut conversionis perducantur.

3. There are yet certain foregoing acts, that are prerequired to the
conversion of a man, and they are both inward and outward.

Quae ab iisdem quandoque libere fieri, quandoque libere omitti solent, ut
adire Ecclesiam, audire verbi praeconium, and id genus alia.

ibid. 4. Outward as to go to the Church, to sit reverently, to hearken to the
word spoken: In these we have freedom of will either way.

Sunt quaedam effecta interna ad conversionem sen regenerationem praevia, quae
virtute verbi, spiritusque in nondum justificatorum cordibus excitantur, qualia
sunt, notitia voluntatis divinae, sensus peccati, timor poenae, cogitatio de
liberatione, spes aliqua veniae.

ibid. These. 2. Non solet gratia divina homines perducere per subitum
Enthusiasmum sed multis praeviis actionibus ministerio verbi subactos, and
praeparatos.

ibid. in explic. These. 2. 5. Inward as the knowledge of Gods will, the feeling
of our sin, the fear of hell, the thought of deliverance, some hope of pardon;
for the grace of God does not use to work upon a Man immediately by sudden
raptures, but by meet preparations, informing the Judgment of his danger,
wounding the conscience by the terrors of the law, suppleing it by the
promises of the Gospel: These inward Acts tending toward conversion are by the
power of the word, and Spirit of God wrought in the heart of a Man not yet
justified.

Quos Deus mediaente verbo per spiritum suum hunc in modum afficit, eos ad
fidem conversionemque vere, and serio vocat, and invitat,

Theol. Brit. ibid. These. 3. 6. Those whom God thus affects by his word, and
Spirit, he does truly and seriously call, and invite to faith, and conversion.

7. Those whom he has thus affected, and called, he forsakes not, neither
cease to further in the way to their conversion, till through their willing
neglect, or repulse of this initiall grace, he be forsaken of them.

Quos ita afficit Deus, non deserit, nec desistit in vera ad conversionem via
promovere, priusquam ab illis per neglectionem voluntariam, aut hujus gratiae
initialis repulsam deseratur.

Hi praecedanei effectus virtute verbi spiritusque rebellis voluntatis vitio
suffocari, ac penitus extingui possunt, and in multis solent, adeo ut nonnulli
in quorum mentilus virtute verbi, spiritusque impressa fuit aliqualis notitia
veritatis divinae, dolor de peccatis suis, aliquod desiderium, and aliqua cura
liberationis mutentur plane in contrarium, verita^em rejiciant, and odio
habeant, concupiscentiis suis se tradant, in peccatis occalleant,

ibid. These. 5. 8. These foregoing inward acts wrought by the word, and Spirit
both may be, and are many times through the fault of the rebellious will
choked, and quenched in the hearts of Men; so as after some knowledge of divine
truth, some sorrow for sin, and desire, and care of deliverance they fall off
to the contrary, and give themselves over to their own lusts.

Ne Electi quidem ipsi in his praecedane is ad regenerationem actibus ita se
gerant unquam, quin ut propter negligentiam and resistentiam suam possint just
a Deo deseri and derelinqui; sed ea est erga eos Dei specialis misericordia, ut
quam vis, etc. Eos tamen iterum, iterumque urgeat Deus, nec desistat promo vere
donec eosdem gratiae suae prorsus subjugaverit, ac in statu filiorum
regeneratorum collocaverit,

Theol. Br. ibid. These. 6. 9. Yea the very elect of God do not so carry
themselves in these foregoing Acts, but that they do oft-times justly deserve
for their neglect and resistance to be forsaken of God; But such is his
special grace and mercy to them, that he notwithstanding follows them
effectually with powerful helps till he have wrought out his good work in them.

Gratiam specialem, and essicacem ad salutem certo perducentem, his, quos Deus
ex beneplacito suo gratioso elegerit, propriam profitetur,

D. Overal. in Art. 3. Sent. 3. 10. When the hearts of his elect are thus
excited, and prepared by the foregoing Acts of grace, God does by his secret,
and wonderful work regenerate, and renew them, infusing into them his
quickening Spirit, and induing all the powers of their soul with new qualities
of grace, and holiness.

Deus animos electorum suorum praedictis gratiae suae actibus excitatos, and
praeparatos intima quadam, and mirabili operatione regenerat, and quasi de novo
creat infundendo spiritum vivificantem, and omnes animae facultates novis
qualitatibus imbuendo,

Theol. Br. de convers. These. 1. 11. Upon this conversion, which God works in
the heart, follows instantly our actual conversion to God, whiles from our
new changed will, God fetches the act of our believing, and turning to him. He
gives that power, which the will exercises: so as it is at once both ours, and
Gods; ours in that we do work; Gods, in that he works it in us.

Praedictam conversionem sequitur haec nostra conversio actualis Deo
perliciente ipsum actum credendi, and convertendi, ex mutata voluntate quae
acta adeo agit and ipsa convertendo se ad Deum, and credendo; hoc est actum
suum vitalem simul eliciendo,

ibid. 12. In working upon the will, God does not overthrow the nature of the
will, but causes it to work after it is own native manner, freely, and
willingly, neither does he pull up by the roots that sinful possibility, which
is in our nature to resist good motions, but does sweetly, and effectually work
in Man a firm and ready will to obey him, his grace is so powerful, that it
is not violent.

Divina haec actio non laedit voluntatis libertatem, sed roborat, neque tamen
extirpat radicitus vitiosam resistendi possibilitatem, sed and pravitatem ad
resistendum motibus spiritus sancti; sed haec resistibilitas propter
efficacissimam, and suavissimam motionem gratiae nequit in actum hic and nunc
erumpere, huic gratiae resisti nequit, quia primum operatur velle, id est non
resistere, etc.

ibid. in explic. These. 2. Deum cum voluerit, and quibus voluerit gratiam tam
abundantem, tam potentem, aut congruam, aut alio modo efficacem concedere, ut
quamvis possit voluntas ratione suae libertatis resistere, non tam^n resistat,
sed certo and infallibiliter obsequatur,

Dr. Overal. in Artic. 4. It is true that whiles our natural concupiscence
reigns in us we have not only a possibility but a proneness to resistance
which yet is by the gracious and effectual motion of God Spirit so over ruled,
that it breaks not forth into a present Act, for God works in us to will, that
is, not to resist: Yea the very will to resist, is for the time taken away by
the power of grace.

Deus hominem conversum, and fidelem non ita semper movet ad bonos actus
subsequentes, ut tollat ipsam voluntatem resistendi, sed quandoque permittit
illam vitio suo deficere a ductu gratiae, and in particularibus multis actibus
concupiscentiae suae parere,

Theol. Br. ibid. These. 3. 13. God does not always so work in the regenerate,
that he does ever take from them this will to resist, but sometimes suffers
them through their own fault to give way to their own sinful desires; for
howsoever in those principal Acts, which are absolutely necessary to Salvation
the grace of God works powerfully in the elect, both the will, and the deed in
his own good time, yet in some particular acts, he thinks good for his own holy
purposes to leave the best Men sometimes to themselves, who do thereupon grieve
his good Spirit by a recoverable resistance.

Oportet semper discrimen statuere inter illos actus principales, sine quibus
salus Electorum non constat, and particulares subsequentes actus, etc.

ibid. in explic. Of the Fifth ARTICLE OF PERSEVERANCE.
QUibusdam non electis conceditur quaedam illuminatio supernaturalis, cujus
virtute intelligant ea, quae in verbo Dei annuntiantur esse vera; iisdemque
assensum praebent minime simulatum. In iisdem ex hac cognitione, and fide
oritur affectuum quaedam mutatio, and morum aliqualis emendatio, non electi huc
usque progressi ad statum tamen adoptions and justificationis nunquam
perveniunt,

Theol. Br. de 5. Art. These. 1, 2, 3, 4. 1. EVen among those, which belong not
to the election of God there are some, that are enlightened by supernatural
knowledge, and give their assent to the truth of the Gospel, receiveing the same
with some joy, and from that knowledge, and faith find some change in their
affections, and lives, who yet howsoever they may pass in the judgment of
charity, never attained to that hearty renovation, which is joined with
justification, nor yet to the immediate disposition thereunto, and therefore
were never in the true State of the adoption of Sons; these may utterly fall
away from that grace, which they have professed.

Unde constat ^os nunquam reipsa pertingere ad illam mentis, and affestuum
mutationem, and renovationem, quae cum justificatione conjuncta est; imo nec ad
illam, quae proxime praeparat, ac disponit ad justificationem,

ibid. in explic. 4. Artic. Idem regeniti ac justificati quandoque suo vitio
incidunt in atrocia peccata,

ibid. These. 3. de persever. 2. The true believer, and regenerate has no
immunity, or privilege, whereby he is secured from falling into those horrible
sins, which are committed by others.

Indignationem Dei paternam incurrunt, damnabilem contrahunt,

etc. ibid. Ita ut dum in eo statu impoenitentes persistunt, nec de^eant, nec
possint aliter sibi persuadere, quam se esse morti obnoxios,

in explic. ejusd. Art. 3. Whiles he continues in those sins, he runs into the
displeasure of God, and is in the guilt of damnation, so as he neither can, nor
ought to persuade himself other, then that abiding in this State impenitent, he
is obnoxious to eternal death.

Talis peccator stat merito suo damnandus,

Theol. Br. ibid These. 5. Jus ad regnum non tollitur, etc. Jure regni
haereditario excidere non potest,

in explic. Art. 6. Tertia sententia Ecclesiae Anglicanae ponit cum Augustino
credentes quidem communiter posse a gratia, and fide per carnis infirmitatem
and tentationis recidere and etiam deficere; sed addit illos credentes, qui
secundum propositum vocati sunt, quique in fide viva solid radicati fuerint,
non posse totaliter, aut finaliter deficere, and perire, sed per gratiam Dei
specialem, and efficacem ita in fide vera, and viva perseverare, ut tandem ad
vitam eternam perducantur,

D. Overal. in Art. 5. 4. Howsoever such a one stands by his own desert in the
State of damnation, yet those who are soundly rooted in a true, and lively
faith, lose not all their right to the inheritance of Heaven, neither can
either totally, or finally fall from grace, and perish everlastingly: But by
the special, and effectual favor, and inoperation of God are kept up, and
enabled to persevere in a true, and lively faith, so as that at last they are
brought to eternal life.

These are the Articles of accord, which whosoever holds and rests in, my
soul betwixt him, and his harms in the ignorance of further particulars. Let
there be a thousand parcells, and Atoms of truth contained in these heads,
there needs no more be known, perhaps not all these, let there be no fewer
errors in misholding those other manifold shreds of opinion, yet these are no
rubs in our way to Heaven: And if now having consented in these chief
specialties, we will needs fall out about immateriall inferences, we are like
to quarrelous brethren, who having agreed upon the main division of their
inheritance, fall out about some heaps of rubbish. Away with this unquiet
Spirit from us, that profess Christians; what should these Mattockes and
hammers sound in the living Temple of the holy Ghost?

Men, Brethren, Fathers help; who sees not a dangerous fire kindling in our
Church by these five fatal brands? which if it be not speedily quenched,
threatens a furious eruption, and shall too late dye in our ashes. That crafty
Devil, that envyes our peace, takes this perilous season to distract us, that
so we might fall as a prey to a common Enemy. It is not yet too late to redress
this evil: A few Pailsfull may yet seasonably extinguish this weak flame,
which time will make headstrong, and irremediable. Let me boldly say, it is not
disputation, it is not Counter-writing that can quench it; These courses are
but the bellows to diffuse, and raise these flashes to more height, and rage;
we saw it in the practice of our neighbors, never did that Belgic quarrel
grow to extremity, till after the solemn conference before the States at the
Hague, which was intended to appease it. There is no possible redress, but in a
severe Edict of restraint to charm all tongues, and pens upon the sharpest
punishment from passing those moderate bounds, which the Church of England,
guided by the Scriptures has expressly set, or which on both sides are fully
accorded on. If any Man herein complain of an usurpation upon the conscience
and an unjust servitude, let him be taught the difference betwixt matters of
faith, and Scholasticall disquisitions: Those have God for their author, these
the brain of Men, Those are contained in Scriptures, either in express Terms,
or irrefragable consequences; these are only deduced thence by such crooked
inferences as cannot command assent; Those do mainly import our Salvation,
these not at all. Those are for the Pulpit, these for the Schools; In those the
heart is tied to believe, the tongue must be free to speak, In these the heart
may be free, the tongue may be bound, of this latter sort are the points we
have now in hand, besides, and after the accorded particulars, which how unfit
they are for popular ears, and how unworthy to break the peace of the Church,
shall appear in the difficulty of the questions in the unimportance of the ill
raised differences.

Visum sapientissimo numini obscuritate quadam and locorum ambiguitate
involvere haec mysteria.

For the former we need no other Judge then St. Austin himself, who calls this
question of predestination, whereon the rest depend, Questionem difficillimam,
and paucis intelligibilem, a question most difficult, and which but few can
understand. What need we any other witness then the learned followers of
Arminius, who in their Epistle to foreign Divines confess that it has seemed
good to the most wise God to involve these mysteries in obscurity, and in an
ambiguity of places seemingly contradictory.

Haec ipsa de praed. perplexa, spinosa and obscuritate sua molestissima, ibid.

And some Pages after, they profess to subscribe to the Judgment of all
Divines, both ancient, and modern, that these questions of predestination being
perplexed, thorny, and troublesome through their obscureness, may without all
detriment of Salvation be either unknown, or discussed.

Neither was that comparison of Strigelius amiss, who likens the place of
predestination in Divinity to the Cossick Rule in Arithmetic. But what an
idleness were it to prove the danger of the passage through these Sands, and
Rocks, when we see the Shipwracks? Where ever did the great Doctor of the
Gentiles cry O altitudo but, in this point? To fall upon these discourses then
in popular auditories, what were it other, then to teach Algebra to those, that
yet know not their figures, or to turn them lose into a perilous Sea, who know
neither Coast, nor Card, nor Compass.

But were the knowledge of these differences as necessary as it is hard, the
difficulty should but whet our appetite, and encourage our industry; what if it
appear there is as little use, as ease in the common Canvasses of them; and
that when the noise of passion is stilled on both sides, so as each will but
hear other speak with just favor, and moderation, our variance shall be proved
less material then may be worthy of the war of Brethren. This shall be made
good in our following discourse, which I entreat both parts in the bowels of
Jesus Christ to examine without prejudice, as that which proceeds from an heart
sincerely devoted to truth and peace. The Judge of all hearts, before whom I
stand, knows with what honest intentions to the welfare of this noble Church,
with what freedom from all partial affections, with what indignation at these
unseasonable troubles, with what zeal of the common tranquillity, I put my hand
to this too necessary (if thankless) task. Who can tell whether God did not
purposely send me to be a witness of these quarrels abroad, that I might be
able to speak a word in season for their appeasing at home.

That we may distinguish the parts without any aspersion, I shall crave leave
to call the followers of the Tenet of the Synod of Dort, Defendants: The other,
which vary from these, following the steps, either of acute Arminius, or of our
learned, and judicious Bishop Overal, Opponents. The Netherlands are out of our
way in this quarrel, yet for the neerness, both of the place, and cause let us
touch there in our passage. Now then let us take a short survay of the
particular differences, and call each part to the nearest verge of an accord.

The first is the point of predestination, concerning which, three things are
wont to be questioned. 1. The motive or ground. 2ly. The object. 3ly. The order
of it.

Neque fidem, neque infidelitatem causam esse impulsivam decreti Dei, sed
liberrimam Dei voluntatem volentis hujus misereri, illius non misereri: damus
tamen fidem, and infidelitatem conditiones esse, sine quibus, nec hunc salvare,
nec illum praeterire ex puro puto beneplacito visum fuit Deo.

Epist. Remonstr. ad ext. p. 38. For the first, both parts hold there is no
other impulsive cause of Gods Decree of Election, or reprobation, then the free
will, and pleasure of the Almighty: Only the one part holds, that Gods decree
looks at faith, and infidelity, as conditions in those, who are to be chosen,
or refused: The other easily graunts that no Man is elect but the believer, no
Man reprobate, but the rebellious, and unbeliever, although they will not put
these as forerequired conditions into the act of Gods decree. Why should the
mere supposall of a condition be worth their quarrel, since it is yielded on
all hands, that in Gods decree of our justification he looks at our faith, as a
necessary condition required thereunto, without any derogation to the perfect
freedom of that his gracious decree. If faith may be granted not to be in our
own power, but that it is the gift of God, there can no main inconvenience
follow upon this Tenet, that God in our election had an eye to our
qualification with that faith, which he would give us.

An quisquam dicere audehit Deum non praescisse quibus esset daturus, ut
crederent, aut quos daturus esset filio suo, ut ex iis non perderet quenquam.

Aug. de bono persev. c. 14. Prius si dicant Deum in nobis fidem, and
perseverationem operari, nihil est, cur nobiscum certent, sequitur enim, Deum
in homine non potuisse plus boni praescire, quam ipsemet in (...) electo suo
efficere decrevit.

Contra Rem. in Colloq. Hag. p. 26. Thus the Belgic Defendents: if they grant
(say they) that God works in us faith, and perseverance, there is no cause, why
they should contend with us; for it follows, that God could not foresee more
good in Man then he decreed to work in him, as his elect one.

Quaestio est, non Utrum Deus, cum hominem eligit, etc. Sed an cum
confideraverit, ut jam credentes dono, and gratia Dei, etc.

Now hear how close the opponents profess to come. The question is not, says
Corvinus, one of their learned Authors, Whether God when he chose Man
considered him, as who, by the power of nature, without the help of grace,
should believe, but whether God considered him, as now believeing by the gift,
and grace of God: This is it (says he) which Arminius teaches, who
acknowledges faith to be the pure pute gift of God.

Hoc dicit Arminius, qui fidem agnoscit purum putum Dei donum,

Jo. Ar. Corvin. advers. Tilen. p. 32. Would we not now think both parts
agreed? The Defendents do but desire, that faith may be granted to be the mere
gift of God. The Opponents profess to grant it; what do they now pretend to
stick at, a needless scruple?

Equidem Arminius agnoscit fidem. Dei donum esse, sed donum in eligendo
praerequisitum, and non ex electione, sed alia Dei voluntate datum.

ibid. Corv. p. 54. How faith is granted to be a fruit of Election to Grace see
Remonstr. scripta dogmat. Declar. Sent. 1. p. 9.

Faith is considered, say the Opponents as a gift of God; but whether
proceeding from his election, or from another will of his, this says Corvinus
is the question. But why should this question trouble their peace, or what can
this subtlety afford able to countervail a public unquietness, while it is
agreed by them, that God foresees nothing in us, but the faith of his own
giving, let the Schools care for the rest. Some will perhaps suspect a secret
fraud in this so liberal grant of the Belgic Opponents, that faith is the
mere gift of God, and some will perhaps imagine, that it might be a word, which
dropped casually from their tongue, whereof they might after repent.

Fidem esse Dei donum and potentia ejus in nobis effici millies in in eadem
collatione confessi sumus

Jo. Arnol. resp. ad notas Bogermani part. 2. c. 7. But for this latter let
Johnnes Arnoldi their best advocate speak for all. That faith is the gift of
God and is wrought in us by his power, we have (says he) a thousand times
confessed in our conference at the Hague. For the other, I take not upon me
either their procuration, or their patronage, This work were both busy, and
impertinent: much perplexed traverse of consequences affirmed, and denied goes
to this task. Let it be their part to make good their protested sincerity in
that assertion, which for peace sake I gladly report from them at the best, and
this piece of the quarrel shall receive a fair mitigation: Only I must needs
say that in the contentions of brethren it is far more equal to receive their
own best constructions then to urge and obtrude upon them disavowed
implications. Surely there is need both of wisdom, and Charity in the
discerning of opinions concerning this point. To hold, that faith is the gift
of God, as that is given to all them, whom God foresaw would dispose themselves
by the good use of their freewill to receive it, and who should improve the
powers of nature to their utmost, is no better then Pelagian, whose exploded
word was of old, that grace is given according to merit. To hold that faith is
so the gift of God, as that it is therefore only not given to all, because all
will not receive it, for that God calls all, and gives unto all men
sufficient helps to believe, if they will, and goes no further, and therefore
that according to the prevision of our free co-working with this sufficient
grace his decree determines of us, is but somewhat better then Pelagian. To
hold that faith is so the gift of God, as that he does not only give common,
and sufficient helps to men, whereby they are made able to believe, if they
will, but so works in them by his grace, that they do by the power thereof
actually believe, and conceive true faith in their soul; This is fair, and
Orthodoxe. And even to this do the Belgic opponents profess to come up in
their late dogmatical writings, Electionis vero quae ad gratiam est fructus,
etc. Beneficio illorum mediorum quae per gratiam suppeditantur homo non tantum
potens redditur ad credendum, sed actu etiam credit and fidem concipit, etc.

Beneficio illius solius gratiae in omnibus qui credunt ea ingeneretur and
efficiatur.

Remonstr. Scripta Dogm. Declar. Sent. circa 1. Artic. which how fitly it holds
suit with their other Tenants, let it be their care to approve unto the Church
of God. I am sure an ingenuous constancy to this position might be a fair
advantage taken for peace.

For the Second: the question is, upon what point of Man's Estate, we should
fasten the decree of predestination, whiles the one part holds Man fallen the
object of this decree; The other Man believeing, or incredulous. What reason is
there this should raise so loud a strife, since we do willingly wink at the
rest of the differences of like nature concerning this point. For there are fix
several opinions about the object of predestination; whiles some take it to be
Man indefinitely, and commonly considered: Others hold it to be Man, that was
to be created: Others Man, as he was creable, fallable, saveable; others Man
created, but as in his pure naturalls: Others Man fallen, which is the most
common Tenet. Lastly others man, as believeing, or disobeying the call of God.
Luc. Irelcat. Call. Be --
Why should these two last be brought upon the Stage with so much profession of
hostility, whiles the other four are passed over by a willing connivency on all
hands, and the Authors of them (whose reputation so small a mote is not thought
worthy to disfigure) go away with meet honor in the Church of God. There is
none of the four first, which, upon some straining, may not yield harsh, and
unpleasing consequences, and yet are let go without the mischief of a public
division. I must boldly say (reserving my judgment concerning this point to my
self) that if this supposed faith may be yielded the mere gift of God (as
formerly) I cannot discern any so dangerous inconvenience in this branch of the
opinion, as should warrant the breach of the common Peace.

As for the order, what do we brawling about our own conceits? We all know
there is but one most simple Act of God in this his decree, wherein therefore
there can be neither precedence not posteriority.

If we now, for our understandings sake, shall so express this one act of God,
as that, whiles we vary in the explication, we are confounded in our own
senses, what do we, but fight with our own shadows. That God requires faith as
necessary to Salvation is granted of all; but in what place it comes into his
decree, there is the doubt. One part makes four distinct acts of Gods decree,
wherein the general purpose of mercy to Mankind through his Son Christ Jesus,
to save believers, and the gift of necessary means for the attaining of faith
comes before the special decree of saving those particulars, whom he foresaw
would believe, repent, persevere; and contrarily the other makes fewer decrees
in a contrary order, placing the decrees of particular election to life before
the ordination of the means tending thereunto: So as faith, and perseverance
issue from this special decree of choosing individual persons to life. Why
should we be distracted in the abstractions of our own making and not rather
rest silent, and wondering in the acknowledgment of the simplicity of that one
act of the infinitely wise God, who does Uno intuitu, see Man creable, created,
fallen, redeemed, believeing, which our shallow capacities shall in vain labor
to comprehend. Surely it were the better posture of our hands, to have one of
them laid upon our lips, the other lifted up for admiration, then to employ
them in buffeting each other for an invincible ignorance, or misprison of that,
which our finite nature can never admit us to know: O God, what do we search,
or quarrel to miss those ways of thine, which are past finding out!

Quod aiunt contra Rem. Deum ab aeterno certas quasdam personas segregasse, ut
eas per Christum, perque fidem in ipsum salvaret, non quia praevideret illas
credituras, sed^ex mera tantum gratia secundum beneplacitum suum, sed and hoc
decretum Dei esse aeternum, and immutabile, etc. Haec descriptio ita laxa est
ut etiam and nostrum pedem addmittat:

Colloq. Hag. p. 81, Remonstr. vindic. 1. Art. That we may consider all these
jointly together, that God has set apart certain particular persons to save
them by Christ, and by faith in him, not because he foresaw they would believe,
but of his mere grace only according to his good pleasure; and that this decree
is eternal, and unchangeable, is agreed on by both sides, This description the
Belgic Opponents grant to be so wide a shoe that it will serve their foot
also.

Sed si personas certas vel singulares intelligant tanquam singulares, ac
perinde extra Christum, and fidem consideratas, id vero pernegamus Rem.

ibid. p. 83. Contra Rem. Neque nos unquam diximus singulares illas personas,
quas Deus ab aeterno elegit plane extra Christum, and fidem esse consider and
as, ut qui semper rotunde professi sumus, merita Christi, fidem in ipsum in
electione ista singularium personarum adeo spectari, and haberi pro mediis,
quibus eos Deus statuit ad salutem perducere,

Colloq. Hag. contra. Rem. page 140. And why then should either part seek or
care for any other Last? Surely a Christian needs not either search or know any
more. Now comes in a Scholasticall quirke to trouble the peace of Men's hearts,
and brains, Whether God have set apart these certain singular persons, as
persons singular without all respects to any other considerations. or whether
his decree looked at them as invested with those qualities which he meant to
give and foresees as given? Doubtless to make Men capable of Salvation, there
is faith, repentance, good works, perseverance in good actually required of
God; But these necessary dispositions are ranged under the execution of Gods
decree: These he requires, these he gives, these he works, these he decrees to
work in his; why should we be scrupulous in what place they come into the holy
purposes of God, which we grant cannot be missing in our way to Heaven? Why do
we not rather labor to be such, as he requires, that we may enjoy what he has
promised, and pre-ordained for us? What say the Belgic Defendents? Neither did
we ever say, that those singular persons, whom God chose from all eternity were
to be considered without respect to Christ, and faith in him, but have ever
roundly professed, that the merits of Christ and faith in him are considered of
God in this election of individual persons, as means, whereby he has decreed
to bring them to salvation; see then how narrow this difference is, God has
decreed by these means to bring men to salvation, yet these fall not into his
decree of ordinary choice to salvation, they are in the execution of his
decree, and in the decree of his execution, they are not in the decree of his
election. Let these be undoubted truths, as they are, yet what need the souls
of quiet Christians be racked with so subtle questions? It well befits the
Schools to examine these problemes, but for common Christians it does not so
much concern them to enquire, how the order of Gods decree stands in our
apprehension of that one simple act of the divine understanding, or will, as
how it is in respect of the execution: Here comes in our main interest in these
eternal Councills of the Almighty, which draws from us a due care, and
endeavor to be capable of this promised salvation, and to avoid the ways of
death: Could we be persuaded to take more from that speculation, and to add
more to this practice, it would be much happier for us.

Neither is this election according to the Plea of the opponents made ever the
more uncertain by this prerequisition of our faith, since they profess to teach
it supposed in our election, not as a condition, whose performance God expects,
as uncertain, but as a gift, which God according to his eternal prescience
foresees in Man present, and certain; as the decree of sending Christ into the
World, did not depend upon a conditioned, and uncertain expectation of what Man
would do, or would not do, but upon the infallible notice of God, who foresaw
Man, as presently sinning, or fallen, so as the election of God is not suspended
upon the mutability of Man's will, but upon the infallible certainty of the
foreknowledg of God, to whose eyes our faith, and perseverance is not more
doubtful, then future, and whose prescience has no less infallibility, then
his decree. If therefore God may have the sole glory of this work in the gift
of that faith, which he foresees, and our election hazards no certainty (as
they profess to hold) what is there, that should need to draw blood in this
first quarrel.

But what need I labor to reconcile these opinions, which have no reason to
concern us. The Church of England according to the explication of R. B. Overall
goes a midway betwixt both these. For whiles the one side holds a general
conditional decree of God to save all Men, if they believe, and a particular
decree of saving those, whom he foresaw would believe, and the other side not
admitting of that general conditionate decree, only teaches a particular
absolute decree to save some special persons, for whom only Christ was given,
and to whom grace is given, irresistiblely, all others being by a no less
absolute decree rejected; our Church (says he) with St. Austin maintains an
absolute and particular decree of God to save those, whom he has chosen in
Christ, not out of the prescience of our faith, and will, but out of the mere
purpose of his own will, and grace, and that thereupon God has decreed to
give, to whom he pleases a more effectual, and abundant grace, by which they
only not may believe and obey, if they will, but whereby they do actually will,
believe, obey, and persevere without prejudice to the rest, to whom he has
also given gracious offers, and helps to the same purpose, though by their just
fault neglected: What can the Synod of Dort in this case wish to be said more?
Indeed with all he adds a general conditionate will of God, or a general
evangelical promise of saving all, if they do believe since God does will, and
command, that all men should hear Christ and believe in him, and in so doing,
has offered grace, and salvation unto all, declaring how well these two may
agree together, That first God has propounded salvation in Christ to all, if
they believe, and has offered them (within the Church especially) a common, and
sufficient grace in the means, that he has mercifully ordained, if men would
not be wanting to the word of God, and his holy Spirit; and that to ascertain
the salvation of man, he has decreed to add that especial, effectual and
saving grace unto some: Neither of which truths can well and safely be denied
of any Christian: Only the sound of a general and conditionate will, perhaps,
seems harsh to some ears, whereto yet they should do well to inure themselves,
since it is the approved distinction of worthy, Orthodox, and unquestionable
Divines.

Deum velle quaedam absolute manifestum esse, and literae sacrae confirmant;
etenim voluit mundum creari, etc.

Eundem Deum velle quaedam conditionaliter docent itidem sacrae literae, vult
enim omnes salvari, si velint implere legem, aut in Christum credere; proinde
illam priorem voco absolutam voluntatem, hanc vero posteriorem conditionalem.

Opusc. p. 291. Caeterum illud tamen verum est Deum velle omnes homines salvos
fieri voluntate scil. revelata, and conditionali, nimirum si velint in Christum
credere and ejus legi servandae studere, hac enim voluntate nemo a salute, and
cognitione veritatis excluditur, etc.

ibid. page 285. Zanchius (in his book de praedest. Sanct.) has it interminis
with a large exposition. That God wills some things absolutely (says he) it
is manifest, and plainly confirmed by Scriptures; so he absolutely willed the
world should be created, and governed, so he absolutely willed, that Christ
should come into the World, and dye for the salvation of his elect; he wills
also absolutely, that the elect shall be saved, and therefore perfomes to them
all things that are necessary to their salvation; that the same God wills
some things conditionally, the Scriptures also teach us, For God would have all
men to be saved, if they would keep the Law, or believe in Christ, and
therefore I call that first an absolute will, this latter a conditional. And in
the next leaf to the same purpose, he says, it is also true, that God would
have all men to be saved in his revealed, and conditionate will, scil. if they
would believe in Christ and carefully keep his law; for by this will no man is
excluded from salvation, and knowledge of the truth. So Ambrose interprets that
place of (1 Timothy 2) he would have all to be saved (says he) if themselves
will, for he has given his law to all, excepts no man (in respect of his law
and will revealed) from salvation.

The Dedarative Decree of salvation to be equally, and indifferently proclaimed
unto all men.

Act. Syno. in These. etc. For the further allowing whereof the same Zanchius
cites the testimonies of Luther, Bucer, and others. Neither does it much ablude
from this, that our English Divines at Dort call the Decree of God, whereby he
has appointed, in, and by Christ to save those that repent, believe and
persevere, Decretum annunciativum salutis omnibus ex aequo and indiscriminatim
promulgandum, Sect. 3. Surely it is easy to observe, that we are too fearful of
some distinctions, which carry in them a jealousy of former abuse, and yet both
may well be admitted in a good sense, and serve for excellent purpose. As that
(if we labor for our better understanding to explicate the one will of God by
several notions of the antecedent, and consequent will of God; which Paulus
Ferrius a reformed Schoolman approves by the suffrages of Zanchius, Polanus,
and other Orthodox Divines to look at it a little running, as that, which gives
no small light to the business in hand.

As there is wont to be conceived a double knowledge of God, the one of mere
understanding whereby he forknowes al things, that may be, the other of vision,
or approbation, whereby he foreknowes, that which undoubtedly, shall be so
there is a double will to be conceived of God answerable to this double
knowledge; an Antecedent will, which answers to the mere understanding, whereby
God wills every possible good without the consideration of the adjuncts
appertaining to it; A consequent will answering to the knowledge of approbation,
whereby (all circumstances prepensed) God does simply will this, or that
particular event, as simply good to be, and which is there upon impossible not
to be, The one of these is a will of complacency, the other of prosecution; the
one is as it were an optative will, the other an absolute. In the first of
these God would have all to be saved, because it is in a sort good in it self,
in that the nature of man is ordeinable to life, and man has by God common
helps seriously offered for the attaining thereof; neither can we think it
other then pleasing to God, that his creatures should both do well and fare
well. In the latter he wills some of all to be saved, as not finding it
simply good (all circumstances considered) to extend this favor to all; this
appears in the effect, for if God absolutely willed it, it could not fail of
being, neither does ought hinder, but these two may stand well together, a
complacence in the blessedness of his creature, and a will of his smart. For
both that, which we will in one regard, we may not will in another, As we may
wish a felon to live as a man, to dye as a malefactor, and besides the
possibility of one opposite does not hinder the Act of another, as he that has
power to run perhaps does sit or ly.

Learned Zanchius methinks gives at once a good satisfaction as to this doubt,
so to the ordinary exception, whereat many have stumbled, of the pretended
mockage of Gods invitations, De not. Dei 1.3. c. 4.
where he means not, as some have misconceived, a serious effect. In the
parable of the Gospel (says he) those, which were first bidden to the
marriage feast, and came not, were they therefore mocked by the King, because
he only signified unto them, what would be acceptable unto him, and what was
their duty to perform? and yet he did not command them to be compelled, as he
did the second guests to come to the wedding? Surely no, yet in the mean time,
there was not the same will of the King in the inviting of the first, and of
the second, for in these second, there was an absolute will of the King, that
they should without fail come, and therefore he effectually caused them to
come; In the former he only signified, and that fairly, and ingenuously, what
would be pleasing to him: Thus he. The entertainment of this one distinction,
which has the allowance of Orthodox, and learned Authors, to be free from any
danger, or inconvenience, would mitigate this strife, since it is that, which
the Opponents contend for, which the Defendents may yield without any sensible
prejudice.

As for the envy of that irrespective, and absolute decree of reprobation,
wherewith the Defendents are charged, it is well taken off, if we distinguish,
as we must of a negative, and positive reprobation, The latter whereof, which
is a preordination to punishment, is never without a respect, and prevision of
sin, for although by his absolute power God might cast any Creature into
everlasting torment, without any just exception to be taken on our parts, yet
according to that sweet providence of his, which disposes all things in a fair
order of proceeding, he cannot be said to inflict, or adjudge punishment to any
soul, but for sin, since this is an act of vindicative justice, which still
supposes an offense. If this be yielded by the Defendents (as it is) wherein
also they want not the voices even of the Romish School, what needs any further
contention? especially whiles the defendents plead (even those that are most
rigorous) that upon the non-election of some, damnation is not causally but
only consecutively inferred. Non causaliter sed consecutive Perk. de praedest.
Sure I am, that by this, which is mutually yielded on both parts, all mouths
are stopped from any pretense of calumniation against the justice of the
Almighty, and we are sufficiently convinced of the necessity of our care to
avoid those sins, which shall otherwise be rewarded with just damnation.

Let this be enough for the first Article, less will serve of the rest.

Concerning the extent of Christ's death, the Belgic Opponents profess to rest
willingly in those words of Musculus. Omnium peccata tulit, etc. He has born
the sins of all Men, if we consider his sacrifice according to the virtue of it
in it self, and think, that no Man is excluded from this grace, but he that
refuses it, So God loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son to the
end, that whosoever believes in him should not perish but have everlasting
life. J. 3.6. But if we respect those which do so believe, and are saved, so he
has borne only the sins of many. Thus he. Neither will the Opponents yield any
less. What is this other, then the explication of that usual distinction,
which we have, whether from St. Austin, or his Scholar Prosper of the greatness
of the Price, and the propriety of the redemption: That equal to all; This
perteining but to some: That common word seems enough to the Belgic Opponents:
The price of Christ's blood is sufficient to save all; and if this may serve
their turn, who can grudg it? Contrarily whiles they do willingly grant, that
in respect of the efficacy of power, Christ dyed not for all, and that Christ
was given only with this intention of his Father, that the World should no
otherwise be saved by his Son, then through faith; what need we urge more?

Magnitudinem precii distinguit a proprietate redemptionis.

Colloq. Hag. p. 161. Christum pro multis duntaxat, and non pro omnibus mortuum
quo ad efficaciam virtutis, and

c. p. 171. Nulli hominum singulariter annuntiatur Christum pro ipso mortuum
non esse.

Col. Hag. p. 155. Both will grant that the Apothecaries shop has drugs enough
for the cure of all diseases, which yet can profit none, but those that are
willing to make use of them. Both will accord in this position, which B. Overal
commends, as in effect the words of worthy Mr. Calvin, So Christ dyed for all
that there is no man (if his incredulity did not hinder him,) but were redeemed
by his precious blood; Neither is there, as is willingly confessed by the
Defendents, any man living, to whom, it may be singularly said, Christ dyed not
for thee: Seeing therefore whole mankind does but result of singular, and
individual men, why should we fear to say unto all, that Christ dyed for them?
Now what should we stand upon a niggardly contestation of words where so much
real truth is mutually yielded? Who can think, there can be any peril to that
soul, who believes thus much? The rest to the Schools. But what ever have been
the nice scruples, and explications of Foreign Divines, we have no such cause
of strife, if we admit that which our learned Bishop commends for the voice of
the Church of England, who having laid down the two extreme opinions of the
opposite parts, brings in the Church of England as sweetly moderating betwixt
both, that she supposing the death of Christ for all men, and Gods conditionate
intention of the general grace of his Evangelical promise, adds moreover the
special intention of God, to apply the benefit of Christ's death by a more
abundant, and effectual grace absolutely, certainly and infallibly to the Elect
alone, without any diminution of that his sufficient, and common favor, which,
as we see so yields to both parts what they desire, as that in the mean time,
it puts upon both what they are not greatly forward to admit, yet that which it
puts upon them may be admitted without any complaint, except perhaps of excess
of Charity, and that which is yielded is abundantly enough for peace.

These Articles are like to linkes of a chain, whereof one is rivited within
another. The Order of Gods decree would not be stiflly stood upon, if our faith
and perseverance foreseen by him be clearly ascribed to God, as his mere and
only gift. But now the Defendents are jealous of some encroachments, upon the
glory of Gods only Act in our conversion, in that, they apprehend it according
to the Tenet of the adverse part left in our power to entertain, or reject the
good motions of his Spirit tending thereunto; whereto the Opponents answer, that
they are studiously careful to ascribe unto God the sincere glory of our
conversion, professing that they do not teach, (as has been usually objected
to them) that God gives man only profers of power to believe, which his own
freedom may either except, or refuse, but teaching openly (if their words may
carry belief) that God gives him the whole power of believing by the
illumination of his mind, and vivification of his will, yet so as that in the
mean time, God, whiles he gives this new power to believe, does not take away
the natural liberty of the will, whereupon the man, whose will is renewed both
may work according to the power of that renovation, and may not work according
to the radical freedom of his will, both may use his new power, as a spiritual
man, and not use it in part, as a natural man, wherein they urge the
distinction betwixt the power and the liberty of our freewil, confessing that
in this state of sin the will has no power at all to that which is good, but
that it has (mean while) a natural Liberty, whereby it can incline to evil,
the new power that is given to man, does not make him cease either to be a man,
or a man in part.

Man has it not therefore from any power of nature, that he can believe, that
is merely from the grace of God; But still he has it from the remainders of
himself, that he can will not to believe, neither do the Opponents profess to
say other concerning the first act of Conversion, then the Defendents
themselves say concerning the progress thereof, wherein they teach, that a
renewed man has freedom of Will both to good, and evil, and yet stand for the
mere and all only power of grace, not occasionally, but causally working the
will to good; And if this must be yielded in the proceedings of our
regeneration, what so great importance is there either way in yielding it to
the entrance? I do not enquire into the truth of this point, I enquire into the
weight; surely these Questions of the concurrence of the Spirit of God with
ours; so as neither the will is necessitated on the one side, nor flattered
with a wild liberty on the other: And how far necessity may stand with freedom
and what kind of necessity may be here admitted? are points fit to be ranged
amongst the deepest problemes of the Schools, and not fit to torture the ears
of popular auditories.

Ad nauseam usque inculcamus nihil ex se aut suis viribus hominem posse (...),
fidei and conversionis gratiae deberi, etc.

Nusquam hominem boni quicquam agere dicimus nisi gratia praeveniente,
concomitante, subsequente ad jutum instructumque.

Rem. Epist. ad ext. p. 62, 63. For the main point it must needs be said; no
man can speak more fully against the natural power of man's free will, and
abilities in spiritual things, then the Belgic Opponents, professing, That, of
himself, and his own powers, man can do nothing; That the beginnings,
proceedings, endings of faith, and conversion are owing to mere grace: That no
good can come from us unless we be enabled by the preventing, accompanying,
subsequent grace of God.

It is the word of Arminius cited by our late learned Bishop of Salisbury: Give
what you will to grace so you hold it not irresistible. Nothing is here stood
upon, but the manner of the working of grace upon the hearts, wherein, if both
parts would hear and understand each other with favor, the controversy would
be found little other, then Verbal. For the part, that most constantly teaches
the forceableness of conversion, holds such a kind of actuating the will, as
does no whit hurt, or infring the liberty thereof; yea rather, which profits
it, and whiles they speak of an irresistible act in turning us, they mean not
such an act, as cannot be at all resisted, if we would, but such a one, as the
will through Gods gracious inclination would not wish to resist, for that,
their will to resist is so overcome by the sweet motions of Gods Spirit, that
now yieldance is made powerfully voluntary; In which sense the very Jesuits
themselves confess an irresistibility. Bellarmine, Suarez, Valent. disp. 8. q.
3. p. 4.
Valentia and others granting it as impossible there should not be a
conversion, where there is an effectual grace, as, that there should not be a
conversion, where there is a conversion.

D. Abbot exerc. 2. ex Arm. declar. ad ord. omnia gratiae ascribantur modo ne
statuatur irresistibilis.

Omnia gratiae ascribantur modo ne statuatur irresistibilis,

Arm. (cit. per R. Abbot. ep Sarisb.) e declar. ad ord. p. 56. Quicquid sit
constanter docent omnes hunc modum actuandi liberum arbitrium ejus libertati
nihil nocere imo maxim proficit illam.

Paul. Fir. spec. Schol. p. 487. Now whether this irresistibleness be out of a
consequent supposition, as the Jesuits, or out of an antecedent, as the
Dominicans with many of ours; or whether this powerful influence into the will
be by way of a Physical, or moral motion, they are subtleties fit for
Schools, not meet to trouble the heads of ordinary Christians; It is enough for
us to know, that we will to consent, because God works this will in us
strongly, yet sweetly, and by an omnipotent facility, so as no free will of
ours resists Gods will to save us, as St. Austin pithily.

Trahitur ergo miris modis, ut velit, ab illo, qui novit intus inipsis hominum
cordibus operari, non ut homines, quod fieri non potest, nolentes credant, sed
ut volentes ex nolentibus fiant,

Aug. contr. 2. Epist. Pelag. To dispute then of the power of that will to
resist, which God has made willing to yield, what is it but to strive about
the passage of those sheep which neither are bought, nor ever shall be?

Man is in a marvelous manner drawn to will by him, that knows to work inwardly
in Men's hearts, not that they should believe, whether they will, or no, which
is impossible, but that of unwilling, they should be made willing says St.
Austin.

True, God makes us willing of unwilling, and so we resist not. But how does he
make us willing? Whether by an irresistible manner of working in us, or not;
this say the Opponents is the main question; Surely so, as that to use Aquinas
his word, the will is impelled, though not compelled; so as, that though there
is in the nature of the will a freedom, and capacity of agreeing, or
dissenting, in respect of it self, yet as it is for the present moved, and
actuated by the effectual inclination of the Almighty, now it so swayes one
way, as if it had for the time put off the power of refusing: What need we then
trouble our selves with these upstart terms of Resistible and Irresistible;
Let it content us, that the gracious inoperation of God effectually draws the
heart of man to will, to receive, to entertain the happy motions of his good
Spirit to our renovation: If we yield not this to God we yield nothing, and if
we give him this, he will not quarrel us for more.

But what place sover these differences have found in Foreign Schools, and
Pulpits, ours have reason to be free, if we shall listen to that wise, and
moderate voice of our church, which our forecited reverend Author commends unto
us, who after the relation of the two extreme opinions rests in this, Medio
tutissimus: that men are so stirred and moved by Grace that they may, if they
attend thereunto, obey the grace, which calls, and moves them; And that they
may, by their freewil also resist it. But withal, that God, when he will, and
to whom he will gives such an abundant, such powerful, such congruous,
otherwise effectual grace that although the will may in respect of the liberty
thereof resist, yet it resists not, but does certainly, and infallibly obey:
And that thus God deals with those whom he has chosen in Christ, so far as
shall be necessary to their salvation. Who so cannot sit down quietly in this
decision me thinks should be no friend to peace.

And if any man stumble at the first clause, as at the threshold of this
sentence; Let him know, that our Divines at Dort have in effect said no less,
whiles having yielded to man's free will in those external works, which are
required of us before our conversion, and supposing certain effects in the way
to our conversion, which are wrought by the power of the word, and spirit, in
the hearts of men not yet justified, add further, that those whom God thus
affects by his word and Spirit, those he does truly, and seriously call, and
invite to faith, Theol. Bri^. Dord. de Art. 2. These. 5.
and conversion, and that Christ in his death not only founded his Evangelical
covenant, but has also obtained of his father, that wheresoever this Covenant
shall be published, there also should ordinarily such a measure of grace be
administered as should be sufficient to convince all impenitent, and unbelieving
men of neglect, or contempt. And lastly, that whom God thus affects, he
forsakes not, nor cease to promote in the way of their conversion, till he be
first forsaken of them by a voluntary neglect or contempt of this initial grace.

But what need any proof hereof whiles that clause speaks but of a common
grace, and the persons, to whom this liberty is ascribed, are such, as by that
learned B. are contra-distinguished to them, which are truly called according
to the purpose of God. Let us go, but so far, as these two guides will jointly
lead us, it will be bootlesse to quarrel about any further discovery.

Hanc nostram esse sententiam prositemur, hominem de salute aete^na cortum esse
posse, and debere, solam Dei gratiam esse perseverantiae causam supernaturalem,
quae sacit, ut voluntas nostra perseverare and possit and velit.

Rem. Ep. ad ext. p. 75. Concerning the fifth Article of perseverance. The
Belgic Opponents at first spoke timorously, professing not absolutely to hold
a possibility of the total, or final defection of true believers, only
suspending their opinion, and rather inclining to the affirmative, but
afterward they grew to a strong resolution of that, whereof they formerly but
doubted; In whose writings yet, when a Man shall come to read, that a Man may,
and ought to be certain of his own eternal Salvation; That the only grace of
God is the supernatural cause of perseverance, which makes our will both able,
and willing to persevere, he would think there need no more words, that this
quarrel were at a happy end.

But when he shall see them flying off into the distinctions of certainty for
the present, and certainty for the future, and dividing this latter into
absolute, and conditionate, disclaiming the one, and establishing the other, so
as this certainty walks still in even paces with perseverance, and we can only
be sure of Salvation, if we continue in faith, and piety; but we cannot be sure
we shall continue in either, and hear them conclude it to be both laudable, and
profitable for a Christian to nourish these doubts in himself, now he might, as
easily be induced to think, that these ends can never meet.

And yet the opposites strain hard for an accordance, whiles they distinguish
of faiths, and yield it fit to consider a faithful Man's Estate in respect of
himself, his own weakness, and Satan's frauds, and in respect of the firm
promises, and supportations of a faithful God: In regard of the former granting
it more then possible, that he should utterly fall away from God; but in regard
of the latter fastening their persuasion upon the unremoveable Rock of their
assurance.

But what need I lanch forth into this foreign deep? Those Opponents, which
perseverance meets with in our Church either are, or should be of a softer
temper, maintaining only such falling away from grace, as reverend B. Overall
stateth for the doctrine of the Church of England, whose last moderation in
this point is worthy to be written in Letters of Gold. Having first set down
the two contrary Tenets of the opposite parts, he now brings in the Church of
England thus (with St. Austin) defining, as from a Celestial Chair.

That believers, as in a common acception, may through infirmity of flesh, and
power of temptation, depart, and fall off from grace, and faith once received,
but those believers, which are called according to the purpose of God, and
which are soundly rooted in a lively faith, can neither totally, nor finally
fall away and perish everlastingly, but by the special, and effectual grace of
God, do so persevere in a true, and lively faith, that at last they are brought
unto eternal Life.

Now, what wise Christian, can make dainty of admitting so necessary, and just
a distinction, since common experience tells us, there are many Meteors, that
for the time shine like bright Stars over our heads, which ere long we find
under our feet resolved into a base and slimy slough? what heart can desire a
more full and satisfying determination, wherein both sides have their own, and
we quietly enjoy what is true in both, when thus much is mutually yielded, let
him be branded for an enemy of peace, that will further contend.

Now when the Christian Reader has seriously perused these differences,
especially as they are propounded, and arbitrated by that grave professor, and
Prelate of our Church on the one side, and those other our learned, and worthy
Divines on the other side; Let me appeal to his better thoughts, what he finds
here worthy of a public division? Well may the Schools pick hence matter
enough for their Theological Problemes, but what should either the Pulpit, or
the press do with these busy and bootless brabbles? My Brethren, let our care
be to study, and preach Christ, and him crucified: To work the souls of Men to
faith, repentance, piety, justice, Charity, temperance, and all other heavenly
virtues, that they may find cordial Testimonies in themselves of their happy
predestination to Life, and their infallible Interest in the precious blood of
their Redeemer: Let us beat down those sins in them, which make them obnoxious
to everlasting damnation and strip them of all comfortable assurances of the
favor of God: Let us not undiscreetly spend our time, and pains in distracting
their thoughts with those Scholastical disquisitions, whereof the knowledge or
ignorance makes nothing to Heaven. The way to blessedness is not so short, that
we should find leisure to make outroads into needless and unprofitable
speculations; Never Treatise could be more necessary in this curious and
quarrellous age, then de paucitate credendorum. The infinite subdivisions of
those points, which we advance to the honor of being the objects of our
belief, confound our thoughts and mar our peace. Peaceable discourse may have
much latitude, but matter of faith should have narrow bounds. If in the other,
men will abound in their own sense, always let unity of Spirit be held in the
bond of peace; since God has given us change of raiment, and variety of all
intellectual provisions, as Joseph said to his brethren, let me to mine; Let us
not fall out by the way. Now by the dear bonds of brotherhood, by our love to
our common mother the Church, by our holy care, and zeal of the prosperous
success of the Gospel of our Lord Jesus, Let us all compose our hearts to
peace; and rest our selves in those common truths, which sober minds shall
find abundantly sufficient whether for our knowledge, or salvation.

I have done, and now I make no other account, but that it will fall out with
me, as it commonly does with him, that offers to part a fray; both parts will
perhaps drive at me for wishing them no worse then peace. My ambition of the
public tranquillity shall willingly carry me through this hazard: Let both
beat me, so their quarrel may cease; I shall rejoice in those blows and
scarres, which I shall take for the Churches safety: Men's fingers do so itch
after the maintenance of their own opinions, that they can hardly contain
themselves from flying upon the fairest moderation of any Umpire. Yet I may
safely profess, that herein I have carried my self so indifferently, that as I
have hid my own Judgment, so I have rather seemed partial against my own
resolutions. If any Man object, that I have not fully stated the questions on
both sides, and drawn my accorded propositions out of the heart of those
Tenets, which both parts will yield to be their own in an adversaries sense,
without waving any consequences, that shall be deduced there from, Let him
receive answer to the former of these, that it were a fit task for him, that
intended a full tractation of the points controverted, and is already too much
done by others, my drift is only to pick out of both what may sound toward
concord. He that would describe the way to some remote City of marque, thinks
it not needful to map out before the Traveller every Town, and Village of all
the Shires, through which he should pass, but only sets down those that lie in
his road.

To the latter, that it is a more strict rule, then needs to be put upon an
Agent for peace. For as it is but just on the one side, that every man should
be allowed to be his own interpreter, and prejudice and ill will can never make
good gloss: So on the other side, it is lawful and meet for moderate minds to
make their best use of those savory and wholesome sentences which fall from the
better mood of an adversary, such, so far, as they come home to me, shall
gladly reconcile him to me. Let him look how in the rest he can be reconciled
to himself; Very shame shall at the last drive such a one (if he be ingenuous)
from incompatible propositions.

In the mean time the good, that he offers, I will not refuse, and leave the
evil to his avoiding: As a man, that meets with a slack debtor, will not be
unwilling to take what small sums he can get, till either more may come in,
or he may conveniently sue for the rest. It is good to hold the ground we have
got, till by the power of truth we can recover more.

Not that I could readily take up with the palpable Equivocations of an Arrius,
or Pelagius; No wise Chapman will suffer himself to be paid with slips. Truth,
and Falsehood will necessarily descry themselves; Neither is it hard for a
judicious Reader to discern a difference betwixt yielding, and dissembling;
Where I see a man constant to himself in a favorable assertion, I have reason
to construe it, as a fair coming off toward reconcilement. If nothing but the
rigor of opinions shall be stood upon, what Hope can there be of Peace? To
shut up therefore, if what I have here meant well, be as well taken, and well
improved, I shall have comfort in the quieting of many Hearts, and many
Tongues: If not, at least I shall have comfort in the quietness of mine own
heart; which tells me I have wished well to the Church of God. To whose awful
sentence I do m^st humbly submit my self, and these my poor endeavors,
professing my self ready to eat, whatsoever word she shall dislike and
desirous to buy her peace even with blood.

Now the God of peace incline the hearts of men, as to zeal of truth, so to
love of peace: And since we are fallen upon those points, which are disputable
to the worlds end (as we see in the practice both of the Romish, and Germane
and Netherlandish Churches) the same God compose the minds of men to a wise
moderation, and bind up their lips in a safe, and discreet silence, that if
our brains must needs differ, yet our hearts and tongues may be ever one. Amen.

A LETTER CONCERNING Falling Away FROM GRACE.
MY good Mr. B. You send me flowers from your Garden, and Look for some in
return out of mine; I do not more willingly send you these, then I do
thankfully receive the other: I could not keep my hand from the paper, upon the
receipt of your Letters, though now in the midst of my attendance: As my desire
of your satisfaction calls me to write something, so my other employments force
me to brevity, in a question wherein it were easy to be endless: I am sorry
that any of our new Excuti-fidians should pester your Suffolk; although glad in
this, that they could not Light upon a soil more fruitful of able oppugners:
it is a wonder to me, to think that men should Labor to be witty, to rob
themselves of comfort: Good Sir Let me know these new Disciples of Leyden; that
I may note them with that black cole they are worthy of; Troublers of a better
peace then that of the Church, the peace of the Christian soul: they pretend
antiquity; What heresy does not so? What marvel is it, if they would wrest
Fathers to them, while they use Scripture it self so violently; For that their
first instance of Hymeneus and Alexander how vain it is like themselves?

Nothing can be more plain then that those men were gross hyppocrites; who
doubts therefore but they might fall from all that good, they pretended to
have; What is this to prove that a true child of God may do so: but (say they)
these men had faith and a good conscience; True, such a faith and goodness of
conscience as may be incident into a Worldly counterfeit. Yea but (they reply)
a true justifying faith; I think such a one as their own; rather I may say
these men desevre not the praise of Himeneus his faith; which is nothing in
this place but Orthodoxe doctrine; How often does St. Paul use the word so, to
his Timothy, 1 Timothy 4.1. In the latter times some shall depart from the faith;
interpreted in the next words, and shall give heed to spirits of error, and
doctrines of Devils; and 2 Timothy 3.8. He describes his false teachers by this
title, Reprobate concerning the faith; Which I think no man will expound of the
grace, but he Doctrine: Yet (say they) there is no necessity binds us to that
sense here? But the scope of this place compared with others may evince it;
That which follows plainly points us to this meaning (that they might learn
not to blaspheme) Their sin was therefore an Apostasy from the Dostrine of the
Gospel, and casting foul aspersions upon that profession; so that an opposition
to wholesome Doctrine was their shipwreck: They except yet; A good conscience
is added to this faith; therefore it must needs be meant of justifying faith;
Do but turn your eyes to 1 Timothy 3.9. where (as in a commentary upon this
place) you shall find faith and good conscience so conjoined; that yet the
Doctrine, not the virtue of faith is signified: St. Paul describes his Deacon
there by his spiritual wealth; Having the mystery of faith in pure conscience:
No man can be so gross to take the mystery of faith for the grace of faith; or
for any other then the same Author in the same chapter calls the mystery of
Godlyness: It is indeed fit that a good conscience should be the cofer, where
truth of Christian Doctrine is the treasure; Therefore both are justly
commanded together; and likely each accompanies other in their loss, and that
of Irenaeus is found true of all heretics; sententiam impiam, vitam
luxuriosam, etc. Yea but Hymeneus and Alexander had both these then, and lost
both: They had both in outward profession, not in inward sincerity; that rule
is certain and eternal, If they had been of us, they had continued with us;
nothing is more ordinary with the Spirit of God then to suppose us such as we
pretend; that he might give us an example of Charity in the censure of each
other: of which kind is that noted place, Heb. 10.29. And counts the blood of
the Testament wherewith he was sanctified an unholy thing; and those unusual
elogies which are given to the Churches, to whom the Apostolical letters were
directed.

This place therefore intends no other but that Himenaeus and Alexander, which
were once professors of the Christian doctrine, and such as lived orderly in an
unblameable, and outwardly holy fashion to the World, had now turned their
copy; cast off the profession which they made, and were fallen both to
looseness of manners, and calumniation of the truth they had abandoned.

For that other Scripture, Romans 8.12, 13. No place can be more effectual to cut
the throat of this uncomfortable heresy: St. Paul writes to a mixed company; it
were strange if all the Romans should have been truly sanctified; those which
were yet carnal he threats with death, If ye live after the flesh ye shall dye;
Those which are regenerate (contrary to the wicked paradox of those men) he
assures of life; If ye mortify the deeds of the flesh by the Spirit, ye shall
live: How does he exclude the Spirit of bondage to fear; which these good
guides would lead in again; how confidently does he averr the inward testimony
of Gods Spirit to ours; and ascribes that voice to it which bars all doubt and
disappointment; and tells us by the powerful assurance of this Abba, we are
sons, and if sons heirs, coheirs with Christ; Let them now go and say; that God
may disinherit his own son, that he may cast off his adopted: But, say they, to
the same regenerate persons he applies these two clauses, and says at once, ye
have received the Spirit of adoption, and yet, if ye walk after the flesh ye
shall die; what follows of this commination? any assertion of the possibility
of Apostasy in the regenerate? Nothing less: These threats are to make us take
better hold, and to walk more warily; as a father that has set his little son
on horseback (it is Zanchies comparison) bids him hold fast, or else he shall
fall; though he uphold him the while; that both he may cause him hereby to sit
fast; and call the more earnestly for his supportation. But the scope of the
place plainly extorts a division of carnal men and regenerate; the threats are
propounded to the one, the promises and assurance to the other; and therefore
no touch from hence of our uncertainty in a confessed estate of renovation.

For that Mat. 12.43. The Apodosis, or inference of the parable might well have
stopped the mouths of these Cavillers: for you shall find in the end of it; so
shall it be with this wicked generation; I suppose no man will be so absurd, as
to say these Jews had formerly received true justifying faith; How should
they, when they rejected the Messiah? And yet of them is this parable spoken by
our Saviors own explication: Maldonate himself a learned and spightful
Jesuit, can interpret it no otherwise. Ideo Christus hoc dixit ut doceret
pejores esse Judaeos, quam si nunquam Dei legem and cognitionem accepissent,
and to this purpose he cites Hilary, Hierom, Beda; and this sense is so clear,
that unless the seven Devils had found harbor in the dry hearts of these men,
they could not so grossly pervert it; Quench not the Spirit, 1 These. 5. will
never prove a final or total extinction of saving grace; the Spirit is quenched
when the degrees of it are abated; when the good motions thereof are by our
security let fall; we grant the Spirit may be quenched in tanto not in toto; Or
if we should so take it, as they desire; I remember Austin parallels this place
with that other to Timothy, Let no man despise thy youth; Not, says he, that
the Spirit can be quenched, or that contempt can be avoided; but that in the
one we may not endeavor to do that which may tend toward this wrong to the
Spirit; and in the other that we should be careful not to do that which may
procure contempt; The place, I remember not directly; but numeros teneo, si
verba tenerem: But in all likelihood that place sounds quite another way; as
may appear by the connection of it with those two sentences following; As if he
should have said, discourage not the graces that you find in any of your
Teachers; despise not their preaching; try their doctrines: And now what is
this to the falling from Grace? Which of us do not teach the necessity of
perseverance? He only that indures to the end shall be saved; Be faithful to
the death, and, etc. But he that has ordained we shall be saved, has ordained
our perseverance as a mean to this salvation; and has appointed these sharp
advises as the means and motives of our perseverance: So as he that shall be
saved shall also endure to the end; Because no man plucks them out of my hand,
says Christ: How evidently does the Spirit of God proclaim our certainty
against these doubt-mongers? Every where is he as full of assurance, as these
men of discomfort: He that is borne of God sins not, neither can sin,
because he is born of God, and the seed of God remains in them; what an
invincible, 1 Jo. 3.3.
and irrefragable consolation is this? The seed of life is sown in the hearts
of the elect; though they could be dead to themselves, yet to God they cannot.

And what a supposition is that of Christ; that if it were possible the very
elect should be deceived? Desponsabo te mihi in perpetuum; Mat. 24.
Hos. 2.
and a thousand of this strain, which your exercise in those holy leaves has,
I doubt not, abundantly furnished you withal: hold fast then my dear friend,
this sure anchor of our undeceivable hope; and spit in the face of men or
Devils that shall go about to slacken your hand; Let these vain Spirits sing
despair to themselves; for us, we know whom we have believed; Thus has my pen
run it self out of breath in this so important a demand; and much a do have I
had to restrain it; neither would I give you one hours intermission to my
answer; which I know your love cannot but accept, as that which proceeds from
a^ heart zealous both of God and you.

Reverendissimo Viro, Do. Marco Antonio DE DOMINIS Archiep. SPALATENSI Epistola
DISCESSUS SUI Ad ROMAM dissuas.
NOli gravate far ( Reverendissime Praesul) candidam hanc and animi and
calami (devotissimi tibi utriusque) libertatem, sane expressit mihi vel
renitenti verba haec prius sincerus quidam and religionis zelus and tui. Fama
est te discessum a nobis meditari, neque tam loco cedere velle, quam fide;
strenua profecto suspicione non caret hoc ipsum proficisci, neque enim
cujusquam subire mentem potest hominem senem velle animi causa peregrinari,
deferbuit procul dubio jam diu juvenilis ille ardor relictas pridem oras
curiose revisendi, nec ita crassi sumus insulares, ut credere possimus coelum
te mutare velle, nisi animum prius quadam-tenus mutare decrevisses, multo vero
minus septem illos invisos coelo totiesque tuo fulmine ictos colles repetere;
novimus and nos sat been ingenium Romae, ecquem latere potest, nedum hominem
cordatum quam infida sit illa statio superbae Hierarchiae expugnatori? Moneat
te olim vester Fulgentius, quam nihil ita tutum sit Pontificiae Majestatis
tantillo violatori, etiam post fidem (si qua famae fides) sancte datam, post
promissa munera, post benignissimae invitationis blanditias. Viderit tua
prudentia ut te vel propudiosissima Palinodia, tactaeque quas de jerasti prius,
arae liberaverint. O tuam (si quem modo profiteris, sanus and orthodoxus) Romam
remeare audeas, miram animi confidentiam, piamque Martyrii sitim, dignam
stupore nostro, dignam immortalitate, quin nobis istic liceret and hanc tibi
gloriam invidere, and gratulari foelicitatem, sed quam te parum provehat
ambitio, est quod non immerito timeamus. Quid ergo? Aegre profecto monuerim
opus esse novas profectionis suae raones exponat Reverentia vestra; quas vero
tandem illas, si ex fassis liceat (uti plebeis semper licuit conjectari)
sanctum quoddam uniendae Ecclesiae studium te Romam, discordae hujusce
sacc^rrimam sedem, propellit; machinaturum demum aliquid, quo funcstissimae
Christiani orbis lites aliquando sopiantur, ad quod quidem opus instructiorem
te aliis omnibus produxisse visus est ille pacis author, animus certe quam non
desit memini te alicubi palam profit^ri. Alicubi inquis, a primis clericatus
mei annis, in me innatum poene desiderium videndae unionis omnium Christi
Ecclesiarum separationem Occidentis ab Orient in rebus fidei, Austri ab
Aquilone aequo animo far nunquam poteram, cupiebam anxie tot tantorumque
schismatum causam agnoscere, ac perspicere, number possit aliqua excogitari via
omnes Christi Ecclesias ad veram antiquam unionem componendi, idque videndi
ardebam desiderio, dolor interno animi ex tot dissidiis inter Christianae
religionis professores, ex odiis acerrimis inter nobilissimas Ecclesias
inflammatis, ex tunica Caristi foede scissa and lacerata concepto, excruciabar.
Qui me dolor and nimia tristitia mirum in modum conficiebat, and indies magis
conficit in deque ad fervens studium invitabar: Dignam sane piissimo praesule
lapsoque o coelis pacis (...)? Quis non hunc una and animi candorem and ardorem
zeli pronus exosculetur? Percat certe quisquis est, pereat pessume qui
descerptissimae Ecclesiae redintegrationem suo ipsius sanguine redemptam ire
noluerit. Sed parce si me audis (colendissime praesul) parce huic labori,
novimus nos istic, quid possint humanae vires, votis nos una tecum, si lubet,
usque contendemus, ut Dei beneficio beet aliquando Christianam Rempublicam pax
alma, respiciensque ab alto dissipet tandem omnes errorum inimicitiarumque
procellas, quibus hodierno die miserrime conflictamur, sed mortalium quisquis
se hoc effectum dare posse sperat, nimio quam frustra est: aut enim exuat se
prorsus oportet Romana Ecclesia (quod quis hominum suadere se posse autemet aut
hoc profecto nullo modo fi^ri potest; non negarim equidem (dedimus enim and nos
strenue, quantum potuimus operam huic instituto) poenes utramque litigantium
partem, esse sacra pacis limina quae aliquanto proprius liceret (absque ullo
fidei damno) salutare. Nam and leviculae quaedam sunt, quae tuto liceret,
alterutrique (si opus foret indulgere, neque quid impedit quo minus in
tractandarum (quae necessario obveniunt) controversiarum modo, plus ut^i^que
moderationis Christianae possit adhiberi, sed ut unanimem in summis relgionis
capitibus (quae nunc est Romae indoles) concordiam incamus (dolens edico) haud
minus impossible est, quam lucem tenebris Beliali Deum consociari. Quam
infamis audit hodie Johanis Sturmii media, non secus ac lata illa quae ad imum
usque Barathrum deducit via; quam vapulat etiamnum bonus ille Cassander,
Friciusque, and quisque moderatioris ingenii theologus, pacis ausus est
meminisse? Quin and tepidos hae^eticis suis connumerandos censuit pridem, nec
nemo Galicanorum patrum Gualterus quis vero te melius novit, quam mordicus olim
tenuerunt Tridentini patres, vel minimas quasque quisquilias, stipulamque suae
(quam vocant) fidei? Quibus orbem Christianum penitus conflagrare maluerunt,
Romani rerum domini, quam ut tantillum suo qualicunque jure credere viderentur,
Ecqua nunc spes est post tot annorum pertinaciam prosusiores very Pontificios
charissimis erroribus ultro ab renunciaturos; nimia profecto fide sit oportet,
qui istud crediderit. Eat nunc quis probus monitor and suggerat ista (cujus in
pectore conclus a delitescit Ecclesia) Pontifici summo sine modo suadere tibi
obsecro sancte Pater, ut fastuosum hunc Papatum, Monarchicumque in Ecclesias
Dei imperium abdicare velis, noli Cathedram tuam (quod soles) (...) venditare;
desine tibi post tam apertam tuorum hominum erubescentiam, arrogare gladium
illum alterum potestatis secularis; cave tui-ipfius praecepta divinis
aequiparanda censeas edicasque. Insigne illud commentum Transubstantiationis,
Sacrificii Missatici, Purgatorii ignis, fatere tandem and exsibila, noli
Ecclesiam Christianam deinceps ludos facere lucrosis indulgentiarum
nundinationibus, jubeas ne sanctorum effigies, reliquiaeve in Idola
convertantur. Quid quaeso aliud a magno Romuli nepote nisi facem crucemve
reportabit? Quid ergo? ubi steterit palam errorum parentibus simul and
patronis, quidvis aut agere, aut pati potius, quam ut a sententia sua,
quamlibet impia, ac prodigiosa discedere velint, quid a nobis tandem putat
paternitas vestra primaevae veritatis asseclis posse expectari, ut
conclamatissimis erroribus dare manus, and plus quam servili jugo Pontificiae
Tyrannidis colla subdere, jam sero animum inducamus? Non ita sane and Deum and
hominem exuere possumus, ut hac tam insana lege pacem colere mavelimus Alterum
profecto horum (si quando convenire lubitum) plane necesse est ut aut illi
errare, aut nos recta ire desinamus, illud ipsi valde nolunt, hoc Deus.

Quod si (qui olim Caesari animus fuisse dicitur) non nisi difficillima quaeque
obeundi, idem hodie sacratum Deo pectus insideat promoveatque. Cave tibi
Tyrrhenum mare ingressuro a duodecim scopulis, plebi quidem nautarum forfitan
incognitis, tibi vero peritissimo naviculatori exploratissimis: minitantur illi
scilicet exitium non cymbis modo quotidianis, seu onerariis, seu actuariis, sed
ubi eo transfretaveris, sane aut impingat tua navis necesse est, aut subsidat,
dicam planius, ne te salus ipsa servare poterit, ubi Romam accesseris quin aut
damnatos a^ te pridem errores, mutata velificatione revoces, resorbeasque, aut
damneris vivi comburio, durum utrunque omen, nec ulla alia ratione, nisi
prudenti (quod cautus usque fecisti) profugio avertendum. Potestne fieri ut
adeo sis prodigus totius tui, horum uti alterutrum, tuto placideque vitam istic
agenti arrideat? Certa mors imminet utrinque reduci, corporis quidem, si verum
fateri audes, si dejeratae animae. At at siquidem animo jampridem discessum a
nobis anteverteris, non erit ut de diuturniore aliqua molis extimae retentione
solliciti simus: Nolo ego de te tanto Theologo mali quicquam-opinari, levis
cujusdam inconstantiae si te tuum ip^ius factum palam alligarit, est quod tibi
succenseas. Dic mihi vero per Deum immortalem (Magne Presul) quid tandem est,
quod te nobis post aliquot annorum moram, jam de subito abripere, Romamque
pellicere potuit? Numquid in hospita tibi visa est gens nostra? Minusve quam
forte speraras virtutibus tuis indultum? Causari profecto istud non potes, in
quem larga benignissimi Regis manus tam ampla, tam opima congessit ultro
munera, majora insuper (si foret opus) largitura; quem Aula, Urbs, Academia
utraque, plebs denique universa ita suspicere solita est, et venerari. Quin and
haec ipsa, qua jam serenissimi Regis beneficio frueris, discedendi libertas,
quam ingenue tecum istic actum fuerit, satis clamitat. Non ea patet ubique
nobis plenissima eundi qua lubet, redeundique facultas. Fuere e nostris quibus
Romam vidisse Capitale pridem fuit, sunt qui ubi saevae urbis limina infelici
pede tetigerint, cesserint illico Lictori, jamque septendecem plus minus annos
modo usque superesse licuerit) carcere inquisitorio crudelissime detenti sunt.
Non ita nos tractamus hosts, non perduelles nostros, nedum advenas; aequo
patent istuc coelum and terra: pessimeque de Britannia nostra meriti, hospitium
nimis hercle benignum sibi pollicentur. Number tibi ergo parum placuere mores
nostri? Paulo forsan depravatiores solutioresque quam par est, vivendi
rations? Obrepent certe vel sanctissimo populo saeculi sui vitia, neque
nostros omnes immunes venditamus ab illa malorum illuvie, cujus bonos quosque
and piget and pudet serio. Venient scandala, vetus verbum est Servatoris: Atqui
teipsum appello testem judicemque, quicquid sumus, non adhuc Italiam impietate
exaequavimus. Cedemus profecto non inviti genti Pontificiae, neque illi diram
hanc inhonestamque palmam invidebimus. Finge nos (si placet) multo adhuc
improbiores, justificabit nos tamen Roma, ipsa Delos Pontificii Apollinis,
Itali vice Dei coelum, de qua merito quod olim dixerit Deus, Vivo ego, dicit
Dominus Deus, quia non fecit Sodoma soror tua, ipsa and filiae ejus, sicut
fecisti tu and filiae tuae, etiam inter Purpuratos Ecclesiae illius Moderatores
comperies, a quibus turpissimi inter nostros gancones facile se victos
fatebuntur. Quid ergo d^mum? Number displicet quam nos istic profitemur, religio?
Absit, absit ut grandaevus Antistes tam eximiis animi dotibus imbutus recedivam
patiatur; Apage mendacem famam, non possum ego tam iniquis rumisculis aurem
praebere, quicquid ogganniat vulgus, nolo ego istoc credere, nolo suspicari.
Quod si quis tui similis tam male consulet and suae and aliorum saluti, cum sic
audacter compellare non dubitarem. Displicetne ergo religio? Non ea nunc
primulum innotescit, diu est ex quo utriusque Ecclesiae dogmata, serio
soliciteque pensiculaveris, ac notam a te probe sententiam nostram denique
amplexus solam veritati divinae consonam orbi propinaveris, veracique calamo
palam consignaveris.

Ecquod vero nunc novi luminis tibi improviso obortum sic illustravit oculos ut
quae solertissima viginti fere annorum indagine frustra perquisiveris,
clarissime demum cerneres. Res eadem est, tu si sisalius, videris quod te numen
mutarit. Certe qui religionem nostram odio habentplusquam Eteocleo, fatentur
nos verum dicere, sed totumnon dicere criminantur, quicquid est positivae (quam
appellant) apud nostros Theologiae etiam adversariis perplacet, negationum
solummodo quarundam paulo atrociorum graviter accusamur, nempe audacem illam,
impiamque novae fidei farraginem far nec posse nos, nec debere profitemur,
nihil quicqum addimus nihil timmutavimus non aut formosior est, quam fuit olim
Romanae Eccesiae facies, aut reformataturpior. Dic mihi nunc cur quae
intoleranda tibi primum visa sunt religionis assumenta placere incipiant? Cur
jam sero primigenia nostrae simplicitatis forma tibi sordescere videatur?
Obsecro te ( amplissime Domine) imo ad juro per Dominum Jesum Christum redeas
ad cor tuum, velisque animae tuae misereri, senex nunc es, moneant te Cani tui
(flores illi coemiteriales: qui nunc caput tuum gravi quodam decore obtegunt)
non long abesse fatalem illum diem, quo tremendo summi Judicis tribunali
sisteris rationem demutatae sententiae redditurus. Cogita jam serio, quid
responsi daturus sis illi, illi falli nescio, vivorum, mortuorumque arbitro,
quicquid certe fiat caecae plebeculae, cui perfida Doctorum Tyrannide coelestis
doctrinae jubar intercludi solet, fieri non potest, quin ut tu quem tam insigni
eruditione rerumque omnium scientia instruxit Deus poenam a veritatis agnitae
prius abnegataeque acerrimo vindice reports. Assurgent contra te in illo
verendo die scripta tua egregia orthodoxias quondam tuae monumenta aeviterna,
testabunturque and quis olim fueris and quam solidis rationum nixus firmamentis
ad nostras parts accesseris turpemque tibi lapsum coram Deo and Angelis
exprobrabunt. Interim vero coelum and terra nobis attestentur, ecquid sit in
quo nos sacris indubiisque Dei eloquiis non firmissime adhaereamus. Ecquid in
quo sanctorum patrum, conciliorumque authoritate destituamur, ecquid in quo nos
a Romany discessionem fecerimus, nisi ubi illos a se, a Deo discessisse
constiterit. O pios salutaresque nostros errores; Ecquis bonus est, qui cum
beatis Patribus, cum gloriosis Martyribus, cum sanctissimis Apostolis, cum Deo
denique ipso errare dubitaverit? Aliam profecto semitam qui sibi calcandam
elegerit erret, cadat, pereat, necesse est. Fige ergo si sapis, ( Venerande
praesul) fige istic pedem, mane usque nobiscum and fruere Deo, fruere
Evangelio, fruere suavissima bonae conscientiae pace. Quod si te ista parum
moveant, age orna hanc modo, and accipe, quandoquidem ita vis, fugam ab hoc
Asylo pacis simul and Religionis, daque aurem noctuis illis (si quae sint)
loioliticis quae tibi istaec suaserint olim ( vivit Dominus) sera duceris facti
poenitentia, Brittaniamque nostram aut nunquam vidisse, aut nunquam
dereliquisse frustra ex optabis, quod ex animo deprecor.

Reverentiae vestrae humillime deditissimus Joseph. Hallus Archipresb.
Wigornien.

A LETTER PARAENETICALL, TO A WORTHY KNIGHT Ready to Revolt from the RELIGION
ESTABLISHED.
WOrthy Sir, when lewd and debauched persons drop away from us, we lament their
loss, not our own, but when Men of worth leave us, it is not their loss more
then ours, with so much more indignation must we needs think of those Cheaters
(for so I construe St. Paul's (...)) that would fain win you from us with mere
tricks of mis-suggestion; the attempt whereof has given occasion to these warm
lines which my true zeal of your safety has drawn from me: So much has been
already spoken to this cavil, that would you please but to cast your eye upon
Bishop Mortons treatise of the grand imposture, and Bishop Bedells Epistles to
Wadsworth you could not desire other satisfaction, thither give me leave to
referr you at your best leisure, in the mean time least I should seem willing
to spare my own endeavors, let me shortly discover the vanity of that stale
collusion which some Seducers would put upon you.

Certainly, Sir, the more you look into these quarrels the more you find that
Templum Domini, was not a more mocking plea amongst the Jews of old, then
Ecclesia Catholica, is this day among Christians, those challenge it whole that
have it not, and those that have right to it, are excluded with equal
importunity. Blessed be God you were born and bred in a noble and renowned
Daughter of that great and universal Mother, the Church of England, what reason
can an Enemy show you why you should repent you of such a parentage and spit in
the face of so gracious a Mother and nurse, nothing it seems, is urged to you
but her age; It is a killing word with those Romish Imposters, where was your
Church before Luther, then which, there was never any plea more idle, more
frivolous, when it falls under a wise and judicious discussion; for consider I
beseech you. Did we go about to lay the foundations of a new Church, the
challenge were most just; Primum verum was the old and sure rule of Tertullian,
we abhor new Churches, and new Truths, find ours either to be, or to be
pretended such, and forsake us: But when all our claim, all our endeavor is
only the reforming and repairing of an old Church, faulty in some mouldred
stones, and mis-daubed with some untempered, and lately laid mortar, what a
frenzy is this to ask where that Church was which we show them sensibly thus
repaired, had it not been before how could it have been capable of this
amendment, and if it be but reformed by us, It was formed before, and having
been since deformed by their errors, is only restored by us to the former
beauty. As sure as there is any Church, any truth in the World this is the true
and only State of this controversy, the mis-prision whereof has been guilty
of the loss of many thousand souls. To speak plainly, it is only the gross
abuses, and palpable innovations of the Church of Rome which we have parted
from, set these aside, they, and we, are, and will be one Church, let this be
done, and if their cruelty, and uncharitableness would sever us, our unity of
faith and Christian love shall make us one, in spite of malice: If their
mis-zealous importunity will needs so incorporate those which we can convince
for new errors, as to make them essential to the very being of their Church,
they are more injurious to themselves, then their Enemies can be, we can but
lament to see them guilty of their own mischief: For us we have erred in
nothing but this, that we would not err; to demonstrate this in particulars,
were a long-some task, and that which I have already performed in that my
treatise of the Old Religion, may it please you to let fall your eye upon that
plain and moderate discourse, you shall confess this truth made good, every
parcel whereof I am ready to justify against all gainsayers; when these Men
therefore shall ask, where our Church was, answer them boldly, where it is; It
is with Churches, as with those several persons, whereof they consist, give me
a Man that having been Romish for opinion is now grown wiser, and reformed, he
has still the same form or essence, though not the same errors, he is the same
Man then, yea I add he is the same Christian that he was whiles he holds firmly
all those Articles of Catholic faith which are essential to Christianity; if
he now find reason to reject those hideous novelties of the inerrability of a
Man of sin, of the new and monstrous, but invisible, incarnation of his Savior
by charm of a sinful Priest, of marting of sins, of purgatory flames, and the
rest of that upstart rabble of the Tridentine Creed, whiles he undoubtedly
believes all those truths which carried our Fathers (who lived before the
hatching of these devices) safely and directly to Heaven, who can deny him the
honor of true Catholicisme and Christianity: No otherwise is it in whole
Churches, whereof every believeing soul is an abridgment; if any of them find
just cause to refuse some newly obtruded opinions, which the rest are set to
maintain, whiles in the mean time the foundation remains entire, this can be no
ground to dis-Church that differing company of Christians, neither are they
other from themselves, upon this diversity of opinion.

But I hear what some whisperers say: It is the determination of the Church
which makes what points she thinks fit, de fide, and fundamental: Let me
confidently say this is the most dangerous innovation that can fall into the
ears, hearts, hands of Christians; If the Church can make another God, another
Christ, another Heaven, other Prophets and Apostles, she may also lay another
foundation; But the old rule of the chosen Vessel, whereon I securely cast my
soul, is, Fundamentum aliud ponere nemo potest.


But, that You may perfectly discover the fraud, what Church is it, I beseech
you, to whom this power ir arrogated? and by whom is it usurped? None, but the
Roman, and what is that but a particular Church? I speak boldly, there was
never so gross a gullery in the World as this; what interest has Rome in
Heaven more then Constantinople, then Paris, then Prague, then Basil, then
London, or any other City under Heaven, or what privilege has the Italian
Church, above the Greek, French, Germane, English, It is the charge of the
Apostle: My Brethren have not the faith of God in respect of persons: I may
upon the same Grounds, say, in respect of places, the locality of truth is the
most idle and childish plea, that ever imposed upon wise men: Away with this
foppery the true divinity of St. Peter was, and is, in every Nation he that
fears God and works righteousness is accepted of him, the climate makes no
difference and if more respect have been anciently given to that See, then to
others, it was the sovereignty of the City which then drew on those honors to
the Church; which upon the very same reason were no less transmitted to
Constantinople: Set those aside, and what holiness can Tiber challenge above
Rhene, or Thames? Let fools be mocked with these fancies, but you whom God
has endued with singular judgment and understanding in all things will easily
resent the fraud; and see that there is no more reason why the English Church
should conform in opinion to the Romish (were the Doctrines equally
indifferent) then the Roman Church to the English. They are but the several
limms of one large and universal body; and if in respect of outward order there
have been, or may be acknowledged a precedence, yet in regard of the main
substance of truth we cannot admit of any dependence on any Church under
Heaven; Here, that which is the purer from Error and corruption, must take the
wall, maugre all the loud throats of acclaming parasites, yea so far must we
needs be from pinning our faith upon the sleeve of Rome, as that we cannot
(without violence offered to our own consciences) but see and say that there is
no particular Church on Earth, so branded by the Spirit of God, in the
Scriptures, as Rome; In so much as the best abbettors, and dearest fautors of
that See, are glad to plead that Rome is St. Peter's and St. John's Babylon: we
bless God for standing on our own feet, and those feet of ours stand upon the
infallible grounds of the Prophets, and Apostles, of Primitive Creeds,
Councels, Fathers, and therefore we can no more deceive you, then they can
deceive us.

The censure that the enemies of our Church cast upon it, is not untruth, but
defect, they dare not but grant what we say is true, but they blame us for not
saying all is true which they say; now that which we say, was enough to serve
those ancient Christians, which lived before those lately devised additions,
the refusal whereof is made heinous and deadly to us; how safe, how happy is
this erring? Let my soul be with those blessed Martyrs, Confessors, Fathers,
Christians which never lived to hear of those new Articles of the new Roman
faith, and I dare say, you will not wish yours any other where, there can be no
danger in old truths, there can be nothing but danger in new obtrusions. But I
find how apt my pen is to overrun the bounds of a letter, my zeal of your
safety carries me into this length, the errors into which these seducers would
lead you are deadly, especially upon a revolt: your very ingenuity I hope
(besides grace) will suggest better things to you: Hold that which you have,
that no man take your crown; My Soul for yours you go right; so sure as there
is a heaven, this way will lead you thither, go on confidently, and cheerfully
in it, let me never be happy, if you be not; you will pardon my holy
importunity, which shall be ever seconded with my hearty prayers to the God of
truth, that he will stablish your heart in that eternal truth of his Gospel
which you have received, and both work and crown your happy perseverance; such
shall be the fervent apprecations of

Your much devoted Friend Jos. Exon.

RESOLUTIONS FOR RELIGION.
WHereas there are many loud quarrels, and brabbles about matter of Religion,
this is my firm and steadfast Resolution, wherein I find peace with God, and
my own Soul, as being undoubtedly certain in it self, and holily charitable to
others, and that in which I constantly purpose (God willing) as to Live so to
Dye.

1. I do believe and know that there is but one way to Heaven, even the True
and Living way, Jesus Christ, God and Man the Savior of the World.

2. I believe and know, that this way however it is a narrow and straight way,
in respect of the World, yet has much Latitude in it self: So as those that
truly believe in this Son of God, their Savior, though they may be misled
into many by-pathes of small errors, yet by the mercy of God are acknowledged
not to be out of the main high way to eternal life.

3. I believe and know, that the Canonical Scriptures of God are the true and
unfailing Rule of our Faith, so as whatsoever is therein contained is the
infallible Truth of God, and whatsoever is necessary to be believed to eternal
Salvation, is therein expressly, or by clear and undoubted consequence
contained, and so set forth as it neither needs farther explication, nor
admits of any probable Contradiction.

4. I believe and know, that God has ever since the creation of Mankind had a
Church upon Earth, and so shall have to the end of the World, which is a
Society or Communion of Faithful men professing his Name, against which the
gates of Hell shall never be able to prevail, for the failing thereof.

5. I believe and know, that the consenting voice of the successions, and
present universality of faithful Men in all times and places, is worthy of
great authority, both for our Confirmation in all truths, and for our direction
in all the circumstantial points of Gods service; so as it cannot be opposed,
or severed from, without just offense to God.

6. I believe and know, that besides those necessary truths contained in the
Holy Scriptures and Seconded by the Consent and Profession of all Gods faithful
ones, there may be, and ever have been, certain collateral and not-mainly
importing verities, wherein it is not unlawful, for several particular
Churches, to maintain their own Tenets, and to dissent from other; and the
several members of those particular Churches are bound, so far to tender the
common Peace; as not to oppose such publicly received truths.

7. I do confidently believe, that if all the particular Churches, through the
whole Christian World, should meet together, and determine these secondary and
unimporting truths to be believed upon necessity of Salvation, and shall enact
Damnation to all those which shall deny their assent thereunto, they should go
beyond the Commission which God has given them, and do an act which God has
never undertaken to warrant: Since there can be no new Principles of Christian
Religion, however there may be an application, of some formerly received Divine
truths to some emergent occasions, and a clearer explication of some obscure
verities.

8. I do confidently believe that God has never confined the determination of
his will in all questions and matters, pertaining to Salvation, or whatsoever
controversies of Religion to the breast of any one Man, or to a particular
Church, or to a correspondence, of some particular Churches, so as they shall
not possibly err, in their Definitions and Decrees.

9. I do confidently believe, that the Church of Rome comprehending both the
head and those her adherents, and dependence, being but particular Churches,
have highly offended God in arrogating to themselves the privilege of
infallibility which was never given them, and in ordaining new Articles of
faith, and excluding from the bosom of Gods Church, and the Gates of Heaven
all those which differ from her in the refusal of her late bred impositions,
though otherwise holy men, and no less true Christians, then any of themselves.

10. I do confidently believe, that though it be a thing very requisite to
public peace and good order, that every several Christian should be ranged
under some particular Church, and every particular assembly to be subordinate
to some higher Government, which may oversee and over rule them in the case of
different opinions and matters of practice; yet that God has not required, or
commanded either of these upon necessity of Salvation; so as an Indian convert,
in the remotest part of the World believing in Christ, may without relation to
any Church whatsoever be saved; and a particular Church being Orthodox in the
main principles of Religion, upon matter of litigious contestation, flying off
from some more eminent Church under which it was ranked for Orders sake,
however it may be faulty, in an undue division, yet is not hereby excluded from
the capacity of salvation; since such slight jarrs, and unkindnesses in
Churches, can no more shut them out, from a common interest in Christ, then the
like quarrels of a Paul and Barnabas, Act. 15.39. could keep either of them out
of Heaven.

11. I do confidently believe, that all the particular National Churches,
through the whole Christian World, are no other then Sisters, Daughters of the
same Father God; of the same Mother, the Spiritual Jerusalem which is from
above; some of them are Elder Sisters, others Younger: Some more Tall and large
spread; others of less stature, some fairer in respect of Holiness of life and
Orthodoxie of Judgment; others fouler in respect of Corruptions, both of
doctrine and manners; still Sisters; and if any of them shall usurp a
Mistress-ship over the rest, or make her self a Queen over them, and make them
subjects and slaves to her; or a Motherhood to the rest (otherwise then in a
priority and aid of conversion) and make them, but Daughters and Punies to her;
She shall be guilty of an high Arrogance and Presumption, against Christ and
his dear Spouse, the Church; since with the just and holy God, there is no
respect of persons or places, but in all Nations those that serve him best, are
most accepted of him.

12. From hence will follow this double Corollarie: First, That (as there is a
kind of natural equality in Sisterhood) no particular National Church can by
right of any institution of God, challeng a commanding power over the rest,
however some one may have a precedence to other, in respect, whether of more
constant Holiness and syncerity, or more speed of conversion; or of larger
extent; or of that civil greatness, and preeminence of that State or Nation,
wherein it is settled; And upon this occasion may and must improve and exercise
her eminence, to the defense and furtherance of the weaker and more distressed:
But if any particular National Church being less able to suste in it self,
shall agree voluntarily to submit her self (for orders sake and for safety and
protection) to the sway of one more famous and powerful, her engagement does
justly bind her, so far as lawfully it reaches; viz. To accknowledg a
priority of place, and to respect her directions in matters of form and
outward Administration, so long as they vary not from the rule, which God has
set in his Church: But if that more potent Church shall abuse that power and
begin to exercise Tyranny over the weaker, by forceing upon her new and undue
impositions of faith, or intolerable insolences in government; there is no
law of God that binds that weaker Church Issachar-like to lie down between two
burdens, she may challenge and resume the right of a Sister, and shake off the
yoke of a slave, without the violation of any command of God; and not the
injuried but the oppressor is guilty of the breach of peace.

2. It will hence follow, that the relation of this common Sisterhood of all
Christian Churches, justly ties all those that profess the name of Christ, to
a charitable regard of each to other: So as though there be in some of them
gross errors in matters of Doctrine, and foul corruptions in matters of
practice, yet whiles they hold and maintain, all the Articles of the same
Christian faith and acknowledge the same Scriptures, the substance of the same
baptism, and of the institution of the Holy Eucharist, they cease not to
continue Sisters, notwithstanding their manifold enormities, and depravations;
these are enough to deforme any Church, not enough to Dis-church it; These are
enough to impair the health, not to bereave the life; Howsoever therefore we
must always hate, and cry down their errors (which a wilful maintenance makes
no less then damnable) yet we must pity and pray for their Persons, and by all
good means, labor to bring them to an acknowledgment of the opposed truth; and
although I well know there is ill use made of our charity this way; by those
willing mistakers who turn it to our disadvantage; that we pass so favorable
censures upon their Churches, whiles they pass so cruel and merciless censures
upon ours, yet my conscience bids me to say that I cannot repent of this just
sentence wherein I know I shall find comfort in my appearance, before the
dreadful Tribunal of God, when the uncharitableness and injustice of these
bloody men, that send their charitable opposers to a remediless damnation,
shall be adjudged to that Hell, which they have presumptuously doomed unto
others: As for them, let them see how they can answer it to that just Judge of
the World in that great day, that they have presumed to blot out of the book of
life so many millions of faithful Christians, only for dissenting from them in
such points as God never gave them warrant to impose.

From the force then of this Relation it is easily subinfer'd that it is not
lawful for Christian Churches, upon differences about points not essential to
the faith either voluntarily to forsake the communion of each other, or
forceably to abdicate and thrust out each other from their communion. There
being the same reason in this behalf, of a Church, and a several Christian: As
therefore one Christian may not abandon another for differences of opinion in
matters not necessary to be believed; so neither may one Church, upon such
ground either leave or expel another, but if any such act be done, it is to be
inquired both where the fault is, and what may be the Remedy.

In a mere simple dereliction of a Church thus differing, and supposed so to
err, the faults must needs be in the Church forsaking: But where the departure
is accompanied with such circumstances, as may be supposed to be incident in
such cases, there the state of the business may be altered, and the blame of
either part, either taken off or aggravated. To instance in the prosecution of
this Relation which we have in hand: Two Sisters are appointed by their Mother
to look to her house, the charge is given equally to both, the Mother is no
sooner out of sight, then the Elder begins to domineer over the younger, and
requires her to do something in the Family, which she conceives may tend to the
prejudice of the common profit, and cross the Mothers intention, the younger
finding her self grieved, with this carriage, and disliking the task enjoined,
both forbears to do it and seriously expostulates with her Sister; laying
before her the inconveniences which will follow upon such an act; the Elder
impatient of a contradiction, not only gives sharp language, but thrusts her
Sister out of doors; neither will admit her to come in again, except she submit
her self to her authority, and perform that chare which she formerly refused,
the Younger holds off, as thinking she may not yield without wrong to herself,
and to her Mothers Trust: The Sisters are now thus parted; but where is the
blame? The Younger is gone away from the Elder; but she does it upon the Elders
violence; on the one side, she had not gone if she had not been thrust out; on
the other side she had not been thrust out, if she had not refused to do the
thing required; on the one side, the Elder might not be so imperious, nor
enjoin a thing unfit; on the otherside the Younger might not upon such a
command voluntarily forsake the Elder; but if the Elder shall unjustly
challenge such authority, and shall thereupon impose unmeet services; and shall
put the Younger out of doors for not performing them, it is clear where the
fault rests.

I appeal to God, and the consciences of all just men, if this be not the state
of the present differences, of the Romans and Reformed Churches; the remedy
whereof must therefore begin from those parties which have given cause of the
breach; if they shall remit of their undue Height and Rigor, and be content,
with those Moderate bounds which God has set them both for Doctrine, and
Government, and yield themselves but capable of error, there may be possibility
of Reunion, and Peace: But whiles they persist to challenge an infallibility of
judgment, and uncontrollableness of practice, they do wilfully block up the way
to all reconciliation and concord, and stand guilty of all that Grievous
Schism, under which the Church of God, thus long and miserably suffers.

And this upon full deliberation, is my settled and final Resolution;
concerning the main difference in Religion; wherein my soul does so confidently
rest; that I dare therewith boldly appear before the face of that great Judge
of the Quick and Dead, as knowing it infallibly warranted by his own UNDOUBTED
WORD.

JOS. EXON.

A LETTER OF ANSWER TO AN UNKNOWN COMPLAINANT, Concerning the Frequent
Injecting of TEMPTATIONS.
THe case whereof you complan is not more worthy of secrecy then of pity; and
yet in true judgment not so heinous as you conceive it: Evil motions are cast
into you, which yet you entertain not with consent: Let me assure you these are
not your sins, but his that injects them: You may be (as you are) troubled with
their importunity; but you are not tainted with their evil, whiles you dislike
and hate them, and are grieved with their suggestion: That bold and subtle
enemy of ours durst cast temptations into the Son of God himself, in whom yet
he could find nothing. It were woe with us, if lewd motions (though repelled)
should be imputed unto us: It is only our consent that brings them home to us,
and makes them our sins; were then these thoughts (as you suppose them)
blasphemies; yet whiles your heart goes not with them, but abhorrs them, and
strives against them, they may afflict you, they cannot hurt you: As Luther
said in the like case, Birds may fly over our heads, whether we will or no, but
they cannot nestle in our hair unless we permit them. Take heart therefore to
your self; and be not too much dejected with the wicked solicitations of a
known enemy: For the redress whereof (as I have not been unacquainted with the
like causes of complaints) let me prescribe you a double remedy; Resolution,
and Prayer.

In the first place take up strong resolutions not to give heed or ear to
these unreasonable motions; resolve rather to scorn and contemn them upon
their first intimation, as not worthy of a particular answer; For certainly
holding chat with them and sad agitations, and arguing of them, as thoughts
meet to receive a satisfaction, draws on their more troublesome importunity;
whereas if they were slighted, and disdainfully turned off upon their first
glimpse, they would go away ashamed. Whenever therefore any such suggestions
offer themselves unto you, think with your self: I know whence this comes, it
is Satan's; let him take it whose it is, I will not meddle with it; say but in
your Saviors words, Avoid Satan; and divert your thoughts to some holy and
profitable subject, and these temptations will by Gods grace soon vanish.

In the second place, apply your self to the remedy of that chosen Vessel, who
when he was buffeted by the messenger of Satan, had recourse to the throne of
Grace, and besought God thrice, (that is frequently) that he might depart away
from him: Whenever you shall be thus troubled, do you by a sudden
ejaculation raise up your heart to God; and beseech him to rebuke that evil
one, and do not so much care to answer the Temptation, as to implore the aid of
him, who can take off the tempter at pleasure; who has an hook in the nostrils
of that Leviathan. Certainly those evil thoughts cannot be more swift-winged
then our prayers may be, nor so prevalent to our vexation as our prayers shall
be for our rescue. Be therefore fervent and affidious in them, and my soul for
yours the enemy shall have no power to harm you. As for your doubt of
receiving the blessed Sacrament because of these misconceived blasphemies, it
falls alone by what I have already said; The blasphemies (if they were such)
are Satan's not yours; Why should you not do your self good, because he would do
you a mischief: In Gods name go on to defy that evil one; and let him take his
wickedness to himself; and do you go with cheerfullnesse and good courage to
that Holy Table: as there and thence expecting to receive new strength against
all his assaults: Neither doubt I but that our good God will so bless unto you
this institution of his own, together with your prayers and Resolutions, that
you shall be soon and fully freed from these hateful guests; and Comfortably
enjoy him and Your self; which I shall also gladly second with my prayers for
you (though unknown) as who am

Your truly Compassionate and well-wishing Friend in Christ Jos. Exon.
Exon. April 14 1630.
A CONSOLATORY LETTER, TO ONE Under Censure.
Sir,
IT is not for me to examine the Grounds of your affliction, which as they
shall come to be scanned by greater judgments, so in the mean time have
doubtless received both a Verdict and sentence from your own heart: and if
this act were in my power I can much better suffer with my Friend then judge
him. But however either partial or rigorous the conceits of others may be, be
sure I beseech you that you receive from your own bosom a free and just doom
on all your actions; after all the censures of others, thence must proceed
either your peace or torment: But what do I undertake to teach him that is
already in the School of God and under that divine ferule has learned more
then by all the Theorical counsels of prosperity. Surely I cannot but profess
that I know not whether I were more sorry for the desert of your durance, or
glad of such fruit thereof as mine eyes end ears witnessed from you. But one
Sabbath is past since my meditations were occasioned to fix themselves upon
the gain which Gods children make of their sins, the practice whereof I
rejoiced to see conconcurr in you with my speculation; and indeed it is one of
the wonders of Gods mercy and providence that those wounds wherewith Satan
hopes to kill the Soul, through the wise and gracious ordination of God, serve
to heal it.

We faint Soldiers should never fight so valliantly, if it were not for the
indignation at our foil. There are corruptions that may lurk secretly in a
corner of the Soul unknown, unseen; till the shame of a notorious evil send us
to search and ransacke; if but a spot light upon our cloak we regard it not,
but if through our neglect or the violence of a blast it fall into the mire,
then we wash and scour it.

As we use therefore to say there cannot be better physic to a choleric body
then a seasonable Ague, so may I say safely there can be nothing so
advantageous to a secure heart, as to be sinsick; for hereby he who before fell
in overpleasing himself, begins to displease himself at his fall: Fire never
ascends so high as when it is beaten back with a cool blast: Water that runs in
a smooth level with an insensible declination (though an heavy body) yet if it
fall low it rises high again: Much forgiven causes much love; neither had the
penitent made an ewer of her eyes, and a towel of her hair for Christ's feet if
she had not found her self more faulty then her neighbors: Had not Peter
thrice denied, he had not been graced with that threefold question of his
Saviors love; it is an harsh but a true word, Gods Children have cause to
bless him for nothing more then for their sins: If that all-wise providence
have thought good to raise up even your forgotten sins in your face to shame
you before men, there cannot be a greater argument of his mercy; This blushing
shall avoid eternal confusion: Envy not at the felicity of the closely or
gloriously guilty; who have at once firm foreheads, and foul bosoms; vaunting
therefore of their innocence because they can have no accusers, like wicked
harlots who because they were delivered without a midwife, and have made away
their stolen birth, go current still for maids; nothing can be more miserable
then a sinners prosperity; this argues him bound over in Gods just decree to an
everlasting vengeance, Woe be to them that laugh here, for they shall weep and
gnash: Happy is that shame that shall end in glory.

And if the wisdom of that just judge of the world shall think fit to strip
you of your worldly wealth and outward estate, acknowledge his mercy and your
gain in this loss; he saw this camels bunch kept you out of the needles eye; he
saw these bells too heavy for that high flight to which he intended you; now
shall you begin to be truly rich when you can enjoy the possessor of Heaven
and Earth; when these base rivals are shut out of doors God shall have your
whole heart; who were not himself, if he were not all-sufficient.

Neither let it lie too heavy upon your heart that your hopeful Sons shall
inherit nothing from you but shame and dishonor; why are you injurious to your
self and those you love, your repentance shall feoffe upon them more blessings
then your sin has lost; let posterity say they were the sons of a penitent
Father; this stain is washed off with your tears and their virtue: and for their
provision, (if the worst fall) The Earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof,
imagine them born to nothing; we that are more Rich in Children then estate
hope well of those vessels whom we can put forth well rigged, and well balla'st
though not wealthy laden: How sensibly do you now find that wealth does not
consist in getting much, but well; and that contentment does not lie in the
cofer but in the breast; lastly that all treasures are dross to a good
conscience.

For your self; If you be pent up within four walls, and barred both of Sun and
Men; make God yours and you cannot complain of restraint, or solitude: No
prison is too straight for his presence; Heaven it self would be a prison
without him; your serious repentance may win that Society which makes the very
Angels blessed; this is the way to make him your comforter, your companion, in
whose presence is the fullness of joy.

Shortly, let your thoughts be altogether such as may beseem a man not
unwillingly weaned from this world, and careful only to speed happily in
another; We your poor friends can answer the kind respects of your prosperity
no otherwise then with our prayers for the best use of your affliction; which
shall not be wanting from your true and sorrowful wel-willer

J. H.

A SHORT ANSWER TO THOSE Nine Arguments Which are brought against the BISHOPS
SITTING IN PARLIAMENT.
THose reasons had need to be strong; and the inconveniences heinous that
should take away an ancient and hereditary right, established by law. These are
not such,

1. To trade in secular affairs, and to be taken up with them, is indeed a
great and just hinderance to the exercise of our ministerial function; but to
meet once in three years in a Parliament for some few weeks at the same time
when we are bound to attend convocation business, is no sensible impediment to
our holy calling.

2. We do indeed promise and profess when we enter into holy orders that we
will give our selves so much as in us lies wholly to this vocation; will it
therefore follow that we may not upon any occasion lend our selves to the care
of the public when we are thereunto called? And if this notwithstanding, we
may, yea must take moderate care of our household affairs, and the provision for
our family; why not as well of the Commonwealth?

3. For ancient Canons of Counsels; will they be content to be bound by them,
who urge them upon us? Or will they admit some, and reject others? Or will they
admit them where they are contrary to our own laws? Now our Clarendon Constit.
have expressly, debent interesse omnibus judiciis: The Canons therefore must
yield to them, not they to the Canons.

4. Twenty four Bishops have dependence upon two Archbishops. When was it
otherwise? Is it not so in all subordinations of government? If this be a just
inconvenience, let all be levelled to an equality, and that shall end in a
certain confusion but they swear to them Canonical obedience: True, but it is
only in omnibus licitis and honestis mandatis: The supposition employed must
needs savor of uncharitableness; that the Metropolitans will be still apt to
require unlawful things, and the Bishops will ever basely stoop to a servile
humoring of them.

5. But they have their places only for their lives; and therefore not fit to
have a legislative power over the honors, liberties, proprieties of the
subject. 1. If they have their Bishoprics but for their lives, yet there are
scarce any of them that have not so much temporal estate in fee as may make
them no less capable of a legislative power then many of the house of Commons
who claim this right. Secondly, is the case other now then it has been all
this while? yet for so many hundred years there have been good laws, and just
sentences given by their concurrence, notwithstanding this their tenure for
Life. 3ly. If they be honest and conscionable though they had their places but
for a year, or a day, they would not yield to determine ought unjustly: And if
dishonest and conscienceless, it is not the perpetual inheritance of our
places that can make our determinations just.

6. If dependencies, and expectations of further preferment lie in our way; why
not equally in many Temporal Lords, who are interessed in offices, and places
in court? why should we be more mis-carriageable by such possibilities or hopes
then others? Especially, when our age is commonly such, and the charges of
removes so great that there is small likelihood of an equal gaining by he
change.

7. If several and particular Bishops have much incroched upon the consciences
of his Majesty's subjects, in matter of their propriety, and liberty; what
reason is there to impute this unto all? why should the innocent be punished
for the wrongs of the guilty? Let those who can be convinced of an offense this
way undergo a condign censure; Let not an unjust prejudice be cast upon the
whole calling for the errors of a few.

8. It is not to be expected but the whole number of 26. should be interessed
in the maintenance of that their Jurisdiction which both the laws of Men, and
Apostolical institution has feoffed them in; why should they not defend their
own lawful and holy calling against all unjust opposition of gainsayers. If
their hearts did not assure them their station were warrantable and good, they
were beasts if they would hold them; and if their hearts do assure them so,
they were beasts if they would not defend them: But there are numbers in all
the three Kingdoms that cry them down; True, but there are greater numbers
for them, perhaps an hundred for one; and if some busy factionists of the
meaner sort here about (a body compounded of Separatists, Anabaptists,
Familists, and such like stuff) make some show and noise, yet what are these,
to the whole Kingdom? Neither do these men more oppugn our votes in
Parliament, then our stations in the Church; so as this argument will no less
hold for no bishops, then for no votes, as likewise that instance in the
practice of Scotland. Scotland has abolisht Episcopacy they say; The more
pity; let them look, quo jure, and what answer to make unto that God whose
ordinance it is: But I had thought it should have been a stronger argument;
England retains Episcopacy therefore Scotland should; then Scotland has
abolisht Episcopacy, therefore England should do so too: Let there be any other
Church named in the whole Christian World that has voluntarily abandoned
Episcopacy, when it might have continued it; and if their practice be herein
singular, why should not they rather conform to all the rest of Christendom,
then we to them.

9. But the core of all, is, that it sets too great a distance between us, and
our Brethren of the Clergy, and so nourishes pride in us, coffeehouse in
them, and disquietness in the Church: An argument that fights equally against
all our superiority over our Brethren, and against our votes here: By this
reason we must be all equal, none subordinate; and what order can there be
where none is above other? What is this but old Korahs challenge. Ye take too
much upon you, wherefore lift ye up your selves above the Congregation of the
Lord: Now; I beseech you, whether was there more pride in Moses and Aaron that
governed, or in Corah and Dathan that murmured and repined?

It is pride then that causes contention, but where is this pride? whether in
those that moderately manage a lawful superiority, or in those that scorn and
hate to be under government? Were those Brethren so affected as they ought, they
should rather rejoice that any of their own tribe are advanced to those places
wherein they might be capable of doing good offices to them and the Church of
God, in stead of swelling with envy against their just exaltation, and would
feel this honor done to their profession; and not to the persons.

Lastly, what a mean opinion does this imply to be conceived of us by the
suggesters, that we who are old Men, Christian Philososophers, and Divines
should have so little government of our selves as to be puffed up with those
poor accessions of titular respects, which those who are really and
hereditarily possessed of, can weild without any such taint or suspicion of
transportedness.

Shortly, in all these Nine reasons there is nothing that may induce an
indifferent Man to think there is any just ground to exclude Bishops from
sitting and voting in Parliament.

FOR EPISCOPACY, AND LITURGY.
WE cannot be too wary of, or too opposite to Popery and Antichristianism: But
let me admonish you in the fear of God to take heed that we do not dilate the
name and imputation of these too far; for I speak it with just sorrow and
compassion there are some well meaning and seduced souls that are by Erroneous
teachers brought into the opinion that the sacred form of the Government of the
Church and the holy forms of the public devotions, and prayers of the Church
and all the favorers of them are worthy to be branded with the title of Popery
and Antichristianism.

For the first, my heart bleeds in me to think that that calling which was
instituted by the Apostles themselves and has ever since continued in the
universal Church of Christ without interruption to this day, should now come
under the name of Popery: I speak of the calling; if the persons of any in this
station have been faulty, let them bear their own burden, but that the calling
it self should receive this construction in the opinion of well-minded and
conscionable Christians is justly most lamentable. I beseech you look back upon
the histories of former times, look but upon your Acts and Monuments, and see
whether any have been more expensive either of their ink, or their blood
against the tyranny of Popery and superstition then the Bishops of this Church
of England, in so much as the reverend Dr. Du Moulin in his public Epistle
professes that the Bishops of England were they to whom this Church is beholden
for the liberty and maintenance of the Protestant Religion in this Kingdom and
in this present age how many of us have written and are content and ready to
bleed for the sincerity of the Gospel? If there be any therefore in this holy
order whose lips have hanged toward the onions and garlic, and fleshpots of
Egypt, let them undergo just censure; but let the calling, and the zealous and
faithful managers of it be acquitted before God, and Men.

For the latter, I see and mourn to see that many good souls are brought into a
dislike and detestation of the common prayers of the Church of England as mere
Mass and Popery, woe is me that error should prevail so far with good hearts. I
beseech you for Gods sake and your souls sake be rightly informed in this so
material and important a point.

I see there is herein a double offense. One of them which dislike the prayers
because they are set forms; the other that dislike them because they are such
set forms.

For the former I beseech them to consider seriously whether they ought to
think themselves wiser and perfecter then all the Churches of God that ever
have been upon the Earth: This I dare confidently say that since God had an
established Church in the World there were set forms of devotion: in the Jewish
Church before and since Christ, in the Christian Church of all ages; and at
this very day all those varieties of Christians in the large circle of
Christianography they have their set forms of prayers which they do and must
use, and in the Reformed Churches both of the Lutherans, and France, and
Scotland, it is no otherwise: yea reverend Mr. Calvin himself whose judgment
had wont to sway with the forwardest Christians writing to the Protector of
England, Anno 1548. has these words, Quod ad formulam precum attinet and
rituum Ecclesiasticorum valsle prob^ ut certa illa extet a qua pastoribus
discedere non liceat in functione sua, etc. And adding three grave and solid
reasons for it, concludes thus: so then there ought to be a set form of
Catechism, a set form of administration of Sacraments, and of public prayers;
and why will we cast off the judgment both of him and all the Divines of the
whole Christian World till Barrow and Brown in our age and remembrance
contradicted it, and run after a conceit that never had any being in the World
till within our own memory:

For the latter. There are those who could allow some form of set prayers, but
dislike this of ours as savoring of the Pope and the Mass, whence they say it
is derived; Now I beseech you Brethren as you would avoid the danger of that woe
of calling good evil, and evil good, inform your selves thoroughly of the true
State of this business.

Know therefore that the whole Church of God both Eastern and Western as it was
divided; both the Greek and Latin Church under which this Island was wont to be
ranged had their forms of prayer from the beginning, which were then holy and
Heavenly compiled by the holy Fathers of those first times: Afterward the
abuses and errors of popery came in by degrees, as Transubstantiation,
Sacrifice of the Mass, prayers for the dead, prayers to Saints; these poisoned
the Church, and vitiated these holy forms whiles they continued, but when
Reformation came in, diverse worthy Protestant Divines, whereof some were noble
Martyrs for religion, were appointed to revise that form of service, to purge
out all that popish leaven that had sowred them, to restore them to their
former purity; leaving nothing in that book but that which they found consonant
to godliness, and pure religion.

If any Man will now say that our prayer book is taken out of the Mass, let him
know rather that the Mass was cast out of our prayer book into which it was
injuriously and impiously intruded; the good of those prayers are ours in the
right of Christians, the evil that was in them let them take as their own.

And if it should have been as they imagine; let them know that we have
departed from the Church of Rome but in those things wherein they have departed
from Christ, what good thing they have is ours still; That scripture which they
have, That Creed which they profess is ours, neither will we part with it for
their abuse.

If a piece of Gold be offered us, will we not take it because it was taken out
of the channel? If the Devil have given a confession of Christ, and said, I
know who thou art even Jesus the Son of the living God; shall not I make this
confession because it came out of the Devils mouth? Alas we shall be herein
very injurious both to our selves and to God whose every holy truth is.

This then is the form which has been compiled by learned and holy Divines, by
blessed Martyrs themselves, who used it comfortably, and blessed God for it.

But if the quicker eyes of later times have found any thing which displeases
them in the phrases and manners of expression or in some rites prescribed in
it, Let them in Gods name await for the reforming sentence of that public
authority whereby it was framed and enacted; and let not private persons
presume to put their hands to the work; which would introduce nothing but
palpable confusion, let all things be done decently, and in order.

Shortly my Brethren let us hate Popery to the death but let us not involve
within that odious name those holy forms both of administration, and devotion
which are both pleasing unto God, and agreeable to all Christianity and
Godliness.

A SPEECH IN PARLIAMENT.
My Lords,
I Have long held my peace, and meant to have done so still, but now like to
Croesus his mute Son, I must break silence; I humbly beseech your Lordships to
give me leave, to take this too just occasion to move your Lordships to take
into your deep, and serious consideration, the woeful, and lamentable condition
of the poor Church of England, your dear Mother; My Lords, this was not wont to
be her style, we have heretofore talked of the famous and flourishing Church of
England, but now your Lordships must give me leave to say, that the poor Church
of England humbly prostrates her self (next after his sacred Majesty) at your
Lordships feet, and humbly craves your compassion and present aid.

My Lords, It is a foul and dangerous insolence, this which is now complained
of to you, but it is but one of a hundred of those which have been of late done
to this Church and Government. The Church of England, as your Lordships cannot
choose but know, has been and is miserably infested on both sides, with
Papists on the one side, and Schismatics on the other; The Psalmist has of
old distinguished the enemies of it, into wild Boars out of the Wood, and little
Foxes out of the Buroughs; The one whereof goes about to root up the very
foundation of Religion, the other to crop the branches, and blossoms and
clusters thereof, both of them conspire the utter ruin and devastation of it;
As for the former of them; I do perceive a great deal of good zeal for the
remedy and suppression of them; and I do heartily congratulate it, and bless
God for it, and beseech him to prosper it, in those hands that shall undertake
and prosecute it; but for the other give me leave to say, I do not find many
that are sensible of the danger of it, which yet in my apprehension is very
great and apparent; Alas my Lords, I beseech you to consider what it is; that
there should be in London, and the Suburbs and Liberties, no fewer then
fourscore Congregations of several Sectaries, as I have been too credibly
informed, instructed by Guides fit for them, Cobblers, Tailors, Feltmakers and
such like trash, which all are taught to spit in the face of their Mother the
Church of England; and to defye and revile her government; From hence have
issued those dangerous assaults of our Church Governors; From hence that
inundation of base and scurrilous libels and pamphlets, wherewith we have been
of late overborne, in which Papists and Prelates like Oxen in a yoke are still
matched together; O my Lords, I beseech you that you will be sensible of this
great indignity: Do but look upon these reverend persons: Do not your Lordships
see here sitting upon these benches, those that have spent their time, their
strength, their bodies and lives, in preaching down, in writing down Popery?
and which would be ready (if occasion were offered) to sacrifice all their old
blood that remains to the maintenance of that truth of God, which they have
taught and written, and shall we be thus despightfully ranged with them, whom
we do thus professedly oppose; but alas this is but one of those many
scandalous aspersions, and intolerable affronts that are daily cast upon us.
Now whither should we in this case have recourse for a needful and seasonable
redress? The arm of the Church is alas now short and sinewless, it is the
interposing of your authority that must rescue us. You are the Eldest sons of
your dear Mother the Church, and therefore most fit and most able to vindicate
her wrongs, you are amici Sponsae, give me leave therefore in the bowels of
Christ humbly to beseech your Lordships to be tenderly sensible of these woeful
and dangerous conditions of the times. And if the government of the Church of
England be unlawful and unfit, abandon and disclaim it, but if otherwise uphold
and maintain it. Otherwise if these lawless outrages be yet suffered to gather
head, who knows where they will end? My Lords, if these men may with impunity,
and freedom, thus bear down Ecclesiastical authority, it is to be feared they
will not rest there, but will be ready to affront civil power too: Your
Lordships know that the Jack Straws, and Cades, and Watt Tylers of former
times, did not more cry down Learning then Nobility: and those of your
Lordships that have read the history of the Anabaptistical tumults at Munster
will need no other Item, let it be enough to say that many of these Sectaries
are of the same profession: Shortly therefore let me humbly move your Lordships
to take these dangers and miseries of this poor Church deeply to heart, and
upon this occasion to give order for the speedy redressing of these horrible
insolences, and for the stopping of that deluge of libellous invectives,
wherewith we are thus impetuously overflown; Which in all due submission, I
humbly present to your Lordships wise, and religious consideration.

A SPEECH IN PARLIAMENT, In Defense of the CANONS MADE IN CONVOCATION.
My Lords,
I cannot choose but know that whosoever rises up in this cause must speak with
the disadvantage of much prejudice; and therefore I do humbly crave your
Lordships best construction, were it (my Lords) that some few doubting persons
were to be satisfied in some scruples about matter of the Canons, there might
have been some life in the hope of prevailing; but now that we are borne down
with such a torrent of general and resolute contradiction, we yield; but yet
give us leave I beseech you so to yield that posterity may not say we have
willingly betrayed our own innocence. First therefore let us plead to your
Lordships and the World, that to abate the edge of that illegality which is
objected to us, it was our obedience that both assembled and kept us together
for the making of Synodicall acts. We had the great Seal of England for it,
seconded by the judgments of the oracles of law and justice; and upon these the
command of our superior to whom we have sworn and owe canonical obedience: Now
in this case, what should we do (Was it for us to judge of the great seal of
England; or to judge of our Judges (alas we are not for the law, but for the
Gospel) or to disobey that authority which was to be ever sacred to us, I
beseech your Lordships put your selves a while in to our condition, had the
case been yours, what would you have done? If we obey not, we are rebels to
authority; if we obey we are censured for illegal procedures? Where are we
now, my Lords? It is an old rule of Casuists, nemo tenetur esse perplexus, Free
us one way or other; and show us whether we must rather hazard censure, or
incurr disobedience. In the next place give us leave to plead our good
intentions; since we must make new Canons. I persuade my self we all came (I am
sure I can speak for one) with honest and zealous desires to do God and his
Church good service, and expected to have received great thanks both of Church
and Commonwealth; for your Lordships see that the main drift of those Canons
was to repress and confine the indiscreet and lawless discourses of some either
ignorant, or parasiticall, I am sure offensive Preachers to suppress the growth
of Socinianism, Popery, Separatism, to redress some abuses of Ecclesiastical
courts and officers; In all which I dare say your Lordships do heartily concur
with them; And if in the manner of expression there have been any failings I
shall humbly beseech your Lordships that those may not be too much stood upon
where the main substance is well meant; and in it self profitable. In the third
place give me leave to put your Lordships in mind of the continual practice of
the Christian Church, since the first Synod of the Apostles ( Act. 15.) to this
present day; wherein I suppose it can never be showed that ever any
Ecclesiastical Canons made by the Bishops and Clergy in Synods, general,
national, provincial, were either offered or required to be confirmed by
Parliaments: Emperors and Princes, by whose authority those Synods were
called, have still given their power to the ratification and execution of them;
and none others; and if you please to look into the times within the ken of
memory or somewhat beyond it, Linwoods Constitutions, what Parliaments
confirmed? The Injunctions of Queen Elizabeth, the Canons of King James were
never tendered to the Parliament for confirmation; and yet have so far obtained
hitherto, that the government of the Church was by them still regulated;
compare I beseech you those of K. James with the present, your Lordships shall
find them many, peremptory, resolute, standing upon their own grounds, in
points much harder of digestion then these which are but few, and only seconds
to former constitutions: if therefore in this we have erred, surely the whole
Christian Church of all places and times has erred with us; either therefore
we shall have too good company in the censure, or else we shall be excused.

Fourthly give me leave to urge the authority of these Canons; in which regard
if I might without offense speak it, I might say that the complainants have not
(under correction) laid a right ground of their accusation; They say we have
made Canons and Constitutions; alas my Lords we have made none.

We neither did, nor could make Canons, more then they can make laws; The
Canons are so to the Church as laws are for the Commonwealth; now they do but
rogare legem, they do not far or sancire legem, that is only for the King to
do, it is le Roy le Veult, that of bills makes laws; so was it for us to do in
matter of Canons, we might propound some such constitutions as we should think
might be useful; but when we have done we send them to his Majesty, who
perusing them cum avisamento Consilii sui, and approving them puts life into
them, and of dead propositions makes them Canons; as therefore the laws are the
Kings laws, and not ours; so are the Canons the Kings Canons, and not the
Clergies, Think thus of them, and then draw what conclusions you please.

As for that pecuniary business of our contribution wherein we are said to have
trenched upon the liberty of subjects and propriety of goods; I beseech your
Lordships do but see the difference of times, we had a precedent for it; The
same thing was done in Qu. Elizabeth's time in a mulct of 3 s. the pound and
that after the end of the Parliament, with the same clauses of Suspension,
Sequestration, Deprivation, without noise of any exception which now is cried
down for an unheard of incroachment; how legal it may be I dispute not, and
did then make bold to move; but let the guide of that example and the zeal that
we had to the supply of his Majesty's necessities excuse us a tanto at least;
if having given these as subsidies sitting the Parliament, and the bill being
drawn up for the confirmation of the Parliament, we now, upon the unhappy
dissolution of it as loath to retract so necessary a grant we were willing to
have it continued to his Majesty's use.

But, my Lords, if I may have leave to speak my own thoughts, I shall freely
say that whereas there are three general concernments both of persons and
causes, merely Ecclesiastical, merely Temporal, or mixed of both Ecclesiastical
and temporal; as it is fit, the Church by her Synod should take cognizance
of, and order for the first whcih is merely Ecclesiastical, so next under his
Majesty, the Parliament should have the power of ordering the other; but in the
mean time, my Lords, where are we? The Canons of the Church both late and
former are pronounced to be void and forceless, the Church is a garden or
vineyard enclosed; the laws and constitutions of it are as the wall, or hedge,
if these be cast open, in what State are we: shall the enemies of this Church
have such an advantage of us, as to say, we are a lawless Church, or shall all
Men be left loose to their licentious freedom, God in Heaven forbid: Hitherto
we have been quietly and happily governed by those former Canons, the extent
whereof we have not I hope (and for some of us) I am confident, we have not
exceeded; why should we not be so still? Let these late Canons sleep since you
will have it so, till we awake them, which shall not be till Doomsday, and let
us be where we were, and regulate our selves by those constitutions which were
quietly submitted to on all hands, and for this which is past, since that which
we did was out of our true obedience, and with honest and godly intentions and
according to the Universal practice of all Christian Churches, and with the
full power of his Majesty's authority, let it not be imputed to us as any way
worthy of your Lordships censure.

A SPEECH in PARLIAMENT, Concerning the power of BISHOPS IN SECULAR THINGS.
MY Lords this is the strangest bill that ever I heard since I was admitted to
sit under this roof, for it strikes at the very fabric and composition of this
house; at the style of all laws; and therefore were it not that it comes from
such a recommendation it would not, I suppose, undergo any long consideration;
but coming to us from such hands, It cannot but be worthy of your best
thoughts; and truly for the main scope of the bill I shall yield it most
willingly, that Ecclesiastical and sacred persons should not ordinarily be
taken up with secular affairs.

The Minister is called Vir Dei, a Man of God; he may not be Vir Seculi, he may
lend himself to them upon occasion, he may not give himself over purposely to
them: Shortly, he may not so attend worldly things as that he do neglect divine
things. This we gladly yield; matters of justice therefore are not proper, as
in an ordinary trade, for our function, and by my consent shall be as in
generally waved and deserted, which for my part I never have meddled with but in
a charitable way; with no profit, but some charge to my self, whereof I shall
be glad to be eased: Tractent fabrilia fabri, as the old word is: But if any
man shall hence think to infer, that some spiritual person, may not
occasionally be in a special service of his King or Country; and when he is so
required by his Prince, give his advice in the urgent affairs of the Kingdom
(which I suppose is the main point driven at) is such an inconsequence as I
dare boldly say cannot be made good, either by divinity or reason; by the laws
either of God or man; whereas the contrary may be proved and enforced by both.

As for the grounds of this bill, that the Ministers duty is so great that it
is able to take up the whole man, and the Apostle says it is (...), who is
sufficient for these things, and that he who warfares to God, should not
entangle himself with this world, it is a sufficient and just conviction of
those who would divide themselves betwixt God and the World, and bestow any
main part of their time upon secular affairs; but it has no operation at all
upon this tenet which we have in hand; that a man dedicate to God, may not so
much as when he is required, cast a glance of his eye, or some minutes of time,
or some motions of his tongue upon the public business of his King and
Country.

Those that expect this from us may as well and upon the same reason hold that
a minister must have no family at all, or if he have one, must not care for it;
yea that he must have no body to tend, but be all Spirit: My Lords, we are men
of the same composition with others, and our breeding has been accordingly, we
cannot have lived in the World but we have seen it, and observed it too, and
our long experience and conversation both in Men and in books, cannot but have
put something into us for the good of others; and now having a double capacity;
qua cives, qua Ecclesiastici; as members of the common wealth; as Ministers and
Governors of the Church, we are ready to do our best service in both; one of
them is no way incompatible with the other; yea the subjects of them both are
so united with the Church and Commonwealth, that they cannot be severed: yea
so, as that, not the one is in the other, but one is the other, is both: so as
the services which we do upon these occasions to the Comonwealth are
inseparable from our good offices to the Church: so as upon this ground there
is no reason of our exclusion.

If ye say that our sitting in Parliament takes up much time which we might
have employed in our studies or pulpits; consider I beseech you; that whiles
you have a Parliament, we must have a convocation; and that our attendance upon
that will call for the same expense of time which we afford to this service, so
as herein we have neither got nor lost.

But I fear it is not on some hands the tender regard of the full scope to our
calling that is so much here stood upon; as the conceit of too much honor that
is done us in taking up the room of Peers, and voting in this high Court; for
surely those that are averse from our votes, yet could be content we should
have place upon the woolsacks; and could allow us ears, but not tongues. If this
be the matter I beseech your Lordships to consider that this honor is not done
to us but our profession; which (what ever we be in our several persons) can
not easily be capable of too much respect from your Lordships, Non tibi sed
Isidi, as he said of old: Neither is this any new grace that is put upon our
calling; (which if it were now to begin might perhaps be justly grudged to our
unworthyness) but it is an ancient right and inheritance inherent in our
station: No less ancient then these walls wherein we sit; yea more; before ever
there were Parliaments, in the Magna Consilia of the Kingdom we had our
places; and as for my predecessors ever since the Conquerours time, I can show
your Lordships a just catalogue of them that have sat before me here; and
truly though I have just cause to be mean in mine own eyes, yet why or wherein
there should be more unworthiness in me then the rest, that I should be stripped
of that privilege which they so long enjoyed though there were no law to hold
me here, I cannot see, or confess. What respects of honor have been put upon
the prime Clergy of old both by Pagans, and Jews, and Christians, and what are
still both within Christendom and without, I shall not need to urge, it is
enough to say, this of ours is not merely arbitrary, but stands so firmly
established by law and custom, that I hope it neither will nor can be removed
except you will shake those foundations which I believe you desire to hold
firm and inviolable.

Shortly then, my Lords, the church craves no new honor from you, and justly
hopes you will not be guilty of pulling down the old: as you are the eldest
sons, and next under his Majesty the honorable patrons of the Church, so she
expects, and beseeches you to receive her into your tenderest care, so to order
her affairs that ye leave her to posterity in no worse case then you found her.
It is a true word of Damasus, Uti vilescit nomen episcopi, omnis statua
perturbatur Ecclesiae; If this be suffered, the misery will be the Churches,
the dishonor and blurre of the act in future ages will be yours. To shut up
therefore, let us be taken off from all ordinary trade of secular employments,
and if you please abridge us of intermeddling with matters of common justice,
but leave us possessed of those places and privileges in Parliament which our
predecessors have so long and peaceably enjoyed.

ANTHEMES FOR THE CATHEDRAL OF EXCETER.
LOrd what am I? A worm, dust, vapor, nothing!
What is my life? A dream, a daily dying!
What is my flesh? My souls uneasy clothing!
What is my time? A minute ever flying:
My time, my flesh, my life, and I;
What are we Lord but vanity?
Where am I Lord? down in a vale of death:
What is my trade? sin, my dear God offending;
My sport sin too, my stay a puff of breath:
What end of sin? hells horror never ending:
My way, my trade, sport, stay, and place
help up to make up my doleful case.
Lord what art thou? pure life, power, beauty, bliss:
Where dwell'st thou? up above in perfect light:
What is thy time? eternity it is:
What state? attendance of each glorious sp'rit:
Thy self, thy place, thy days, thy state
Pass all the thoughts of powers create.
How shall I reach thee, Lord? Oh soar above,
Ambitious soul: but which way should I fly?
Thou, Lord, art way and end: what wings have I?
Aspiring thoughts, of faith, of hope, of love:
Oh let these wings, that way alone
Present me to thy blissfull throne.
ANTHEME FOR Christmas Day.
Immortal babe, who this dear day
Did change thine Heaven for our clay,
And did with flesh thy Godhead vail,
Eternal Son of God, All-hail.
Shine happy star, ye Angels sing
Glory on high to Heavens King:
Run Shepherds, leave your nightly watch,
See Heaven come down to Bethleems cratch.
Worship ye Sages of the East
The King of Gods in meanness dressed.
O blessed maid smile and adore
The God thy womb and arms have bore.
Star, Angels, Shepherds, and wise sages;
Thou Virgin glory of all ages
Restored frame of Heaven and Earth
Joy in your dear Redeemers Birth.
LEave O my soul this baser World below,
O leave this doleful dungeon of woe,
And soar aloft to that supernal rest
That makes all the Saints and Angels blessed:
Lo there the God-heads radiant throne,
Like to ten thousand Suns in one!
Lo there thy Savior dear in glory dight
Adored of all the powers of Heavens bright:
Lo where that head that bled with thorny wound,
Shines ever with celestial honor crowned:
That hand that held the scornful reed
Makes all the fiends infernal dread.
That back and side that ran with bloody streams
Daunt Angels eyes with their majestic beams;
Those feet once fastened to the cursed tree
Trample on death and hell, in glorious glee.
Those lips once drench't with gall do make
With their dread doom the world to quake.
Behold those joys thou never can behold;
Those precious gates of pearl, those Streets of gold,
Those streams of Life, those trees of Paradise
That never can be seen by mortal eyes:
And when thou see this state divine,
Think that it is or shall be thine.
See there the happy troops of purest sprights
That live above in endless true delights;
And see where once thy self shall ranged be,
And look and long for immortality:
And now beforehand help to sing
Allelujahs to Heavens King.
FINIS.
BOOKS printed for, and to be sold by, John Crook, at the Sign of the Ship in
St Paul's Churchyard.
Annals veteris and novi Testamenti, Aviro Reverend. Jacob Usserio Archiepisco
Armachano. Folio. The Annals of the Old and New Testament, with the
Synchronismus of Heathen story to the destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans,
by James Usher D.D. Archbishop of Armagh and Primate of Ireland. Folio. The
Antiquities of Warwikcshire illustrated and beautified with Maps, prospects,
and pourtractures, by William Dugdale. Folio. Hymen's Preludia or Loves Master
piece being the 9th. and 10th. parts of Cleopatra. Folio. The History of this
I^on Age* wherein is set down the Original of all the wars and commotions* that
have happened from the year of God 1500. Illustrated with the figures of the
most Renowned persons of this Time. Folio. The History of the great and
renowned Monarchy of China. Fol. The holy History, containing excellent
observations on the Remarkable passages of the old Testament, written
Originally in French by N. Caussin S.I. and now rendered into English by a
Person of Honor. 4. Ejusdem de textus hebraici Veteris Testamenti variantibus
Lectionibus ad Lodovicum Capellum Epistola. Quarto. Usserii de 70. Interpretum
versione syntagma. Quarto. Montagues Miscellanea Spiritual^ia. 4. second part.
A Treatise of Gavelkind both name and thing, showing the true Etymology, and
derivation of the one, the nature, antiquity, and Original of the other, by
William Sonner. Quarto The Holy Life of Mounsier de Renty a late noble man of
France. 8. Certain discourses viz. of Babylon the present See of Rome, of
laying on of hands, of the old form of words in Ordination, of a set form of
prayer, being the judgment of the Late Archbishop of Armagh and Primate of
Ireland by N. Bernard, D. D. Octavo. The Character of England with reflections
upon Gallus Castratus. 12.
The French Gardener, instructing how to cultivate all sorts of Fruittrees,
with directions to dry and conserve them in their natural. An accomplished
piece illustrated with sculpture.

By whom also all manner of Books are to be sold, brought from beyond the Seas.


