The Humble REMONSTRANCE OF Sir Frederick Hammilton, Knight and Colonel. TO
THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE COMMITTEE OF BOTH KINGDOMS.
I Have served King JAMES and King CHARLES, near this thirty year in their
Court, as a Gentleman of their Privy Chamber, without Pension or Monopoly; and
for most of that time, I have had a Command in the Old Army in Ireland. King
JAMES having in his life time conferred upon me, the Troop of Horse, with the
Foot Company, and the Government of Carrickfergus, which were Commanded by the
old Lord Chichester.

Afterward I levied a Regiment of Foot, and was with Honorable
Recommendations, employed by His Majesty into Germany, where I served some
years under the glorious and victorious Prince, the King of Sweden, returning
with His Royal Recommendations, and good acceptance of my Services, witnessed
with His Princely Tokens, bestowed upon me.

At my return it has been heard of, what hard measure I met withal in
Ireland, by the power, and greatness, of the late Earl of Strafford; whose
design was apparent, the ruin of my Honor and Fortune, if the Lord had not
of his great Mercy enabled me with courage, to stand for my innocence, for the
defense of both.

Since this horrid Rebellion, how I have been engaged with a poor handful of
men, and what wonderful things God has done for us, and with us, is not
unknown to my greatest Enemies, though they call me a bragger.

After it pleased God to enable me, to bring off my Wife and Children from the
great miseries they suffered, without any comfort or relief, leaving my Castle
and Garrison in the best condition I could, procuring the Soldiers leave to
apply my self hither, with hopes of better preferment for my self, and speedy
relief for them.

Coming to Londonderry where I had some Fortune left me by my Wifes Father,
Sir John Vaughan, who died Governor of the said City. I found that means he
left me, and all my Tenants, incroached upon by the Regiments there, who had
taken of me and my Tenants, to the value of three thousand pounds;
Notwithstanding the several reliefs they received both from England and
Scotland; besides the great sums they have got of other men's Lands, and the
several great Preyes has been got amongst them since this Rebellion.

Finding my self so used by them, and not able to Command my own Rents and
Tenants, having been as active in the Service, as any Colonel amongst them,
and the means of keeping them so free from the incursion of the Rebels out of
Connaught, Did think in Honor and Justice, my own Lands and Tenants
undestroyed, should have been laid off for my own quarters and maintenance; but
finding neglect, and hard-heartednesse amongst them, I was forced to apply my
self to my Noble Friends in Scotland, who were pleased to take my hard
condition and great charge, into their Honorable and Charitable Care, and
Consideration, and to appoint me the Command of a Regiment of Horse there,
until they could be the instruments of procuring me from the Honorable
Parliament here, some greater power and preferment for the better inabling me
to go on with the Service there in Ireland.

I being in Scotland, news was brought to the Committee of Estates there, of
the dangerous discontented condition of their Army in Ireland, near
Carrickfergus; and how through want of means, they were necessitated to join
themselves in a dangerous Oath, to stick to one another in applying themselves
toward the Parliament of England, for performance of what was promised them:
Which miserable extremity of theirs, the State of Scotland endeavored to
relieve and suppress, so long as they could; until at length two or three
Regiments did forsake that Kingdom, as the rest intended (to the no small
hazard of all the three Kingdoms) had not the State of Scotland, out of their
judicious care, made use of me, and Sir Mungoe Campbell, a Colonel of that
Army, whom they sent with instructions, to endeavor the appeasing of their
discontents, and to persuade the rest of the Regiments, not to abandon that
Kingdom, and to leave it into the hands of the Rebels; who at that time were
apparently in a readiness to have entered upon the Country, so soon as the
Scots Army had forsaken it, being confident (as many others were) that no
persuasions could alter their resolutions from going: Nevertheless, it pleased
God, beyond expectation, so to bless our endeavors, and instructions, as we
prevailed with them, and our words were taken for a time, to stay, until the
State of Scotland were advertised with what we had undertaken for, in their
names, should be speedily sent them from Scotland, which accordingly was
performed, notwithstanding their own great burdens at that time.

I was afterward the immediate instrument, and best help to the Ministers, who
were entrusted with the Solemn League and Covenant, to get it taken by the
Citizens of Londonderry, the Regiments and Country thereabouts; who will
confess, that without me, it had not so easily past, if at all, at that time.

Notwithstanding all these pretenses and services, besides the several
Recommendations of the Parliament, and Committee of Estates in Scotland, have I
waited here near this eight months, in expectation of some course to be taken
with me, for the recompense of my past Services, and encouragements to go on,
and as yet have met with neither.

Therefore prays leave to inform what danger I apprehend will follow to the
Public Service, if I shall be thus neglected and discountenanced for my
faithful Services. If Sir Charles Coote, a young Gentleman, whose hopeful
expectation I will not except against, what the Parliament shall think fin to
confer upon him, so as his preferment do not entrench upon the prejudice of the
Public Service, or upon my Honor and Interest; wherein I conceive both will
suffer, if the resolution hold as is reported, to make him Lord Precedent of
Connaught.

And what content it will be to the Rebels, when they shall hear my Services
against them, has been so rewarded, as not only the Counties of Sligoe, and
Leitrim; which God has enabled me to do so great Service in, since this
Rebellion, without the help of Sir Charles Coote, who must by this Title enjoy
the fruits of my Labor; as also be Commander of my own Castle and Garrison,
and such well deserving Soldiers in it, as has served near this six years,
without means, but out of my own Fortune has maintained Officers and
Soldiers, there being near 6000. pounds in Arrear, due to me; And having lost
as great a Fortune in that Kingdom, in Stock, and Rent, as any here has, What
such hard usage may produce, and what dishonor this will be to me, to have
another put over my head, with the charge of those two Counties, wherewith I
was at the beginning of this Rebellion entrusted, by Warrant and Commission,
from the Lords Justices, and Council of that Kingdom, to raise, and Command,
what numbers of men I thought fit for the Service; and now to be turned out of
this trust, after all my long Service, great loss, and sufferings,
unquestioned for any misdemeanors, or neglect in that Charge, I humbly submit
to your Honors Judicious Wisdoms.

Tendering to your further considerations, my weak opinion out of my knowledge
and experience of the Country, and out of my faithful zeal for the
advancement of the Service; what I hold fittest for the present to be done
concerning Connaught.

That according as I joined in a Paper with Sir Charles Coote, mentioning the
way we intended to prosecute the War there: We may be enabled with equal power
to help one another, as we shall stand in need, and that I may be trusted only
with those two Counties, with what proportion of the Supplies shall be thought
fitting for me to make use of.

That Sir Charles Coote may Command the rest of the whole Province, consisting
of four Counties, which he may the easier deal withal, I taking charge of the
other two, which I have so long served for; and it were hard measure, if not
injustice, to turn me out of the Province, and out of my own house with
disgrace, which must be no otherwise, if he must be Lord Precedent of
Connaught; yet rather then I should in any way appear in opposition to the
Parliaments pleasure (if it were not to inform them of the conveniences and
dangers, which may concern their own services) I should choose to forsake all.

Consider likewise, that Sir Charles Cootes House, and Being, is so far remote
from Sligoe, and those parts in Leitrim, wherein I live, as with no convenience
can he do Service there, without neglecting the Country where he lives, being
near fifty miles distant.

If the Parliament be resolved not to give ear or credit to my opinion or
advice, let me have my Arrears, and contentment for my house, and interrest in
that Province, and dispose of me elsewhere, at their pleasure.

Frederick Hammilton.

FINIS.

