A SERMON Preached in the Cathedral and Metropolitical CHURCH OF St. Peter, in
York: On Friday, the Fifth of November, 1697.

Being the ANNIVERSARY-DAY of THANKSGIVING for that Great Deliverance from the
Gunpowder-Treason: And also the Day of His Majesty's Happy Landing in England.

With a POSTSCRIPT and Two LETTERS, which clearly discover the Roman Designs
against the English Church and Nation.

By GEORGE HALLEY, A. M. and Prebendary of Ripon.

London: Printed for, and Sold by Tho. Baxter, Bookseller, in Peter-Gate, York.
School.

TO THE Most Reverend Father in GOD, JOHN, By Divine Providence, Lord
Archbishop of York, His GRACE, Primate of England and Metropolitan.
MY LORD,
WHEN I first composed this Discourse, I had not the least Thought of sending
it abroad into the World: But partly through the Importunity of such as gave it a
patient and favorable Audience, and partly through the Reflections of some, who,
without cause, are Enemies to our Great and Triumphant Prince, and partly through
the Incredulity of others, touching a Principal and Necessary Branch of true
Repentance; Restitution: as also through the Hopes of its proving, in some
measure, a happy Instrument to bring back into the Fold such Sheep as are gone
astray; I have adventured its Publication.

And now, My Lord, this humbly begs the Honor of Your Grace's Patronage, and
implores the Favor not to interpret the prefixing of Your Great Name to so
mean and defective a Piece, as great Boldness and Presumption, but to accept it
as a Specimen of Gratitude and Sincere Affection for all Your Kindnesses
unworthily conferred upon me.

I am, My Lord, incapable of making Your Grace any other Return than this
Public Acknowledgement of them; with Fervent Prayer to the Great Shepherd and
Bishop of Souls, to protect You and Yours, and to continue so Great a Blessing,
as Your Grace is, amongst us.

I am sure all the Flock, committed to Your Pastoral Care, have the Highest
Obligations to render unto Almighty God and His most Excellent Majesty, their
hearty Thanks, as well as gratefully to commemorate the late most Pious and
Incomparable Queen, for sending so burning a Light, so bright and shining a
Luminary amongst them.

In what an Ocean of Peace and Tranquillity does the Great Ship (Your Large
Diocese) now Swim? of which God and the King have constituted You the Supreme
Commander: You not only Direct and Govern, but You pull at the Ropes and Sails
with as much Vigor, as any Common Mariner that Sails therein: So Great is Your
Lordship's Talent, so Indefatigable is Your Industry in Preaching, that Your
Grace might justly, with the late Lord Archbishop of Armagh, make this the
Motto of Your Archiepiscopal Seal; Woe is unto me, if I Preach not the Gospel.

That a Prelate, so singularly Eminent for Great Parts and Abilities, for Piety
and Virtue, Care and Diligence, Meekness and Humility, for Love and Charity,
may long Preside over and Adorn the Church of God, is the Affectionate Desire
and Ardent Prayer of

My LORD, Your Grace's most obliged, Dutiful, and Grateful Servant, GEORGE
HALLEY.

2 COR. I. 10. Who delivered us from so great a Death, and does deliver: in
whom we trust that he will yet deliver us.
THE Conjunction of Mercies, which the Almighty so eminently and peculiarly
wrought on this Day for our Church and Nation, makes this Day an High Day, a
very great and glorious Festival. A Day, which, upon a double Account, ought to
be had in everlasting Remembrance: Not only for the Providential Discovery of
the Snares of Death laid this Day for our Ancestors, but for the late happy and
astonishing Deliverance of us, their Posterity, from the imminent Danger of
Popery and Arbitrary Power. The impure Streams of Idolatry and Superstition had
gone even over our Souls, the proud and insulting Waves, the Romanists had
triumphed over us (for they began to rage horribly, and swell, they gnash'd
upon us with their Teeth, when their small Stock of Arguments was spent; and by
this time of Day we should have found their Teeth Spears and Arrows, and their
Tongue a sharp Sword) the Romanists, I say, had triumphed over us, had not God
sent us, on this blessed Day, a Deliverer to rescue us from Popish Tyranny,
when we were so near sinking under it. Great Reason therefore have we to say,
with St. Paul, God delivered us from so great a Death, and does deliver: in
whom we trust that he will yet also deliver us.

In which Words, consider we

I. The great Death from which the Holy Apostle was delivered by God.

II. I will endeavor to show you, that God, in this as well as in the
Apostolical Age, does still deliver from Death.

III. What Method we must of absolute Necessity take to indear the Lord our
God, to oblige him still to protect and deliver us from Death.

Who delivered us from so great a Death, and does deliver: in whom we trust
that he will yet also deliver us. But first.

In the first Place consider we the great Death from which the Holy Apostle was
delivered by God.

By Death may be understood Troubles and Afflictions, extreme or uttermost
Dangers: Troubles and Afflictions in a Superlative, in the highest Degree: He
was pressed out of Measure, above Strength; insomuch, that he had almost black
and desponding Thoughts, he despaired even of Life: If he had not found more
than ordinary Assistances of the good Spirit of God, he had certainly sunk
under them. This is the doleful Account which he himself gives us at the Eighth
Verse, with the place too, where those Troubles came upon him, namely, Asia.

What the Troubles were which he met with in Asia, we are informed by St. Luke,
in the 19th of the Acts, and the 23d Verse, where we read of a Riot, or
unlawful Assembly, a great Stir raised by one Demetrius, a Silver-smith, and
the Workmen of like Occupation, about the Doctrine of the Gospel; because St.
Paul had preached against the Images which they made and worshipped, as
confounded be all they that worship carved Images, and that delight in vain
Gods, worship him all ye Gods; because he had persuaded much People, that they
be no Gods which are made with Hands; they came upon him in a furious and
tumultuary Manner. Further;

In the first Epistle to the Corinthians, 15.32. we read, if after the manner
of men I have fought with Beasts at Ephesus, what advantageth it me, if the
dead rise not? Some interpret those Words of his Conflict with the same
Demetrius and the Silver-Smiths, who were like Beasts in their Conditions and
Manners: Others are of Opinion, that he really was exposed in the Theater to
furious Beasts; though, peradventure, he was only so (...), in the Purpose of
Men; the Magistrates had sentenced and condemned him to that Death, but Divine
Providence interposed and rescued him from the Execution of the Sentence: Thus
probably these Words of my Text relate to his Sufferings at Ephesus, when God
delivered him from so great a Death. Further;

In the Second Epistle to the Corinthians, 11.23. St. Paul tells us, That he
suffered more than any of the very Twelve Apostles, in Labors more abundant,
in Stripes above Measure, in Prisons more frequent, in Deaths often, that is, in
eminent Perils of Death; it is an Hebraism, the Hebrews express great Dangers,
Afflictions, Conflicts or Agonies by the Name of Death; thus Psalm 18.4, 5. the
Royal Psalmist, when his Blood-Thirsty Enemies were ready, as a Torrent, to
overwhelm him, complains, the Sorrows of Death compassed me, and the Floods of
ungodly Men made me afraid, the Sorrows of Hell compassed me about, the Snares
of Death prevented me. And thus in Deaths often, that is, in Deadly Accidents and
Dangers: And what they were, the Verses following sufficiently declare. Of the
Jews, five times received I forty Stripes save one: thrice was I beaten with
Rods: once was I stoned: thrice I suffered Shipwreck: a Night and a Day I have
been in the Deep. (...), There are some, who, according to Theophylact, assert
this to have been the Name of a Well in which he hid himself after his great
Danger at Lystra, Acts 14.19. Or else it imports some deep, filthy, noisome,
infamous Prison. A Night and a Day I have been in the Deep: in Journying often,
in Perils of Waters, in Perils of Robbers, in Perils by my own Countrymen, in
Perils by the Heathen, in Perils in the City, in Perils in the Wilderness, in
Perils in the Sea, in Perils among false Brethren: in Weariness and
Painfulness, in Watchings often, in Hunger and Thirst, in Fastings often, in
Cold and Nakedness. And at the 32d, and 33d Verses, in Damascus, the Governor
under Aretas, the King, kept the City with a Garrison, desirous to apprehend me,
and through a Window in a Basket was I let down by the Wall and escaped his Hands.
God delivered him from so great a Death. Such were the Sufferings of the Holy
Apostle, St. Paul, thus God was pleased to try him, and many other his
principal Favorites, in the Fiery Furnace of Affliction. God, for such wise
Ends and Purposes as are best known to himself; peradventure for an Exploration
or Trial of his Faith and Constancy, or lest he should be exalted above
Measure, lest he should be too much elevated with the high transcendent
Revelations vouchsafed unto him, or for the more effectual Propagation of the
Gospel, God permitted him to sail through a Sea of Blood, to be tossed with
Storms and Tempests of Trouble and Affliction. And oh! how did he endure them
with an undisturbed Patience, and an entire Resignation to the Divine Will! How
did he bear up against them with all Christian Courage, with a vigorous and
undaunted Resolution! How perfectly pleased with, how did he glory of his
Infirmities, that is, his Sufferings? He very well understood that the
Sufferings of this present World are not worthy to be compared to the Glory
that shall be revealed. Though the Floods of Sorrow arose, though the Winds of
Persecution blew and vehemently beat upon him, yet he fell not; he had in
Prospect the beautiful and fair Haven of Eternity: His sole Trust and
Confidence was in the Lord his God, whom the Winds and the Seas obey. Thus,
though he was troubled on every side, yet not distressed, though perplexed, yet not
in despair; though he was persecuted, yet not forsaken; though cast down, yet not
destroyed; no! God delivered him from so great a Death, and does deliver: in
whom we trust that he will yet also deliver us.

And this brings me to the Second thing, namely, That God, in this, as well as
in the Apostolical Age, does still deliver from Death.

In the 13th Chapter of the Hebrews, Ver. 8. we read, Jesus Christ the same
yesterday, and to day, and for ever: The Faith in him, the entire Religion of
Jesus Christ is not only unchangeable, constantly the same throughout all
measures of time, but also his Care and Love to his Mystical Body, and all the
Members of it is immutable throughout all Times and Ages of the World; with the
Lord our God is no Variableness, neither Shadow of Turning. God never did
leave, God never will forsake such, whose Lives are conformable to his Laws, as
are Pure and Holy in all Manner of Conversation. God has in all Ages, does
now, and ever will cover such as fear him with the Wings of his Divine
Providence, will give them his immense Favor and Almighty Protection, so long
as the Sun and the Moon shall endure. It is God who made, who governs,
preserves and takes Care of the World, he sees all the Springs of Motion, all
Transactions here below, all Things are naked and opened to the Eyes of him
with whom we have to do. Though his glorious Residence and Habitation be in the
Mansions of Bliss above, yet he so far humbles himself, as to behold the
things done upon Earth; and therefore though wicked Men encourage themselves in
Mischief and commune of laying Snares secretly, and say, who shall see them?
though they imagine Wickedness and keep it secret among themselves, every Man in
the Deep of his Heart, yet God shall suddenly shoot at them with a swift Arrow,
that they shall be wounded; yea, by his good Providence, their own Tongues
shall make them fall, insomuch that whosoever sees them shall laugh them to Scorn:
Thus, Prove. 19.21. Solomon tells us, there are many Devices in a Man's Heart:
nevertheless, the Counsel of the Lord, that shall stand. There are many Designs
and Contrivances in the Minds of Men, which, they think, are so well laid, that
they cannot miscarry; but are all defeated by the overruling Counsel of the
Lord. No! it is not the most refined Policy, it is not the most subtle
Stratagem, it is not the most strong and invincible Contrivance of Man that can
outvie the Strength of Heaven; nothing can stand in Competition with the
Divine Favor and Protection. This, the Great Politicians, the Hellish
Projectors of the Gunpowder-Treason, found to be infallibly true. The
Arch-plotter, Garnet, who was at that time superior of the Jesuits here; the
Jesuits! a wicked Generation or Men: how has this Church and Nation of ours
been and still is plagued by them? They are under a Holy League and solemn Oath
to pursue our Ruin and the Destruction of our excellent Religion, and to
effect this, they have all along acted, and still do act under any Masque; they
turn themselves, Proteus like, into any Shape to enkindle Strife and Contention
amongst us. Alas! all our Schisms and unhappy Divisions flow from this bitter
Fountain. Oh that we would become wise and suffer our selves no longer to be
cajoled and deluded by them! Oh that we may see in time the Things which belong
to our Peace! Oh that we would strive to answer the illustrious Character of
the Primitive Church, to be all of one Heart, of one Mind, and of one Soul, to
meet together with one Accord, in one Place. But to return:

I say, it is not the most refined Policy that can outvy the Strength of
Heaven: This the Hellish Projecters of the Gun-Powder-Treason found to be
infallibly true; the Arch-Plotter Garnet, a perfect Achitophel, a Man that
could give and hide his Counsel as deep as Hell, with whom his Friends would
embark in any design though never so black and dangerous, yet how far infatuated
was this cunning Politician? Alas! he considered not that some of the
Conspirators, who were willing to work a public Mischief for his Pleasure,
might also have a Desire to secure their private Friends from Danger, by giving
them some general or ambiguous Admonition: And, indeed, that one of them should
hint in a Letter to his honorable Friend the instant Danger, was not
extraordinary, save only in this, that so much Tenderness of Heart, so much
good Nature could be left in his Breast, who had consented to his Country's
Ruin. It is really, prodigiously strange, that such a Man should put on the
Bowels of Compassion for a private Friend as had designed his Country's
perpetual Desolation: Where was then this Piety? Where was then this Religious
Affection? Alas! all Nature, all Humanity, all Respect of Laws both Divine and
Humane were then quite abandoned, there was then no Conscience made to
extirpate the whole Nation, and all for a pretended Zeal to the Catholic
Religion. Can this be the Christian Religion* No, the essential Mark, the
proper Character of the Christian Religion is Love and Charity: This is a
Religion which has all of the Dove, and nothing of the Vulture in it, which is
Wisdom from above, which is first pure and then peaceable, it is a charitable
Religion, and none can justly pretend to it, whose Doctrines are Earthly,
Sensual and Devilish; who breathe nothing but Curses. and Slaughters, who hold
it lawful to destroy all such as differ from them in Matters of Faith, to
extirpate by Fire and Sword all such as worship God after the Way which they
call Heresy; and such are the bloody Principles of the Roman Religion:
Principles diametrically opposite to the Doctrine and Practice of the Author of
the Christian Religion, the ever Blessed Jesus. He came into the World to save
and not to destroy the Lives of Men: But, alas! the Papists are for sending Men
out of the World in a fiery Chariot, for illuminating our Understandings with
Fire and Faggot: The Marian Persecution is a Demonstration of their Cruelty,
and the same dismal Tragedy would have been acted over again, had not God sent
us a Deliverer, who delivered us from so great a Death. Thus, I say, there was
then no Conscience made to extirpate a whole Nation, and all for a pretended
Zeal to the Catholic Religion; a horribly mistaken blind Zeal, a Zeal not at
all according to Knowledge. Alas! They know not what manner of Spirit they are
of. But God delivered the King, the Queen, the tender Princes, the Nobles, the
whole Kingdom from their designed Destruction. God delivered them from so great
a Death. Death! How exorbitant was that Death in its Nature? How transcendently
wicked in its Design? How barbarous and unnatural? Such a prodigious Cruelty as
is beyond the Example of former Ages, as is not to be paralleled in all the
voluminous Records of time from the Beginning of the World. The Plot was deeply
laid, it was hatched and contrived in the dark, they kept it secret, every Man
in the Deep of his Heart, and not without Ceremonies of Religion; Ay, they
swore by the Blessed Trinity, and by the Holy Sacrament never to disclose it
directly, nor indirectly, by Word or Circumstance: But, by the good Providence
of God, it was proclaimed upon the House-tops. A most wonderful Proclamation,
and never enough to be reflected upon with Praise and Thanksgiving; such a
Discovery as Bellarmin himself confesses to have been miraculous. Had it taken
effect, as it was just ripe for Execution, my Blood chills, I tremble to think
of the dismal Consequences of it: We had then been deprived of King, Queen,
Princes, and all the Nobility: It would have been a most miserable Desolation:
How would this poor Church and Nation have laid a bleeding? Peace and Happiness
would presently have taken the Wing and flown from this British Isle; there
would then have been nothing but intestine War, Bloodshed, and the greatest
Confusion. Never did the Ear of Man hear of such a Conspiracy before. The
highest Treason that could ever be imagined by any, who either made or writ of
Laws, was Crimen laesae Majestatis the violating the Majesty of the Prince: But
the Gunpowder-Treason wants a Name sufficient to express it; it tended not only
to the Hurt, but to the Death of the King; and not to the Death of the King
only, but of his whole Kingdom, to the Destruction of the beautiful Frame, the
Dissolation of the Noble Fabric of this Ancient, Famous, and Flourishing
Monarchy, even the Deletion of our whole Name and Nation.

No Mantle of Holiness can cover such a Treason, no Pretense of Religion can
excuse it, God and Heaven condemn it, all Souls of a truly Christian Temper and
Disposition must detest and abhor it. Six and Thirty Barrels of Powder, with
Bars of Iron, Stones and Wood upon them! What a great Breach, what a fiery
Tempest, what a Motion and Commotion of Earth and Air would there have been?
But God delivered our Ancestors from so great a Death.

But Secondly, God does still deliver from Death.

Ay, God has lately delivered us, their Posterity, from Death and Destruction.
It is not many Years ago since we had a sad and melancholy Prospect of Affairs;
it is not long since a thick and black Cloud hung over our Heads, which, in all
probability, would have broke and poured down upon us a Deluge of Waters, if it
had not been timely dispelled by the comfortable Appearance of a Bright and
Glorious Star in our Hemisphere, by the happy Arrival of King William upon this
Day. I need not acquaint you how our Popish Enemies attempted to destroy both
our Laws and Religion. It was an excellent Reply which an ancient and eminent
Sergeant at Law gave the King, when he complemented him upon his Arrival: His
Majesty told him he had outlived most of his Profession; and he truly
answered, that if his Majesty had not come over, he should have outlived the
Law it self. We flattered our selves indeed with a Belief that it was
impossible to have the Popish Religion ever introduced here, because a thing so
absolutely against the English Constitution; that let the Principles of the
Prince be what they would, the Administration of the Laws must of necessity run
in the same Channel he found them in: But we soon saw how the Course of the
River was forced, and the Stream turned so as to run over our Soul; we were
quickly made sensible of our gross Mistake and Delusion, we presently
understood that there is no Government too hard for a Jesuit to cut in sunder,
no Constitution so strong as to wrestle with a dispensing Power. Thus our
Religion, our Laws, our Liberties, all that is near and dear to us would have
been destroyed, had not God delivered them from so great a Death, by sending us
the best of Princes, who this Day set his Foot on the British Shore: It was he
alone whom God made the happy Instrument of our Preservation, it was he who
stopped our furious Enemies in their Career, who prevented their base Designs by
a sudden and an unexpected Change of the Scene, by such an astonishing
Revolution of Affairs, as no Age, peradventure, can parallel.

A most happy Revolution, whatsoever our Malcontents think of it. Alas! when
once the Minds of Men are darkened with Ambition, Pride, Revenge, Hatred, Malice
and Envy, let Acts of Providence be never so illustriously visible, they will
not see them, such Darkness is thick to Admiration, how great is that Darkness!
It was, I say, a most happy Revolution: Though it is true indeed, the Consequence
of it has been a vast Expense of Blood and Treasure: but still we have the
least Reason to murmur or complain: This Blood has not been spil'd, this
terrible War has not raged in our own, but in a Foreign Land; all the Havoc
which has been made, all the Devastations by Fire and Sword were not here, but
in other Countries. Taxes and Impositions indeed we have not been freed from,
but what then? our Yoke has been easy, and our Burden light, and if Judgment
may be formed according to the Sumptuous way of living, according to the little
Abatement there has been, ever since the War commenced, either of Diet,
splendid Attire, or other expensive Diversions, all the Charge we have been at
is comparatively as nothing. It is a Question whether greater Injury has been
done to the Public, whether the Nation in general has suffered more by
impairing the Coin, than by the War: the Prevention of which great Mischief for
the future, is such a glorious Act as ought never to be forgotten: To have
called in our base Money at a time when we slept upon the downy Bed of Peace,
would have been a matter of far less Difficulty; but to regulate the Coin, when
we were engaged in a bloody and expensive War, this Act no Age peradventure can
parallel. It is a Question, I say, whether the Nation in general has suffered
more by impairing the Coin than by the War: I heartily wish that such as have
thus been guilty of plunging the Nation into calamitous Circumstances, may be
deeply touched and affected with the Consideration of it, that they may Repent
of the great Wrong and universal Robbery which they have committed, and
demonstrate the Sincerity of their Repentance by giving the Wealth they have
gotten by Injury, Fraud, and Deceit, to Charitable Uses. If they do not, the
time will come, when they will wish they had not enriched themselves by others
Poverty; that they had moved in a low Sphere, and been contented with a mean
Condition, that they had cast themselves naked into the Arms of Divine
Providence, and known nothing of Temporal Affluence and Prosperity. Oh! What is
a Man advantaged, if he gain the whole World, and lose himself, or be a
castaway? Luke 9.25. Oh! what shall a Man give in Exchange for his Soul? Mat.
16.26. I am sure Thieves (and such are the greatest Thieves, as either
impaired, or by furnishing were instrumental to the impairing of our Coin)
unless they repent of their Wickedness, and make Restitution, if there be a
Capacity for it, can never enter into the Kingdom of God, 1. Cor. 6.10.

But, blessed be God, the Tables of the Money Changers are now overturned, this
great and dangerous Distemper which the Nation has long labored under, is now
healed, this base Art, as well as the terrible War, has had its happy Period
and Conclusion; and if we would but put away from us all Bitterness and Wrath,
Anger and Clamor, Malice and Envy, and live in Christian Love and Charity, if
we would but endeavor to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace,
what could hinder us from being the happiest People upon the Face of the Earth?
What complaining could then be in our Streets? Trade, which is the Life and
Soul of this Nation, will now flourish, our Money has recovered its ancient
Weight and Fineness, it has now the greatest Beauty and Comeliness; and though we
have been at a vast Expense of Blood and Treasure, yet the Happiness we have
gotten thereby, will infinitely overbalance and preponderate all our Harm and
Loss; we have purchased therewith a Jewel of a Transcendent value, of the
greatest Price, an Honorable, and, I hope, a durable and lasting Peace. God
has made the War to cease, it is he who is the Author of all our Deliverances,
it is he who makes Wars to cease in all the World, who breaks the Bow, and
knappeth the Spear in sunder, and burns the Chariots in the Fire: God, I say,
has made the War to cease, through the Noble Conduct and Heroic Valor of our
Great King, God has given unto us the Blessings of Peace. God Land him safe
again on our joyful Shore, let him return with the greatest Glory and Triumph,
with the loudest Shouts and Acclamations, God Almighty give him always the
Hearts of his Parliament, and the Affections of his People; O Young Men and
Maidens, Old Men and Children, cry, God Save King William; for he it is by whom
God has delivered us from Death, from innumerable Dangers, and does deliver:
In whom we trust, that he will yet also deliver us.

And this brings me to the Third and the Last thing; Namely,

What Method we must of absolute necessity take to endear the Lord our God, to
oblige him still to protect and deliver us from Death.

And here, if ever, we hope to endear the God of Heaven to us, to oblige him to
protect and deliver us from Death; this is the Method which we must of absolute
necessity take: We must lead an holy and exemplary Life, we must endeavor, as
much as in us lies, to be Pure and Holy in all manner of Conversation. Do we
pretend to trust in the Lord our God? Alas! without Holiness, we trust in vain;
unless we purify our selves, we can have no sure and certain Hope, no rational
Assurance of the Divine Protection. No People under Heaven have more liberally
tasted of the Favor and loving Kindness of the Lord, than we. No People in the
World have stronger Obligations to Piety and Virtue than we. What is it that
the Lord could have done for this our Nation, and he has not done it? God has
given us the best Religion, the best Government, the best Laws, and the best of
Princes, and by him the best of Blessings, Peace. How many Deliverances from
Death have we had? The Time and your Patience would fail me to give you a
particular Enumeration of them; they are more in Number than I am now able to
express. How often has the Lord been pleased to deliver our Glorious Prince
from Death; and in him us? for if this our Light, our Lamp had been quenched in
Battle, What a Day of Darkness and Gloominess, what a Day of Clouds and thick
Darkness would there have been? He may very justly be called the Light of our
Israel, for, the Splendour and Greatness, the Beauty and Glory, the Conduct and
Direction, the Comfort and Safety, the Welfare and Happiness of us his People
flow from and depend upon him. How often, I say, has the Lord been pleased to
deliver him from Death? From Perils in the Field, from Perils in the Sea, from
Perils by his own Subjects, from a treacherous and bloody, an horrid and
barbarous Assassination. And God will still deliver him and us, if we be but
obedient and conformable to his Divine Laws. But if we will not be obedient, if
these manifold Favors and Mercies of the Lord will not influence and persuade
us to Purity of Life and Holiness of Conversation, how fatal will the
Consequence be? What can we look for but Ruin and Destruction? Oh! We shall be
consumed both we and our King. We may assure our selves, that all Engines are
now at work to disturb our Repose, our Peace and Tranquillity. Oh! that all such
as move in sublime and honorary Orbs would have a vigilant Eye upon all the
Enemies of our Constitution. Oh! that all Magistrates would unanimously resolve
to watch and study to preserve the People committed to their respective
Charges, in Peace and Godliness. We may assure our selves, there will be
Hellish Plots and damnable Contrivances, so long as there is either a Devil or
a Jesuit in the World. The Romanists will always bear us the same implacable
Hatred, we shall find them of the same diabolical Temper and malicious
Disposition. Now, who can confound their Devices? Who can deliver us from their
Machinations but God? and nothing can challenge or oblige him to do so but
Piety and Virtue. Alas! if we do wickedly, if we do not leave off our
Ingratitude and Impiety, our unreasonable Murmurings and Repinings, if we still
provoke him by Sins and Transgressions, what terrible Effects will not these
Things produce? Oh! we shall be consumed both we and our King: For search the
lively Oracles of God, the holy Scriptures, and you will find there, that God
has all along darted the Rays of Prosperity, has showered down all imaginable
Blessings upon such Nations as feared him and wrought Righteousness; and on the
contrary, God has poured down the fiercest Instances of his Anger and heavy
Displeasure upon such Kingdoms as trampled upon his Laws, as affronted him by
Wickedness and Impiety; this has been the constant Course of Divine
Providence, and in all probability will be so to the end of the World. That was
good and wholesome Advice which Achior gave Holofernes concerning the Jews.
Judith 5.21, 22. My Lord and Governor, If there be any Error in this People,
and they sin against their God, this shall be their Ruin; but if there be no
Iniquity in their Nation, let my Lord now pass by, lest their Lord defend them,
and we become a Reproach before all the world: And this salutary Advice we find
confirmed by Judith her self in the 11th Chapter, and the 9th and 10th Verse,
As concerning the Matter which Achior spoke in thy Council, we have heard of
it. O Lord, and Governor, reject not his Word, but lay it up in thine Heart,
for it is true; our Nation shall not be punished, neither can the Sword prevail
against them, except they sin against their God. And, indeed, consider how God
dealt with his own peculiar People, the Children of Israel.

When they walked in his Statutes, and kept his Commandments, how
transcendently great then was their Affluence and Prosperity? the inestimable
Blessing of Peace was then within their Walls, and Plenteousness within their
Palaces; Quietness and Ease, Unity and Love, all imaginable Happiness they
enjoyed at home, and the Almighty made them victorious and triumphant abroad;
they rejoiced under the Shadow of his Wings: But when they became corrupt and
abominable in their Doings, when there was a general Declension from the Faith
and Practice of True Religion, then they ceased to be a happy and a prosperous
People; they were then led into Captivity, their Enemies then oppressed them,
and had them in Subjection, put upon their Necks the Chains of Bondage and
intolerable Slavery. Now these things happened unto them for Ensamples; these
things are written for our Learning and Admonition. If we constantly walk
before God in Holiness and Righteousness, we shall then enjoy Happiness and
Tranquillity, Peace and Plenteousness: But if we apostatize from God and
Goodness, he will then have a Controversy with us, Fire and Famine, Sword and
Pestilence, his Judgments will then rage amongst us: For if God spared not the
natural Branches, how can we expect he will spare us? If we continue not in his
Goodness; that is, if we stand not fast, if we persevere not in the Faith, in
such a Faith as works by Love, as lives and acts by Charity, as is productive
of all noble and virtuous Actions; thus St. Paul argues, Romans 11.21, 22. It is
infallibly true, that Wickedness and Vice draws down God's Wrath and Vengeance
upon any People, that Looseness of Life, and Corruption of Manners brings the
most flourishing People to Ruin and Decay. Oh! then let the Consideration of
this important Truth oblige and enforce us to live up to the Precepts and
Institutions of our excellent Religion. God then will be our constant Friend
and Benefactor, God then will stablish the wonderful Things He has been
graciously pleased to work for us; God then will continue to deliver our
Sovereign Lord the King, and us his People from Death, from all the impious
Plots and Conspiracies of his and our Enemies, both at home and abroad; God
then will bless him and us with Temporal Peace and Happiness in this World, and
with eternal Peace and Happiness in the World to come.

Which God, of his infinite Mercy, grant for Jesus Christ his sake, to whom,
with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be ascribed, as is most due, all Honor,
Glory, Praise, Thanksgiving, Might, Majesty and Dominion, from henceforth and
for evermore. Amen.

THE POSTSCRIPT.
IN part of the foregoing Discourse, I have slightly touched upon the unhappy
Schisms, and much to be lamented Divisions, which now furiously rage amongst
us; and have showed you the Spring from whence they flow, namely, the Jesuits,
and other Emissaries of the Church of Rome. It is that Church which has, ever
since our Blessed Reformation, industriously sown the Seeds of Contention
amongst us, and, it is much to be feared, She has now more than ever, a
pleasing Prospect of a plentiful Harvest. It was that Church which was the
Source and Origin of all the late Troubles and Confusions; and She still
endeavors with the same implacable Malice to set us at Variance and Strife
amongst our selves. This is the Engine which the Romanists have all along made
use of, and still do, to effect our Ruin and Destruction. They very well
understand, that Discord is the only Gate which can possibly give Popery an
entrance into this Kingdom. That this has been their constant Practice, I
could produce infinite. Testimonies out of very Authentic Historians; but now,
I shall only recommend these Two following Letters to your serious Perusal and
Consideration, which are not only of unquestionable Authority, but clearly
evince, and sufficiently discover the Roman Contrivances and Designs.

I pray God we may obviate them by our Vigilance and Circumspection, by our
timely seeing the Things which belong unto our Peace, by a vigorous and
inviolable Resolution, to be all of one Heart, and of one Mind, and to be
henceforth no more Children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every
Wind of Doctrine, by the Sleight of Men, and cunning Craftiness, whereby they
lie in wait to deceive. Amen.

A LETTER from Sir William Boswell, to the most Reverend William Laud, late
Archbishop of Canterbury, remaining with Sir Robert Cotton's choice Papers.
Most Reverend,
AS I am here employed by our Sovereign Lord the King, your Grace can testify,
that I have left no Stone unturned for his Majesty's Advancement; neither can I
omit (whenever I meet with Treacheries or Conspiracies against the Church and
State of England) the sending your Grace an Account in general. I fear Matters
will not answer your Expectations, if your Grace do but seriously weigh them
with Deliberation: For be you assured, the Romish Clergy have gulled the misled
Party of our English Nation, and that under a Puritanical Dress; for which the
several Fraternities of that Church, have lately received Indulgencies from the Sea of Rome, and Council of Cardinals, for to educate several of the young Fry
of the Church of Rome, who be Natives of his Majesty's Realms and Dominions,
and instruct them in all manner of Principles and Tenants contrary to the
Episcopacy of the Church of England.

There be in the Town of Hague, to my certain Knowledge, two dangerous
Impostors, of whom I have given notice to the Prince of Orange, who have large
Indulgences granted them, and known to be of the Church of Rome, although they
seem Puritans, and do converse with several of our English Factors. The one,
James Murray, a Scotch Man, and the other, John Napper, a Yorkshire Blade. The
main Drift of these Intensions, is, to pull down the English Episcopacy, as
being the chief Support of the Imperial Crown of our Nation: for which, purpose
above Sixty Romish Clergymen are gone within these two Years out of the
Monasteries of the French ^ing's Dominions, to preach up the Scotch Covenant,
and Mr. Knox his Descriptions and Rules with in that Kirk, and to spread the
same about the Northern Coasts of England. Let therefore his Majesty have an
inkling of these Crotchets, that he may be persuaded, whenever Matters of the
Church come before you, to refer them to your Grace, and the Episcopal Party of
the Realm: For there be great Preparations making ready against the Liturgy and
Ceremonies of the Church of England; and all evil Contrivances here and in
France, and in other Protestant Holdings, to make your Grace and the Episcopacy
odious to all Reformed Protestants abroad. It has wrought so much on diverse of
the Foreign Ministers of the Protestants, that they esteem our Clergy little
better than Papists. The main things, that they hit in our Teeth, are, our
Bishops to be called Lords; the Service of the Church; the Cross in Baptism;
Confirmation; Bowing at the Name of Jesus; the Communion Tables placed
Altar-ways; our Manner of Consecrations: And several other Matters which be of
late buzzed into the Heads of the Foreign Clergy, to make your Grievances the
less regarded in case of a Change, which is aimed at, if not speedily
prevented. Your Grace's Letter is carefully delivered by my Gentleman's own
Hands unto the Prince.

Thus craving your Grace's hearty Prayers for my Undertakings abroad, as also
for my safe Arrival, that I may have the Freedom to kiss your Grace's Hands,
and to tell you more at large of these Things. I rest

Hague, June 12. 1640. Your Grace's most humble Servant, W. B.

A LETTER from the Right Reverend J. Bramhall, Bishop of Derry (afterward
Primate of Ireland) to the most Reverend James Usher, Archbishop of Armagh.
Most Reverend,
I Thank God I do take my Pilgrimage patiently, yet I cannot but condole the
Change of the Church and State of England: And more in my Pilgrimage than ever,
because I dare not witness and declare to that straying Flock of our Brethren
in England, who have misled them, and who they are that feed them. But that
your Lordship may he more sensible of the Church's Calamities, and of the
Dangers she is in of being ruined, if God be not merciful unto her, I have sent
you a Part of my Discoveries, and it from credible Hands, at this present
having so sure a Messenger, and so fit an Opportunity.

It plainly appears, that in the Year 1646, by Order from Rome, above a Hundred
of the Romish Clergy were sent into England, consisting of English, Scotch, and
Irish, who had been educated in France, Italy, Germany, and Spain; part of
these within the several Schools there appointed for their Instructions* In
each of these Romish Nurseries, these Scholars were taught several Handicraft
Trades and Callings, as their Ingenuities were most bending, besides their
Orders or Functions of that Church. They have many yet at Paris a fitting up to
be sent over, who twice in the Week oppose one the other; one pretending
Presbytery, the other Indepency; some Anabaptism, and other contrary Tenants,
dangerous and prejudicial to the Church of England, and to all the Reformed
Churches here abroad. But they are wisely preparing to prevent these Designs,
which I heartily wish were considered in England among the Wise there.

When the Romish Orders do thus argue Pro and Con, there is appointed one of
the Learned of those Convents to take Notes and to judge: and as he finds their
Fancies, whether for Presbytery, Independency, Anabaptism, Atheism, or for any
new Tenants, so accordingly they be to act, and to exercise their Wits: Upon
their Permission when they be sent abroad, they enter their Names in the
Convent Registry, also their Licenses: if a Fransciscan, if a Dominican, or
Jesuit, or any other Order, having several Names there entered in their
License; in case of a Discovery in one Place, then to fly to another, and there
to change their Names or Habit.

For an Assurance of their Constancy to their several Orders, they are to give
Monthly Intelligence to their Fraternities, of all Affairs wherever they be
dispersed: so that the English Abroad know News better than ye at home. When
they return into England, they are taught their Lesson, to say, (if any enquire
from whence they come,) that they were poor Christians formerly that fled
beyond Sea for their Religion Sake, and are now returned, with glad News to
enjoy their Liberty of Conscience.

The Hundred Men that went over, 1646. were most of them Soldiers in the
Parliaments Army, and were daily to correspond with those Romanists in our late
King's Army, that were lately at Oxford, and pretended to fight for his Sacred
Majesty: For at that time, there were some Roman Catholics who did not know
the Design a contriving against our Church and State of England. But the Year
following, 1647. many of those Romish Orders, who came over the Year before,
were in Consultation together, knowing each other. And those of the King's
Party asking some why they took with the Parliament's Side, and asking others.
Whether they were bewitched to turn Puritans? not knowing the Design: But at
last, secret Bulls and Licenses being produced by those of the Parliament's
Side, it was declared between them, there was no better design to confound the
Church of England, than by pretending Liberty of Conscience. It was argued
then, That England would be a Second Holland, a Commonwealth; and if so, what
would become of the King? It was answered, Would to God it were come to that
Point. It was again replied, Your selves have Preached so much against Rome,
and his Holiness, that Rome and her Romanists will be little the better for
that Change: But it was answered, You shall have Mass sufficient for 100000 in
a short space, and the Governors never the Wiser. Then some of the mercifullest
of the Romanists said, this cannot be done unless the King die: Upon which
Argument, the Romist Orders thus licenced, and in the Parliament Army, wrote
unto their several Convents, but especially to the Sorbonists, whether it may
be scrupled to make away our late Godly King, and his Majesty, his Son, our
King and Master; who, blessed be God, has escaped their Romish Snares laid for
him? It was returned from the Sorbonists that it was lawful for Roman
Catholics to work Changes in Governments for the Mother-Churches Advancement,
and chiefly in an Heritical Kingdom; and so lawfully make away the King.

Thus much, to my Knowledge, have I seen and heard since my leaving your
Lordship, of which I thought it very requisite to inform your Grace; for my
self would hardly have credited these things, had not mine Eyes seen sure
Evidence of the same. Let these things sleep within your gracious Lordship's
Breast, and not awake but upon sure Grounds, for this Age can trust no Man,
there being so great Fallacy amongst Men. So the Lord preserve your Lordship in
Health, for the Nations Good, and the Benefit of your Friends; which shall be
the Prayers of

Your Humble Servant, J. DERENSIS.

FINIS

