Inprimatur

Gualt: Blandford, VICECAN: OXON.
Aug. 1. 1664.
xa THeou krsi. Judgment worthy of God. OR An assertion of the EXISTENCE and
DURATION OF Hell Torments, IN Two occasional Letters, written several years
since, by

The most Learned, Reverend, and Pious Dr HENRY HAMMOND.

TO WHICH IS ADDED An Accordance of St PAUL with St JAMES, in the great point
of Faith and Works,

By the same Author.

-- Who being Dead yet speaks.

Heb. 11.4. OXFORD Printed by H. H. Printer to the University, for RIC:
ROYSTON, and RIC: DAVIS, 1665.

The Preface.
SO servilely dis-ingenuous is our Nature, and altogether brutish in the
pursuit of sensual enjoyments, that the proposal of rewards does in no
proportion lead us so forcibly to our Interests and duties, as do the threats
and menaces of punishment. Insomuch that it may be said with perfect truth,
that God is far more gracious in severity then in mercy; far more obliging and
indulgent in creating of a Hell, then in furnishing a Heaven. Whilst the
flaming sword and dreadful Cherubim, set at the Entrances of Paradise, though
they seemed meant to hinder the return of our first Parents, prove really both
theirs and ours best Convoy thither. We being such, whom vengeance only can
reclaim, terrors allure, and even damnation it self preserve from ruin and
damnation.

Accordingly, it is an Observation verified by full experience, that our fears
of Hell are balanced with our hopes of Heaven; and our beliefs concerning
each, answer our Expectations of either. The Apostle's assertion of Men's
heaping to themselves Teachers according to their lusts, being as true of their
choice of doctrines: and however in other things we live not answerably to our
Principles, in this Instance we rarely deviate, and by the same degrees grow
confident in doing ill at present, and disbelieving of our future sufferings
for it: so that it proves a Contemplation of great variety to recollect what
shifts men put themselves upon, to gain a truce and correspondence with their
vices; how they sweat and labor, as to acquire the real punishments, so to
elude the anticipated dreads and frightful Expectations attending their
misdoings.

1. And first of all; how being engaged in vicious practice, they strive to
palliate its deformity with the beauteous appearances of neighboring virtue;
calling their angers justice, their lusts friendships, their rapines zeal, and
so of the rest. But when this Umbrage proves too thin, and the hypocrite has
the ill fate never long to impose on others, and therefore much less upon
himself.

2. The next Attempt is made to lessen the regard of Virtue and shame of Vice,
by suggesting that both are the production of opinion: That Nature knew no
Ethics, but founding all things in Community made no proprieties excepting
those of enjoyment and possession: whilst Law and right are the mere issues of
preceding VVrong, the usurping on that freedom which was the native birthright
of mankind; and honesty is nothing but a bondage unto common fame, the being a
fool to escape the style of Knave. But when this gourd is withered in the day
of it is appearance (dishonest practice; however fashionable and recommended by
Example; being of ill mark and seeking Covert: never secure by any strengths,
nor sheltered by Concelement: Nay more then this, the partial sinner condemning
still in others, the very guilts he flatters in himself, which makes it evident
that naughty practice has an horror in it which in despite of interest or
prepossession confesses it detestable)

3. A fresh expedient is sought, and men are taught to argue, that howsoever
Wickedness be shameful in its nature, it will not much import if it at least
be innocent in its effects; and followed by impunity. Which hope is countenanct
by the indifferent and seeming casual dispensation of successes in the World;
where one event happens to the good and bad, the clean and unclean; him that
sacrifices, and him that sacrifices not; whilst providence is so far from
punishing offenders as to allow to them the most signal liberalities; and good
men in the interim rarely share in any thing but misery. Yet notwithstanding
this; since conscious guilt by sad misgiving controules its most assured
enjoyments; and reason adds her more concluding suffrage, retorting back the
Argument, and from the impunity of wicked men at present demonstrates that
instead of peace and safety a sure arrear of judgment must be looked for; it
being most consequent, that if there be a God, he must be just; and if he be
so, will punish in a future world the injustices which escape and thrive in this.

4. Henc it grows needful for the vicious person to look out farther for
security; and beaten from the former shelters, his next address is to
religion, and with the troops of other Criminals he seeks for refuge at the
Altar, which to all purposes besides he scorns and desecrates. And here he
boldly claims the privilege of Saintship, of Faith, Predestination, and
thousand texts of Scripture which promise mercy and forgiveness unto sinners.
But when these flattering expectations are silenc't by the voice of the same
Scripture, which plainly says that no Whoremonger, Adulterer, unclean person,
or the like, shall have any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God:
and on the Contrary, that tribulation and anguish is on the Soul of every man
that does evil whatsoever his opinions be: and as to advantages from outward
profession, they are but this; he that knows the Will of God and does not
practice, has right unto this one prerogative alone, to be beaten with more
strips then others:

5. After these frequently repeated misadventures, the sinner encourages
himself to try a yet unthought of Artifice: and since that in all addresses
whither to Nature or Religion he meets with sad abodes of future punishments:
he would fain please himself with putting far off from him the evil day:
suggesting that these punishments both are and likewise will be future still;
at least are so remote, as not to merit our regards, or stand in competition
with a present satisfaction. But when the hourly possibilities of death and a
succeeding state of torment, revenging with severe inflictions the broken
minutes of reprieve, intrude upon the mind; then this fair dream of Comfort
likewise vanishes as faithless and as empty as the rest. And now it were to be
expected, that the sensual Man driven so often from his fastnesses and places
of retreat, should yield and be content at last to part with ruin.

6. But the Industry of vice is not so wanting to its self: for though it be
made evident that virtue is a real being, and the demure pretension to it will
no way satisfy our interest or duty: also that it appear religion has no Gospel
for the wilful sinner: and no impunity can be expected to transgression, nor
advantage in delay of suffering: One more, and indeed the only unattempted
refuge is laid hold of* to try if that these punishments are really so
formidable as is pretended; or such indeed as a generous and valiant sinner may
meet and grapple with. The which is put in practice by framing easy Characters
of the inflictions apportion'd to transgression, and likewise shortning the
date of their duration.

And indeed this method of procedure seems to be the last effort of resolute
Impiety: when men determined not to leave their sin, rifle the regions of
darkness for their shelter, and seek a refuge in perdition: fulfilling the
prophetic strain and high Hyperbole of making a Covenant with Death and being
at an agreement with Hell. A method which though not perfectly unknown unto
precedent generations, was rarely ventured on; but seems left like to the
barbarous Western World to be invaded and possessed by this our Age. Even that,
which having attempted Mischiefs beyond all common practice, was in reason to
look out for salvo's and excuses no less peculiar. And as if these would not
be authentic if only whispered in discourse, we have lived to see them made
the Argument of Books and magisterially disputed as sober truths and maxims of
Divinity. For besides the preparatory Doctrine of the Socinians, The Socinians
opinion of the future state of Souls.
(who teaching men to disbelieve that Resurrection which God asserts, leave it
an easy task to overthrow that which themselves contrived.) We have in our own
language been solemnly instructed that the pains of Hell are nothing but the
luxuries of Earth; the drudgery of getting Children, Mr Hobbs.
and living over again that age which sensual men would live for ever. Mr White*
We have bin likewise taught those pains dwell only in the fancy, nay in the
VVishes and importunate desires of them that are tormented: as if the flames of
the infernal Tophet had bin the painted Fires of Purgatory, and every criminal
were his own Hell and pain and Devil too.

Resolution concerning Origin.
Lastly, we have been taught that the severity of the day of judgment shall pass
upon its self, when death shall learn to dye, damnation be condemned, and
perdition be destroyed. Whilst men have brought again from the infernal pit
that monstrous Heresy, which should have justified its doctrine, by having been
its self consumed there, and lost unto Eternity.

Alas! who will from henceforth be afraid of sin, if it only punish by
inflicting pleasure, torment by baiting us with keen desire, or end in painless
deperdition? We can dwell with consuming fire, and peacefully cohabit with
everlasting burning, if the flames be only those of lust, or of desire; or be
they real ones, if they utterly consume, and are so great as to be withal most
friendly, and calcine us in a moment.

Which severals being thus nakedly premised, there will not need a farther
Preface to manifest, how very seasonable the subjects of the ensuing discourses
are: nor more to justify the Edition of them, unless it may be useful to
declare, that these considerations were so weighty, as to persuade thereto the
Right Reverend Father in God, the Lord Bishop of London, (who was entrusted
with these Venerable Remains) though he otherwise is very jealous without much
caution to commit (and will not suffer any other person to bring) the
posthumous labors (especially the occasional private letters) of his friend to
public light: least, though every thing which fell from that Excellent Pen,
merits its readers full reception, yet wanting the advantage of a review, it
may not altogether merit and deserve its Author; that is, be not so exactly
absolute, as whatsoever past his second view was sure to be.

May the Charity of the one in writing, and the other in publishing these
discourses be answered in the advantage of the Reader; who can only, by being
convinced there is a Hell, escape the knowing what it is, and will happily
confute these Papers by being a Proselyte unto them.

(...). Judgment worthy of God. or, An assertion of the Existence and Duration
of Hell Torments.
SIR,
AS soon as I had made my last dispatch to you, it pleased God to fasten me to
my bed for some days, by the return of a fit, which has been my frequent
exercise; from whence being now after five days removed to my chair, I have
some liberty to review your question; and think it best with my pen in my hand
to offer to you (in the same order which you have used) my thoughts of every
period.

And first for the terms of the Question, they want somewhat of Expresness:
For supposing, as you do, that the Wicked rise, and are judged, and adding
from hence that their sentence shall be that they shall utterly be destroyed,
yet it is uncertain, whether that sentence shall be immediately executed, or
after some space; or if immediately, whether by a swift or lingering
destruction. For he that should affirm the wicked to be at the last judgment
committed to a fire, which should torment for many hundred or thousand years,
and at last consume and annihilate them, would affirm the affirmative of this
question: and so he, that advanced from 1000ds to millions of years and ages of
sufferings, concluded (at any the longest last) with abolition. And then the
arguings that are after used from Gods Justice etc: would be of little force,
if no more but this were designed to be gained by them. For it were sure as
much Justice to punish eternally, as to punish millions of years, and then
annihilate, when the supposed ground of Injustice is the lightness, or
shortness of the Acts so punished, which would in the Eye of Law, and Equity,
bear as little, i. e. no proportion with many Millions of Ages, as with
duration absolutely infinite. I shall therefore take it for granted by him that
proposes the question, that he means destruction immediately following the
doomsday sentence, and that no lingering but swift destruction.

Next then p. i. for Origens opinion, granting it right stated (as I think it
is) I demand for what reason that is mentioned? Is it not for this, because
Origens Doctrine was deemed an Heresy in the Church, and that of some ill and
dangerous consequence to be believed? If so, then it must be considered,
whether they that deemed Origens Heretical, can appear to have been more
favorable to this, (which will not be found) or whether the ill consequences
of this be not as dangerous, as of Origens, i e. whether the belief of no
future punishment to the wickedst Hypocrites in the world, save only of swift
annihilation, will not be as forcible a means of securing wicked men that have
no taste or spiritual joys) in the admitting of any gainful evil, as the
belief that after a long space of horrible torments proportionably increased to
their number of Sins, and the aggravations thereof, they shall one day, no body
knows when, when the Devils have been punished enough for their highest
rebellions and continued hating and opposing of God, be delivered out of their
flames, and made partakers of vision of God, and society of Saints and Angels,
which they ever hated, and never desire to see* or be in their company, and
have suffered all those torments, rather then they would entertain or admit
Communion (or desire and practices) with them. It Is possible it may be said,
that the reason of the difference is because Origens opinion was contrary to
Scripture, and that this other is not. To this I shall make no further reply,
then in the words of Vincentius Lirin: Imo plane nemo unquam Magistrorum fuit,
qui pluribus divinae legis uteretur exemplis. His only fault then must be,
that he urged divine Testimonies in uncatholick Interpretations: (And whether
that have not place here also; I leave it to every one to consider) and so
says Lirinensis again, Dum parvipendit antiquam religionis Christianae
simplicitatem, dum se plus cunctis sapere praesumit, dum Ecclesiasticas
traditiones and veterum Magisteria contemnens quaedam scripturarum capitula
nova more interpretatur, meruit ut de se quoque Ecclesiae Dei diceretur, Si
surrexit in medio Tui Propheta --

Thirdly then, to come to your Testimonies from Scripture, of the N: T:
especially, for proof of the affirmative. And 1. for the use of (...) and
(...): It is acknowledged that these words properly signify the same that in
English death or dying does. But that this should be limited to utter
destruction and annihilation, is most unreasonable. For, in the using of this
argument it is foreseen and granted, that death is taken sometimes for death in
and unto Sin: Only it is suggested that those are mystical and metaphorical
Senses* Hereupon I infer, that if the words be taken sometimes mystically and
metaphorically, and yet no assurance that they are so, but because they are
used in a matter whereto death, as it signifies a separation of Soul and Body,
is unappliable; then may they by the same reason be taken so elsewhere, and not
bound to that one which is thought to be the sole literal and proper
signification. If Death appear to signify in Scripture somewhat beside utter
destruction, then how can the wickeds utter destruction be concluded from the
mentions of their death etc? Against this it avails not to say, that the one is
the proper, but the other only metaphorical notion of it: for it being granted
that the scripture uses Metaphors in one instance, why may it not in another
as probably? This is sufficient to the force of that argument. But then ex
abundanti, I add, that the Notion of Death for utter destruction i. e.
Annihilation being only useful to the disputer, it will be hard for him to
produce any one place, either in Old or New Testament, (I might add, or in any
other Author) where (...) etc. signifies Annihilation. It signifies indeed the
separation of Soul from Body very frequently; but that is not founded on
supposition that in that separation either of the parts, much less both,
utterly perish. Nay the doctrine, for which the proposer of the questions
disputes, supposes him not to mean death in that notion; for then Eternal
death, the wickeds portion, must be eternal separation of Soul and Body, which
is exclusive of all reunion or resurrection at the day of Judgment: which the
Disputer averts as heretical. Nay it is to be observed that when our Savior
came nearest the expressing this matter or annihilation, he chooses two other
Phrases, (not this of death, or anything that way inclining) having never been
born, and having a millstone hanged about the Neck and being cast into the midst
of the Sea, which by an imperfect resemblance seems meant on purpose to
signify annihilation: And yet it is also observable to the main question, that
either of these states (and so annihilation) is better and more desirable, then
the Lot which in Gods decree awaites a betrayer of Christ, a wicked man, for
that one fact. Thus far by way of evacuating all force in that Argument; To
this I shall add somewhat Positive toward the laying foundation for the
evincing the contrary, viz. That death in scripture use., is (as it is granted
in the objection) opposed to life. Life then ordinarily signifies that which
results from the union of Soul and Body: but it also signifies the result of
another union ( Unio Virtutis) betwixt God and the Soul, or betwixt God and
both. In the former of these it signifies spiritual life, both as that
signifies living well, whereby the passages of spiritual virtue betwixt God and
us, are kept open and free; and as it signifies pardon of sin, the contrary
whereto is expressed by separating and hiding his face, and turning himself
from us. In the latter ( viz. betwixt God and the Soul and Body, i. e. Person
of man) it signifies Gods favor and protection, of which under the style of
Gods presence the Psalmist says, that in it is life. And then as all felicity
is the certain effect or consequent of this kind of union, so life often
signifies felicity, even that of the highest Magnitude. And all this not
Mystically or Metaphorically, that I know of, (or if it did, that exception is
of no force as has already been showed) but as literally, and with as full
propriety as the union of Soul and Body is called Life, God being (as the
School says out of St Augustine) intimior cuicunque rei creatae, then the Soul
is to the Body: and so the several parts of that union more necessary to the
several sorts of life signified thereby. Mean while it is evident that (...)
life belongs not to being simply; for all Ents have not life: or to miserable
being; non est vivere sed valere vita; but to greater or lesser degrees of
happy and joyful being, the utmost of which is so naturally expressed by
(...), that it wants not the addition of (...) (often times) to do it: If thou will enter into life Mat. XIX, 17. and VII, 14. and XVIII, 8. i. e. the happy
being in Heaven: Which is so properly that which is called life, that this we
live here scarce deserves the appellation in comparison with it. Now in
proportion to these acceptions of life must the Notion of (...) etc. be
calculated. Had life signified most properly [being] simply taken, there might
have been some pretense, that the contrary (...) should denote the contrary to
being viz. Annihilation: But when it signifies those so many other things, and
not simple entity, it is most rational that (...) should both technically, and
properly signify the opposites to those severals, wicked life, the displeasure
of God, a miserable being here, separation of Soul from Body; of both from God,
and above all endless torments in another World, Joh. viii, 51, 52. (and that
as somewhat to be seen and tasted, which were not so well appliable to
annihilation) and in many other places; I instance in one or two more, first,
Heb. 2, 14. because there it seems to me to have a mark distinguishing it both
from death, the separation of Soul and Body, and from annihilation. For of
neither of those I suppose the Devil can be said (...), to have power,
especially not of the latter; which is a work of the same Omnipotency that
creation is: Whereas of eternal torments of the wicked it is certain that the
inflicting of them is entrusted to the Devil; and so he has power over them.

Secondly 1. Joh. 3.14. Where he that loves not his Brother is said (...) to
abide in that which is there called death, which is some prejudice to the
opinion of redactio in nihilum: for in that there is no abiding. So that I
suppose it clear that there has been little gaind to the establishing the
affirmative of the question, from this first objection, the use of (...) etc.
for the punishment of the Wicked.

Proceed we then to the second sort of words (...) and (...) and (...) there
rendered destruction or perishing or perdition. For all these will be ruled by
the former (...) etc. none of them having any propriety to the sense of
annihilation, but only opposed to (...) and (...) in the notions wherein they
are visibly used for rescues or deliverances; sometime from greater, sometime
from lesser dangers, sometime for forsaking of Sin, repentance Act. 2.40.
coincident with spiritual life: sometime for pardon of Sin, sometime for
temporal cures; and sometime for that state of endless rest from pain, Sin,
Frailties, Infirmities, together with addition of all positive bliss in the
vision of God. And in proportion (...) is fitly used not only for the
privations; but contraries to every one of those, the evils extremely opposite
to these good things. And nothing hinders but that (...) be taken Mat. 10.28.
not for annihilating but tormenting in Hell, that being the known place for the
inflicting of torments, and to that end the fire eternal prepared for the Devil
and his Angels, and Men also adjudg'd to have their parts of it Mat. 25.41. and
the office of the Devils there to be Lictors, and tormentors, and jaylors,
which suppose space of detention and cruciating, but are irreconcilable with
instant annihilation: see Mat. 5.25* 26. And against this sense of (...),
nothing farther said has force. For, first, thus it is certain, God both can
and will punish, i. e. cruciate those that fear him not. Secondly, It Is denied
that (...) most properly signifies the destruction of the being of the subject,
or annihilation, and whereas it is affirmed so to signify Mat. 10.39. it is
certain it does not. For there as it is once opposed to the loosing this
present life, (as our Savior foretells the complying Jews, and Gnostics
should in event do by those very means by which they intended to preserve them)
so it is a second time applied to godly Martyrs who loose their lives for
Christ's sake, of whom it will not be imagined that they are annihilated, when
they so dye. Thirdly, the Concession that when applied to a person, it
signifies generally death in the proper sense, is a manifest prejudice to its
signifying annihilation; for if the death of a person were the annihilating
that person, all resurrection were superseded. And this is farther evident by
the several proofs farther produced as Mat. 26.52. where they that take the
Sword against the lawful Magistrate, shall i. e. are worthy to perish by the
Sword of the Magistrate, which yet I hope can annihilate no man, but only kill
the body, Mat. x.28. And beyond that have no more that they can do: so Mat.
27.20. I hope Jesus was only crucified, not annihilated. And so in all other
places, save only that of 1 Cor. 15.18. where upon a false assumption it would
follow that (not the wicked, which alone were pertinent, but) good Christians
should utterly loose all being, at least of the body, or be never raised again,
so that it is far from being by that Cumulus of Testimonies concluded that the
destruction or perishing or the wicked signifies utter destruction.

If these testimonies may be believed (some of which belong to Christ, some
more to the godly, and no one to the annihilation of the wicked) the direct
contrary will be concluded.

Fourthly, the places that are produced to prove this to be the expectation or
the Devils, prove it not. Not Mar. 1.24. for there to destroy them] is to
retrench their great power over the men of the World, to destroy their
Dominion, to cast them out of the bodies v. 25. yea and out of the Temples and
minds of men, which they possessed. The other of Luke 4.34 is to the same
purpose, and so concludes no more, then that concluded. And indeed it cannot be
with any show of reason imagined, that the devils should know so little of
their own doom, as to think it possible they should at Christ's coming be
annihilated. Nay if they had, their present condition being so far from the
least degree of happiness, they could have no reason to deprecate it, or beg
Christ to let them alone, and disclaim having any thing to do with him. Their
annihilation (if that had been the signification of destroying them) the
speedier it were, it were certainly the more desirable; especially when it
would also have secured them from the fear of a yet worse condition, which we
know was decreed them, and of which they cannot be doubted to have received
presages, by being finally sentenced to it. If this argument be considered, it
will certainly warrant my affirmation, that 'twas not annihilation that the
devils with such horror expected from Christ, but, as appears by comparing
with Mat. 8.29. amandation to torments.

Fifthly, the uses of the word (...) for eternal destruction, exemplifi'd by
the Objector by many texts Jo. 3.15, etc. if proved as manifestly, as freely
granted by me, are still of no force to induce the desired conclusion, because
it was said (...) signifies not annihilatio^. And yet it falls out, that
several of the testimonies are impertinent to that to which they were
designed; as 1 Cor. 1.18. 2 Cor. 2.15. where they that perish are impenitent
sinners (abstracted from the doom that expects them) as opposed to (...) in the
notion of penitents, and the next 2 These. 2.10. is of the same importance.

Sixthly, the uses of the nounes (...) and (...) must be concluded by what has
been already said of the verbs and nounes together, and indeed infer as little
toward the undertaken conclusion. For to that two premises being requisite. 1.
That the punishment of the wicked is expressed by (...) and (...). 2. That those
words signify annihilation, only the former of these is pretended to be proved
from the use of the words in the quoted places: the later, on which all the
weight lies, being not pretended or endeavored to be proved, but rather taken
for granted, which is the great fallacy of petitio principii, not to be
tolerated in the pressing any Argument.

Seventhly, For (...) it availes nothing: for allowing it to be all one with
(...) (a word which by the way I must now add, having formerly omitted to
insert it, signifies bodily smart inflicted by the devil, 1 Cor. 5.5. all one
with (...) 2 Cor. 12.7. buffeting, yet still it signifies not annihilation, but
sometimes an effect of spiritual death, or separation of God from the soul:
viz: abominable uncleanness, which in a Christian is the defiling of Gods
Temple 1 Cor 3.1, and that is granted by the Objector to be useless to him
(and is not rendered more serviceable by pretending it is Metaphorical, for
though to call a man a Temple may be deemed a Metaphor, yet to pollute, whether
Temple or Man, is propriety of speech, and that the only importance of (...) in
all places of the N. Testament, 1. Cor. 15.33. 2 Cor. 7.^. and 11.3. Ephesians. 4.22.
Jud. 10. Revel. 19.2. and so very often (...) Romans 8.21. vid. Annotat: 2 Pet.
1.4. and 2.12. twice and 19. Sometimes the corruption of the body in the grave,
1 Cor. 15.42. and 50. sometimes for hurt to the man, Col 2.2^. and sometimes
for the pun^shments that await the wicked, Gal. 6 8 and opposed to an happy
everlast^ng state called (...), and by that opposition not prejudiced but
rather concluded to be an everlasting miserable state. For whereas the contrary
is suggested without offer of proof, viz that destruction being opposed to
eternal life, does therefore seem to signify that which is most opposite
thereto viz. real and eternal destruction, this is indeed scarce so much as a
seeming or probability, very far from a demonstration. For sure eternal
miserable being is most properly contrary and so opposite to eternal happy
being. And though in Metaphysicall consideration absolute not being be most
opposite to being, and so to eternal being; yet in moral speaking it is not
so. 1. For sure eternal ill being, eternal torments, are much worse then no
being at all: the bare Bonitas Entis, which Dr Twiss, and some Predestinarians
fly to, being, when joined with infinite miseries, very far from being valuable
to him that has it, If we believe Christ; having never been born, is more
desirable then it. What is said on this word (...) to the interpreting of 2
Pet. 2.12. is in my opinion not to be adhered to: (...) and (...), are, I
think, to be actively taken, and so (...) will signify those that take, and
corrupt others, the filthy Gnostics; see Annot:) and in that sense, of which
only the words are capable, the phrase has no show of usefulness to the
Objecter. For then (...) readily signifies in their corrupting or debauching
others, they shall be destroyed i. e. punished severely (I suppose eternally
though that word enforce it not.)

Eighthly, For (...) Luke 19.27. the full importance of it is to denote a
signal execution of punishment on malefactors, brought forth and slain before
the provoked King, but no more implies annihilation then any of the former. Nor
is it at all discernable by that place, whether the punishment executed were to
be swift or lingering, it only signifies sharp, and not to be averted; and
solemn, and exemplary, as for a great and provoking crime: and indeed the
passage wherein we find that phrase being a Parable, the Notion of it must be
accorded thereunto; and so cannot be other then such as a Prince executes on
his rebel subjects, neither annihilation on one side, nor eternal punishments
on the other; and so that phrase will be argumentative on neither part.

Ninthly, For (...), and the other words of the same nature with that, (...)
and (...), the utmost that can be pretended of them is, that those things that
are thus burnt, consumed, and devoured, are utterly changed from their former
state, not that they are annihilated. For what is utterly burnt is turned to
ashes, but then ashes and not nothing are the term of that corruption. So
likewise that which is eaten and masticated never so small and converted into
Chyle, then blood, then flesh, the rest going out into the draught, is still
but thus changed not annihilated. It Is not indeed what it was, but thereby it
only the more fitly represents those infernal torments, and state, which is as
wide a moral mutation and departure from all good or desirable to any appetite,
as can be imagined. And certainly this is all that can pretend to be deduced
from common interpretation (which is referred to) of those Phrases. For if the
wicked were granted to be destroyed exactly after the manner of Chafe etc. Yet
as chafe is not annihilated, so would it not follow that the wicked are
annihilated. But then withal it will be just to remember that Similitudes and
Parables must not be bound to such accurate (...), as that every circumstance
in the parable be accounted for strictly in the application, but only the main
lineaments, wherein the designed resemblance consisted, preserved, viz. that as
after the threshing and winowing the good corn, and laying it up carefully in
the granary, the manner is to set fire to the chafe, which licks it all up,
and never cease 'till it have consumed all, and in that respect is called
(...) (the wind conspiring with the fire, as in their open threshing flours on
the tops of mountains the Jewish husbandry directed) so after the trying and
purging and at length rewarding the godly with eternal Heaven, it is to be
expected that God shall proceed to deal severely with the wicked, and then that
severity be such as they shall not possibly avert nor be able to undergo
without the utmost moral damage to them. As for the use of (...) Heb. 13.11.
of sacrifices burnt to ashes, Act. 19.19* of books burnt also, and Revel. 8.7.
of trees, and green grass burnt up, it is no more then has been yielded to
the force of the former places. For still none of these were annihilated, they
were burnt to ashes, not to nothing. Nay when the very phrase (...) is
sometimes joined with the burning of the wicked, as of chafe, it is not
obvious to render any reason for the choice of this phrase, but what will be
founded in the eternity of their torments and being; for fire we know goes out
it self when the fuel is exhausted: and so the Unextinguishablenesse of the
one must be answered with the durableness of the other.

Tenthly, For the same and like Phrases in the Old Testament, granting
(according to the mind of the Objector) that they include the second death
after the general judgment: yet still this avails nothing to the desired
conclusion, unless it be farther proved that those Words and Phrases do
signify absolute utter destruction, or annihilation, for upon that only the
affirmative of the question depends, and for that there is no least pretense of
proof offered here.

Eleventhly, For the Phrase (...), it will never be useful to the disputer:
for if the first death be the Act of separation of Soul and Body, and (...) not
the torments of Hell, but the state or continuance of that separation (as it
will be found to signify in all the places of the Bible, and in the most and
best heathen Authors) then the second death being the taking away them, must by
consequence be founded in the reunion of the Soul and Body, that reunion being
in propriety the dissolving of separation, Act and State both.

Granting therefore that the casting of death and Hades (I must set that word
instead of Hell, which in use signifies another thing, even that whereunto it
is there said to be cast) into the lake of Fire, Revel. 20.14. is the second
death: and the converting those (Act and State) into a State of sensitive and
real misery: what can follow thence to the disputers advantage? That according
to the Rabbinical Notion, it signifies final and utter destruction? Why, let it
do so; and the result is, that then death being finally and utterly destroyed,
a never ceasing State of being (though that most miserable) now takes place,
and that is eternity of torments, far removed from annihilation: for though
utter destruction of positive Entities may be deemed to signify annihilation,
yet when attributed only to privative Entities, death and Hades, it can in no
reason signify annihihilation, but the contrary restoration to being, i. e.
to union of Soul and Body. But then secondly that the Rabbis or Chaldae
Paraphrast, Deuteronomy. 33.6. or Is. 22.14. meant by second death to denote absolute
negation of all being, must not be allowed: for Deuteronomy. 33.6. the Hebrew reading
let Reuben live and not die, and the Chaldae Paraphrast using the Phrase of the
second death, that can infer no more, then by that Phrase they explained what
they deemed already meant by the Hebrew word duly rendered dying: and there is
no reason or color for saying that that signified annihilation; dye he might,
yet not be annihilated. And the like is apparent of the other place Is. 22.14.
so much therefore for that.

To proceed then, will it be for the Objectors advantage that the second death
is expressed by the lake of Fire and Brimstone, and that evidently referring to
the utter destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah? To this I reply first, that 'twas
a tempestuous Rain of Fire and Brimstone that consumed Sodom, and not a Lake;
and so the reference does no farther hold then the Fire and Brimstone, i. e.
The terrible stinking, and furiously burning Fire, and that gains nothing to
the disputer; The Fire of Hell may be as searching, and noisome, as is
possible, without being finite, utterly consuming, or annihilating. Nay,
secondly, when the Men of Sodom and Gomorrah, the inhabitants as well as the
Walls, were burnt to ashes by that Fire and Brimstone, to which that lake bears
some resemblance, what probability is there, that either those walls that were
burnt to ashes were annihilated, or else that all that people were then
annihilated so as to be incapable of being raised, and judged at the day of
doom? Or if they were, wherein did their punishment appear to be greater then
the portion of any other more moderate wicked man, which in the disputers sense
shall be so finally annihilated; and sure reap no advantage by the state that
expects him in the intervall? Lastly, will his advantage be, that as death by
being cast into the lake is supposed to be utterly destroyed, so whoever else
is cast into the lake, shall be utterly annihilated? That I suppose the
specially designed advantage: but as it was said, it will prove none, because
death being a privative thing, the destroying of that necessarily infers not
only a positive Resurrection, but consequent to it an undying State, and that
is contrary to the disputers pretentions. And then though those privations be
destroyed by being cast into the lake, yet it no way follows, that men by
being cast in thither, shall be destroyed also. The concluding thus were, as
if, putting off the prophetical expression, one should say in plain words,
After the death of Adam and all his posterity, and their continuing in the
state of separation some thousands of years, they shall be raised again, and
their Souls eternally united to their bodies, and of those so raised, many
should be cast into as eternal flames, (the former of these is parallel to the
casting of Hell and Hades into the lake; the latter of the persons into the
same lake) Ergo as there shall be no more separation of Souls from Bodies, so
there shall be no more punishing of wicked men, whereas indeed the very
contrary follows: The destroying of death is the commencing of this endless
miserable life, therefore proov'd to be endless because death is destroyed,
and so life comes universally; and so to continue eternally instead of it: for
else death and Hades (or that which is more then death, annnihilation) should
return to have their being again, which it was decreed they should not, and
therefore they are said to be cast into the lake. It Is true indeed, if Hades
signified the place of Hell or state of torments, then the casting this into
the lake, would be the finishing those torments, whether after Origens way, or
any other, it matters not; but this as has been said, is not the importance of
hades, but the State of death, as (...) is the Act of it.

To what has last been said, that which follows in the bottom of p. 3. will
be found no competent answer. The first Answer is, that the destruction of
death and Hades is spoken properly in reference to them whose Names are in the
Book of life.

But first, if this were true, then one of my former conclusions must needs be
granted, that Hades signifies not Hell Torments (for that being destroyed to
those that were under it, the Godly were never under these) but the state of
the dead in universum. Yet secondly, it is not true, for v. 12. I saw the dead,
small and great, stand before God, and the Books were opened, the Books of
Register of all men's deeds (from which the book of life, following, is
different) and the Dead were judged -- the Dead indefinitely, i. e. sure all
the dead, and yet more deictically by enumeration of all particulars concerned
in it: The sea gave up its Dead, and Death and Hades delivered up the Dead
which were in them, and they were judged every Man according to their Works.
Here it is evident that Death and Hades are properly spoken in reference to all
that were to be judged according to works, and not only to them whose names
were written in the Book of Life. And so that evacuates the first Answer. The
second Answer is, that they that are not written in that Book, shall never
suffer such a Death as brings to Hades, but shall fall into a worse, the second
Death. But to this I reply, that this distinction has no ground in the text,
but contrary wise both Death and Hades are equally there said to be destroyed
to all that were under them, both whose names are, and are not written in the
book of life. As therefore to the Godly, that Death that leads to Hades is
destroyed, so equally to the Wicked; and then they are both rendered eternal;
and then the Wickeds being cast into this lake, is not, cannot be to be
destroyed there; but being a lake of fire, to be tormented there eternally, as
is most apparent v. 10. where the Devil was cast into this lake, and the beast
and the false Prophet said to be there already, yet were not annihilated by
being cast thither, but as it follows, shall be tormented day and night for
ever and ever. That they fall into a worse death, I willingly grant, and think
it useful to the cause I defend: for suppose a Wicked Man, whose impiety costs
him dear here, (one of the Devils saddest Martyrs) cruciated with the Diseases
his Sins have brought on him in an exquisite manner many years, and at last
either seized on by the hand of Justice, and delivered to a wittily tormenting
Death, or exercised many years with the rack of Stone and Strangury, or the
like, and at last by these horrid miseries his Soul rent from his Body, and he
continue in Hades many Hundred years, and certainly partake of no good in that
estate, at the utmost, but rest from the labors of his former life. Can it in
this case be said that the second Death is worse then this, and yet this second
Death defined by a swift Annihilation? Certainly it cannot. Nothing but long
continued if not endless Torments can be said worse then those so long
continued Torments. But whereas it is added that the second Death is absolute
and eternal destruction, as the scripture elsewhere speaks, I reply, that the
scripture no where speaks so; never uses second death of any such thing as
annihilation, nor ever seems in any other words to say of any wicked man, that
he shall be annihilated. As for (...), I grant it parallel to (...), but can
see no Argument producible thence that either of them denotes annihilation,
being both so much more proper to denote Torments, and those eternal. For the
valley of Hinnom, it is known that Children were not burnt to Ashes there, but
put into hollow brazen vessels, and there fried and scorched (a most lingering
pain,) and therefore called Tophet from the Timbrels that there used to sound
to drown the noise of their dismal cries. And for the lake the Text is
express, they that be tormented (without intermission) Day and Night (and
without cessation) for ever and ever. And though the valley of Hinnom being on
Earth was not a state of of Eternal but temporary punishments; yet that is no
prejudice: for being to take a resemblance from earth and humane punishments
where nothing was eternal, the most that could be was to take the sharpest and
most lingering Torments thereby to express those which, being most sharp, were
eternal also. Thus much for the Texts of Scripture and phrases therein, which
seem favorable to the affirmation, but duly weighed have not so proved.

Now for the Consideration taken from God's Attributes of Justice, and
especially of Mercy p. 4. There seem to me to be three weak parts in the
arguing. First that to those sins which are committed under temptations and
infirmities of ours, not generally releiv'd by a sufficiency of auxiliary
grace, God's eternal punishments are supposed to be affixed by them, that
maintain such punishments of eternal torments. Certainly they that thus do,
do amiss; and by so doing give great occasion to those that believe them to
find other measures for justice in God, then those which he has prescribed to
men: (whereas in matters of this nature God is content to be judged by our
Tribunal and measures, Judge I pray you betwixt me and my Vineyard, and Are not
my ways equal?) But they that maintain God's requirings Mic. 6. to be
proportioned to his shewings, and the sufficiency of the Divine grace, ready
for all that will make use of it, and therein found the justice of punishing
those that do despise or neglect those means so liberally and abundantly
provided for them by God, have given no cause for that exception. It is by them
(on the contrary) marked out as an act of superabundant mercy, that God
forsakes not upon the first refusals and not making use of his grace; he is
long-suffering, and most willing, and most ardently labors that all should
come to repentance, even such as have long resisted his Evangelical methods of
rich grace. Secondly, that weight is laid upon the Temporalness of the sins
committed in this world, intimating I suppose the unproportionableness of
Temporal to Eternal, and therein founding an objection against the Justice of
those punishments. This I suppose is believed to have force against those that
are wont to answer it by compensating the want of weight in the temporariness
of the sin and sinner, partly by the eternity of God against whom the sin is
committed, partly by the preparedness and inclination of the man to sin
eternally, in case he should live eternally. And I shall confess that I have
always looked on those as (...), (such as the Schools have many) not able
fully to satisfy humane understanding, and have therefore been careful in
several writings to offer surer grounds of satisfaction in this matter; by
laying the weight on the option, which is by God given us, of eternal bliss on
one side, as the reward of our Evangelical obedience, as on the other of
eternal woe on our wilful denying, and this finally and obstinately persever'd
in: which makes it most just, that they that resolutely and inexorably make
this choice of never so much ill to themselves, should have none but themselves
to blame for the unhappiness of their portion. Thirdly, that God in inflicting
punishment is compared with man in respect of the compassion supposeable in him
to see any the worst man thus afflicted. Whereas I conceive God is to be looked
on here only as the Rector of the Universe, whose office it is to proceed in
the work of Judicature without passion on either side. You may see it in a
Judge on Earth, which if he be a well-natur'd man never willingly pronounces
sentence, dolet quoties cogitur esse ferox: but yet must utterly disclaim his
Office, if he do not secundum allegata and probata pronounce that sentence,
which the Law prescribes against such or such a fact, and resist all
temptations of his compassion in so doing. Such a severity is that of God's,
which the office which belongs to him in the World exacts of him, even when he
swears that he is far from delighting in the death of him that dies, and most
passionately exhorts to repent and live, and imputes it to absolute
wilfulness, for which no reasonable account can be given by any man, that he
will thus suffer.

Should he never make such laws to repress Sin by assured expectation of
eternal punishment, we might easily judge what a World or rather Wilderness of
savage Creatures this Universe would be, by what it now is, even after all this
severity of menace and interdict. It Was therefore most just and most necessary,
that he should thus have ordein'd and enacted these sad laws; And therefore in
great Justice and Wisdom, and without any resistance from his infinite
goodness and mercy, He thus enacted. And having done so, should he as often as
any one came to suffer according to those Laws, retract or dispense with; set
his Compassion to evacuate the process, and frustrate all the wise designs of
this his Justice? Certainly no man would ever expect this of an all-wise
lawgiver; or (after he has set his Seal to this grand Indenture, so solemnly
as by his Son's promulgating and signing it with his blood) imagine that his
Compassion should thus tempore non suo interpose, when there are so many more
proper seasons, wherein he has effectually demonstrated himself to have as
much of that to every the wickedst man that perishes, as any the tender'st
father, even David ever owned to the most desperate rebel Son Absolon, that
finally refuses all returning to mercy, 'till at length he perishes in the
midst of his Sin to the wounding his Fathers heart. These are three competent
exceptions to that part of the arguing taken from Gods attributes. And
therefore to the additional considerations for the strengthening thereof the
reply will be easy, that if they are the greatest part of the World that falls
under this severity: this is but necessarily consequent to that greatest part
being such as that sentence most justly and indispensably belongs to, and
consequently not such whose guilts are truly suggested to be thus more venial,
and of an ordinary degree; but only such as proceed from malice and obstinacy,
gross negligence or groundless presumption. For for all other sins of
infirmity, ignonorance, and even wilful, timely retracted by repentance, there
is remedy prepared under the Gospel. Only whereas to the two heads of
infirmity and ignorance, as proofs of the more ordinary degree of guilt, the
Objecter adds negligence, strength of temptation, corruption of nature,
affection, evil education and example; and then in gross farther adds many
other circumstances, both positive and privative, abating the heinousness of
the guilt. This will deserve to be better considered, both because the most of
these (as the case truly stands) yield no matter of just excuse to any, (for
so it is sure of examples of men, when in evident opposition to the commands and
intermination of God: so of affection or sensitive passion, when in
contradiction to reason and humane nature, the upper soul which ought to
exercise its dominion given it by God over those (...), the bestial part of the
man; and not be corrupted and led captive and blindfold by it: so again evil
education, when contrary to the light of natural conscience; corruption of
nature, when repaired by grace; temptations of the flesh or world or Devil,
when infinitely outweigh'd by contrary motives to obedience and good living)
and because some of them have much of malignity in them, which may well enhance
not lessen the guilt. Of this sort I chiefly instance in negligence, such as it
may be supine and wretchlesse, which in a creature and servant contains all
degrees of enhancing any sin: it is wilful, for he might be more careful: it is
obstinate, for he is often warned of it by the noxious effects (which he cannot
but discern) of it, and the Master's continual precepts to the contrary: It Is
presumptuous, still imagining he shall find mercy, when God assures him he
shall not in this way, and upon that groundless confidence still presuming to
offend: It Is most ungrateful scorning and contemning to make any use of the
greatest treasures of grace, all ready for him that would use tolerable
diligence: It Is an act of horrible pride, in despising God himself, his
precepts, threats, promises; of infidelity both active and passive, not
believing God, not being faithful to his service; And it self being nothing in
effect but height of Idleness, and that doing or admitting much more ill,
omitting much more good (merely to gratify that one swinish vile pleasure of
sloth) then any covetous voluptuous man does for his greatest treasures, or
taste fullest sensualities; it has as it were all the aggravations of all other
sins collected into one sink or kennel. In this place the description assigned
the worst of men, [ viz. men of flagitious and contumacious lives] may perhaps
deserve some animadversion. For if this be the one measure, to which eternal
punishments are thought commensurable, it is possible there may be great and
dangerous mistake in it.

For 1. There are many principles of godless living all meeting in the effect,
casting off the yoke of God's obedience, and so equally deserving to fall under
the severity of those laws by which the world was created and managed. (...)
and (...) are the two comprehensive names of them, but there are several under
each. Under the first pride and rage and revenge etc. under the second
voluptuousness of all sorts, Covetousness, desire of praise etc. And every of
these have a foundation in our corrupt nature, and temptations from without
also: And as one soil is more unhappily qualified for the one; so another is
for another. And if all the restreints, commands, preventions, excitations,
invitations, engagements, mercies, punishments of God; all his Methods of
armature and fortifying each man against these domestic enemies and traitors
of his, may not be permitted to have any force toward his rescue out of this
slavery to any of these sins, there is little reason of excuse that will hold
the pleading for any of these. The contumacy is in effect the same in each; in
him that asks God forgiveness for his intemperance every day, and every night
wallowes in it; as to him that goes on sullenly and demurely, and has no
regret to it. The aggravations are several; but the difference of the degrees
of malignity hardly discernible: Or if the disadvantage be on the side of the
stout flagitious offender, this is no more then is necessary to be supposed to
the defining several degrees of torments in Hell, that the mighty sinners might
be mightily punished; it does not at all concern the justice of that sentence,
that decrees every unreform'd impenitent to those flames. For repentance, as it
signifies some degree of sincere renovation, being the minimum quod sic,
without which all shall perish even under the Gospel, (that utmost dispensation
of strict Law that God will permit any to hope for, that does not give the lie
to his message in the mouth of his Son) they that come short of this have no
more to plead from any other circumstance imaginable, because that God which
gave space for repentance, has also provided such counterballances either of
aids or pardon to such circumstances, as shall utterly frustrate and prevent
all plea that can from thence be drawn either against his justice or his mercy.
2. It must be remembered that there be other states, to which those titles of
flagitious and contumacious lives are not competible, which yet have no less
of malignity in them by that consideration, such are that of the intricate
disguised painted hypocrite, that has God always in his mouth, and his glory
the design of his foulest actions, and yet his damnation as just as any man's:
that of the wicked Christian, carnal Gospeller, that under the vow of baptism,
i. e. Christ's banner, equals the sins of Jew, Turk or Heathen Worshipper:
that of recidivation into forsaken sins, Apostasy, Temporary adherence to
Christ, (but in time of temptation presently they are offended, the (...) or
cowardly Gnostics, that Christ in the Revelation ranks with (...) unbelievers)
each of these upon other as just accounts, as those under which the flagitious
and contumacious is acknowledged to fall, and perish, may as reasonably be
resolved to have their portion: the richest talents being rather more then less
accountable for, then the meanest; and the utter darkness, where there is
weeping and gnashing of teeth, peculiarly assigned to the unprofitable servant,
that being apt to object severity and austerity against God, did not yet
endeavor by improving his Talent to approve himself unto him. By the way, that
parable forewarns us how possible it is for a man negligently to loose all his
opportunities of graces and advantages toward heaven, and engulfe himself in
endless woe, whilst his heart is secretly objecting against the
reconcileableness of God's judgments with those Attributes which he thinks fit
to be vindicated in all his inflictions. In this Section (after the middle of
the 4th. p.) it is resolved, that the opinion of eternal torments, properly so
called, is not to be accepted upon less terms then of plain demonstration from
Scripture: But what that signifies, I cannot guess; God's affirmation when once
revealed, as there is no just cause to doubt the testimony to be divine, will
bear down all difficulties, which any improbability of the matter will suggest
to us. Reason it self thus judges, that God is to be believed rather then any
humane reasoning. If therefore Christ (who sufficiently testified himself to
come from God, and to have the signature of his Authority on all his
affirmations) did teach eternity of torments properly so called, and express
that doctrine in such plain words, as all that heard him and his Commissioners
preach, were firmly resolved to signify the real everlastingness of those
torments, then I suppose here is as plain demonstration, as the weightiness of
the matter or the Objecter's exceptions can exact. And that thus it is, it may
not be amiss briefly to show in this place. Besides those testimonies which are
by the Objecter produced (and as they are enervated by him, have and shall be
vindicated and cleared to have force in them, and so are not to be mentioned
here) I insist on these three. 1. The parable of Dives and Lazarus, which being
yielded to be but a parable, has yet from Christ's using it these grounds of
assuring our faith, that there is as certainly after this life a state of
torments as of bliss, and those torments executed by scorching, but not
devouring and consuming, much less annihilating flames. He that is in them has
nothing to beg but a present cooling of his tongue, and that may not be had,
because Dives has had all his portion of good things in this life, and so must
have no more such, though it be but the least allay of his pains for one
minute, which sure excludes annihilation, which is the perfect superseding of
them. Again, there is a gulf fixed, which interscinds all intercourse between
Heaven and Hell, whereby any aid or relief should come to them. These
circumstances put together must conclude, that the fire being not such as of it
self consumed those that were tormented in it, and Abraham, that was now a
Comprehensor, knowing that there was now no place left for the least degree of
release to the sufferer, and no relief being to be hoped for from Heaven, from
whence only it was possible to come, the fire and so the continuance in the
torments must be eternal. I foresee but one objection to this, viz: that this
was before the Day of Judgment, and then, this non obstante, the fire after the
day of Doom may annihilate. To this I answer, that the Parable is not bound to
refer to the time wherein it was delivered. Other parables of the King and the
Bridegroom referred to after times, and this here by the seeing Dives bodily in
Hell, and the scorching of the tongue and the mention of dipping the finger etc
must refer to the state of conjunction of souls and bodies in Heaven and Hell,
and that must be after the Resurrection; and so that supersedes that one
objection, and I foresee no other.

Secondly, I mention Christ's words of Judas, that it were better for him never
to have been born, and of him that should offend a tender disciple, and avert
him from Christ, that it were better a Millstone were hanged about his neck, and
he cast into the midst of the Sea. Here I shall suppose annihilation as fully
expressed by these two phrases, as by any it could be, and yet that somewhat
worse then that expects wicked men, which must needs be founded in eternal
miserable being: for eternal Being, if not miserable, is much better; and
miserable Being, if not eternal, but immediately determined by a swift
destruction, as Christ supposes, is not certainly and unquestionably worse
then never having had a Being.

Thirdly, I resume again (though I now perceive they are after mentioned) the
express words of Christ Revel. 20.10. that the Beast and the false Prophets, i.
e. some wicked men (...) shall be tormented in a lake of fire and brimestone
day and night for ever and ever. Nothing could have been more express: And to
these I add, that there is no one seeming dissent of contrary testimony
producible from the whole Scripture, but innumerable that bear full consent
with these, which consequently have established the faith of this Article, that
it was by the Apostles of Christ entered into that depositum which they left in
every Church where they preached, as appears by the last words of the Apostles
Creed, the life everlasting; which as it is expressly contrary to annihilation,
which is excision and determination of life in respect of duration or lasting,
so being subjoined to the resurrection of the body, must be indefinitely
coextended to that, and so belong to all bodies that are raised. And that it is
thus comprehensive, appears more manifestly by the Athanasian Creed, which to
the rising and coming again of all men with their bodies, and giving account
for their own works, which is parallel to the Resurrection of the body,
subjoyns as the Explication of Everlasting life this express Dogma, And they
that have done good shall go into life everlasting, and they that have done
evil into everlasting fire. And this was no doubt the concordant sense of the
Churches, that had this depositum of Christian faith, both from the Scriptures
and the preaching of the Apostles, and their Successors, committed to them. And
so there remains no cause of doubt of the validity or plainness of
demonstration, as far as any matter of doctrine is capable of it from the
testimony of Christ and of God. What follows of the incredibility of this
doctrine, making some men desperately doubt of the truth of the whole body of
Religion, can have no force against the truth of it. All Christ's duri sermones
had that effect of his teaching them, they were offended at him: and the
meaning of that is, They forsook the whole Religion.

Having gone thus far in particular Reply to all that have been proposed in
favor of the Affirmative of the question, I need not accommodate any Answer to
the remaining (fifth) page of the first part. The three Postulata's, if all
granted, (as they may in some limited sense) will gain him nothing. Not the
first, for the letter of Scripture favors not him, as has been showed; death
and destruction no way signify or conclude annihilation. Not the second, for
there is no one Text clear in phrase and signification yet produced for the
affirmative, nor any that by any age or orthodox Father has been so
interpreted. Not the third, because in our doctrine, set upon its due basis,
there is nothing so much as of a seeming disagreeableness to piety, or the
nature or Attributes of God, as has been showed also. Then for the scandal of
those disputes about Predestination etc. which is thought to be allayed by the
opinion of Annihilation, I answer, that they which deny all irrespective decree
of Reprobation or Praeterition against Supralapsarians and Sublapsarians, that
affirm universality of Redemption, and of the gift of sufficient grace (all
which are maintained by Bishop Overall, to whom the disputer professes to
incline, and are known to have been maintained by concordant votes of all the
Fathers of the Greek and Latin Church before St Augustine, and since him by a
considerable part of the Church through all Ages, and the contrary never
universally received as a Doctrine, and so remains to have been but a
disputable question at the most) cannot be imagined to be under any part of
this scandal, or consequently to receive benefit by the Allay that is spoken
of. And if the Doctrine of Reprobation etc. have need of this Antidote, to
avert the ill and dangerous consequences of it, and to reconcile their dictates
with piety and reverence to God Almighty, then it is more then time that the
favorers of that Doctrine should rather change their poisons for wholesome
diet, then like the Mountebank on the Stage presume to swallow the poison in
confidence of this only antidote, which I have not yet heard that he believes
to have any force in it. In a word, let us all renounce the irrespective decree
of Reprobation, as I profess to do, and there is no more pretense for the
denying of eternal torments of the Reprobates upon that account. As for the
punishment of personal sins, and their circumstantiall abatements, that has
been accounted for already.

The second Part.
IN the Second Part the view of the places producible for Eternal Pains,
begins with a prejudice, viz. that it is no where plainly and directly denied
that the Reprobates shall be destroyed. But that negative Argument as it is
simply invalid, so it is most unseasonably prefixed to the setting down of
Testimonies for the perpetuity of their Torments: For if one such Text be
produced that shall really conclude their torments perpetual, (as certainly do
the words of Christ Revel. 20.10. of their being tormented Day and Night for
ever and ever) it is then most certainly consequent that the Reprobate shall
not be destroyed immediately after the day of Judgment: and what is that but
the plain and direct denial of it. And to add that it is no where said that
they shall live for ever but that incorruption seems to be the privilege of
the Elect, is sure but another branch of the same paralogisme, for they that
are tormented for ever have sense and life for ever, but that being a life of
misery eternal has no semblance of the privilege of the Elect, whose Crown it
is to live and reign, not to live and be punished for ever. And so this yields
not the least mite of advantage to the former opinion. Now for the phrases
(...) Mat. 18.8. and 25.41.48. (...) Mat. 25.46. (...) Mar. 3.29. (...) Mar.
9.43.44. and (...). v. 45.46.48. (...). 2. Pet. 2.17. Jud. 13. (...)* Revel.
14* 11. and the lake of fire and brimstone, where the beast and the prophet
shall be tormented day and night for ever and ever. Revel. 20.10. All these are
endeavored to be evacuated first by a general Answer; then by particulars
accommodated to each particular phrase. The general is, that the phrase [(...)
and (...)] do not always signify an absolute eternity, but either a long time,
or an irreparable estate of things, or during unto the cessation of the
subject. And without disputing the truth of this answer, it will be sufficient
to my turn, if either some of these phrases do sometimes signify an absolute
eternity, for then I shall have no reason to except against the Interpretation
of the universal Church of God for so many Centuries, which thus understand
all, unquestionably most, of these places; or if they here denote an
irreparable state of those things that are spoken of; for then the wicked being
cast into fire, are in that state irreparably, Math. 18.8.25.4^. being in
eternal punishment, Math. 25.41. are irreparably there, and so in the rest;
which notion of eternal would never mind any man of the annihilation of those
that are entered on such eternal flames or punishments. As for the testimonies
from Deuteronomy. 15.17. Ps. 37.29. and 14.6. they are all necessarily interpreted by
the matter of them to refer to certain finite periods, either of the man's life
and capacity, either of serving, or enjoying the earthly Canaan in the two
former places, or to the end of this World, as the last of them, but no way
prejudices the proper use of the words for absolute eternity, when the matter
so requires, as I suppose it does, whenever it speaks of a duration which
is to commence at the end of this life or world of ours, as when eternal life
is mentioned, the disputer will acknowledge; and yet with no more reason then I
can render for interpreting eternal punishment to this sense. But because the
Objecter depends not on this his general Answer, let us descend to the
particulars: And first that of everlasting fire. Mat. 18.8. and 25.41.48. Jud.
7. Here Jud. 7. is added over and above those places which were even now
produced for this phrase, and on purpose, it seems, as a decoy to draw all the
rest into the net. For herein is the answer founded, that the last of those
Iud. 7. is by most Divines not understood to speak of the fire of Hell, but of
that fire whereby their cities were destroyed, which was only a deigma of hell
fire, and so (...) shall not signify eternal burning, but utter destruction, to
which is added the consideration of a question, which may be made from Mat.
8.29 whither the Devils themselves, for whom eternal fire was prepared, be yet
cast into it, who are said Iud. 6. and 2. Pet. 2.4. to be but prisoners, and so
not yet under the execution of their doom.

To all this I answer, First, that if the suggestion be true, that such is the
judgment of most Divines (which I acknowledge to have been mine own formerly, but
have changed it since) concerning that place Iud. 7. and their authority deemed
by him that urges it worth the heeding* then is the more united consent of all
Catholic interpreters, none excepted, for the notion of the same phrase in all
other places of far greater authority for the admitting the eternity of that
fire which is asserted in them: and if by those other places the Article be
established, I shall not need contend for (nor should ever have produced) yt
one place of Jude, because some Interpreters, and even mine own former
doubting of that one, can be no prejudice to their consent with me for the many
other, any one of which if it truly conclude the eternity of hell fire, is as
good as a thousand. But then, Secondly, as I do not consent this to have been
the judgment of most Divines, which is said to be; so I now upon better
consideration of the Context, see no reason that could induce me or any to make
that, so as to reject the more literal interpretation. That Sodom and Gomorrah,
and the Cities about them signify the inhabitants of those Cities, is apparent
there by their being affirmed to have given themselves over to fornication,
which sure not the walls but the inhabitants did: and then sure those that
suffered the vengeance of eternal fire, and therein are set forth for an
example or essay, what we Christians following the like sins are to expect, are
not the Walls but the Inhabitants also. By the way, it is not the praeter tense
or sense, or in the aorist, (as when of the Angels v. 6. it is said they kept
not but left, and of these (...) having given themselves over to fornication)
but in the present (...) suffering, either as not at all looking back in this
part of the period to their destruction on earth by fire and brimstone, or else
as to a lasting judgment then began, but still continuing upon them without any
release; they still suffer that vengeance of fire which withal is (...) also,
never likely to have an end. So no good firm ground is there in this
Interpretation, which I remember I had long since out of Socinus, but is not,
that I know of, the resolution of most Divines. As for the question whither the
Devils are yet cast into eternal Hell, there will be no need of discussing it
here, because if for God's wise and just ends they are not so confined thither,
as after the judgment, when there is no farther place for those ends, they
shall be, yet still the souls of the men of Sodom may now suffer in that fire,
and the Devils that are tied to their dark prison (which appears not to be any
other place but that Hell, where the spirits of wicked men are) be ready at
hand to torment them. Having cleared this place, it follows, that as yet no
least probability is produced how (...) in other places should signify any
thing else but eternal torments of them that are cast into it, and the Section
that follows at the top of p. 8. has nothing in it that exacts return, for if
the fire of hell be (...) then it burns everlastingly, and if they that are in
it suffer the judgment of eternal fire, then they must be eternal also, and
that is here affirmed and Rev. 20.10. As for the four considerations that next
follow to evacuate the belief of eternal torments being signified by eternal
Fire, it is certain they have no show of force in them severally; and then
jointly they will have as little. For 1. If the word Fire (in that phrase
(...)) be a Metaphor, as indeed it is not deemed to be the same with our
culinary fire, and it differs from it in that it enlightens not, but leaves the
place dark where it is, yet still it may be really fire to all other the
punitive effects, and no doubt it is so in respect of burning and scorching and
tormenting, or else the Scripture would not so often affirm it of it. 2ly, If the
word (...) do not primarily or perpetually signify everlasting, yet it is not
once found in the new Testament to signify otherwise: the place Jude. 7. is the
only place pretended, and that has bin competently vindicated. 3. Though Fire
be a destructive thing, yet it is not able to annihilate by any its natural
force, and besides it is a cruciating thing, and thus was it in the valley of
Hinnom, from which the Fire of Hell takes its denomination, and thus the beast
and the false prophet are said to be tormented day and night for ever and ever
in it, and then sure it is neither Expression nor Instrument of annihilating
destruction. 4. If everlasting fire be opposed to life Mat. 18.8. yet this
ingages it not, no nor inclines it to signify utter destruction* but the most
unhappy cruciating state which is more contrary to happy life then absolute
annihilation would be, as has formerly been showed; And therefore though
everlasting Fire should be granted to signify everlasting destruction, (as with
any propriety it cannot, Fire being the Instrument of destruction, not
destruction it self) yet in that case everlasting destruction would reasonably
signify as (...) eternal perdition does 2. These. 1.9. and of that we have
already given account, that it signifies notorious judgments here concluding in
the flames of Hell, and that it no way signifies or infers annihilation, but
the contrary to the joys of a blissful life, i. e. the pains of Hell.

For the rendering this phrase more applicable to the desired notion, it is
thought fit to compare it with another like phrase (...) Mar. 9.43, 44, 45. as
that is rendered, that shall not nor never shall be quenched; of which it is
suggested, that it necessarily signifies no more, then that that Fire shall not
go out, till the matter or fuel of it be consumed or destroyed, and thus it is
used Isay 66.24. and that this appears to be the importance of our Saviors
meaning, from other places Mat. 3.12. Luke 3.17. where it is applied to the chaff
and Tares which admit no everlasting duration in the Fire, but are very capable
of utter destruction. To all this I answer, 1. That there is no such affinity
between (...) and (...), that one should regulate the notion of the other; when
they are applied to diverse matters, one to the burning of chaff, the other to the
punishing of wicked men. Or if there be, it may as reasonably hold, that (...)
should be interpreted by (...); and in order to that, the chaff and tares
interpreted of wicked men, which are known to be figuratively expressed by
them, as that (...) should be regulated by (...), and so wicked men thought in
the same manner to be consumed by the fire, as the chaff and tares are. 2ly,
That for (...) if it be granted that it necessarily signifies no more then that
the Fire shall not go out, till the fuel of it be destroyed, yet 1. it as
fairly follows, then it may (when the context requires) very conveniently
signify more; and that 2ly There will be no ground of doubt, whither when it is
applied to those who are affirmed to be tormented in a Lake of Fire day and
night for ever and ever i. e. to wicked men it shall not signify this more,
viz. eternal burning. 3. for the place of Isaiah, I shall appeal to ancient
interpreters; not only whither it may, but whither it do not, signify eternal
fire, or that which is not extinguished for ever. Procopius, I suppose, has on
this prophecy as great a reputation among learned men as any; I shall give you
his sense, that the Prophet in the conclusion of the Prophesy speaks of the
Saints of God (...), etc. Shall pass into the most eminent heavenly City, the
mansion set apart for the kingdom of God, where they shall be for ever serving
God, placed under the great high priest, and they shall all see the destruction
of the wicked, and think what good things they have lost by despising God. Is.
1. Whom they shall behold (...) placed far off from them, (...). You see his
sense of the words, which undoubtedly they will bear, as the description of the
final reward of the pious believing Jews and Heathens on one side, and of the
impious obdurate on the other. And if, as he tells us, some will have it
understood as a prediction of the Jews destruction by the Romans, which were
(...), yet still this interpretation is founded in the supposition, that the
worm that dies not, and the fire that is not quenched, signified an undying
punishment, and as such is used to signify in prophetic style that which is
next degree to absolute eternal; pursuing the Jews wheresoever they are to be
met with, without any the least mitigation or mercy. 4ly, For the use of the
same words Matthew. 3. and Luke 3. of the chaff and tares, it is sufficient to say
that, those parabolical expressions being undoubtedly set to denote the wicked,
the word (...), which properly signifies that which never is or shall be
quenched, being applied to the tares in the parable, but to the wicked in the
application of the parable, must be allotted such a notion in either, as the
matter requires; and so though spoken of Tares, it be not taken in its full
amplitude of signification, but in that inferior degree which is competible to
the burning of Tares or chaff to ashes; yet being applied to the wicked, the
thing signified by those tares, it may still abide in its full amplitude, and
signify the tormenting and not consuming, and so the everlastingnesse of that
Fire. And indeed if it be argumentative in the disputer, that chaff admits no
everlasting duration in the Fire, from which it may be deemed conclusible that
(...) applied to that, is not unquenchable fire, then it will be as well worth
observing that wicked men are capable of everlasting duration in Fire, and
therefore (...) applied to them (as it is Mar. 9.43, 44, 45. signifies
everlasting Fire.

Next for (...), that that may be reconciled with the objecters notion, He
notes first, The opposition of it to everlasting life, Matthew. 25.45. which may
incline it to signify everlasting death. 2. That (...) does not by absolute
necessity signify everlasting. 3. That (...) does not necessarily signify
tormenting punishment but may be understood of a privative punishment, and then
death being a punishment, ever lasting death may be truly called everlasting
punishment. To these I answer, to the first, that the opposition to everlasting
availes nothing; everlasting life being undoubtedly everlasting bliss, and then
everlasting misery is most directly opposite to that. To the Second, That (...)
spoken of that which begins after the day of judgment must denote such a
duration as is proportionable to the (...) following that, as (...) spoken in
relation to any other age, whither to the year of Jubilee, or the age of the
Jewish state, or the age of this world simply or the Christian age, must be
commensurate to that age to which it refers, and therefore (...) there, being
consequent to the judgment of the great day described in that Chapter, must in
all reason be of the same duration as (...) in the same place. To the third
that (...) generally signifies positive punishment, not mulct, as (...) and
perhaps (...) does; however the reason cannot hold, that if death be a
punishment then eternal death may be truly called everlasting punishment, because
though death should infer annihilation wherein there is nothing, ergo no
punishment, yet Death it self is something, and is joined with real pains as
well as privations: but of those or any other reality the state of annihilation
is not capable; and then to say everlasting punishment, though that were
supposed to signify no more then everlasting poena damni, yet must it be
founded in everlasting being, for no man can be punished everlastingly by
deprivation of bliss that has not a being at all, to be thus capable of
devesting or deprivation: for non entis nulla est affectio. But to this it is
replied, that the text says not the wicked shall be everlastingly punished,
but they shall go into a punishment, and that punishment shall be everlasting;
and such is everlasting death. To this I answer; that there is no ground of
this distinction in the Text, which says together, they shall depart into
everlasting punishment which is certainly the very form that would be used, if
the (...) were designed to be never so positively punitive, if it were into the
furnace of fire, where there is weeping and gnashing of teeth. Secondly, it is
replied, that a man may suffer or be punished by that which he does not
actually feel, and many attempts are made for the proof of this. But it is
sufficient in a word to say, that none of the proofs come home to the state of
annihilation whereof only our question is. A mad man or fool may suffer though
they discern it not; a dead man, who is not annihilated but lives in his better
part, may suffer in his memory, children, friends here; much more while he
lives may he without folly desire to avert such sufferings, but he that is not,
is not capable of any of these: and if I were sure, that to morrow I should be
nothing, no real consideration of my self (but either present care of others
good, or perhaps irrational phansy) would incite me to make any provision for
after that morrow. So again privation of possible felicity is to any one that
has being a real punishment, because he is a looser, though not sensible of
what he has lost; but to him that is not, it is an absolute nullity, and were a
man sure to be annihilate, the fear of this were unreasonable, for that time
when he should be nothing, and the only thing that renders it reasonable now is
because he has a being, and hopes to continue it, or (whatsoever he is seduced
to believe to the contrary) yet still he desires it, and as long as he has
life, may well desire, and cannot choose but wish all the accomplishments and
even images of it: and at once fear the loss of life, and all felicities which
either do or may accompany life. But still this man's being subject to this
fear, because capable of the causes of it, is no proof of his being punished,
who is supposed not to be: he that has a being, and desires the continuance of
it, suffers when he loses it; but he that has no being, is not to be
esteemed by these measures, any more then he that has never yet been, is this
day punished by not being created, or conceived till to morrow. Nor to this is
it any way consequent, as is objected, that the desire of everlasting life
should not be a reasonable desire. For though it be reasonable to fear the
privation of a reasonable desire, yet this fear is only incident to him that
has a being, and he that has no being cannot have desire, how reasonable
soever it is for him, that has a being, to have it.

The Sadduces had a being when they desired praise, and though they believed no
immortality of souls, yet they believed durability of memory, and memory was a
kind of image of life; and they that despaired of the body might take some
content in the shadow; but even that a mere shadow and phansy too, which also
would be at an end, whenever their being were supposed to be so. So again the
same Sadducee whilst he lived might fear death, because he enjoyed somewhat
which he was unwilling to loose, and because death it self though it were
thought to enter him on a state of nothingness, yet was it self something, both
respectu sensus and damni. And beside the Sadducee could hardly be Sadducee
enough in the point, so as not to have some fear of the contrary: however he
still had a being, and was to be unwilling to loose it. But that having no
being should be real punishment to him that is not, is above my comprehension.
As to what is said in the objecter's person p. 10. at the beginning, that if he
believed annihilation, he would yet as much fear the punishment, as he desires
everlasting life, I shall grant it on this presumption; that he now believes he
shall enjoy everlasting life: but then he that thus desires and fears, is
supposed to exist, and to him it is granted that deprivations are penal; and
again, though he would fear that, yet sure he would never fear (...) in the
notion of eternal sensible punishments and scorchings of fire. I know not
whether all that I have said of the nature of the privative punishments be
maturely said or no, as non entis non est affectio, so I have always found it
hard to satisfy my self concerning any thing of that which is not. Only I rest
my self in this, that my mistake, if it be such, is sure of so nice a making,
that I cannot my self discern it, and therefore it is not to be imagined that
the truth of Christ's speech should hang on so weak a string as it must, if by
(...) Christ meant no more then eternal deprivation of being. For if that which
is not, cannot be eternally punished, how can the wicked be said to depart to
eternal punishment when they are annihilated?

For everlasting judgment I acknowledge it signifies no more then the former
imported; and so is to be concluded by the discourse on that. It Is the
adjudging to a state which shall last to all eternity, or a sentence, wherein
the eternity of him that is judged, is concerned.

Next for their worm never dying, I have three things to add, First, that the
worm in dead bodies devoureth very slowly and leasurely, and so is as fit as
any thing could have been to express lingering torments. Secondly, that the worm
devoureth not the whole body, the bones and firmer pars are not liable to her
malice; and so it is most unfit to express utter annihilation of the whole.
Thirdly, that the worm being peculiar to dead and putrified bodies, is a most
lively representation of gnawings and miseries after death; and then when
instead of mortal worms, which are the only instruments of gnawing on dead
bodies, there is somewhat else threatened by Christ, which is fit to be
expressed by the style of an immortal worm, nothing could have been more
adaequate for the expressing the eternity of torments in hell; those especially
of a gnawing tormenting conscience, which, if it be but the conjecture of
Divines, is, as appears, a very probable conjecture. Of the meaning of the
place in the Prophet Is. 66.24. I have formerly spoken, and acknowledged it the
fountain from which our Savior Mar. 9. derived it, but have showed how little
is gained from thence toward prooving it a present, because a visible,
destruction. Abraham is supposed to behold Dives in hell, but that proves not
that Dives his punishmens were present of this world. Procopius has showed,
how the pious in heaven might behold the punishments of the wicked in another
world, and in what sense to be said to come forth to worship before the Lord,
and go forth, and look etc. And indeed if it be unquestionable, that in
Christ's speech the future miseries of the wicked are thus expressed (as the
disputer himself yields) there can be no difficulty to understand the words so
in Isaiah also. If therefore the place in Isaiah, so referred to the future
torments of the wicked after the day of judgment; if the expression of future
punishment by fire and worms, proportionable to the several customs of
disposing dead bodies by interring and burning, was frequent among the Jews (as
the disputer grants to the force of the other Texts which Grotius quotes) if
the addition of the never quenched fire take away all ambiguities imaginable in
the worm, and incline it more strongly to those punishments which are elsewhere
expressed by eternal fire: and if they, to whom Christ spoke, the Jews which
generally agreed to the Pharisees opinion of the eternity of another life, so
understood the phrase, and Christ speaking agreeable to their opinion and
interpretations of Isaiah, gave no least cause of conjecture or imagination,
that he meant the words in any other sense, then it was sure they would
understand him; what cause of doubting can remain in this matter? None
certainly from the subsequent words, v. 49. for adhering to that interpretation
of (...) for consumption of the sacrifice, as in the Holocausts, to which the
wicked are fitly compared, there follows no more, then that the whole of the
wicked, bodies and souls shall like the Holocaust be cast into the Fire, and
burnt, or destroyed there; but in what sense of destruction, whither in that of
annihilation, (which is not competible to the holocausts, and wherein it is
never found to be taken in the Sacred dialect when the Heavens are said to
vanish or melt, as Salt Is. 51.6. this is not for the Heavens to be
annihilated, and the (...) used for vestimenta detrita seu evanida, Jer. 38.11.
were not annihilated) or in the other, having lost all the advantageous parts
and effects of life, and being engaged in a most sad estate far worse then not
being, is not so much as intimated in the phrase, any farther then by the
conjunction thereof with the Eternal never dying Worm and Fire, it is
reasonably to be interpreted; and that is quite contrary to the disputers
interests.

Next then for (...) Jude 13. 2 Pet. 2.17. there is no pretense that it should
in these places be meant for death any more then (...) is 2 Pet. 2.4. It
signifies the sad uncomfortablenesse of that state, which, being in respect of
the torments expres'd by Fire in other places, has not yet the one comfort of
ordinary Fire belonging to it, viz. lightsomnesse, but contrariwise (...), as
durable as the flames. The Texts produced Job. 10.21, 22. 1 Samuel 2.9. Eccl.
11.8. Ps. 88.7, 11, 12. Job. 17.13. Eccl. 6.14. are Pertinent to prove what
they designed, that darkness denotes the State after this life: but that no
way prejudices the use of it for a positive state and not that of annihilation:
for for that it is not used in any of those places. Yet that it shall not here
be taken in that sense which in those places belongs to it there are these
reasons, 1. Because the New Testament most explicitly affirming a resurrection
from that Old Testaments darkness; does yet threaten this (...), which
therefore must commence after the resurrection, and so cannot be that death
from whence men rise in the resurrection, of which those Old Testament places
were understood. 2ly, Because in the same Chapter 2 Pet. 2.4. it is said of
Angels (...), where (...) being applied to Angels, it cannot signify that
death, as if 'twere applied to living men, it might. 2. Being joined with
chains, it thereby seems to signify some positive state, but especially 3.
Being joined with (...) it must denote that state, which all sorts of men,
Heathens, as well as Jews and Christians, understood by Tartarus, that sure is
a place of suffering after death. 3ly. Because though there be no further
mention then of the privative part of Hell, in the (...), yet in the other
places of the N. T. where the same is mentioned under the name of (...), the
utter or utmost darkness, the farthest recession from lightsome or blisfull
life imaginable, there is joined with it weeping and gnashing of Teeth, Matt.
8.12. and 22.13. and 25.30. which sufficiently differenceth it from the notion
for death.

As for the places in the Revelation, it is granted to be reasonable to
interpret them according to prophetic style, and not exact them to strict
literal interpretation; accordingly as Jer. 7.20. and Is. 34. 4.10. signify
utter final vastations, (as appears by their smoke going up for ever and ever,
lying wast and none passing through it, from generation to generation, for ever
and ever, and the not quenching of Gods wrath, but burning upon man and upon
beast) so where the like circumstances either enforce, or but incline, the
interpretation of passages in the Revelation, I shall make no scruple to yield,
as Revel. 18.18. speaking there of the ruin of Babylon it is most reasonable to
interpret to that sense the smoke of her burning, by her meaning that great
City in the end of the verse, and so again chap. 19.3. her smoke rose up for
ever and ever, Heathen Rome was destroyed, so as never to be rebuilt again;
there is nothing in the context's that inclines to any more then this. But then
for Rev. 14.9, 10, 11. I cannot thus yield. There, to deter all from yielding
to Idolatry in the least degree, worshipping the beast and his image etc. the
intermination goes out thus, if any man shall do thus verse. 9. the same shall
drink etc. verse. 10. where the bitter wine of God mixed, unmixt in the cup of
his wrath, is properly such a vengeance as has 1. No mixture or allay of
mercy. 2. All the embittering spices added to it, and so fitly signifies
deprivation of life and all that is precious here, and very much more of
bitterness after it. And this is further enforced by their being (not consumed)
but tormented with Fire and Brimstone (not here as Sodom was in the presence of
men, but) in the presence of the Holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb.
i. e. by the sentence of Christ with his assembly of Angels in judgment, and so
verse. 11. the smoke (not simply as Rev. 19.3. nor of their burning or consuming
as in Isay it was, but) of their torment ascends up for ever and ever; and
they have no rest day nor night (quite contrary to death whereby men rest from
their labors, and to annihilation much more, which is a perfect cessation and
that eternal, as opposite as was possible to having no rest day nor night) so
chap. 19.20. where it is said of the beast and the false prophet, the Roman
Idolatry and Magic etc. (i. e.) the eminent supporters of the former by Magic
and auguries, the principal factors for the holding up the Heathen Worship,
Apollonius Tyanaeus etc. (See note on Rev. 13. g.h.i.k.) that they were cast
alive into a Lake burning with Fire and Brimstone, the meaning in all reason
must be, that they were from this life sentenced to be cast into exquisite
torments, not that they were utterly destroyed or consumed, but as infallibly
removed to that place of Torments, as if they had gone down quick Bodies and
Souls together into Hell.

Here indeed is nothing said of the perpetuity of those Torments, but that is
expressly set down chap. 20.10. not only as far as concerns the Devil that was
to bear them company, and was cast into the Lake where they are (which by the
way must either infer that the Devils who are not deemed to enter on their
full punishment till the day of Doom, shall then also be annihilated, or that
the wicked who are then in the same condition with the Devils shall not be
consumed or annihilated) but particularly as to them (...) the Beast and the
Prophet shall be tormented for ever and ever. And if you shall demand, why I
said not this thus particularly in the Paraphrase and Annotations on the places
of the Revelation? I answer that it was not agreeable to my design on that
Book, which was only to set down the grand lines and branches of that obscure
Prophetic Writing, and not more nicely to descend to every minute expression
in it.

Where it is said page 12. l. 8. That to apply any passages in the Revel. to
that which is to follow after the last judgment, is not so Prophetical and
therefore not so probable a sense; I answer that all that is future (as surely
all that follows the last judgment is) may well be ingredient in a Prophecy
and so in this probably enough, if either speaking of vengeance on wicked men
this be added over and above their visible portion (for that sure is very fit
in a Christian Prophecy, when wicked men often thrive very prosperously here,
'till the day of full iniquity and their accounts comes, and then they die often
but as other men, and would not deterr any man from following their steps, if
we were not admonisht that after death they must meet with a dismal Portion) or
speaking of the end of the World and the day of doom, the several allotments of
men be there seasonably mentioned also, as we see it is in Rev. 20.12, 13, 14,
15.

As for the last reserve, that if the punishment here described be to be
understood of that which follows the last Judgment, yet no expression used in
any of those Texts does necessarily signify an absolute eternity of positive
Torments; I answer that undoubtedly some do. I instance in Rev. 20.10: as it
has been formerly enlarged on, ( day and night for ever and ever expresses an
absolute eternity, as much as any words of man can do; (...)) does plainly
denote positive torments, and referring peculiarly to a rack, does thereby
denote the kind of positive torments to be such, as are not designed to ending
the life, but to continuing it in great pains, for so we know the Rack is
among men.

Now for the exceptions to Rev. 20.10. I must add somewhat. 1. it is suggested
that that seems not to be spoken of the last final judgment. I grant it is not,
but of the hour of death, whereon I suppose those wicked men's Souls cast into
the Fire of Hell, and never rescued from thence, till Body and Soul together at
the day of doom being joined in those torments, they are shut up thither to all
eternity. Secondly, It Is suggested that it seems not to be meant of Hell (i.
e.) Gehenna, into which none were ever cast alive i. e. before the first death.
To this I answer, that to be cast alive into Hell is a phrase like to that of
going down quick into Hell, used of them whom the earth swallowed up. Wherein
it is more then possible that such notorious sinners might go, Bodies and Souls
together, to Hell, without any previous separation by death; by the same
analogy whereby we believe that Enoch and Elias went up, bodies and souls, into
heaven without seeing death; and whereby we believe the same of those that
shall be found alive at Christ's coming, both wicked and Godly. But then,
secondly, if this be not certain enough to be adhered to, then the phrase will
signify as suddenly and really to be cast into those Flames, and there to be
tormented, as they could be imagined to be, if bodies and souls together, they
should be cast alive thither; and so this is a direct prejudice to the sleeping
of their souls, or receiving any interval of rest from their passing out of
this life, and their entering into the torments of hell.

Of the places in the Apocalypse some things are added, to the taking off from
their force. First, a desperation of any certain understanding of that book. To
which I answer, that it is but a panick and popular fear, which is the author of
that desperation, and keeping men from the study of it, makes it necessarily
unintelligible; whereas First, there be many repeted passages of Christ in it,
designed on purpose to excite men to the studying of it. Secondly, there are
evident characters, which serve as keys to the understanding of it, and
nothing but the seeking and fancying depths and mysteries in it, has made it
so mysterious: the meaning nearest to literal, and such, as by comparing it
with other prophecies, appears to be the one prophetical signification of each
passage, will be found to be the truest; and they that strein higher, and seek
farther off, to find what was never intended by the inspirer, or the
Amanuensis, are the men that have made this Prophecy obscure, which would
otherwise be as perspicuous as any one of the greater Prophets of the Old
Testament. Secondly, when it is suggested, that the places for interminable
pains are but two or three, and those opposed to as many hundreds, which are
to be alleged against this sense; I answer, that as few or as many as they
are, (it matters not for number, one affirmation of God's will establish a
truth) First, they accord with many others in writings not obscure or
prophetic. Secondly, there is no one (much less many hundreds) producible to
the contrary sense, as has hitherto appeared by examining all such as were
pretended to be opposite, but were found very reconcilable with the sense.
Thirdly, when the obscurity of the writer is again mentioned, that has been
already spoken to on the first place.

Concerning the reasons which are used to secure the places for eternal life
for to signify that, though eternal torments be not allowed to be properly
eternal, I have little to say, because I fully acknowledge that importance of
the word eternal, whether to bliss or woe. And I think it has already
appeared, that there are not these reasons of difference between them as now
are mentioned. For, first, as there are no texts in the Gospel which seem to
oppose the absolute sense of eternity in the promises, so those that were
thought to seem to oppose the absolute eternity of the threats, having been
brought to trial have been found very light; and, secondly, the doctrine of
eternal torments truly stated and vindicated from the mistakes by men
introduced into the doctrine, has appeared most credible also to those that
believe the Gospel; and as necessary to God's justice as he is Rector of the
Universe, and as agreeable to his goodness, who earnestly averts their dying
that will needs die, as the eternal promises are reconcilable to all the
attributes of God. Thirdly, that as there are negatives that irrefragably
confirm the truth of the article concerning eternal life, so there are
affirmatives and negatives both (each is therefore is not quenched) that as
irrefragably establish the truth of the doctrine of eternal torments. As for
the Philosophical doctrine of the immortality of the soul, I yield it can
import no more, then either its not being corruptible from any outward
principles, nor destructible from any created power; I yield it (for all that)
destructible by God, but have formerly answered how that place Mat. 10.28. has
nothing to do with his will or purpose to annihilate it.

Lastly, as for tradition, as that signifies the suffrages of all the men in
the world, Heathens of all sorts, Jews of all sects, Mahometans, Christians
heretical as well as orthodox, it matters not though this doctrine be not
deduced by such absolutely universal tradition. I yield that many Heathens
there were that believed it not, that the Sadduces denied it, that the Jews now
adays care for none but themselves, and so make no provision for other men,
that there have been Origenist Heretics, and some such as Augustine mentions
Enchir: c. 12^ de civit: Dei. l. 21. cap. 17.18. ('it is no news that there
should have been false teachers and believers in the world.) But that
Augustine, who is confessed frequently to assert the doctrine, and frequently to
defend it against adversaries, should yet be believed to doubt, lib. de sermon.
Dom. in mont. tom. 4 super Mat. 5.25.26. I am not apt to give heed to it.
Because, first, if the same Augustine should be so uncertain and unconstant, he
were little worth heeding on either side. Secondly, there would be reason to
resolve, that the place, where the doubting is found, was either not written by
him, who wrote elsewhere so contrarily, or were written by him before he had
competently considered the grounds, whereon afterward he establishes his
acknowledgments of the truth. But the truth is, I discern not how those words [
neque ita hoc dixerim, ut diligentiorem tractationem videar ademisse, de poenis
peccatorum quomodo in Sacris dicantur aeternae] should be interpreted, so as to
express him a doubter in this matter. In other circumstances he might well give
men liberty of expression, yet himself never have the least suspicion or doubt
of the truth of the main Article. It remains therefore that the Scripture, as
that has been found consonant and agreeable to all other places of its self,
and as it has been interpreted by all learned Orthodox men of all ages, and as
from the Apostles time to this day their doctrine has been delivered down in
the Creed of the Apostles, and other occasional explications thereof, does as
evidently affirm the eternity of the torments of the wicked on the one side, as
the eternity of the joys and bliss of the Godly on the other side; and that as
far as the Catholic Church in all ages has extended, in opposition to the
heterodox and haeretical, so far the tradition of this Article for eternal
pains is universal, and therefore in no reason to be doubted of by a meek Son
of this persecuted Church, which professes readily and uniformly to receive
all Catholic Tradition, truly so called, as that includes the writings and
preachings of the Apostles. Having gone thus far, and at last arrived to the
conclusion, in the same posture (with some intermissions) of the Chair, wherein
the Gout had fastened me; I now find the use of my foot returned again, and so
take my leave of this paper and my chair together, and by the length of it
suppose I have your full leave so to do. When you have surveyed it as
deliberately as you desire, I desire that you will return mine own to me, not
weighing too severely what was written thus hastily. But remember, if any one
text of Scripture, or testification of the Churches sense of all times
(including the Apostles) be producible, it is sufficient for the establishing
this truth, though many passages produced, or defenses made for the farther
confirming of it, should not be found rigorously Concludent or Demonstrative.
The God of Heaven, Author of all Grace and Truth be now and ever with you.

SIR
IN your account of the eternity of infernal punishments you make them consist
in the persevering appetition and aversation of those things (then impossible
to be obtained or avoided) which formerly in via men have desired and averted.
To this stating of this matter much what the like with Sr Ken: Digbies and Mr
Whites, I have more to object then is fit for a Letter. Some few heads of
Exceptions I shall briefly note to you. First, I see not how this agrees with
the nature of the judgment to come: the giving and executing a sentence upon
wicked men. This we are every where taught in Scripture and our Creed: But your
stating, which only leaves men with those desires and aversions wherein they
lived here, and so die, without sentencing them to any other punishment but
what they thus bring with them, and so is already inflicted on them, and needs
no Devils to execute it, seems not reconcilable herewith. Secondly, the Matter
of this sentence is expressed in Scripture to be a lake of Fire and Brimstone,
into which they are cast, which must be a very strange figurative expression,
if it signify no more then their own voluntary acts, appetitions, and
aversations. Thirdly, it is manifest, that those diseases which precede many
Men's deaths, do change their appetitions and aversations. The luxurious Man on
his sick Bed has not those vehement desires of Weomen, delicate meats, etc.
which he had in his health: Why then should I think that after Death his
appetites, of what he desired in via, viz. in his life and health, should
continue to him? Nay, 4. When Souls are divested of those Bodies which were the
necessary Instruments, and also the fomenters of those carnal sins; and again
when the body before its reunion is so changed as not to be sustein'd, as in
via it is by eating and drinking, it is not imaginable it should retain those
natural desires which in via it had: And when they no more marry in Hell then
Heaven, and are as equal to evil Angels, as the Saints in Heaven are to good
ones, and the natural end of all carnal desires ceasing; it is not imaginable
God should continue those desires to them for ever. Or if any should so
conceive, many strange wild consequences unfit to name, would be equally
probable and equally unimaginable. 5. By this stating, the loss of Heaven will
from hence only be penal, that Men desired Heaven in via, or judged it fit to
be desired. And if so, it will be no punishment to them that never thought of
it at all, as infidels, or despised it (as they did all spiritual joys, and
thought it not worth desiring) as they that placed all their appetites on
carnal and material pleasures; which are the worst sort of men, who in
consequence hereunto must be least punished in Hell poena damni.

Having said thus much against your Scheme, I owe my self the pains of adding a
word or too for the defense of the way that I have used in the Practical
Catechism, viz. by considering the option given to us by God, wherein you seem
to me not to have observed that, on which the chief weight of my account was
designed to lie.

That God proposed to Men life and death, blessing and cursing, eternal joys
and eternal pains, as the Rector of the Universe; I take for granted; and so
do you, as an Article of our Faith: So that of the an sit the question is not,
but considering the transitory short pleasures of sin, the only question is,
How eternal pains are with any justice proportioned to them: and to that the
answer is, Not that they are proportioned to them, but that there is no need
they should be, because God having proposed the joys of Heaven, and (much
more) immunity from these pains upon terms put absolutely in our power, it is
merely our own fault, not imputable to the decree of God, if we fall under
those hardest pains. The extremity of which was primarily designed, as by all
prudent Lawgivers punishments are, to deter men from those sins which are
fenced with so thorny an hedge; not that they may be inflicted on any, but that
all may be kept innocent: and in this sense it is ordinarily observed, that the
everlasting Fire which is threatened men, was prepared for the Devil and his
Angels. Yet when such threats are entered into those laws, whereby the Universe
is governed; it is just and reasonable that they should be also actually
performed on the disobedient: else it were as good, nay better to all political
ends, that they had never been made or promulgate. And if still, when they come
to be inflicted, they appear to be hard, or above the proportion of the
offense, there are yet other ways of superseding that exception beside the
evacuating the decree: viz. The several branches, of the (...) all which the
Gospel has provided in this matter.

First, That those which we could not (either by Physical or moral
possibility) avoid, should not be charged upon us to this condemnation, as
Original sin; sins of Weakness, Ignorance, sudden surprise,
Indeliberation, etc.

Secondly, That know deliberate voluntary sins, if timely retracted by
repentance, Humiliation, Confession, change of mind shall not fall under it.

Thirdly, That God gives sufficient grace to avoid all willful sin, and again
sufficient grace to repent, when it has been committed; and inflicts it not
till he sees men go on obstinately, and that they will not repent.

Fourthly, That he calls, and warns, and importunes them to consult their own
safety, to make use of his grace timely, and not obstinately to harden their
hearts against their own mercy, and so to perish in despite of mercy.

Fifthly, That he offers not only deliverance from these torments, but over and
above, eternal joys upon so easy terms of so moderate nay desirable
performances, that they which will neglect so great Salvation proposed to them,
with so many advantages and concurrence of all rational motives; and finally
make so mad a choice as to take Hell as it were by violence, cannot but be
thought worthy to take their portion in that lake be it never so punitive and
endless: Because though in respect of that one sin (the short pleasure that
comes in to them by sin compared with intensive endless flames) there is no
proportion, yet 1. In respect of their obstinacy and unexcusablenesse. 2. In
respect of God's tenderness, using all wise means of moderating the rigor of
his Law by the Gospel (though not by utter abrogating his Laws, which becomes
not either a just or wise Lawgiver, or Rector of the Universe) all show of
Injustice is removed: particularly by the second taken alone, (much more in
union with the first and third) the rule being owned by all rational men
volenti non fit injuria, be the evil never so great, it is just they should
have it, that finally make it their choice, (so does the persevering
Impenitent) and that not only an hasty passionate choice as Nero's Mother's,
Occidat modo imperet, (which yet Historians observe to have brought her death
justly upon her) but a deliberate, stanch, obstinate constant choice, when
their Creator, and Redeemer, and Sanctifyer have used all prudent probable
means to gain them to better counsels and choices, but all in vain, they die
because they will die: When yet they are often warned (and expostulated with) of
the irrationalnesse of that will or choice. It Is true, when they come to suffer
their own choices, they are far from liking them (as Xiphilin observed of
Neroe's Mother in the forementioned case) and then it is likely would fly from
them, call to the mountains to cover them from the wrath of the Lamb: But
their choices being primarily terminated in the pleasant sins, and but
consequentially in the pains annexed to them by God's Law, 'twill be as
unreasonable that they which have chosen the former should be freed from the
latter, as that he that has bought a Commodity at a price, and bound himself
to a day of payment, should, after he has enjoyed and spent the Commodity, be
excused from paying the price of it by pretending it was not really worth so
much, when it appears by his bargain that he himself thus valued it, and
willingly took it at this price, and has now changed his mind on no other
consideration, but because the enjoyment, for which alone he valued it, is
past, and none but the payment behind, which considered by it self, every man
acknowledges to be the ungrateful part; and so he did when yet on intuition of
the more pleasant he made choice of it.

I have thus far enlarged to give you a clearer view of the force of the option
in this matter, then I can discern you to have had of it; and consequently to
show you the insufficiency of the reason on which you reject it, when you say,
that upon this Hypothesis it should seem to be concluded, that eternal life is
owing to Piety ex justitia. But to this I reply: 1. That it were no news from
St Paul's words [ That God the righteous Judge shall give the Crown of
righteousness to all that keep the faith etc.] to conclude that that Crown is
some way due to Piety ex justitia. But then Secondly, My Argument from the
Option has no least need of so affirming, but becomes much the stronger the
less that be affirmed; For the less rewardable in it self our Piety is, the
more mercy and superabundant goodness it is in God thus to decree the
rewarding it; and the more undeserved that Mercy, and the easier the condition
of it, the more Criminous is the guilt of those that despise and contemn it,
and prefer sin, and impenitence, and eternal death before it.

An Accordance OF St PAUL with St JAMES, in the great point of Faith and Works.

By The most Learned, Reverend, and Pious Dr HENRY HAMMOND.

OXFORD, Printed by H. HALL Printer to the University, for RIC: ROYSTON, and
RI: DAVIS. 1665.

Of Faith and Works.
HE that says with St Paul, a man is justified by faith and not by works, and
to reconcile St James with St Paul, affirms, that good works are the effect of
true faith, means either that true faith, where e're it is, is able to produce
good works, though it do not always actually produce them; or else, that it
actually and necessarily produces them. If the former be his meaning, then I
conceive it true in some degree, but not pertinent to his purpose of
reconciling St. James with St. Paul, because faith may be able to produce them,
and yet never actually produces them; and so the man that is supposed to be
justiffied by faith, never be able to show his works, which St. James requires
of him, and consequently his faith be a dead faith, i. e. not able to justify.
But if the latter be his meaning; that true faith, wheresoever it is, actually
and necessarily produces good works, I conceive it false; yet can I not
dispute against him in those terms, by instancing in any particular to the
contrary. Because he has a guard or hold for himself to fortify him against
any assault, by affirming to any such instance of mine, where good works were
not produced, that that faith was not true faith; which yet if he should be put
to prove, he would have no other reason to confirm it, but only because it
produces not good works; being ready, if it did produce good works, to
acknowledge it true faith; which how guilty it is of those two faults in
disputing, circulus and petitio principii, I think is manifest to any. Yet
being by this Sophism of his interdicted this way or proceed^ng, I have but one
way of arguing left me; first, to demand his definition of true faith, and
whatsoever definition he gives, to prove that faith, in that notion of his, is
the cause of good works, at the most, but as a man is the cause of a child, a
true perfect, univocal cause of the effect, when the effect is produced; but
yet such a one, as might have suspended that action, by which it was produced,
and so might have been as truly a man without the actual producing of that
effect, as he is now, he has produced it: that is, that faith is a rational or
moral, not natural agent, working freely, not necessarily.

To bring this operation to practice, I will suppose this definition of faith
to be given me (which by them that affirm good works to be an effect of faith
is ordinarily given) that it is a fiducial assent to the promises of Christ.
Where that I may not mistake him, I must first demand, whether he conceives
these promises, which are the object of his faith, to be absolute, or
conditional. If he affirm them absolute, made to men's persons, or individual
Entityes, without respect to their qualifications or demeanors, then surely
that faith, which supposes all kind of qualifications of the subject so
unnecessary, will never so much as move me to produce good works, because I may
as well be saved without them, the promises being supposed without condition;
and therefore he that affirms good works to avail nothing in the business of
attaining to salvation, cannot, without contradicting himself, say, that his
faith must necessarily produce good works, if it be a saving faith: for sure
all that necessity proceeds from a believing, that without good works there is
no salvation to be had; which if it be not believed, that necessity cease.
But if he affirm the promises, which are the object of his faith, to be
conditional, then I must ask, what he takes this condition to be, either faith
alone, or good works alone, or faith and good works together: if faith alone,
then (beside the ridiculousness of that, in making the believing that I shall
be saved, the only ground of my believing I shall be saved) the former
inconvenience recurrs again, that that faith which supposes faith only to be a
condition of the promises, will find good works as unnecessary, as that faith
which supposed the promises to be absolute, and so will never incline me to
them neither. If he affirm the condition of the promises to be good works alone
(I mean by good works all other graces besides faith, contrition, amendment of
life, charity* holiness etc.) then he acknowledges, that these good works are
of themselves simply required of a man that is, or will be a believer; and so
that they are no necessary effect of faith, for if they were, it would be
enough to require faith alone, and they would undoubtedly follow without
requiring. For I conceive it ridiculous to make the condition of an Indenture
something that is necessarily annexed to the possession of the demise. If he
affirm faith and good works neither single, but both together to be the total
adaequate condition of the promises, which St. Paul calls faith consummate by
charity, St. James, faith made perfect by works, St. Paul again (...) (which
certainly is the truth) then first I must admonish him, that his fiducial
assent, by which he defines faith, must not signify a believing with reliance,
that he is one of them that shall be partakers of what is promised, which they
are wont to call special faith, or particular application; for that must either
suppose them to have performed the condition, and so good works in them (yea
and faith) must be before faith; or else it is the believing confidently of a
lie, it being absolutely false, that the thing promised belongs to any that
has not performed the condition.

But his fiducial assent, if it be a tolerable definition of faith, must be
(answerable to the promises) only this, a believing and relying conditional;
that he shall be partaker of what is promised, that is, a believing (and
depending on it) that God will not fail him, if he fail not God; that God will
give him heaven, if he perform sincere obedience, and rely upon the gift of
Christ, not on any merit of his obedience for the attaining of it. Now to say
the truth, this fiducial assent thus expressed (and none but this) may truly be
affirmed to be a most powerful motive to me to produce good works; but then it
is as true, that it is as powerful a motive to me to rely on the gift of
Christ, and so in that respect faith may be said to produce good works, faith
may also be said to produce that which they call faith, i. e. the believing,
that if I obey and rely, I shall be saved, is a motive thus to produce actual
relying; and in this sense I will acknowledge both (if he, with whom I dispute,
will thank me for it.) But then, secondly, it follows not that that which is a
powerful motive, is a cause necessarily producing, because that motive is but a
moral motive, persuading not enforcing, and man by corruption, or by some
prevailing temptation may resist that motive, and I think 'twould be no Paradox
to say, that some men have made no doubt of the truth of God's conditional
promises, i. e. have verily persuaded themselves, that if they served God
sincerely, they shall be saved, and yet quite neglected God's service: and if
it be objected, that they want the fiduciall, though they have the assent, and
that if they had the affiance, they would assuredly produce good works; I
answer, that by that affiance they mean either absolute assurance that they
shall be saved, (and that, if it be not an error, supposes good works, if it
be, produces them not) or else a conditional affiance; and then again I affirm
of that, that it is no more then what I expressed by making no manner of doubt,
but if they serve God sincerely, they shall be saved; which though I believe to
be a most powerful motive to obedience, yet I conceive not a necessary
irresistible cause, (because it is only a moral motive) nay nor that that
always produces the effect. First, because the foolish virgins had as much of
this as the wise, for ought we see; and after the door is shut come as
confidently, Lord Lord open to us, and yet it seems did not watch and make
ready their Lamps, which was the act of obedience required of them; and the
want of it forfeited their hopes. 2. Because the unprofitable servant that
professes he knew that God reaped where he sowed not, yet hid the Talent in a
Napkin, put it not out to the exchangers. 3. Because the exhortations of Christ
and the Apostles are generally to good works, as well as to faith, nay much
more frequently, which argues to me that faith does not necessarily produce
good works, and they that are supposed to have faith are exhorted to add to
their faith virtue, 2. Pet. 1.5. which (if Faith were a necessary cause of
Works) were all one as to exhort the Fire to burn, the Water to moysten etc.
4. Because there is a difference observed in Scripture between a working and a
non working Faith, and the privileges are bestowed only on the first, by which
it is plain, that it is possible for it not to work. 5. Because faith is said
to be made perfect by works Jam. 2.22. which sure an agent cannot be said to be
by producing an effect, which it cannot but produce; as the act of Humectation
adds no degree of perfection to the water. Nay it is a general rule, that the
producing of what effect soever adds no perfection to the cause, save only
relative; as the begetting of a Son adds only the relation of a Father, but
nothing else more then he was before; it rather supposes him perfect before,
which is the importance of the Logic axiom, effectus est extra naturam causae.
All that can truly and in propriety of speech be said of Faith in this matter,
is this; that Faith is so strong a motive to obedience, that if it be drawn as
a Weapon to the purpose, and used as it should, it would in reason out-ballance
all the contrary temptations to disobedience: and if the will, which has the
casting voice, give its suffrage, as in reason it ought, it shall then
infallibly produce obedience* but yet not irresistibly, because that will being
still a free faculty at least to evil, may after all the proposal of motives
either suspend its Action, or else do that which it should not. For sure it is
an error of Socinus to affirm cognitionem rerum pulchrarum aut turpium, quales
praeter alias sunt res honestae and vitiosae; harum odium, illarum amorem
necessario gignere; and that Socrate's speech ( praesente scientia fieri non
posse ut quis incontinens sit) was true, with this Caution, ut quis sciat res
honestas, eas facienti magnum commodum allaturas def. disp. de loco c. 7. ad
Romans and in 1 John 4.8. If by amor and odium he mean prosecutio and aversatio,
as it is plain he does by that which follows. For sure Medea was not deceived
in her self when she said, video meliora proboque, deteriora sequor. And so
many, who make no doubt of an Heaven to belong to all penitent reformed
Servants of Christ's, and that that Heaven conteines joys above all that the
World can afford, do yet choose the pleasures of sin for the present season;
like Ephraim that is likened to an heifer that loved to tread out the Corn,
betook her self to that course which for the present yielded some profit (as
the Heifer being by the Law then unmusselled, might eat as she troad it out)
that had its reward at that minute, that she did the Work. Whence is all this?
but from hence, that the carnal pleasures of sin for the present obtain the
consent of the will against all the future pleasures and joys of Heaven,
joined with the sowernesse of present obedience; which could never be, if
believing the promises allwaies either necessarily, or infallibly produced good
works.

FINIS.

