THE Old English Officer. BEING A necessary Looking-glass For a Christian ARMY.
OR A fit Companion for Young SOLDIERS.

Wherein you may behold a Perfect, Easy, and speedy path to obtain the Exercise
and Discipline of Foot, and make Soldiers fit for present Service; either in
Field or Garrison, the Old English Military way.

With plain Directions and good Instructions out of Sacred and Moral Histories
of Worthy Commanders, how they should behave themselves in time of Peace and
War; Delightful to hear, and profitable to practice these Times.

Written by Charles Hammond Captain of Foot, by Commission under K. Charles the
First, of ever Blessed Memory, and one of the Sons of the Clergy.

It was the saying of Jesus the Son of Sirach, Eccl. 26.28. ver. there was two
things grieved his heart, To see a Man of War suffer Poverty, and men of
understanding not set by.

The Epistle.
To the Young Heroic spirited Reader, whose Resolutions are generally Affected
to Military profession, and well deserving that Honorable Name of a Soldier.
Wisdom, Valor and Victory, attend ever their Service for God, for Religion,
for his Church and for their King and Country, Amen.
GENTLEMEN,
FInding there is little likelihood of my being employed abroad in these times,
I thought not to be idle at home; but would advance and encourage as much as
lay in me, that Honorable Calling of a Soldier, which I have been a
well-wisher to this Forty years, in the Service of our Gracious Sovereign that
now is, and all along in his Royal Fathers of ever blessed Memory: and now in
these times of Action, to take off the ill thoughts of many men, and convince
them as much as lies in my power of their opinions, which many will busy
themselves and discourse on.

Frst those that look upon Soldiers with a scornful eye, as men not worthy of
Respect and Honor.

2. Them that think Old Soldiers not fit for Employments or Commands.

3. Such as cast an aspersion on those that served his (...) Majesty, in the
Wars.

4. All that think the old Discipline of England cannot be taught as short and
serviceable as the new way.

5. They which will hold that opinion that wars is not lawful.

And Lastly, to convince that rebellious principal of too many that will argue
and hold it lawful that Subjects may take up Arms against their lawful
Sovereign in points of Religion:

Gentlemen I must confess I am no Scholar, though I sprung from the Loins of
the Clergy, my Father and Grandfather being both of that Function, but they
dying in my minority, I was brought up and Educated otherwise with that
Learning they left me, which was enough to instruct me in the points of
Loyalty, and to defend my Religion in the English Tongue: and as I ever took
delight from my Youth, to learn and study the practick part of the Discipline
of Foot, to enable me as much as could to be a Soldier, answerable to that
Command I obtained; so I made it my study in spare time, to Read and Learn out
of Sacred and Moral Histories and Authors, and worthy Commanders, how Soldiers
might live and behave themselves to their credit, and for the Honor of God,
their King and Country.

For want of Memory and practice I have forgot much of both; yet this small
Treatise, if practiced, I hope may serve you as an A. B. C. to begin withal,
till your experin^e and abler Schoolmasters in Discipline can teach you more:
which I hope will not be despised by any that are well-wishers to an old
Soldier. Now I desire you if you find any Errors of the Press to pass it by, if
in me, judge it my forgetfulness for want of employment and Exercise, which I
wish all young Officers that are now honored with the first (employment or
Command may not forget the last) Exercise, when Time and Opportunity serves;
which will redown'd to their Honor, the encouragement of their Soldiers, the
daunting of their Enemies when they come upon Service, and the glory of our
King and Nation, which I shall heartily pray for, and wish to hear, and as
willingly serve to the utmost of my Power and Ability.

Charles Hammond.
From my House in Cloth Fair next door to the Sign of the Hearts Horns.
The Contents of the Chapters.
CHAP. I. Of the Honorable Calling and Employment of a Right Soldier. CHAP.
II. Of Pressed men and Volunteers. CHAP. III. Of the just causes of making war.
CHAP. IV. For the choice of Soldiers and Officers. CHAP. V. Of Discipline,
Government, and the Evils to be avoided in a Camp, and Punished. CHAP. VI.
Directions and Instructions for the Discipline of Foot Soldiers.
Judge not the Author
Till you have Read his Book
Spare time, have Patience too
Observe and look
Over every Leaf, and then
I hope you will find
Truth guide his Pen
A Loya^ Heart hi^ Mind.
Of the Honorable Calling and Employment of a Right Soldier.
A Right Soldier in his Vocation, well qualified and behaving himself worthily
indeed, lives in a Course of life worthy Honor; and his employment in Warlike
affairs is very honorable.

First God himself is pleased to carry the name of a Soldier, God is a man of
Way (says Moses) Exodus, 15.3. and the Son of God professed himself to be, a
Captain of the Lords Host. Joshua 3.14.15.

2. The most Renowned in Holy Writ, and in Human Stories, have attained to
great Fame and glory by their valient acts and Feats of Arms, as we may see in
Joshua, in Gidian, Ebud, Buruc, Sampson, David and his Warriors. What speeches
are there of the Nine Worthies? whereof Joshua, David and Judas Machabeus are
three, it is all for their Valor and victory in Battle; by War the Fame and
Memory of Julius Casar, Great Alexander, Pirrhus, Themistocles, Scipio,
Hannibal, Scanderberg, and Charles the 5th. remain immortal, and innumerable
others both in Profane and Divine story.

3. Whence came all those greatly affected Titles now in the world, rose they
not from Valor, Prowess, Military employments and Exercise of Arms? whence
came Esquire, but by being Armiger, an Armor Bearer, whence came a Knight of
old, not by scraping of Wealth and buying the Title, but by being Miles a
Soldier, a Noble man; an Earl, a Duke, nay the highest name of Dignity, an
Emperor, but from Honor in the field bestowed upon him that knew how to Rule
and Command an Host of men.

4. Solomon the wisest of Kings that ever was, held such as were men of War to
be more honorable than to be employed in servile work, such as he employed
strangers in, 2 Chronicles. 8.9. And the people of Canaan the Hittites, Amorites,
Perizzites, Hivites and Jebusites base people, were not worthy to be men of
War, the function was too honorable for them, as it is for too many that are
admitted sometimes, more fit for Stocks, Bridewell, Goals, Galleys, or the very
Gallows, than to be Enrolled among the honorable and men truly worthy the name
of Soldiers, if the worth of a true Soldier were well weighed.

5. By the profession of Arms many have attained from a mean condition to great
honur, David from a shepherd to be a King of Israel, Jepttha of base birth, yet
by valor became a Judge in Israel, Isicrates the Athenian who was Lieutenant
to Artaxerxes was he not a Cobblers son, Eumenes one of Alexanders Captains, was
a Carters son, Servius Tullius who triumphed 3 times, was the son of a poor
servant, Dioclesian though a bloody persecutor of the Christians, yet a valiant
man, obtained the Empire by his Prowess and valor and yet but a Scriveners
son. Nicholas Pichinnino the great Captain and Commander of the Armies of the
Potentates in Italy was but a Butchers son: The famousest Nations of the World
the Romans who subdued Kingdoms, never held any profession worthy so great
honor, nor ever rewarded any so much as they did Valiant men, generous
spirits, adventuring their lives and obtaining thereby praises to themselves
and glory to their Nation, as their Histories do show.

6. That Calling must needs be honorable which requires so many honorable
parts and praiseworthy Endowments, requisite to make a man deserving to be
admitted into Military profession, As to be a man of understanding, of a stout
and undaunted courage, not fooll-hardy, but prudent and patient of an able body
yet no Lubber or Luskish and sluggish disposition, but nimble and lively to
execute designments, and crowning all this with true Religion, and zeal toward
God, with a Loyal and faithful heart to his King and Country. For the honor
of this profession how great Volumns are written of men of War, their valiant
deeds and Memorable acts have caused them to be Registered to all Posterity, by
the Pen of the Learned, which cannot be read but with great delight and great
profit even to make valiant and courageous spirits emulous of their Fame and
Glory: what profession procured more honor to People a Nation then men of War
has done, Greece for her Achilles, and others: what praises everlasting did
Epirus that little country obtain by her Peerless Pirrhus, and that terror to
the Turk Scanderberg, Macedonia by her great Alexander; Troy, by her valiant
Hector, Rome by Caesar, Pompey, Scipio, and the rest; Lacedeman by Simon and
Leonidas; Carthage by her Hannibal, and so other places by their valiant
Worthies: in a word who is more worthy honor in the hearts of all virtuous men
than a man of Courage, so he be well qualified, that by some base condition he
wrong not himself, which true generosity of spirit will utterly disdain to do.

CHAP. II.
Of Pressed Men, and Volunteers.
OF such as go to war, there are two sorts, such as be commanded, and such as
offer themselves; the former we call Pressed, who without inforcement would not
go, Moses was as King in Israel, and he waited not for Volunteers, but
commanded to choose out of every Tribe 1000 to make an Host of twelve thousand
to go against Midian, so did Saul and David, 1 Samuel 21. 2 Samuel 20. without
which Command Princes could not have waged Battles as they then did.

The other sort are termed Volunteers, which are Natives or Foreigners, these
men may offer themselves to the wars, and enter into the Profession of a
Soldier; its not to be doubted Ehuds Soldiers were all Volunteers at the found
of a Trumpet, Judge. 3.27. So were the three sons of Jesse, and such were
David's worthies, 1 Samuel 17. Again Deborah the Prophetess praises the
Volunteers which came to help Barak, besides she complains of such as
following their own private business, neglected the wars, and withal cursed
Meroz for not coming to help the Lord Judge. 5.12.15.23.

Moreover, that which may be lawful by Pressing and compulsion may as well be
lawful for Volunteers if there be not very just cause or impediment to hinder
this: A lawful calling may be as well undergone freely as by compulsion, else
how should Princes and States do that have not power to Press, if Volunteers
might not in good conscience offer themselves; but here Volunteers must know
and be resolved of some things.

1. Of the Calling of a Soldier, where it is lawful and that a man may therein
live, and as well receive wages as men do for discharge of other duties in any
other lawful vocation: be content (says John Baptist) with your wages,
speaking to Soldiers, therefore they may serve for wages.

2. Of the justice and lawfulness of the war into which he thrusts himself,
seeing he goes not by Command of supreme Authority: if the war be just, a man
may serve with a good conscience of his own accord, but if it be apparently
unjust, let men beware that they imbrew not their hands in blood going
Volantiers if Princes command: that case is altered for private persons may not
sit and judge of Princes actions; I have Read that St. Austine says, That a
good man may serve under a sacrelegious Prince, for the unjust Command shall
bind the Prince, when the duty of Obedience shall make the Soldier free.

3. They must have the leave of such as have Sovereign Authority over them, for
a Subject to one, cannot dispose of his own person to the service of another
Prince without leave; but he may put himself voluntarily into the Service of
his own Sovereign whose Subject he is.

4. Volunteers are to weigh with themselves what special impediments they have
to withold from going, in respect of some particular calling, requiring their
own person for discharge of the duties thereof, or some charge of a Family,
Wife, and Children depending upon their personal being necessarily amongst
them, or whether their being at home may do more good to the Country then the
service in War.

5. There end must be good for defense of Religion, their King and Country, for
Relieving the unjustly Oppressed for maintenance of Right and such like, and
withal to learn Experience for the good of their Country, but not to run in
unadvisedly, as some do out of a Malecontentedness, nor of an idle humor, nor
of a foolish vain glory, or a bloody dsposition, of a base mind for Prey and
Plundering, but as a man of valor, for more praise worthy and better ends.

6. Lastly that Volunteers put themselves under the Command of Authority to do
Service, and to be subject to Rule and Discipline, observing Order, keeping
their places where they are commanded, from which they may not depart without
leave of such Commanders as they have committed themselves unto: for though
they enter voluntarily, yet being under Authority, they may not think
themselves then free at all times to part at their pleasure, for if they
should, upon necessary service, such wandering Stars and such straglers would
utterly fail the Expectation of their Commanders.

Thus with these considerations, men may be Volunteers and put themselves into
Military Service and Authority may admit of them, as both the Scriptures and
Histories show, but yet the General and others with him must be cautious what
Volunteers they entertain; beware of such as fly from the Enemy, let them be
tried before they be trusted, for we may read in stories that such sometimes
has been sent of the Enemy to do mischief.

Two Spaniards feighned themselves Fugitives to the Venetians, with a purpose
to kill Alvian their General, so did certain Turks with an intention to kill
Scanderberg, the Munidians which seemed to forsake Hannibal and to fall to the
Romans in the battle of Canna, were a great help to Hannibal to get the
victory, in turning against the Romans upon a sudden, this wisdom was among
the Philistians going to battle against Saul, they would not admit of David and
his company, many other Examples has been abroad, and here at home in our late
unhappy wars, but I hope our Commanders will be more careful abroad (if there
be occasion) in entertaining Volunteers in other Countries.

CHAP. III.
Of the just Causes of making war.
Wars upon just causes undertaken is undoubtedly lawful, though contrary to
the opinion of some, but there is nothing more for encouragement in any action
than to have Conscience satisfied in the lawfulness thereof.

1. God is pleased to be called a man of War, now he never admitted of a title
of a thing unlawful, Exodus 15.

2. He has given command to his people to ^ight, he made Laws for directions to
them, when they went to war God sent his spirit upon them to encourage them, as
in Gidion and Sampson, as you may read in the Book of Judges, and in 1 Samuel
15.2 24. Number. 31.3.

God raised up some Prophets to comfort and set forward his people to war, thus
he moved Deborah to call Barak into the wars, Judge. 4. and Jahazi^l to
encourage Judah to go against their Enemies, 2 Chronicles. 20.14, 15. God taught
David to play the part of a valiant Captain and Soldier, he made his hands to
war and his fingers to fight, and made his arm strong, for which David tendered
thanks to him, Psalm. 18.39.

Thus you may see what warrant war has in the Old Testament, but in the New
you will say it is otherwise, for he but once or twice at most is called the Lord
of Hosts, James 5.4. more often the God of Peace, and we do profess the gospel
the word of Peace; it is true, that all men should seek peace, and ensue after
it as a blessing of God, yet just and necessary war is not to be condemned, St.
Ambrose says, it is part of Justice by war to defend our Country and
confederates and such as need aid from spoylers and oppressors: neither does
the New Testament Matt. 24. disalow of war, so it be just; our Prince of peace
tells us of war Rev. 19.17. and is pleased to be set out as the Captain of an
Host riding on horseback, and subduing his Enemies; hereby showing that his
Church shall have wars and he will take their part: A Centurian, and Cornelius
a Captain, and a Soldier that feared God waited on him Acts 10.1. the Lord in
calling the Gentiles to the Gospel, made choice to begin with this calling;
with a good conscience we may take up Arms when there is no safety but in Arms;
we must know that God takes not away the Law of Nature to defend our selves by
forcible means against violent Enemies, God has now appointed Kings to use the
Sword, not only to punish Offenders under them, but also to defend their
Subjects from violence and wrong at home and abroad, and what hinders Princes
and States to recover what is justly their own, if otherwise not to be gotten
but by force of Arms.

As we see the undertaking of war to be lawful and honorable, so it must be
understood whether it be just; for the cause as it is, either Good or Evil, so
may the issue be thereafter expected; true it is that unjust wars may have good
success, for the iniquity of the people against whom they are undertaken; a
just war is in defense of our King, our Country, our Religion and Liberty, God
allows to go to war against an Enemy coming upon us, Exodus 17. Jud. 6. Upon
this ground was the wars of Joshua against the Amalekites, 1 Samuel 15. of Gidion
against the Midianites, of Saul against the Philistines, of Ahab against
Benhadad, the Romans against Hannibal, and of our ancient Britains here
against the Romans, Saxons and Danes: Kings may justly war against native
Rebels, it is a just war to help friends Allies and Associates unjustly oppressed
and wronged, upon this ground Abraham armed himself against the four kings to
recover Lot, whom they had carried away, Genesis 14.14. David rescued Keilah from
the Philistines, 1 Samuel 23.1. Saul, Jabosh Giliah from the Amonites, Judas and
Simon his brother helped the other distressed Jews, 1 Mac. 5.10. It is a
reproach to a Nation to forsake Friends, Confederates, and such as should be
helped in their distress, God wills, allows us and commands us in such a
case: it is a just war to bring under such as Rebel, or to get peaceable
possession of a Crown, justly claimed as David did the Kingdom of Israel
against Jeboshah, and the house of Saul: Now lest men imbroyl themselves in
needless use of the Sword, to their own ruin, in the next place it is to be
considered by what Authority this war is to be undertaken, for a necessary and
just war does not warrant every one upon their own heads to make war, though
they be able to gather a people together; but the first mover thereof must be
the Supreme Authority of that Nation, the wars that God allowed, and so just
which he always commanded, were made ever under and by the Authority that he
set over h^s people, Exodus 17.8. Tthe war against Amaleck, Number. 31. was
commanded by Moses, so was that against Midian; in like manner, Israel warred
under the Command of Joshua, and after under the Judges, and then under Kings,
as Saul, David and the rest, therefore it is not for Christian Subjects to be
of that Rebellious principle, as to wage war or to take up Arms against their
lawful Sovereign, under pretense of Religion, much more to destroy their
Subjects, and murder one of the best of Kings, whose blood I am afraid cries
for Judgment still on the heads of them and theirs that had a hand in it, and
not truly repented for.

CHAP. IV.
For the choice of Soldiers and Officers,
NOw in sending forth an Army, great care must be had what sorts of persons are
to be sent forth.

Let them be Natives and Subjects living under that Sovereign Authority that
sends them out, though they be of several Countries; then their years such as
the Lord held fit for war were in Israel, 20 years old and upward, Number. 26.2.
and such did Amaziah take for younger or hardly grown up to strength, and above
46 (except old and expert Soldiers for skill) are not to be admitted, because
strength decays 2 Chronicles. 25.5, as I have heard Learned Experienced Soldiers
say, touching their bodies, in Israel were chosen strong men, able to go to
war, men of valor and courage, stout and strong, of a vigorous and courageous
mind, not fearful, 1 Samuel 14.51. for such were put out of the Host by God's
appointment, and this did also that valiant Judas Maccabeus, 1 Macc. 3.56. what
good will they do but fail in performance, make others to be faint hearted, and
so give the Victory to the Enemy: likewise for their skill in Arms, raw and
ignorant men are not to be put suddenly upon service, for not a multitude, but
Art and Exercise geteth the victory, for the ignorant Soldier may not only
endanger himself but his followers too, therefore the Soldiers in Israel were
very expert men, Judge. 20.16.

Besides all this, it is fit Soldiers should be Religious, ye very requesite,
because they expose themselves so to the danger of death, which none but such
as are Religious can be prepared, for he that is not truly Religious can never
be truly valorous, for they then may expect God's aid, they may fight with
their hands and pray with their hearts, by which means that renowned Machabeus,
2 Mac. 15.26.27. conquered Micacanor, and slew of his Enemies 35 thousand:
Religion will make men Valiant, never any in Holy Writ Recorded for Religious,
but were indeed Valiant, for God requires all should fear him, there was
Abraham, David, Asa, Jehoidah the High Priest, Josias the Religious King, all
valiant men, and how can they otherwise choose but be valiant when they know
that God is reconciled to them, death if it come will be to them advantage,
these only have Faith in God, See Dr. Sutton Dean of Exeter, his book of War,
moving the Army to be religious.
and so will be courageous, the Religious, of conscience will be obedient, as
Israel professed to be to Joshua, and are like the Centurians servant going and
coming at command, Matt. 8.9. and not mutanous, they are of a quiet behavior
and temperate, not bablers, drunkards, nor quarrelsome, they will esteem of and
love a worthy Captain according to his worth, who must be to them as a father,
and they to him as sons; for in Isreal's language they were called the sons of
the band, their Prayers are of more force to prevail with God to take their
parts and to vanquish an Enemy than all other means besides: Israel fought but
Moses did procure the Victory by Prayer; now I know some of your young roaring,
Atheistical, Profane swearing dam-me boys will laugh at this, and f^off and
deride this choice of Religious men, as having no pattern of warlike Chieftains
to follow; let them look to the mighty man of war, the Lord of Hosts, the King
of Kings, and consider what manner of Soldiers he did choose to fight his
battles, the Commanders were Religious, as Joshua, the Judges, Ehud, Gidion,
Jepthah, David and others, his Armies mustered by the Lord, were called His
sanctified ones, Isa. 23.3. set a part by him to Military employment, they were
all mighty ones, and strong, skilful to march and did not break rank, they
cared not for wounds though the sword pierced them, Joel 2.2, 5, 7, 8. verses.
I can bring you Examples here in our own Kingdom, in our late war, in the Army
that was raised for the King in that small County, when Sir Ralph Hopton came
down, who was counted a Puritan, he was religious and a brave Soldier
likewise, pray enquire of the worst of our Enemies how it was governed, when
they were first raised, and how God prospered them, being but 5 Regiments of
Foot and very few Horse; The chief Commanders the Lord Mohun Sr. Bevil
Greenfield, Sr. Nicholas Slaning, Coll. Godolphin, Coll. Trevanion, and others
which ventured their Estates, and most of them lost their lives in the Service,
their Officers and Soldiers under them were as well instructed to fear God as
as to honor and serve the King; Oaths was held so abominable amongst most of
the Officers, that the Soldiers durst not swear an Oath before them. Likewise
went to Prayers before we went to fight, if possible we had time, the Soldiers
durst not Command for a cup of beer, much less then to Robb, Plunder and Spoil
their Quarters where they marched or lay, and for their undaunted valor and
Resolutions upon Service, it was very well tried several times before they ever
had Relief or could March out of their own Country to join with other Forces
as that Remarkable Fight at Stratten; in Cornwall, where our Army was but 5000
foot at most, and about 17 Troops of Horse, the Enemy 12000 Foot and 1500
Horse, and a brave Artillery, 12 Brass Guns, and we but 3 Iron guns, we fought
them and totally routed them, the Earl of Stamford Commanding them, and Chidly
his Lieutenant General, whom we took Prisoner, and all their Artillery; the
Fight beginning about three in the Morning, and continued till three in the
Afternoon, they having another great body of Horse at Bodnam, which likewise
the next day we routed and dispersed, and having at last neither Powder nor
Shot left, but Resolution and clubs of Muskets to fight them, we went to
Prayers that Morning before we fought them, and that strengthened our Forces,
and Armed our Soldiers with undaunted Resolution, in a word, no courage like a
Christian courage.

But it will be objected, that Jeptha had in his Camp vain men, there gathered
to David men in distress, in debt, discontented, ye and wicked men sons of
Belial, who fought with courage, recovered their losses and slew the Amalekites.

It is very true, but these were some only amongst the rest, the Commanders
themselves and others among them were well given, again, they had such persons
as pleased to come to them in their distresses, bu^ they did not hire such as
Abimel^^k (...), vain men and light men, Jud. 9, 4. A Company fit for such a
Captain. Authority that may Press, may find fitter men for their Service in a
good cause if they look to prosper, than Rogues, Loyterers, Swearers, debauched
persons, Goal-birds, Scuif and scumm of a people, held unworthy to live amongst
honest men, very Ou^ casts of Parishes, not to be admitted indeed unto the
honor of being a Soldier; but some will perhaps say that out of these Routs of
Outcasts, some have proved very serviceable, also so may unclean Livers,
profane Swearers, and Cup Captains have showed great courage in wars, and its
known that Heathen men, Julius Caesar, Alexander, Hector, Achilles,
Themistocles, Epaminondas, Pyrrhus, and infinite others have been va^^ant
Soldiers, for these latter though Heathens, yet moral vertiles have been
commended in them, and according to their Pagan Pro^e^^ion they were Religious;
asking counsel of their gods, without which they would not go to war, and they
hearkened to their Priests, Devines Southsayers, Astrologers, Chaldeans, and
such as was Revealers (as they thought) of the will of their gods: but for the
Rout of Outcasts it may (...) some, very ^ew have been serviceable, but wha^
have all the rest been, an heathen could say, tha^ of a Company Riotous and
disorderly, there is (...) use, for the other that are held so valorous: tru^
it is, that humane fortitude may be in an Abi^aleck that murderer of his
brethren, in an Abner Joab, as it was in these fornamed Renowned Heathen, yea
in other most lewd and vicious, and most profane in religion, there may be out
of Pride and ambition, out of a furious heat of heart out of a resolved
foolhardy desperateness, out of hope of spoil; out of some such grounds
perhaps showed a kind of valor: but this is not Christian fortitude such as
was in David and others accompanied with other laudible virtues, what desperate
companions were the three Seditrous Captains in Jerusalem and their followers,
they prodigally shed the blood of one another, and like Lions fought with the
Romans, but at length to their utter confusion: what becomes of such seeming
valourous men let experience speak? happy were it that Christian Armies were
gathered, of Religious, or at least of civel and moral honest men, that the
commendations of them might be like Scipio Africanus his Army, the meanest of
whose Soldiers seemed to be grave Senators, but it is the Deportment,
Discipline, and Conduct of Officers that must make experienced an well governed
Soldiers, when David had numbered the people, as likewise Amaziah, they placed
Commanders over them, of which somewere over thousands, some over hundreds,
some over fi^ties, 2. Sam. 18. and some but over tens, they were called the
Officers of the Host, the chief had command over many thousands, all of them
were choice persons, valiant men skilful in the use of Arms, ry'd Soldiers in
the field worthy their places, they were wise and valiant and such as (...) God
before them and in the service of war offered themselves to the Lord, and
though all were worthy praise^ some exceeded others, and were more Renowned as
were the special Worthies of David, and tha^ without Pride in themselves, not
contemning o^thers and without envy of the less famous, for any thing the
Scripture speaks of; the Leaders Captains and Officers were none of them young
striplings, raw and unskilful soldiers, but a^ known ^en, if a David, a young
man, a youth be advan'd to be Captain over a thosand by Saul it was
extraordinary indeed, because he was known and had often showed himself to be
va^^ant, a man of War, prudent in speech, and wise in his actions and
behavior, for he had ^lain a Lion and a Bear, and overcame Goliath, before this
his advancement, such a youth as he may well be admitted to Command, but Adrian
the Emperor expressly forbad beardless youths to aspire to such a charge;
Alexander in his Expedition against Darius chose such for his Commanders as was
Experienced in his Fathers service, and of rip^ judgment, such as have not
attaind to the grace of a manly countenance in such man-like services cannot
procure authority sufficient to command brave spirits; and such as procured
their places without desert was removed. Caesar being in Africa dismissed some
Colonels and Captains with disgrace because they had got such places by favor
(...) no^ by just deservings; deserts should only advance every officer such as
are Valiant, Loyal, Di^igent, men of Skill and aiming at public good, not
profit, or other ^ourses not befitting a ^ight Soldier, much less a sound
Christian; worth in men advances the work intended; wars by God's blessing
will prosper, soldiers will be more obedient, and the whole Army better
governed.

Now I would not have no young Gentlemen and Noble persons mistake me, that I
should any ways yonder value such as has taken Command and raised men ^or the
speedy advancing an Army; (...) know that some has taken delight to experience
themselves in Discipline from their youth ^^d bent themselves to learn to
Command though they were never commanded: but I speak of such as despise, and
scornfully look upon old Officers, a^ not worthy to bear the Titles they have
honour^bly got, much less to have Commands answerable to what they are able to
undertake, and with knowledge and (...) perform if tried, which I believe if
His Majesty knew their constant Loyalty, their former ability, and their now
indigency, they should be some ways provided for, as well as others, though
they are old, else it is a bad encouragement for the young: that virtuous and
valiant King, Pyrrhus who was the greatest Commander that was in his time, when
word was brought him, that one that was an old Soldier who had faithfully
served him was dead, the King was very sorry, some told the King he was old,
and ripe for death, Yes (says the King) I am not sorry for his death, but that
death has cut him off from the good that he deserved, and I intended him: it
is written of the Lacedaemonians, that they did not only provide for men which
served them in the wars with good salleries, but also the very horses when they
were grown old, they bought a piece of ground to keep them in.

I found an old Treatise that was translated out of a Spanish copy, was Printed
at Saragoza 100^ but remained in Oxford, dedicated to our late Sovereign, of
ever blessed Memory, King Charles the first, the Life and Death of Jacobo
Almansor an Arabian, Mohammedan King, for Example, it is written of his Virtues
and Victories, when he saw his Officers were grown old, having spent their best
time in his service licen^ed then to take rest, and honored them with places
in Cities, Castles and Fortresses, giving them good Saleries, receiving still
their Pay what they had in the wars, which was the cause he never wanted men of
Service, and he won eighty and six battles by Sea and Land, Conquered Spain,
and took five Kings, subdued Asia, Africa and Europe, it is said of him in his
Epitaph, That he observed Justice with benignity and mercy, and ki^d the
nakedness, hunger and thirst of his Subjects with his large and liberal hands.
He began his Reign in Anno Dom. 654 and dyed in 723.

CHAP. V.
Of Discipline, Government, and the Evils to be a^oided, in a Ca^p and punished.
AN Army gathered, General, and Officers chosen, and by good coun^el the war
established, yet all is nothing without Military Discipline; which is the main
foundation and strength of an Army, the Lord therefore when he brought forth
his Host of the Israelites under the General Moses, he appointed a strict
Discipline, which is the strongest guard to preserve an Army from destruction.
Alexander Severus, so called, for his strickt observing of Discipline, he held
Discipline the preservation of the Commonwealth, as the letting of it slip
should be the loss both to his Name and Empire. Scipio Africanus so observed
Discipline, as his Soldiers seemed Senators, as Plutarch witnesses: the cruel
Turks observe Discipline to our admiration, by which they have mightily
prevailed against us Christians, who may be ashamed of our over much looseness
therein.

The well ordering of the Host of Israel by the Lord, stood in these things.
First, in making excellent Laws for googo-N^^ment, for his Laws were so
righteous as no^ation could come near them, nor had the lik^; as Mos^^ old
them, Good Laws are the foundation of Order and Discipline, the guide of men's
actions and preservation of an Army, without which there would be nothing but
disorder and so confusion.

Secondly, in the Execution of those Laws, from which none might turn either to
the right hand or to the left, the life of all Laws is to see them observed and
strictly obeyed, for else Laws be made in vain.

Thirdly, in not allowing any priveledge to any person to transgress the Laws;
Moses the General was a strickt observer thereof, and so was his Deputy
Lieutenant Joshua, and if Moses himself transgressed, he tasted of the Kings
the Lord of Hosts displeasure, Number. 20.12, 14. Moses was so just and strict a
justicer, that in just proceedings he would have none spared, not the heads of
the people, nor any to spare his brother, nor his companion, nor his Son, Saul
would have put Jonathan to death for not keeping the charge put upon the whole
Ho^t; Number. 25.4. Exodus 32.27.29. And the Romans without respect of persons,
punished offenders: the Consul Titus Manlius caused his own son (for breaking
the Law of Discipline, though otherwise his act in slaving an upbraiding Enemy
was honorable, and to the Romans beneficial) to be Be^eaded, none in a Camp
may think themselves free from observing Order, no not the General, for he that
commands others, must order well himself, or his command will grow in to
contempt; this made Papirus to purpose the death of the General of his Horse,
because he fought without command, though he returned Victorer; Alexander the
great, would desire of his Soldiers the observation of no stricter Laws than
himself would undergo: Adrian the Emperor was singular praise worthy for this,
so was Scipio, Severus and others.

Fourthly, in promising rewards to the obedient, grace and favor to such as
keep themselves within bounds and good government; the promises are set down at
large in many places by Moses, and was faithfully performed as to Caleb,
Joshua, Phineas, and others; this will procure love to the Laws, make them more
remarkable, and take up the minds of the well disposed with a watchful care to
obey them; for as impartial Execution of Laws terrifies some, so the reward
performed puts life and courage into the hearts of other some to do
worthily. Now the evils to be avoided and punished are several; there is
nothing displeasing to God but sin, and sin it is that prevents God's
blessings, Deuteronomy. 23.9. and causes all success, as Moses exhorted Israel, and
as Aurelianus the Emperor said to his General in a Military Epistle of his, if
thou be a tribune, yea if ^hou wilt live, keep back the Soldiers hands from
^ing evil.

1. Evil to be taken heed of is Atheism, deriding of God and Religion, cursing
and blaspheming his name, this God punishes with death, Lev. 24.16. for where
God and Religion is contemned, what can prosper? Q. Fabius a Heathen imputed
the calamity that befell the Romans in the overthrow of Flanimus, to be the
neglect of Religion; and the only means said he to recover God's ^avour, was to
reverence it, and to have a care to please God; should then a Christian deride
God and Religion: what came of Rabsakah and other Blasphemers? God did slay in
his Host 85000. Julian the Emperor after he apostated and became Christ's
Enemy, he soon came to destruction* and Julian his Uncle, who in contempt of
Christ and the Sacrament, pissed against the Table; before he dyed he fell into
such a Disease as made his entrails rot, and he to void filth at his mouth: and
the abuse of his name by swearing and cursing and damned Oaths, the Lord
tells us that a curse remains upon them, and he threatens to cut them off:
yet some hold themselves no Soldiers, till they can gracelesly, as a grace to
them, thunder out bloody Oaths, ay and of late days, what terrible oaths have
been invented, that it would make one that has any fear of God in him, tremble
to hear them: let me be bold to tell you, that if you were not Atheists and
believed there was no God, you would never so often call upon him to damn you
for every idle false thing that you do: but how can the Soldiers be controuled
for it when they learn it of their Officers; let your Valor, Discipline, and
conduct be never so good, you may find those Oaths be the cause of conquering
of you, and if God be not the more merciful to you, your damnation may fall
upon you as suddenly as you have often wished it.

2. Profanation of the Sabbath, the Lord's day, God punished this in the Camp
of Israel, Judas Maccabeus took special care to keep the Sabbath with his Host,
when Nicanor King Demetriu's General would in contempt of God fight with Judas
on the Sabbath day, there was slain of his men 35000 and he killed, his head
struck off, his tongue cut out for blasphemy, and his head sent to Jerusalem to
be hanged upon the Tower, 2 Macc. 8.27.

One of the Kings of Denmark, contrary to the persuasions of the Divines, would
join battle with an Enemy upon the day of Pentecost, but he lost the Field and
his life withal, vain sports are to be abandoned on the Lord's day in a
Christian Host.

3. Rebellion treasonable practices, Mutanies, Rebellion against lawful
Authority God punishes extraordinarily, making the Earth to open and swallow
up some, and fire to devour others; see it in Absalom though he had most of
Israel to take his part, let the end of them, Bichry and Zimery make men take
heed of Rebellion Treasonable practices and conspiracies and secret working
with the Enemy are to be carefully looked into, and to be prevented; and the
parties found out, severely punished; for good Gedeliah being warned, and not
making timely enquiery, was by traiterous Ishmael cruelly murdered; so one
Quintilius Varus for being too slack to find out the treachery of one Narminius
of which he had intelligence, was slain with all his company: of such was
Nehemiah in danger, but his wisdom prevented, and Judas Maccabeus had a
Rodorus among them a discloser of secrets to the Enemy, but he was found out:
Cyrus the younger Executed one O^untes which went about to betray him to the
Enemy.

Mutany, God punishes murmuring, and such as cause Sedition; and stir up
others to grow Rebellious; Scipio upon a Mutany of his Soldiers in Spain, put
to death the chief movers, and so pacified the rest; so did Tiberius, when his
did Mutany in Pannania; but it is hard measure to poor starving Soldiers, for
coming and demanding their pay in extreme need to be held Mutanous; for only
this Captains should hang some to make others willing to dye rather for hunge^
then any more to complain, which is unchristia^ cruelty, and merciless
inhumanity.

4. The ill use of much Gameing, a thing that was not in use in God's Host, and
good it we^ that it were less in use in our Camp, for God is dishonored by
Swearing, monys wasted and many evils happen thereupon; I have heard that the
Spaniard in time of Service does banish unlawful games; in the Seige of
Poytiers, the Admiral caused a certain Ensign to be hanged, for playing at
cards while his company did watch in some peril; many Exercises should be
appointed them, and such as can Read to get Histories of War, and other good
books to read and discourse thereof: Thus the mind and body will be well
employed, it may be some Soldiers would be so well Exercised, if there were
Commanders like Caesar, who read much, and did write his own wars; or like
Pirrhus the famous Martialist in his time, who wrote many books; and as Hanibal
in whose Tents were found many books which he studied; brave generous spirits
should be delighted in either to read or hear read the Acts of valiant
Warriers, and scorn base Play and childi^h games.

5. Is Cowardliness, and flying out of the Host to the Enemy: Cowardliness when
a Soldier dare not for fear perform his charge: Cowards God sent out of his
Camp, when he sent his to war, and so did Maccabeus; Appius Claudius did behead
those Soldiers, that throwing down their Arms fled from their Enemies: Licurgus
made a Law amongst the Spartans, That no man should return home that turned his
back upon his Enemy: Caesar put certain Ensigns from their places, because they
lost their ground in an Encounter with Pompey at Dirrbachium: The Coward does
not only help the Enemy, but dishartens his friends; The Lacedemonian women
would deliver Shields to their Sons, exhorting them to war, either to bring
them again, or to dye valiently; there was among them Damatria who hearing that
her son had not fought like a Lacedemonian, when he came slew him; so much did
women there detest a cowardly spirit: flying away out of the Host to the Enemy,
is worthy severe punishment, such base and treacherous spirits amongst all the
Soldiers in Israel I never read of, the Romans punished such with death, Caius
Matienus coming but home from the Army in Spain without leave, was beaten under
a Gibbe^, and sold for one piece of money, to signify the base esteem of such a
Fugitive.

6. And last is Murder, Theft. Filching, Rapine, Robery, and Sacrilege, the
killing of one another; God gave a very strict charge against it, Joab the
General being guilty must dye for it even at the Al^ar; 1 Kings, 2.30.31.
Captains may not like rash-braind and bloody men, disorderly kill Soldiers: he
that shall do so among the Spaniards, I have read, dies for it; Q^arrels and
Challenges thereupon with acceptances have been the loss of many lives
unworthily, hereby Princes lose their Subjects, the Army weakened, and the Enemy
thereby advantaged; Soldiers lives should be precious one to another, their
blood should be spilt in the Public^ cause against the Enemy, not in private
qua^rels, no if a man put the lie upon another: Jehu a right valiant Captain
mar^hing ^uriously, did not quarrel with the Captains in his Company, when they
said it was false which he spoke, so putting the lie upon him, Jeremiah said it
was false, which was a lie to a Captain of the Ward; Gedeliah put the lie upon
Johanan a Captain, a high and proud spirited man, and valiant too, yet none of
these offered to any the stab, nor did beast-like, more than man-like, rush upon
one another and kill-one the other: these quarrelsome fellows are not ever the
best men, drunkenness, who^eing, swearing and no doubt forswearing, are no
marks of disgrace o them, but the term Lie, I must confess is a ^r^voking
word, and cowards will use it to provoke a patient yet a good spirited man, and
found so when they try him, or before the face of an Enemy; away wi^h these
delusions of Satan, you that are truly valiant and right Christian Soldiers,
suffer not your selves to be transported with this conceited disgrace to seek
Revenge, and so be guilty of blood, a crying sin before God. Now for Theft
also, God punishes Acans theft, yet these are too common with Soldiers, for
many base fellows fitter for the Jayl, ye the Gallows than the wars, are no
sooner enterd into Service, but are bold to lay hands upon other men's goods,
which they carry away with many a bitter curse, the curse is upon the thief and
the swearer, who also brings a curse upon others, as Achan did, that one
thief caused the overthrow of the Army, what evil then will a multitude of
thieves do in an Host, Aurelianus the Emperor would not suffer his Soldiers to
take a Pullet or chicken from country people his friends: Tiberius made one of
his guard to be put to death for taking a Peacock out of a man's yard,
Tamberlain caused a Soldier to be slain for taking a poor woman's milk and some
cheese and not paying for it; Pescenius Niger would have put to death diverse
Soldiers met together ^easting themselves with that they had stolen, but
through entreaty their lives was saved, yet they were punished, and their
punishment was to lie in Tents during the war without fire, to live only with
bread and water, and to make restitution to the Husbandmen; and the reason
given to this severity, because such acts did tend to Rebellion. Aurelius
writes an Epistle to Soldiers, to keep their hands from other men's goods, but
theft is not only to be restrained in Soldiers, but also in Captains and
Officers, which they may many wa^es commit, by robbing poor Soldiers of their
pay; Caesar was severe against this villainy, so as two of his Captains of horse
Roscillus and Aegus having defrauded Soldiers of their Pay, fled to the Enemy
as soon as they heard that Caesar had notice of it, its an indelible base
character of infamy, says one, to defraud a poor Soldier of his due. Likewise
in taking from a Soldier his weapon or horse: Theophilus the Emperor of the
East, banished a Commander out of ins Dominion, for taking a Soldiers horse per
force from him, for want whereof he was afterward stain in battle, and withal
bestowed the Commanders possession upon the Soldiers widow, albeit that
Captain had bestowed the horse upon the Emperor himself, unwitting to him till
the widow claimed him as the Emperor rode on him, Of Captains abusing poor
soldiers, read Sr. Tobi^s Smiths Epistle to the Nobility of England, as
Captains and Officers may not wrong soldiers, so soldiers may not rob one
another: Modestina judged him worthy of death that stole his fellows (...),
besides great care must be had that soldiers do no spoil, nor rob such by whom
they are permitted to pass by peaceably, nor such as be Victuallers of the
Camp, such must be suffered to go and come very securely; the Army of the
Prince of Aurange besieging Florence; had like to have been famished through
the disorder only of three or four soldiers which robbed the Merchants and
Victualle^s which came and went from the Camp, but those were hanged and then
plenty was brought in, the punishing of this sin in Tamberlains Camp; made his
mighty Army of many hundred thousands for to be plentifully served.

These are those sinful evils which principally in an Army are to be suppressed
and punished, for by suppressing disorders, God is honored, the Army
strengthened, the Enemy dishartned, neighbors and friends secure and encouraged
to abide constant; but where sin does reign, and disorders suffered, there all
things fall out clean contrary, misery and want will follow to their ruin and
overthrow, God will be against them and friends will abandon them as unworthy
of aid.

CHAP. VI.
Directions and Instructions for the Discipline of Foot Soldiers.
Six chief things a Soldier ought to be instructed in when he first enters
himself to be under Command.

FIrst to make choice of a civil comrade, and an able Soldier if he can, that
he may instruct him to handle his Arms.

2. to keep his Arms clean and fixed.

3. To keep his Arms by him in a reddiness, if sudden occasion should happen to
be called to them.

4. To behave himself civilly in his Quarters, and to be in them in due time;
and not to be out after the Taptow is beat.

5. To keep himself clean in his linen and clothes.

6. And Lastly, to give respect to his superior and inferior Officers and not
to dispute their commands, and to be civil to the Corporal of your Squadron
that he may teach you at leisure times to handle your Arms completely.

Now there is six necessary motions and postures belongs to the Exercise of a
foot Company,

1. Orders, 2. Faceings, 3. Doublings, 4. Countermarchings, 5. Wheelings 6.
Firings.
There is six Orders.
1. The Closest Order, which is not a Foot between Files, it is only necessary
for a Stand of Pikes to keep off the Horse from entering a Port or Auenew, Piles
at this closest and the Ranks at Order, or closest Order, which is 3 Foot or a
Foot and half, in this posture they may keep off a party of Horse.

2. Is Close Order, which is a foot and half, this is necessary when Pikes and
shot are interlin'd to charge horse, when they have fired to fall off to the
Right and Left from their Center, the Pikes Ported while they fall off, a close
Order is fit for Firings and Wheelings.

3. Is Order, that is three foot, which is a fit distance between File and
File, either Marching or in the Field.

4. Open Order, which is six foot, that is commonly between Rank and Rank,
either marching or in the Field, but in a March between Open Order and
Distance, which may be about nine foot, is very convenient for Pikes when they
march in a Body by themselves, if the Officer thinks fit.

5. Is Distance, which is twelve Foot; which is a very fit space in time of
Service, to run up Field pieces, opening from the center to the Right and Left,
either in the Flanks of Musketeers or in the Body of Pikes, and when they have
fired to run them back in the Rear, and the Files to close again as they were.

6. Is Double Distance, which is twenty four foot, this may be used when any
great person is coming to view the Company, to make a guard for Ranks to open
backwards, to double Distance or what distance the Officer sees fit, according
to the fullness of his Company; then for half Ranks, double your Right and Left
hand Files from your center, every man upon the Right from the center, fall
behind his right hand man, and so doubles the Right I and File, so every man
upon the Left from the center does the like, so you make but two files, but
when you make your guard, you face to the Right and Left inwards and make two
Ranks, no other word for Reducing but, Files Rank off as you were.

Now take notice these Orders or Distances are to be observed as your Officers
gives the Word of Command, either for Ranks or Files, for Ranks o open
backwards, or advance forward, or Files to open from the Right or from the
Left, or from the Right and Left, as your Officer pleases to Exercise, only
observe your word of Command when your Officer gives it, and not mistake Ranks
for Files: Now your File-leaders, your Bringers up, and your Right and Left
hand Files, must be sure to know their Distances, for the File-leaders and the
Right hand File guides the whole body, so does the Bringers up and Left Hand
File, when they, face about, the Rear is made the Front, for a Soldier has
but two men to observe in Marching ( Opening, Closing, and Countermarching)
that is, his Right hand man and his File-leader, File-leaders are to take their
distance from the Right hand man, or from the Left if Commanded; now to keep an
even Rank let every man be sure to keep his right heell even with his
Right Hand man's left heell and Files every man to keep right behind his Leader,
upon Service he will find it a good security, one man standing amiss spoils
either Rank or File, (which is the credit of a Company) either Marching or in
the Field, so much for the first fow Orders.

2. Now your second is Facings which I have brought into six, which are
necessary and serviceable.
1. FAcing either Right or Left as occasion serves.

2. Facing to the Rear.

3. Facing to Front and Rear.

4. Facing to the Right and Left from your center.

5. Facing to the Right and Left inward to your center.

6. Facing to either Angles, or to all your Angles.

Now let Soldiers observe in all their Facings, to turn upon the right heell,
and then they shall keep their Ranks and Files even.

Five of these Facings are necessary for f^^ings, but facing to the right and
left inward to your center.

The word of Command is March and intercharge ground, then, your Body of Pikes
are Hanks, and your Musketeers are in the body, which may charge the Horse if
the Horse should Flank them, and if you have a good stand of Pikes, you may
interline Musketeers and Pikes; The word of Command is, Pikes face to your
Right and Left inwards, Musketeers face to your Right and Left outward from
your center, then March when your Pikes and Musketeers are joined, face to
your Leader, then you you have a Rank of Musketeers and a Rank of Pikes; then
Ranks to the Right or left hand double, take notice this must be it your stand
of Pikes be equal with your Musketeers, if not let the odd Files of
Musketeers that are over above be in the Flanks.

3. Is Doublings.
1. DOubling Ranks either to the Right or Left.

2. Doubling Files either Right or Left.

3. Half Files double your Front.

4. Bringers up double your Front.

5. Half Ranks of the Left, face to the Right, March and double your right half
Ranks, face to your Leader, then face to the Left, Reduce them. So likewise
half Ranks of the Right, face to the Left, March and double your Left half
Ranks, face to your Leader, face to the Right and reduce them.

Directions.
RAnks Doubling, every even Rank 1 doubles the 2 the 4 and the 6 movers, if you
be never so deep, if you face about them that mo^ed before stands, and they
that stood double if you double to the Right, then move with your right foot
first, to the right hand of your Leader, at 3 steps or motions, as you were:
fall off with your left foot first, and at three motions it brings you in your
right ground again: Likewise if you double to the Left, you step with the left
foot first and fall back with your right. Now for Files you that are
File-Leaders, tell from your right hand File whether you are even or odd, if
even you must double to the Right, if commanded move we with your right foot
and at three motions, fall behind your right hand man, as you were, advance up
with your left foot first in your place again. Now if you be an odd File from
the right hand, you must double to the lef^, with your left foot fall beind
your left hand man, and with your right foot ad^ance in your place again when
commanded: take notice that the File-leaders and tight hand File guides Ranks
and Files, for the Ranks move not till their right hand man moves, nor the
Files till the File-Leader moves, when you double rank or file move altogether,
not before your right hand men and File-Leaders. Now for your half Files,
doubling your Front the half Files is the 4. Ranks if you be six deep, if you
double to the Right you March up of the right hand of your Leaders keeping your
distance, then facing about to the left, you March and fall into your places:
so if to the left, you March on the left hand of your Leaders, you face about
to the right and fall into your places.

Now Bringers up to the Right or Left hand, double your Front, you move with
that foot first as the word of Command is; the Bringers up Marches, passes the
5th Rank, then they March, falls into the second Rank next the Front, and the
half files in the third Rank reducing; face about on the contrary hand, march
and fall into your places.

Now the six doubling is: Half Files face to your right and left from your
center, the center is the midst of your files, if you be even files; if not you
cannot Exercise handsomely: if you be twelve files, you face six to the right
and six to the left; the word of Command is (as I take it) March clear your
Body and double your Front to the right and left entire; this posture drawing
up at the brink of a hill, you may seem three Bodies, being three stands of
Pikes; now you may be reduced two ways; face about clear your Body, face to
the right and left inwards, March, join, and face to your Leader.

2. Reducement.
Half Files face to your right and left inwards, March and double your Front
half files, then face to your Leader, then face about, March and take your
places.

4. Is Countermarches.
There is but three Countermarches, Gaining, Maintaining and Losing ground: in
your Coun-Marches your Files to be at your Open Order, your Muskets Poys'd and
your Pikes advanced.

1. Gaining ground; to your right hand advance three steps, face about to your
right, March easily, observing your right hand men which was your left hand men
before, let your Sergeant be in the Rear, and show them their ground where they
shall stand, face to your Leader, then the Front is the Rear and the Rear the
Front, then countermarch them to the left, then they have gained six steps of
ground in the Front.

2. Maintaining ground; they step one step and fall off, either to the Right or
Left.

3. Losing ground; every man falls off the ground he stands on and follows his
Leader, so you lose your whole ground.

Countermarches, Maintaining and Losing are very necessary for quick firing,
they all make ready, then they fire and countermarch off very quick;
countermarch losing upon a Retreat is good Service; they Fire, and every man
falls of upon the ground he stands on, upon a countermarch you may make your
half files your Rear and your Front half File the Front; thus, Hal^ Files to
your Right hand about, then to the righ^ and left hand countermarch, your Front
Half Files countermarch to the Right, and your Rea^ to the Left, then to your
Leader; Reduce From and Rear half Files to your Right and Left countermarch,
then your Front half Files to yo^ Left, and your Rear to the Right, they have
(...) same ground and the same places facing to (...) Leader: then Half Ranks
countermarching, fa^ to your Right and Left from your center, the countermarch
to the Right and Left outward then your Pikes are Flanks and your flanks the
Body; to your Leader; Reduced; Face to your Right and left from your center,
then countermarch to your Right and Left inwards; to your Leader.

5. Is Wheelings.
1. Wheeling to the Right.

2. Wheeling to the Lef^.

3. Wheel to the Right hand about,

4. To the Left hand about.

5. Wheel to the Right and Left inwards to your center.

6. Wheell is face about.

Then Wheell to the right and left inwards to the center.

Directions.
YOu must close your Files to your close Order; and Ranks to their Order; slope
your Muskets and advance your Pikes; if you wheel to the Right, your Right
hand man stands still, only ^s a hinge moves as the Body comes about upon is
right heell, and the Left hand man moves the Body, and must observe a distance
in the ground that he may neither close nor open his Files in ^heelings: now
the F^e-leaders must observe ^eir Left hand men in wheeling to the Right, and
^e Right in wheeling to the Left; and if File^eaders observe their distance in
their Files, the Left hand men must move fastest; it will ask Officers great
care to teach them to wheell handsomely, which is a very necessary and
commendable motion if well done, either to the Right or Left, or Right hand
about, or Left hand about; the Right hand men and Left hand men in the Front
being the chief guides in their wheelings; it is necessary in gaining the wind
of an Enemy, or in altring your Pikes and Musketeers either to the Front or
Rear, or to your Flanks.

As for Example, Wheell to your Right and left inwards to your center, then
your Musketeers are in the Front and your Pikes in the Rear; when you have
wheeled facing to your Leader Reducing, wheell to your Right and Left outward
from your center, so to the Rear; face about and wheell to the Right and Left
inwards to the center then your Pikes are in the Front, and your Musketeers
are in the Rear; Reduce them as before. Then Half Files face about, wheell
Front and Rear half Files to the Right and left inwards to your center, then
your Musketeers are in Front and Rear, and your Pikes in the midst of the
Body; much more may be done with Wheeling, but I shall leave it to those whose
often Exercising has learned what I have forgot for want of employment.

6. Is Firings.
1. Front. 2. Rear. 3. Right Flank. 4. Left Flank. 5. Front and Rear. 6. Both
Flanks.
According as the Enemy charge them Firing to the Front.

FIrst two Ranks make ready, First Rank advances six paces when he Presents;
the second Rank Marches up ready to Present against the first has fired; when
they have fired they fall off to the Right and Left in the Rear, loading again
as fast as they can: this Firing is proper, Marching toward the Enemy; but
when they approach nearer the Enemy, then All make ready, the two first Ranks
advances 3 paces, Presents, Fires, falls off the first Rank stooping, the next
standing.

The third firing is three Ranks advances, first kneeling, 2 stooping, the 3
standing. The first and second fires, the third presents, if commanded fires.
This posture of firing is most commonly fired by Divisions; the Divisions that
fires stands still and make ready again while others advances and Fires.

There is another firing advancing upon the Enemy, and very necessary,
interlin'd with Pikes, charging they all make ready the first Rank, Fires,
Stands, makes ready again, the second Rank advances before them, the third be
fore them so advances still as long as your Officers sees advantage, the Pikes
still advancing with them; I need not give any Directions for the Rear or
Flanks firing, the Rear firing is for a Retreat, and the Flanks is either for
advancing or Retreating.

Now I shall only give you my opinion concerning the Postures of Pike and
Musket, which is the shortest and speediest way to make young Soldiers fit for
present Service.

For the Pikes, I have reduced into six.
1. Is Order your Pike. 2. Advance. 3. Shoulder. 4. Port. 5. Comport. 6. Cheek
and Trail, which is very little difference only removing the hand. For your
Order it is a fit posture for a Centry in the day time to be set at any
Carriages belonging to the Magazeen or Artilery; and when you stand to your
Arms in the Field: for your advance it is a fit Posture to Troop home your
Colors; to fetch your Colors; when you wheell or countermarch, or when you
are interlin'd with Musketeers, to be ready to Port or Charge.
Shoulder is for a March.

Port is only when you enter a gate, or Por^ that you may be ready to Charge if
you were opposed by Horse.

Comport is necessary when you March up Hill.

Cheek is a fit Centry posture in the night.

Trayl is only fit for your Marching throw a a cops or wood in the night, every
man to take hold of his Leaders butt end of his Pike and join it with his Spear
end, March easily, your Files Marches out completely as they enter in, Now you
may charge from all these postures, but never used upon Service, nor necessary
only 3 which is, from your shoulder, Advance and port, there is two Postures
more, Charging to the Horse, and your Funeral posture.

The First, from your Order to your inside Order; that is, your Butt end of
your Pike, in the inside your right foot, your left hand holding your Pike;
with your right hand draw your Sword over your left arm, bending with your
right knee, keeping firm your Pike with your ^oot, charging to the breast of the
Horse, you may face and charge any way, turning on your right heell; when you
have done charging, Order your Pikes; lock your Pike with your right leg and
^eath your Sword.

2. Your Funeral Posture, you only ground our Pikes to the left hand of your
Leaders, and ^ce to the Left hand about, so Trail; take notice (...) your
Funeral posture the Rear and youngest Officer Leads, the less you are Exercised
with it ^he better it is for your Company.

Six chief and necessary Postures of the Musket.
1. ORder, which is answerable to Pikes, Order the Butt end close to your right
foot with your Lock outward, your right hand up to your Muzz^l end, but not
over your Muzzel, and your left hand akembow by your side, (having no Rest)
which is a graceful posture.

2. Poyse, which is answerable to your advance of Pike; your right hand close
under the Pan, and your thumb up the side of your Pan.

3. Shoulder, which is answerable to Pikes being ready for a March.

4. Join your left hand holding your Musket by the stock, the Barrel upwards,
under your Lo^k at a Balance, yet your Muzzel mounted, your right hand
employed either to your center posture or guarding your Pan, when you stand
made ready or Marching under a Gate or Port.

Present, a complete posture if you stand well, with a full body, your Musket
breech close to your right shoulder holding your elbow up, your left foot
standing a little further than the right, your heels bending something inwards,
and your toes a little outward, leaning your shoulder a little forwards close
to your Musket, your face upright, not bending to the Lock of your Musket as
if you were aiming at a mark.

6. Firing. breast high or something lower.

Now when you are commanded to load your Muskets either from your Order or
shoulder.

1. Join or balance your Musket.

2. Open your Pan and clear it with your Thumb, or a little scut or Furr, which
your nea^ Soldiers will have hang at their Bandeleers, which will clear better
than your thumb.

3. Prime your Pan, handle your Primer with your two forefingers and your
thumb, so Prime over the breech of your Pan

4. Shut your Pan, east about, in your casting about, shake off your loose
corns of Powder that is on the ^i^er of your Pan, for in trying your match it
may do a mischief; in casting about, step forwards with your right leg, holding
your Musket in your l^ft hand, with your barrel downwards.

5. Charge and load wi^h bullet: open your Bandeleers with your teeth, charge
with Powder, draw forth your scourer, shorten it to an inch, take the bullet
out of your mouth; ram down your bullet, recover your scourer, shortning him
upon your breast to a handful or more, and hold so with your fingers that you
endanger not your hand over the Muzzle, if he should fire by chance being hot
in Service, some sparks may lie in the breech of him, when you have Loaded.

6. Recover and Poys, casting back your right foot, then you are ready e^her to
Order or shoulder, as your Officer thinks fit.

When you are commanded to make ready.

First is, Join or balance again.

2. Draw forth your Match, blow your Coal.

3. Cock and fit your Match.

4. Guard your Pan with your two fingers over your Pan.

5. Present, when you present blow your Coal again.

6. Fire.

There is Six good Instructions for Soldiers to Observe for Firing well.
1. To keep good Priming Powder

2. To keep a good Coal in your Match

3. To try and make fit your Match, that you^ Coal may rather bruise at the
breech of your Pa^ than Cock too short.

4. Carry your Arms fair, when you stand made ready, for fear your Piece going
off yo^ may offend your Leader.

5. When you Present blow your Match, an^ Present breast high, rather lower,
bend your presenting a little toward the left; if you be on the right
Division, if the left, bend a little toward the Right, for firing foreright,
your shot man go through the Files, which thus levelling a little a cross your
shot must do execution in the body, and specially if you be near your Enemy.

6. When you Fire, draw your Tricker but once, if he fires not, fall off and
mount your Piece going off, if he should fire he might do no harm to your
Leader.

I shall not presume to give instructions to any Officers what their duties is,
only these six properties they ought to be endowed with.

1. Courage. 2. Policy. 3. Patience. 4. Humility. 5. Mercy. 6. Charity.
Courage and Policy are good Companions in the Field before the face of an
Enemy, Patience and Humility will gain the love of Soldiers and all others.

Patience will Teach and Discipline a Company sooner than any hasty or
passionate words or blows can do.

When you give the word of Command, give them time, and show them how it should
be done, if they be young Soldiers, if old Soldiers and neglectful, then ought
some severity to be used.

Mercifulness, in not too severely punishing, if they be not common offenders.

Charitableness, In taking care of them in their sickness, or lying wounded
when their Pay cannot maintain them: or if they are taken Prisoners to get them
Exchanged or send them Relief if you can.

These things will make your Soldiers stick to you in time of Service, and
venture their lives if they see you engaged, to fetch you off.

Gentlemen, or Fellow Soldiers, I have sent this Old English Officer amongst
you, how he will be intertaind I know not, I hope some will respect him for his
Loyalty, though by some others slighted for his Indigency; he looks for no
entertainment of Self-conceited Time-servers and self-ended men, for they
disdain Loyalty if clothed with Poverty.

God and a Soldier they alike adore,
Just at the brink of danger, not before,
The danger past they are both alike required,
God is forgot, and the Soldier slighted.
Learning and Arts by most these days we see
Are Honored and Respected, when they Age^ be.
Why should Old Soldiers then be slighted when they have gained
Experience in the Field, and Honor have obtained.
Encouragement will make us young, being tried it might appear,
For in midst of dangers, we are too Old to fear.
Lisenced

Octo. 22. R. L'Estrange.

FINIS.

