Some farther Matter of Fact Relating to the Administration of Affairs IN
SCOTLAND, Under the Duke of Lauderdale.
Humbly offered to His MAJESTY'S Consideration, in Obedience to His Royal
Commands.
That the Duke of Lauderdale was concerned in the Design of Bringing in of
Popery and Arbitrary Government, may appear by these following Particulars, etc.

I.
FIrst, in Anno 1669, when he knew that the Duke had changed his Religion, he
procured an Act in Scotland for Asserting the Kings Supremacy; which he made
the Presbyterian-party believe was to empower the King to put down Episcopacy,
and set up Presbytery, (the very words of it.) The disposal of the External
Government of the Church, is put absolutely in the Kings Power; as also all
Ecclesiastical Meetings and Meeters are to be ordered by the King.

Now the acknowledgment of the Pope is a great part of the Ecclesiastical
Government; besides, the other words are so comprehensive, that all Popery may
be brought in at that door. Soon after this, he entered into a firm Friendship
with the Head of the Popish party.

II.
At his next Session of Parliament, which was after Madam's being at Dover, in
1670, to show his farther Kindness to that Religion, he put in words in the 7o
Act of that Session, against Withdrawers from public Worship; which secured
Papists from all troubles: for the Act runs only against his Majesty's
Subjects of the Reformed Religion; for that Papists are expressly Excepted, and
the words he put in with his own hand in the draught of that Act.

III.
Whereas he first procured the Act that was past Anno 1667, that offerred the
King an Army of 22000 men to be brought into England for any Cause in which his
Majesty's Honor, Power, and Greatness was concerned; which was generally
passed as a Complement, and continued so till the year 1669, that other design
being projected in England by the Papists.

He to be ready to second that, raised this Army, and procured another Act,
which is the second in the first Session of the Parliament held by him; by
which the former Act was not only confirmed, but it was ordered that this Army
should obey the Order of the Council, without naming the King at all: which, as
he has managed it, is upon the matter himself. And of late, before the
discovery of the Plot, he designed to convert the 22000 men to a standing Army,
as an Addition to the new Forces raised last Summer, to be constantly
maintained by all Subjects; contrary to the true meaning of the first or second
Acts of Parliament relating to that purpose, and directly against the
Fundamental Constitutions of the Nation, to impose Burdens upon it without
consent of Parliament.

IV.
When he went down Anno 1673, to see if he could draw down this Army to England
(finding he could not effect it, that Nation not being able to support this
Tyranny longer) he first wearied the Members of Parliament with often
Adjournments, and finding in the end that Artifice and other tricks would not
do, he dissolved the Parliament, that he might proceed there, consonant to the
Council he gave here; and set up a Barefaced Arbitrary Power there, which he
has so much advised and pressed here; and has ever since taken all the ways he
could fall on to force the Nation to a Rebellion, by illegal Imprisonments,
unjust Accusations, false Reports made to the King, taking away from the
Subjects the right of Propriety, their limitable Jurisdictions by the Councils
order, grounded upon Letters procured by him from the King, and put in
execution by his brother Halton, by wrongful turning out Bishops, Ministers of
State, Magistrates, and others, by cruel and illegal Sentences, Banishments,
and Fines; some whereof he disposed to Pensioners Relations of his own, by
Grants obtained from the King here, which bear date before the Fines were
judicially imposed in Scotland.

And likewise by bringing a man to die, whom he had persuaded to confess upon
hopes of Life; and afterward forswore that he had promised, though it stands
yet registered upon the Councils Book. By sending Shipfuls to be Slaves in
English Plantations, which he justified here at Council Board in Whitehal. By
imposing Bonds against Law. And above all, by sending an Army of 9 or 10000
men, most of them Highlanders, to lie upon Free quarter, and rob and spoil a
Country that was in no Rebellion, nor could any color of saying they intended
any, be ever found now or since. This he did last year, thinking that would
certainly make them rebel, and so give a just Cause for keeping up a standing
Army both there and here. And that being at the time when the Papists thought
the Plot so near perfection, was certainly in conjunction with them having
prepared above 8000 Horse and Foot, with Officers of his own stamp, to execute
his design. It is more than probable that it was for the Intelligence his Lady
gave of this, that the Cardinal of Norfolk sent his thanks to her.

V.
Whereas there are but few Papists in Scotland, he has given these all the
Encouragements he could. The Earl of Aboins, who was often complained of to the
Council by the Bishops for keeping many Priests in his house, and being a main
Stickler for Popery, he made a Privy-Counsellor, and gave him a Pension, though
he has never since gone to Church, nor received the Sacrament. The Earl of
Northdale, another furious Papist, in Command of the new Forces he raised (and
so is Lord and King) and both those two were last year employed by him in the
plundering of the West of Scotland, etc. And there being in Scotland but five
Noblemen that are Papists, four of them have been supported and maintained by
him, etc.

VI.
He was a principal Instrument in procuring the Toleration of Popery, and
courted them into sworn Friendship with the Lord Clifford; and preferred the
Declaration and other the Kings Edicts at the Council Board, to Law, etc. He
pressed the King to break with his Parliament, and maintain the Declaration,
and to take the Great Seal from the Earl of Shaftsbury, for giving him better
Council; of which he has often boasted. He became also an Enemy to the Earl of
Arlington, upon the same account, and has ever since had an entire friendship
with the Lord Treasurer, for promoting those ends he supported the last year
against the just Complaints the Scotch Lords made for Free Quarter, and other
barbarous usages which they met with, etc.

VII.
He became a Pensioner to France, from whom he received rich Presents, and
great Sums: out of one of the Jewels which Monsieur Colbert gave him, he made
his rich George. He always helped on the French Levies in Scotland, against the
Treaties the King had made, and gave the French Officers the public Prisons;
yea, and the Kings own Castle of Edinburgh, of which he is Governor, to keep
their Leavies in, till the Ships are ready for their Transportation: he gave
order to his Brother to set the Levies forward, and to press men by force into
their service; which being informed to the House of Commons, he corrupted one
of the Witnesses by Money to forswear it; and this he did, after the House of
Commons had Voted that any who assisted those Leavies, should be looked upon as
public Enemies to the Nation. So much did he contribute to serve the French
Kings designs; and particularly in the year 1667. when complaints were made to
the King by Spanish Ministers, that Scotland Leavies for France were a breach
of Treaty, His Majesty's Commissioners ordered a Proclamation to be sent down
immediately for the discharging of them; but the Duke of Lauderdaile dispatched
an Express to his Brother Halton secretly, to acquaint him that the
Proclamation was coming, and that it should be kept up, until the Leavied
Soldiers should be shipped and sent away, and then published; which was
accordingly performed. But for all the have they made to sail, the wind
detained some of their Vessels in the Road after the Proclamation, and did
drive others back, which had been a good way gone, yet none durst stop or
trouble them, for fear of Halton, who had always promoted those Leavies, and
had signed particular Warrants to several Prison-keepers, for delivering their
Prisons to the French Officers. He lived at that time in such intimacy with the
French Ambassador, that they were never asunder. He sent his Nephew to make
Campaigne in the French Army, and wrote to the English Ambassador to present
him to the King; and tell him, That he had sent the dearest thing he had to his
service, and if he had anything dearer he would have sent it.

VIII.
He has upon all occasions spoken of the House of Commons with the greatest
contempt and scorn possible, calling it commonly, Bellua multorum Capitum; and
usually said, if they would Address against him, he would fart against them,
and that he would put a dog in his Arse and bark at them. And after boasted
among his Creatures, That he had risen by their Addresses. For after one, he
got himself made an Earl of England; after the other, he had a Pension of 3000
l. per annum in England, though he had above 9000 l. per annum in Scotland, of
the King; and his usual word about the Commons is, Let them bark, and he will
bite.

IX.
Not long ago he carried a person, known to be of a very mercenary quality,
before the King, and its like suborned him to accuse some of the Nobility of
Scotland, and say, They had enticed him to complain upon his Grace to the
Commons in Parliament; thereby thinking not only to put those Noblemen out of
the Kings favor, but also to beget in His Majesty an ill Opinion of the House;
but the parties being convened before the King, His Majesty discovered the
Forgery, and Ordered the cheating Rogue to custody, where he yet lies under
restraint.

X.
At his last being in Seotland, he forced all the Officers of State, and
others, in both Civil and Military Employments, to hold their Commissions of
the King durante beneplacito, which was never practiced in that Nation before;
the consequence thereof tends so much to Arbitrary Power, that they need not be
particularilized; he put in and put out Members of the Kings Council, according
as they suited his secret Designs. In a word, he so packt all the Judicatures,
that Justice and Equity have been Administered according to his pleasure, under
color of the good of the Kingdom.

XI.
When the Treaty for the Union of both Kingdoms was set on foot, which had been
a great happiness to both Nations, perceiving he should thereby loose that
absolute Power he had in Scotland, and not be able to prosecute his Arbitrary
Defigns, set himself to a breach; for which, this was his Argument, That it was
rather the Kings Interest to keep the Kingdoms distant, and to hold England
under the fear of the Scotch Army, which then he was Raising and Modelling.

XII.
He has lived in that Correspondence with the Papists and Priests, that the
Cardinal of Norfolk before he left England was perpetually at his House; he has
kept constant Correspondence with Conyers and some Jesuits; and at Rome he was
called by one of the Popes Bedchamber, a great friend of the Catholics; and
in all his concerns, the Papists were still of his side. So that his late
Proclamation against Papists in Scotland has been only a Mockery. Now since
the Plot is discovered, to disguise his Traitorous Conspiracies, which then,
though upon Mr. Oats his Discovery he talked at the Board like one that
believed it; yet he went strait to the Duke, and spoke of it with all possible
scorn, and called it a Ridiculous Contrivance.

XIII.
First, That Colemans Letters were discharged to be made public in Scotland.
And next, his Trial being Reprinted at Edenbourgh, the Books were by a
peremptory Order in Council stopped at the Press, when finished almost to the
last sheet, not only to the Printers great damage, but to a manifest
suppression of the Discovery of that horrid Plot from the good people of that
Nation, who were longing for the Particulars thereof. For is it not known, that
Charles Milford of Hatton Treasurer, Deputy of Scotland, managed all the
Affairs and Councels there, exactly as he received Instructions from his
Brother the Duke of Lauderdail here? according to which, those in that Country,
which these Creatures talk now, of the discovered Plot, to be only a Malicious
Forgery of two Rogues, Oats and Bedlow.

FINIS.

