A LETTER TO A Member of Parliament.

Written upon the RUMOR OF AN Invasion.

LONDON, Printed in the Year M DC CX IX.

A LETTER TO A Member of Parliament.
SIR,
I Have been, and still continue to be so much engaged, in Reviewing some
Accounts and Papers of Moment, that I could find no Leisure to Copy those loose
Papers, that contain my Project for a well Regulated Militia, which I promised
to put in Your Hands in the Easter-Week: And this Session draws so near a
Conclusion, and the Militia-Bill now before the Honorable House, being ready
to pass the Third Reading; I see no room for admitting my Papers to be heard in
a Committee, if I had 'em ready for that Purpose. And I hope, and with all true
Englishmen expect such a Proof of the great Care and Wisdom of Your Honorable
House, in settling the Militia at so Critical a Juncture as this; that all the
Private Schemes, formed by Men, that are Sincere Lovers of their Native
Country, shall be Infinitely outdone by the united Prudence and Vigilance of so
many Glorious Asserters of our Liberties, as are Members in this Present
Parliament. It Is a Matter of so great Consequence to the present Government,
and indeed to the whole Body of the People, and the Liberties of England, that
the Kingdom should be put into a good Posture of Defense, and be well provided
against a Foreign Invasion; that I Am confident, there is not a Gentleman,
Sitting and Debating within the Walls of that Honorable House, that could ever
be persuaded to pardon himself, if it were possible for him not to contribute
all the Skill and Advice he is Master of, to bring to the greatest Perfection a
Bill of that Unspeakable Importance to his Native Country.

And when I find most of my Acquaintance have the like Sentiments of Your
present Deliberation^* I confess it is to them, and to me too, a sufficient
Antidote against the Fears and Jealousies that every Body, in a manner, is
amused withal, upon the Rumor of an intended Invasion from abroad. I venture
to say, Fears and Jealousies; because I meet with a great many People
everywhere, that are apt to fancy* We should be in a very unprovided
Condition, if 30 or 40000 Disciplined Men should Land upon us, now the Regular
Troops are reduced to 7000 Men, and the Invaders would meet with no Body to
oppose 'em, but a Raw Unexperienced Militia, and they not to be drawn into any
considerable Body under a Month or Six Weeks. This I assure you, is a mighty
uneasy reflection to many good Men, and they begin with Impatience to desire
Your Bill may pass out of Hand, that pursuant to the Model of it, We may be so
well prepared, that no Foreign State may dare to think of Invading us. For my
part, I should be very ready to have no great Opinion of any State but ours,
that consisted in a Body of about 1,500,000 Men, capable of bearing Arms, and
they possessed a Large, Fruitful, Wealthy Country, of above Thirty Millions of
Acres; and yet, upon a Rumor of an Enemy of 30 or 40000 Men approaching their
Frontiers, should immediately fall into a Great and General Consternation, and
consequently run into such Confusion, as to be incapable of making any
Opposition; but scour away like a terrified Mob, or fly like a Flock of Sheep.
And yet it is no Wonder, that a Populous Country, and a Generous Free People, as
the People of England are, should be Alarmed, when they have a Fertile Soil,
Great and Valuable Liberties, and many Thousand Lives to lose; if they can
trust to nothing but a Country Rabble, or a Giddy Multitude, for their
Preservation. I am therefore of Opinion, it is the happiest Policy, that any
State can practice, so to model its Subjects, and their Estates, that in Cases
of extreme Public Danger, the whole united Power of both may be so readily
collected, as to make the bravest Defense with their own Hands, without sending
to Foreign Countries for Assistance; which every Body, that has read our
Chronicle knows, has been often Fatal to England: And I am sure it remains an
Indelible Reproach upon Our Ancestors, that their Discord was so Notorious, and
Government, at some times, was so Imprudent and Impotent, that when they were
Invaded by one Neighbor, they were often obliged to send to others, and give
them an Invitation to Invade 'em, to save their Liberties; and when they have
so done, pay their Saviors with an absolute Surrender of the Liberties they
came to redeem. The English, or the Inhabitants of this Island, were often in
this Humor, and as often smarted for it before the Times of William the First,
and hardly ever succeeded, but in the Case of William the Third, a Prince of
Vnparalell'd Virtues, and an Unalterable Friend to Liberty. The petty Princes
and States of Italy and Germany, having but small Territories, and few Subjects
are often put upon this Shift: Some Potent Neighboring Princes are chosen
their Protectors; and because they cannot subsist alone, they admit Foreign
Troops into their Garrisons, to secure their Towns and Government.

But England certainly is a Country of so large an extent, and so well filled
with Strong and Able Men, and those Men are of so true a Natural Courage, that
it is impossible for us to want help from Abroad, in any occasion whatever, if
our own Countrymen are but well Armed and Disciplined at Home; and it is our own
fault if we either have not been, or are not so now; and the fear of an
Invasion is justly Chargeable upon our selves, if we are not so well prepared,
as to let all the World know they may come if they dare. For who durst think of
such an Enterprise, if he were sure to be received at his Landing with Sixty
Thousand Brave Fellows, under good Discipline, and skilful Officers, ready to
Cut the Invaders in pieces, and force 'em into the Salt Water? The Thirteen
Cantons of Switzerland possess a Tract of Land, that in Value and Number of
People, I dare say, don't exceed the Three Counties of Kent, Sussex, and Surry;
and though the Country makes a very rude and troublesome March* yet the Militia
is so well Ordered, that upon occasion they can bring into the Field, in Ten
Days time, a complete Army of Fifty or Sixty Thousand Men; and sooner too, if
we may believe those who have been there. Now if the People here were as well
Disciplined as the Switzers are, or according to the Model I have drawn: I see
no manner of reason to doubt, that should an Enemy of Twenty or Thirty Thousand
Men Land in any part of Kent or Sussex; within One Weeks time those Three
Counties beforementioned, with a Body of Men drawn out of the City of London,
all amounting to Sixty or S venty Thousand Men, should be upon their Bones, and
Cut 'em off every Man. But were we once but so well provided as the Swiss
Cantons are, we might be confident no Body would have to do with us. And our
Women and Children would then Despise those very Forces, of which a great many
Men amongst us now seem to be afraid. But should any one of our Neighbors,
destitute of Faith and Truth, make an Attempt upon us at this present Juncture,
the fittest Expedient that I can think of, is, That by a Resolve of the House,
His Majesty may immediately issue a Proclamation, to all Officers and Soldiers
that have Served in the late War, to render themselves by such a Day, at such a
Place, where they shall have such Encouragements, as, Two Shillings per diem
for a Foot Soldier, Four Shillings per diem for a Dragoon, and Six Shillings
per diem for an Horseman, during the Expedition, a Gratuity of the Rebels
Estates, when the Service is over, and a Charity to the Families of those who
fall in the Service; join with these the Militia of London, and of the nearest
Counties, to the place of Invasion; and I would hope these might serve our turn
for the present, if occasion be, which God forbid: And for the future, I hope
we shall be put in so good a Posture by the present Parliament, as to make all
our Neighbors utterly despair of ever succeeding in any pretended Invasion of
England.

I am, Sir, With very great Veneration, Your most Obedient, Humble Servant, H.
H.


