THE Private Christian's WITNESS FOR Christianity: In Opposition to the
Notional and Erroneous Apprehensions OF THE Arminian, Socinian, and Deist of
the AGE. With the Easy and True Means leading the Profane, Mere Professor, and
Lazy Christian, to the same Experience, as Preservative against the Infection
of each, and against the ill Example of the Practical Blemishes in Lazy
Christians Conversation.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Cockerill at the Three Legs in the Poultry. 1697.

THE PREFACE BY A Friend of the Author's.
SINCE the Fall of Man by his Rebellious Sin, he incurred the forfeiture of his
Felicity, that principally consisted in Communion with God.

The Divine Goodness is like a sealed Fountain, all comforting Emanations are
obstructed: Divine Justice is a consuming Fire to all guilty and polluted
Creatures. The Son of God by his precious Merits and Intercession, is a
Mediator of Reconciliation and Communion.

All our Ascents to God in spiritual Duties, and his Descents to us by
communicating Graces and Comforts, are through Christ. He introduces our
Persons into the Divine Presence, he purifies our Services from their
Defilements and Defects, and presents them with acceptance to his Father.

Our Communion with God is managed by the Influences of the Holy Spirit into
the Soul, and the returns of the Soul to God by the Energy and Efficacy of the
Spirit. In all the parts of Divine Worship, the Spirit composes the Mind, with
the Reverence of God's invisible and adorable Majesty: He encourages our trust
in his Mercy, and raises our Affections from Earth to Heaven. This is a
difficult height which the carnal Nature cannot arrive to. Prayer is a Duty of
daily Revolution, but cannot be performed in an acceptable manner without the
Spirit's Assistance.

The Holy Spirit is the Seal of God's Love to Believers, that can never be
cancelled; that distinguishes them from the unrenewed World, and appropriates
them to God. He first works those Graces in the Soul, wherein the Image of God
consists, and by illustrating them in the view of Conscience, witnesses that
they are God's Children: He is therefore styled the Spirit of Adoption.

The Spirit ratifies the Truth of the Gospel to those who have felt his
sanctifying and comsorting Operations. There are some Doctrines in the Gospel
of impossible discovery by the light of Reason, and when revealed, are
incomprehensible. Now there is such Evidence, beyond all exception, That the
Gospel is a Divine Revelation; that any Doctrine declared in it, though sublime
and supernatural, and contrary to our carnal Prejudices and Passions, justly
requires our assent to it. We must distinguish between the evidence of the
Object, and the evidence of the testimony. An Object is evident by its own
Light, and the impression it makes immediately on the Mind: Thus it discerns
between Truth and Falsehood, between what is fair, and what is fraudulent; as
the Eye sees the difference between the day and night. The Evidence of the
Testimony, is, when the proof of the Truth is resolved into the Veracity and
Authority of God, who is Infallible; For he cannot be deceived nor deceive. Now
of the Gospel's Divine Original, there are external Characters and Signs, and
internal: Of the external Characters, Miracles are the most conspicuous: Of the
internal, the sanctifying and comforting Operations of the Spirit in the Souls
of Men are most sensible and convincing. For certainly humane Nature, though
assisted by Moral Counsels and Constancy, could never produce such Divine
Effects. The Holiness and Comfort that the Spirit in Concomitancy with the
Gospel, works in sincere Christians, produces a more clear and strong assurance
of its Truth, than the sight of Miracles. For Holiness is an Attribute as truly
Divine as Power, and has a nearer Affinity with the Nature of God, it is his
peculiar Glory. The cleansing and changing the Heart of a Sinner, the calming
of the afflicted Conscience, are a more eminent effect of Power, than the
turning of a Wilderness into a Paradise, or the laying Storms and Tempests. The
sanctifying and comforting Virtue of the Spirit by the Word, is a more inward
and lasting proof than Miracles. A Miracle, like a sudden flash of Lightning,
astonishes Men at the present, and causes them to consider what is proposed;
but when the surprise is over, they may neglect their Duty: But real Holiness
in the heart and life, like the Sun, irradiates the Mind with a constant light;
He that believes has the witness within himself.

Inward Experimental Religion is perceived by the Sense of them that have it,
and cannot be so clearly demonstrated by Words. Who can see a Taste? From hence
many ignorant and profane Persons expose the Operations of the Spirit to
ignominy and contempt, as the dotages of Enthusiasts. And Doctrinal Professors,
who owe their Religion to Tradition and Education, and are merely Titular
Christians, cannot understand and believe what the Saints really enjoy. They
are hardened in their Unbelief, because many have fathered the bastards of their
deluded fancies upon the Spirit. But to show the unreasonableness of this
pretense, consider, It were strange that the low life of Sense has perceptive
Faculties, that living Creatures feel that they live, and the spiritual Life,
more raised and excellent than the rational, should not perceive it self. Is it
possible there should be such a Prodigy, that the Soul should live the life of
Holiness and Joy, like a Plant, without the knowledge of it? Or, Because many
are deceived with a false Light, and pleased with a Delusion, does it follow
that those who have vital Experience of Religion, are deceived? One may Dream
that he is Awake, but a Man that is Awake knows himself to be so: The Delusion
of one does not weaken the assurance of another. If it be inquired, How shall
we distinguish between the Genuine Operations of the Spirit, and the Spurious
and Counterfeit? A clear answer may be given. 1. By the light of the Spirit we
may discover and know his Operations. This is no vicious Circle. I know I have
a reasonable Soul, by the light of Reason: For the Understanding that discovers
other objects in the direct act, is the object of it self in the reflective
act. Thus I know that I have the Holy Spirit as a principle of Divine life
acting in me by the light of the Spirit. 2. It is the peculiar Character of the
Spirit's Operations, they are all in Consent and Congruity with the Word of
God, for he is the Inditer of the Word, and cannot contradict himself: They
make Men more Holy and Heavenly; and as the Star directed the Wisemen to
Christ, the light of the Spirit always directs us to him as the Fountain of
Grace and Salvation.

And for the satisfaction of those who desire to know when the Blessings they
receive are obtained by Prayer, and are not the effects of God's general
Providence; I shall only desire them to consider, whether their Prayers are by
the Spirit's Influence, which is known by the frame of the Soul in that Duty.
The Spirit knows the Mind of God, and is the Intelligencer of Heaven; he
directs us to the most favorable Seasons, and by soft Whispers and warm
Impulses, brings us in God's Presence to pray for Mercies when God is ready to
bestow them. He does with sensible Enlargements open our Hearts in the Duty;
And as under the Law, when Fire fell from Heaven upon the Sacrifice, 'twas a
sign of God's Acceptance; so when a sacred Fire kindles our Affections, it is a
sign our Requests are accepted. He mixes in our Prayers Reverence with filial
Confidence; Resignation to the Will and Wisdom of God, with Reliance upon his
Love and Power. And when a Mercy is bestowed, the Spirit converts our Prayers
into Praises, and by the Mercy, confirms our Faith, inflames our Love, and
endears Obedience to us.

Concerning the Person of whom the following Papers give an account, I shall
only say, He is a Christian inwardly, who has had a stated Intercourse with
Heaven, and has recorded the gracious Passages of Providence, the rich Returns
of Prayer to him. It Is true, there is a continual succession of Mercies through
all the minutes of our lives, which we cannot observe and remember; but as
there is a different Glory in the lights of Heaven, One Glory of the Sun,
another of the Moon, and another of the Stars; so some are eminent and
illustrious above others, and ought to be remembered and acknowledged with
Solemnity.

Of these Mercies he has been deeply sensible, and could not be silent, but
opens the Treasures of his Experiences, and with David, the great Pattern of
Thankfulness, calls upon those that Fear the Lord, to Read what he has done for
his Soul. His end is, to Glorify his Blessed Benefactors, and to invite others
to partake of the same Mercy. May his Example excite us with diligence and
delight to maintain Communion with God on Earth, the sweet and sure
anticipation and earnest of our Communion with him in his Temple above, where
Light, and Love, and Joy, shine in their perfection for ever.

To the Reader.
WHO amongst the adopted Sons of God, can behold the abounding Vice of the
Profane, the profession of Christianity made a Cloak for Sin and Error, and
the laziness of Christians lives in our day, and not awaken our selves to hear
God speaking in the same language to us, as to the children of Israel, Isa.
43.10. You are my witnesses. Is God's Divine Providence practically denied or
retrenched, when so much thereof is in the constant view of the sons of men? Is
the Word of Truth denied by a Sectary of Deists, when so much thereof is felt
as real in the Souls of Christians? Is the Godhead of Christ, with the Being of
a Divine Spirit, so audaciously and profanely denied, when those who have
experienced the privileges of the satisfaction of the first, by the powerful
application of the latter, witness the reality of both? I am resolved therefore
to make no other Apology for my Printing the following Discourse, than that it
is in obedience to the Apostle's charge to all Believers in the 10th verse of
the 4th Chapter of the first Epistle of Peter, As every man has received the
gift, even so minister the same one to another, as good stewards of the
manifold grace of God. What I have imparted, I have received, and in these
gradual steps, and in the use of these means treated of in the first and latter
part of the Discourse; and therefore in the imparting of what God has done for
my Soul, and by what means, I hope I stand his witness this day on the earth,
and approve my self a faithful Steward in ministering the same things to others,
and that in the way wherein they were received. There seems to be a Confederacy
between Satan and the men of this Age, to discredit the Oracles of God, but his
Word is a firm foundation of Faith; and sincere Christians clearly see the
Characters of its Divinity, and feel the sanctifying comforting efficacy of it,
and many have sealed its truth with their blood: Others in their dying hours,
when men speak with most feeling, and least affectation, have declared their
unshaken belief of it; and others, in converse with those they most dearly
love, and therefore would not deceive. Each Christian therefore is under
obligation to glorify God according to their measure of experience concerning
God and his Divine Truths. All are not in the office of the Ministry; and there
seems in our day but small opportunity in conversation to witness for
Christianity. Converse with the Profane is of so dangerous consequence, that
discourse of such things occasion God and his Truth to be mocked, yea, to my
certain knowledge blasphemed. Converse with some under the character of greater
Sobriety, draws forth such open confidence in Error, as to tell us God's Word,
the Rule of our Faith, is to be laid aside, and Debates in Christianity are to
be left off, at the first Chapter of Genesis; they giving no credit to its
Truths than so far as their natural Reason can comprehend; whereas the Soul was
corrupted in all its faculties by the Fall. Although in the structure of the
world, and its preservation, with the various turns of Providence, there are
clear discoveries of the Divine Maker; yet how little advance did the wise
Philosopher make to that perfection of Soul which was in man before the Fall,
or to that that is obtained under the influencing light of the Scripture, and
the Divine Spirit, or shall be in man placed in a state of glory? And though
God has added to us his blessed Scripture in conjunction with the works of
Creation and Providence, to exercise our thoughts upon, for the perfecting of
our knowledge, yet to what little advancement do many attain in the
understanding of God and Divine Mysteries! Therefore our compassionate Father
in Christ, sensible of our weakness in the real and firm understanding of
Divine Things, has given forth another help to our dark Soul in conjunction
with the former, even his Divine Spirit, teaching us all truth, and helping us
to a rest and reliance upon his Word, working in us a sense and feeling of
those great and mavelous mysteries for preparing our Souls toward the more
full and glorious perception of them. The Revelation in the Old Testament was
like the morning-light, mixed with the shades of the night; the Revelation in
the New Testament is clear day; but the Revelation of God and Christ in Heaven,
is like the Sun at noon in its full luster. If this therefore has been God's
gradual method to restore men, and we enjoy so bright a discovery of mercy to
save us, those who refuse to accept it, cannot escape the condemnation due as
the recompense of it, the dwelling in darkness with the children of darkness
and disobedience for ever, Romans 2. If those who have had no other help in the
understanding of the invisible things of God, besides the beholding of created
things, are left without excuse for not improving that light, and being
obedient to it; How much more inexcusable shall they be who have the light of
Life shining upon them, do not believe the Supernatural Truths revealed by it,
and will rather charge the Doctrines of the Gospel with Impossibility, than
acknowledge the narrowness of their understandings? Converse with some real
Christians in a way of Experience is greatly laid aside; feasting, discoursing
the common affairs of the Nation, the recommendation of Self-notions in
Religion, and the disparaging of others, are put in the room of such
Conference; that the serious Christian putting in sentences of experimental
Religion is immediately repulsed, with the pleasing, though lazy, Excuse, of
Experiences being too nice and dangerous to be talked of, which perhaps is
found so, when either triflingly observed, or biassed with the vicious design
of applause, and mutual instruction and comfort out of the Soul's aim.

Printing therefore I have made choice of. Its commonness and unsucccssfulness
in the hands of the most Learned and most Holy of God's Children had greatly
discouraged me, if God's special method of discovering Himself and his Word to
my Soul, and that in so short a while, had not put me under a greater
obligation than ordinary to witness for him, when so many bear false witness
against his Attributes and Revealed Will. And therein I design not to debate
the Reality of Inward Religion, (being come, blessed be his Name, to full
establishment and assurance thereof) but to tell you, That Christianity is
somewhat else than an outward Profession, more powerful in its dominion than
the by-ends of Applause, outward Interest, or the strength of Education, and
never to be understood by corrupt Reason alone, without the help of Divine
Revelation, and a Divine Spirit; and to convince hereof, I design not sensible
demonstration, but first of all to give you a Narrative of some Mysteries
experienced, I formerly was unacquainted with as Evidences of an inward change,
and of the life of Religion to be between God and the Soul; my outward
Conversation while under the power of Education, having been in great measure
as unblameable in appearance as now.

2. To tell you the Means made effectual to enlighten my dark mind to
understand the reality of Divine Spiritual Mysteries, that so you walking in
the same road, may meet with the same knowledge of God and his Word as true,
and then you will bid adieu to all your spreading Errors, and find them rather
confirmation to Christianity, than shaking to your Faith, (Resemblance being
generally a Companion to Reality) you will be changed from cooperating with
Satan, to the pleasing of him and your own inward Lust; to the working together
with God, pleasing of him, and the obtaining Salvation to your Souls.

Farewell.
Page 137. after Line 3. add what here follows;

A second Argument to persuade to the Duty of Observation, is, That it is
introductory to greater matter of Observation. It Is known to all observing
Christians, That the more they have observed, the greater things have been
brought to their view, and lesser Providence remarked, have led to greater;
the smallest step a Christian makes toward God, it is greatly encouraged by him,
and he will enable us to further Progress in his ways. How evident is this from
Christ's words to Nathanael, Believe thou because I said, I saw thee under
the fig tree? thou shall see greater things, heaven open, and the angels of God
ascending and descending upon the son of man.

By the observation of outward Providence, you will see God in the Blessings
he bestows: Jacob when he met his Brother Esau, Genesis 33.10. says with a Rapture
of Affection, I have seen thy face, as tho I had seen the face of God: This at
first view looks almost like Blasphemy; but in Esau's reconciled face to him,
he saw the Face, Presence, and Favor of God; the principal Object was not so
much Esau's reconciliation to him, as the Favor and Hand of God in bringing it
about; this raised his Spirit to such an Exclamation: Such a sight of God in
the going forth of his Divine Providence, necessarily supposes its Observation.
Is it therefore possible to observe means probable of bringing forth such
designs, but made unsuccessful? The contrivances of the Wise brought to other
ends than they purposed? The evil Craftiness of others to their Dishonor and
Ruin, when designed for their Honor and Preferment? Yea, means in appearance
tending to hurt, bringing forth great good? Is it possible, I say, to observe
these things, and not to discover another Power above Human Policy to contrive,
or Human Strength to effectuate? Even the Sovereign Power of an Infinite God,
who many times determines Events contrary to men's designs, but still for the
bringing forth his own.

THE Private Christian's Witness for CHRISTIANITY, etc.
THE following Discourse I divide into Two Parts: The First, Contains an
Historical Account of my self, under no other Religion than that of Education,
with the outward Providence, and inward Workings of a Divine Spirit, changing
me from thence to a sensible feeling of a more inward powerful Principle than
that of Education; opening a door of Knowledge of God, of Divine Mysteries, of
my own State before, and of my present State thus Enlightened.

The Second, Contains an Application thereof to the Profane and mere
Professor, or unto the real, though lazy Christian.

First, I begin with the Narrative, and take this Account of my self under no
other power of Christianity than the effect of Religious Education: One Born
within the Pale of the Church, instructed in the knowledge of the True
Principles of the Christian Religion, and enabled to discourse of them; with
the Character of knowing the Things of God, (though but Notionally then;) Trained
up with the continued Example of performing all the Duties of Hearing, Reading,
and Praying, with that powerful influence, that public or private Devotion
were seldom neglected, but not diligent and serious in the perusal of the
Scriptures; Besides, all this under the advantage of Religious Conversation and
Holy Practice, was so powerfully impressing, that in the course of my Life,
never one single act of the common Vices of Drinking, Swearing, or Uncleanness,
tainted my Conversation: Yea, the impression continued so strong, as after my
departure from under this strictness of instruction and example, still the same
exactness in Duties and Conversation remained, though Youthful Temptations
surrounded me. God's restraining Grace was my preservative; and my natural
desire to be in Business was a means of preventing the impression of
Temptations; yet still I was in the dark as to the saving knowledge of True
Christianity, or the inward power of Grace sensibly acting in the Soul; my
natural disposition inclining me more to Observation, than to much Talk in
Conversation, led me not only to observe the Discourse and Actions of others,
but even to remark the Events attending my Life, with Reflections thereupon,
without any regard to it as Duty, or productive of the knowledge of Divine
Things, but purely as the effect of natural Curiosity, inducing me both to
observe and to record them with great pleasure in reviewing them; and finding
the more I observed, the greater and more numerous things were presented to me,
I became stricter in observing things of great and smaller moment. While I
continued in this practice, a Dispensation of Providence occurred, that induced
me not to trust in my self, or second Causes, but by a siducial assent to the
Being of a God in his full governing Power, as to Persons and Things, with a
full desire of being interested in the favor of this Great and Omnipotent God,
to live in an entire dependence upon Him.

The Providence was as follows: Being called to attempt a matter of great
concern, (that many far excelling me in Age, rational Judgment, and natural
Activity, had endeavored, though unsuccessfully, to bring about) I brought the
Business, and that in a very few days, to all seeming probability of success;
but being obliged by a Providential Occasion to be absent, and to appear where
those that had tried their endeavor to no effect did usually reside, I found
the progress I had already made, with the prospect of perfecting the matter,
had so increased the esteem of my self, that disparaging of those, was the Game
I then exercised my self withal; but returning to the place where the Business
was to be performed, matters were altogether changed for the worst; and upon
enquiry of the time this change happened, (my custom of Observation having
brought me to some more than ordinary curiosity in it) I found it exactly
answering the time my Lust of Pride put forth its Tyranny in my Conversation;
and stepping from the Floor to my Bed, that very night, this Suggestion
suddenly and strongly darted into my Mind; That by my ill return to God's
Kindness, affording such hopes of success, in detracting from Him the Praise
that was entirely due for such an eminent Providence, and in not retaining an
humble Sense of my own Unworthiness and Insufficiency, I had provoked the Lord
thus to turn the course of the Affair, immediately convincing me who it was
that had made me to differ from others of more promising Abilities than I, and
impressing my Mind with great seriousness of Thought, and force to Prayer,
begging Pardon from Him, and His further assistance in the matter, with a full
resolution of looking to God, extolling Him, and debasing my self in the
success. My Prayer was immediately returned, evident by the great alteration
that immediately happened, as a sweet Condescension of God to train a poor
Creature to the Knowledge of Himself, and to delight in Him; but in a weeks
time more, being called to the same place as before, I found the same
Self-applause return: This was a full conviction to me of the great need of
continued supplies of Heaven after the greatest confirmations of God's Love to
preserve us from forgetting his Mercies, or repeating failures; and
correspondent to this, the same unsuccessful turn happened in the affair, which
was so powerfully bore home upon my Soul, that I could not but see God with
favor in one hand and punishment in another; mavelous Mercy in bringing me
to the sense of my failure, and the repetition of my Address to Heaven;
Punishment in withholding his assistance, the just merit of my forgetfulness,
and of my repeated failure: Upon Address to God by serious and sincere Prayer,
with unfeigned Confession, the Business turned again with a favorable aspect
of success; suitable to the Psalmist, I confessed my Sin, and thou forgavest
the Iniquity, or Punishment, of my Sin; And at last by his Divine Assistance,
attained a final and perfect success, though between my first undertaking and
this final Issue, there was four turns of Providence exactly answering my
Soul's posture.

From hence I date my first sense of inward serious thoughtfulness of passages
of Divine Providence; of minding God in all undertakings, with an entire
dependence upon him for conduct to the right use of means, and for a Divine
Blessing to make them successful, of the certainty of access to him; for this
very end, with a distrust of self-sufficiency, all which met as it were in a
moment in my Soul, by the Spirit of God's bearing home this passage upon me:
But from the Observation of God's further method of outward Providence and
inward Workings of his Spirit, I have found that these were but little
glimmerings of light, an Eye beginning to be opened after a sound and secure
sleep. God having marvellously enlightn'd my Eyes since, and made me to see
what before I knew only in the notion, enabling me to discourse thereof; but
what now, I hope, I may say I have felt, and am well assured of, even the truth
of an inward change upon the Soul, putting it self forth with such power, as to
hinder Thought, Words and Actions to run in the same course from the same
principle, or toward the same end as before, but to tread according to a Rule,
not of self, but of God's Will.

I could subjoin many circumstances of this Providence here related, that might
marvellously affect the Reader; yea, other Providence, concerning the Lord's
first exciting designs, as well as his method in bringing them successfully
about, were it not that I am unwilling to be known to the World, and that for
these Reasons.

First, That Mockers at, and Unbelievers of these great things experimental
Religion has made known to my Soul, may not prejudice themselves by imagining
show, self-commendation and applause at the bottom of this design, the faithful
aim thereof being to bring men off their reliance upon notional Religion, and
their trusting to their rational conclusions, as fittest means to inform them
of Christianity, or to their own strength as sufficient help to the right
performance of Gospel Duties; and to lead them to the vital part of
Christianity, experiences therein, not to be maintained by notional knowledge
or quarrelling Debates, but by a serious and strict use of means God commonly
imparts the experience of himself and his Word by; The Lord has given forth
great Truths to be tried and experienced in the Christian Soul, but we are not
at the pains either to observe them, or by mutual converse to confirm one
another in the truth of them.

A Second Reason is, Lest it prove Temptation to my self, exciting a corrupt
Principle within to puffing up, whereas great Humility is the companion of such
Experiences when first felt in the Soul, and ought to be preserved in imparting
them to others, lest we our selves be exalted above measure, or engage others
to think of us above what we are.

Again, this change wrought in my Soul, is the Lord's own doing; let it
therefore in its declaration glorify him by Confirming some, and Instructing
others, without any knowledge of my self therein, but with full discovery of
the actings of a Divine Spirit.

This Seriousness brought forth by the means of so remarkable an outward
Providence in the Hand of God, was soon accompanied with some sensible Changes
never felt formerly, but then so visible as forced me to commit them to a
Diary; some whereof were as follows.

First, An Eye to God in all Things, a Petitioning of Him for all Things, with
some beginnings of Resignation to his Will in all events. It was not as before,
a trusting to nothing but what was sensible, a distraction of Thoughts to find
out this or the other instrument to bring about such an event; but now I could
hope in things unseen; and instead of hurrying of Thoughts to find out means to
bring about an event, I began the pursuit of a design with serious address to
Heaven, for conduct to my self in the use of means, and for a Blessing to the
event according to his Pleasure; enlargement in Prayer was not at this time
understood, only when an endeavor in the use of means and with address to God,
was made successful, I could not but observe it, with some excitings to love
this God that had given me my Heart's Desire, and that in answer to Prayer;
which brought me,

Secondly, To some Trust to God; Sense begun to be out of favor, whereas
formerly I could encourage my self in nothing but what was either in
possession, or in all probability certain; now there were some sparklings of
Trust to God, and Love to Him I had been so obliged to by his Blessings,
Endeavors, and answering of Prayers, which would often raise that reflection
in my Thoughts, how gratefully and dutifully I ought to endeavor the pleasing
of him, whose Strength was my Assistance, whose Ear was so open to my address,
which proved a sensible mean of bringing me,

Thirdly, To a diligent search of the Scriptures, therein to know his Will, and
by endeavoring conformity thereto, to please him who had made himself to be
observed thus loving, whereas formerly with Historical delight only the
Scriptures were made use of by me; my Thoughts then run pleasantly after the
Practical meaning, as well as the Notional Knowledge of them; at which time the
15th Psalm throughout greatly accompanied my Thoughts, and inclined me for some
considerable time to breathe forth continual Petitions for practical Conformity
to it.

Fourthly, Great exercise of Hatred to those Sins that usually did beset me.
While under the impression of Education, and Religious Example, and sober
Society, my outward life was free from single acts of common Vice; yet upon the
sense and feeling of an inward change, a long roll of inward Corruptions I
discovered, that the World and I were not judges of, though then they offered
themselves fully to my view.

Fifthly, An inward seriousness of Thoughts, as well as outward gravity in
performance of Duties, aiming then at pleasing God in the parts of his Worship.

Sixthly, A serious free affection toward Holy Christians, the least degree
whereof I never had formerly any evidence, their Conversation in Christianity
having often proved confinement and burdensome, unless where Relation and
Friendship made it less tiresome: The first sensible evidence whereof
discovered it self in my Carriage toward some who had falsely reproached me
with an Aspersion base in its Nature, and likely to be injurious to one against
whom I had determined Prosecution; but this inward change happening in the mean
while, both my malice and resolution of Revenge ceased at once, with some
uneasiness of mind, till I had discoursed the thing with themselves, and given
them my own sense of its ill management, they having been bound in conformity
to God's Divine Word to have imparted the reproach first to my self, by doing
whereof its falsehood would have been known, and their spreading of a false
reproach to the injury of others might have been prevented; a caution to all
Religious Professors giving too great heed to common Reproaches, and too great
way to their spreading them in Conversation. My Malice and resolved Revenge
were turned into affectionate Inclinations and good Actions; after which
instant, a delight in Converse with Christians, though mean in outward
circumstances, was more pleasing to me than all the hurrying joy of Companions
abroad, when at any time obliged to be witness thereto.

Seventhly, A surprising compassion toward the Poor, with continual
Ejaculatory Praise, that my Station was otherwise than theirs; even when going
along the Streets or Roads, if objects of Charity presented themselves, this
frame of praising God was immediately upon me, blessing him for my being in
other Circumstances than theirs, of want or bodily Imperfections; with a watch
over my self, lest in my Charity desire of applause, or any degree of
unwillingness had appeared. Charity to be seen of men receives its reward when
viewed by men; unwillingness therein spoils it in its nature, and takes off all
expectation of a reward.

Eighthly, A clearer sense of the Work of Redemption, and of Christ the
Redeemer. Though I had the Notional Knowledge, and Historical Faith of both, yet
in Prayer or Meditation, my admiring Thoughts of free Grace, and my words of
Praise for its effects upon the Soul, would continually center upon God the
Father; yea, in Prayer there always would appear a constraint from giving any
distinct Worship to Christ, for his adorable love in the Work of Redemption,
and that for some time after the sensible evidence of this inward Charge, which
was an opportunity to Satan, to argue against the Deity of Christ, if God's
restraining Power had not chained his Malice from trampling upon that tender
Plant of Grace, beginning to bud forth; and though Satan was under constraint as
to any Assault or Victory of this kind; yet I found an uneasiness and
dissatisfaction in my self for not being enabled to give Admiration and
Prayers, centering upon God the Son, as well as upon God the Father, which made
me impart my concern of Mind to several Ministers of eminent Gifts, but had
Instruction from none, save one, who thus answered me out.

No wonder (says he) our Love and Admiration, our Prayers and Praises run most
toward God the Father, these being as a natural Tribute, which in nature we
allow to God as Creator and Preserver of us. Whereas a saving Eye to Christ as
Redeemer, or as God, in Worship seems more the effect of the Blessed and Divine
Spirit. Which answer was accompanied at the time with some satisfaction of
Mind; but soon after this inward Change put forth such strong and numerous
evidences with heart-service in the parts of Divine Worship, as well as outward
Gravity therein, that self-sufficiency was laid aside, and hope entirely
dependent upon Christ's Satisfaction as the Fountain of all Gospel Privileges,
was raised, with a clear apprehension of Christ's Satisfaction, and with a
distinct Worship of him in Prayer; from whence I was easily confirmed, that
under the incapacity of Worshipping Christ as God, I was not under the saving
sensible power of Christianity; but that now under this saving change of Soul,
producing, among other things, a clear view of Christ, the foundation of our
rich Privileges, I could perform a distinct worship of Christ in Prayer, and do
hope that I am under the instruction and inward power of that Divine Spirit,
whom he has promised should guide us unto all Truth in the use of his means;
John 14.26. What is a guide otherwise in Nature and way of power upon the Soul,
than that the product only of religious Education, and of the Notional
Knowledge of Christianity?

As by the word of Truth, with a frequent use of the Sacrament, so by this very
experience, I have been wonderfully established in the truth of the Godhead of
Christ, against all the Socinianism falsehoods of the men of this Age; in that
Duty of the Holy Sacrament I have often been so ravished with the Contemplation
of Christ's Love in himself as God and Man, that at the very time I have been
in great exercise of pity toward those poor Creatures who deny his Godhead;
and have often thought with my self, that unacquaintance with themselves on God's
own word, experience in their Soul, was the occasion of their distrust of
Christ as God. How weak are the Socinian Arguments against our Blessed Redeemer
as God? And tho they be prevalent upon some unacquainted with God's word, at
least not experimentally felt as truth upon their Souls, yet they are easily to
be repelled by the Scriptural discovery of Christ's Two distinct Natures in One
Person for ever. And how much more weak will they appear at that blessed day of
Resurrection, when they shall see him in his perfect Glory, as God-Man,
Redeemer of lost Man, and the Judge of them that would not comprehend him as a
Glorious God.

What is more plain than that Scriptural evidence of the Godhead of Christ in
the First Epistle of John, chap. 5. v. 20? And we know that the Son of God is
come, and has given us understanding that we might know him that is true; and
we are in him that is true, even in his Son Christ Jesus; this is the true God,
and eternal life; if we are in him, ingrasted by the operation of his Divine
Spirit, we shall draw forth such knowledge of him both as certainly come,
against all the Jews on Earth; and as God, and Eternal Life, against all the
Socinians at this day; from my own experience. I desire to put my poor Seal to
this Scripture-truth, discoverable in what I have already laid before you. I do
believe, That the Professor of Christianity turning Socinian, never knew Christ
any other way than by a notional Knowledge, pleasing to its self, but never
feeling that saving-knowledge of him by the work of a Divine Spirit in the use
of means, planting or watring Grace in the Soul.

John c. 1. v. 3. All things were made by him, and in v 10. The world was made
by him, and it knew him not, undoubtedly therefore he made up one of them, Genesis
1.26. who said, Let us make man; one in Nature, though three Persons distinct;
Is not the Soul a Man? One in Essence, though different in its Faculties, of
Judgment, Will and Affections.

Colos. chapter 1. v. 14, 15, 16. By him, to wit, the Son that Redeemed us, the
Image of God, the first born from the Dead, all things were Created, he was
before all things, and all things consist by him, which are never applicable to
Christ unless he be God as well as Man.

Again, God's attribute of Omnipotence could never be appropriated to him, if
he were not God as well as Man. John 2.24. But Jesus did not commit himself to
them, because he knew all Men. John 6.64. For Jesus knew from the beginning who
they were that believed not, and who should betray him. In the sixth verse of
the same Chapter, it is said, That Jesus knew he had been a long time in that
case.

Isaiah 8.13. Sanctify the Lord of Host, let him be your fear and dread, he
shall be for a sanctuary; but for a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense
to both houses of Israel: Who is this Lord of Hosts that is to be a stone of
stumbling, and a rock of offense? It is expressed in the ninth Chapter of the
Romans and 32 Verse, They stumbled at the stumbling-stone.

Isaiah, c. 6. Who can read it throughout and compare it with the 12th chapter
of John v. 38. and not be convinced of the Deity of Christ? therefore they
could not believe because Isaiah said, He has blinded their eyes, and hardened
their hearts, that they should not see and be converted, as is set down in the
latter part of that 6th Chapter of Isaiah; and in the 41st verse of the same
chapter of John, it is expressed, These things said Isaiah when he saw his
glory, and spoke of him, as in the former part of that 6th chapter he did
express it, Sitting upon a throne, high and lifted up, his train filling the
temple, Seraphims standing above it, crying one to another, Holy, holy, holy,
is the Lord of Hosts, the whole earth is full of his glory; by the comparing of
both Chapters its plain, that it was Christ that is thus described; and whether
such a description be applicable to mere man, I leave it to any Christian to
judge of.

Withour further running over the Scriptures attesting the Divinity of Christ,
or further enlarging upon the personal experience of freeness of worship to him
in Prayer, and other Duties, in that change of Soul wherein Faith to Christ was
implanted, I Will only add one Scripture more, not only accusing of Socinians
themselves, but these of Christ's Flock, who encourage their Erroneous Doctrine
by too familiar converse with their persons: It is the 2d Epistle of John, the
9th and 10th verses, Who abides not in the Doctrine of Christ, has not God;
and if that of his being God, but now made out, be not one great part of the
Doctrine of Christ, I know not how we shall understand his satisfaction of God
as is described in his word: In the 10th verse it is said, If any deceivers
come unto you and bring not this Doctrine, receive them not in your house,
neither bid them speed; both being an argument of Familliarity, but justly
reproving those who are so far from giving such discouragement to Deceivers,
that if by them can be diverted Splenetick Vapors by acuteness of their Wit
and diverting Conversation, they shall have as great, if not greater room in
their Society or Houses, as those whose delight is to communicate and discourse
the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Grace. By this means we hug the tools of
spreading Errors in our Bosoms.

To proceed in the Narrative of God's further method of carrying on this great
inward change in the use of his usual means, I shall First of all lay before
you the Experiences of the certainty of the Souls access to God in Prayer, of
the seriousness of frame therein, that the profane and mere Professor, though
never so outwardly Religious, are altogether unacquainted with; the experiences
of the certainty of Christ's Spirit interceding in us in Prayer, and of the
correspondency thereof to God's return.

Secondly, Experiences of God's method of working sensibly, and fructifying
Faith and Reliance upon himself.

Thirdly, Experiences of the withholding Divine Influences in Prayer.

Fourthly, Experiences of God's method of training the Soul to right hearing of
the Word, and participation of the Lord's Supper.

Experiences of the First, take in the following Order.

My First Experience leading me to the certainty of what is expressed above,
was, That when providentially called to the undertaking of any matter of great
concern and difficulty, that then, according to the fervency and powerfulness
of Soul carrying me forth to supplicate, so encouragement has accompanied the
management of such an Affair; and when endeavor has been to be continued in,
according to the continuance or intermission of this frame, so encouragement or
discouragement has appeared; some instances whereof I have experienced in the
following method, where the endeavor has been of three days duration. The
first day I have been Heavenlily carried out in Prayer; the next two days this
frame has been removed, and the matter either neglected in Prayer, or
superficially given up to God; And upon the examination of the success of Means
throughout those three days, I have sound eminent success the companion of the
first days Endeavor; but in the use of the two following days Endeavor, a
perfect discouragement, and that exactly answering the two different postures
of Soul that Prayer in these different days was put up to Heaven in.

A Second Experience was, when in one Prayer I have Petitioned the Lord
concerning two different matters; and Pleading for the one, my Thoughts have
been ravishingly carried forth; but supplicating for the other, a damp has been
upon my mind, and neither life or vigor in its frame, nor freedom of words in
utterance concerning it; Praying then no otherwise than while under the power
of Education, and ignorant of any inward change of Soul by the power of a
Divine Spirit; and in the enquiry have found, that the design and desire
Spiritually given up to God's Divine conduct, has been successfully brought
about; but that the other was without imminent probability, or real and certain
success.

A Third Experience was, When my frame of Mind has been cold, listless and
lazy, continuing thus throughout a Prayer, excepting one Petition that suddenly
has seized my Thoughts, and has been in sweet Heavenliness of frame put up,
yea, so seriously and powerfully put up to God, unconceivable by any
unacquainted with fellowship with God in Prayer, the Petitions before and after
having been asked of God with great coldness of frame, and constraint of words;
but this to which God was to return an answer, and for which strength was
conveyed to Petition, corresponded a visible and eminent return of Prayer,
without the least measure of answer to the other parts of Prayer thus coldly
given up to God.

Many instances of these Experiences I could bring forth, and that fully
discovering the nature of them more plainly; but fear of being known, confining
me, I shall only lay before you one, which was mavelous in my eyes at the
time, and has often been repeated in my Experience since.

Having been for some days engaged in endeavoring to obtain a design of great
moment, in the diligent use of all visible means, that only excepted of giving
it up to Heaven by Prayer; I resolved one afternoon to go abroad on purpose to
know the success of means made use of; but after walking down one pair of
Stairs, there suddenly seized me an unexpressible force to return, that I might
first Petition the Lord concerning it; and bowing my Knees, a sweet serious
frame seized my Mind, and my Thoughts were carried forth with great warmth and
freedom of utterance concerning the matter: After this Address to God, and
going forth, I found that the least degree or shadow of success had never
appeared till that very time, in which I was under so undesign'd and sudden a
force to Prayer, and with so Heavenly a frame therein; the times of both so
exactly answered one another, that I was under a meaning Meditation of the
thing, clearly evincing of a Power above ones self.

The circumstances in this instance most remarkable, were, first, sudden and
prevalent force to Prayer, undesign'd by previous Meditation, and altogether
different from that of a sudden remembrance of any thing forgot, but very
suitable to the exciting-methods of Christ's Spirit, and quickening Influences
upon the Soul, raising it out of a dead frame, or exciting it to Duties omitted
or carelessly performed. Psalm. 65.4. Blessed is the man whom thou causest to
approach unto thee; and if this was not causing me to approach him, never any
motion was; visible by the sudden and strong excitement to that Duty formerly
omitted, and by imparting Divine Strength to petition concerning it, in Prayer,
and to resist the corrupted reluctance to it.

A Second Thing remarkable in the instance, was, the struggle in my self at the
first excitement to Prayer, between an inclination and aversion to returning,
with the victorious strength of Divine influence, bringing me to a willing
performance of the Duty; which circumstance proved amongst the first, to
confirm my Faith in the reality of there being a law in the Members warring
against that law of the Mind.

A Third Circumstance in the instance, was, The exact correspondency of the
time of Excitement, and Heavenliness in Prayer, to the time of the real, though
unexpected success; a circumstance greatly discovering Self-insufficiency in
the use of means, without Divine conduct therein, and Trust to God for the
Event.

The Fourth Experience concerning Prayer, was, when any failure observed in
Thought, Word or Action, and accompanied with concern of Mind, and great
Spirituality in Prayer in acknowledging it to God; that then I have found, as
its immediate concommitant, the uneasiness and concern perfectly gone off, with
full quiet possessing my Thoughts, and the exercise of greater watch its
consequent, confirming the truth of the 6th and 7th verses of the 4th chapter
of Philippians; never experiencing either ease of Mind, as to events, giving up
to Divine conduct, as to concern for sinful failures, but when carried forth
heavenlily in Prayer for either.

I must subjoyn hereto an experienced circumstance, That according to the
greatness of my fear as to any event, leading me the more frequently to Heaven
by Prayer, and the less to confidence in outward means, the more unexpectedly
eminent the return has been, discovering the excellency of the Psalmist's
method, What time we are afraid, we will trust in the Lord; with the use of
that Blessed means of serious Prayer, I have often experienced, that Trust to an
outward instrument for the bringing about any design, with a resting therein
without frequent and fervent Prayers for the same end, has made the mean that
was successful in the hands of others, or that is in its self tending naturally
to a successful event, of none effect to me.

A Fifth Experience, was in the Lord's affording me heavenliness of frame, and
the intercession of his Divine Spirit for an event in Prayer, when all hopes
from any thing else had been removed, and no ground of hope left but what was
drawn from this frame of Soul in Prayer, and the full quiet of mind concerning
the event, brought forth by the same Divine Hand: I could set down numerous
instances of the imminency of Death to Friends and Acquaintances, where nothing
of probable hope was left, but what was draw^ from this experience of the
Spirit of God interceding with me, by carrying me out to ask in a manner far
above my self, for their Recovery; and then against all probable expectation,
the recovery has followed: Yea, at this very time, I can instance, a Child, who
for some time was laid out as Dead, but in my humble hope, Alive; and that
purely from the sensible power given me to ask its life of the Lord, Who knows
the things of God, but the Spirit of God? as the Spirit of Man alone knows the
secret Thoughts and Will of Man; and if the Spirit of God know the Mind of God,
and his design of bestowing an event unknown to our selves, it is not so
strange that unexpectedly and suddenly, in the use of that blessed Duty of
Prayer, Christ's Spirit should breathe upon us strength to ask, what we
designed not, but what he knew would be, through that method discovering the
reality of a Divine Spirit, who is to help our Infirmities, who neither know
what to ask, nor how to ask of our selves, only by keeping in the Obedience of
God's Will to Prayer, and thereby lay our selves in God's road to receive
Divine Direction, both to ask what we did not premeditate, and in a manner
above our own natural corrupted capacity. If the Spirit of God know the Will of
God against an event, no wonder he draws his Divine influence from the Soul in
Petitioning to obtain it, and no other warmth in Prayer appears than what is
the product of self, and the great desire of obtaining it, far differing from
that seriousness that is the effect of a Divine Spirit, the right observation
whereof greatly helps the Christian to distinguish the one and the other.

I know that great care is here to be taken, not to entertain hopes of
obtaining every Petition, that God has not absolutely promised; or by
Petitioning without Resignation to his Will; but from experience of God's
condescending-way of training up Babes in Christianity, I hope I may say, that
the Spirit of God never intercedes with us in Prayer to God for any thing that
is not to be obtained, or without Resignation to his Blessed Will; and any
mistake herein must slow from either of these two Reasons: First, From an
ignorance when Christ's Spirit does intercede with us in Prayer: A natural
tender affectionate Constitution, and an ardent desire after the thing prayed
for, imposes a likeness thereof in some, and continual thoughtfulness of Mind;
or a sweet Tone and way of Expression brings sometimes others to a likeness of
this frame; Whereas the observing Christian, from care therein, finds this
Prayer come suddenly upon him, and with full gale of Strength, far above his
own, drawing himself forth with that filial Boldness, and near Familiarity and
approach to God, and with that quiet of Mind concerning the matter, as if its
answer was already returned: The observed experience whereof helps the Soul to
answer all such cautionary Objections, and discovers to its experience, That
Resignation to God's Will goes along with the Heavenliness of Frame, to make up
the evidence of Christ's Spirit, helping us to ask, without either of which,
the evidence seems cloudy, dull, and uncertain.

Or Secondly, Mistakes may come by misapplying the return of Prayer, through
too soon judging of the Prayers returned, or by applying Prayer to somewhat
else than is the real return of the Prayer; the effect whereof has been often so
evil, that even many gracious Children of God have been led into Darkness, kept
from that sense of intimacy that really they had, judging their Prayers
unreturn'd, or at least bringing them under great Thoughtfulness; though their
Faith was fixed upon God's Word, yet how to reconcile former experiences to
this of a Divine Spirit's intercedings for them, and yet unreturn'd.

My great help against such mistakes, has been an exact observation of my
different Utterance, as well as my different Frames in Prayer, and to set down
the very Word expressed therein. If the Spirit of God give and help the
Utterance of Ministers, as well as Spiritualize their Mind in Preaching, that
being recommended by Paul as a fit Petition upon his account, and experienced
as Truth by the worthiest of his Ministers; Why not to give and to help
Utterance in Prayer, as well as a Heavenly Frame therein? Whatever others
imagine or ridicule concerning familiarity of Style in Spiritual Prayer, I can
truly say, That when my Frame of Soul has been thus suddenly changed from
Lifelesness to great Spirituality, I have then been in a maze to experience an
unusual freeness of expression, wondering at the Words themselves expressed, and
the nearness to God that I have thought my Soul approached to: And upon some
patient waiting before judging the return of the Prayer, and comparing the
parts and circumstances of the event to the words I was enabled to utter, and
had afterward set down, I found so much correspondency as is between a Seal
and its impression. I know those far excelling my self in Grace and Experience
with God, losing the sight of the return from God, by misapplying the return
not to the Words uttered in Prayer, but to what they so mightily desired. I
remember an instance in my self, concerning a Servant's parting from me, and
Petitioning Heaven for his conduct to the use of means for another, I found
comfortable Divine Strength in Prayer; and in some hours after happening in the
company of one, who formerly had recommended a Servant in most things
acceptable, he informed me of another, with a Character far exceeding the
first; to which Providence I immediately implying Prayer, expressed it at its
return, but afterward found disappointment as to them, and difficulty in
finding any other seemingly evidence of Prayer without Divine Strength put up,
and unaccepted by God; but soon after, by some special passages of Providence,
this Servant begged leave to stay, though they had confidently despised my place,
and given warning to provide another in their room, which proved better than
changing at that time, though a good one had fallen in my way, which was a return
exactly suiting the Utterance in Prayer, confirmed by the comparison of the
latter Event to the Utterance set down.

As this was a plain instance of too hasty a judging the return of Prayer,
taking one Providential passage for return, begun only by it, and carried on by
other passages adjoined thereto; so I shall lay before you another instance of
misapplying the return to the thing desired, and not to the Utterance in the
Prayer Spiritually performed, and that by as eminent a Saint as ever lived on
Earth, though now gone off the stage of time, without the sight of its return,
yet died in the Faith of my seeing its return, but still his Thoughts was upon
what he so mightily pressed for, in his own desire.

Providentially happening to design a matter of great concern, and imparting
the design, with some passages of Providence exciting me first thereto, to this
Saint then on Earth; he desired some time to think upon the matter ere he
returned his Advice, which I found was on purpose to lay the whole affair
before the Throne of Grace, by repeated Addresses thereto; After which he
advised my undertaking the design from his sense of God's laying it in my way
by special conduct of Providence, and from his sense of his Petition accepted,
for Divine Assistance in it, and mavelous Effects from it, from which I
engaged in the endeavor, but all attempts proved unsuccessful: In the interim
of which endeavor, my Thoughts in Prayer never fixed to any one Petition
concerning it, besides Divine conduct in the use of means, and Resignation to
his Divine Will; this endeavor between hopes from this Prayer accepted, and
discouragement from the unsuccessfulness of attempt, continued for many months,
yet still easy, and with amazing Resignation to God's Will, till at last such
a circumstance fell out as did unalterably obstruct the matter, and the return
that he applied his Prayer unto; notwithstanding of which, amongst his last
words to me on Earth, long after this disappointment, he uttered this Sentence
with great exercise of Faith, That I should meet with a full discovery of God's
design therein, and that in answer to his Prayer. Prayer accepted, and the
intimation thereof given, will never want its return, clearly verified from
comparing his Letters and Words to the Events that have attended my life since;
though the disappointment seemed an evidence of his Prayers lost, yet really has
led into such things as plainly appear his Prayer's return, his mistake
appearing to be fixing his Spirituality in Prayer, with his other evidences of
its acceptance, to what he so much desired, to wit, the success of an outward
endeavor, whereas if his Utterance had been recorded, reflected upon, and
compared with Events, that even I begun to find from God in my self, and did
discover to him, the mistake might have been prevented.

In one of his Letters he expresses himself thus: It is becoming me with much
humble sobriety to speak as to any impression on my Spirit, with respect to
your business, though often I dare say I have had some special assurance from
the Lord of his Gracious respect to you, so as I could not question, the
evidence whereof was so full and clear, and of so great testimony; yet to you
hereof in the way of Providence, and am at the furthest of persuasion, that
such a breaking up of Light shall occur, as shall be matter both of Joy and
farther Establishment; and if after such unusual and eminent Evidences he has
given of his Respect and Favor to you, beyond most in this day, would it be
strange or grievous, if in so great a concern, he should take a new trial of
your Love and Resignation to him, by giving it entirely up to his blessed
disposal? I know you have settled your Reliance on his Hand, in ordering the
present matter, who has been your God, and the God of your youth hitherto.

In another Letter, his Words were: You shall see the design of the Lord in
this affair, however dark it at present appear, with that evidence as shall
tend to a higher establishment of you in his Way and Truth, and clear all
former dark steps; the greatest experiments of Trust has been most obtained in
the greatest extremities of his Peoples case.

In another Letter his Words were: Though it is not easy to write at such a
distance, yet I have confidence to say, That one day rarely passes without some
serious remembrance of you. My last acquaintance with you has been amongst the
most sweet remarks of my being in England, especially as to the blessed way of
God round you, therein you have been a further strength to my Faith; I know not
how that matter is with you, but I hope I may adventure to say, That if ever I
knew converse with Heaven here, I have often had, yea, in some special way, an
answer of Peace and Assurance about the Lord's Gracious Design of Grace for
you, and of his further testifying the same to your Soul: I hope you are
gaining new ground of a nearer acquaintance with the way of the Lord, by which
you will find, that by the greatest trials he takes of his followers here, he
then designs the greater trial of himself and his Truth.

Now comparing the Words of this Saint, expressed, concerning the difficulty I
was then under, to my own experience of Divine Providence round me, and to the
Workings of Christ's Spirit in me, since that time; I cannot but confirm his
Sense and Faith of Prayer accepted, and witness its return to my self.

By the very words of his Letters, the current of his Petitions, and seeming
Assurance, run upon God's witnessing his special favor to me in the way of
Providence, and that such breaking up of Light should occur as might establish
my Faith in God, which blessed be his Name, has been the real effect of God's
disappointing my desire and endeavor after this outward thing; yea, has been a
mean in God's hand to discover his special Love to my self, in affording me a
better Mercy in its room, and establishing me thereby in a Trust to God as to
all things else.

Besides, since these outward attempts, since those Letters received, such
mavelous occurrences of Providence I have enjoyed, with such inward sensible
workings of a Divine Spirit, informing and comforting my Soul, and making
progress in that rich Grace of Faith, and actual reliance upon God in all
things, both as to Soul and Body, for conduct in the use of means, and events
following, which makes out his Prayer accepted, and that his assurance was
firmly founded, his failure being the misapplying the Prayer thus sweetly put
up, to a return of what he desired, and not to the return exactly answering the
Utterance of his Soul when Christ's Spirit breathed upon his Petitions to God,
concerning the Lord's Gracious design, and testimony thereof to my Soul, I have
had wonderful establishment, no more amazing; and assured to him in his actual
strength to Petition it, than to me in its enjoyment, by way of his Prayers
returned.

It is conceivable by none but those who are strict observers of God's Ways,
How freely Words fly out of the Mouth of a Soul under a Heavenly ravishing in
Prayer; How familiarly they are expressed, and with what quiet of Mind as to
the return, that if the Soul out of this frame would desire and do all that his
own strength could afford, yet he shall not attain that height of free
utterance, so Heavenly a Style, or so familiar and near an approach to God in
Prayer, as sometimes suddenly in the twinkling of an Eye he shall be brought
to, and that by the blowings afresh of Christ's Divine Influences.

I have my self, while under no other power than that of Education, stood in a
maze to hear Ministers express Communion with God in Duties, the Influences of
Christ's Spirit, and the like, imagining these as words chosen to set off
Religion, and to make it the more amiable to Souls, till experience discovered
the reality thereof; and since the discovery thereof to my self, I have often
with great concern of Soul, heard Christ's Spirit mocked at, Emanations and
Influences from him so ridiculed, that I could not but exercise Compassion,
comparing their Words to my own Thoughts while under the same circumstance of
ignorance of Experimental Religion, and the inward power of Christianity; no
less instruction being capable of illuminating such dark Minds, than what is an
emanation and influence of that Spirit so reviled and set at naught in their
Thoughts; such a one, and the Creature setting Christ in his Divine Nature at
naught, I place in the same Categorical line.

To this Fifth Experience, I subjoin the following instance of an Undertaking,
where the Eyes, Hands, and Wishes of many were against me, and no probable hope
of success in a rational way, but what I had from the mavelous frame of Soul,
and near access to God, concerning it, and like a Miracle, the use of means
obtained, and the desired end was brought forth.

Here I subjoin the Experience of humble Awe and Fear, always attending the
clearest Heavenly frame and most satisfied quiet of Mind I ever had concerning
any one thing; confidence looking to me too much ominous of somewhat of Satan,
and commonly proves a mean of security, and of less diligence in petitioning
Heaven, and depending upon God, than when the Soul has an humble Awe, going
along with its erperience of God's approach to its Soul.

A Sixth Experience of God's Spirit carrying forth the Soul to Petition,
according to what God was to bestow, was not only by changing of the Souls
frame concerning any one Event, but even by changing the verbal Petitions in
the change of circumstances in the same thing: As for instance; At the first
discovery of my inward change, my words in Prayer for any undertaking would run
upon its success, and hardly upon the use of means, to which the condescension
of my Heavenly Father complied by numerous and continual returns of success,
though my endeavors at my first acquaintance with, and observation of God's
Ways, were not so exact; but upon further knowledge of his ways, and greater
progress and reliance upon God for conduct to the use and right use of means,
then my words were changed, running out in Prayer after Divine Assistance in
the performance of Duty, resigning the issue to his Will; answerable to which,
a more diligent watch over my self in the use of means, and the less anxiety
concerning the event, appeared; an experience greatly helping the Soul against
mistaking God or themselves, when his Ways run not in the same stream toward
them, their advancement in strength being gradual; and many times according to
the different steps of growth in Grace, so God walks in different steps round
them, requiring a constant observation of his ways, admiring their variety, and
bringing forth suitable improvement of knowledge of God, love to him, and
dependence upon him: How infinite therefore is the Wisdom of our Blessed God,
who knows the various Constitutions, and the things their Thoughts are most
fixed to, that his breathing Divine Influence thereupon may be his readier mean
to bring them to a serious discovery of God and their selves thereby!

How infinite is the Wisdom, Love and Tenderness of our blessed Husbandman, in
the gradual growth of all the young tender Branches in his Vineyard, and in
training up his Babes in the first knowledge of him, feeding the one with Milk,
and the other with Meat, knowing well what each stand in need of, and can bear,
either of his Smiles, or correcting Stripes, ordering each by degrees to the
perfecting of Grace in the Soul, and making it mete for Eternal Glory!

The Experience whereof helps the Soul to answer the Objection of some serious
Christians, but not exact Observers, who will reply upon imparting a particular
method of God with a Soul by way of caution; You must be careful not to depend
upon that particular way God acts with you in, lest Satan make it a temptation
to unbelief and distrust of God, and your selves, when he shall please to walk
in another road with your Soul; but general and strict Observers find God's
Ways to be thus: That according to the infancy or manhood of the Soul in
Christianity, or according to the different steps of advancing the Soul toward
this Manhood, so God's Ways to be various; and according to his different ends,
so his courses leading thereto usually to be different; mavelous argument
indeed of infinite Wisdom, Love and Compassion in our great God! instruction
enough to make us stand off from prescribing methods according to our
Inclinations or Expectations, but instruction to keep our selves close in the
observation of his Ways, in continual Prayer for a sight of his design, and the
obtaining the establishment of Faith, though the method of God be never so
various with us.

Hereto relates my Experience of God with my own Soul, that according to the
beginnings and progress of my Faith of Reliance, so God's Method has varied;
for while in the beginning of this Trust to God, I think I may say, That never
a Prayer Spiritually performed, wanted its return immediately, and that exactly
suitable to my words in Prayer; but upon further strength of this Grace of
Reliance upon God, I have found the return of my Prayer longer deferred; yea,
sometimes to the last pinch of extremity, but still answerable to the frame of
Soul and Words uttered in Prayer, when this frame and utterance were above my
own strength thorough Divine Influence; argument enough of Divine Wisdom
adapting his various Ways to the various Circumstances of his Childrens
weakness and strength; of Divine Love, establishing their Trust to himself, and
trying their Reliance upon him, as a comfortable evidence of that strength of
Grace, and thereby to lead them to the Sacrifice of continual Praise,
Admiration and Love to him.

How different was Christ's carriage to the Leper, from his acting with the
Woman of Canaan, whose Faith far exceeded the other? The Leper, much weaker in
Faith, had the return of his Prayer immediately; but she, much stronger in
Faith, has the return greatly deferred, with the intermixture of many trying
passages of Christ, with his own silence to her own Petition, and with his
calling her a Dog, as if she were unworthy to be taken notice of, much less to
receive of his Children's food, Mercies in answer to Prayer: The Lord knew her
strength, and adapted his way of trial thereto, which issued in Honor to him,
and evidence to her self of the greatness of her Faith.

When Christ saw Peter's Faith as a Rock to build his Church upon, he then
tells him of the Sufferings to attend him, and all that would follow after
Christ, his Faith being gradually brought up to such a strength, enabled him to
bear this report, which perhaps in the beginning might have discouraged him to
follow Christ or his Rules; when therefore we are as Moses, we may be kept six
days on the Mount before the answer of Prayer comes, Genesis c. 24. Let us
therefore admire God's Wisdom and Love, in first planting or further carrying
on Grace in the Soul: Let us be instructed, not to limit God to any one way in
converting or further perfecting a gracious Soul; but let us keep in the use of
all God's means, with the observation of his various ways of Providence and
Spirit, established upon his Divine Word, and experience in our Souls, that so
we may be confirmed in the depth, the length, and height of the Love of God,
not only by a Faith wrought and kept in the Soul, but by an evident sense
thereof, experimentally felt, not yielding to that lazy excuse of the danger of
fathoming him; though we cannot find God out to Perfection, yet we may comprehend
much more of his ways than we do, to keep us in continual admiration and praise
of his Love, making our life the nearer to resemble the work of Saints above,
not suffering his Ways to lie still in the depth without Record thereof, or
Reflection thereupon; a method which might greatly prevent the many Fears that
many gracious Souls meet with in their way, and by which they dishonor God
before the Wicked, that by knowing their own Wants, and God's Method of
supplying them, might be remedi'd.

A Sixth Experience of the Spirit of God's breathing upon the Soul in Prayer,
and of its correspondency to the certain return thereof, was, That according to
my Morning's frame in giving up my self, so has my frame continued thorough the
day, but most remarkably thus on a Sabbath Day, wherein I have found that my
frame in hearing a Sermon has greatly answered to the frame of my Morning's
private Address to Heaven, with that exactness, that I could never observe or
set it upon record without great amazement: Herein mistake me not, as if I
passed my day without any other Address, resting upon the comfortable
experience of good frame in my Morning's Prayer; but upon all occurrences
throughout the day, my supplication has been repeated, my method being never to
attempt any Service, Civil or Spiritual, without Address to God for conduct
therein; and when opportunity of set Prayer is denied, the same Spirituality in
Ejaculation, and that correspondent to return, is experienced, confirming the
truth of God's acceptance of the Spirit's helping the Soul to groans not to be
uttered, when the Soul in Meditation is under such a Heavenly Thoughtfulness to
God as is impossible for it to utter.

I could set down numerous instances of God's acceptance of Prayer put up
before entering into Company, with freedom from Quarrel or Disquiet; and when
Disquiet of any kind has accompanied me, I have found it at such a time when my
Soul has been out of frame, or my Addresses to God before my entering the
Society has been neglected: Who would not therefore advise me to rest upon God,
and to Petition him for all things, and to have all things conveyed to me, with
a sight of his special Providence in it, and as a return to Prayer for it, that
when my passage through this Wilderness is at end, I may not enter unto an
unknown God, who has been a Father by his special conduct of Providence, a
Husbandman by the workings of his Divine Spirit; my alone Friend to whom I have
put up all my Requests, and from whom I have received all the supplies of
wants, and that in a way of Communion with him; neither to an unknown work, but
that of which I have had some foretaste, in the use of Observation, Prayer
solemn and ejaculatory, and Meditation, admiring of God manifested, and
praising his Name for the experienced discovery of himself.

A Seventh Experience of Christ's Spirit exciting to Prayer, and interceding
with us in Prayer, with the certain correspondency thereof, by a return of that
Prayer thus performed to God, has been by putting words in my Mouth, as well as
Spirituality in the frame of my Mind, and that suddenly, unpremeditated, yea
sometimes contrary to matter and words designed. To clear this Experience, I
will give you amongst many instances, the following one concerning a Friend's
Distraction in a Fever, for whom my design was to Petition God for his
recovery, but was carried out in Prayer, and that powerfully too, altogether
for the return of their Reason, without ever being able to ask one Petition for
the abatement and removal of their Fever; upon inquiry I found their
Distraction gone off, but the Fever remaining the same, the return of their
Reason exactly answering the time of the Supplication for it.

Another instance of this Experience, was, Concerning another Friend, for whose
H^alth I had designed to Petition God, but found my Words in my Address to God,
strongly diverted from Petition to Praise, blessing his Name for what he had
done, and that without any foreknowledge of amendment, or probable reason to
expect it, but what I had from this powerful, sudden, and undesign'd utterance
in Prayer. Another instance of the same kind I very lately had concerning a
Friend's beloved and only Child, for whom I found in my self great and amazing
freedom of Utterance, and that by way of Praise, though my design was to Petition
God concerning it, having all humane probability to expect its Death: After the
Experience of this Utterance in Prayer, I was kept in the dark till at least
ten days, and then had the account of its recovery, yea, of its great amendment
answerable to the time of the Utterance of Praising, being strictly curious in
the observation of the circumstance of time, that none of these mavelous
Experiences might afford the least doubting in their enjoyment, but obtain a
clear reception thereof, and produce the greater establishment therein in the
Soul.

Another instance of the Seventh Experience, was, Concerning some with whom I
have had to do in matters of concern, but at a distance from me, and without
any other opportunity of hearing the proceedings or success of endeavors than
by Letter; I have found, that though I have designed before the coming in of the
Post, to supplicate for a good account; yet have not been able to say any thing
at all concerning the matter, answerable to which no Letter has come, or other
Petitions and Words concerning the matter has been Spiritually darted up to
Heaven, than was designed, correspondent to which, the account received has
exactly answered the Petitions, and Utterance actually put forth, and not to
them only designed to be expressed in Prayer.

A Ninth Experience of certainty of access to God, and of his Spirit's
breathing power on the Soul to ask what he knew was to be returned, has been
concerning a design of three different endeavors at one time, and Prayer for
guidance, a mean made use of; I have found all shadow of Spiritual enlargement
in Prayer concerning it, strongly withheld, and so indeed has the least degree
of successful endeavor; but for the second, enlargement only once, suitable to
which successful endeavor in one circumstance thereof, and at that very time
did occur; and for the third, such Heavenliness of frame in Petitioning not
only once, but all along continued upon the Soul, and so successful endeavor
without one cloud, proved the issue: Plainer expression I cannot well use, and
instances I must forbear, left it occasion the discovery of my self.

A Tenth Experience of the Lord's exciting and preparing to ask what he was in
his good pleasure to return, was, That of his exciting and powerfully
strengthening of my Soul for a continued time to Pray for self-abasement, when
at the same time no outward Temptation has been my motive thereto, though soon
after has appeared some outward advancement, and correspondent to the Divine
Wisdom and loving care of Christ's Spirit, enabling me to ask the exercise of
Humility, Self-loathing has always accompanied such outward smiles; yea, from
observation of this Experience, I have imagined a smiling Providence eminent,
from the frequency of this suit to the Lord undesign'd, but greatly assisted to
Petition it.

I have often experienced, That when my Soul has not been thus carried out to
Petition lowness of Mind, either before or in the enjoyment of outward
advancement, that either security therein has fallen out afterward, imbittering
my Thoughts, or some circumstances in the thing enjoyed that has imbittered its
sweetness, or removed its satisfaction, nothing being more satisfactory to a
Christian Soul, as the reception of an outward favor by special steps of
Providence; argument of Divine favor, accompanied with such strength of a
Divine Spirit, as enables the Soul to improve it, with the exercise of Love,
and Reliance upon the Bestower, and to keep the Souls satisfaction therein in
its true Bounds, more upon the discovery of God's Love thereby, than upon the
thing it self enjoyed.

As the Experiences already laid before you relate to outward Enjoyments, so
now I shall give you some Experiences respecting Spiritual Enjoyments,
answerable to Christ's Spirit breathing influencing-strength to Petition them.

A First Experience thereof, was, When Spiritually carried out to ask for
Humility, previous to any Spiritual Improvement, as well as before any Temporal
Enjoyment; and when security, accompanied with the intermission of the means of
Grace, has followed any inward advancement, then has a cloudying of what was an
inward comforting evidence to the Soul, issued; but when the Soul has been
carried forth to ask it before hand, or in the time, by way of return thereto,
the Soul's posture has been in the exercise of self-debasement, and exultation
of, and dependence upon Christ's Spirit for producing such a mavelous change
in the Soul, without the least exalting thought of self.

I remember that one day in Conversation with that Holy Saint mentioned before,
I expressed my self concerned to know the reality of my Grace; to which he
humbly replied, I have not had the least Cloud as to my interest in Heaven, but
should rejoice to experience that measure of confirming passages of God's
special love, as I know you have enjoyed, the effect whereof I found some quiet
of Mind; but by the wise overruling hand of God, was followed with such cloudy
darkness of Mind, lest Satan had excited self-exultation or sinful security,
till in the following Evening-Prayer, God carrying me forth to bless his Name
for the evidences of his Love, and to Petition Humillity in their enjoyment,
the darkness disappeared, and his discourse was bore home, with the alone
effect of quiet of Mind, Love to, and Reliance upon God, and that with humble
Thoughts of self.

Secondly, I have found, that previous to any victory over some particular
Sins, I have been helped wonderfully to plead with God on this very account, in
a most near and sensible approach to him, for Conquest over Sin, that Scripture
being at the time often and comfortable in my Thoughts, Nay more than
Conquerors through him that loved us; answerable to which Temptations to these,
has occurred Sins, but victory of them has been my Mercy, both as a return to
the Prayer Christ's Spirit helped me to ask, and as an evidence of such, a
change in my Soul, as bespoke my interest in Christ, by the evident supplies of
his strength, enabling me to be victor of those Sins that formerly I gave way
to.

Thirdly, When God has been to afford me the evidence of great supply of
strength, to suppress wandering Thoughts in Duties suddenly and powerfully for
some time; ardent desire and great spirituality in Petitioning God has seized
me; answerable to which, mavelous freedom from wandering Thoughts has
occurred, and that in all the Duties I have been exercised in.

A remarkable instance of this Experience, was, When at a certain time my
Petitions run out for strength to overcome wandering in Duty, with full
assistance of God's Spirit to supplicate, and by a passage of Providence
establishing my comfort, though wanderings, prevailed, and a mean of helping
forward my victory therein.

The passage of Providence was thus; Being one Sabbath-morning hindered from my
ordinary place of Hearing, and having an opportunity of hearing Sermon in the
afternoon, I found my desire with a const^aining force toward another place
and Minister, which was so strong, without any rational Motives thereto, that I
would not be hindered, though several difficulties occurred in my way; in the
hearing of which Sermon, my disposition was so spiritual, that my Thoughts had
full flight thither, and I in the exercise of low esteem of the Earth, with all
its Allurements; but which was the Circumstance most remarkable, is a Question
a Minister was desired to answer to, What should be done to help wandering
thoughts in Duties? Which was the very thing my mind was hurried withal then,
the thing Christ's Spirit was helping me to petition strength against, and to
which he was giving return with sensible Supplies; and with this passage of
Providence quieting my mind, and as a help to forward my endeavor and victory
over it; his word was, That it is a Complaint common to all Believers; so long
as there is a sense and concern for it, the Christian is not overcome by it; go
therefore on, not only striving against it, but begging the Lord's aid to
vanquish it.

Fourthly, Previous to a sensible change in my self as to watchfulness in
Conversation against reproaching of others suddenly and undesignedly; and for
some continued time my Soul was carried powerfully to pray for strength to
resist the temptations of reproaching others, either through the natural
tendency thereto, the common example of others, or out of the tempting-design
of self-applause, in the disparagement of others; and answerable hereto
mavelous strength of Christ's Spirit was afforded me, with special
Providence discovering this spiritual strength, accompanied with the bearing
home upon my thoughts that of St. Matthew, chap. 7. ver. 12. All things
whatsoever you would that men should do unto you, do you even so with them;
That then I could not but observe my self, against my own corrupted
inclination, and others example, preserved from this too natural and common
Vice even of lazy and professing Christians, who by the actual remembrance of
this very passage, might be an excellent means to preserve them from the
malignant infection of reproaching others.

Fifthly, I experienced a wonderful strength to pray for a continued sense of
God's All-seeing Eye, as well in Conversation, as in the performance of
Religious Duties; suitable to which, not only awful thoughts of his Majesty
approached in Duties, preventing Distraction therein, seized me, but even a
powerful awe of God affected me in common and private Actions, always
considering any Circumstance in the Action as might destroy God's accepting
thereof; especially as to Acts of Charity, wherein I have found such a watch
over my self, as I could not have been satisfied without strict enquiry,
Whether unwillingliness was not in the action? Whether some desire of applause,
or only pity and natural tenderness were not the Motives of this charitable
action? and nothing then has been more pleasing, than to find, that a
willingliness to obey God's Command, on purpose to please him, in the
compassionate relief of others, a cheerfulness without the least intermixture
of reluctance; a sincerity without the least desire of its being known, were
the ingredients of the Duty. I desire to witness the difficulty of thus
performing actions, without great and actual influences of strength from above,
the reception whereof is often obtained by that blessed means of solemn or
ejaculatory Prayer, wherein the Spirit of Christ intercedes for his People. The
same Spirit of Prayer impressed upon me a sense of God's all-seeing Eye, and that
Scripture was continually in my Thoughts, Of doing all things as unto the Lord;
the constant remembrance whereof I have found greatly advancing that
Gospel-perfection of an unfeigned sincerity, both in converse with God in Holy
Duties, and with one another in common Actions and Discourses.

Sixthly, I can tell you, that at another time I have been powerfully helped to
Petition for the exercise of love to God; and answerable to this, I have been
helped in Prayer, and in worldly Business, to draw forth kindlers of Love to God
from all sensible circumstances of my self and others, even from the poor in
the Streets, both as to their poverty and imperfections of Body, blessing the
Lord, with sweet exercise of Love to him; yea, this Grace of Love to God has
been excited from the observation of fullness and prosperity in some, but with
great emptiness of the inward comfort of the experiencing Christian's Soul; for
sensual pleasures divert their Thoughts from the observation and enjoyment of
what is much more to be valued in their Nature, and lasting in their Duration.

At this very time happening to be alone in a Coach, remarking such kindlers of
Love, from circumstances of others appearing in the streets, suddenly and
strongly this suggestion forced it self upon my mind: How was it, That God did
show such special favor to me beyond others, yea, to make me differ so much
from my self in former times! with amazing Thoughts of the change upon my Soul;
and immediately that Scripture overawed me from corrupt rational arguing, or
from Satan's darkening or deviateing me from right Conceptions of God and his
Ways; I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy; I will have compassion on
whom I will have compassion; from whence happened such quiet of Mind, as has by
the blessing of God stilled my Thoughts perfectly as to that great point of
Election, which is the great effect of free unmerited Mercy, and in the use of
means brings the children of Mercy safely to salvation. This warmly excited my
Love to God, having an evidence of my share in his Electing Mercy, by the
inseparable effects of it, the work of Grace begun in me, and preparing me for
the Heavenly Glory.

A Seventh Experience was, When altogether insensible of the growth of Faith,
and when the Lord by a mavelous method was to establish it in my Soul, even
then I observed for some considerable time, that I was carried out in Prayer
and Meditation with zealous Affection, that the Lord would turn my Eye and
trust from sensible things, to a trust and reliance upon God himself as to all
outward things, and as to the inward advancement of H^liness, as a mean tending
to future Salvation; answerable to which, God has discovered himself
marvellously in the steps of outward Providential Dispensations, and by the
inward workings of his Spirit, as means of founding and establishing this Grace
of Reliance in my Soul, which I hope shall be increasing in the use of means,
till Faith obtain its perfect end, the Fruition of God in Glory. And though I
hope I may say in Humility, that my Soul is raised above sensible things, to
look to things unseen, and to set my Esteem and Reliance with comfort and
satisfaction upon them, independently upon worldly things; yet I am ashamed for
the small growth of Reliance in me, and that greater improvement therein has
not been the fruit of the infinitely wise and condescending method of God's
goodness in training me to live by Faith in his Promises and Perfections.

Experience of God's Method in training me to the first sense of Reliance, with
its further establishment and growth, and that exactly, as they are set down in
Record in my Diary.
THE first Experience leading me to observe God's following Method with me, was
that of carrying me forth in Prayer, to petition establishment of Faith in my
Soul; which begun most remarkably after a Fit of Sickness, and has continued to
be upon my Mind in all my Suits greater or lesser since that, and I hope will
continue to the end of my Militant Warfare.

A second Experience leading me to Reliance upon God, was by removing all
dependence from these outward fabulous Passages, reckoned as ominous of such
and such certain Events, which undoubtedly were at first the effect of
ignorance of the true God amongst the Heathen World, who notwithstanding the
discoveries of God in his Nature and Providence by visible things, the Effects
of his Power; yet natural things keep first in their view, and had the
preheminency of God in their minds and hearts. And though we enjoy the
discovery of God in his Word and Providence so plainly, yet how do we retain
the example in reducing those things to Natural Causes, that are to be applied
to a Divine Agency, the true reason Chance is so much in our ears, and general
Reliance upon God is so little powerful in many professing Christians in our
day.

To establish this Experience, God made use of the following three Means,
gradually each after other.

The first was concerning one dangerously ill, whose Sickness, in its Nature,
seemed mortal, in the thoughts of Physicians, and other Assistants; and was
accompanied with such passages of Dreams, and other things, that in the old
time, (and too much now in our time) were reputed certain Presages of Death. In
the interim, I thought with my self, that if a Recovery should happen, nothing
could be in those things fit to be depended upon, and therefore should no more
regard them. And one day going thence in a Coach alone, I found my self
marvellously serious in my thoughts concerning it, and astonishing strength to
ask this Person's Recovery, and that God would make it a means to help forward
for getting off such things, and the placing a trust on God in their room.
Answerable to my Prayers, an unexpected Recovery appeared, changing my thoughts
from relying upon such things, to a dependence upon God: But alas! it is so
inherent in our corrupted Natures to look to, and to exalt Self and natural
things more than God or spiritual things, that there was a further need of
God's powerful influence.

A second Means in God's hand to destroy observation of, and dependence upon
such Omens, was the breaking some Measures observed in my common Undertakings,
and rested upon as presaging of such Events to it, answerableness of the
numerousness of Undertakings in the latter part of a week, to those that fell
out in the forepart thereof, which was in observation unsuitable to example;
and though the observation of other Omens be suitable to the too-much example
of others yet altogether unwarranted by Divine Scripture, yea, threatened to be
accompanied with evil, Jonah 2. v. 8. They that observe lying vanities, forsake
their own mercy. Psalm. 31.6. I have hated them that regard lying vanities, but
I trust in the Lord. How agreeable is it to the Infinite Wisdom and Mercy of
God, to bring me from trusting any thing, as a blessed means of reliance upon
God alone! and therefore I have observed, that according as the first has been
gradually cutting off, so the gradual growth of dependence upon God in all
things, has sensibly sprung up; and though the effect of this Divine Passage
was a greater distrust of those vain things, yet God was not pleased to rest
here, but to take

A third Means of advancing this blessed Grace of Reliance, and laying low this
sinful esteem of Natural Causes, was a severe Fit of S^ckness, accompanied from
the first apprehension of it, to its perfect removal, with such providential
Steps as bespoke plainly a Divine Power without Means, drawing my Soul
irresistibly to the observation of, and dependence upon him, at least with the
use of Means.

One Step whereof was, A fixed apprehension of a Fit of Sickness imminent, and
that as a just punishment for my trust to Omens of natural Events which God by
his merciful Condescension turned about as a spiritual Remedy to that reigning
Illness then too much in my Soul.

A Second Step was, An unexpressible nearness to God in fellowship with him,
ravishing my Soul at the time with that comfortable view, as it were, of
Heaven, and despising things below, that I could not have bore up if it had
continued long, and that immediately before the first assault of my Illness.

A Third was, The sensible withdrawing of this Frame for some days, till near
the danger of being delirious, and the use of such Means as formerly had never
been used toward me, on purpose for its prevention.

A Fourth was, That my Soul was in a spiritual and heavenly Frame, and carried
forth with that amazing strength to pray for ease to my head, and preservation
from deliriousness, with such an immediate return, that I think I may say my
head was easy, and my judgment clear in a moment after this Address; and though
without any rest for some days, yet I was as free in my head as ever to my own
apprehension: this amazed me at the time, and gave occasion to lay aside the
Clyster and Blisters which my worthy Physicians had prescribed, telling my
Nurse, a godly woman, That the Lord had done it.

A Fifth Step of Divine Agency was, The powerful carrying forth of my Soul in
Prayer after recovery, upon these two Petitions which have continued to be
expressed in all my Addresses to Heaven ever since that time, and have
marvellously continued to be returned since then. The Petitions were, That the
Lord would advance a work of Faith, and that perfectly in my Soul; and that I
might discover Immediateness of him in Providence, and the inward working of
his Spirit: which were Petitions unpremeditated, and undesign'd. And as it was
Divine strength exciting and enabling me to petition, so by influences of the
same strength he has enabled me to hold on petitioning, and by sensible
Providence and Operations of his Spirit, he has eminently discovered his
Divine Hand, and my being under his special Conduct.

A sixth Step was, A more se^sible Advancement from trusting things commonly
received ominous of future Events, to an entire reliance upon himself. The
searching into Natural Causes, with excluding a Divine Hand, is the occasion of
our imagining our selves more knowing than we are, and of exalting Nature with
its effects, in the room of the Creator, and his Divine Providence.

A second Experience of God's Method of establishing and making to grow in this
Grace of Reliance was, By removing Reliance upon spiritual Means made use of by
others on my account, especially when it lessened my own diligence with God for
the same thing. It is natural for us to overvalue Nature, and natural things,
and undervalue God and spiritual things; the confirmation whereof I had in my
self by an over-valuing of one who, I may say, was a great helper of my Faith,
and in the making up of whose Crown I shall, I hope, be a Member in that day of
Glory, to whom I would always run with any of my difficulties to acquaint him
therewith, sometimes before my acquainting God therewith in Prayer, and would
endeavor to obtain his Interest by his Addresses to Heaven concerning it,
which when undertaken by him would faithfully be performed, and sympathizingly
too, from personal Affections; and God's inclining me from my youth to observe
him, which was a Duty greatly assistant and comfortable. By reason of all
which, I have had less Anxiety concerning the matter, and probable hopes from
his interest with God to obtain it, and have used less diligence my self with
God upon my own account; which derogated from God, upon whom my entire Reliance
should have been placed, and not to have given him some degrees of trust, that
were the alone Prerogative of God. The Method of God to overcome this in my
Soul was,

First, By the discovery of this holy Soul's misapplying Prayer to what he
desired, and not to his utterance in Prayer, and that in an Affair on my
account, of which you have already heard.

Secondly, By removing him from me at that time when God made him so blessed a
help to my Faith, I giving him more of affection and trust, than what was his
due as God's Instrument. And if these two had sufficiently overcome this
Failure, perhaps God had proceeded no farther; but having the opportunity of
Letters to acquaint him with matters of difficulty, and to press his interest
for me, I found this trust to him, and less diligence of my self hold on, and
so God in his wise condescending care and love

Thirdly, Removed him from the world, and that unexpectedly and surprizingly;
and whatever was the end of God concerning himself or others, this was plainly
discovered to my self by after-passages of God's outward Providence and inward
Spirit attending my life, That my regard was too high to this Instrument, and
his prevalency with God, and dishonorable to God; therefore to rectify my
Error, the Lord was pleased by his death at the same time to recall me from
trusting in Creatures, but only to rely upon himself in the use of his ordinary
means prescribed in his Word. This may be Caution to all Hearers to give the
Ministers their due place, neither overvaluing some, nor undervaluing others,
but valuing and admiring God's Free Grace the more, that by any means is made
effectual to establish and increase Grace in the Soul.

The departure of this blessed Saint, was made a powerful Means of Conviction
of my Failure, and that as a leading-step toward higher Trust to God, with
that sweet Fellowship with him, that at the time, and often since, to obtain
such an enjoyment, I could willingly accept of such another stroke, though it
was very afflicting to my Soul to be deprived of my alone spiritual Friend on
earth, and the greatest helper of my Soul; but I am now instructed to say of
God, my chosen happiness, Whom have I in heaven but thee, and there is none
upon earth I desire besides thee.

A Third Experience of God's Method of removing Reliance upon any thing, to
establish and advance dependence upon himself, was, By turning Natural Causes
out of their course of producing their natural and former experienced Effects,
to the Production and Events seemingly unnatural, and formerly unexperienced.
Thus eminently it has fallen out, when the intermixture of serious and heavenly
Prayer has been neglected, from the certain expectation of a desired effect, as
the natural issue of such a Cause made use of, and a Mean formerly experienced.
Many Instances of this Experience I could produce, when in undertaking a Matter
of great Concern, by reason of using as a Means to effectuate the Matter
naturally tending thereto, and often tried, as productive of it; I have had
less Solicitude, and made seldom approach to God by Prayer for Conduct in the
use of Means, and for a Divine Blessing upon the Issue; and instead of the
natural and common effect, unsuccessfulness has followed endeavors; yet when
God has changed this laziness, and secure frame of Soul, to a more spiritual
addressing God by Prayer, in conjunction with Means, that then the next Attempt
to use the same Means, has been accompanied with such success as was suitable
to its natural and experienced tendency. This clearly convinces of the
uncertainty of the most probable Events in the use of the most promising Means,
without a Divine Blessing accompanying; and therefore instructing the necessity
and advantage of address to God, in conjunction with other Means to make our
endeavors successful. An Experience fixing and advancing within my self
resolution of addressing God concerning all things, and a dependence upon him
for the issue of all things, whatever seeming certainty appear without this in
the use of Means; and though many great Events have been brought forth in the
use of Natural Means, without so much perhaps as once petitioning Heaven, as
many successful undertakings of the wicked do witness; yet this is no
opposition to the present Experience: The wicked enjoying all things in a
common Line of Providence; the Children of God in a Line of special Conduct,
Love and Favor, by special passages of Providence, and in a way of return to
Prayers. This Experience reproves trusting to any Natural Agent, but in
subordination to a Divine Power, which is a Proposition that in Conversation we
find seldom opposed, though little verified in the Actions of some, who, with
Lifted-up-eyes, and Outward seriousness, will say, The Lord give a Blessing to
Means; when, at the same time, they never put up a serious Prayer to God
afterward concerning the same matter; or who, in pinchings only of extremity,
when natural things fail, or they are incapable of smothering the Convictions
of Conscience, are forced to cry out, (Lord have mercy upon me.) This is also
little verified in the Actions of some Professors, who looking so much to
Natural Causes, or to Fortune or Fate, lessen that trust and dependence they
ought to have upon a Divine Overruling Power in all things, and hinder
themselves from addressing God for his Conduct in the right use of Means, or
bringing about their desired End; and especially if they are under God's
special and Divine Conduct, and entered into the number of his Children.

A Fourth Method of God discovering his hand in all things, and leading me to a
dependence upon him for all things, was, By disappointing expectations, when
founded upon seeming, sure, and probable grounds, especially if trusted to with
a pleasedness and rejoicing in the expectation, but without ever supplicating
the Lord's Conduct to bring it about. It is true the Psalmist's Advice is, To
be anxiously careful for nothing; not by Idleness, or by using Means diligently
with a trusting thereto, but by making our Addresses known to God by Prayer
When this is restrained, no wonder anxiety of Mind, and toil of Body meet God's
Children's endeavors, yea, disappointments follow their most desired and
probable expectations. I hope I may faithfully witness it as truth, that I was
never helped in a heavenly ravishing frame of Mind, to petition God concerning
any one Event, with resignation to his Will, and full quiet of Mind, whatever
discouragement seemed in obtaining the matter, but a gracious return followed.
Yea, the most hopeful design, without this means of supplicating God concerning
it, has ever been accompanied to me with a visible disappointment. Many
Instances I could adduce, were it not that I am to be unkown. Sometimes for
many months together, every day, in one Instance or another, this Experience
has been brought to my observation; and if the observation of God's method in
removing trust from any thing, and planting a reliance upon himself, with the
visible and blessed effects brought forth thereby in my own Soul; if the
reflection thereupon had not established my Faith, I should have often been
flying out with repinings at God's disappointing my diligent use of Means,
commonly leading to such Ends: But discovering God's design, yea, infinite
love, in my own disappointments, and my Meditations thereupon were thus; Did
the Lord strengthen me eminently after my Fit of Sickness, and continually in
most, if not all my Addresses to Heaven since that time, to ask for advance of
this Reliance? And has the Lord returned this Petition by sensible Reliance
upon himself, never formerly acquainted with, and that in a mysterious conduct
of outward Providence; shall I therefore bring forth this ill improvement, of
not working with God, or of trusting God only in the enjoyments of smiling
Favors, when difficulties sensibly have tended to the increasing my dependence
upon God; or trust God only when other things are of no use, or when Means
producing such Events, naturally or probably turn their course, and prove
ineffectual? No, that should be no less than height of Ingratitude; and what my
loving God has prevented by his Spirit's accompanying his method of special
outward Providence, and therefore have great Reason to walk in a Road of
Constant Dependence upon him, crying out; Oh, the height and depth of the Love
of God, in first designing me such a mercy of Reliance, in bringing it about,
and that in a method of outward Providence, evidencing it sensibly to my self,
as well as really working it in the Soul by his Spirit going along with his
outward Providence, and in preserving this Reliance, notwithstanding the
Soul's unwillingness, when Duty and Interest went hand in hand at the same time.

This very Experience is enough to answer all the ignorant Cavils of the
Irreligious, and the Doubtings of some Christians, who with the Psalmist are
perplexed how to understand rightly the inequality of Divine Providence toward
the profane and the gracious Christian; the first abounding in worldly
Pleasure, while the other appears under crossing afflicting Providence: The
private Christian's inward observed experience of God's method with himself,
affords knowledge of God and his Ways, and strength to resist corrupt and
Satanical Suggestions, and peace and comfort even in the enjoyment of outward
disappointments, when their Friends are in concern on their very account, or
others in their circumstances ready to stagger as to God's favor to them; and
that by reason of these things which appear to the observing Christian, the
greatest tokens of Divine special Love: For the better understanding of this, I
would have you consider;

First, That a Christian renewed from original Corruption to Grace, is received
under a special conduct of God's Providence without, as well as his Spirit
within, and that greatly different from the common Providence that attend the
wicked of the Earth, Psalm. 4.3. But know that the Lord has set apart him that
is Godly for himself; Exodus 11.7. The outward Providence of God was so special
toward the Children of Israel, That the very Dogs were not to Bark at them;
besides, to be witness to three or four private Christians imparting God's
special conduct remarkt round each one of themselves, one would think that the
Narrative of each argued so much of Speciality, as if each had been the alone
beloved Child of God, about whom he had spent his special loving Care; whereas
those round whom is the alone conduct of common Providence, they can reach no
higher than the general power of a great and merciful God, as Creator and
Preserver of all Things, but not as their God and Father, or their Providence
attending them as the Fruits of their peculiar Interest in him through Christ,
and as Heirs of his Kingdom, enjoying the earnest thereof, in the special
outward Providence and inward workings of a Divine Spirit attending their
life. Great loss therefore, that Christian incurs, who though under the special
conduct of outward Providence, yet wants the sense thereof, unless in
remarkable instances of it; and that for want of a general observation of all
the steps of God's Ways with himself, from his first Conversion to a full
establishment in all the Graces of God's Spirit. A Christian that has been
observant of God's outward and inward conduct, not only witnesses a speciality
of Providence regarding God's own children, but he will patiently bear
afflicting Dispensations, that are designed to make him sensible of his neglect
of God's dealings with him, and of his neglect or careless performance of
particular Duties, and may change his nature from secure, cold, and lazy, to
spiritual, heavenly and zealous; and to make him more watchful and diligent in
the resisting Temptations, and mortifying Corruptions, and in the exercise of
every Grace that may preserve him from the power of the Tempter. A Christian
under the same special conduct of God's care, but without the strict
observation of it in all the steps of God's Providence, has neither the
knowledge nor the strength that the observing Christian has conveyed to his
Soul, as the true effects of so desirable a Duty; but is ready to droop in his
Spirit when afflicted, not knowing God's design in particular, though relying on
that blessed Word, That all things work together for good to them that love
God; yet missing God's particular design in the present want of his Soul, the
present Mercy thereby to be bestowed, he becomes in danger of Satan's tempting
him to Despondency, of a Melancholy carriage in Religion, and of passing his
Pilgrimage State under Clouds.

Secondly, That since God's own Children are under the special conduct of
Providence, then they alone must best judge of God's Wise procedure, and
witness for God, that what the carnal World is apt to charge against God upon
the account of the present Afflictions of his Children, is from Ignorance: For
Afflictions are the certain Evidences of his Wisdom and Love, as a Father and a
Physician, to purge them from Sin, to make them more holy and heavenly on
Earth, and to make them more prepared to reign with him above. Though those who
are only led by sense, see not Good in Afflictions, yet sincere Believers, who
from constant observation, and by the help of a Divine Spirit, have improved
Afflictions, they are ready to comply with God's End so soon as it appears, and
earnestly pray for, and rejoice in the hope of a blessed Issue. If Christians
were serious in searching out their Sins before, or in the time of Afflictions,
and how defective they are in the exercise of the Graces of the Spirit, they
would be assured, not only from Divine Revelation, but from their happy
Experiences of God's Mercy in all; that the peaceable Fruit of Righteousness
will outweigh all their Sufferings and Sorrows.

A Fifth Method of God to advance Reliance upon himself, was, by immediate
specialty of a Divine Hand in passages of Providence, in laying matters of
great success in my way, and that in the following instances.

First, By bringing them about, without the operation of second causes commonly
made use of, having in many instances experienced such things laid in my way,
wherein I have hardly been able to discover any thing else, besides the Hand of
God bringing them forth.

Secondly, By ordering my real Enemies as instruments of Benefits to me in
their Actings, though undesignedly by them.

Thirdly, By ordering such numerous successful designs with freedom from
outward toil, that I enjoyed a great opportunity to observe and meditate upon
the Lord's Way thus with me, and to set it upon strict record for
after-reflection, and comparing it with his preceding and following methods,
and the improvement thereby brought forth in my own Soul.

Fourthly, By Divine Excitement of some to be assistant in such providential
matters laid in my way.

Fifthly, By ordering success to all such undertakings, accompanied with such
immediateness of Providence.

A Sixth Method to advance Dependence upon God, and to keep means (too much
relied on) in the due place, was by suffering by one step of Providence or
other, Friends to my outward concerns (of whose Friendship and Service I had
eminent experience) to be turned and fixed to the interest of others, which I
must confess, seemed at first appearance dark and cloudy, and continued thus to
be, till by perusual of my Record, I came to know the state of my Soul I was
then under, the work of God he was sensibly advancing, the particular design of
God at the time, (from comparing his Ways, and the improvement brought forth
thereby) and the suitableness of such a method of Providence to bring it forth,
even an entire Reliance upon himself for all Events.

In which Experience I had this sweet passage to observe, That as God in his
returns to Prayer, suited their speediness or greater delays to the weakness
and strength of Faith, so herein did the Lord compassionately suit his Ways to
the weakness of my reliance in him; for least such an Experience should
overwhelm my weak Faith, the Lord immediately gave success to my endeavors,
with the same ease of Mind, and freedom from toil of Body, as when under the
advantage of the interest of such Friends and visible means, with that special
Providence, that I have often stood in amazement, and have been ravished with
the observation of what strange passages of Providence has every day fallen out
to continue such successful endeavors; yea, I may say, greater then when under
the opportunity of such instruments.

A Seventh Experience, was, By permitting the loss of some undertakings, that
were probable to be greatly advantageous, without the least deficiency on my
part as instrumental therein: This at first seemed afflicting, till the
discovery of the unsuccessfulness of others concerned, with great disparagement
of Character appeared, which then made me rejoice in God's Divine conduct, and
see great Love in the disappointment, with the feeling of inward Peace, that I
had no ways contributed to the unsuccessfulness of the affair, moving me to lay
all my concerns at God's footstool, leaving Events, pleasing or ungrateful, to
Divine disposal, I keeping serious with God for the faithful discharge of Duty.

The Eighth Experience of God's method to suppress Reliance on any thing
besides himself, was, by the Lord's Way of vindicating me from undeserved
reproach, either by immediate clearing up of innocence and the falsehood of
reproach, and so cutting it off at first; or by hindering it, though continued,
from injuring my name, by making impressions upon others, or by giving me
opportunity by some failure of theirs, to Asperse them truly, to their great
loss and discouragement, and so stopping of their Rage through Fear.

One eminent instance of this Experience I Will give you, concerning one, who
from no other foundation that I ever could judge of, but that of Malice,
greatly disparaged my Name, yea, continued therein, notwithstanding of my
Dutiful imparting the thing to themselves, with a true vindication of my self,
till by a mavelous passage of Divine Providence, an eminent opportunity of
reproaching them was laid in my way, and that by the knowledge of her failure
in a great and weighty concern, capable of ruining them, and freeing my self
from their further rage; but though there was a struggle between revenge and
forbearance to Asperse them, yet blessed be the Lord his Grace was victorious
over corrupt Nature, and instead of reproaching, I only endeavored the making
of themselves sensible of their faults, trusting God, who had laid such an
occasion in my way, to stop the current of their Malice, and had preserved me
from the guilt of pursuing Revenge: That their reproaching, at least, with
impression upon others, should cease; which was clearly verified by after
experience, wherein I have fully seen their incapacity of injuring me that way;
and therefore one instance I hope of the exercise of Grace in my self, and of
this Experience being an excellent mean to advance Reliance upon God in all
such cases.

Another special Instance of this Experience is, concerning a Reproach against
me, with some great probability of Guilt when rehearsed by the Reproacher: I
must own my not meriting the Reproach, was from the restraining Grace of God, I
being at the time of the occasion of the Reproach, under no other power
sensible to my self than that of Education; but if at the time of being
reproached, I am helped in a Heavenly posture of Soul to lay it before God, and
find carefulness and anxiety laid aside, in correspondency to this frame,
appears a Divine Providence restraining the Enemies from Reproaching, or if
continued its insufficiency of injuring me, though it be greatly their design,
and that with a unwearied diligence. In this instance I have two Circumstances
to lay before you, greatly remarkable and mavelous, discovering the
sutableness of Heavenliness in Prayer to its return; and of the Providential
Method of God to train me higher in the exercise of Reliance upon himself.

One of which Circumstances is, That at the time when God was building this
Faith, then a violent assault was made use of as a mean of strengthening and
enlarging the degrees of Reliance, and trust in God, with Prayer for all my
concerns; and that in the following method, the assault of reproaching
continuing as furious as false in all its reported Circumstances, did seemingly
tend not only to disparagement of Name, but to danger of Lawsuits, the
hindrance whereof could by no other means be procured, than the presence of one
who had been for some considerable time out of the Kingdom, and in no
likelihood of returning without great Entreaty, Pains, and Charge: But at the
time when this Reproacher was at the height of their pursuit by Reproach, and
design of Law against me, the inward posture of my Soul was spiritual in Prayer
concerning it, and in Meditation upon it; and at that very time I had an
account by Letter, that the Person whose presence was requisite for my
Vindication, was surprisingly called to this place upon a Providential
occasion, he knowing nothing thereof till some hours before, and altogether
ignorant of my Circumstances, or of the desire I had to have him here. By this
only Circumstance I had opportunity of allaying the Reproach, and of perfectly
preventing any Lawsuit against me. Though I cannot fully stop the fury of a
malicious Tongue, yet I cannot express my self concerning its continuance,
without praising the infinite love of a Divine Being in it, and the great
improvement by it; finding that often a cold, lazy frame of Soul, and the
renewing of this reproach meet together, and that the immediate effect of the
latter, is mostly a change from this lazy frame, to a spiritual heavenly
posture of Soul with the enjoyment of sweet Fellowship with God in Prayer
concerning it, greatly helping me from anxiety and disquiet under it, with a
design and endeavor to comply with the Blessed end of God in it.

Another Circumstance greatly remarkable in this instance, has been, That
without any other mean of endeavor to defend my self by reproaching again, or
the like, but purely by the laying it before the Throne of God, the repeated
Reproach has either been still, or frustrated; which at first occasioned some
doubtings in my Thoughts, whether I should not by going to this or the other,
clear my self, and not presumptuously expect deliverance without Means; but
finding my Vindication to themselves of no effect, and my Vindication of my
self to others would occasion Aspersions upon them, I was still, and used the
means of Prayer, and was careful of not giving them further occasion to
Reproach, and found greatest success, and dare recommend it to the practice of
others; not only from my own experience, but from the Psalmist's, who in Psalm.
38. v. 13. expresses himself thus, I as a deaf man, heard not; and as a dumb
man, opened not my mouth: No doubt but he could have used reasonable Arguments
to prove his Innocence, but in v. 15. He hoped in the Lord: In like manner when
I have been enabled by Prayer with great exercise of Faith therein, to lay the
Case at God's foot; and trustingly to hope in him; I have found all power of
the Reproach gone off. I desire therefore what time I am afraid, to trust in
the Lord; And this very Experience has been a blessed Mean to bring forth this
desire in my Soul, Psalm. 56. v. 9. When I cry to thee, in a believing heavenly
posture, then my Enemies shall draw back: When God strengthens a Soul by his
Divine Spirit under Reproaches, to cry unto him; either the Reproachers will
cease, or their Reproaches will be without effect, or Recoil upon themselves.

To this Experience I subjoin the following Observation, That upon hearing a
Reproach, and seriously reflecting upon my self, I have often found it as a
just punishment, and an immediate return to Sin of my own, either of
Reproaching the same Person with the same or another sort of Reproach, or some
body else, by such a kind of Reproach; and so a sense of my own fault, with a
discovery of love from God therein, and a watch over my self unto Prayer, and
against reproaching, by this very reflection has been brought forth, accepting
the reproach, as Shimei's was taken, God bad him.

A Ninth Experience of advancing Faith was, By the great, sudden, and
unexpected Supplies that have come in suitable to Wants, and to my firm
dependence upon God, through former experience of his ways. I have found that
though Supplies has been deferred for some considerable time, yea, even to the
very last moment, yet they have come in so seasonably to my need, that God in
his method of bestowing them, has taken trial of the strength of my dependence
upon him, and so has afforded me a comfortable evidence of that Grace, and
given a discovery of the immediateness of his hand in bringing them about, as
well as producing thereby a trust on himself; sometimes I have found Supplies
deferred for a long time, that if former experience of God's way of trying my
Faith, and further establishing it thereby, had not preserved in me a divine
strength, I should have been ready to droop; but even then such a true Reliance
upon God, in the time of long delay, I have followed always with such numerous
successful passages, as afforded more than if Providence had walked in its
usual course; when therefore by such steps and supplies following a true
Reliance under those delays has occurred afterward, how ungrateful had it been
not to regard God in the thing, or not observed his ways, with the improvement
of a Reliance upon him?

I have observed, that so soon as observation of God's way, and settlement of
Faith in himself thereby was brought forth, that then the Lord's method has
varied with me both as to time and things; appearing in a time, and in a matter
and way unexpected, and all on purpose to advance my dependence upon God at all
times, and in all sorts of concerns.

A Tenth Experience of advancing Reliance upon God was, By his making outward,
diligent, lawful, and commendable endeavors altogether unsuccessful, till he
had founded it, and gradually advanced this dependence upon himself; the
obtaining undertakings and success therein, having been kept in a constant
stream of special Providence, so that when any undertaking thorough my own
interest has been near, it either has not occurred, or most commonly proved
unsuccessful; and undertakings have been never more frequently successful, than
when most remote from common Methods of obtaining them, and I have been most
near to God in Prayer concerning them. I think I may say, I never found my self
without this encouragement of successful undertakings, but my frame of Soul has
been dead, cold and lifeless, and my intermissions from heavenliness of frame
visible; and I have never found my self in continued fellowship with God in
Prayer and Meditation, but numerous undertakings have fallen in my way, and
that with mavelous success, unless unsuccessfulness was necessary for one
good end or other, plainly appearing in the Circumstances of God's providential
Conduct therein, sometimes for the discovery or punishment of one failure or
other in my self, all which have abundantly laid open to my view the
immediateness of God's hand in all things here below, the great advantage of
interest in his special Conduct, and by the help of Christ's Spirit raised an
ardent desire of trusting God in all my designs, even when most diligent in the
use of Means.

An Eleventh Experience of God's design and method to advance Faith of Reliance
was, By the visible Effects of these very Experiences, establishing my eye and
thoughts upon God, either in respect of strength to act Duty as pleasing to
himself, or in respect of special Providence bringing all things unto my hand,
that nothing has made the Mercy relish more with me, than that Circumstance of
Specialness of a Divine Hand in bringing it about; yea, I may say, that the
most comfortable Favor on this earth has nothing of solid sweetness in it,
without a discovery of Favor from Heaven therein: And that the most afflicting
disappointment and disturbing evil wherein the design of God's love has
appeared in his providential order of it, has been more acceptable to my Soul
than an outward Blessing, wherein special Love has not been so clearly
discoverable. The Method of God's advancing Reliance, has been by sometimes
delaying the answer of Prayer, and withholding its return longer than usual,
(though there has been evidence of its acceptance in Heaven) and that sometimes
to the last extremity of a matter concerned.

An eminent Instance whereof was, concerning an Affair, where acting or not
acting in it, carried along the danger of great disgrace and disadvantage; and
determining with my self not to act, was by an irresistible passage of
Providence constrained to move in the matter, which at first seemed to damp my
hopes that my Prayer concerning it was accepted; but the return exactly suited
my frame and desires expressed in Prayer, though its discovery was so long
deferred, even till upon the very brink of acting, and then providentially
effected other ways; a passage which at the time ravished me with astonishment.

An Instance instructive not to limit God to time or desire, but to commend our
case to God as our Father, entirely to depend on himself for the Event in his
own method and time, with a diligent acting Duty on our part, and then the
blessing will be the sweeter and more remarkable; yea, with great honor to
God, by such an actual exercise of Reliance upon himself.

A Twelfth Experience of God's Method to establish my dependence upon him, has
been by laying in my way outward Vexations, for the bringing of me in to a
serious spiritual frame of Soul, the experience whereof seems as it were
naturally to prevent murmuring at Disquiets, and to keep me often upon my knees
with heavenliness of thought, and in the exercise of trust to God, who
discovers in afflicting Providence great love in their effects, of changing
the Soul's posture, and making them a mean of preserving dependence brought
forth in the Soul.

A Thirteenth Experience of God's Method to continue and heighten dependence
upon himself was, By giving great raisedness of frame of Mind, and high
exercise thereof in Prayer, as a Forerunner of some Disquiet, that from this
Experience, Anxiety and Despondency under it might be prevented; and I,
notwithstanding thereof, kept on in Reliance upon God, who, in condescending
Favor, gave such sweet strengthening allowance as might hold out in the ensuing
Providence, and that against the rising of Sin within, and the force of
Temptations without.

And here I subjoin an Instance of the inefficacy of the latter, when one day I
in sweet communion with God in Prayer, and at the time of Enjoyment, under the
actual sense of some Disquiet, (having observed in the Method of God, that a
sense of Disquiet, and Fellowship with God at the same time, have met together,
as a Forerunner of some Affliction that would happen;) so soon as I was off my
knees, to walk up and down in my Chamber, as soon, like Lightning* Satan threw
this Suggestion upon me, That I had better be without these Enjoyments, than
have the Disquiets that follow them. My Fellowship with God in Prayer, was too
strong at that time to receive any impression of that kind, and, blessed be his
Name, the Suggestion was so bare faced, and clearly diabolical, that I was
immediately strengthened to repel it as a Trifle.

The Effects of which Experience were,

First, A further establishment in the truth of that Scripture, All things work
together for good to them that love God.

Secondly, A continued hope in his mercy, which since that time has been
greatly established by the enjoyment of the Psalmist's words as certain truth,
The Lord delights in them that fear him, and in them that hope in his mercy:
That, methinks, all my Arguments with God are bound up in this one, of the
greatness of his mercy in Christ, the observation of special favor in all
smiling and frowning passages of Providence, the advancement of Reliance upon
God in all things, brought forth by God's Divine Spirit, in the use of that
mean of observation, has further established and fixed my hope upon his mercy
in Christ, and that for other changes within, and future happiness hereafter.

A Fourteenth experience of God's Method of training me into dependence upon
himself, was from the observation of God's way of freeing my Thoughts from
concern under Disquiets, and carrying my concern off from the thing
disquieting, to a search and desire after Enjoyment of God in Prayer put up for
the disquiets, which is the alone Gift of Christ's Spirit; the Promise of
Divine Scripture, and my alone comfort under disquiet. This is to me the
evidence of my Petitions being accepted, and the Token of special Guidance from
Heaven throughout the disquiet; In confirming the truth of which experience the
Scripture is plain, charging us to be careful for nothing, but by supplication
to make our request to God; and when by the intercession of a Divine Spirit we
are enabled to make our request, the experiencing Christian can truly say, that
anxiety is taken off, and full exercise of reliance upon God is in its room,
both for conduct to the Soul throughout the disquiet, and for the removing of
it in his own time and way; if God's Method herein was more observed, there
would be less trust on outward helps, and more reliance upon God in Prayer,
joined with the due use of means, and would by a blessing attending them, be
convincing to the men of this World, who are led by sense, and disbelieve the
Prerogative-Power of God's Providence in all things.

A Fifteenth experience of God's Method of advancing my reliance, has been by
fixing my desire, delight and longing after spirituality of frame, with all,
and every one of the most comforting outward mercies of the present Life, in
the desires of the best of outward blessings, I find an unexpressible fixedness
of thought upon these two things: One is, That it may be conveyed by
Providence, arguing speciality of love; another is, that this conveyance may
be a means of heightning reliance upon God, and raising me to more sweet and
intimate Communion with him: And I hope, I may with some humble awe say, that
my Eye is so much upon God's hand in bringing about, and upon Communion with
God, in the enjoyment of all things on Earth, that the more I see, and enjoy of
the outward pleasures of this Life, the more they are undervalued by me, and
the more I am afraid of them, by reason of the temptations attending them to
the breaking off of Heavenliness of frame, which is the true inward comfort of
the Soul of an experiencing Christian: This very Experience has made me
sensible of the following things.

First, That the best of them (of which I have not wanted some taste) afford
not that solid abounding sweet satisfaction, as I do really experience in
Heavenliness of frame, and therefore do exercise great pity toward them who
know nothing of fellowship with God in the frame of their minds, or in the
performance of duties; I don't much wonder at their prizing the comforts of
this Earth, counting all things else as nothing or imaginary, never having
experienced the reality of spiritual things; and no wonder therefore they dip
themselves as much as possible in these things that afford present, sensual,
and vanishing comfort, rather than by a serious application of themselves to
God in the use of Divine Ordinances, which while they are unregenerate, can
afford no solid ravishing comfort; they being as I was while only under the
power of Education, Nicodemus-like, amazed at the litteral meaning, how
Christians could talk with God, and enjoy Communion with an invisible God, it
being impossible by the greatest reach of the most ingenious fancy, to
apprehend the state of the Soul with its ravishing sweetness, when in
fellowship with God; and though I have made use of these words of Spirituality,
and Heavenliness of frame, to explicate fellowship with God, my design is not
thereby to set it forth with words, that may make it sensible to unexperiencing
Souls, these words being understood and felt only by real Believers; it is
enough that to you of the unregenerate rank, I can seal and give testimony to
the truth and reality thereof, from my certain experience; and can lay before
you the means God was pleased to make use of to bring me to the sensible
enjoyment thereof: And if your longing desire to experience it, prompt you not
to the use of these means, by which you may obtain it, then in the Day of
Judgment you cannot but expect your accusation to run thus: Light came into the
world, but you chus'd rather to walk in darkness, according to your carnal
Conceits of Divine things, and not in the use of Sacred means, as others have
done to attain a clear comfortable experimental knowledge thereof; which you
may easily do, considering the great condescending encouragement God gives to
the smallest sparks of sincere desires, and serious endeavors; he will by the
Spirit of Grace assist you, and reveal the secret of his love to your Souls,
and bring you into his Mavelous Light. And as the case of the profane, and
of these only under the power of Education, fills me with pity, so Lazy
Christians are greatly to be threatened, who know the reality of fellowship with
Heaven, but instead of keeping themselves in the comfortable and continual
enjoyment thereof, and thereby to witness its truth, in Conversation with
others, by their involving themselves in the full stream of the pleasures of
this Earth, they hinder their delightful and constant enjoyment of God, and
give occasion to others, to believe that ravishing comfort of fellowship with
God, is merely a Notion, and make their own Lives upon the assault of
afflictions, yea their Dyings too, less comfortable, and thereby disparage the
Truth of the Gospel: it may afford you an awful reflection; O Lazy Christians!
who by your great outward enjoyments should be more excited to maintain
Communion with God, who is the fountain of felicity, and to testify that his
favor is better than Life and all the fruitions of it; but you content your
selves with hasty or drowsy performance of Religious Duties Morning and
Evening, without the Exercise of those Graces and Affections which are the Life
of them: And by a careless Conversation in the World, the impression of Divine
things are soon worn out, and dye in the diversion of the Soul from God, by the
free fruition of Temporal things, which are to be so temperately used, that we
may enjoy God. When the World is the Idol of Men's Heads and Hearts, it
Dethrones God, and deprives them of the Comforts of his Love and Presence.

Secondly, My Fifteenth experience has made me sensible, that the comfort of
outward things, is more in the expectation than in the possession; whereas
spiritual comfort is much sweeter in the enjoyment, than it is for any Humane
Creature possible to imagine, unless experienced in the Soul. My own
apprehension, and account of a spiritual frame is this; That when I am in it,
my mind is clear, free of Clouds, or concern of any kind, though in the midst
of trouble, unless it be lest I should not continue in a holy frame. While
under the alone power of Education, I have often suggested to my self, O that I
were in such a Circumstance, my state should be happy! but when by the
Providence of God I had arrived to that Circumstance, I found no addition of
comfort by it; and to speak more plainly, my great expectation was confuted by
Experience; for either I tasted no Happiness in what was so earnestly desired,
or the pleasure was embittered to me by unexpected troubles mixed with it; I
now am well contented in a State without abounding or wanting, relying entirely
upon God for all things necessary for my wants.

Thirdly, This Experience has made me sensible of this certain frame in my
self; That the more of outward comforts I enjoy, the more I undervalue them,
and in the greater esteem I find fellowship with God, and that the evidence of
special love from God by the enjoyments, is in my esteem far more valuable than
the most precious or most desirable things that can be obtained in this life.
In the Enjoyments of the world, I neither find present satisfaction, nor the
sweetness in the after-reflection that is in spiritual Enjoyments; but what
brings Honey, has a Sting that vexes more than there is sweetness in it: This
serious Christians know by experience. But Carnalists, whose Consciences are
Seared, and whose Experience never reach further than outward Comforts, nothing
can Sting them but sensible things; as Illness after Drinking, Rottenness after
Whoring, and the like, affecting their Body. It is otherwise in spiritual
Fellowship with God; it relishes sweetly at the present, and in the reflection
upon it an evidence to the Soul of Union to Christ; for although the degree of
Joy does not continue, yet the reality of Union abides, and the new Breathings
of Christ's Spirit in his Ordinances revives the Joy. Friendship, that rational
and most comfortable Blessing in humane Society, is not now so common on the
Earth; when Sin abounds, the love of many waxes cold; and where it is, it
affords one of the most solid satisfactions on Earth; but it is not complete,
wanting much at the same time it is enjoyed; neither is it durable, but upon a
trifle changed, and former Friendship made fuel to kindle and keep burning
everlasting Hatred and Malice.

A Sixteenth Experience of God's method to train me into Reliance upon himself,
has been, by disappointing me of one favor greatly desired and expected, on
purpose to introduce a greater. The Lord has often issued forth a mavelous
Mercy out of the Bosom of a disappointing-Providence; and could the effect of
this Experience be otherwise than to trust God for all Events attending my
life, however bad they looked at the present, leaving them to his Will; that so,
if a disappointment occurred, I might not immediately repine, but by Patience,
through former Experience and Prayer, wait without disquiet till the Divine
Providence has sweetly ordered that disappointment to be for my greater good.

I could instance in this Experience, a matter of greatest worldly concern,
where disappointment has fallen out contrary to desire and probable
expectation, from whence has issued a Providence at first appearance not so
desirable or pleasing, but a Mercy far beyond what I now know the other would
have been, and has some comfortable circumstances in it not so common in such a
matter. One instance greatly advancing Reliance upon God, and confirming what
has been formerly laid down, of a certain correspondency between Christ's
Spirit helping the Soul to Ask in Prayer, and the Lord's returning it, was,
that my frame in Prayer was my great support, while under no other view than
that of a disappointment.

Who would not in the Enjoyment of such eminent Experiences, leave all things
to Heaven's conduct, and by entire dependence thereupon, with continued Prayer
to be interested therein, spend a whole life through this Earth, and that with
greater success to outward Affairs, less anxiety of Mind concerning them, or
toil of Body to obtain them, and much more sweetness, than when brought about,
and no other Agent seen therein, but outward endeavor of our selves, strength
of Friends, or the like, upon whom our Trust was wholly fixed?

Seventeenthly, To advance an entire general dependence upon God, he has
marvellously discovered immediateness of his Hand in matters of very small
moment, and that both as a return to Prayer concerning them, and as a token of
special favor in them; and though they have been such things as are reputed
small, yet they have been accompanied with as immediateness of Providence, as
clear a discovery of Divine Love, as in weighty concerns, designing thereby to
bring me into a Dependence upon him for all things, the meanest not being
excluded from the compass of his Providence.

Many instances of this Experience I could bring forth in respect of my going
from one place to another; of Servants coming to, and going from me; yea,
reaching even to irrational Creatures, that I have made use of: I have had
Experience, that according to my strength in Petitioning Divine Favor
concerning them, and according to the time of neglecting, or beginning and
continuing this seriousness, so successfulness or unsuccessfulness has occurred.

At this very time of God's training me into a Dependence upon himself, a
powerful bearing home of Scriptures upon my Soul, of Promise, for instruction,
conduct, and comfort, has been a remarkable mean in God's Hand, and
marvellously blessed with that great end of removing Diffidence, and settling
Reliance upon himself.

The First whereof by way of Promise, was that of the 6th Chapter of Matthew,
verse. 33. Seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these
things shall be added unto you: Of this Promise, till now, I could never feel
the powerful Efficacy, and apply it to my self for comfort.

At my first entrance upon Business in the world, this Scripture suddenly
seized my Thoughts, without any previous Meditation thereupon, or Reading it
with remark in the Scriptures, but with such constancy of impression, that in
diversions in real Business, at home and abroad, this Scripture would still
rush upon my Thoughts: Its suddenness and constancy of impression, its
suitableness to my circumstances, at that time going to engage in the affairs
of the world, where Temptations to omit or intermit the seeking Grace in my
Soul might abound, and its correspondency to Experiences that afterward
occurred in my concerns on Earth, as means of sounding Grace in my Soul, made
me hope it was bore upon me by a Divine Power. A further confirmation and
certainty whereof I have had, not only from its continuance even till this day
in my Thoughts, with the powerful influence of making me seek God first in all
my concerns, and to trust in him as the God that hears Prayers, but also from
the mavelous method of God in my life, enabling me to use endeavors, and
giving his success to them; chiefly, when I am most diligent to advance his
Kingdom of Grace in my Soul; never could I say, that I was diligent and
spiritual in the means of Reading, Prayer, and the like, for the advancement of
Grace in my Soul, but even then all outward Comforts flowed in upon me with
great sweetness in their Enjoyments; and then Divine Providence has afforded me
opportunities and success in my Temporal Affairs; yea, I never observed my self
at any time disquieted, or under the probable or real danger of the
withdrawings of these Comforts, but I always found my self out of the road of
spirituality of frame, and of the diligent use of means of Grace.

To the enjoyment of this Experience, I am still held, and do hope, while I
live, shall be able to apply it as a special Gift from God's Divine and
Merciful Hand: Yea, with the Psalmist, in the 19th Psalm and 49th v. I have
often found it a prevailing argument in Prayer, That the Lord would remember
the word to his servant, upon which he had caused him to hope; it was indeed
his own work suddenly to bring and fix it upon my Thoughts, at a time when I
was altogether ignorant of such a thing, as a spiritual Power accompanying any
Scripture-Truth, and a beginning only to be sensible of a special conduct of
Providence round me; but now it appears more plainly his work, by its
confirmation, from the outward Providence, and inward workings of Christ's
Spirit in my Soul since; till which confirmation, I did not experimentally
understand it; and blessed be his Name, I am at quiet that he will continue my
hope therein, till the Kingdom of Grace has had its Perfection here, and I
passed into his everlasting Kingdom of Glory, where Promises shall be no more
of use, but there shall be the perfect Fruition of our rich Privileges, both
of Grace and Glory.

A Second Scripture bore home upon my Soul with instruction, and as a mean of
advancing Reliance upon God, more than upon means, was, That Scripture in
Daniel, wherein it is said, That by the blessing of God, the pulse nourished
him; that he looked fairer and fatter than these Children fed with King's meat.
One evening in Reading this passage of God's Word, I found my Mind deeply
impressed with Meditations upon it in an extraordinary manner, though many a time I
had read the same Scripture, and with great seriousness, but without such depth
of Thought: This made me hope at the time, that it was the work of Christ's
Spirit, it proving afterward a rule of action, and a means of advancing
greater Reliance upon a Divine Blessing to food, than ever formerly I had
observed in my self.

The Thoughts seizing me at the time, were, First, The great weight to be laid
upon a Divine Blessing for the nourishment of our Bodies, as well as upon the
food Eat.

Secondly, The great seriousness that is necessary in Petitioning a Divine
Blessing, and the exact extension of our Petitions to all things received for
that end of nourishment; thereby reproving my self and others for the formal,
and overly addressing God herein; and not endeavoring the same seriousness and
spirituality of Frame, as in other set and solemn Petitions, and not
Petitioning God's Divine Blessing for every thing we desire Nourishment from,
or Pleasure in.

Thirdly, A Resolution, and I hope I may say, a Performance, at least much
better than ever before, to extend my Supplications to God for all things taken
for the support of life, and in as serious a manner, as for matters of higher
concern, God being the same when then addressed to, as when by solemn, long and
numerous Petitions; and though to others, Food comes in a common way of
Providence, yet to God's own Children in a line of special Favor; and
therefore more Obligatory upon them to show their Trust to God for Mercies
seemingly in common with others, as well as for more special concerns; and that
in a way becoming the God they are more especially acquainted with; and the
greater Trust they pretend, and do give to God than others, who only enjoy all
those Favors, as out of the hand of a general Provider, in a common way of
Distribution.

The effect of which Instruction, Reproof, and Resolution, has been in my self
to avoid all opportunity of public Petitioning a Divine Blessing upon these
outward Favors, and that upon the following accounts.

First, Because of the necessity of going out of the common road, if my
Resolution be faithfully performed; and any thing uncommon, either in spiritual
or outward things, draws forth many times Reproachings from Carnal Persons;
yea, the very apprehension of such Persons present, to my certain experience,
is the occasion of marring a serious spiritual Petitioning God's Divine
Blessing.

The common road of Professors in this Duty is form and brevity; and
considering the mixed Company, this Duty is often to be performed with a
petition for God's Divine Blessing, with, the serious thoughtfulness upon what
is expressed, many times prevents the Mockings that attend a Spiritual posture
of Soul in the performance of this Duty without a Form; there being many
conversant with us at Meals, who were it not for the power of Education and
fear of Reproach, would please their Palates, without any Blessing petitioned
thereupon; and I Am sure with greater comfort, than when burdened with a Serious
Address to God, or Religious Conversation amongst themselves; I rather
therefore eschew the opportunity, than spoil my serious Address to God, having
little satisfaction in performing this Duty unspiritually: And sure I am, that
the mind confined to a Form of Thoughts and Words aforehand, must needs lay
occasion of restraint upon the Breathings of a Divine Spirit, which runs with
strong force of Thought upon the Soul, and great extension of Word, as any
acquainted therewith, will witness of me. I grant a seriousness of thought is
very agreeable to a Form in this Duty, but far different from that spirituality
of Soul evidential, sensible of Christ's Spirit acting therewith; yea, from my
own Experience, I can witness that I have had my frame of mind that has been in
a spiritual posture, allayed with an overly performance of this Duty.

Brevity I accuse, as marring of a Heavenly Frame; I must testify, that
sometimes I have been in the beginning of Prayer Cold and Lazy in the Frame of
my Soul; but in the progress thereof, a holy heat has been diffused in my
Affections, and therefore justly may fear, that if my frame be cold, passing
immediately from the World to this Duty, a repeating some short Sentences in a
Form will be over before Spirituality has seized my Thoughts, and so prove an
occasion of preventing Spirituality: But for a serious spiritual Soul, I think
him hardly capable of performing this Duty with common brevity, he being
carried out many times beyond designs and words, both exposing him and the Duty
to the Mocking of such, if then present, and therefore reservedness in the
public performance of this Duty I greatly affect.

Take therefore my reason thus for eschewing the Public performance of this
duty, that I may neither keep off Divine influences by form, nor short'n the
sweetness thereof by brevity, nor expose my self and the duty to the ridiculing
of those, who either would willingly feast upon God's good things, without ever
acknowledging him the Giver, or petition his blessing to follow them, rather
than cool the Victuals a degree-more than suits their Palate, and gratifies the
sensual Appetite.

A Second reason of eschewing Public performance of this duty, has been
because of this Spiritual frame and Heavenliness of mind I endeavor after,
throughout the day, out of duty, as well as in duty, which hinders a rushing
from Worldly Discourse, to a petitioning of God, with Three or Four Sentences
by Roat, and sets forth a duty proceeding from a mind spiritual and actually
serious. Besides, when at any time I am Heavenlily carried out, petitioning God
in any duty, I find that often Petitions and Expressions will run upon Matter
that I have been formerly pleading for throughout the day, of which I should
not willingly desire any Company, perhaps, to know of; and to restrain my self
in this Frame is what would greatly burden my Soul, and rather incline me to
lose such Comforts though never so grateful to Sense.

My Method therefore, and great Endeavor is, That whether others perform this
Duty, or my self, I may, if possible, meet with nothing that may occasion its
unspiritual performance: And when others are so short, my Soul is not at ease
till I have seriously ejaculated my Thoughts to Heaven, easily done without the
least knowledge to the Short-sighted Professor's round; and privacy to my self
I make choice of, unless Family-relation engage me, that so neither Form nor
Brevity may hinder me of so sweet an Enjoyment as spiritual Frame in the Duty;
and that what bears most in my Thoughts toward God through the day, may not be
prevented from being uttered, through the fear of others knowing it, or
ridiculing the Duty because of it.

Thirdly, Another Scripture was bore home upon my Soul by way of Instruction
and Comfort; when one day I happened to be out of all Business respecting my
Calling, and discovering one of the same way with my self in great hurry
therein, some repining melancholy Thoughts begun to spring up, of which I was
concernedly sensible at the time, and anxious how to suppress them; but after
walking some four or five paces, I see the Bible before me, which I took up,
without any design of serious reading therein: But the first Verse that my eyes
fixed upon, was that of the 9th Verse of the 5th Chapter of James, Grudge not
one against the other; which immediately bore home upon me with astonishing
amazement, that so exactly it should suit my Circumstances, which, perhaps,
might have from Lust within, and Satan without, occasioned the neglect of
regarding God in all Events, and the attributing this to Chance, or some
external Accident, if I had not discovered God's own hand in the matter: For
besides God's adapting it so suitably to my present Case, by the true meaning
of the words, there immediately issued relief to my anxiety, and full quiet of
mind, and comfortable satisfaction, without the least repining. And I still
find upon the occurrences of the like temptation, a power not reduceable to my
self as the Fountain, but proceeding from Christ, and conveyed by his Spirit,
working mightily in my Soul. Let therefore these prosper, and others excel me,
my satisfaction is founded on God's special conduct of Providence round me,
God's overruling all Events for such an end, as the dethroning of Corruption,
and the raising of Grace to such perfection of Faith, and meetness for Heaven,
as will be rewarded with an abundant entrance into that blessed Kingdom. This
divine calm of Mind was the product of the Holy Spirit, the great Comforter;
for mere Reason and natural Constitution cannot quiet us upon such Motives, and
are but weak Bulwarks to defend against disquieting impressions when
difficulties occur.

Fourthly, Having set apart some time for private Prayer, concerning a more
than ordinary Affair, and reading some Scripture before it, one Verse thereof
affected my thoughts by way of Instruction, more than the other parts of that
portion of Scripture; it was the last Verse of the 10th Chapter of
Ecclesiastes, Curse not the King in thy thoughts, nor the rich in thy
bedchamber; for the birds of the air shall declare the voice, and the fowl with
wings shall tell the matter. In the reading whereof, such a divine Power
accompanied me, that set me a resolving from that moment to eschew speaking
evil privately, and that by way of whisper, against my Superiors and others;
and to leave whatever might be expressed against my self in such a manner, to
the permission of a Divine Hand, under whose especial Conduct I had some
comfortable evidence of being stated, having at this very time often and often
experienced, that upon reporting any thing injurious to others, either from a
foundation of Self-applause, or of spreading a reproach with that privacy, that
I have imagined it impossible the reproach could ever reach their ear; yet it
has been heard of, and providentially returned me with the just punishment of
Reproach, either from the same person, or from another, by a reproach of the
same kind. And that this resolution of Conformity to this Scriptural Lesson
might be the more effectually performed, I set it upon Record, with a design of
viewing it every morning, before my entrance upon public Conversation, to help
forward that resolved watch, of taking heed to my ways, not to sin with my
tongue. To the intermission of which watch, so many daily Temptations occur,
not only from natural inclination to applaud one's self, and to disparage
others, but from the ill example of others, who, upon pretension of concern and
friendship for a person, and trusting to their privacy they are conversing
with, whisper an ill report, with the name of the person reproached, and
thereby draw forth a mutual discourse upon the thing, that aggravates and fixes
its belief upon their minds and thoughts, that it is ready to break forth on
all occasions, while the person reproached is perfectly ignorant, and perhaps
as truly innocent. This is the abounding Sin of the Christians of this day,
either to believe a Reproach too soon, or to aggravate it in its after-report,
and neglect the speaking to the persons concerned, for their amendment. This is
privately contrary to the Rule of the Gospel, and hinders the obtaining of
spiritual Blessings; yea, brings Men under the danger of that denunciation,
Psalm. 101.5. Whosoever privily slanders his neighbor, him will I cut off.

Fifthly, When I have been under great concern for the omission of Duty, and
losing that delight therein that I had formerly enjoyed, then the Lord has made
that verse of the 7th Chapter of the Romans, a powerful relief to my fear of
its being evidence of no grace; The law of the mind, warring against the law of
the members. And when I have found before the performance of Prayer, a struggle
between doing and neglecting it, and the most trifling occasion, looking out at
a Window, a great noise, and the like, delaying of my Duty, then my Soul
labored under the weight of concern, lest it betoken'd my being altogether
empty of Grace; and that till God was pleased to bear home this express
Scripture-truth to be experienced in my self, and to quiet my Mind by a Sermon
Preached upon the 1st v. of the 4th chap. of the Hebrews, Let us fear lest we
come short of that rest; wherein in the Explication of Fear, so far as Duty, he
discovered the mixture of Corruption and Grace in a Christian Soul here on
Earth, and that strugglings often rising thence, would cause fear in the Soul,
but what was no ground of fear, unless when overcome by them; after which time
I begun to observe the victory over these disturbing fears within, and the
exercise of a greater watch unto Prayer, to endeavor their repulse.

Sixthly, Another Scripture powerfully bore home, has been that of the 16th of
Matthew, where Christ desires his Disciples to Remember the five Loaves; which
Scripture, then and ever since, in the steps of God's advancing Reliance in my
Soul, has been of great use; and when God has seemed to withdraw any sorts of
Mercies, it has made me have immediate recourse to former Experiences, with the
good effect of accusing my self for my little faith, and forgetfulness so soon
of his former preventing Mercies, hastening me to Prayer for strength of Faith
and Reliance upon him: Let this be upon the Thoughts of poor Creatures under
God's sensible withdrawings, to prevent sinking fears, lest they are without
Grace, when there is Grace in Sincerity, but not in that sensible strength
which by Prayer, and the remembrance of God's former Mercies, they should
diligently endeavor to obtain.

Seventhly, That Scripture of seeking the Lord while he may be found, and
calling upon him while he is near, bore home in sweet Exercise, at such a time
when God's Breathing has been sensibly upon my Soul, raising my frame to a
Heavenliness of Mind; when the Holy Spirit by warm influences excites the Soul,
it is a season of Grace to the unrenewed, and a precious opportunity and
advantage to the real Christian. This has made me to prize the smallest motions
of the Divine Spirit, not to quench them, and watchful of entertaining them in
the exercise of Meditation and Prayer, eschewing what Conversation might at
that time bring levity of Mind to dethrone them.

Eighthly, Another Scripture impressed seriously upon my Heart, was the 21st and
22d verses of the 18th chapter of Matthew; Then said Peter, Lord, how often shall
my brother sin against me, and I forgive him; till seven times? And Jesus said
unto him, Until seventy times seven. This has been a Scripture accompanied with
great power, to repel risings of Corruption toward Revenge, and perfectly to
quiet my Mind with a Reliance upon God concerning the matter. The first
Experience whereof met me in the Streets, where hearing of a false and
unmerited Aspersion upon my self, at whose hands I deserved better; immediately
a design of Revenge was rising, and was carried further on by meditating upon
it, till coming home, and entering my Chamber, and taking the Bible in my hands,
that very Scripture was offered to my View, and by the influence of Heaven,
made an assisting-instrument of quiet at the time, and ever since a strong help
to watch my self in the like case: Its suitableness to my circumstances, its
effectual power restraining me from complying with Satan and inward Corruption,
and inclining and enabling me to obey God, whose Will is declared in his Word,
was a testimony that a gracious Providence brought that Scripture to my sight.

Ninthly, When Reproaches against me, and malicious Designs had a probability
of taking effect, and have been turned into other Events, against the Design,
Wish, or Expectation of my Enemies, then that Scripture of the 11th verse of
the 41st Psalm, By this I know thou favourest me, because my enemies triumph
not over me, has been not only confirmed, but impressed upon me with much inward
Comfort.

At one time the whole 15th Psalm was bore upon my Thoughts with that strength
and continuance, that I was continually desiring Conformity to it, and
measuring my Actions by its Rule, till God gave into my Soul the Evidence of
some measure of Conformity to it, with other spiritual Comforts at that time.

A multitude of other Scriptures have been applied to my Soul at the times of
needing Comfort and Instruction, but they would enlarge my Discourse too much,
and might occasion a discovery of the Author, and therefore I choose rather to
stop here, having enumerated so many as afford a Testimony to the reality of
Christ's Spirit, applying to the Precepts and Promises of the Word, and bearing
home Scripture Truths as instructive, to instruct and remember us of our Duty,
and encourage us to persevere in it till we arrive at Heaven.

Experiences of God's Spirit's sensible withdrawings in Prayer from helping the
Christian to ask what he will not return, though in his design to Petition.
THe First Experience whereof was, That though I had designed to have Prayed
for an event, yet in the Prayer I have not directed a Petition for it; and
though I have intended in the performance of that Duty, several times to Pray
for it, I have been restrained.

Secondly, When one day I designed to renew my Requests to God for obtaining a
matter in my morning's Supplication, my desires were fervently excited; but in
the afternoon I was much restrained, and in some hours afterward, my Soul was
drawn forth earnestly to seek it; and upon enquiry, I found that the three
different alterations in the matter that day, and the different times of the
alterations, exactly suited the times of different Prayer.

To illustrate which, I Will give you one instance amongst many, concerning a
Friend whose Circumstances I put up to the Lord three several times in one day,
and suitable to my great enlargement for them in my Morning-Prayer, were much
better; but suitable to my Afternoons constraint, were for some hours in
racking misery; and suitable to my return in spirituality in Prayer for them,
there was a return of mercy in their relief, the circumstance of time exactly
suited one another, that there was a refreshment from Pains, and a return of
them according as Prayer was intense and enlarged, or restrained, of which I
made careful Observation.

Thirdly, Another Experience of constraint from Prayer, has been concerning a
matter, which (all circumstances considered) was very likely to succeed, but
not finding my Heart in a frame to pray for it, I suspected the issue, and
accordingly it was not effected.

An instance thereof was, concerning the dearest Relation I had on Earth, who
being Sick for 6 weeks, I was restrained from Prayer, with Reliance upon God
for restoring Mercy; and the issue was, the Death of that Beloved Person, for
whose recovery thorough the course of their Illness, I could never put up one
serious Petition.

Two very late passages I can set down greatly establishing my self, and
mavelous in themselves. One was concerning a Person of great Worth, of whose
Death I had information in all probability certain, but being in the Street all
alone, I found my self enlarged to pray for their Soul's Salvation, and that
with mavelous Pleasure, as if I had been assuredly certain of their future
eternal Happiness; and being afterward in serious Prayer, I found the same
sweetness as I have enjoyed, in Spiritual Breathings from above; upon this, I
humbly said to one who was my Bosome-friend, I was not of the opinion, that the
Person I prayed for was dead; and imparted my Reason hereof, That the Lord by
his Spirit had helped me in sweet spirituality to supplicate for them:
Accordingly we had an account of the Person's being better; but the next
morning following, I found such a restraint from Praying for that Person, that
I then said to my Friend, That the Person was Dead, and that very account we
had presently after.

The other passage was, Concerning one to be Executed, for whose Salvation I
found my Affections very ardently drawn forth in Prayer to the Father of
Mercies; but in Prayer for his Life, my Desires were dried up, and my Tongue
did as it were cleave to the Roof of my Mouth. Three times I found this change
in my self, being always carried out with fervency and freedom to Pray for his
Soul, but restrained and discouraged to Pray for his Life; observing this
difference in my self, I told an intimate Friend, That I had good hope of his
eternal Salvation, but no hope of his Pardon. The issue was, the Condemned
Person was Reprieved for two days, and was afterward Executed; and at his
Death, his Behavior was so humble and Christian, that the Minister that
attended him, declared his great satisfaction, that he died a Penitent Believer.

Many instances of the same kind I could set down, but I shall only add the
following instance: I was going to see a Friend that was Sick, and addressed my
self to God in secret Prayer before I went, but a kind of terror seized my
Mind, and Words stopped, that I could not offer up one Petition in any
seriousness, or with any hopes of being heard for recovery: And going to see
the Person, found that they had been dead some time before. This was a
discovery to me, that the Holy Spirit does often withdraw his Assistance to Ask
for that which he knows God will not bestow.

Experiences of God's Method of training me to the serious, aweful, and
delightful hearing of Sermons.
FIrst, by suiting Sermons upon a Sabbath unexpectedly to things my Thoughts
have greatly ruminated on through the week, and by bearing home instruction and
comfort to my Soul thereby. One instance, (without expressing many I could
give) was, when through the week greatly thoughtful concerning the knowledge of
effectual calling, and my evidence thereof in my Soul; and happening to be one
day in a Friend's Closet, where several Books lay, I looked into one, and being
pleased with the subject, I brought it home, without knowing that any thing
concerning Effectual Calling was in it; in the perusal whereof I found an
Appendix concerning Effectual Calling, which greatly pleased me at the time, my
Thoughts being then in great Exercise concerning it, but still without any
sensible satisfaction in my self from using it. The following Sabbath I found a
strong inclination to hear another Minister than whom I usually heard, without
argument to my self against him, or any sensible and more grateful motion to
hear another. The Inclination grew so strongly and suddenly, that no objection
could stop my design, though I met with several; and at my hearing the Minister,
found his Sermon upon Effectual Calling, and accompanied with such satisfactory
Instructions, and sweet Sense of my being effectually called, that I was amazed
and ravished at the time; which plainly proved the word Preached to be the
power of God, bringing forth evidences which are means to Salvation.

Secondly, By bearing home Duties with such Power of Christ's Spirit in the
hearing of a Sermon, that immediately their performance has been resolved, and
the practice dutifully and delightfully continued. One remarkable instance was,
By a Sermon of a faithful Minister of Christ, Mr. Showers, in a December,
Preparatory to the Sacrament; wherein he pressed, That as People, at that time
usually, were a considering their Account-Books, to know their Circumstances;
so we might at the same time every year, take an Account of our Souls, to know
the State of Grace, whether growing, decaying, or at a stand; which greatly
impressed me at the time, and was a mean in God's Hand to persuade me to the
Custom thereof; which ever since I have used; and not only then, but every
night, and at the end of every month; and blessed be God it has been of great
Service to my self in the discovery of the advancement of my inward Change, and
in the preserving of me from misapprehensions of God's Ways with me, helping me
to know what Grace is most in exercise, and what Corruption most tempting, and
a continual discovery of God's Method suiting his Providence to each. I impart
it, as an Example to others, and to help forward their comfortable Pilgrimage
on Earth.

Another instance of that Experience, was, In the powerful Influence that
accompanied my Soul in hearing the Sermons Preached upon Family-Duty, by which,
though I always performed Evening Family Prayer, yet had never performed it in
the Morning, till by that means God was pleased to enforce it as Duty, and help
me to practice it with Comfort: And if these Ministers had no other Seal
accompanying their Religious Undertakings, this one may Comfort them, and let
them know it was not in vain.

Thirdly, By influencing Sermons with a power to suppress Evils predominant at
the time of hearing, which gave me ground to fear they would interrupt me in
that Duty. I have often found my self under Disquiet, and in great fear lest
the Disquiet should occasion an unprofitable Hearing, it being natural for a
thing disquieting to draw forth the Mind upon it, even when it ought to fix
upon a thing of higher concern; and yet I have been so far from losing the
advantage of this blessed mean of Grace, that it has been through the Blessing
of God effectual to remove the Disquiet it self, and to bring me into a sweet
spiritual frame of Soul. How ought this greatly to caution us, not to add one
folly to another, and by pretension of unfitness to hear, to neglect hearing,
it being a means by Divine Assistance to make you sit? How often have the
Profane of the Earth, vainly said, They were as knowing as their Ministers,
and understood as much as they could acquaint them? And why should they go to
hear what they know beforehand? Never considering, Hearing as a means not only
instructing their Judgments, but changing their Hearts, establishing them
Experimentally in what they know, and raising them by a Divine Hand to a
serious spiritual heavenly frame of Soul, the Element a Saint desires
continually to breathe in.

Fourthly, By ordering the Sermons of Persons disliked from some circumstances
in their way, as means both of Instruction and Comsort; and the circumstance
despised, more spiritualizing my frame than ordinary, to prevent partial
respects to Ministers, and to see the assisting means that God affords us, and
to encourage us in the use of the means that God affords us, the most unlikely
means being truly successful, as it is influenced with a Divine Spirit.

One instance whereof was, Before I happened to know or hear a worthy Minister
of this City, I ordinarily exclaimed against his Singing of Hymns, not as
unlawful; for Hymns, Psalms, and Spiritual Songs, are the parts of Praise under
the New Testament; but lest it should give encouragement to others, not so
sound in Learning and Divinity, not only to neglect the use of Psalms, but to
compose what might be erroneous, weak, and dissonant from them, one day I found
a mighty inclination in my self to hear him, without any rational motion to it
at the time: And though I was in an extraordinary lazy cold frame, yet no sooner
did I enter the place, but I met with the Hymn I had so much exclaimed against,
plainly made use of as a mean to bring me into a most ravishing spiritual frame
of Soul, which continued with me in all the after public and private Duties of
the day.

I have also Experienced, That when upon the consideration of a low esteem of a
Minister for his weak parts, and unsuitable way of Preaching to what I wanted,
I have withdrawn to some place else, that that very day I have had an unusual
Testimony of the Worth of this Minister's Sermon whom I left; and instead of
meeting with that sweetness I have expected, or sometimes have had from the
other, when I have gone with some inward constraint, I have found my self in as
bad a frame as ever, without any satisfaction and establishment, but rather an
uneasiness of Mind concerning it.

O how instructing is this of the Inefficacy of the best means without a Divine
Power, and of the Efficacy of the weakest means with a Divine Power! It is
neither learned matter, nor fine Oratory, that will savingly instruct the Mind,
or comfort the Soul, though it may affect the fancy, and inform the judgment
for a time; how instructing is it of a dependence upon God in the use of means
he lays providentially in our way as our Duty, unless when God goes out of his
ordinary road, of which we are not to make a Rule? If they be weak means or
strong means, it is according to the influence of a Divine Spirit that they
become effectual; and if you slight a weaker Preacher, under whose Instruction
you are by the Designation of Providence, and choose to go to one more learned
and pleasing, you have not so good a Warrant to expect a Blessing, partly
because of your neglecting the appointed means for your spiritual Profit;
partly lest you be in danger to limit God to afford his Blessing to the
Preaching of one, and not of another; whereas his working is as glorious, if
not more, with a weak instrument, than by a strong; and it is the plain serious
Sermon that I have many times found most pleasing to my self, however other
sorts have ravished my Senses at the time.

The Method I used that my hearing the Word Preached might be profitable, was
and is, to examine my self, whether I could assent to the Truth of what I
heard, from my own Experience, as well as the Minister's Assertion, by which I
was established and comforted, when my private Experience was consonant to the
Doctrine of a public Preacher: But when this was wanting, if the Doctrine was
proved from Scripture, my Petitions to Heaven have been spiritually carried
forth, That the Truth might be sealed to my Soul by feeling its Efficacy; and I
have in a short time found my Desires answered, by the operations of Divine
Providence, and of the Holy Spirit in me. The right hearing of the Word
consists not in a grave outward gesture, or giving ear to a Sermon, either upon
the Fundamental Principles of Christianity to be believed, or the practical
Duties to be performed, but you must compare your Faith and Life with the
Doctrine of the Gospel, and that seriously, without the intermixture of
wandering Thoughts, and with fervent Prayer for a Divine Blessing; sometimes God
is pleased to give Grace more richly by a weak than by a more able instrument:
This reproves many, who content themselves with attendance upon the Ministry of
the Word, and with an outward grave behavior in Hearing, but never seek after
an inward frame of Heart suitable to the Word; so that a serious frame of Soul,
as well as a grave gesture of Body, a reflecting upon, and comparing it with
your own Experience, as well as a reflecting upon and comparing it to your own
Notions, I recommend to all that would hear God's Word Preached with profit
thereby.

Experiences of God's Method in training me to the Knowledge of right
participating the Lord's Supper.
PRevious to which, let me premise my Opinion thereof, and Practice then while
only under the Notional Knowledge of Christianity and the Power of Education,
and that in the following Parts.

First, That by the strength of Education I believed the Sacrament an
extraordinary Ordinance, solemnly to be gone about, and extraordinarily to be
prepared for; wonderful Communion with God being there to be enjoyed, of which
I never then had felt any Experience, though I had once partaken of it with all
seriousness, by the instruction and example of others, and my own Thoughts of
the solemnity of that Ordinance, but without any other seriousness than what is
wrought by a Minister's affecting Discourse, and delivery of an affecting
Subject; but spiritual Communion with Christ, without which, Sacrament
Communion is unprofitable, and the discovery of God's love to the Soul, which
Holy Ministers have spoke of as more valuable than all the World; all this was
Mystery to me, and not desired; but now, blessed be his Name, has been
Revealed, and Experimented in my Soul by the means of Grace.

Secondly, When I felt an inward change in my Soul, and I had clearer knowledge
of the Nature and End of that Ordinance, my intention and manner of performance
was Spiritual, and the Benefits concomitant and consequent with that Ordinance
were enjoyed. It Is true, that Prayer was the first Duty wherein I felt a
serious hearty delight, and understood fellowship with God; but gradually I
advanced to the Experience of the same delight and heavenliness of frame in
other Duties, and amongst the rest, in that Duty of the Sacrament, but without
that high flight of Joy as sometimes I have had in Prayer; but I still
imagined, that though I had not attained its experience so much in that Duty,
yet it was to be enjoyed therein, and that God would please in due time to give
me the Sense thereof.

Thirdly, That no sooner I had the Sense of this inward change, but as soon my
judgment was clear, as to the repetition of this Duty of the Sacrament; for
before, neither the Reading of the Institution, nor Ministers preaching
thereupon, were so powerful as to induce me to its often performance, which
frequency I once imagined Sinful, or at least the occasion of leading to a
careless Sinful performance thereof: Satan like an Angel of light, disturbed my
tender Conscience with this Argument against frequent Communion, That I was not
to partake of the Lord's Table without a Week's solemn Preparation; but I was
more instructed concerning my Duty, by my own Call afterward; for once being in
great Affliction both inward and outward, I resolved to go to the Lord's
Supper, imagining it a season in which I could best be serious, and thereby
better prepared than when the pressure of the Affliction was over: And if there
were any such thing to be experienced as the great Comforts the Saints
declared, I might then probably feel them; and accordingly did partake with
greater Gravity and inward Thoughtfulness than otherwise I should have been
able to do; but I did not feel those raised Affections, nor that inward
Fellowship with God, or ravishing Joy that I did expect; which disappointment
greatly concerned me, Satan forcing home upon me this suggestion, of its being
an Evidence how unprepared I was, and what an unacceptable Sacrifice I offered
to God; which made me consult a spiritual Friend, whose Sincerity and Judgment
I had in very high value: His Answer was, The Spirit of God is not to be
limited; God's ways of imparting himself is not confined to the time of
Partaking this Ordinance, but you may judge of your right Performance by your
frame before and after, as well as in the Duty. This greatly revived me, and
was a mean of quieting me, and of keeping me in the frequent Participation of
the Ordinance; the Truth of his Words I have found by many Experiences.

Fourthly, I have sometimes found great heavenliness of frame before the
Partaking of the Ordinance, and sometimes after it, even when in the time of
the Duty I have been coldly affected, and without sensible Comfort; Upon
hearing my complaint, my Friend replied, Though God in training you to the
knowledge of himself and his ways, has dealt with you as a darling Child, with
wonderful smiling providence, think it not strange if having obtained his end
of working Faith of Reliance, he change his Method, and tries the Grace he has
wrought in your Soul.

Fifthly, In the mean time this Blessed Saint being at a distance from me, I
often prayed, O that I had fellowship with God in this Ordinance, that I might
feel therein what others do, or what I have felt in other Duties, I should be
satisfied if I should never enjoy it there again; unbelief still working in me.
It pleased God in his wonderful Condescension to comply with this desire, and
thereby to discover the greatness of my weakness, as well as the advantage of
Reliance upon God in the use of means, without limiting him to our desires; for
in the participating of the next Sacrament, I was admitted to such a sweet
ravishing Enjoyment that I never had before Experienced in that Duty, which
persuaded me of the Truth of what I have often heard; but such a disquieting
darkness was consequent both in my Mind and outward Affairs, that I by the rich
Mercy and Power of God was then helped, sweetly to resign my desire to his
Will, and to supplicate for his influences, as he pleased to dispense them,
never limiting God to things or times further than as suitable to his
Omniscient Will; by this Experience I was helped in all my concerns, less as
well as greater, to cast them at Heaven's Gate, to hope in his Mercy for them,
with this desire only, that I might by the Spirit of Grace and Supplication, be
assisted to make known my Requests to God with Faith and Resignation, so as to
be accepted of him; and in this I find my Hearts Ease.

I have since esteemed it Duty, and had ardent Desire of Partaking the Lord's
Supper every Month. While my Religion was merely from Education, I thought once
in a year or two enough, to partake of this Ordinance, but since my regard to
my Sovereign's and Savior's Command, Do this in remembrance of me, and my
performance in Obedience to this Command, I have enjoyed ravishing sweetness in
Communion with Christ in this Duty: And I shall add, That the frequent
repeating of this Ordinance is attended with great advantage; for by
Preparatory Examination, I am more fully acquainted with my Spiritual State,
with my present Corruptions and Graces stronger or weaker, and the way how God
makes this Duty a mean to suppress the one, and raise the other, with my
Defects in the performance of this Duty; and I have a fuller sight of Christ in
all-sufficient merits in his Treasures of Grace that are opened to all that
come with Holy Affections to him. The serious and frequent renewing our
Covenant with Christ in this Ordinance, will endear him to us, and engage us to
live to him who died for us; and the warm impression of his love will be
maintained in our Souls, which is too apt to cool and decline, unless fed and
revived by the frequent Contemplation of our Crucified Savior.

Seventhly, In the beginning of the Celebration of this Ordinance I have often
been in a cold frame; but at the approach of the Elements this frame has
changed, and my Soul has been sweetly carried forth to petition for the
imparting the Privileges of Christ's Body broken, and Benefits annexed to it;
and I have found from receiving the Elements, the strengthening power of the
Spirit, verifying our Savior's Words, That his flesh is meat indeed, and his
blood drink indeed. This has been a means to preserve me from Anxieties, and to
persevere in the frequent Commemorating of Christ's Death prescribed in his
last Will: I also find, that the more frequent renewing my Vows, makes me more
careful to perform them, and that it is more easy to take an account of our
Faithfulness to God and our Souls, or of our Neglects, once every Month, than
when there is a greater distance between the time of our Receiving, and
Examining our selves, how correspondent our Conversations have been to our
Covenant sealed in that Ordinance.

Eighthly, At the time of partaking this Ordinance, I have often desired with
ardent Affections, two Things, That I might be spiritually-minded in the whole
course of my life, and that Holiness may be advancing in my Soul till I arrive
at perfection. This will be attended with solid Comfort, according to the
Promise, Great peace to those who keep thy law: And although we are to seek the
shining face of God, the joyful assurance of his love in the use of his
Ordinances; yet since the shedding abroad in the Soul the clear Evidences of
God's Love, is a free Dispensation according to the Divine Pleasure, my
principal request has been to have a pure Heart and Holy Conversation,
depending upon God for inward Comfort.

From which Experiences you may upon good ground fear, that when the excuse of
neglecting the Sacrament, is because of its being a Solemn Ordinance, and
therefore to be seldom received, is an Error of the Carnal Mind, and a
Temptation of Satan to divert us from using frequently that means of Grace,
which confirms our Faith, inflames our Love, and secures our hope of Glory, and
makes us more exact and constant, and comfortable in the everlasting way.

I shall conclude this with Advice to those who have not felt those Joyful
Emanations in this Ordinance which they have expected, and others of the Saints
have enjoyed; Be not discouraged from your Duty, but with unfainting
perseverance, continue in the use of the means of Grace; The Lord waits to be
gracious, to bestow his Comforts in the best season: There is sweet Peace in
our Obedience to the Divine Commands, though we have not raptures of Joy; And our
Obedience is more pleasing to God, when notwithstanding all difficulties and
discouragements, it is with Conscience to his commanding-Will performed, than
when it is made easy by sensible Comforts.

THE APPLICATORY, AND SECOND PART OF This Discourse.
CHristianity, as is described in the Gospel, is Experienced in the Souls of
Real Christians, in different degrees of Knowledge and Power; but the most who
are Christians in Profession, are strangers to its vital Efficacy.

The reason of this diversity is, Because the most rest in the speculative
Notion of the Christian Religion, and are contented with the external Character
of others; others are cleansed and changed by the Truths of the Gospel, and are
inward Christians.

Among Christians in Title there are various Divisions and contrary Sentiments,
according to the Principles of the Education, which often cause violent
Contentions among them.

Among real Christians there are Differences, but not of so deep a nature; Some
Christians are weaker by damping of this powerful Principle of Regeneration,
through too long omission of the means of Grace, or by too deep mixing the
Thoughts and Affections in the Business of the World; or by a levity of Mind in
their indulging too free a use of sensitive Pleasures that are innocent in
their nature. And from these Reasons it is, that spiritual Influences are
obstructed, and the Divine Nature in Christians is not so lively and vigorous
as in others, who regard their Souls, and internal things, with great
application and diligence, sometimes carnal Pride insinuates into those who are
real Christians; and to maintain their Parties, and to be distinguished from
others, will with Heat contend for their Opinions in things that are not clear,
nor of great moment, as if they were Fundamental Doctrines.

There are some Christians that have not only the life of Grace planted in
them, but the liveliness of Grace; they are working and watchful to prevent any
impression and taint of Evil from the Contagion of the World wherewith they are
encompast; And they are watchful unto Good, they are ready to exercise every
Grace in its season, and by a continual Derivation of strength from Christ,
they are preserved from sinful Errors and irregular Passions.

Our Blessed Lord Jesus Christ has paid the price of our Redemption, and that
we may have an interest therein, and enjoy the Privileges thereof, as evidence
and earnest of Heaven God has appointed means whereby we may obtain this
Blessed end; means that are suitable in their use to rational and lapsed
Creatures, in their human capacity, such as exclude boasting in ourselves, and
of Presumption, Licentiousness, and security in a carnal Conversation; these
means are prescribed in the Gospel, as Prayer, Meditation, Hearing, and the
Participation of the Lord's Supper.

These are the Sphere of the Holy Spirit's Activity, in these we draw near to
God, and he draws near us; By these means Christ with all his saving Benefits
is applied to Souls; By these they are revived from the Death of Sin, and
restored to the favor and Image of God; They live in Communion with him, and
are confirmed thereby against the Temptations of the Evil Spirit, who rules the
World.

Those who neglect the holy and constant use of these means, whether from the
delusion of their Minds, or the corruption of their Hearts, will find, that
Darkness is their guide, and the issue of their way will be fatal and
destructive.

Let me therefore apply the foregoing Narrative thus: There are some Professors
that have knowledge in an eminent degree, and are of a fair unblemisht
Conversation, by the advantage and impression of Education, but are strangers
to the inward power of Godliness as ignorant Heathens: Let such duly consider
the Case, and neither despair, for the Divine Spirit can quicken them; nor
delay the serious and diligent use of means which God has made effectual for
the Conversion and Salvation of others: Let them observe both the outward
Providence of God, and the inward Workings of his Spirit, and apply themselves
to God in the Ordinances, both private and public, that they may receive
renewing Grace of God, and be preserved from destructive Evils.

If a Notional Knowledge of God's Word, and an unblemished outward
Conversation, be no real Christianity, no certain Testimony of Real and Saving
Grace, How utterly void of it are the Profane? To them I would give this
Counsel, Not to be averse from Serious and Real Religion, upon the account of
some Professors who have only a name to live, but are dead; or from a conceit
that the Christian Religion is so extremely rigorous, as to deprive us of all
Natural Comforts; or upon the account of different Opinions in the Christian
World; but to remove all Prejudices, and to endeavor to understand the Gospel,
to believe the Doctrines, to obey the Precepts of it, and then they will find
Christianity to be more than an outward Profession, a serious Divine Principle,
regulating the Heart and Life; and that it is to be obtained of God by every
sincere Seeker of it; and that it allows the temperate Use of Natural Comforts,
and only forbids the licentious Abuse of them, whereby men become most unlike
God, and are like the beasts that perish: And the lawful sober Enjoyments of
Nature are consistent with the Joy of the Holy Ghost in the hearts of the
Saints; which is infinitely more satisfying and lasting than all the Pleasures
of Sense, for which so many lose Heaven, and are condemned to Eternal Torments.

If Christianity and its Power may be really felt in the Soul, and yet damped
by the too long intermission of the Means of Grace, and clouded by the
admixture of too much of self, producing a kind of Christians lazy in the
obtaining the continued Power of Christ's Spirit in their Souls, and so are in
danger both of long intermissions of fellowship with God, and breaking of
fellowship one to another; more dishonouring God than either the mere
Professor, or Profane, who never experienced the Reality and Comfort of True
Christianity:

To such I would apply this Exhortation, Not only to be in the Right Use of
Means, but in the more Continued Right Use, than ever formerly; for
undoubtedly, if the Means of Grace be the ways by which he walks, and by which
he communicates to Believers, (to the truth whereof all experiencing Christians
will put their Seal), then the oftener Christians walk in those ways, the oftener
and the more they receive both of Knowledge and Comfort from God; which
undoubtedly is the reason why some real Christians go beyond others in the
knowledge of his ways, and are in the more close walking according to the Rule
of his Word, with more inward Fellowship with God, both in the Means of Grace,
and common Conversation.

That therefore the Word of God (the doubting whereof being one great occasion
of Error and Vice) may be experienced as Truth, and the means leading thereto
given forth, I shall previously lay down Two Propositions, the first
Instructive, the other Cautionary.

The first is, That all the Children of God in their Pilgrimage-state are under
Three sorts of Conducts.

The first is that of God's Word, the Foundation of our Faith, and the
Infallible Rule by which we are to judge of all Doctrines, of all our
Experiences, and all the Passages of Providence.

The second is that of the Divine Spirit, who according to the Promise of
Christ, instructs us in all Saving Truth by the Word, and brings it to our
remembrance to guide us safely to Heaven.

The third is that of Divine Providence, sometimes enlightening what seemed dark
in the Word of God, and in the Actings of Christ's Spirit, but founded upon his
Word of Truth, and agreeable to both, though the dispensations of Providence
are no Certificate of God's special love to men; yet we are assured by the
Scriptures, that there is a peculiar tender Providence of God, that regards his
Children, which is declarative of his special Love; and by a serious
observation of it, their Duty and Comfort will be encouraged and improved.

Secondly, Cautionary; Not to limit the Spirit of God to any particular way or
time of working in the Soul, either in planting of Grace, or its further
growth. Though by observation of outward Providence God was pleased to bring
me to the first serious sense of my self, and to a dependence upon God for Life
and for Salvation; and by mavelous steps of his outward dispensations, joined
with the inward Workings of his Spirit, he has begun and increased a gracious
Change in my Soul; yet he has used various methods in the Conversion and
Sanctification of others; which whether External or Internal, if observed and
remembered, would seal to Souls the Truth of Christianity, in opposition to all
its Opposers. There is a clear discovery of the Divine Wisdom, Power, and
Goodness, in the different means that God is pleased to use for the saving of
Souls; all which are to be considered with Reverence, and to be complied with
by Obedience; the end of all being our Holiness, as preparatory to Eternal
Happiness.

The first Duty or Means I would have you apply your selves to, is that of
observation of outward Providence; this having been so effectual in me, I
earnestly recommend it to the serious practice of all concerned for their
salvation; but that you may know in what method rightly to observe, I will give
its Characters in the parts I have found so advantageous to my self.

First, You must observe all sorts of outward Providence; great and more
remarkable, lesser and not so palpable.

Secondly, You must observe all Circumstances that attend such Providence, and
set them upon Record, on purpose to reflect and compare one with the other;
many confirming Providence have lost their favor and establishing effect, as
much by missing some Circumstances thereof, as by forgetting of the whole: By
this neglect some have had misapprehensions of God, and false conceits of
themselves. The Circumstance of time wherein that Nobleman's Son was recovered,
John 4.52. exactly answering the hour when Christ said unto him, Thy Son
lives; was the convincing-proof that the Cure was performed by Christ, and
consequently of the truth of his being sent from God. In like manner, the
observation of the return of my Prayers, with Success answerable to the
fervency of my desires, and Unsuccessfulness of Prayer when I have been cold,
and not duly affected in that Duty, has confirmed my belief, That it was from
the Excitation of Christ's Spirit that enabled me to pray, and from his
excellent Goodness the return of my Prayer.

Thirdly, You must observe outward Providence with improvement: The Lord's
design in laying passages of Providence before you, is not only to view them,
but to see Him in them, and thereby to understand his Being, with the glorious
Attributes of his Wisdom, Power, and loving kindness to Man, and that with the
suitable Improvement of Eying him in all things, seeking to him for guidance in
Means, and happy Events of all things.

Observation unimproved, serve not God's Honor on Earth, and will serve your
selves no other way than by heaping up Aggravations to your Accusation before
the great Judge's Tribunal, for neglecting to improve his precious Talents by
Reliance upon him, and Glorifying his Love.

To excite your Observation under these three Characters, I Will lay before you
the following Motives.

First, God's own encouragement to it, Psalm. 109.43. Whosoever is wise, and will
observe these things, they shall understand the loving kindness of the Lord. If
in God's account Observation be Wisdom, and accompanied with the blessed
discovery of his loving kindness, can you blame my Friendship in pressing you
to make use thereof to obtain a Wisdom to discover and baffle the falsehood and
errors of the Foolish, (though Wise in their own Eyes) and to enjoy a sense of
God's Divine Favor?

The Psalmist is giving an account of some remarkable outward Providence
attending Nations, Churches, and particular Persons, and then concludes, That
who is so wise to observe such things, shall learn the knowledge of God, and
his loving kindness to their Souls. If Christians of our Age had but been exact
in the observation of National Church-Providences, our Wisdom had more shined
in the times of the Gospel, Scriptural Fulfillings had been more clear, and
Errors respecting such things had less abounded than they do in our days. What
a little proportion of Care does the public Men of our Age bear in recording
the mavelous steps of Providence, concerning the Nations and Churches of the
Earth, to that Care of God's public Officers under the Old and New Testam^^^?
Our Civil Records abound from one year to another, with all Testimonies that
advance the Honor of Princes and People; but where is the Record of a Divine
Hand in the wonderful Works of Providence, respecting Churches, Nations, and
particular Christians, for the vindicating of his Honor, and the discovery of
our infinite Obligations to him, that his Authority may be born up on Earth,
and those discountenanced who refuse the Lord to reign over them. What more
clouds the discovery of God than the unmindfulness of Divine Providence? In
the room whereof, the conduct of Chance, the agency of natural Wit and Policy,
has taken place in our Observation, Admiration and Dependence; and God has been
neglected in his Dispensations; and trusting with a boasting in our selves for
the bringing about Events encouraged.

If public Providence concerning our Nations and Church, since our late
Revolution, had been with all their Circumstances strictly remarkt, and set
upon Record, there are none of us but who could own God's agency in them, and
make the words of the Psalmist ours, They get not the land in possession by
their own swords, neither did their own arm save, but thy right hand, and thine
arm, and the light of thy countenance going along with them.

I hope, though Mavelous and National Providence have not had place in any of
our Public Records, for fixing the Faith of a Deity, and his Divine
Providence; yet the Private Records of Particular Christians are filled
therewith. I say again, His God been so visible in the outgoings of his
Providence since, and at the late Revolution, and are we still attributing the
Events that have fallen out for us, to National Strength of Policy, Treasure
and Courage? How often has God turned the most Politic Methods of the Wise, to
lay bare and open its Insufficiency? And how has the Instruments of War,
adorned with Courage, been swept off? That from Nations so abounding therewith,
How few appear at this day? How near is our Treasure to be exhausted, by vast
Expense of War, and by Scarcity of Current Money? Has this no Language? Or has
its Voice never entered the Ears and Hearts of the People of the Nations? It is
the black Sign to me, the little Sight of God in his Providence, though he has
been so Visible; and the little Improvement thereof, by dependence upon him in
the use of Means: Though our Means were fewer, and of less strength, it should
not afford me so dismal a Prospect of things to come, as the disregard of God
in all our Enjoyments, the little dependence we show upon God, by our solemn
and serious Addresses to him, and by our Endeavors to please him, in walking
conform to his Will. Did ever Error and Vice abound more in our Reformed
Nations? Were Christians ever more lazy than in our days, spending their time
in the full Excess of Riot of all those things that God, in condescending Love,
has bestowed upon us, and thereby distinguishing us from other Nations? How
many times does God bring private Christians, yea, Nations and Churches, to
great imminent Dangers, before he pours out his Smiles, on purpose to make us
sensible of that regard of God we ought to have in his Providence round us, of
our Duty to cry unto him in Public and Closet-Addresses? And if these were the
Effects of our Troubles at this day, if we were brought to far greater Pinches
of Extremity than we are or can be at, I should not doubt but to behold the
Returns of Providential Smiles upon our outward things, and spiritual
Influences upon our Souls with Riches, and inward Peace amongst Christians yet
in our Land.

It was but this Summer, when God providentially, by the great and continued
Rains, threatened Scarcity of Bread, and in merciful Condescension suffered it
to fall out, when a Fast was appointed to be kept for Success to our KING: that
at the same time, by the Rains visible before us, we might join in Prayers to
Go^ for the one as well as the other: otherwise we might, perhaps, have been
brought nearer to an Extremity. Before we had publicly ^ought God on that
account, an additional st^p (...) the other, was in God's (...) Rains
immediately, as (...) very Evening of the (...) weather. By (...) thus with us
(...) see God in his P^ovi^^^^^^ (...) in the use of (...) such (...) the
following (...) for not going (...) we may know what that blessed Duty of
Dependence upon God means, and may taste of its blessed fruits both upon Souls
and Bodies.

In this discovery of a Divine Hand in the out-going of P^ovidences, a fair
reproof arises, First, To the Profane, who reject the impression of a Divine
Providence, and will not observe his ways of it, lest they be brought to a
Sense of the just Power above, and be under terror for despising his Laws that
are not pleasing to the Carnal Appetites.

Secondly, To the mere Professor and lazy Christian, who would limit God in his
Providence to matters of great moment, and not extend it to all events, though
the Scripture, as well as Christian Experience, bears sufficient Testimony
thereto.

The Scripture tells us, Matthew 10.30. Luke 12.7. That the very hairs of our
heads are all numbered, and that consequently his Divine Providence influenceth
the most minute things, by upholding and ordering the world. If this be true,
as to a general Providence over the whole Earth, How is it much more clear as
to a special Providence, respecting his own Children in their Pilgrimage and
Warfare here below? even then that as it is said by our Savior, Luk 21.18 One
hair of his Disciples heads should not perish.

Christian Experience confirms this Truth, That in the most mean Events, God's
overruling Hand is greatly discovered, and Prayers put up for small matters
are returned with such full discovery of him in the bringing them about, that
the observation thereof afford greater inward Comfort in the enjoyment of the
outward benefit; were this more firmly rooted in the Hearts of professing
Christians, we should have less talk of Fortune and Chance, and less Trust to
Humane Endeavors, distinct from a Divine Influence.

Secondly, By the Observation of outward Providence, you may not only discover
God therein, but even from thence be led to a Dependence upon, and a Trust to
him, and that for matters of great moment, and also for your smallest concern
on Earth, you will say with the Psalmist, Thy right hand saved us; and as in
the 6th verse, I will therefore not trust in bow; and as in the 8th verse, I
will boast in God all the day long, and praise his name for ever.

You wont with the Profane, confine the acknowledgment of God; your Address to
him, and Reliance upon him to pinches of extremity, when Evils seem nigh at
hand, forcing the Creature by the very light of Nature to cry out for help from
God, or to desire those they have formerly mocked at as Religious, to supplicate
Heaven to withhold the Evil, or that God would have Mercy upon them in it.

You wont, with the mere Professor, express only your trust to God's
overruling Providence in Words, censuring those that deny it, and yet live as
without the sense of a God therein, by doing Evil privately, without
considering his All-seeing Eye, or endeavor to obtain things desired in the
use of ill means, without considering his overruling Power in the bringing
forth of all Events.

You wont, with the lazy Christian, limit his governing-hand, but clearly know
the extension of his Power toward all things, determining small Events in the
lawful use of means, as well as greater; and that God's conduct of his Children
in their small concerns, as much honors his condescending Goodness, as his
regard of them in their most difficult concerns glorifies his Power and
Godhead. The exact Observers of his special Providence, find as truly his
Compassionate Care in answering their Requests for smaller things, as in the
greatest concerns of their Life: Yea, that when matteas of small moment has
been managed in the use of means, with Dependence and Resignation to him, they
have then had both a better Event, than if the whole strength of humane Power
and Policy had been trusted to, or ill means made use of for its obtaining: And
that the honoring of God so faithfully in the diligent use of means, and true
Reliance upon him for the Event of a small concern, has been encouraged by
God's laying a greater matter in their way, and greatly Honoring them therein.

It is therefore your Duty, to trust God in all circumstances, afflicting or
smiling in your Souls, and in small as well as greater things that concern our
Temporal State, and give up the least concern of your life to his conduct,
address him for his Guidance in it, and depend upon him for the Events. This is
to be recommended to all; To the Profane, who mind not God in the goings forth
of his Providence; and to the mere Professor, who acknowledge him in Word, but
in Action deny his overruling Power; and even to the lazy Christian, who minds
not God in matters of small concern, and gives not God the same Tribute of real
Reliance for such things, as for matters of weighty concern; and this many
times causes a slight and formal performance of our Duties to God, which is a
dishonouring of God as truly as the more visible Sins of those who are
Strangers to the Covenant.

Thirdly, By the observation of outward Providence, and of God therein, with a
reliance upon him, you are in the way of obtaining a discovery of the inward
workings of Christ's Spirit in the Soul, an enjoyment making you sensible of
what formerly you could not give credit to, though exactly described in his
Word, and making you bless his Name, that he ever put it in your thoughts to
practice that excellent and greatly neglected Duty of observation, that is, the
promise of Christ, To him that has shall be given. The conscientious regard of
external Providence, will lead us to a discovery of greater things more
mavelous in their nature, more dignifying our Souls, and more comfortably
establishing our Faith in God's Word, than a Series of outward Events: The
freeing of the Soul from the power of Original Corruption by the sweet dominion
of Grace, the degrees of spiritual growth in the use of means appointed by God
for that blessed end, will be of excellent advantage to increase in the Soul
light and joy, and establishment.

An Observer of such things is enabled to see good, where others discover
nothing but evil; and evil, where others think all is good. He is arrived to
the eminent degrees of those Christians, who in the 5th Chapter of the Hebrews,
and the 14th, are said to be such, who by reason of use, have their senses
exercised to discern both good and evil; who by habitual observation of God's
ways by his Spirit and Providence concerning them, are enabled to see the
design and end of Providence, not mistaking the merciful Methods of God's
dealings with them as the effects of Anger, nor the trial of their Grace for a
punishment for want of it, and thereby dishonor God, and sink under
despondency; they can rejoice in tribulation, the blessed privilege of those
who are in a state of favor with God, Romans 5. and feel a power above
themselves supporting them in all Troubles.

It is therefore to be lamented, That such instructing and comforting things
are laid in our way to observe, and yet that so many with their Circumstances
should pass without Record and Improvement. Though Christians are assured that
God's Gifts are without Repentance; that they have the evidences of Grace in
their Souls, and are kept steadfast in that Grace God has freely bestowed: yet
by their not observing God's Means working, and the proportioned advancement of
Grace to such Means, they are not so duly affected with the infinite Mercy of
God, nor so comfortably sensible of his gracious dealings with them, nor so
firmly established in the hope that he will not cease his working in them, till
they are made mete for the inheritance of the Saints in light. The
observing-Christians have the privilege of the Angels, though in a lower
degree, to see the Face of God, they have the enjoyment of Heaven by the
assurance of it; they live in the exercise of Divine Love, Joy and Praise,
which is the Life of Heaven.

I would from hence reprove those Professors, who by their neglect, coldness,
and long intermissions from Holy Duties, are justly deprived of the sweetness
of communion with God, and are apt to censure others who are more spiritual and
heavenly in their Conversation, as fantastic and enthusiastical, an Instance
whereof I had, by an Aspersion of some Ministers upon the Writings of a Saint
now triumphant in Heaven, whose Life was employed in Study, to understand God's
Word, and the actings of Christ's Spirit in the Soul; by which Holy Care, and
the Divine Favor, he obtained the precious Jewel of Assurance, and for many
Years was possessed of it.

The Aspersion run against him as a thoughtful melancholy person; of the latter
he had very little, but of the former much more, I do believe, than his
Aspersers, and what was becoming the weight of the matter his thoughts run
mostly upon, often bemoaning the trifling, superficial thoughts of the
Christians of our Times concerning Gospel-Mysteries, Christianity experienced,
our passage hence, and concerning another state in its certainty and eternity.
The Aspersion also run against him for laying stress upon enlargement in
Prayer; and that concerning inward Religion his Discourses were unintelligible.

In answer to the first part of the Censure, I can from my own blessed
Experience declare, That I have had the Promise verified to me of the Holy
Spirit's helping our Infirmities, directing me in the things to be prayed for,
and inflaming my desires in the Duty, and strengthening my Faith in the power
and love of God; and the Returns of my Prayers have been most convincing and
comforting evidence, that God's Spirit was the Indicter of that Prayer of which
God was the Fulfiller.

To the other part of the Censure, I shall only say, That the Communications of
God to the Soul, are more convincingly felt than expressed: The peace of God
passes all understanding; and the comfortable sense of it cannot be fully set
forth by human Language, but the real enjoyment is far distant from Enthusiasm.
The sincere Christian knows, that communion with God is a Heaven on earth,
though some who have only Notional Divinity, think it is merely imagination
without reality; our communion with God and Christ in the use of Divine
Ordinances, is the best preservative from the Illusions of Satan, and the
distempered Mind.

Having given Reproof, Let me advise all such, (who expose the high Seize
of Christianity experienced) to reflect upon their bypast life, if exactness
of Observation of all past between God and their Souls, either as means, or the
end, lie by them upon Record in their Diaries; and whether they have not rested
upon the use of means as Duty, without observing and recording the Enjoyments
therein, and their advancing-effects upon their Soul, and have not rested upon
Evidences without ever observing by what means and method of God they were
first made sensible of them, or had them further established. Has there never a
step of outward Providence, round you, past your Observation, and search for
God therein, or as a return to Prayer for that blessed end of crushing a
Corruption, and exciting a Grace? In short, Has all the steps of God, in
training you to the Sense of Conversion, and Graces after growth, been remarkt
by you? If you can witness this, I am confident you have attained to the
Experience of such things as will keep you off from Censuring others, and
engage you to bear Seal to the Truth of what Christ bears sensibly on the
Christian's Soul; but if upon Reflection, you have been out of this road, my
Compassion is greatly toward you, even though you are Christians indeed; and
that because of the great Comfort withheld from you, it being punishment enough
to want the Comfort that strict Observers enjoy in this life: And generally
there lodges at the bottom of such Censurers, either Ignorance of the same
enjoyments from Heaven, an unwillingness to have any in greater esteem than
your selves, or prejudices from their being of another Party, Opinion, or the
like. All which I would greatly advise to serious observation of themselves,
before their Censures be put forth against others; for my own part I have often
found from some instructing and establishing passages, such amazing discovery
of God and my self, that I have thought nothing more could be added thereto;
but soon after I have had a further knowledge and establishment in the same
thing, and that by another passage, caution enough to suppress disparagement of
others, but from their example to bestir thy self more than ever in the use of
Means, if a Soul therefore were to live Thousands of years on earth, it attains
not to know so much; but upon strict observation in the continued use of Means,
more and more Mysteries would be imparted. No wonder the Apostle's different
Christians grown from others by a capacity of discerning good and evil, and
that by the habitual use of observation, and experiencing God's ways with the
Soul; if therefore you find others express what you have not felt, accuse not
them, but censure your own neglect: especially, if upon the review of your
life, you have not been acting with an exact observation and improvement of
knowledge of God in his Word, outward Providence, and inward workings of his
Spirit.

I think it not amiss to subjoin to this Reproof and Advice, an Experience
concerning my self, and the very Saint thus reproached. I once being importuned
to assist in a particular matter, a more than ordinary willingness to it seized
me; in the undertaking whereof a successful Issue occurred, and great benefit to
the person that importuned, whose Poverty and Goodness I had no discovery of,
though greatly known to others, but was under a surprising force to refuse
their grateful Acknowledgment. And happening about an hour after to unbosom my
self to this Saint, amongst other things I imparted this Passage, with a
wondering at the meaning of such a surprising willingness to the action, and
unwillingness to accept of reward, though Duty obliged me to it, when no other
Motives to the contrary appeared. To which he gravely answered, You shall
receive it as a reward of this action sixty-fold, by God's imparting himself to
your Soul this day; but be not concerned, though a disquiet follow it before
you sleep. This then, in my account, run like Prophecy, especially after its
fulfilling; our Discourse being about eleven in the forenoon: About two in the
afternoon, in a Chamber all alone, such enlargement of Soul, such sudden
ravishing, and heavenly affections, with an unexpressible delight seized me,
with amazement in my self, to observe the first part of his Assertion made out:
But about nine at night, there came a Penny-post Letter to my hands from one
whose Malice prompts them with false Accusations to asperse me, and that
expressed in such bitterness, that it greatly did disquiet me; and going
immediately with it to him, he with Modesty and Concern replied, That the Devil
had been at the penning thereof. His foresight of these two such different
Effects consequential to this action, was neither by Prophecy nor Revelation,
but purely from his strict and constant observation of God's ways round himself
in the like case, and though then it seemed strange to me, hardly being able to
forbear from thinking of something prophetical in it; yet since by observation
I may say often or never falls out a voluntary lively Act of Charity without
the least of self, and much of God in it, but great spirituality of frame has
followed, and after this, one disquiet or other has fallen out; yea often, I
may say always as yet, at the time of this fellowship, an apprehension of some
succeeding disquiet is in my thoughts.

Those that have reproached his Writings, would have been as ready to have
reproached this Experience of him as Melancholy, unless they had been strict
observers of God's ways with themselves.

I do believe that every Christian had not met my passage with the same return,
and that none but those who by use are made discerning of good and evil, had
been capable of what I find he was.

Be humbled therefore, lazy Christians, and think of others better than your
selves, and not of your selves above what you are, by aspersing each other: You
encourage those who know nothing of inward Religion, to keep out from trying
its Enjoyments, and others to mock at Experimental Christianity. Alas! Is so
much of the depth of God's Ways to be known by years Observation, and this time
made use of to rack Thoughts to explicate Events notionally, although the
Psalmist himself found it too painful for him to explicate the inequality of
Providence without God's Word; yet our Land abounds with such Deists, who, to
destroy the Being or necessity of Revealed Religion, or of a Holy Spirit, as
helps in the use of means, exalt Reason alone, and expunge all things
incomprehensible by it, as Fancy or Chimera; as well as the Christian treated
of; expunge Enjoyments obtained beyond others, in a constant and close walking
with God as Enthusiastical.

Some, I am apt to believe, affect this way of high Pretensions to Rationality,
when at the same time they are greatly distant from its Exercise, either to
obtain a Character of being Learned, or a liking in Society, by Rhetorical
Conversation, or to draw Followers after their Notions, and they to appear as
Primate thereof. You that have rational Souls, improve your Reason more for
God's Service and your own Interest; the more Rational, the more capable of
improvement with the blessed helps of God's Divine Word, Providence and Spirit:
Place your Knowledge in Divine Things, upon his Word as the foundation, and
learn to establish it by the observation of his Providence and Spirit
confirming it to you; and then I dare say, there will need neither Rhetoric
nor Division to keep up the Christian Religion in its Power amongst its
Professors. You are too weak to comprehend the Mysteries of the Gospel, put
forth never such acuteness of Judgment, without the powerful Influences of
Christ's Spirit opening the Eyes of your Understanding, and fixing your Faith
therein by your Experiencing its Truth in your Souls, such clear knowledge and
establishment appears, as resists all the fanciful and erroneous Notions of
others; yea, such unspotted Conversations, as may engage others to your way,
and to be Members of Christ's Mystical Body here on Earth. I have with great
concern, known some Christians weak in Learning, but strong in the knowledge of
Experimental Religion, clearly understanding an Event of Providence; yea,
rejoicing in an Event outwardly afflicting, when a Learned Wit could neither
comprehend the meaning of the one, nor free himself from disquiet under the
other. How often may you hear some unacquainted with Experimental Religion, but
greatly knowing in Notional Divinity, mightily applauding a Sermon, itching
their Ears with a Rhetorical style, and Philosophical arguing: And others, mean
in Learning and worldly Reputation, but well acquainted with inward Religion,
esteeming this same Sermon an empty noise, and the Preacher a feeder of his
Flock with airy Notions, that have neither solidity nor comfort in their
relish, and will lead them in no other Path than that of a mere Notional
Knowledge, as a Bate to be caught by the Errors of this Age.

If Ministers and People were more close to the use of means, whereby God's
Truths might be Experimentally felt, both would see far less need of adjoining
the high flight of Notions in Pulpits, or in Conversation, for its
establishment in their Souls. I think it in our day a more advantageous Sermon,
and a more necessary Book, that leads Christians to the use of such means, by
which much of God's Spirit may be communicated to their Souls, and thereby
God's Word experienced as certain, and their Reliance upon it as the foundation
of their Faith, evidently to themselves and others brought forth: Such I say,
seem more necessary, than the Sermon or Book enlarging upon a Divine Truth,
with such fine Oratorical and Philosophical Style, as may itch the Ear of the
Christian with establishment of its own Notions in Religious Theory; and of the
illiterate, with an opinion of the Preacher or Writer's great and learned
Gifts, indangering both, through obtained applause, not only of Pride, but of
keeping Reason out of its due place; and if this has not brought forth many
unneccessary Heats at this day, I am greatly mistaken: Reason is that noble
Principle distinguishing us from all other inferior Creatures, and though
Corrupted, yet capable of being restored to greater Perfection and Stability,
than when Man was Created at first perfect, but capable of falling: God has
made provision of suitable helps to advance, and to bring forth this
Perfection; but the Pride of Corrupted Man is such, that as at first it
prompted him to affect an Equality with God; so now it prompts him to the vain
imagination of himself, as sufficient without Divine helps to regain his
perfect State, and obtain by his own knowledge the understanding of all
necessary Divine Truths, and by his own strength the performance of all
necessary Duties; And if this has not brought forth the undervaluing of
Revealed Religion by the Deists, the undervaluing of Christ by the Socinians,
and the undervaluing of a Divine Spirit exposing him as no help, neither his
Spiritual Influences as strength to work out our Salvation by, I am as much
mistaken.

Experimental Religion cuts off all these difficulties; For the more a
Christian observes of himself in his experienced failures; the less room and
lower station self-strength obtains in his Affections, the more he finds of
Christ's Spirit unexpectedly and powerfully bearing home Scripture-Truths to
his personal experience, formerly unacquainted with, though often Notionally
heard of; the lower esteem Reason must have, as by its self incapable rightly
to understand Gospel Mysteries: And though in our day, we have some so openly
confident, as in Print to tell us, That nothing is Mysterious in the Gospel,
against God's own Word, the Seals of Martyrdom, and against the Experience of
all the Saints of the Earth, endeavoring thereby to act Factorship for Satan,
by whose pleasing suggestion of Man's Reason and Strength in himself to be
relied on, without any other help to believe or to do what is necessary for the
obtaining Heaven hereafter, and a secure undisturbed quiet of Mind here. I must
believe, that that Creature has never yet been under any other discovery of
Gospel Truth, than what was the effect of notional Knowledge; and that
continuing in the same State, he can hardly expect to be a Member of that
Triumphant Society, whose Eternity will be taken up in the Admiration and the
Praise of that Mysterious method of Redeeming Man from a state of Corruption
and Misery, to a state of Perfection and Glory above; the prospect whereof we
only now enjoy darkly through a Glass, and yet the views thereof that upon this
Earth we sometimes experimentally have, are known by all Experiencing
Christians, both to be Mysterious, far above Nature's foresight or enjoyment
through it self, and rendering the Creature unexpressible astonishment in its
approach upon the Soul; though the Protestant Nations abound with such Errors,
yet they neither derogate from God and his Word, or afford darkness to
Christian Professors, who have experienced the reality of both upon their
Souls, but expose themselves to them as Christians certainly ignorant of God
and his Word, whatever fine Notional Flourishes in Print or Discourse they
express, and also draw forth Christians pity toward them, and help Believers
to advance their praising God, who has made them in the use of means to differ
from others.

Experimental Religion makes us become as little Children, and esteem our
selves so low as to lay all our depraved Faculties at God's Footstool, and
using them not alone by way of Reliance, but with the help of God's Divine
Spirit in the use of means: We have for many years enjoyed so much of the
Gospel, but alas in Notion only, that I have stood in a maze to hear the
Discourse of some illiterate People, concerning the Notions of Christianity;
and to see their Zeal, debating their Preachers Notions with that hear, as if
they had been throwing Fireballs one to another, till Fire has been kindled
amongst Assemblies of Professors, when at the same time, experimental Religion
has never been called in, as a help to unloose their difficulties. At the time
of hearing some such differences, my own Experience in Christianity has made me
discover, that either their Debates could be resolved in various Words; or that
if means made use of by God, as helps to the People or Preachers Soul, for
their experiencing of Divine Mysteries, had been more pressed upon the People,
with that enlargement which their own Experience might have afforded, no such
Debates would have risen, and People and Preachers should be better known in
our day; and whether God's Honor, the establishment of his Truth,
self-applause, or outward Interest, were at the foundation of such hot Zeal.

When once in the use of means, a Christian finds the evidences of
Sanctification, he shall then make the current of his Zeal run toward further
evidence of its reality and further growth in it, advising others not to debate
whether Justification or Sanctification precede, whether certain Conditions
must precede qualifying to be united to Christ, or union to Christ, before any
thing of Holiness in our nature appear; but to walk in the use of God's means,
and in them to obtain the application of Christ, and all his Privileges, by
the help of his blessed Spirit, and so both Conditions themselves, and a
renewed State by your Union to Christ may sensibly appear at the same time: By
the observation of the means thus blessed, and the steps of advancement in this
newness of Nature, is brought forth not only establishment to themselves, but a
capacity of instructing and comfirming others upon surer ground, than that of
stretch of Wit and Notional Theory.

Our Debates concerning Free Grace and Works, carry along with them too much of
Self, and too little of Divine Experience, and I Am sure, too much of fiery
Constitution; the experienced Christian finds enough in himself to keep both in
their just Bounds, according to Scripture Rule; and imagines the Debates
unneccessary, and bringing forth of no other Fruit, than that of Faction,
Dishonouring God, and exposing Christianity as uncertain to those that are
ignorant thereof. The Experiencing Christian finds that the more of the
Free Grace of God in Christ appear in his Experience, the more love to God is
kindled in his Soul, the more of true Sanctified Love, the greater desire he
finds to please and to obey him in all his preceptive Commands, and that his
Experience of Free Grace no ways tend to a Licentious Life: Whatever the
Notional Knowledge of Free Grace may do amongst those who know nothing of a
real Faith, and experience of God's Grace in their Soul, and where unstrictness
and unholiness of life appears in the greatest Zealot for Free Grace, it
savours of nothing more than its Notion in their Brain. Again, the Experiencing
Christian finds, that when he sets himself to be most diligent to perform Good
Works and Religious Duties, yet in the first he is often overtaken with faults,
and in the latter constant failures ^^^ur, wandering Thoughts therein,
discomposure of Mind from some disquiet falling in before, or some suggestion
from Satan, or corruption within, rising up at the time, which forces the Soul
to lay by trust to Self-sufficiency, and to have recourse to the Free Grace of
God in Christ; that through his Divine Spirit, supplies may be conveyed,
enabling of us to do Works, though our own, yet performed by Christ's supplies
enabling of us; and accepted from us thorough his Merits perfuming them, that
being our alone argument to obtain both, for the sake of the multitude of his
tender Mercies, the opening and pouring forth of which we owe to our Blessed
Redeemer, who has removed the flaming Sword, and given us access to the Throne
of Free Grace, but still in the use of the blessed mean of Prayer: And I think
it more a Soul's concern, to try the Truth of access to the Throne of Grace by
Prayer, in our own endeavor and observation, if returned, (that being a mean
of obtaining of Prayer in Christ's Strength) than before the trial of Prayer,
to pursue first the Knowledge, whether Justification be previously necessary
before access to this Grace, as is set down in the first verse of the fifth
chapter of the Romans. Alas! While we are a striving which things go first, we
are in danger of missing all; while we are debating about the Notions of
Religion, we suffer the Truths of God in their Experience to drop. Oh that our
Debates were more at home with our inward Corruption, sighting it with the
continued use of means capable by Christ's Strength meeting us in them, to
overcome it, and to fructify Grace in its room, and less with our fellow
Christians, unless in point of strict and Holy Lives: Christianity needs no
other bulwark from us, than the true plain meaning of Scripture-truth, and
putting Souls in the use of such Means as God conveys the experience in; and
where the power of Christianity is felt, let him be Church of England, or
Dissenter, under all its Subdivisions, he becomes the Object of my love,
because of the Impression the Divine Spirit seems to have stamped upon him. Of
their being such, we may easily have discovery in discourse one with another,
and that without any extraordinary gift of discerning. However others think of
this Gospel-priviledge, there is such a difference between the Nature of
Notional and Experienced Christianity, between the way and words of a mere
Notional Professor, though never so outwardly strict, and of an experiencing
Christian, that to my self I find not the least difficulty: And it is greatly
suitable to the forecited Text in the Hebrews, where it is said, That it is the
privilege of grown Christians to discern good and evil; and these Christians
are such, who have grown thereto by use and experience. And where I can
discover nothing of this, whatever Party he is of, let his Notions and Zeal in
spreading them fly never so high, I am always afraid that the Motive of Self
bears too much room in his witnessing for God and his Truth: Let all therefore
be reproved, who set up Variance with those that bear Christ's Image upon their
Hearts and Lives, and only differ in their Notions and Conceptions about the
Truths of God. Let Holy Lives and Acquaintance in Conversation, with their
experiencing Christianity in their Souls, be the Touchstone of trying and
esteeming them. By the denying familiarity with such upon such differences, you
pinch the great evidence of loving the Brethren, and show to the world that
such an one is laid aside, or introduced to your Favor, from having a name of
being one of such a Party; and so give occasion of producing Proselites in
profession to such a Party to obtain interest, and encourage thereby others to
ridicule Christianity because of such Professors blemishes, through the want of
Christianity's power in their Souls; though these inward enjoyments (into which
observation of outward Providence lead as a mean) are incomprehensible by the
profane and mere Professor while in that state, yet they are outward passages
greatly discovering God, bringing forth good where all evil is ominous, if
observed by mere Professors.

It is experimentally known, that a passage of Providence dark and afflicting
in its first approach, has many times had in its bosom a rich mercy. There is a
known passage of one who broke his Leg in his Journey to go a Shipboard; a dark
and afflicting Providence, both by reason of his breaking his Leg, and the
disappointment of his Voyage; but in its bosom was that great mercy of saving
his life, the Ship being lost in which he was to have gone. It is not long ago
since a Wind hindering our Fleet to go forth was afflicting, but in it was that
great mercy of the preventing of a French Invasion; such passages the profane
and mere Professor cannot dive into, and if each were but observant of such
like, they would be reckoned by Millions round Nations and People, and all with
a discovery of God, the Governor of all things, and would help us against
repining for disappointments, and advance a reliance upon him in all things, by
committing them to a Divine Conduct by Prayer, and diligently using means
providentially laid in our ways.

Again, Is it not known with experimental Christians, that the Lord many times
introduces a rich spiritual mercy by a dark Providence, a spiritual instruction
for their establishment, by an afflicting Providence? It has often been their
experience to be brought under an outward disquiet on purpose to free them from
a cold, lazy frame of mind, and to introduce a sweet heavenly posture of Soul,
who therefore from continued observation of this experience, will not forbear
repining, and exercise patience, till the discovery of God's design therein
appears; yea, work together with him for the same end, by addressing the Lord
for strength to stand firm in the exercise of reliance and love to him, which
greatly establishes the Soul in the exercise of these Graces, and therein
honors God, and is even met many times with a visible reward suited to that
particular Action, though performed by his own Divine strength, the observation
whereof has often brought that Scripture to my thoughts, Psalm. 31. Great is thy
goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear thee, which thou have
wrought for them that trust in thee before the sons of men; either by hiding
them in the secret of thy presence from the pride of man, or keeping them
secretly from the strife of Tongues; and what establishment hereto the personal
experience of an observing Christian would give, is more fit for filling up of
sheets, than a few lines: Mark the 10th Chapter, ver. 29. None has left house,
etc. for my sake, but he shall even in this life receive an hundred fold, and
eternal life in the world to come.

Is it not the personal experience of Christians to be disappointed of the
designed and desired issue of an endeavor to introduce the success of another
and better? the constant observation whereof must needs bring the Soul to a
greater measure of patience under a disappointment, to a sooner and better
sight of the Providence than the other, who, though under his disappointment,
is strengthened to rely by Divine influence perhaps in return to Prayer,
petitioning strength to honor God therein, yet he must needs be under more
sinking Fears, through the course of the passages of such disappointments; the
other Christian having these supporting helps, the reflecting upon God's former
ways of the same kind observed, and upon record, with the instructing and
establishing effects such ways had then upon the Soul, and the better event
brought forth in a way of Providence, than what was expected, together with
Prayer put up, and strengthening supplies of grace received; however dark this
may seem to the Notional Christian, yet this, I hope, will receive many Seals
in its perusal by observing Christians.

Is it not the experience of Christians to be led into a pinch of extremity, on
purpose to see the more of God, and the less of means in an event, and to stir
up the greater reliance upon God with means, and the less upon means without
his Divine Hand accompanying? How often are lawful, diligent using of means
disappointed to Christians, till they be brought to serious and often Prayer
for Heaven's conduct and blessing thereto? The observation whereof keeps the
Soul safe between means, and a Divine Hand, affording each his due place,
without presumption toward God, or Idolatry toward the other; if therefore
the Christian Observer is enabled to discover good and evil, where others not
so used thereto, are incapable even in these more common Experiences; how far
less capable are some Christians to discover more secret and adorable methods
of God, observed by others? Either they were never experienced by them through
the long intermissions of fellowship with God, or at least never observed,
reflected upon, or improven by them to the end of further knowledge of God in
the depth. There is therefore not only in the sight and enjoyment of spiritual
things, a difference between Christians and mere Professors, but even between
Christian and Christian, and that without either a Gift of Prophecy, or an
extraordinary Gift of Discerning, but with such Gifts as are communicated to
the Soul in the use of common means; only with this difference, that these
means are more continually and in greater heavenliness performed, and the
enjoyments of God therein, either for comfort or instruction more carefully
remarkt in all its Circumstances, and laid up in record for this very end of
improvement, the greater knowledge of Christianity, and of God's more
extraordinary steps therein. Thou therefore, O Christian, that has necessary
occasion of business, and of lawful diversion, greatly admixt with thy
Religious Duties, as a mean of hindering such fellowship with God as those do
enjoy, whose life does run in a stream of actual heavenly mindedness; reproach
not, I say, these other Christians with melancholy Fancy or Enthusiasm, either
of which bear their distinct marks from that knowledge of God obtained in the
constant use of means, and by Divine fellowship therein, in continual and
serious recesses of Soul with God; but bemoan your Circumstances thus involved
in the necessary occasions of the world, when compared with some others, and do
more with the opportunities you have, than ever yet you have done, and that
according to the means treated of, and blessed by God to others.

In the hope therefore of passing from common Providence in your observation,
to special ones round your self, yea, to the steps and workings of Christ's
Spirit in your Soul, exactly correspondent to his Word, affording you such
knowledge thereof, as expose the Contentions and Errors of the Earth to your
Pity, and keep you safe from the discouraging Blemishes, and infectious
Failures of Christians. In hope, I say, of this, let me press you to this great
and experienced Duty of Observation, and I am hopeful your expectations will
not fail, but a mysterious discovery of the reality of his Divine Word shall be
unfolded, such as could never have been forethought, or foreseen by you.

It is not to be supposed that ever the most refined Wit on earth could have
made up such a System of Mystery as is contained in the Scriptures, and is
experimentally felt in the Soul. Is it supposable that the Wits of our Age (who
pretend their Reason as their Guide) could foresee, contrive, or rightly
comprehend the Work of Christ's Spirit in renewing the Soul? Or is it
supposable, that the most rational man on earth, unacquainted with experimental
Christianity, can imagine the work of Christ's Spirit in raising the Soul to a
heavenly Frame, and the state of the Soul at that time? Is it imaginable, that
by the will and power of man, such a Frame by which we are admitted to
fellowship with the Godhead, can be retained without a Divine Influence? when
though that this Divine Work is declared in the Scripture, yet with their
reason and light of God's Word without Divine Spiritual influences, (obtained
by God's common means) they are not able to comprehend it, and therefore is
left unknown to some of them, and mocked at by others of them; yea, the Word of
God made the occasion of Errors on earth, the prevention of all which comes in
by the right and continued use of these means God commonly affords the sensible
experience of himself according to his Divine Records.

Some Christians excel one another in Faith of Reliance hereby, that if there
be no assurance going along, yet their Hope is without shock, and that in the
use of Reflection upon former Experiences, which in the 5th chap. of the Romans
and the 5th and 6th ver. is said, to bring forth hope, that makes not ashamed;
and certainly found to do so in the Experiences of such Christians, if their
Seals were given forth to the World.

Let us imagine the judgment of any mere Professor under never so rational a
Conviction of any one Scripture-truth, yet without the power of Christ's Spirit
bearing it home as Truth upon the Soul, you will hardly see (as the certain
effect of this) saving Faith therein, either commenced or so sixth, but that it
may give way to a succeeding Error, if it have a fairer appearance to his
rational Comprehension than the other. I don't therefore much wonder at the
profane or mere Professors, who have no other sense of Divine Things than what
is Notionally imparted and comprehended by them: My greater admiration, is,
That Christians indeed, who feel the certainty of what others have but heard of
Notionally, and much more than can be expressed by any, should not be more
endeavoring the witnessing for God's Truth in Preaching, Printing, and
Conversation; and less for the setting forth of their own Parts, or Notional
Controversies, not so material in our day, where the Truth of God's Word is so
much exposed and struck at.

A Third Motive to this Duty of Observation, is, That it is no hindrance to
your worldly Business, or lawful Pleasures, but rather by fixing your Thoughts
upon an adjutant to your ordinary means, even a Divine Hand, and Blessing, you
may conform to his Will, and receive the reward of such a Duty: The Experience
of Christians discover, that a laying aside anxiety of Mind, and hurry of Body,
and a laying the matter before God, with the diligent use of means occuring in
their way, obtains more business, better success, and greater Peace and
Comfort, both in the way of obtaining it, and its after-enjoyment, than when
they eyed nothing else, besides natural Contrivances, which when mightily made
use of, is apt to lead a Man beyond true sincere Uprightness, and their
diligent lawful Industry, unless for some special end of cutting down a
Corruption, or for some differences of the temper of the Mind: God's Method
differs with the Soul; but whatever difference be in his Method, it will end in
the same delight, easy endeavor, and discovery of Mystery. I add nothing more
to this Motive, being it belongs also to the other means to be mentioned, which
though commonly talked of, yet not so Experimentally treated of, nor Practiced in
such a manner as bring in Knowledge of God and themselves, or afford that
inward Comfort that might be attained thereby.

Let therefore your observation be general, as to all the steps of God's
Providence round your Bodies and Soul, and you will see God in all, and may be
brought to rely upon him for all, and have discovered such a Mysterious Work,
as the implanting and growing of Grace in your Souls; yea, you may be led to
more than ordinary fellowship with the Godhead, with the discovery of such
steps, as even other Christians have never been admitted to, or have let slip
in their reflection and improvement of, and thereby be made more capable of
witnessing for God than others, and better judges of meetness for Heaven than
otherwise you should have been; and all this, without hindering your lawful
Business, but rather with less anxiety of Mind, and hurry of Body; yea, with
greater success, and more inward comfort, without confining you from Pleasure,
unless it run to an extreme, either of being Sin it self, or the occasion
endangering you to Sin.

The Second mean you are desired to be in the use of, to bring you into the
knowledge of Experimental Relig^on, and thereby the certainty of God's Word,
and of his Ways with the Soul against Errors abroad, and Darkness within, is
that of Prayer.

In this very Duty did I first understand the meaning of Fellowship and
Communion with God, of Divine Influences, Spiritual Emanations, spirituality
and heavenliness of Frame, which are words mocked at by the Profane in our
days; and was unintelligible to my self, while only under the instruction and
power of Education, and must be incomprehensible to all others, under the mere
profession of Christianity, let their outward Behavior be never so innocent,
and their Duties never so gravely performed to the obtaining a name on Earth.

While I was under the power of Education, I seldom missed my set times of
Prayer, with as grave a gesture as now at this day, and my concern used to be
more for neglect of Prayer, than for not performing it aright; but after the
Eying of God in all things, by the mean of observation of outward Providence,
I began to think, that if I would have God's favor acting and shining in any
passage concerning me, I ought to ask it, and in asking by Prayer, to do it
with a real design and desire of obtaining it. First of all, I found a
seriousness therein like unto the sincerity and unwanderings of one Man's
speaking to another to obtain any favor; but soon after I was carried beyond
this, with an awful Sense of the Majesty of God, who behooved to be of great
Might, to bring forth all Things, and to act in all Things, so visibly as I had
observed, and with such height of sincerity and heavenliness of Mind, that my
Thoughts darted upwards, as with Wings, the same time my Words were expressed;
and that with such pleasure of Mind, as I had never observed before in Prayer;
all my delight formerly having been, that I performed, and not missed my times
of Prayer, but according to my usual time and way, had the satisfaction of
doing it; and so from this went on as I have described in the Experiences
concerning Prayer.

I know there are many profane Creatures, whose Education perhaps has not been
Religious, and so this Duty of Prayer has never been enforced upon them: They
live without the sight of God in his common Providence, and therefore are the
less moved to call upon him by Prayer for his favor in them, unless in a pinch
of extremity, where, by the very light of Nature, and the power of their
Conscience, they are forced to lift up a Petition to him, but perhaps without
any apprehension of God at the time, or concern of seeing their request brought
forth in a discovery of him in passages of Providence, bringing it about, or in
a way of return to that Petition, their concern chiefly running upon the
Deliverance, whatever way it come.

But alas there are others, amongst whom I was, and for whom I am now under
great concern, and for whose sake I have so particularly expressed the steps of
going off from formality in Prayer to its spiritual and right performance; and
from my Soul I wish, have, and shall beg of God, that what I am to say
concerning Prayer, might influence their Minds with a sense of their State, and
a desire to be out of it, in the right use of these few means; They are such,
who have had Religious Education, who profess the Christian Religion even in a
stricter way than others, who perform all outward acts of Worship with outward
Gravity, who are free from known Vice; and still from no other Principle than
either that of Parents instruction and example, fear of offending them, or of
reproach from others, but void of inward seriousness of Mind in the Service of
God; yea, in hearing Ministers or Christians express in Duty, or out of Duty,
Communion with God, Divine Emanations, and the like, apprehend the Words
without any inward sense of their meaning, and as little desire after it, or
mock at such words, as too familiar and inconsistent with the greatness of that
Majesty we approach unto in Prayer; not knowing experimentally the Mercy of
God, as well as his Power; the Wisdom of God in expressing his own Mysterious
Truths by Words inferior to the Mysteries, but proportioned to our weaknesses,
as well as the condescending steps of God with a poor guilty Creature, in first
planting Grace in the Soul; and I am confident, not knowing experimentally what
a heavenly frame in Prayer is; for then when the Soul is in a ravishing
spiritual posture, words of this kind are forced to drop from their Mouths, and
there is more satisfaction in the Soul, and greater acceptance with God from a
familiar style to him, influenced by his Divine Spirit, than from a whole
Prayer of another, where distance appears, either from the words, fine style
therein, or length of Prayer, but unspiritually performed: Yea, from this very
principle of Education, there are some who have an outward sincerity, and from
thence an inward satisfaction in their Profession, with a resting in their
knowledge and practice, as all the Religion to be obtained, with good hopes of
their state for Heaven, without ever doubting either their profession or
security for Heaven. There are others under the power of Education alone, who
though unspiritual in their Minds in Prayer, yet upon any failure of their set
times, are really uneasy and dissatisfied, especially the breach of their
continued custom.

And as it is for these my concern is greatly put forth, so it is with those
that many times greatest difficulty is to reclaim. It is well known how deeply
are fixed the Impressions of Education, and that nothing but a spiritual working
of Christ's Spirit is able to blot them out, or to impress them anew; upon
which very account, Childrens Education, with true Notions of the Christian
Religion, can never enough pay their Obligation to such Instructors; it being
an excellent preparation for renewing the practical impressions of the same
Notions upon their Hearts, as well as upon their Brains: In a word, Religion is
between God and the Soul, and according to the heavenliness or unheavenliness
of the Temper, and frame of the Soul; so a thought, word, or action, in Duties,
or out of Duties, is either acceptable or unacceptable to God.

Before therefore you leave off the Errors of Education, to a right notion and
performance of Prayer, you are first of all to be convinced of what is
Erroneous, and then of what is True and Right.

First, Therefore a laying too great a weight upon a particular place for the
performance of Prayer, is an error of Education: I know there are some so
strictly addicted to Prayer in a Church, that neither earliness nor lateness
will obstruct their Custom herein, as if it were a circumstance material in
God's account. It is not against Prayer in a Church that I set my self to
oppose, but the great stress some from Education are pleased to lay upon it: I
do believe, that if others were as painful to bring their Minds into a serious
posture, as these are (by retrenching their natural Rest in a morning, retiring
themselves from Diversion through a day, or at an evening) to have their Bodies
in the Church at the times, Prayer would be better known, and much more pursued
in its right performance, than at this day. For my own part, if my Soul be
right with God, it is neither to House or Church I affix my self, but the place
I can be most private in, either from the diverting sight of others, or their
discomposing noise; and if I have opportunity of choice, no place is more
grateful to me than that in which I have had greatest enjoyments of God in
Prayer. Privacy I greatly value, from an unwillingness to expose my self to the
Censure of Show and Applause, or a Prayer acceptably performed to the mocking
of some, finding it impossible to restrain my self from more than ordinary
flood of words, and from a more than ordinary audible voice, when the LORD is
pleased to raise my affections above my ordinary frame. The reason of choosing a
place favored with God's presence to my Soul, is, that the memorial thereof
may excite the greater endeavor after it, and former Experiences may be one of
my pleading Arguments for it. This is abundantly suitable to the example of
David, who would often say, Psalm. 42.6. That he remembered the hill
Hermon-Missar, and other places, which were remarkable to him, from the rich
entertainment of God's presence in them; from all which, I drive only thither,
to make you know how little the consideration of Place, Prayer is performed in,
avails in God's account, or comforts the Christian's Soul within, whatever
customary performance, or outward applause afford.

Privacy is recommended from Christ's own example, who would retire to the
Fields on that very account; yea, part then from his own Disciples, and
constant Companions: And truly the more serious a Soul is, the more willing to
be from all, and to center all his thoughts upon his dear God. If therefore any
labor under this failure of Education, let me advise against it, unless on the
account of better performance of Prayer; and because I hope there are some who
on this very account give strict example thereof, let me advise all from
censuring such an Action; the doing of it for a greater meetness, for
fellowship with God in Prayer, makes it a Circumstance congruous to a
well-perform'd Duty; but the Circumstance of pleading for it in Conversation,
and fixing it upon others, from a liking of the way, argues it rather an Error
of Education, than a Circumstance experienced in themselves, helping forward
their seriousness with God: for though to some it may have this advantage, yet
to my self it could not have; the seeing of any before or with me in any
performance of private Prayer, proving many times visible hindrances.

Secondly, A laying too great weight upon punctual keeping of set-times to
pray, is an Error of Education. There are many in no other state of
Christianity, than that of its mere Profession, and outward Acts of Worship,
who with mavelous strictness perform the set-times of Morning and
Evening-Prayer, purely from the Rule of Education; but still at a loss what
communion and fellowship with God in Prayer means: I accuse not their praying
at set-times, but Professors confidence therein, as evidence of their religious
state, or their Prayers right performance. David's set-times of Prayer are
instanced in his Book of Psalms, and I hope there is not any experiencing
Christian on earth at this day, who slights their appointed seasons of private
Prayer, to supplicate the Lord's conduct from morning till night, and from
evening to morning; yea, by observation of continued Mercies through the day,
are kept in a posture of Soul fitted to ejaculate Praise; and by observation of
continual Wants, fitted to ejaculate Supplication throughout the whole course
of the day, and so kept in obedience to that Divine Command, of praying without
ceasing, even amidst diligent endeavors in business, and outward lawful
pleasures, as well as in the performance of morning, noon, and evening
Sacrifices. My Challenge therefore takes place, when exactness in that
Circumstance proceeds from no other foundation than that of Education, or
guided by no other Rule than that of others Example, and tending toward no
other ends than Applause, or pleasing themselves by their Customariness
therein. The former experience of my self under the alone power of Education,
and now under the power of Christianity, gave me occasion to reprehend this
Error, having then found my self more uneasy at the neglect of a set-time of
Prayer than I am at this day, when a lawful occurrence falls in my way to
hinder my performance of Prayer at my usual set-time, then I have found my self
still under anxiety for the omission only; but blessed be the Lord, my
experience is such, that a heavenly Frame (the continual desire of my Soul) is
neither confined to set-words, nor set-times of Prayer, and followed with as
evident returns when put forth in Ejaculation, as when in Solemn Prayer.

Thirdly, A laying too great a weight upon the performance of Prayer in form,
or extemporary, is an Error of Education; the frame and posture of the Soul in
Prayer, is the touchstone of its right performance, and therefore either of
which the Christian finds most raising a spiritual frame, that I think safest
for a Christian to stick to.

For my own part, without regard to the opinion and way either of the Church of
England, or Dissenter, but purely to personal experience, founded I hope upon
Scripture-Revelation, I must say, that when in Closet or Family Prayer, my
frame of mind has been raised to great spirituality and heavenliness, my words
then have run from me with an amazing freedom and current, and in a most
affecting way to my self and others; from whence I must imagine, that the Soul
confining himself to words in a form of Prayer, gives an occasional hindrance
of this spiritual frame, by confinement to what is designed to be uttered, and
so keeping off such Divine Influences, which we are incapable of bounding
either in the frame of the Soul, or in the Christian's outward expression.

Again, There is a mighty difference between a Christian's seriousness, when
nothing else is sensibly productive thereof, but the strength of the Creature's
self, by the means either of thinking upon God's All seeing Eye, upon the
greatness of the Majesty approached to, or by the means of drawing off the
thoughts from distracting things: There is vast difference, I say, between this
serious frame, and a spiritual heavenly frame sensibly, suddenly, and
powerfully influencing the Soul without any thing of Self, unless as in the use
of Prayer, but sensibly raised from a higher hand, to thoughts and words far
beyond the other. I bless the Lord without the latter I am never satisfied; and
I know the first may be performed, and yet without sensible fellowship with
God, but perhaps real fellowship with him by his strengthening influences, and
nothing more, fixes the thoughts from diversion, or discovers Self, and
Christ's spiritual Influences; and carries the Soul more out of Self, to cry
and depend on Christ's Supplies, than such extemporary Prayer with observation.
But if this Experience can be opposed by others, who, for any thing I know, may
find less distraction, and greater heavenliness of frame in a formed Prayer,
whatever their opinion be, I shall never offer my Censure against the
Circumstance of formed or extemporary Prayer, being only to be accused, when
either it is performed, stuck to, and pleaded for, because of Education, and not
by reason of the one or the other's being a better mean toward performing of
Prayer in a more heavenly and spiritual manner; if our Concern run more upon
the observation of the Soul's frame in the performance of Duties, than upon the
various methods of their outward performance, the common distinction of
opinions and quarrellings about needless Circumstances would soon be abandoned.
I dissent from all, though of my own opinion, who lay weight upon any
Circumstance, but in so far as it contributes to greater spirituality in
Prayer; and shall never censure those of another opinion, who stick fast to
some Circumstances, and thereby differ from me, purely because such
Circumstances are more serviceable to their Souls, in raising their frames to
greater spirituality than when otherwise performed: But to be strict in their
use, and to plead for them in conversation, purely because of being educated
with them, without trying the contrary way, pleaded for, and experienced by
others, seems to me the product of Self, rather than the Spirit of God.

Again, I am of the opinion, that Children educated with Forms of Prayer, are
led to greater laziness in their more grown years, and often proves a mean of
rendering them secure without fellowship with God in Duties: Not as if I
confined God's spiritual Influences to an extemporary Prayer, or that there
were never a spiritual frame in praying with Form; but that the latter more
consines the Soul with its thoughts in the Duty, and so fits the Soul far less
to receive spiritual breathings, than an extemporary Prayer. And when a Soul in
the use of Form in Prayer is raised by Christ's Spirit to a heavenly frame, I
think I may say, that then the Soul goes beyond the path of Form it begun the
Prayer in, and reaches further in expression, than what his Soul designed by
his usual Form.

Fourthly, A laying too great a weight upon the Circumstance of Length in
Prayer, is another Error of Education, especially amongst the Youth of
Dissenters, who are as much pleased herewith, as those of the Church of England
are with Form in Prayer. Length in Prayer I accuse not absolutely; for if the
Soul be in a heavenly frame, and admitted to near approach to God in Prayer,
its delight therein is such, that it is unwilling to, yea, can hardly give
over; but when Length in Prayer proceeds from no other foundation than
Education or Custom, it is a Circumstance no ways promoting the Soul's
heavenliness in it, or God's acceptance of it. There are many, who from being
trained up in the way of extemporary Prayer, can with strength of memory,
judgment, and readiness of expression, lengthen out Prayer to their own conceit
and satisfaction, and with applause from others, and yet never know at the same
time the meaning of access to God in Prayer; it is a Consideration that has
often moved me to concern for some under good Education, and religious
Character, but altogether unacquainted with inward Religion. The meaning of
outward Worship to God, is to honor him on earth amongst our selves; and the
service that is proportioned to God, is spiritual in the Soul; expression being
no acceptable Sacrifice to him, unless upon that account of spiritual Worship;
it is that which assimilates a man most to God, and brings a man sooner to the
knowledge and admiration of God, and to a meetness for that Heaven wherein in
all his Childrens Servants shall be spiritual and heavenly. A Prayer
spiritually performed, seems to fly with wings by the gale of Christ's Spirit
blowing upon the Soul, making it sail toward God with such words and thoughts
as appear more the fruit of a Divine Spirit, than of great memory and judgment.
Let us but make observation of one man's Prayer at one time and another, when
the judgment (...) are left only at the helm, how (...) and faintly does his
words drop, though never ^o fine; but when God breathes suddenly and freely
upon the Soul, his frame is visibly changed, is more affecting to the hearer,
and is admitted to plead with God in greater familiarity, with greater power,
and readier expression. It is experimentally known how much more pleasing and
affecting a spiritual Prayer is, though performed by an illiterate hand, than
the Prayer performed by the most ingenious but unspiritual. There needs no
other way to converse with the experienced Christians, but by bringing
Experiences to their memories; but for others unacquainted with experimental
Christianity, I hope the use of the means treated of, will bring you to the
same Experience, and then your arguings upon Air will vanish, and they will find
the Christian Religion solid and true, and filled with all solid comfort and
establishment to your Souls.

Abandon therefore Circumstantial Niceties as evidential of your
right-perform'd Prayer, restrict your self to no place, in performing the Duty,
or in debating concerning Prayer, but where you find most privacy, and greatest
assistance toward a good frame of Soul; confine your self not to morning or
evening Prayer only, but throughout the whole day, upon any occurrency of
affair, or company you are called to, distrust your self, without begging God's
conduct therein; and if under constraint from Set-Prayer, endeavor after a
good frame of mind in ejaculating a Petition to God, which will issue in as
sweet and remarkable a return, by which means the frame of your mind is kept in
a continual seriousness to answer that Command of praying without ceasing, as
was said before, and as a mean to repel forgetfulness of God. And to hinder the
danger of running to an extreme in lawful diversion, which at this day is an
occasion leading to much evil, even amongst real Christians, lengthen out your
Prayer according to your Suits you find you stand in need of, or are sensible
of at the time; and if you are heavenly, you will lengthen it out with
pleasure; use form or extemporariness; not because you have been so educated,
or because those of your Party do, and plead for it, but try both, and then use
what you find most serviceable toward a good frame of Soul.

These Errors being removed, I come to give you my Experience of right
performed Prayer; not by Philosophical Definition or Distinctions, there being
sufficiency thereof by excellent hands already in Print, but by Enlargement,
according to my method of experiencing the gradual steps of knowledge God was
pleased to afford concerning Prayer in the performance and continuance of it.
In general therefore, judge of your right performance in Prayer by the
following marks, which were the two I was first of all made sensible of, though
afterward others (of which you shall hear in the repetition of the same two,
with the addition of others) occurred: But I chose rather to keep them in the
method of time as well as matter that they were experienced in; not so much for
grown Christians who have experienced the same with my self, and therefore may
be comfortably established thereby; but for the sake of the illiterate and mere
Professors, though notionally learned, that they, and all unacquainted with
Experience, may be led step by step to the right knowledge and performance
thereof.

First, You may judge of your right performance of Prayer by the frame of your
mind in it, if spiritual and heavenly, if your thoughts are carried upwards
with sincerity and fervency, the same time your words pass your lips; the power
of Instruction, Custom or Applause having small room as Motives thereto; but
the obedience of God's Command, the sense of your need of, and insufficiency to
bring about what you ask. The sense of power in God, and of his willingness to
bestow, if for your good, moving you to address him, after the experience
whereof, and strict continuance in the use of set and ejaculatory Prayer, with
observation of what occurs therein, you will find more knowledge and enjoyment
creep upon you, than all the Divines on earth that ever I have met with has
been able to express or impart.

Secondly, You may judge of your right and acceptable performance, by returns
to your Prayers. Such objections, that a return may come to a Prayer, and the
Christian not know it to be the return; or that a return may be so long
deferred, as when it comes in, the Prayer that Petitioned it being out of the
Christians Thoughts, he is in danger of mistake, by imagining the Prayers not
being spiritually performed, not accepted of God, or returned by him, when the
Prayer has been performed aright, God pleased with it, and yet answered: Such
Objections shall fully be answered in further discoursing concerning Prayer:
Only give me leave to say, that when a return comes to a Prayer, and the return
not known to be such, it is certain argument to me, of laziness in that
Christian, and that a general and exact observation of the Enjoyments
accompanying spiritual and continued Prayer, has not been the practice of that
Soul, and that that Prayer has not at first been remarkt; God's ways between
the Praying, and its return, not exactly observed, and reflected upon, and
consequently the return given i^, not compared, but unsuitably applied to
notion and fancy; the neglect of the observation of this, God's common method,
extremely hinders the knowledge of a Prayer right performed, and really
returned, and is the true and often ^^^^sion of false and erroneous Thoughts
both of God and our selves:

Again, It has (...) been my own Experience, (...) the return of a Prayer has
been to (...) that at the time of the performance I have had an (...) p^werful
sense of God's acceptance thereof, (...) it was God's work, and not my own,
from its sudden and powerful fixedness in my Soul; neither the work of Satan or
inward Corruption, by reason of its effect in the Soul afterward abiding, even
full pleasedness and quiet of Mind concerning the Event, though the return was
deferred; neither any repine, but continued exercise of Resignation, Love to,
and Reliance upon God, which clearly discovers the power of a Divine Spirit;
these going along takes off the Thoughts of Prayers being unspiritual,
unacceptable, or not to be returned, though the return be deferred.

There are many at this day under no other advancement in Christianity than its
mere Profession, who are constant to their Duty of Prayer; but either reflect
not, or in reflecting upon their Duty performed, never seriously question in
themselves, whither any other thing than there petition of words in such
serious a manner as the strength of Education, and others discourse concerning
God's greatness, had brought them to, was either necessary or actually in their
Prayers, or ever examined after Prayer was over, whether it had return or not;
How this way of living should train a Soul to the experience and knowledge of
access to, and enjoyments with God in Prayer, I know not, speaking as to God's
common way of bestowing such comfortable privileges purchased by Christ for us.

To instruct you therefore, (from the Experience of God with my self) O
profane and mere professing Christians, I would with much sincerity and love
(...) ^ur selves, beg your steps in the following (...).

When you are designing any matter, or endeavoring the interest of this or the
other mean, to bring forth your purposed end, resolve to address the Lord by
Prayer for his guidance of you to the use of right means, and his blessing the
means to bring about your design, unless inconsistent with his Honor and your
Interest; And if you are hindered from solemn Address, make use of your
Thoughts, and dart them up to him with the same Petitions: Mind not only the
words in your solemn Prayer, and your thoughts in Ejaculation, but consider the
frame of your Mind in both, whether serious or not; if as serious, as when
speaking to this or the other help to carry on your design, (at your first
entrance I suppose not your acquaintance with spirituality of frame) and if
your frame be thus serious, mind the issue of your affair; if it be according
to your Desire and Prayer, impute not your success altogether to your outward
help of this mean, and the other, but let Heaven's Blessing, accompanying your
diligent use of means, have room in your Thoughts, if not as chief, yet as
necessary; and therefore you will improve this passage thus observed, with a
resolution to address God more seriously than ever, in your next undertaking;
and accordingly perform your serious Prayer to him for his Divine Assistance,
which meeting with a sensible return, you will improve with a more fixedness in
your resolution to Petition him in all your after-concerns, and with giving of
him now the place of principal Agent with your means, which will lay a
foundation, not only for a resolution and performance of Prayer, and that
seriously to God in all Occurrences, but make a fair step toward the founding
a Faith of Reliance upon God; yea, an endeavor of pleasing God, to interest
your selves in his favor, and a perusal of the Scriptures, to know the Will of
God, and the way of doing it; and going on in this way of Prayer and
Observation, with such suitable improvement, you know not, neither is it in the
power of the greatest exercise of a rational Soul, to foresee or imagine
aforehand, what great and mysterious things may be laid before you to observe;
to wit, of a Christian's advancement from the first step of Seriousness, to a
Reliance upon God as the alone power to be trusted to, with such means he
allows of, and has witnessed his pleasure in, by working with them for the
bringing about such Events as are sought from natural strength by others, but
by them in Petitioning the Agency of his Power: I don't mean by repeating of
Words, by way of Form and Rule given you in your Education, but thorough a
sense of the great advantage of his favor, and a sincere desire to obtain it;
a carrying out of your desire with thoughts and words suitable to the present
height of your longings, which lays you in the way of meeting with the
breathings of Christ's Spirit to help your infirmities, and to raise your frame
to such a posture of heavenliness as you never knew before, unless by the
hearing of the ear, and will soon unfold what a dark state you have been in;
that all the seriousness you had in Prayer, was no other than the strength of
education, and that there is something else in the Christian Religion you have
never yet been senble of, more suitable to the feeling of the Soul, than to the
utterance of the greatest Orator on earth. The Spirit of God has expressed in
the Scriptures these Mysteries in a style suited to our understanding; but when
the same Spirit bears them home to the sensible feeling of a Christian, what
addition is given to the Christian's understanding of them, and true Faith in
them! I go not therefore about to express these experienced Mysteries in a
better style for your understanding, but to put you in a way of obtaining their
experience upon your Souls, by the working of a Divine Spirit in the use of
common means. You lose your labor in endeavoring to understand them in their
saving efficacy by your natural reason, without the help of a Divine Spirit,
and his internal Revelation. What can better unfold or express the breathings
of Christ's Spirit upon a Soul in its holy frame and performance of any
Religious Duty, than its resemblance to the blowing of the wind upon our
Bodies, which, though sensibly felt, yet is mysterious as to the parts of the
Heavens from whence it blows, or the way of its blowing upon us. In like
manner, though the Spirit of God, breathing upon a Soul in praying to God,
comes often suddenly like a gale of wind, refreshing the Soul's dead frame with
a ravishing heavenly life and power; thoughts, desires, and all the affections
being then carried heavenward, like a Ship toward its Harbor, with sweet
delight therein, and an actual undervaluing of the richest treasures and
pleasures on earth, in the balance with this comfortable sweetness for the time
enjoyed, the continuance whereof would afford the Soul a Heaven on earth; yet
the Spirit of God, in the excellency of his Divine Nature, and in his method of
thus changing the frame of the Soul, is incomprehensible by the reach of human
reason; and to the experienced Soul there is but a discovery of him in his
blessed effects and operations, and a sight of him through a Glass darkly, till
that blessed change pass upon them, and they obtain a perfect meetness to see
and to understand him as he is.

No wonder therefore the profane, or mere professing Christian, attempting to
comprehend God's Word as to the work of the Spirit of God in planting Grace, or
watering it with constant influences to keep it in exercise, find themselves at
a loss how to understand it; and therefore never feeling its effects upon their
Souls, either look upon it as Chimaera, and the Being of the Spirit of God, or
his blessed operations of converting and spiritualizing a Soul, to be only
Notions of a melancholy Brain. How many are there at this day who mock at the
Spirit of God, and the Divinity of our Blessed Redeemer, and ridicule
expressions of fellowship with him as canting discourse; for they never
received the precious benefits which the Son of God purchased, and the Spirit
applies to the Souls of unfeigned Believers. Is it possible that one in a
violent hot Country unacquainted with the blowing of Wind? Is it possible that
one that never tasted Honey? Is it possible, I say, that the first and latter,
from the description either of the blowing of the Wind, or of the nature of
Honey, in the most perspicuous words, can so well understand, or so firmly
believe the blowing and refreshing effects of the Wind, or the nature and the
sweetness of the Honey, as those who have enjoyed of the first, and tasted of
the latter? This is a true resemblance of their condition, who are void of the
real inward knowledge of Religion; and their slighting and disbelief of the
spiritual efficacy of the Ordinances, cannot weaken the Faith of Believers, who
have experienced the reality thereof upon their Souls; but give them greater
establishment, and afford them matter of repeated exercise of love to him, who
past by some, and calls others, and advances them to a further reliance upon
him, in the due use of means, for the obtaining a richer abundance of the
communications of the Holy Spirit. When the Errors of the profane and merely
professing Christians endanger the staggering of any real and true Christian,
it is often my fear least that Christian has been too careless of his Duties,
and has not improved the pure motions and assistance of the Spirit within, and
the advantage of the external means of Grace; for else he would be above the
impression of the objections of carnal persons against his own feeling. Is it
possible that force of the most powerful Argument of the greatest Rationalist,
covered with the finest dress of words against the sweetness of Honey, can
shake the Faith of any one that has tasted thereof? perhaps he cannot discover
the Sophistry of the Allegation, but he knows it is false; like the poor Woman,
when opposed by the enemies of Truth, her Faith was firm in her Savior, and
she answered all Arguments with these words, I cannot dispute for Christ, but I
can die for him. A sincere Christian can say, I cannot perhaps demonstrate with
rational arguing, the Being of the Spirit of God, and his effects of renewing
the Soul, conforming it to Christ's Image, and spiritualizing its frame in
Duties, but I am well assured of it against all the Infidels on earth. Let what
I have said move thee, O profane and mere professing Christian, to the use of
observation and right performance of Prayer, as helps by which you may
experience the reality of inward Christian Religion; yea, let it move you, O
lazy Christian, who know not so much of God in the Soul, and of inward
Religion, as is attainable by you, be more serious and constant in converse
with God, in the use of his means, that you may enjoy what others have been
acquainted with: The wise and serious observer of Gods dealings with his Soul,
who frequently reflects upon them, will better understand the harmonious
agreement between the revelation of God in the Scripture, the workings of the
Holy Spirit, and the divine disposals of things in this low life, than another
sincere Christian who does not acquaint himself so intimately with God, by a
constant application of himself to him in all the ways wherein he draws near to
us. It is the hand of the diligent, in the use of means, that makes rich; so is
it the mind of the diligent Christian, in the use of means, that is filled with
knowledge. God's private Councils are not to be dived into, but what is
suitable to his Word is to be sought after, and may be found out. It Is the
trial of his Word that brings Experience, and Experience brings hope; and it is
the not trying the Truths of God, that makes so many doubtings and shakings in
a Christian's Faith, and so much of unsettled hope of their inheritance above.

I return from the lazy Christian again, to the mere Professor and Profane,
and beg you would be entreated to join the easy and advantageous Duty of Prayer to
all your endeavors, not contenting your selves with the cold forms of words,
but mixing holy affections, which are the life of Prayer, and observing the
gracious return of Prayer, when performed by the assistance of the Spirit of
Grace. This is a Privilege provided for you, and to be obtained by you in the
use, and continued use of right means; the reason you miss the Divine Bounty
is, because you don't present your self in God's way. If a Beggar expects the
Alms of a Prince, he will endeavor to be in the same street he passes
thorough, and as near him as ever is possible; he will neither go to a contrary
street, nor to the opposite side of the same street; neither will he plead his
Poverty alone, but express all his Wants one after another, as so many Motives
to move charitable Compassion. All Beggars keep not to the same form of words,
but open their Cries differently, according to the different Sore, Lameness,
Blindness, or the like, wherewithal they are afflicted sensibly with. Prayer is
God's way wherein a poor Creature may draw near to him without hindrance of
this or the other diversion between his Soul and his King; and when a Christian
is once sensible of his Wants, and of the All Sufficiency and Condescension
that is in God, it is not Form or fine words, but fervent serious pouring out
the desires, that moves the compassionate Father in Christ. A Closet-Prayer is
oftentimes the opportunity of receiving great mercies from God, and is many
times the settling of a disquieted mind, and the change of a carnal earthly
frame, to a spiritual heavenly one. It allays our Sorrows, and gives peace
under sharp Afflictions. This Duty spiritually and constantly performed, will
make you happy by Experience, and to resolve with the Psalmist, It Is good for
me to draw near to God.

But to discourse more particularly concerning Prayer spiritually performed, be
pleased to remember the many Experiences in the forepart of this Discourse,
concerning spirituality in Prayer, as evidential of its right performance; yea,
God's acceptance thereof, and of God's returning what was asked therein. I hope
with an humble rejoicing I may say, that since ever I begun to experience a
real heavenly frame in Prayer, when my Soul therein has been carried forth to
God with high spirituality concerning any one particular Event, with full quiet
of mind, and sensible exercise of resignation at the time concerning it, a
return to that Address has never as yet failed me; and that when my desire has
been in exercise toward any one thing that God would not bestow, I found my
self by the strictest observation under a constraint from this spiritual frame;
yea, sometimes from words to utter any Petition: or when words have been
uttered, it has been in the same manner as when I was altogether unacquainted
with inward Religion.

These and other Experiences are built upon no slenderer a foundation than
God's own Word in Psalm. 10.17. according to the expression of the Psalmist,
Thou will prepare their heart, to wit, the hearts of the humble, and of God's
own Children, and thou will cause thine ear to hear.

Is there any thing more plain or more fully experienced by observing
Christians, than that when God enclines his Ear to hear a Petition from a Child
of his own, that he prepares his heart aforehand to ask it. He prepares the
heart to ask by the influence of his Divine Spirit, one part of whose work is
said to be to help our infirmities, and that infirmity of our not knowing what
or how to ask, by making intercession with us in Prayer for what God is to
return, as well as exciting us to ask what we should not have otherways done,
though really standing in need thereof. As the spirit of a man knows the things
of a man, so the Spirit of God knows the mind of God; and is it to be imagined
that this Spirit knowing the mind of God concerning what he will return, will
raise a Christian's Soul to a heavenliness of frame, and thereby prepare his
heart to ask of God for an Event, when he knows God will not return it? A
spiritual heavenly frame is not the fruit of Self-power, otherwise a Christian
would be capable of getting and retaining it when and as long as he pleased,
which from its sweetness in enjoyment would be desired for ever; but it is the
certain operation of the Divine Spirit influencing a Christian's Soul commonly
in the use of means, and extraordinarily without means, for the end of letting
the Soul experience the sweetness of nearness of fellowship with, and access to
God in Prayer, as a foretaste and earnest of more intimate and lasting
communion with him in Heaven; and for the end of helping him to pray in such a
manner as may be acceptable to God, and returned by him. It is as, yea more,
insupposable that the Spirit of God would help the Soul to plead with God for a
thing contrary to his secret Will, (not a Secret to him) as to help him to ask
any thing contrary to his revealed Word and Will, where his assistance is given
to ask, it is assuredly for the obtaining of what he knows God will bestow;
however the return be deferred, and and Christians lose its sight by the
intermission of observing of passages between the addressing God, and God's
giving in a return thereto.

Preparation to ask of God in Prayer, obtained through the sensible comforting
Influences of his Divine Spirit, and preparations to petition the Lord,
obtained without any other sensible help than outward endeavor in the use of
means, are easily distinguished in their present sense, and after-effects; the
one is sensibly the intercession of a Divine Spirit, with the blessed effect of
inward delight, resignation of mind, and return to the Prayer; the other has
nothing else apparent besides the Creature's own strength, without that inward
comfort or return following it, but the latter is often the means of obtaining
the first. I have often found, and to be sure other observing Christians the
same, that when I have designed and desired to lay a Petition before God in as
serious a manner as possibly I could, my preparatory means has been to bring my
Mind in composure, and my Body in gravity of gesture; to read a Scripture again
and again, to fix my Thoughts with seriousness, and to meditate upon the
All-seeing Eye of God, to whom I was to address, on purpose to overawe me from
levity of mind in my Prayer: But when I have been actually engaged in the
Prayer thus prepared for, the desired and designed petition has never been
mentioned; either my Thoughts have been carried upon somewhat else undesign'd,
which I have with earnest affections and submission prayed for, and has
sensibly had it afterward returned; or if the desired and designed petition has
been expressed, it has been in such a manner, though sincere and unfeigned; yet
sensibly a Prayer performed with Self preparation, and greatly wanting heavenly
supplies to enliven and spiritualize it; and as spiritual and heavenly strength
preparing to ask was withheld, so was the return: Yea, besides the experience
of correspondency, of heavenliness of frame in Prayer, the true comforting
preparation of Christ's Spirit to that Prayer's return, I hope I may sincerely
witness that in the enjoyment of such a heavenly frame in Prayer, words of
Praise concerning the thing I designed to petition for, without the least
foreknowledge of the mercy obtained, has been given in. Who observes not these
things at the time, and lays them not up in their Diary till the Explicatory
passage appear, such lose the comfort of such enjoyments; the Knowledge of
God's deep ways, and their Capacity of witnessing for him as others.

Some real sincere Christians may here perhaps advise, and wisely too, to have
a care lest by God's changing this method, observed as certain, the ill
consequence of darkness and Faith's staggering occur not, leading to misdoubt
both former experiences, and the new methods of experience God gives in.

To which, I say, that any mistake concerning the Spirit of Christ interceding
for any one thing in Prayer, and the return thereof as certain, is not because
that ever it otherways has been, or shall fall out; God's word being true, and
the certain Foundation of this experience, but by reason of some failure on the
Christian's part thorough laziness in observation.

Again; This Objection is evidence to me, that thou, O Christian, art not in
the way of Observation, otherwise thou would have known from experience
God's infinite condescension to be such as to suit his Dispensations according
to the State of the Soul in its Conversion, and in its progress in
Christianity. To a new Convert the experiences of God are so mavelous and
plain, either in their Nature, or by God's continuing to repeat them, till the
Christian understands them plainly. If he apprehend not one, he may others; if
he cannot see somewhat of a Divine Power in a common serious frame brought
forth by the Soul's own strength, and sincere endeavor; yet he may in a
raised, ravishing, heavenly, delightful frame, coming suddenly, and that again
and again, with returns to the latter, and not to the first; that the one may
be the more distinguished from the other, and the ardently sought after. The
Leper weak in Faith had his Prayer immediately returned; but the Woman in
Canaan great in Faith had the return of her petition deferred, with the
intermixture of many trying passages. Thus by Observation of God's ways with my
self, I have found that my Prayers sincerely performed, when first sensible of
an inward change, were immediately returned; that I had not time to lose sight
of God and his condescending love in them: But so soon as the Faith of the
certainty of access to God in Prayer, was established in me, and Faith of
reliance upon him was stronger, then his returns of such Prayers were greatly
deferred: And as a condescending help to prevent desponding anxiety, quiet of
mind concerning the return to be deferred, always accompanied my supplication,
and the Lord left me not to the Dominion of corrupt nature, or of Satan's
suggestion: Or if either had assaulted me, the Divine strength raising me to an
actual resignation to his Will at the time, fortified me against them.

Again; An Observing Christian sees so much of the depth of Wisdom in God's
ways concerning them, that it must be strange if he presumed to confine God to
one method, when the variousness, yea the contrariness of methods to bring
about the same end, is one great evidence of the Excellency of his Wisdom. An
observing Believer knows, that God tries the strength of Christians various
ways in order to their Establishment: Not because he is ignorant of the exact
measure of their growth in Christianity, but from love to them, that by their
faithful continuance in Prayer deferred as to its return, the Graces of the
Spirit may be excited, and exercised, both to the honor of God, and their
inward Comfort: For what can be more reviving than to find corruptions
weakened, and grace strengthened, which is the sweet issue of many grievous
afflictions, that are not removed upon our renewed Petitions, till we are
purified by them.

Hereafter may some say, Since spirituality in Prayer is the Spirit of God's
gift, and it unexpectedly comes, we may lay by Prayer with our own Endeavors,
and wait as the Quakers say, till the Spirit move, and then to Pray. To this I
say, Spirituality in Prayer is the alone Gift of Christ's Spirit, and it comes
when he pleases; but by sincere Prayer, we obtain this blessed Gift: It is not
the usual way of God to bestow it in more excellent degrees, without our
sincere asking it in the humble sense of our need of it. The Quakers
acknowledge, as from converse with some of them I have heard, they have an
innate Spirit, by which they are acted, and according to its inward striving,
so they move in Duties. I know in us all there is that innate Principle of
Corruption, which reigning, makes our faculties of Soul and members of Body
move as it lists to evil; but a principle of Grace that inspires us with new
life in our Duties, comes from Heaven, and is obtained in the use of his
Ordinances. This does not in the least obscure the Glory of God's Free Grace;
for his Spirit excites us to Duties, and supplies us with strength to perform
them; but it directs us to seek God in the ways appointed, that we may find him.

That therefore Christians may rightly judge of this heavenly frame, and
intercession of the Divine Spirit preparing them to ask from God what he is to
return, (Errors herein proceeding either from mistaking the work of Christ's
Spirit helping them to ask, or from applying the return to what they ought
not,) I shall give the following marks accompanying such a Prayer, and that
observed from my own personal Experience.

First, A height of spiritual Thoughts and Affections throughout in Prayer, or
in one particular Petition thereof, far beyond common seriousness, which though
by words it be almost inexplicable, so as to make the unexperiencing Christian
comprehend it, yet it is easily perceived by the experiencing Christian. In
this raised frame of the Soul, either in solemn or ejaculatory Prayer, there is
such heavenliness of Thought, as if the Soul were already in Heaven's
Enjoyment: And for the comfort of young Observers, I must acknowledge, that my
spirituality of frame in Prayer, the real preparation of Christ's Spirit to
ask, and certainly evidential of God's return, was at first observed to be much
less in degree, though the same in nature, than now it is; one degree of
experimental Knowledge, preparing for farther degrees. This brings to my
Thoughts the gradual rise of Christians meetness for Heaven, by Christ's Spirit
in his common way of working by the use of means, of which observing Christians
are sweetly sensible.

Secondly, Another mark of Christ's Spirit's intercession in Prayer, as token
of God's acceptance thereof, and his return thereto, is, when with an Address
so spiritually performed, goes along a comfortable quiet of mind concerning the
Event, though the praying-Believer be encompast with Afflictions. A calm
composure of mind in our trust upon the gracious Will and Wisdom of God to
dispose of all things concerning us, is our Duty, but it is the Gift and Work of
the Holy Spirit, who is styled the Comforter. We must observe in the Word of
God, what he Commands us to do, he promises to enable us to do: He Commands us,
That Sin should not reign in our mortal bodies; and he has Promised, That Sin
shall not have dominion over us: In like manner, God Commands us, To be careful
for nothing, but by supplication to lay our requests before God: And certainly
freedom from anxiety and disquiet, and a full possession of the Soul in
Patience, concerning any thing, in commending our Affairs to God by Prayer, is
the product of the Divine Spirit, and not from the natural temper and
stayedness of the Mind: And where the Christian actually experiences it in
Prayer, he may safely conclude himself influenced by a Divine Spirit, not only
in raising his frame to ask, but leaving it at God's footstool as to the Event,
and that as presaging of God's returning favor, and introductive of his
blessing. The Promise of God is the foundation of this Trust; Psalm. 37.5.
Commit thy way unto the Lord, and he shall bring it to pass: The habit of
Resignation may be in the Soul, but it is drawn forth into exercise by the
renewed influences of the Spirit.

Thirdly, You may judge of the intercession of Christ's Spirit in your Souls,
in addressing God by Prayer, by the passages of Providence that bring about the
return of this Prayer. In the Observation whereof, the speciality of a Divine
Hand in the Providence bringing the return about, is as discoverable, as
immediateness of a Divine Spirit influencing the Soul to ask with calm and
resigned submission, as to the Event. The observing Christians do often see
these two joined together, and each illustrating one another, where others do
not, or hardly are at the pains to observe the one or the other; And what the
Psalmist in the first ver. of the 116th Psalm. in the fifth ver. of the 118th
Psalm, and in the 121st Psalm, finds that Prayers return observed, and the
passages of Providence discovering or bringing it about, is powerful in
bringing his Soul to the actual exercise of love to Reliance upon Admiration
and Praise of God: I love the Lord because he has heard my supplication; I
called to the Lord and he heard me, therefore shall I see my desire; and he is
now my strength and my song; I will praise thee, for thou have heard me, and
art become my salvation: The unobserving Christian therefore of Prayer's
return, and of the method bringing it about, loses thereby the actual
excitement of the excellent Graces, and so miss of much comfort and light that
others enjoy.

Fourthly, You may judge of the intercession of Christ's Spirit in your Prayer,
by the never-failing correspondency between a Prayer performed as is expressed,
and a return thereto: This is according to God's own Word, and the Experience
of diligent, true, observing Christians; And if it were not so, I doubt not but
amongst thousands of Experiences training me to the knowledge thereof, and
establishment therein, I should have met with one contradicting it. I know I
have met with many passages upon my advancement in the knowledge of God's ways,
that at first view seemed greatly opposing of this; and if a strict observation
had been intermitted, the shaking of my Faith, or mistake therein, had been the
consequence; but keeping strict to observation of Providence present, and
reflection upon past ones, with patient waiting the full sight of the return to
Prayer appeared, with that improvement of being more serious and considerate in
the observation, and comparing God's ways of Providence, and inward workings of
his Spirit, according to his revealed Will. I would subjoin to these few marks
of Prayer with the intercession of Christ's Spirit, some things you are to
beware of, as occasions of mistaking this Prayer, and deluding you with a false
resemblance of it; and something I would advise your observation of, that may
be a means to lead you into the performance of Prayer aright, and thereby an
opportunity of obtaining Christ's Spiritual influences therein.

I begin with the latter; First, Be advised to enter upon private Prayer
without any discomposure of Spirit from the things Temporal that pleasantly
affect us: The thoughts of them will be ready to rush themselves upon your
remembrance: I could easily set down the many Prayers I have had spoiled by
such things rushing upon my thoughts at the time; but circumstances will not
permit.

Secondly, Without any vexation upon your Spirit, unless you use Prayer in such
a circumstance, as a help to quiet your mind, and to suppress the further rise
of corrupt motions; for which end I dare recommend private Prayer as a healing
means.

Thirdly, Have your thoughts as free of worldly Persons and Things as possibly
you can; otherways passing immediately from Conversation with the world, you
will be apt to cast a lingering look back upon the world, and to have thoughts
stealing into you, which will hinder the Spirit's assistance to pray, in the
manner before charecteriz'd.

Fourthly, Do not cursorily perform the Duty of Prayer to satisfy your mind
that you have discharged the Duty, and till night you are not to return to it;
but consider, that Prayer is not only a Duty, but a heavenly Privilege,
wherein we may with a filial freedom address our selves to the Lord Almighty as
our Father, who from the infinite treasures of his love will supply all our
wants, and satisfy all our regular desires: Therefore let us be liberal in the
time for that Duty. By continuance in Prayer, our Hearts are more fully possessed
with God; and by wrestling with him, we get a holy heat of Affection, though in
our entrance into the Duty we were but coldly affected.

These are some of the hindrances which a Christian is to watch against; and
there are many other which the observing Christian will discover, and endeavor
to prevent.

Concerning the other, to wit, the occasions of mistaking the natural workings
of the Affections, for the Spirit's work in Prayer, I shall first in general
say, That the not considering the state of the Soul, first designing to Pray,
in Praying, and after Prayer, leads into many mistakes: According to the inward
and habitual frame of the Soul, such is the exercise of the Affections in that
Duty, and usually such are the influences of the Holy Spirit.

Secondly, The judging that common seriousness in Christian Duties, is all the
spirituality that is necessary or attainable, may be an occasion of mistake:
For this will make them content, without seeking for supernatural influences,
and without the perception of them. Close walking with God in the often use of
Prayer, is the best help to train this Soul in the further knowledge of the
Breathings of Christ's Spirit.

Thirdly, A more than ordinary seriousness, from the ardent desire of obtaining
the thing petitioned for, may impose upon some with its resemblance to
spirituality; as also a Christian's indifferency in obtaining a thing prayed
for, may impose a resemblance to the Souls of straitning in Prayer thorough
Christ's withdrawings.

Fourthly, The rational hope of obtaining our Petitions, or the rational
improbability of obtaining, may sometimes impose a resemblance of spirituality
and constraint in Prayer.

An Experience whereof I have had concerning Friends dangerously Ill, who in my
thoughts, and in the judgment of their Physicians, have been Dying, from which
seeming certainty of their Dying, I have had an unwillingness, as being
altogether needless to pray for them.

I remember of a Child, who was dangerously Ill, without sensible pulse, cold
as clay, and in the opinion of all, Dying or Dead; which rational conjecture so
impressed me, as to restrain me from Prayer concerning it: But next morning in my
Closet Prayers, not designing a Petition for the Child, supposing it then
assuredly Dead, a sudden seriousness and spirituality seized me, carrying me
forth in Prayer for this Child, which at first astonished my Thoughts, till
sending to know if alive, I heard of its life and great amendment.

To the praise of the infinite condescension of God, I shall mention two
directions as preventive of Error and Mistakes in the observation of Prayer,
and the enjoyments accompanying it, and that as an encouragement to weak
Christians, to use these means without fear, or doubting of God's wise and
loving conduct of them, to preserve them from Error, unless God's permission
thereof be for the Christian's good, taking that way to establish Grace
stronger in the Soul.

First, His impressing me at the time with the true state of the matter, that
never to my remembrance was I under false resemblances of spirituality or
constraint in Prayer, but at the time I had some discovery of it.

Secondly, Such dangers never occurred to my Experience, till God had
established my right knowledge both of spirituality and constraint in Prayer;
and that by Experiences in abundance, a part of which is laid down in the
Historical part of this Discourse: I say this, as a witness for God's
Condescension and Wisdom in training the sincere diligent Christian groaning
after the true knowledge of God's ways in the right use of means; yet I say it
not to encourage laziness, either in the beginning or more grown Christian, but
excite them to more serious and strict observation of their Souls, that they
may not be deceived.

I find it more common with private Christians than formerly, to observe
enlargement in Prayer, and constraint therein, as forerunners of their enjoying
or not enjoying what is Petitioned from God; but in Conversation, I find their
observation as too narrow and confined, looking upon that that may be a
Christian's common Food in the close continuance in the means of Grace, as an
extraordinary Feast, and minding it mostly concerning the recovery, or the
dying of Friends, and not extending it to all things, hoping the life, or
fearing the death of one, from a Minister's pouring forth his Soul, or from a
private Christian's fervent address to God, or the constraint of both: It makes
me remember how extraordinarily amazing and delightful such Experiences were,
when at first observed by me in the more tender days of my Knowledge in
Experimental Christianity; and makes me greatly afraid, that however notional
Knowledge abound amongst Ministers and People that have lived so many years
under Gospel Instruction; yet Heart-Service to God in the performance of
Duties, or at least strict continuance therein, especially this delightful Duty
of private Prayer, is not so common, and so the Enjoyments that follow, are
less and seldomer experienced: But to this real and comfortable Experience of
Enlargement in Prayer, concerning the recovery of Friends, that is more
observed by Christians, let me give you two cautionary Instructions from my own
Experience therein, and of which some observing Christians are not at the pains
to remark, concerning this Enlargement in Prayer.

First of all, Not peremptorily to hope the recovery of a Friend from once
observing your selves, or others, carried out in a heavenly manner, in Prayer
concerning them; and though answerable to this once observed spirituality, appear
some real amendment at the time; yet often without the continuance of Prayer,
thus spiritual, their amendment falls off, and suitable to their omission of
further Praying thus, their Friend Dies, unless God act in a stream of more
than ordinarily condescension to weak Christians. I know not but the Reliance
upon the Evidence of one Prayer spiritually put up for a Person's Recovery, may
occasion carelessness in the Duty afterward, and so hinder the obtaining the
blessing that was thought to be coming to us. I remember a Holy Christian, who
was in great Thoughtfulness concerning the Recovery of his Wife, for whom he
had so near access to God in Prayer, that he had great hopes of her life; but
she dying, gave him some more concern of Thought, that he should hope on so
good ground, and yet be mistaken; whereas his near access to God in Prayer was
but once experienced, his Eye was upon the frame of his Soul in Prayer, and not
upon the Words uttered, while under this Divine Influence: His omission of
continuing thus to Pray, hindered him from clearer discovery of God's Ways: His
missing the observation of his Words, rendered him incapable of applying the
return to what God helped him to Ask; to wit, God's love to her Soul greatly
manifested in her passage hence. At this very time I can instance in a Child
for whom I found great spirituality in Prayer, but without the least appearance
of amendment for a fourth night's time, which seemed to oppose all former
Experience, and might have occasioned great mistake if I had not recorded my
words, as well as frame in Prayer spiritually performed, which were centered in
one Petition, without the least deviating from it throughout the whole fourth
night, That the Lord would spare his life, and that his life might be precious
in his sight, without the least inter-mixture of desire or word in Prayer for
Health or Recovery. When a Prayer spiritually put up, is remarkt as such, and
corresponded with a return of amendment, but followed with after-laziness and
forbearance of the same diligence, no wonder the return stopped, and a contrary
effect to what was desired, or imminent appear; If therefore your heavenly
frame in petitioning Health or the like, be once observed and continued in, I
never knew such petitions return to fail; but if this frame be obtained but
once, and afterward it go off, you will undoubtedly find amendment answerable to
the time of having strength spiritually to petition it; but such a frame going
off, either thorough the intermission of your own endeavor after, or God's
withholding it, nothing else but disappointment to your expectation and
desire, and justly to your dependence upon once experiencing the frame, falls
out: It is laziness in the right performance of means, and not continuing
therein, that keeps off the many experiences of inward Religion, or occasions
the mistakes that abounds concerning the great things of inward Religion;
however some satisfy themselves with the ill usage of that Proposition, God's
ways are in the depth. It is from multitudes of instances experienced, that if
the Soul be carried forth in Prayer for any Friend ill, that suitable thereto
there is many times visible hopes; but if this frame is not continued in, the
Friend does decline and die. I know that once feeling this hopeful frame has
made some Christians lazy and secure, and not by serious Address afterward, lay
themselves in God's way to obtain the continuance of this frame, and so their
Health and Life has gone: To conclude thence, That return is not always suited
to spirituality of frame, is mistake and erroneous, and evidence of your lazy
unexactness in observation of God with the Soul: Right observation hereof would
discover condescending Mercy in God, on purpose to keep the Christian
continually holding on that Duty of Prayer till the final determination,
issued, which meets commonly with great reward, though the continuance and
spirituality of Prayer continued in, be his own work in the Soul.

A second Cautionary Instruction, is, Not to be peremptory in judging the
spirituality of another man's Frame, or an Event answerable thereto; but to be
strict and diligent in judging your own Frame, and Events consequential to it.

I would advise great carefulness in judging another man's spirituality in
Prayer, as presaging of certain return answerable to the spirituality supposed
in his Frame.

1. First, Because of the difficulty of judging another man's heart in Prayer:
It requires exactness of Observation to raise a Christian to the capacity of
knowing his own Frame when spiritual, or to raise him to an establishment in
the reality of Correspondency between his Prayer's spirituality, and its
certain return; but how can we be sure of another man's heavenliness? I have
known many under no other knowledge of Christianity than what is Notional,
acquainted with no other power in performing Duties, than that of Education,
and Self-strength, and yet pray with that sense, distinctness, and outwardly
appearing heavenliness, that the Hearers have been affected with a good hope of
the person, and a delightful thought of their spiritual seriousness in Prayer;
yea, the strength of natural parts in the exercise of Prayer, may heat the
affections, and may persuade a person and others that he prays in the Holy
Ghost. If therefore you may hear a Prayer from a mere Professor, so near
resembling a Christian's Prayer, influenced by Christ's Spirit, then to be sure
a real Christian seriously performing a Prayer with a natural affecting way of
expression, may make a near resemblance to a heavenly Frame, like unto that
sensible preparation given in by a Divine Spirit to ask what God is to return.
Now to judge either of these Prayers seemingly put up in spirituality as really
spiritual, and to expect from thence the health and life of your Friend, upon
that sure foundation of God's Word, telling us that he prepares the Christian
to ask when he is to incline his ear, and yet the person does not recover, may
greatly tend to make them mistake, when they judge it from the ignorance of
their minds, and the delusion of Satan, a failure in God's truth, rather than a
failure in themselves, in judging that Prayer spiritual, and presaging a
gracious return, which really bore no evidence of either. But if you observe
the Prayer of a Minister, or other Christian in public, put up spiritually,
and judge it as God's Token given you for good; You that are concerned, and
really acquainted with experimental Christianity, do not only find a sense and
impression at the time of this Prayer, as its being God's evidence of good, but
retiring your selves to your private Prayer, you will find the same Frame upon
your own Soul, as evidence both of God's returning it, and of the other's
performing it spiritually; and that your judgment therefore was right, when a
return is in God's design; though his Spirit be one, yet he influences many at
the same time to ask the same thing of God. Thus there are more Witnesses to
his mercy, and its greatness appears the more, and he is the more honored
thereby.

Both Cautions I Will endeavor to explain by a late Instance of my own
Experience amongst many I could produce, which for Brevity I must omit, that
thereby you may know how many times a Christian is helped by a Divine Spirit to
ask of God for a Friend's Recovery, and yet unless continued thorough the whole
Illness, the Recovery has not issued; thereby you may also know the right
judging of another's spiritual frame in prayer. The Instance is concerning a
Friend of my own, for whom the Lord was in a solemn manner addressed to by some
Ministers, who set apart some time for this very purpose; they seemingly were
wonderfully carried out in Prayer, answerable to which there was a present
Relief appeared, but went off soon after, and continued not. Throughout the
course of their Illness, I found in my self in Prayer a perfect dryness as to
the frame of my mind, and words in Prayer for them, which made me continually
express my self with fear of their death, excepting one Prayer in an evening in
my Closet, which upon discourse with other Friends. I found to be the very
exact time of others being united to pray, and the time of there being some
hopes; of which joint and solemn Prayer I knew nothing at the time of my own
observation which I had set down in my Diary, till afterward in discourse with
Friends; and I had set it down with special Remark; but excepting that one
Prayer, I found them lost in all my other Petitions, and proclaimed my fears,
when their Physicians had great hopes, and their symptoms had some abatement,
with the wondering of Friends what could be my reason moving me to think this.

If any should ask me, after what has been said concerning Spirituality in
Prayer, and its answerableness to return, Whether Returns from God are only to
such Petitions breathed upon sensibly by Christ's Spirit, and raising them to
greater heavenliness of thought and word, than commonly; or if extended to
Prayers performed with no other sensible seriousness than the sincere endeavor
of a Christian's self?

Before the Answer, I shall first lay down the difference between strengthening
and comforting Influences of Christ's Spirit; David had his withdrawings of
comfortable Influences to such a degree, and to such a time, as made him cry
out, Psalm. 77.7. Is his mercy clean gone? will he be favorable no more? And in
ver. 8. Does his promise fail for evermore? And yet at the same time, though
insensible then thereof, he was under the strengthening Divine Influences of
Christ's Spirit; for when David comes to himself, after he had said, I have
cleans'd my heart in vain; and returning thence to the enjoyment of comforting
Influences, he says in ver. 22, 23. Though I was so foolish, and carried my
self as a beast before thee, nevertheless thou have holden me up by my right
hand. From whence I draw a Caution to dejected Christians, Not to think that
though God withdraw his comforting breathings formerly experienced, and that for
holy ends of Reproof for not better entertaining them formerly enjoyed, or of
excitation to prize them more when they return, and to keep closer and
stricter, and more continually to the use of means to obtain, and to retain
them; that therefore they have lost the grace they had once the sensible
evidence of, by Christ's comforting Influences, and so give Satan opportunity
of following this thought with his suggestion of Apostasy, and danger of
damnation, and the being no advantage in the further use of means; whereas the
continuance therein, is evidence of spiritual supporting power, and of God's
holding them up from falling, however unsensible they are of his comforting
Influences.

Secondly, There is a difference between spiritual Influences strengthening the
Soul to the continued use of sincere Prayer, and between spiritual Influences,
making the other comfortably sensible, and carrying the Soul out thereby with
more fervency and joy than at other times.

Thirdly, That shorter Intermissions of Duties, and sincere endeavors therein,
contribute greatly to the drawing down of continued comfortable Influences, and
that the more close we walk with God in the use of means, the more clear
comfortable delightful enjoyments occur.

I answer therefore first, That a Return is certain to that Prayer that is
directed by the Holy Spirit to God, for obtaining a blessing for us; and an
evidence of this direction is, by the heavenly frame of mind, and more than
ordinary freedom of utterance in the Duty.

Secondly, That often God returns a Prayer performed with spiritual Influences,
though they are without that delightful evidence at the time of Prayer; the
Spirit of God exciting and strengthening the Soul to ask, carries him to nothing
but what is suitable to God's Word, and with Resignation in the Christian's
self, whether this heavenliness of frame be sensible at the time of Prayer, or
not; and therefore if God's Spirit be helping the Soul really, though insensibly
to the Christian, or really and sensibly too, a return certainly follows that
Prayer, but with this difference, that under heavenliness of frame he enjoys
the Comfort of the return aforehand, and under strengthening influences, he is
not so certain of the spirituality of its performance or its acceptance with
God, till the return make it manifest.

Thirdly, That such a comfortable sense of spiritual Supplies to ask, is many
times the reward of serious self-denying Christians, and truly depending upon
God in Prayer; and that the other is the allowance of real Christians, but less
watchful, and not searching into, and desirous of the knowledge of God's ways,
and therefore have not that assurance of present acceptance and after-return,
as the serious observing Christians have.

Fourthly, That comforting Influences are more experienced as the portion of
beginning Christians, and training up to the knowledge of God, of tender
hearted Christians, and of those who walk continually with God in their
thoughts by ejaculation.

Fifthly, The evidence of supporting Influences without the other, is
continuance in serious use of means, notwithstanding God withholds its
comfort, which must evidence a power above the carnal nature.

My Advice therefore is, To begin the use of serious Prayer, as well as of
observation of outward Providence, that you may have fellowship with the
Godhead even on earth, and come to the knowledge of God's ways without the fear
of mistake, because of the infinite wisdom and tender love that is in your
Guide and Conductor, leading you in the right way, unless you stand still, and
walk not further on in the use of means, or walk in them inadvertently. Pray
the Lord to prepare you to ask the things which he has declared in his Word, he
is ready to give, and in his time you shall obtain them. This humble, constant,
and affectionate continuance in Prayer, will be an excellent means to make you
understand the method of God's bestowing mercies, as the certain sign of his
Favor.

By this Duty of Prayer, and observation therein, you will be able to expose all
the Errors of the Age; you will see Arminianism at the root of our new-sprung
Errors: for if they cannot defend Self-sufficiency to will and choose spiritual
things, and to comply with saving means, they must look to Christ, and
acknowledge that conversion from its beginning to its perfection, is to be
ascribed to Divine Grace. Others deny the Deity of Christ, and think him as
mere Man like themselves; inferior to the Devils, who acknowledged him the Son
of God, his power over them, by begging he would not torment them, but finding
the Doctrine of Jesus Christ's being God so clearly asserted in the Scriptures,
they turn Deists, and deny all revealed Religion, that so we may have nothing
above our own Reason and Self-sufficiency to recur to, for the obtaining the
Favor of God here, and of Heaven hereafter. God believed as Creator, and men
living in the practice of public moral Virtue, though private Vices are
allowed, is sufficient, in the opinion of some, for their present peace and
esteem, and their future happiness: But the Scripture and Experience does
strongly refute those Arminian Errors, in that first Chapter of John, and the
13th verse, We are not born of the will of man, but of God. And in the second
Chapter of the Philippians, ver. 13. It is God which works in you both to will
and to do of his good pleasure. These Texts are confirmed by the experience of
all sincere Christians, who feel the grace of God, in turning them from the
love of Sin, to the love of Holiness; and carrying them through a tempting World,
to the eternal Kingdom; exposing both, with the embracers of their Errors, in
their true Colors? Their growth is no marvel to me; their not being more is a
greater wonder. Profaneness in Practice, Christianity in mere Profession,
Experimental Religion discouraged by some, and neglected too much in the
Conversation of God's own Children, with their divisions and unnecessary ^eats
being the great Nourishers of such wild Grapes. I do believe I may, without the
breach of Charity, say, That if Arminians in this Age are understanding in
God's Word, their knowledge thereof is merely Notional, with Self-Paraphrases
thereupon, but ignorant of its reality from the experience thereof in their own
Soul.

That what I say may not seem Censure, but what has true ground for suggesting,
I Will call forth all the experienced Christians on earth to witness, If any one
of them was ever able to bring themselves by their own strength, and when they
would, to a heavenly frame of Soul in Prayer; yea, though God has given forth
means to obtain this frame. I appeal to their experience, whether their
reliance upon these means, has not often obstructed this Gift of Christ's
Spirit influencing the Soul depending thereupon in the use of means.

We have Millions of Instances, and I believe I could produce thousands from my
own personal experience, of being out of a heavenly frame of mind, and that
suddenly and unexpectedly a ravishing heavenly frame has seized me, without any
previous working my self therein, only suddenly this frame has seized my Soul
like a sudden Gale of Wind, filling the Sails of the Faculties of the Soul, and
driving the Ship toward the heavenly Harbor of God's Throne.

We have also multitudes of Experiences of the same power of Christ's Spirit
suddenly, undesignedly, and powerfully working, with a verse of a Chapter read,
and with a sentence of a Sermon preached, both the conversion of Christians,
and also the spiritualizing of their frames, without the least design or
forethought in the Creature's self, and without any other strength of man than
laying himself in God's Road, and Highway of Duties, in which he commonly
walks, and by which he acts when and how he pleases.

My Argument is from lesser to greater: If a Christian cannot bring forth nor
retain a spiritual frame in the Soul when or as long as he will, how much less
is an Unbeliever capable of choosing and working Grace in his Soul when he will?
Where is that Instance of a Christian that dare pretend, when he is in a
heavenly frame, to be able so to keep himself? I dare say any that ever had it
in reality and power, would desire no other lot on earth, but to be kept in
this Heaven on earth.

If thou therefore, O Arminian, art incapable of believing without a Divine
Power, or to exercise a heavenly frame in Prayer when thou would, or to
retain a spiritual frame when thou art in its enjoyment, lay by Self, and forge
no more lying delusions for thy Bulwark, all experiencing Christians find out
thy falsehood, and bemoan thy misery. I should rejoice if God should honor me
as an Instrument to prevail with thee to walk in those means in the method
mentioned, that with a Divine Spirit accompanying them, you might be led to a
discovery of your Errors through blindness, and the evil of broaching and
fructifying them on earth.

Apprehend with your selves how unmeet you will be to admire the Infiniteness of
Mercy, in providing these blessed helps of Divine Revelation, Divine
Providence, and Divine Spirit; and how unfit to praise his Name for either,
when now you derogate from all, to affix it upon Self. Let not matters
unexperienced, and capable of being experienced in the use of few and easy
means, be debated first, but rather let your arguings succeed to your
experience, unless they be such Mysteries as are merely to be credited
according to Divine Revelation, and incapable of man's comprehension in this
life; and then in God's method of working and watering Grace, you will obtain a
full discovery of Self-insufficiency, the need of a Redeemer to look to, and
depend upon God's revealed Word in conjunction with his Divine Spirit, as your
chief helps hereto.

An Arminian, to plead his own power, is like the profane and mere Professor,
mocking and doubting of fellowship with God in Prayer. It is the Arminian's
want of Grace, or at least the want of the observation of steps, that has led
to their Grace and its growth, that keeps them still exalting of Self; and it is
the others never experiencing communion with God in Prayer, that make them
ridicule it. Put Self to the trial, Arminian, whether you can in your strength
work Grace? try it, and do not delay till a dying hour. And if you find you
cannot, then bring to the trial another strength, even that of a Divine Spirit
in the use of means recorded in this applicatory part, and then you will follow
Christ's Command, and become as a little Child, obedient in the use of God's
means to help forward the right knowledge of him and your selves, and shall be
enabled to get out of Self-confidence, into a reliance upon a more Divine
Foundation, even Christ's Spirit, the Gift given to the Christians in the
world, upon Christ's leaving the Earth, and his Ascension to Heaven.

By Prayer, and Observation therewith, you will soon discover Socinianisms
Falsehood, as it has sprung from Arminianism, by so much exalting Self; so the
discovery of the vanity of the latter, soon lays open in Christian experience
the delusion of the former. Let a Christian but observe the difficulty of
laying aside Self-trust, even after God's most establishing Experiences
dethroning it, and the proneness of his mind to admix Self in Duties rightly
performed. The difficulty of putting on Self-denial, and of being clothed with
that glorious Grace of Faith; yea, the means made use of by God to uncloath us
of the one, and to adorn us with the other. The Observation I say of all these
in a Christian, will soon convince us of our insufficiency, and incline us to
exalt Christ as the Object of the Soul's trust and adoration, for the
destroying of that branch of Socinianism, even the denial of the Godhead of our
blessed Redeemer. Besides Scripture plainness, the attributing to Christ all
the uncommunicable perfections of the Deity is proof against them. Will all the
Socinians Sophistry on earth make me disbelieve his Godhead, when I have
experienced that in the worship and adoration of Christ, the Grace of God that
has converted me from Sin to Holiness is then in exercise? GOD is a jealous
GOD, and will not part with that Prerogative of Adoration, no more to mere man
than to vain Images; and yet, Who are the sanctified ones in Christ? who are
the Persons Paul judged meet to write unto, in his first v. of his first chapter of
his first Epistle to the Corinthians, even such who call upon the name of Jesus
Christ our Lord not nominally so, but such a Lord as is made the object of
Adoration in the Gospel Churches; none else being fit Members to make up a
Christian Church, and all denying Christ's Godhead and this Adoration due to
his Name, exclude themselves from being fit matter for a Gospel Church. My
Adoration of Christ as God, I observe most solemn and with an entire trust in
him, when I am in a heavenly frame of Soul in private Prayer, being then
certain that the exercise of Adoration to Christ is the true effect of God's
Divine Spirit influencing my Soul. Often in meditation in participating the
Lord's Supper, the admiration and adoration of Christ as God blessed for ever,
has been kept up with great warmth and spirituality in the Soul. To the
Socinians I would put this Question, If ever in a private Prayer to God, in
participation of the Lord's Supper, or upon a sick, and in appearance dying
Bed, they experienced a heavenly ravishing frame of Soul? and if they have,
what exercise of thought in either of these three Circumstances concerning
Christ and themselves then seized them? I dare answer, That if really
influenced with a heavenly frame, Arminius with honor to Self, and Socinus
with his disparagement of Christ, were low as the dust in their Opinion then.

How unsuitable are those who deny Christ this Tribute on earth, to reign with
him in Heaven, when the Mystery of the Trinity, the Mystery of Redemption by
God the Son, and the Mystery of Conversion by God the Spirit, shall be
perfectly unfolded; when the admiration and adoration of God, for his
infinitely wise and condescending Mercy in delivering man, must be in frequent
exercise: This is the most excellent, beneficial and comfortable object of a
Christian's Faith, Contemplation and Affection. We can only see it here through
a Glass darkly; in the full sight is the perfection and felicity of the Saints
in Glory: But the serious thoughts of redeeming love in our present state,
fills the Soul with a Joy unspeakable and glorious.

God constituted man at first with all the necessary faculties of Body and
Mind, and with their beautiful Ornaments, that man by considering the excellent
Goodness of his Maker, might Glorify him, and not merely please himself in his
own Perfections, and the fruition of Paradise: In like manner, a gracious Soul
is renewed to Christ's Image in Conversion, not that the doing of it may be
proclaimed as his own work and Glory thereby derogated from the Godhead of
Christ and his Blessed Spirit; Man is made meet for Heaven by Grace growing in
his Soul on Earth; And does he pass that perfecting change at the day of
Judgment? and is he admitted to these glorious Visions in Heaven for the
admiration of himself? No; He will know, that as the Creation of Man was the
product of the Counsel and Power of the Deity, as it is declared in these words,
Let us make man; so the Conversion of man from the power of Sin to Holiness, is
the sole effect of the free Mercy and Power of God, and for the honor of his
Grace. Pride first discovered it self in our fatal fall, and has continued to
show it self in arrogating to our selves what is entirely due to God; but the
perfected Spirits of Just men, know how unworthy and unprepared they were to
see God in his full Glory: They continually pay the humble Homage of Praise to
him that sits upon the Throne, whose Spirit sanctified them, and to the Lamb,
by whose Sacrifice and Satisfaction Heaven was opened to them. Can a mere man
receive the Hallelujahs above, and rob the Father of the Praise of the
Triumphant Saints in Heaven? With what faces will those who deny the Deity of
Christ, look upon a Redeemer glorified as God and Man in one Person, when such
a view of him will force their remembrance of denying him in their Minds and
Hearts, the Adoration due to him as God, equal with the Father, though he humbled
himself that we might be exalted, and might in Heaven see his Glory, and be
transformed into his Glorious Likeness? It will be righteous, that those who
vilified the Redeemer, should not reign with him; and since they deny, that he
washed away the guilt of their Sins with his Blood, it is righteous that their
guilt should remain on them for ever. He that feels the power of Christ
strengthening him, will notwithstanding the subtle Cavils of others, glorify
him as the incarnate Son of God, who purchased Grace and Glory for him by his
Humiliation, and confers it in his Exaltation.

As for Deists, who deny all Revealed Religion, their Error is brought for the
support of Socinianism; for in the Scripture there is so full a proof of the
Eternal Deity of the Son of God, and of the Holy Spirit, which is a Doctrine
supernatural and incomprehensible by our narrow minds, that they will rather
return to Heathenism, than receive the Gospel: Besides, the purity and
perfection of the Gospel in its Commands they will not obey, and therefore will
only follow the dim light of Nature, that discovers not many Sins which they
love, nor some Duties from which they are averse.

You therefore under this Character; Let me invite you to the trial of God's
Word, and if you find in your Experience any one thing that was
incomprehensible to natural Reason, but sensibly felt in your Souls, it will
lead you to the desire and endeavor of Experiencing more. If in Prayer you
come to understand a strength above your own, even that of a Divine Spirit
according to Scripture Revelation thereof, you will desire to comprehend many
other Christian Privileges and Changes of the Soul by Grace, of which you
never formerly had any true Idea: If once you come in the use of means to
believe and trust things unseen, which to a faithless Creature is a Mysterious
Doctrine, but of Scripture Revelation, and certainly experienced as Truth by
Holy Souls.

To what purpose, O Deist, should I trouble my self to argue the case of there
being a spiritual heavenly frame in Prayer, of there being a trust to a thing
unseen, more strong and durable than a trust to an object before the Eyes; the
one being supported by the Divine Truth and Power, the other by a weak mutable
Creature. All the Argumentation and Oratory on Earth cannot make a sincere
Christian doubt of the Truth of the Gospel, which he has felt to be the power
of God to save him from Sin and Hell: A superficial assent to the Doctrine of
the Gospel may be easily changed; but when the Truth of it is fixed in the Soul
by deep Experience, a Christian is as stable as the Center against the
strongest storms of opposition: You may as well suppose a rational Soul to be
without thinking, as when it is convinced by over-powering light, and an inward
real sense of the Truth of Religion Revealed from Heaven, he should be apt to
change his Faith, and like a Drunken Man reel from one Opinion to another.

I therefore earnestly recommend the endeavor after an Experimental Sense of
the Truth of the Gospel in the use of all Ordinances, as the best preservative
from Unbelief.

But now I come to the third and last mean of bringing Creatures into the
certainty of God's Word and inward Religion, and that is a right reading of the
Scriptures, not a superficial reading of them in Obedience to Parents, or out
of Custom, a Chapter morning and evening, without ever one thought reflective
upon what is read; but such a reading as may lay you in the way of the
influence of a Divine Spirit, who communicates light unto us in this Duty, as
well as in that of spiritual Observation and Prayer; we must fix it in our
thoughts as the Rule of our Life, and particularly observe what may be
directive in those Duties that belong to us, and may serve for Comfort in
disquieting Afflictions to which we may be exposed; Mr. Pool's Annotations are
useful in our Reading. This method was marvellously blessed to me in the
practice of it with Observation and Prayer; I soon saw the worth of God's Word,
the benefit of using it in this manner, and my Soul was ardently and constantly
desirous of Divine Grace to conform me entirely to the Precepts and Examples of
Holiness set down in it.

The method I used at first, was, To Read a Chapter of the Old Testament, a
Psalm, and a Chapter of the New, with Pool's Annotations upon each; and this
sincere endeavor after the Knowledge of God in his Precepts, was soon
accompanied with the inward workings of a Divine Spirit, influencing me with a
desire after, and, in some measure, Conformity thereto.

Psalm. 119. How shall a young man cleanse his ways? It is by taking heed
thereto according to God's Word: Those that read not his Word, or read it in a
customary way, obtain no knowledge thereof, or at least what is only notional
to discourse of; How can a Christian cleanse his Heart and Ways, or be in the
means of obtaining Christ's Spirit helping forward this work, but by comparing
considerately his Ways and Thoughts to God's Divine Truths, as he goes on in
the reading of them; and nothing more fixes the Thoughts to this, than a
reading with Annotations, and many times in comparing Scripture to Annotation,
a comparison of ones self to Scripture, either for instruction, or comfort
occurs; reading with Thoughtfulness is a mean God many times blesses with sweet
success that way.

Reading with reflecting the light of the Word upon the Soul, warms it, meets
the Affections, and makes them receptive of heavenly impressions.

The mere Professor, Religious only from Education, I greatly compassionate for
this neglect; it being for the serious, a probable mean of affording
establishment in their right notional Knowledge wherewith they have been
impressed, thorough the instruction of Education; and applicative Reading the
Scriptures, is the means, with the Spirit's blessing, of establishing us on
that Divine Foundation of Faith and Obedience.

This Advice of Reading the Scriptures with Pool's Annotations, is not to be
limited to those only in younger years, but necessarily to be extended to
Persons of more mature Age.

First, I advise the younger, That they would not rest satisfied to answer
their Parents Instruction, or in the customary method of reading so many
Chapters a day, and that at their usual times; but to consider what degrees of
knowledge of the Word, and Conformity to it, they are advanced to by it, that
by right Conceptions of God and his Holy Will, they be preserved from youthful
Lusts, from the Erroneous Opinions and vicious and contagious Examples of
others: Let the first Principles of Religion in this way, be deeply set in
them, before they read Controversies in Religion: I do really acknowledge, that
from reading a Chapter, with Mr. Pool's Annotations concerning a point, I have
had more clear knowledge and confirmation than by reading Controversial Books;
And I do believe it one of the most common failures of Youth under Religious
Education, not reading the Scriptures with Annotations, which greatly fixes the
Thoughts upon ones self, and God's Divine Rule, if conform unto it either in
Heart or Life.

Be advised therefore, to begin your knowledge of Spiritual Things right, and
not to end where you should have begun; and to read but one Chapter with
Annotations and Observation, rather than many slightly; remarking that part of
Scripture your Thoughts at the time of reading mostly fix to, and observe the
method of Providence afterward appearing, and perhaps you may discover its
correspondency to the matter remarkt, either as Instruction or Comfort.

Secondly, I advise grown Professors, who busy themselves with Controversies,
and with Books Eloquently written, or of high Notions, but still are without an
affectionate vital knowledge of Divine Truths, and in danger of being infected
with this or the other new-sprung Error: I say to such, That I am afraid the
advice given to younger Persons has not been followed by them; I therefore
earnestly exhort them to read the Scriptures with a design to be enlightened and
sanctified by them, and with the assistance of a sound Expositor, that their
imperfect and unsettled Conceptions of Divine Things may be rectified, and
strongly impressed within them, and the power of them may be visible in their
lives.

If you cannot enjoy full measure of time once a day, do it by parts. Many sit
in their Shops waiting for their Customers, and Reading of Books of no value,
or thinking upon what they can give no account of afterward, that have great
opportunity of using this method: Many might detract from their great time
spent in Dressings and Visitings, and thereby might have more leisure for this
profitable and ^ounding work: I am hopeful, if this method was once in use,
there might be an excellent foundation laid for your Knowledge of God the
Lawgiver, and of your own Loyalty and Duty to him in Heart and Life. The
delight the Soul would taste in Reading the Word, would cause us to disrelish
all other Books, though never so pleasing to the carnal Fancy and Desires that
govern the unrenewed part of Mankind. I have often thought upon the fancy so
delighted with variety, and have pitied some such who would be taken with every
new thing, but did not Experimentally know the varieties of things in the
Scriptures greatly alluring, worth the reading and the contemplating, and the
varieties of impressions affecting the mind in reading the same Scripture at
various times.

But I have observed, the better the Duty is, the more instruction and comfort
abound therein, inward corruption and Satan keeps the Soul the more backward
from it: And let any experiencing Christian reflect upon the days of their
Ignorance, and the Beginnings of their spiritual Knowledge, they will find, When
Hearing and Prayer has been practiced by them, yet serious Reading was greatly
neglected, especially with an Expositor: A Duty establishing and comforting a
Christian, is the Duty Satan loses most by; to Read matter indifferent,
overcomes neither Satan nor Corruption, but Scripture-Revelation discovers both
in their natural Colors, and a way to escape the Tyranny of either. I remember
the neglect of Reading the Scripture while only under the power of Religious
Education, kept me in darkness and security for not bringing the false hopes of
the goodness of my spiritual State to the Touch; I presumed that I was in a
safe condition, but by serious Reading the Scripture I had a true discovery of
God and my self, and I delighted in the discovery and the blessed means of it:
That which before was so unpleasant to the corrupt Nature, was sweeter than the
Honeycomb; This is the usual Reward that is joined with our Obedience to the
Divine Command, Of searching the Scriptures.

I am afraid the neglect of this Duty keeps not only profane and mere
professing Christians from a change to a state of real Christianity, but even
real Christians in a careless neglect of their Conversations; The serious
Reading a Chapter in the morning would so fix the matter upon the Christian's
Thoughts, that now and then he would be reflecting, whether he has stepped aside
from Conformity to what he had Read in the morning, and would make him watchful
against Temptations that surrounded him, lest he be surprised by them. How sad
is the carelessness even of real Christians, with respect to the inward frame of
their Souls, and their outward Conversation, which I do believe may in some
measure proceed from the neglect, or at least the unserious performance of this
Duty, and the not considering that God sees them in their Companies, in their
Families, in their Closets, and in their Hearts, and their neglect of serious
yielding themselves to the conduct of the Holy Spirit thorough the day? I
remember a passage I heard of a Minister, who had neglected his serious
morning-Prayer before his going forth upon that Sacred Work of Preaching; and
after Reading his Text, was stopped, that he could go on no further, and another
was forced to supply in his room; and upon review, found that his neglect of
Praying for Divine Assistance, and dependence upon it, was the cause why he was
so deserted. If Christians were more concerned to have their morning Duties
strictly performed, their Conversations would be strict and spiritual thorough
the day, they would not disparage their Profession, and dishonor God by so
many blemishes in their Actions; they would not so harden the profane and mere
titular Christians in their sinful state; whereas Prayer joined with the
Reading the Word in the morning, is a blessed means to maintain our Communion
with God in all the business and lawful refreshments of the day.

If innocent Recreations, by fixing our thoughts upon them, or by reason of the
length of time we are in them, lessen our seriousness, we should be less
frequent and shorter in them; let the Conversation be never so innocent, and
the Company never so dear, they must not deprive us of communion with Heaven,
we must so use the world as we may enjoy God* I think visiting of Friends a
Duty, as well as diversion; but prolonged to a day, or an afternoon, meddling
in others affairs, censuring some, and commending others, perhaps without
reason, is grieving to a spiritual-minded Christian, unless where he may either
do or receive some spiritual good. The serious exercise of our minds upon
spiritual things, and discourse of them, preserves the sacred fire burning in
our breasts. Spiritual Conversation is as rare amongst Christians as it is
profitable; it is the beginning of Heaven, and reduces friendship to the state
of Paradise: But we are so sadly declined, that unless he is a person of
eminent holiness and gravity that interposes divine discourse in Conversation,
it is entertained very coldly, or with contempt and derision.

As to Recreations doubtful amongst Christians, playing at Cards, and the like,
whether lawful or unlawful, I think it is best to keep the judgment free from
entangling Scruples, but to restrain our practice, and accordingly I desire to
order my Conversation, and that for these three Reasons.

1. Because since nothing in Christ's Commands or Example, or of the Apostles,
is express herein, I judge it best to regulate my practice by the example of
the most holy and heavenly Christians, who I know have abstained from
Recreations of a suspected nature.

A second Reason to me is, That Recreations, though seeming innocent, have
often been, and are dangerous snares to men. How many have resolved to spend an
hour in a Recreation, and have spent many, to the irreparable loss of precious
time! How many have begun with Pence, and ended with Pounds, to the wasting
their Estates, and impoverishing of Families! The perfect forbearance from such
allurements, is our security and happiness; and that others who allow
themselves in such things are not overcome, is from restraining Grace, and not
from corrupt Nature.

Thirdly, Because to my own experience such things wither a heavenly spiritual
frame of Soul, by drawing off the thoughts from seriousness, to a little
levity, and from less to more, till a heavenly frame be gone. The
heavenly-minded Christian is the only Judge of this matter, the profane and
mere Professor never having had a heavenly frame, can hardly be said to judge
of, or be concerned for its decay or removal; neither the lazy, though real
Christian, who if serious in his morning or evening duties, matter not the want
of a heavenly, serious frame of Soul throughout the day in his business and
pleasures, of the number whereof too many abound in our Age, by reason whereof
while under afflictions, or in their dying hours, when their evidences should
shine not only with light to themselves, but as witnesses for God to others,
they appear more dark and clouded than in those whose life has been a continued
enjoyment of God. How many real Christians have bitterly lamented their time
misspent in Vanities, and when near Eternity, have had gloomy thoughts, and
distracting doubts of the Eternal State; when those who have used the world
with indifferent affections, and have been serious in working out their
salvation, have rejoiced in the Lord. In short, a heavenly frame of Spirit, is
the best Antidote against the infection of sensual pleasures.

The main Reasons to press Christians strictness of Conversation in doubtful
things, are from pity to the profane and mere Professor, and to prevent the
drying up of spiritual seriousness of frame in real Christians; the latter
sort, I hope, thorough the exercise of Grace, may limit their pleasures and
diversions from being inductive of Sin: but the carnal are hardened in their
profuse wasting time, and their indulging their sensual desires, even by Saints
innocent Recreation of themselves in them, pleading for themselves by such a
Question, Does not such an one do so and so?

Ministers, of all other Christians, should be very diligent to prevent a
taking occasion and encouragement from their example, to Licentiousness in
things of this kind; they have the best opportunity to spiritualize
Conversation with their People, and improving time to the most excellent
advantage; that is, to increase their knowledge, holiness and comfort. This was
the practice of Paul, who was so great a Lover of Christ and Souls; this
practice would refel the double Accusation of Ministers in our days.

First, That they are so much seen in the Affairs of the world, and are so
little at home conversing with God and themselves, and seldom with their
People, unless in outward enjoyments, and without spiritual profit to them.

Secondly, The other Accusation, is their ignorance of their Peoples spiritual
state, and their more applying themselves to maintain such Doctrines as are the
Characters of their Party, than to preach Truths suitable to the Case of the
Congregations. Some Preachers are called Legal, others Evangelical, and
according to the different opinions and affections of the Hearers, are censured
or commended; but a Minister of the Gospel defames and pollutes his Profession,
who does not make it his sole end to glorify Christ, and save Souls; and for
that end the Law is to be preached, discovering the undone condition of
Sinners, that they may come weary and heavy-laden to our compassionate Savior,
making him appear the more lovely to their view, that they may with unfeigned
willingness walk in those means wherein his Spirit may be found, to apply
Christ with all his Benefits to the needy Soul.

I cannot but mention what I have observed in my self, that upon any stirring
of corrupt nature, tending to puff me up after enjoyed communion with God, or
leaving a kind of security in the following Duties, what need I have had of
reflecting upon the Law, showing thereby to my self how insufficient I was to
give full obedience thereto, or to perform any one part thereof aright, unless
by the continued assistance of a Divine Spirit to be obtained in the use of
means; and therefore it is Duty to be in the close work of using means, and to
ascribe benefit obtained therein to the free and powerful Grace of God, and not
to any dispositions or strength of our own: Therefore the meditation of Law and
Grace must be joined, the first leads to the other, and greatly discovers the
efficacy thereof; yea, more than that, contemplated alone, shall I see the
precious excellency of Christ, and not see my lost, corrupted, depraved state?
Shall I see the need of a Divine Power in working and planting Grace, not
seeing my own insufficiency to act without it? Again, before the close of the
same evening, I have been brought under such concern for one failure or other,
that the necessity and excellency of the free grace of God in Christ has
convincingly and comfortably by serious reflection wanted to have been applied
to my Soul, shall therefore one Christian need the bearing home of both the Law
of God and the Free Grace of God in Christ in one day, how much more shall a
Congregation made up of Christians, whereof some are secure, and others tender
and self-condemning, stand in need of Sermons of both sorts, or of a Sermon
made up of both.

It is therefore the great Duty of Ministers to be frequent and fervent in
their Prayers to God, that by Divine influence they may be directed in the
choice of fit Subjects, and assisted in their preparatory Studies, and in their
preaching the Word, in demonstration of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.4. Not with
enticing words only of man's wisdom, that it may be beneficial and saving to
their Hearers; the neglect of this method may occasion the choice of an
unsuitable Subject, and its delivery to be unsavory, unless to the mere
Notional Christian. A Minister of eminent Holiness told me, That Converse with
God in Prayer was his best preparation for preaching; and that according to his
frame in Prayer in the Lord's Day morning, such was the frame of his heart in
preaching. I have my self found, that according to the holy exercise of my
affections in my Closet-Prayer, such has been my enjoyment of God in public
Ordinances, and especially in receiving the Sacrament.

The Professors of serious Religion, but especially Ministers, are more in the
view of the world, and more obvious to Censure, therefore they should be very
regular in their Conversations, and watchful to prevent reproach upon Religion.

If a Divine Spirit once meet you in the use of these three means, you will
find that whereas you have formerly enjoyed the good things of this world
without thankful thoughts of the bestower of them, and of his rich mercy
distinguishing you from others in a lower condition; and without serious
consideration that they are Talents committed to your trust, to be improved for
his honor, and for which a strict account must be given; you will, by the
observation of God's general and special Providence, acknowledge him to be the
Fountain of all your blessings, and depend upon his condescending care of you
in the use of due means, and employ his benefits for his glory; a sweet effect
of observation!

You that prayed, because by Parents you were instructed, commanded, and had
their example to move you to it, will find that now you pray in obedience to
God's Command, as the blessed mean of acquaintance and fellowship with him; and
that if you express your self with never so free and learned utterance, you are
uneasy, unless the frame of your minds has been serious, and your affections
heavenly and spiritual; and you have some hope that he is pleased with your
performance, and has evidenced his acceptance. There are not only many who are
not at the pains to use means to come to such a comfortable knowledge, but who
will hardly observe whether ever they enjoyed the return of such a Prayer,
unless the return has come in soon after, or in such a remarkable way, that
they could not but see it was a return to that Prayer, by reason of which
negligence God is sometimes pleased to defer a desired return; but at last, in
compassion to his Children, gives a remarkable Answer that deeply affects them,
and is for their great advantage.

You that read the Scriptures, because your Parents led you into the road of a
Chapter morning or evening, or for the historical part thereof, or to be
knowing in the Notion of it for Conversation, now find that your use of it is a
mean for the right knowledge of God, the comprehension of his Divine Truths,
and as a Directory to your life, and as a help to your evidences, in comparing
your life to it, and as a preservative from infectious Errors.

You that heard Sermons, and appeared serious all the while for fear of
Reproach, or to obtain a good Name, without any thoughtfulness of the matter
discoursed, unless to pass a judgment of the ingeniousness or dullness of the
Preacher, and to entertain Company with Reflections upon the matter or manner
of his Preaching, find now such an inward change, that every Sermon is
transmitted to your hearts thorough your ear, producing a Reflection upon it,
and a comparing it with your own experience. I think nothing can be more
pleasing than in hearing a Minister, or in reading a Chapter, to be able to
seal the truth of either from our experience. Instead of examining the words of
a Sermon as to the Rhetoric, you now mind the matter it self, not so much if
learnedly managed, as to consider whether you have experienced its Truths,
which will he a comfortable evidence to the Soul; or if you have not felt its
efficacy, it will excite earnest Prayer to God that he would make the
instruction powerful in you.

O how reproving is this of the Profane, who slight the constant attending to
the preaching of the Word, it being unknown to them when and how God may work
by it upon their hearts, the neglect of a Sermon may be the loss of an eternal
Blessing.

You that before converst about Religion in the Letter and Notion, speak now
your own experience; You that aimed at Reputation for your knowledge in Divine
Things, now design Honor to God, and the Confirmation of the reality of
revealed Religion; You that aimed at worldly Interest, now you aim at the
enlarging of Christ's Kingdom; where greatest S^nc^rity reigns, Self applause
is least valued, and greatest privacy sought for, unless where God may be
publicly honored. The great and solemn judgment at the last day, will pass
sentence of Condemnation upon many, whose character on earth was not disputed,
and were reputed holy, and will acquit those whose fellowship on earth was with
God, and yet traduced as Hypocrites.

You that before ripped open the Faults of others, either from a corrupt
Principle of reproaching, inherent in the very nature of some more than others,
or from a desire of raising your Reputation by the depressing others, you will
compassionately bear with the infirmities of others, knowing your own frailty.

You, who before affected only such Professors as were of your own Opinion,
will now extend your Charity to all who believe the great Truths of the Gospel,
and live accordingly.

Can the World imagine otherwise, but that those who press hard after
strictness of Conversation, by avoiding all liberty that may be an occasion to
Sin, have not the same natural corrupted Inclinations and Principles as others,
but they are cleansed and changed by power from above. A rational Principle,
produces a rational Action. A sensitive Principle, produces a sensitive Action.
A corrupted Principle, produces a corrupted Action. A gracious Principle,
produces a gracious Action; according therefore to the dominion of the inward
Principle, so the outward Action is, or at least the Inclination toward it.
The Soul formerly under a Principle of Sin was inclined to sin; and upon the
occurrence of any Object to set this a moving, the Soul was acted; but now
under the dominion of a Principle of Grace upon the occurrence of any good
Object, the gracious Inclination is active, and with greater pleasure, than
under the power of the carnal Principle. Profane persons, and strangers to the
life of God, are utterly mistaken to think that the Actions of the spiritual
life are not mixed with the sweetest and most satisfying delight. The outward
Acts of Religion, if they are not produced from a Principle of Life, are
without relish, and toilsom to the carnal Nature; but ^lowing from an inward
and real Principle, they are productive of the most solid and purest pleasure
in the present exercise, and in the joyful reflection, and are the beginnings
of heavenly fruition.

I have thought, that to represent this with the greatest illustration, is of
no force without a method proposed to bring it to men's Experience; that
Proverb reigning amongst profane and mere Professors, That seeing is
believing; let therefore feeling in the Soul be believing: The days have been,
when in all the outward parts of God's Worship I have made a specious show, but
from no other principle than that of Education, being altogether ignorant of
any inward Comfort in Duties, and without longing after it, imagining it to be
more talked of than really enjoyed; This cannot have been my case alone, but I
dare say, the case of many professing Christians who have had Religious
Education; and therefore my method has been, not only to show the evidences of
a Change, but the steps of God's way thereto, and the few easy means made use
of by my self, and successfully blessed by the Divine Spirit: And if this be
not the fruit of my labor, to bring you to the use of these means, that you
may lay your self in the way of receiving Divine Influences, my Experience will
make but small impression; but if the Lord accompany your sincere endeavor in
these few means, believe me, the internal sweetness of inward Religion, of
fellowship with God in Prayer, of Reading the Scriptures with improvement, of
observing God's Dispensations, with Reliance upon him for all things, will so
affect you, that you will need no other motive to persevere in the use of
means, and you will abstain from all carnal Diversions that alienate the Heart
from Communion with God. The preserving a spiritual frame in the Soul every day
keeps us watchful, lest Temptations should break in, and Corruptions break out.
This affords us a foretaste of Heaven, and an assurance of it; who can doubt of
the Hell that is revealed in Scripture, who feels the tormenting fire of guilt,
and extends his Fears to Eternity? These are the beginnings of Sorrow. Who can
doubt of the Heaven revealed in the Gospel, who has felt in his Soul a Joy
unspeakable and glorious, and differing from the Joy in Heaven only in the
degree, and the manner of Divine Fruition?

I do believe, the Conceptions of profane stupid Sinners, concerning spiritual
Comfort in the Soul, and concerning inward Agonies for Sin, are as doubtful as
they are of the reality of Heaven and Hell in the future State. Oh! Therefore
let not Christians be discouraged by the Atheism, the Infidelity, and
Wickedness of this Age, but let them pray and labor to obtain a more full
experimental sense of things revealed by the Word of God, which will be a
powerful preservative from the Errors and Vices of the infectious World, and
will make them admire Divine Grace that distinguishes them from others, and
will make them compassionate those who are careless of things that concern
their precious and immortal Souls: And to preserve a spiritual frame in its
liveliness and vigor, let those be our chosen and intimate Friends in whom the
Image of God shines, who partake of a Divine Nature that declares it self in
spiritual Communion, where we may be confirmed and comforted in the serious
practice of Godliness, and prepared for the Joy that flows from the Divine
presence above, to the blessed Celestial Society.

Besides these three means, of right Observation, right Prayer, and right
Reading of the Scriptures, there are other means of God's own appointment; such
as the Hearing of God's Word, the Participation of the Lord's Supper, and
Communion with Saints; but I have confined my self to these three upon the
following Accounts.

First, Because Observation was the means of my own sensible Conversion, and
the other two the special means of further growth in Grace.

Secondly, By reason of the Christian's tendency to the right and continued
performance of the other means, when excited and allured by the Enjoyments that
attend the right performance of those three.

Thirdly, That my invitation to the profane and mere professing Christian may
meet the sooner with successful acceptance, the apprehension of the difficulty,
and of the burden of real Christianity, as if it were inconsistent with
natural pleasant enjoyments, frights many from the acceptance of the Gospel,
and Obedience to it; the falsehood whereof I have endeavored to show, in that
spiritual Religion allows a modest temperate use of sensitive Pleasures; and
Religion when seriously practiced, sweetens those Duties which to Carnalists
are so uneasy; for when the Soul is cleans'd from sinful Affections, and
changed into the Divine likeness, the suitableness between the Duties of
Religion and the Soul, causes the purest pleasure: Since our Redeemer had
reconciled God by his Meritorious Sufferings and Mediation, and has obtained
such precious privileges for all that will accept of him, our present Pardon
and future Glory, Holiness and Happiness in perfection; How can reasonable
Creatures neglect the great Salvation so dearly bought, and so freely offered
to them in the use of so easy and few means? Methinks we should hear convinced
and alarmed Sinners cry out, What shall we do to be saved? and apply themselves
to the Redeemer, to obtain spiritual and eternal Life by him: The Pearl of
Price is offered to all that sincerely accept of it.

To press the Duties of Christianity upon a profane and mere professing
Christian, is as if Food was offered to a Dead Body to receive and digest, as
if the carrying of heavy Burdens were recommended in exchange with an easy,
quiet, and pleasant course of life. The profane Creature is Dead in Sin;
though his Ear be open as the effect of natural Life, yet his Soul is shut from
the reception of spiritual Truths, as the effect of a spiritual Death.

Now to shut up all, I Will give you my repeated Exhortation, with some
Reflections annexed to it, respecting the foregoing Discourse.

Be exhorted therefore, O profane, mere professor and careless Christian, to
walk in the use of the three means mentioned, and take an estimate of your
performance, from the extensiveness of your observing the passages of
Providence, from the spirituality of your Prayer, solemn or ejaculatory, from
the strictness of your conformity to God's Word, the Rule of Obedience, and you
will obtain the first life of Grace, and an experimental increase of Holiness
and Joy.

The world is blinded and secure, from Lusts that darken the Mind, and from
tempting objects in the world that divert from the serious thoughts of the
righteous God, who is terrible against Rebellious Sinners: Now the observing of
visible Vengeance that often falls upon the wicked, will strike men with the
fear of God, which is the first motive to fly to his Mercy.

Or men are blinded and secure upon the account of external profession and
outward performance of Christian Duties, and a notional Knowledge of the
Gospel. The remedy of this destructive delusion, is the frequent and serious
addressing to God by Prayer, to obtain a living principle of Holiness that will
be permanent and powerful in the Soul.

There are real Christians, who by neglect of their Duty, decline from God, and
disparage their Profession; Let such be excited to a constant and serious use
of those means whereby Grace is conveyed into our Souls. If they will observe
God in all his ways more strictly, and pray more frequently and fervently, and
read and hear the Word with more application, they will feel the power of
Godliness reviving in their Souls, and will show forth the beauty of Holiness
in their Conversation, which will be convincing of others, that Religion is a
Divine disposition productive of fruits suitable to it; A holy habit of Soul
may be preserved in the business and diversions of the world, by our constant
converse with Heaven every day.

You have two excellent motives to this Exhortation:

First, Because it may be done without any hindrance to your business and
lawful diversions: How easy is it in the morning, before you enter into
worldly Affairs, to read a Chapter with Pool's Annotations, and to give your
selves and all your concerns by Prayer to the conduct of a Divine Hand to
direct and succeed your lawful Endeavors? How easy is it thorough the day,
while in the midst and course of your lawful business, to direct an ejaculatory
desire, Lord, Let my endeavor be according to Duty on my part, and accompanied
with a discovery of Mercy in the Event; and according to the many endeavors
you are active in throughout a day, so many Ejaculatory Petitions in a serious
frame to be repeated, which you will observe to issue in great inward Knowledge,
and perhaps great success to business, as an occasion of turning your many and
various Ejaculatory Petitions to one solemn Duty of Praise in the evening.

How easy is it in an evening in your Shops or Closets to record, that in such
an endeavor you were kept serious with God in your thoughts, and you were
blessed accordingly! The remembrance whereof will make you ready in all your
Affairs to pray for the Divine Blessing, and depend upon God in doing your
Duty, and thankful for his succeeding your endeavors.

The second is, That this constant looking to God in Prayer ejaculatory or
solemn, with the use of means, will enable us to perform the works of our
ordinary Callings with less trouble to our Mind, and toil to our Bodies: This
will cure the anxiety of our Minds concerning the Event, and consequently make
us more moderate and orderly in the use of means. It is the anxious desire of
obtaining an Event, the great fear of losing it, that sets peoples minds on the
rack to contrive means, and their Bodies on the hurry to use these means, and
how often does unsuccessfulness accompany both? Whereas by Observation of God,
the Governor of all things, access to him for his favor in any thing is
discovered to the Soul, and that the dutiful use of means is successful by his
favor, when the eager pursuit of a desired thing has been ineffectual. This
has been verified to all by many Experiences, and therefore shall add this
Advice as the sum of all.

To use means with the same diligence, as if by them alone, without a Divine
Hand, Events were to be obtained.

To eye God with a reliance upon him for Events, as much as if they were to be
brought forth by him without the use of means.

By which Rule I would reprove the Censures against God's Children, who from
their dutiful diligence in business, without the intermixture of pleasure in
fear of losing providential opportunities in it, are reputed Covetous; And
advise others to judge themselves by their inward aims, if conform to God's
Will; and whatever be the Censure of Men, they thereby prevent the condemning
sentence of Christ the Redeemer and Judge. It is neither the Character or
Censure of any, that ought to bound our Endeavors, but the being in Duty or
out of Duty, and the regarding of the Lord in all our ways.

Reflections that must naturally follow the perusal of what is written.
First, THAT the Author having felt such Experience of an inward change upon
his Soul, without any other hand of his own therein, than the use of the means
above recited, Ought I not to believe there is a Knowledge above human
Judgment, and a power above natural Strength? for otherwise he had continued in
the same ignorance of God, then appearing sufficient knowledge, wherein he was
involved for many years, though enjoying the outward dispensation of the Gospel.

Secondly, That it was but suitable to Christian Affection in him to endeavor
that others may tread in the same steps with the same success, especially
finding some Ministers in their Sermons to run from plainness and experience,
to Rhetoric and Notion, and finding the care of Christians more to run out
upon arguing the Notions of Religion, than the confirming Divine Truths, and
the establishing the Minds of others by the Seals of their own Experience: If
experimental Religion was more Taught in Sermons, and Discourst of amongst
Christians, the performance of Holy Duties wherein it is obtained, would not be
thought a mere fancy, and the light and beauty of Grace would more shine in the
Church of Christ.

A Third Meditation ensuing upon the second, may be, Whether you have not some
longings after the same establishing Experiences? If you have, these longings
may be kindled by the consideration of their being attainable. I was once so
carnal as only to look to things seen, and thought the Reliance upon an unseen
Superior power to be a vain imagination; but God in his excellent Mercy has
convinced me beyond all doubt of his governing Providence, that disposes of
Events for the good of those who wait upon him; and the same goodness will be
extended to all that sincerely seek his face for ever.

We must regard the Word as our Rule, the Spirit as our Guide, to direct us by
that Rule, and the Dispensations of Providence correspondent to that Rule, and
we shall be preserved from the Atheistical neglect of God, and from the fancies
and phrensies of those who pretend to Inspiration from above, and from doing
those things which are directly and scandalously contrary to the revealed Will
of God. O that Christians would earnestly pray for the Holy Spirit, that by his
directing-light they may understand the Scriptures; and by his warm impressing
them on their Hearts, they may feel their cleansing and comforting power; but
truly, Christians in our day are not much concerned to mind and try the work of
God in their own Souls, nor seek after knowledge of him by his Operations in
others. The Observations of our selves, and the Communion of Saints, are rare
Duties: We live at a distance from our selves; and in converse with others, the
subject of our discourse is the present World, or Notional Religion, which
occasions Dissension and Faction; whereas the mutual communicating of
Christians to one another what God has done for their Souls, and how variously
according to their wants, their desires, their sorrows and fears, he has
attempered his Dispensations, would be an excellent means to raise their
admiration of his condescending and compassionate Goodness, and of his Wisdom,
and establish their joyful trust in him.

Fourthly, If you have any longing, and find it attainable, can you have easier
means? Inward Religion affords no Lesson for emaciating your Bodies with
outward Fastings, but commands a rational and moderate support of our Bodies,
sitting them the more for serving God. We are not enjoined to be Pilgrims, and
to take wearisom Journies as a Penance for Sin; Christian Society and Communion
will make us more watchful against Sin. The Gospel does not enjoin severity and
niceties in outward Conversation, which rather discourages than invites those
who are without; but allows a civil sweetness to all; but there are Seasons of
Retirement and Recollection from the business and pleasures of the World, which
a Christian ought to improve for more immediate Fellowship with God. There are
chosen hours, wherein the Soul ascends to God by solemn Thoughts and ardent
Desires, and God descends into the soul by the Excitations of his Graces, and
the Influences of Joy; and it is most unreasonable to think Religion to be
sour and unpleasant, because wise and holy Christians prefer God before the
Creature, and Heaven before the Earth. Begin therefore, and go on in the right
way, with steady Resolutions not to stand still, or draw back, and you will
have renewed Strength and Comfort afforded, you will be advancing every day in
your Journey, till you arrive at the Celestial Canaan.

Fifthly, Reflect not only upon the easiness of your means, but also upon the
certainty and comfort of obtaining your end of Holiness here, and Happiness
hereafter by them. How are you able to spend your spirits upon Notions that
have no other foundation than depraved Reason, and little other design than
Self-Applause, and the Character of Learned, or Leader of such a Party? Let it
be the great Work of Ministers to preach those Truths whereby we may have
Communion with the Lord crucified here, and with him glorified hereafter; and
thereby the Souls of the people will be confirmed in the blessed hope.

God has given an account of his Truths to be believed and obeyed, yea, to be
tried; and the more strict and particular the Enquiry is, the more certain of
our Profession here, and of our Privilege hereafter. It is superficial
knowledge of Religion, that occasions uncertainty in our selves; but an inward
serious sense of its Power, will fortify us against all the fiery Darts of
Satan.

Be at certainty therefore of your Persuasion here; and as to your Inheritance
hereafter, I shall add this, Who that sincerely and with perseverance prayed
for the Spirit of Truth, that read and heard the Word with attention and
application, yet has remained in darkness and distracting doubts about eternal
things, God will make good his Promise, Those that seek him shall praise him
for the Revelation of his Goodness to them.

Sixthly, Let this be the Reflection of the Reader of these Papers; What Excuse
at Christ's Tribunal can I make, either for the ignorance of my mind as to the
Truth of Christianity, or the looseness of Conversation from God's Divine Rule,
after reading the great things in the Change of this Author's Soul; the few and
easy means that led him to it? Can you think any thing else, but as it
witnesses for God on earth, so it will witness against you above, and aggravate
your Sin and Punishment? Light came into the world; others comprehended it,
walked in it; the Light that truly might obtain the Inheritance of the Saints
in light; but you chose rather to walk in darkness. If you now think it not
worth your while to endeavor the means of obtaining such a Pearl of Price, as
the true knowledge of Christianity, and its Practice on earth, and perfect
Holiness and Happiness above, the reward of it, you may walk on under a Cloud
of Delusion, but you will find, that inward Darkness will bring you to outer
Darkness, in an everlasting Hell.

Seventhly, Let therefore your Meditations issue here; I will in the strength
of God begin the use of these Three Means, according to the Prescription of
this Witness for God; and I will try whether I find the same Experiences, or
others as mavelous, or more suited to my Case, it being possible for me to
use these three means, when hearing the Word, taking the Sacrament, and
communion with Saints are denied me, yea, easy and pleasant, to admix them in
all my business and pleasures.

To encourage which Resolution, I shall subjoin the following Directory as a
means of keeping up constant fellowship with God, and your selves; and as a
Bulwark against the Prophanity and Error of the Age.
LET me previously bring to your thoughts what has been already treated of, to
wit, three Methods of God's conducting his Children thorough this lower life,
The conduct of his revealed Will in the Scriptures, Of his divine Providence
without, And of his divine Spirit by his workings in the Soul; answerable to
which three Methods of condescending power and love, three Duties have been
proposed as means to be interested in this threefold divine blessing;
Observation of outward Providence, as a help to know and to believe in his
general and special Providence round the created and adopted sons of God;
serious Prayer as a help to know, to experience the certainty of the spiritual
operations of a divine spirit in the soul; Reading the Scripture with Pool's
Annotations, a help to know notionally God's Will, and experimentally to know
it as Truth made out in his way of Providence, and inward workings in the soul.
As necessary therefore to guide you to the right and continued use of these
three easy Duties interesting the soul in these three mavelous blessings for
which the Godhead will be admired, loved and praised in our eternal state, I
give you my own course thorough a day as what has kept my self in constant
heavenliness of frame, and afforded me the astonishing enjoyments of Grace, and
that with so great ease to lawful business and diversions. Your knowing my
hurrying affairs, and the enjoyments of Grace I have experiene'd and given
forth now to the world, would be sufficiently convincing how easy and how
comfortable (no ways detracting from diligence in business, or lawful
recreations) this blessed life of Religion is; and since I am not to be known,
I desire to impart the way I walk in for your imitation, and soon you will be
convinced of the reality and sweetness of inward Christianity, however the mere
profession thereof expose it to the Censure of others as burden, melancholy,
and the like.

The Day is to be divided in three parts; the Morning, the Course of the Day,
and the Evening: The Evening I appropriate principally to the exercise of that
Noble Faculty of the Soul, Even-Reflection; the two former parts principally to
Apprehension and Observation.

First therefore, After awaking, or in the time of dressing, observe the frame
of your Souls, whether serious, or not; whether it seems to be the bent of your
mind to think upon God and your Duties to him, or whether there wants a force
upon your soul thereto.

Secondly, After dressing, begin your Morning Duties with reading a Psalm or a
Chapter, by Pool's Annotations; observe the Words and Sentences thereof, that
impress your minds most, with serious advertency to them; observe the thoughts
that thence arise at the time; if tending to explain what formerly you were
ignorant of; if tending to establish you in what formerly you had the knowledge
of; if tending to make you resolve you will conform to it; or if tending to
comfort you, as having walked conform to it, and thereby discovering your self
in the reading such a Portion of Scripture.

Thirdly, Enter upon private Prayer with a serious Acknowledgment of God's
Favor in conducting you through the Night; and with a sincere Supplication to
him for his conduct through the Day, by his special Providence and Spirit; that
from the evidence of both thorough the Day, you may discover his special Favor
to your souls as a comfortable evening Cordial; and that by his supplies of
Grace throughout the day, you may be enabled to bring forth the blessed
Improvement of both, by the exercise of Trust in, and Love to the Godhead, for
life and salvation. Observe your frame of soul throughout this Prayer; observe
if it continue in the same degree of seriousness throughout the whole, or vary
according to the various Petitions put up: Observe and record the different
Frames and different Petitions.

Fourthly, Go forth thus prepared, to your lawful Business and Conversation.

In your Business through the day, observe,

First, The Passages of Providence that seem to bring Undertakings to your hand.

Secondly, Observe your own Endeavor in the use of Means. And

Thirdly, The Event of each Undertaking.

In your Conversation through the day, observe,

1. The Occasions of your Entrance into it, whether Idleness, Lust within,
Necessity, or Recreation.

2. The Frame of your Mind while in it, whether on your watch against the evils
thereof.

And 3. The Issue of it, whether freedom from, or commission of Sins.

But now in the evening of the day, Reflection according to the Observation and
Record of the day, is the Duty preceding your last Closet Prayer, and to be
recommended to your practice.

Perform it in the following Parts.

First, Reflect upon the frame of your Souls that you observed in the morning,
whether by the Duties of Reading and Prayer, it was not brought to a
seriousness, if observed to be unserious; or to a greater seriousness than the
degree of seriousness at first observed, yea perhaps to great Heavenliness.

The improvement whereof must needs be, that it is good to draw near to God in
the Duties he has prescribed, and a fixed resolution to walk therein, and
perhaps daily continuance may bring in daily additions of the Enjoyments of
Grace, and preserve the Christian in daily heavenliness of Soul, as Bulwark
against all the Temptations of the day, with Honor to God, and great inward
Peace.

Secondly, Reflect upon the passages of Providence round you through the day;
and,

First of all, compare them to the parts of the Scripture you read in the
morning, and to the Thoughts that then most impressed your Minds, to see whether
or not these passages of Divine Providence afford you some discovery of the
reality of that part of the Scripture thus observed, establishing your Faith in
it.

The improvement whereof must needs be a resolution to go on in the same Duty
of reading the Scripture in the morning before the entering upon the business of
the day, and perhaps there will arise to your sensible Experience, greater
knowledge of God's Word than ever yet has been observed by you in the enjoyment
of outward Instruction; yea, such establishment to its truth and reality, as
could not be brought forth by the strongest arguings of the most Learned, and
into which the strongest Dart of Erroneous Sophistry can never pierce; enabling
your Soul not only to see the Reality, but even Harmony of God's Word to his
Providence and Spirit.

Secondly, Compare the Providence of the Day, to your Morning-Duty of
Closet-Prayer, to the Petitions therein put up, and to the frame of Soul you
were then under, that you may discover what Passages of Providence seem to be
afforded you in return to Prayer, and what Frame your Soul was in, and what was
your Utterance in that Prayer, or part thereof, that was returned.

The improvement whereof must needs be a discovery of the Certainty of Access
to God by Prayer, and a Desire to be always in that Frame wherein you was, when
you prayed that Prayer that is so visibly returned. It will help you to see a
difference between one kind of Prayer and another; between a Prayer with our
own Spirit, and with the Spirit of Christ; between a Prayer with the Spirit of
Christ enabling to ask sincerely, and a Prayer with the Spirit of Christ,
giving the Soul the comfortable sense of it as such; and discovering the
Reality of a Divine Strength above our selves, both bringing the Providence of
the day to us, and bringing forth the improvement thereof in us, by a gradual
advancement of relyance upon, and love to the free Grace of God in Christ, by
whose satisfaction this once-seal'd Fountain is opened, and by whose Spirit its
Waters of Spiritual Life continually flow upon us, and in the use of Duties
applied to us.

Thirdly, Reflect upon your own way of managing Business and Conversation with
others; that so you may not only discover a special Providence round you, but
the actings of a Divine Spirit within you; and that by comparing,

First, Your Frame of Soul, to the Passages of Providence laying Undertakings
in your way, through the day; reflecting whether God was observed in bringing
them about, as a discovery of Divine Strength in you, carrying your observation
beyond the enjoyment, even to God himself.

Secondly, By comparing your Frame of Soul, to your method of using Means, and
managing Endeavors thus providentially laid in your way; not only whether God
was regarded therein, laying Providence in your way, or helping you to observe
him; but whether your concern run out chiefly upon doing Duty, neither
designing ill ends, nor endeavoring to bring about any purpose in the use of
ill means, but regarding Duty to him in all.

Thirdly, Compare your Frame of Soul to the Events of such Undertakings thus
providentially laid in your way, and thus faithfully managed by you; if they
are according to expectation, or better than expectation: Reflect whether
exercise of the Grace of Love and Faith were not and ought not to be brought
forth by such a Discovery, and a fixed resolution to keep on in the same lawful
use of means, with a trust to Divine Supply for Events; as full evidence of the
working of Christ's Spirit in your Soul, and of your being under his Spiritual
Conduct.

In Conversation with others,

1. Reflect upon your Entrance to it; whether its occasions were Necessity and
innocent Recreation; with a previous Address for Divine Conduct in it.

2. Reflect upon your Carriage in it, thus prepared; the Temptations you met
with therein, and the Strength you had to resist them; and that in answer to
your Ejaculatory Prayer.

3. Reflect upon the Issue; whether it was freedom from being overcome by its
Temptations, and that in return to ejaculated Thoughts for Divine Strength to
preserve you, before entrance in it, or at the time you were engaged with it.

The Improvement of which Reflections must needs be, A Resolution to enter no
Society, but when under the constraint of lawful Business, or Recreation; and
even then, with an eye to God in the use of Ejaculatory Prayer, either
aforehand, or while in Conversation, for Strength to resist Temptations that
may either endanger occasions to sin, or of losing a spiritual Frame.

Fourthly, Reflect upon the Failures of the Day, and what you have let pass
unobserved; what Failures in your Business and Conversation have appeared: If
the eye of God has been as much regarded as the eye of the World: If the
opportunity of Secresy has not clouded your fear of God: If you have kept your
Tongues with a Christian Bridle, from Lying in telling Stories to divert
Companions, or as Excuses for Faults: From Self-commendation, with an inward
design to disparage others: From censuring others, especially Christians, and
picking out somewhat in their life to make a discourse of to disparage their
Profession, rather than endeavor their amendment by acquainting themselves
therewith. And whatever in your Reflection you find has been amiss herein, let
particular acknowledgment be made, that with the Psalmist, you may thereby
escape the punishment of your particular Sins, and vow, not to repeat it, and
tho repeated by you, forbear not your Resolutions and Endeavors against it;
your unwilling breaches reflected upon, will bring you soon out of your selves
to a Redeemer, and to cry for his Spirit to apply strength to your Souls to
resist.

In reflection upon the passages of Providence through the day, and upon the
strength conveyed by a Divine Spirit to your Souls, evident not only by your
spiritual Frame in the Duties of the day, but in the Improvement of its
Providence, by eying God in bringing them about, by regarding his Will in the
use of Means, and trusting to him for Events, with a constant watch to
ejaculatory Prayer against the Temptations of Company; In reflection thereupon
arises a fair and comfortable discovery of your being under three blessed
Conducts, of God's Word, Providence, and Spirit, and is laid before you as your
last Evening-duty, (e're your head lies down upon your Pillow) a private
Prayer, blessing God for the discovery of his Love in his Word, Providence and
Spirit, blessing him particularly for each particular step therein, and begging
his further grace to be upheld in those means wherein he is pleased to discover
so much of himself in strength and comfort to the Soul, above what is
attainable by other helps or comforts in this life. Give therefore your selves
up to God for conduct thorough the night, that if your eyes should never open
more upon this earth, your Redeemer may find you laid at his Footstool as the
last performance of your life, and may raise you up to that glorious dignity of
being embraced into Abraham's bosom; a blessed issue to such comfortable
endeavors! And however tedious this Directory may seem in its reading, yet I
dare witness to this truth, that the person in the greatest hurries of outward
Affairs, has time enough for this easy work, it being easily to be intermixed in
the throng of Affairs; and the more Affairs are laid in your way, the greater
opportunity you have to observe God's Providence and his Spirit, and that built
upon his blessed Word, as a Mean of keeping up the sense of God's Love in your
Souls, and the sense of your love to him; that so Communion with God may be
your Life on earth, which will make you live comfortably, and dye triumphantly.

I can do no more but lay the way before you; and the Lord himself give you
strength to choose it, and to walk in it.

FINIS.

