Dr. Hammond's brief Resolution of that Grand Case of Conscience, (necessary
for these Times) concerning the Allegiance due to a Prince ejected by Force out
of his Kingdoms; and how far the Subjects may comply with a present Usurped
Power.
Question.
Does not Victory give a Right to the Conquercur?

And does it not thence follow, that he which is ejected out of his Kingdom, by
Force of a prevailing Party, has thereby lost his Right of Allegiance from his
former Subjects?

And is not then that Right devolved on the Conqueror, by the force of these
words of God, when he says, Dan. 4. 17. and 25. 32. That he rules in the
Kingdoms of Men, and gives it to whomsoever he will, and sets up over it
the basest of Men? And of Ecclus. 10. 8. because of Unrighteousness the Kingdom
is translated from one People to another?

And when he does so, are not all Members of such a Kingdom obliged (as the
Israelites in their Deportation to Babylon) to yield Obedience to the
Conqueror?

Answer.
This Objection consists of diverse Branches, and I shall answer it by degr^es.

1. That all Victory does not give a Right to the Conqueror, but only when
the War being founded on a just Cause, that just Cause has (...) with Victory.
And when that is, depends wholly on the truth of that Quetion, concerning the
Lawfulness of any War.

Now (...) there can never be just War on the Subjects part against their (...)
they want the Warrart of Supr^me Authority, without which (though the Cause
should be never so just, and the End never so good,) all the Blood that is
shed, is no better than Murder: Therefore though the Subjects in such a War
should prevail against their Sovereign, yet neither is he hereby divested of
his just Right, nor they invested therewith, because the War was wholly unjust
on their part, for want of Authority.

2. Therefore if that Party whose Cause is Unjust, shall yet prevail, and prove
successful, then in answer to the second Branch, I say, that there is no Right
acquired by this: For, it is a mistake to think that this is the meaning of Jus
Victoriae, the Right of Victory, which the Civil Lawyers speak of, as if God
had by this lottery testified his Judgment of the Right, and pronounced that
Just now, which was Unjust before; or that the present Force is always to be
looked on as the Higher Powers, and allowed the Obedience required by the
Apostle, as due to them, which is the mistaking of (...), Power, for (...),
Authority, and agrees with that speech of the Atheists, Wis. 2. Our strength is
the Law of Justice, and that which is feeble is found to be nothing worth. And
we know it is Gods ordinary dispensation now under the Gospel to permit Violence
to oppress the Godly, which sure is no Argument that those prosperous Ungodly,
have the sole Right to the Possessions of the World, or that the oppressed Godly
Man, shall no longer be thought to be oppressed, when the prosperous Oppressor,
is arrived at the height of his oppression.

3. The Question then being removed from the Title of Force, (which being
itself unjust, cannot confer Right on any,) It must next be considered, what
Dedition (that is, yielding or resigning up of one's Right) can do. That will
be of two sorts; either of the Prince, or the People; and again, either
Voluntary or Involuntary.

A Voluntary Dedition, or yielding up, of the rightful Possessor, if he be a
private Man, transfers a Right: But a Prince, being a public Person, and
having an obligation of Protection to his Subjects, cannot without some breach
of that Obligation, abdicate his Kingdom, nor consequently voluntarily yield up
his Power; or if he do, he cannot transfer the Right to any, (save to the
lawful Heir or Successor,) without the tacit or express Consent of the People
also.

But in case they consent also, then will his Right (in Kingdoms Elective) be
transferred by the joint yielding of the King and his Subjects. As for Kingdoms
hereditary, the Subjects Consent is not necessary; but the King's yielding up
of his Right alone, is sufficient to transfer the Right to the next Heir.
Neither can the joint Act both of King and People, transfer this Right, from
the next Heir, to any other. The King's yielding is an Absolution of the
Subjects from the Allegiance formerly due to him by them, and so makes it
lawful for them to yield the same to another; and when it is thus free and
lawful to them, the Intervention of their own Act also becomes Obligation on
them to submit to that Person so yielded to. And when this is done (in Kingdoms
Elective) and withal when no Heir is left to make Claim, or the Claim is
relinquished by the right Heir, (in Kingdoms hereditary,) then is the Kingdom
removed, (and given by God, who now rules not immediately among us, as he did
in the time of the Theocracy among the Jews, but is then said to remove a
Kingdom, when his Providence so disposes, that by the Laws, and Right among
Men, it is removed,) to another.

But till this be done, i. e. till He, or They, in whom the Right both of
present Possession, and future Claim by Inheritance, is truly vested, do
voluntarily yield up that Right, and when that is done, till they which by
their yielding, are freed from their former Bands, do now by their own Act
enter, into new, what Force soever there be, and how successful soever the
Force be, there is not thereby any such Victory completed, as shall be able to
confer Right on the Victor, nor remove it from him that has, and still
protests his Right, though as yet he be not strong enough to vindicate it.

4. But then in the next place, if there be a Dedition, or yielding up by the
King, and that Dedition involuntary; that is, such as nothing but the present
Success of the Force has inclined him to, then certainly does it not so divest
him of his Right, as that it shall be unlawful for him when he can, to make
Claim, and recover it again. As he that by a violent Invader is made to swear
to pay such a Sum of Money, it is acknowledged lawful for him to implead that
Thief, and recover from him, what in performance of that involuntary Oath he
has paid him.

In this case the difficulty is, What Condition those Subjects are lest in for
that time, betwixt the involuntary Dedition of the King, and his renewing of
his Claim; and the Solution must be, That a Proportion be observed between the
Act of the King, and the Subjects consequent Act: The Act of the King is but a
present Dedition, and does not oblige him never to make any farther Claim
again; and consequently this gives not any such Absolution to the Subjects, as
that they may do any thing which shall prejudice that After-Claim, or blemish
his Royalty, such as are taking new Oaths of Allegiance, Abjurations of him and
his Issue, Engagements to the Usurped Power, etc. All that it can do, is to
make it free for them to submit to such other things, of an inferior nature,
(which includes not any such blemishment of Rights of the lawful Prince,)
provided that they acknowledge not the lawfulness of the present usurped Power,
nor act as Ministers or Instruments thereof. This is the utmost that seems
possible to determine in this matter.

5. As for that Power which Tract of Time may be thought to have in this
business, that is not considerable, where the Claim is continued, (for that
argues the Dedition involuntary,) and much less, when there is no Dedition at
all; for there 'twas before supposed, that Force cannot conser Right.

6. And if by this stating of the Case it follow, that the Lot of the faithful
Subjects must be very unhappy at this time, and that great Disorder must
necessarily continue in such a broken Kingdom, as long as the Contention
between the violent Usurper and the just Owner thus remains undecided. I
answer: That this is often the Lot of the most pious Men under the Gospel, who
have their good things here mixed with Tribulations, and must content themselves
in the solaces of a good Concience, in performing those Duties which cost them
dearest, and expect their full payment of joys without hardships, to be paid
them in another World.

THE END.

