A SERMON Preached at St. Botolphs Aldersgate, At the FUNERAL OF ROBERT
HVNTINGTON Esquire Who DIED April 21. and was BURIED April 30. 1684.

BY TIMOTHY HALL, Rector of Alhallows Staining, London.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns at the lower
end of Cheapside near Mercers Chapel, 1684.

TO THE Worshipful, and my much valued Friends, Esquires, Sons, and Executors
of the Deceased.
ROBERT HVNTINGTON. JOHN FRIEND. THOMAS BRVMPSTED.
And to Mr. TIMOTHY DOD. And to their Worthy and Religious Consorts:
Mrs. ELIZABETH HVNTINGTON. Mrs. ANN FRIEND. Mrs. MARTHA BRVMSTED. Mrs.
ELIZABETH DOD.

FVnerals may well be styled (with Sacraments) Visible Sermons, because they
teach by the Eye, and outward Senses. The Dead speak aloud to the Living, and
as it were in a Glass, represent to them what their condition in the
circulation of a little time will be. Shortly, we shall be in the place of
Silence with them. When we see others fall before us, how easily and naturally
is it inferred, that our standing cannot be long after them. Yet how apt are we
to flatter our selves with the spinning out of our Thread of Life to a great
length! A man would wonder, that in the Wilderness, where so many Thousands
died, Moses should then pray, Lord, so teach us to number our days, that we may
apply our hearts unto wisdom, Psalm. 90.12. If they who had so many dying
Objects continually before them, needed to be stirred up to pray in this
manner, surely much more have we to whom such spectacles (though many) are more
infrequent. To Correct this folly and madness which possesses the hearts of
men while they live, Eccles. 9.3. Who turn away their Eyes from their
Sepulcher, and divert them with more pleasing prospects, I have ventured to
comply with your Requests in Publishing this Sermon. I am equally surprised,
That you should desire, and I permit so thin a Discourse to appear abroad. I
expect to be Censured for distributing a Trifle amongst so many of you. I take
you all jointly in the Dedication, because on this occasion to have addressed
to one, might have been interpreted a disregard to the rest; Besides, it being
Preached by your Order, and by the same influence being now made Public, I
engage you to be accountable with me for all the rude strokes in it. I know
your design was to keep up his Memory; but such an hasty Monument Erected to
it, cannot long preserve it; I had neither Art nor time to build one. The
Errand this Discourse comes on, is not to desire you to remember your Father;
It would be a rudeness to request that he might live in your thoughts; I am
sensible, you will do that without my being your Remembrancer; but I beg, That
nothing which was Exemplary in him, be Buried with him, and sealed up in his
Grave; That you would improve what was delivered at his Funeral to the best
Spiritual advantages, that you may live as strangers in this World, and persons
belonging to a better; That it may prove effectual to the furtherance and joy
of your Faith, shall be a considerable part of the hearty Prayers of

Yours to Serve you, TIMOTHY HALL.

Heb. II. 15. And deliver them who through fear of death were all their life
time subject to bondage.


THE Apostle, in the former part of this Chapter, having asserted the nature
and necessity of the Incarnation and Death of Christ; he now in my Text, and
the preceding Verse to it, acquaints us with the ends and uses of it.

All the Host of Heaven stood amazed at this great Mystery, expecting what
would be the issue of this great Trial. Men and Devils could not fathom the
depths of God's design in this dismal Tragedy. They verily concluded, That the
Captain of our Salvation would now be conquered, and that they should hear no
more of him, when once he was humbled to his Grave. Can he save others, who
cannot save himself? Can he bring life to others, by his own death? After this
Sarcastical manner the Heathens upbraided the Christians; and the Apostle tells
us, That this Death and Cross of our Lords, was a stumbling block to the Jews,
and folly to the Greeks, 1 Cor. 1.18, 23. And thus indeed it well might have
been, had not that All-wise God (who brings light out of darkness, and meat out
of the eater) by his unsearchable counsel and wisdom overruled this matter so,
that the Death of Christ, like to that of Sampson's, should issue and conclude
in the utter rout and overthrow of his, and our greatest Adversaries. Whilst
they bruised his heel, he brake their head. Thus by his wise disposal, he made
Suffering, to be Saving; Death Victorious, and the Stripes of his Son to be
Medicinal and Healing to us. One end was to destroy the power of Satan, to
break the head of that Serpent, stilling this enemy and self-avenger. Psalm.
8.2. Leading captivity captive, Psalm. 68.18. Binding the strong man, Matt. 12.
And dividing the spoil with him, Isa. 53. Thus this great destroyer was quelled
and conquered, and at the Sign of the Cross thus used (by faith in his death, I
mean) we may at any time put the Devil to flight, and cast out the Prince of
this World.

The other end is mentioned in my Text, to deliver them who through fear of
Death, etc. Which words acquaint us with a double subjection of the Servants,
or Children of God, (as they are called in the foregoing Verse.)

1. A subjection to Death. 2. A subjection to Bondage upon account of Death.
From whence I gather these Propositions.
Prop. 1. God's own Children, those for whom Christ dyed, may be brought, and
kept under the fear of Death.

Prop. 2. The fear of Death is a state of Bondage.

Prop. 3. The only deliverance from this fear, is by the Death of Christ.

I shall make the first, the subject matter of my Discourse at this time; and
in treating on that, shall comprehend the other.

God's own Children, those for whom Christ died, may be brought under, nay,
kept under the fear of death; and this fear may be so great and pressing, that
it may be a heavy burden; it may gall them much, and deeply affect their Souls
to their great disquietment; so that they may have many uneasy hours, and
doleful complaints; it may bring them into an Estate of Slavery and Bondage:
And this trouble may not only be heavy and great for its nature, but long, and
continued for its duration; it may run Parallel with the longest date of their
time, and not come only by way of Paroxism and Fit, but hold them all their
life long. So that in the best, the fear of Death is not wholly destroyed and
removed. Grace does not extinguish Nature; and the Christian does not cease to
be Man. There is a double fear of Death.

1. Natural, and inseparable from our present condition. There is implanted in
Man a desire of Self-preservation; and this is Natures aversation to its own
dissolution. This is an innocent and guiltless infirmity, and no more culpable,
than weariness, sickness, and many other natural imbecillities, inseperably
annexed to the condition of Mortality.

2. There is a sinful fear of Death, a fear of Death more than as it is
natural, viz. as it is Poenal, and an issue of the Curse; as it brings Men
under the Devils power, and may prove a dreadful inlet and passage to
Everlasting Burnings.

Now the Children, (viz. of God, and of the Promise) in some measure have
conquered this last sort of fear; but it is impossible for them, while they are
clothed with this frail and tattered Humanity, wholly to rid and divest
themselves of the former. Death is the King of Terrors, and therefore may
command dread and fear even in the best. Plentiful are instances of this kind,
and they easily occur to us. Thus Jacob feared to die by the hand of his
Brother Esau, and studied how to meet him in Peace, and prayed to God to stay
his Hand, and turn his Heart. The Man after God's own heart cries, the sorrows
of death compassed him, Psalm. 116.3. And tells us, how his soul came to be full
of trouble, Psalm. 88.3. because his life drew nigh to the grave, and he was
counted with them that go down to the pit. How industrious he was, to save his
Life, will appear from his Counter-plots to save himself when Saul pursued him.
Good Hezekiah could not receive a summons to the Grave with dry Eyes; the
Message made him chatter like a Crane, and mourn as a Dove, Isa. 38.3, 14. Good
old. Hilarion was frequently chiding of his Soul with an Egredere O Anima, for
being so loath to leave a crazy body, in which it had been a Tenant upwards of
Fourscore Years: Nay, our blessed Redeemer himself, in whom there was no Sin to
imbitter his dissolution to him, yet we find him greatly affected at the
approach of his departure hence; his soul was heavy unto death. He entered not
the Lists with that last Enemy without a heavy Spirit: Father, if it be
possible, let this cup pass from me.

It was the saying of Reverend Mr. Greenham, (page 15. of his Works) I like as
well of them that measurably fear death, as of them who joy at it: In another
place he tells us, He never dared desire to dye, however his continual Crosses
did afford him small desire to live.

It is true, we sometimes meet with Christian Heroes of St. Paul's temper,
whose song ever since he had been in the Third Heavens, was to return thither
again; who are so much exalted above the fear of Death, that they court, and
crave it, and make it the most desirable of desirables, Phil. 1 23. They never
sing a loath to depart, but cheerfully chaunt out with old Simeon their nunc
Dimittis, Luke 2.29. Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace. With
Elijah, they are satisfied, and full enough of days, and crave no further time,
1 Kings 19.4. Nay, so fervent and earnest was the desire of the Primitive
Christians after Immortal Glory, that they groaned earnestly, desiring to be
clothed upon with their House from Heaven, 2 Cor. 5.2. They seemed not only
to be contented, but rejoiced with their departure; and in the mean time, they
did rather accept of Life, than affect it, and endured it, more than desired
it. Great is the number of Christian Pilgrims, who (in St. Bernards Phrase)
desire Repatriasse, to return home, and loose from the shore of Life, and to
Launch out into the Ocean of Immortality, looking for that blessed Hope, and
the glorious Epiphany of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, Titus
2.13. At the news and tidings of their Lords approach, their Faith Eccho's back
their hearty Amen, Even so come Lord Jesus. But here we must take notice, that
our desires may be looked upon in a double capacity, either as natural and
connate, or rational and elicite, according to the Principles of Reason and
Grace. A man that has a gangrened Member has a natural desire to keep it in
the Body, but his Rational desire makes him willing to part with it. Thus our
Savior told the Apostle Peter, He should be bound, and carried whither he
would not, John 21.18. To be girded and pinioned, he would not, according to
his Natural will; but according to his Renewed and Sanctified will, he was
ready joyfully to go to the place of Martyrdom.

Thus my Spirit may cry, Come Lord Jesus, Come quickly; when the Flesh may say,
Master, save thy self, and pray that the cup may pass from it.

On the other hand, They who have the greatest reason to dread it, may
sometimes defy it; and knowing not what it is to dye, brutishly seem to slight
it. Thus in these low running dregs of time, an Atheistical crew of Men living
in Brutish Ignorance, fall blindfold into their Pit and Grave; they shut their
Eyes, and are never awakened, till those Infernal Flames flair about them, and
lend them Light to read their folly. They are not out of danger, but only
without the knowledge of it: Their hardiness proceeds not from the knowledge of
their good Estate, but their ignorance of their bad one, like Passengers that
are asleep in a Ship that is sinking: They Revel, and Hector on the very Pits
brink, and their joy is like to that of those who are stung with the Tarantula,
which is not the Effect of Mirth, but Madness; and though they have no bands in
their Death, yet Death has dominion, over them.

Pleasant Company, Wine, Feasting, Music, divert their thoughts from that
formidable prospect of their End, couzening themselves as far as they can, with
that vain Opinion, That the way to escape the sting of death, is not to think
of it.

It is Risus Sardonicus, a deadly joy; The end of their mirth is heaviness,
Prove. 14.13. Like those silly Fishes, which swim down the sweet stream of
Jordan, into the dead Sea, where they perish.

Some indeed there are which please themselves with vain hopes of deliverance,
and flatter themselves with ungrounded presumptions, that they shall escape the
bitterness of Death. Oh the foolish, and helpless shifts that besotted sinners
cling to! How many perish at the very horns of the Altar? What ungrounded hopes
have they from their own Fictions? How sadly do they abuse the best Doctrines;
and suck Poison from the extent of God's Mercies, and Christ's Merits! They
suffer their own innate Light to be Extinguished, and resist all means of
Conviction from that which is Revealed. Thus you see, that the Proposition is
irrefragable, notwithstanding we Read some good Men have desired it, and some
bad Men have not dreaded it.

In further prosecution of this Truth,

1. I shall lay down some Propositions that tend to the clearing and confirming
of it. 2. I shall inquire into the grounds and causes of this fear of Death. 3.
By way of Application, I shall lay down some Directions as proper remedies and
cures of this fear.
1. Propositions tending to the illustration and further defense of this Truth.

1. Prop. Man in his first Creation was not made Mortal or Corruptible. Adam
fell into a dying condition in the day that he Rebelled against the Crown and
Dignity of Heaven. I know the Question is much controverted, Whether Adam were
made Immortal, or no? This were to make Death necessary before Sin; which the
Apostle contradicts, when he writes Romans 5. That by one man's sin death came
into the World: and Romans 6.23. The wages of sin is death. Death is the fruit
and effect of our Disobedience, and passes upon all, inasmuch as all have
sinned, Romans 5.12.

2. Prop. All men are now subject unto death, as it is poenal. The first
Sentence reaches all Mankind, Genesis 2.17. Most men look on Death as the common
lot and condition of Mankind, resulting from their frail condition, and the
jarring and warring Principles of their composition, which for want of poise
destroy one another. They think it belongs only to our Natural, and not at all
to our Moral Capacity; reckoning it to be the consequent of their Being, and
not the demerit and punishment of our Guilt. It is very true, though the
principles of our Nature are subject to Dissolution, yet if we had not declined
from the Law of our Creation, we had not inclined to the Grave or Corruption,
but God had made our Life commensurate with our Holiness, and prolonged our
Time with our Obedience. But alas! Death now is not more Natural, than it is
Poenal. All Mankind is Condemned as soon as Born. Life is a Reprieve, and short
suspension of the execution of that Sentence, which in the day of Adam's
Transgression was pronounced on him, and his descendants: And oh miserable we!
if we improve not this small scantling of time to sue out our Pardon, and make
our peace with this incensed Judge of Heaven and Earth; who though he be a
Serene, yet withal is a dreadful Majesty; and will infallibly Execute the
severity of the Sentence on every Offender, who does not timely accept and
comply with those Terms and Articles of Peace, which in the Preaching of his
Gospel are tendered to them.

3. Prop. Fear and Bondage are inseparable attendants on such a sinful and
poenal state. It cannot be avoided, but that the expectation of Death in such a
condition must be very troublesome. This is a strait Yoke, and will pinch the
Necks of all the Sons and Daughters of Adam, though some wear it more easily
than others. This will perplex our minds, raise storms within, and sink us
frequently into deep despondencies; for we know not how to cast it off, in vain
are all attempts to slip the Neck out of this Collar; we are unable to deliver
ourselves, no man can free his own Soul. We are in God's Chain, and it is
impossible to break it, all our strivings will contribute nothing to its
Removal, but only gall and torment us more.

4. Prop. Whatsover bitterness and gall there is in Death, it is from Sin, that
makes it more terrible than otherwise it would be. 1 Cor. 15.56. The sting of
Death is sin. So many Sins as thou committest, so many stings thou put into
thy Death, to render it more dreadful to thee. Could a man dye, and have no Sin
laid to his Charge, though there might be some pain, yet there could not be
Terror in his departure out of this World.

Well may Death be called the Terrible of Terribles, when there is not only an
apprehension of the dissolution and divorce between the Soul and Body, but
there interposes and starts up the guilt of many Sins, which confront the
Sinner, and stare him in the face; nay, those sins that had a gaudy and
tempting dress, will then be stripped of all their feigned Beauties, and appear
in all their dreadful Circumstances, agitating and terrifying the Consciences
of men, with the expectation and dread of future Evils. When the Sinner dare
not die, yet cannot live, what Convulsions must there needs be in his Breast,
which must terrify him like the cracks of a falling House. What a calm and
well-natured Death might a man have, (far beyond that Euthanasia which Augustus
wished for himself) if Sin and Hell, and approaching Judgment, and a gnawing
Worm within, did not drive him into Agonies and Despair. Alas! when nothing is
in view to him but these things, and the conclusion of the whole matter will
with him be nothing short of hideous Darkness, and a tormenting Fire, having
Heat but no Light, gnashing of Teeth, late Remorse, incurable Wounds,
Self-hatred, and all imaginable distresses, even to be hated of God, and to
hate him for ever, He must needs turn away his Face in the anguish of his Soul
from beholding such distracting Objects. These things our Sins procure for us,
and fill our Souls with all the anticipations of Hell.

5. Prop. The Death of Christ applied by Faith, is the only Sovereign Remedy
to deliver us out of this estate of Fear and Slavery.

Our Heavenly Elisha has cast Salt into those bitter Waters, and so healed
them. Death to a Believer is a Serpent without a sting. He has fortified us
against these Fears two ways.

1. By giving us the example of his Dying. His tasting of Death before hand,
keeps it from being a Cup of Trembling, and wonderfully will this animate our
Spirits under all dejections, That our Lord walked in this dark Valley before
us.

2. By affording us the merit and efficacy of his Death; This is very operative
to this purpose, to consider, That our Redeemer, and the Captain of our
Salvation, undertook our Deliverance by his own Death: so that now there is no
Condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1. For being justified
by Faith in the Death of Christ, they have peace with God, and in themselves,
Romans 5.1.

Thus has Christ changed the nature of Death, that it should be more desirable,
than dreadful to a good Man, being like Joseph's Chariot sent for dying Jacob,
to carry us to the place of our hope and desire. This made the Apostle ring
that sharp and shrill Note, in the ears of Death, and send that bold and brave
Challenge to the last eneny; 1 Cor. 15.55. O death, where is thy sting? O
grave, where is thy victory? Death is swallowed up in Victory. It is not now so
much an Outlet of Temporal, as an Inlet of Eternal Life. Well might the Apostle
write insultingly, as a man offering Sacrifice for Victory, and singing a
Triumphant Song, while his Feet stood on the Neck of his Enemy. We know now to
whom to have Recourse, when our Spirits droop at the apprehension of our
Decease; not to Saints, or Angels, not to the Blessed Virgin her self; but to
her Son, who is the Lord of Life: that Brazen Serpent we are to look upon, when
that Fiery one of Death puts out his Sting; and we are sufficiently Antidoted
against all the Poison that is spit at us.

Thus we see the Children, though they cannot escape the stroke, yet they are
freed from the sting of Death; they can play upon the hole of this Aspe without
danger, and welcome the grimmest approach of this Destroyer with a smile,
being freed from the Venom of this Serpent, by him who is, the Captain of the
Lords Hosts; who has abolished Death, and brought Life and Immortality to
light. He has by his own Death, made Death to them, not only tolerable and
easy, but desirable and gladsome. Indeed, none dared cope with this King of
Terrors, but our Blessed Lord; and he by dying, went into the Den of this
Dragon, Fought it, and Conquered it in its own Territories and Dominions.

6. Prop. Notwithstanding all that Christ has done to reconcile us to a view
and prospect of our Dissolution; yet so deep is the love of Life, and fear of
Death implanted in us all, that Nature cannot but tremble at the approaches of
it. Though this Serpent is bereaved of his Sting, and the Nature of it changed
to every holy man; yet its hissing affects us at sometimes with a cold sweat
and shivering, some regrets and aversation from it. The heart of that man who
is most heavenly, and covetous of entering the promised new Canaan, who breathes
after that happy Country, the Jerusalem above, is now and then startled at his
passage thorough the howling Desert which leads thither; he would be clothed
with Immortality, and yet unwilling to put off the Garment of this Body. We
would be blessed and happy, but wish it might be some other way than by dying.
Loath wear to be absent from the Lord, and yet desirous to be present here; we
may desire to be with the Lord, and yet at sometimes very loath to depart: it
is often the case of many a Child of God, that he very willingly would be at
his journeys end, and yet at the same time dreads the going the way of all
flesh, which leads to it: thus, like little Children, we are covetous of being
clothed with a new Garment, and yet may be so pained and pinched in the
putting of it on, that it may force a Tear or two to distill from our Eyes, in
the exchange of our Suit of Flesh, for the Robes of Glory.

7. Prop. This natural fear of Death frequently sinks and degenerates into a
very vicious and sinful one. It is difficult in this matter, so to fear, as not
to over-fear. Our Passions of this nature, are often subject, either to mistake
their Object by fearing what we need not, or else to exceed their bounds by
fearing more than we need, or ought. Hence it often comes to pass, That this
dread of Death has proved a great snare to the best Men. What mean and unmanly
shifts, what poor tricks and artifices, what unfriendly ways and methods have
many used, (even to the spilling of others Blood) to save their own? They have
sullied their Names and Reputations, wounded their own Spirits, and grieved
those of their Friends, and all to eke out an Inch of Life. Abraham though
dignified with that Illustrious Title, of the Father of the faithful; yet so
unbelieving was he of God's Providence over him, that he betakes himself to
sinful Equivocations, (those Cousin-germains to a Lie) to save his Life. While
we use any indirect means to prolong our days, it plainly Reproaches us to our
faces, that we fear men more than God, and Death more than Hell and Damnation;
which is very absurd and foolish, to fear the less, and not the greater evil;
to be afraid to dye, but not to be Damned. Great reason therefore there is, to
watch over this Natural Fear, lest it prove immoderate, and betray us into the
hands of many foul Temptations, as it did Abraham, Isaac, and Peter. Our
Savior gives us praemonitions about it, when he instructs us not to be afraid
of men who can kill the body, and after that have no more that they can do: but
I will forewarn you whom you shall fear, etc. Luke 12.4, 5. One fear, (like
fire) drives out another. If the fear of God more prevailed in our hearts, it
would wonderfully qualify and moderate all the powers of our Souls, that there
would not be such prevailing excesses and disorders in them. Our care therefore
must be, that our Natural Fear be compatible with that which is gracious; and
that we never dread any thing further than it is consistent with the fear of
God.

8. Prop. This Natural fear of Death being kept within due bounds, may very
much be improved to our advantage.

1. It will help us to be more patient underder all poenal evils. So Sentence
of Death be not executed, Stripes and Imprisonment, Fines and Banishment are
more easily under-gone. Skin for skin, and all that a man has he will give for
his life, Job 2.4. A living man will not complain, Lam. 3.39. Thou art alive
man, that one word encircles many Blessings, and I pronounce an hundred Good
things in that comprehensive Monosyllable. Of all other evils we say, They are
not so bad as Death, and therefore they may, and must be bore.

2. It will make us more watchful against all sinful evils. God has in his Law
appointed Death, as a punishment for many Offenses, that it might be a curb and
bridle in our Mouths to restrain us from the Commission of those Sins; and when
men throw this aside, what wickedness is there which they will not attempt?

Eve was emboldned to sin by the Devils telling her, she shall not die. Men
will not commit that wickedness which they know is not only against God, but
against their own lives also.

3. It will weaken our pride.

It will render us more low and vile in our own Eyes. This will much abate our
Pride, and keep us humble. Put them in fear, O God, (viz. of Death) that they
may know themselves to be but men, Psalm. 9.20.

4. It will strengthen our Faith. We received, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 1.9,
10. the sentence of death in our selves, that we should not trust in our
selves, but in God which raises the Dead. While a man looks to sense, and is
upheld by sensible Comforts, there is not that exercise for Faith, which
otherwise there would be; for the exercise therefore, and strengthening of his
Grace so acceptable to God, and advantageous to us, God exposes his Children to
this fear of Death, that when all other helps and supports are removed, they
may fly to him for Refuge. The Bohemians when they lost their famous Captain
Zisca, styled themselves Orphans: She that is a widow indeed, and desolate,
trusts in God, 1 Timothy 5.5. Whereas, while she had an Husband and Children,
she trusted overmuch in them. The Hemorrhoisse made not her Applications to
our Lord, till all her stock was spent. A poor and afflicted people will trust
in the name of the Lord, Zeph. 3.12.

5. It will quicken our preparations for death. God therefore wills it, That we
should have, not only some thoughts, but also some fears of Death; that we may
improve the day of Grace, and be working while it is called to day. Fear is an
Affection which quickens to Action; Noah being moved with fear, prepared an
Ark, Heb. 11.7. They that fear not Death, grow desperate, their Language is,
Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we die; but they that are armed with this
well-guided and bounded fear, infer much more wisely, saying, Let us pray,
read, hear, repent, believe, obey, for to morrow we die. Thus you see great
advantages may be made of this Natural infirmity, and we may learn how to turn
our Water into Wine; to make those thoughts of Death, which at some times lie
very cold at our Stomachs, to become very cordial and reviving against all
sinful and immoderate dread of it. Grace, though it do not extinguish, yet it
corrects and regulates Nature; and by the ways above mentioned, mortifies this
fear, that it prove not a Temptation to Sin. Stoicism has attempted to do
this; but Christianity only can, and has effected it; In the School of Christ
is best taught the right Cure of all our amazing and distracting fears.

2. I come now to inquire into the grounds and causes of this fear. As before I
distinguished this fear it self, so now I shall the causes of it, into Natural,
and Sinful.

1. Natural Causes. Death on this account is dreadful, because it is a future,
unavoidable evil to Nature. As a future possible good is the object of hope, so
a future possible evil is the object of fear; and much more it is to be
dreaded, when it is a certain futurity, as death is, which no ways can be
declined. Nature looks upon Death as its Enemy, whose design is to divorce and
separate Soul and Body, two ancient Comerades, no wonder therefore that it shun
it, when it knows it shall one day fall by the hand of it. Memorable is the
passage of that Martyr to the Executioner, driving the Staple into the Stake;
Pray friend knock it in fast, for Nature will be working.

And that this fear is greater in some, than others, from the very constitution
and temperament of the Body, is every days observation. Our very natural
Complexion renders us either more bold, or fearful. This is a natural Passion,
which though it may be Corrected and Sanctified, yet it cannot be totally
Conquered, for Religion changes not the temperament of the Body. Good men who
are of this fearful temper, and melancholy disposition, and experience the
tyranny of this Natural Passion, have need to pray for the Sanctification of
it. I never thought Religion did depend upon the temper of the Body, but I am
sure the acting and exerting of it very much does. But these fears, so far as
they are Natural, they are Lawful; for they are not Transgressions of any
precept, and though they may be reckoned amongst our infelicities and
weaknesses, yet they come not into the number of our Sins and Crimes.

2. There are sinful grounds of this fear of Death; these chiefly are to be
regarded, and they are very many; some I shall name, and can do little more
than in the gross produce them, leaving you to enlarge on them, and I am sure
any man of thoughts may be very Copious on this Subject; his own inward sense
of things strongly will attest all to him. This sinful fear proceeds,

1. From the want of a holy fear, the fear of the Great God. As the fear of him
is the less, the fear of God in our Lives, is the ready way to cast us into a
slavish fear of Death. It was one of the Judgments Threatened, Deuteronomy. 28.58, 65,
66. If thou will not observe to do all the words of this law that are written
in this book, that thou may fear this glorious and fearful name, THE LORD
THY GOD; Then neither shall the sole of thy foot have rest, but the Lord shall
give thee a trembling heart, and failing of eyes, and sorrow of mind; and thy
life shall hang in doubt before thee, and thou shall fear day and night, and
shall have no assurance of thy life.

2. From the want of faith in the death of Christ springs this fear of our own
death. Even the children, holy and religious persons, who live soberly,
righteously, and godly, are sometimes beset with these uncomfortable
apprehensions of Death; being now and then plagued with the remainders of an
unbelieving heart, as if still Death were not subdued, as if Death had
conquered Christ, and not Christ Death: The Disciples were terrified and
frighted, and unbelieving thoughts did arise in their hearts, Luke 24.37, 38.
Fools, our Lord calls them, and slow of heart to believe, ver. 25. We trusted
that it had been he which would have redeemed Israel, v. 21. Here their Faith
flag'd, and hanged, the wing extremely; their Buckler was much battered, and
stood in need of beating out again. Weakness of Faith gives strength to our
Fears, and does both greaten and multiply them upon us. Faith is not without
its Conflict with sadness of Spirit, and carnal fears; Amalek sometimes is too
hard for Israel, and the House, of Saul frequently prevails over the House of
David.

3. This Fear proceeds from want of serious meditation on Death, and due
preparation for it.

Our negligence and sloth in not finishing that Work which God has put into
our hands to do, way well make us loath to come to an account with our Lord.
Bad Stewards are afraid of a Reckoning; and Death coming thus suddenly, puts
all into Confusion: Suddenness and fear are joined together, Prove. 3.25.
Suddenness of Destruction is the description of a doleful and fearful Estate.
When men have laid in no Antidotes and Cordials against Death, then, like
Nabal, their Hearts die before they do. This was David's Case, Psalm. 39. ult. O
spare me. Stay a little, that I may get strength to combat with this Adversary.
The best are too backward in their preparations for this Encounter with this
grim and ghastly Enemy, and therefore are not without their fears; But oh! who
can express that great fearfulness which needs must surprise Unregenerate men,
who are clapping many Stings into their Deaths by their repeated and continued
Sins; they take pains to make their End uneasy, and with their Vices dress up
Death in a terrible Vizard to affright them. What ease can they live at, whose
Souls this Night may be turned out of their soft Beds where now they lie
securely snorting, into a Bed of Flames? one would think, these Men should eat
their Bread with trembling, and the thoughts of their danger should keep them
waking. There is no wonder, that a sinful Cause should produce a sinful Effect;
and that Men's Terrors should be increased with their Offenses. Every wicked man
must look Death in the face, with pale cheeks. It was a Copy of Julians
countenance, but not of his dying one, when he said, Vitam repescenti naturae
tanquam debtor bonae fidei redditurus exulto. What Solomon speaks of Profane
men's merry living, That even in laughing their heart is sorrowful, Prove. 14.13.
is very applicable to their Dying condition, their heart gives their mouth the
Lie.

Indeed, sometimes like furious Gamesters, they throw up their Cards, not out
of any dislike of gaming, but of their Games; they are rather discontented with
Life, than contented with Death; but yet such reassume their Play, and go on
afresh; and so do these Passionate Fools upon second thoughts, eat their words,
and unwish their wishes. Such are like to Gaal in his drink, Judge. 9.27. He
cursed Abimileeh when he was at a great distance; speaks very contemptibly of
him, brags how he would use him, if he had him in his Clutches, ver. 29. But
upon Abimelechs appearance, his courage was cooled, his heart sunk into his
heels, for he fled before him, ver. 40. Men's sins will one time or other sink
their spirits, and make their Death dreadful; and that upon account,

1. Of the guilt that is in sin. To apprehend sin unpardoned, amazes and
confounds, and therefore God's Arrest by Death, must make the knees smite, and
strike one against another, Belshazzar like, who could not hold his joints
still.

2. Of the filth in sin. The defilement of it is so great, that it makes the
sinner startle. Such squalid and nasty sights, must needs occasion the turning
away of our Eyes. Who can look upon them, and live? The Sinner often sinks and
drops at the view of his Lusts; they have a killing Aspect.

4. Excessive love of Life, and of this World, begets immoderate fear of Death.
When Men's hearts are so closely united to Creature Comforts, they cannot be
torn from them without much violence and pain. What we over love in the
Enjoyment, we over-fear in the Apprehensions of its loss. A Child that has
tasted much of the Breast, cannot be pulled from it without much crying: Things
glued together, are seldom parted, without tearing or breaking. If thy Portion
is only in this Life, thou art utterly undone when it is ended, and who can
blame a man for fearing the loss of his All?

It is a Canonical Truth, though in the Apocryphal Writings, O death, how
bitter is the remembrance of thee to a man that lives at rest in his
possessions! Eccles. 40.1. How sad a sight is a Hand writing on the Wall to a
Belshazzar in his Cups? To a rich man dreaming of his goods laid up for many
years, how sad and confounding must that voice be, Thou fool, this night thy
soul shall be required of thee? Luke 12.20. It was a wise and Christian Speech
of Charles the Fifth, to the Duke of Venice, who Hezekiah-like, showed him the
Glories of his Throne and Palace, his great Wealth and Riches; Haec sunt quae
faciunt invitos mori, These are the things that make us loath to Dye.

5. This fear is frequently occasioned by too much carelessness about our
worldly Affairs; I mean, the neglect of a provident, timely setting our House
in order, and adjourning this necessary and hard Work to the dregs of our Age.
That which should be the living Man's care, is too often the dying Man's task:
The ending of our Accounts with Men, and the beginning of our Accounts with
God, are both of them generally put off to the inconvenient season of a
Deathbed! To reckon with God and Man at once, is too hard a Province for a
sick and languishing sinner. Many more Grounds might be assigned, I shall add
but one more.

6. The breach of former sickbed Vows and Resolutions, when we were in fear of
Death, renders men more fearful when once they come in sight of it.

The Answer is not amiss which Theodoricus, Bishop of Coleine gave to the
Emperor Sigismund, upon his inquity, which way he might best get to Heaven: If
thou walk (said the Bishop) so as thou did promise under thy painful fit
of the Stone. Our Extremity commonly renders us holy, and our Pain is prodigal
of those Vows, which our ease is niggardly of performing. We daily see
desperation making those Votaries, who in their health were the loosest
Libertines. Were it essential to Health, thus to debauch us, it would make a
good man out of love with it. It were better to be always Sick, than for our
Health to maks us Irreligious. Let us pray to God to remedy this Sickness of
our Health and to bless us rather with sanctified afflictions, than curse us
with unsanctified prosperity.

I now am to speak to the third Particular, and that by way of Use and
Application.

3. To give some Prescriptions and Remedies, by way of Antidote and Defense
against the Fears of Death. It was one of the defects which the Learned
Verulam, (In his advancement of Learning,) found in our Physicians, that they
do not study those Rmedies, which might procure an Euthanasy, an easy passage
to their Patients (since they must needs dye) thorough the Gates of Death. Such
helps must be left (says Bishop Hall) to the care of the skilful Sages of
Nature, the use whereof must be with great caution; lest while they endeavor
to sweeten Death, they shorten Life. My work at present, is to prescribe
spiritual helps to an easy and comfortable departure out of the houling
Wilderness of this World, to make the Grave-bed soft, that we may lie down in
Peace there, and descend to those dark Chambers with as great desire, as a
weary Traveller lies down to Sleep. The neglect of looking to this while we
live, is the cause why Death comes on so many as a Snare, as amongst many
other, it did on Caesar Borgia (the wicked Son of a worse Father, viz. Pope
Alexander the sixth) who meeting Death in that Cup of Poison, which he had
prepared for others, cried out with great Consternation under this terrible
Surprise. Adversus omnia pericula me munivi praeter quam mortem: That he had
armed himself against all casualties, excepting Death, for of that he never
thought. Amazing and deplorable inconsideration! that men should find time to
think of all things, but those which do most nearly concern them! that Heaven
and Hell, Death and Judgment, should then only come into men's thoughts, when
they have nothing else to think of. How solicitous are we to fortify our
selves against external evils, timely engaging against Sickness and Poverty,
Banishment and Imprisonment, Cold and Hunger, Shame and Scandal, but laying
little or nothing up against the evil day? Death comes and seizes most with a
heavy hand, because so little is done to bear up against it. Take notice here
of the excellency of the Christian Doctrine, which affords beyond all other
Professions, the greatest relief in this way. Some Philosophers have essayed
upon comforts of this Nature; and Epicurus tells us, if a wise man were to burn
in Phalaris Bull, he might say, Dulcae est, and ad me nihil pertinet. But these
were empty brags, and founded on some principles, of which we may say, (as Job
to his Friends) Ye are miserable comforters; such as these,

1. Premeditation on it before it comes; others rejected this as much, because
it made a man miserable before he was so. Mere apprehensions of it to them
(whow wamed the Divine Oracles) signified little to lighten their burden.

2. Others supported themselves with the thoughts of necessity, and inevitable
fate, and many such like considerations. But alas, tho Philosophy has been
styled animi medicina; yet their Precepts in reference to comfort, have been
compared to the influence of the Moon, which does rather rotten, then ripen, in
respect of the Suns influence. They were ignorant of Christ the Prince of
Peace, of the holy Paraclete and Comforter, and unacquainted with the Life of
Faith. They knew not how with Ignatius, to invite the Cross and Fire, Breaking
on the Rack, Quartering of Members, and all the Torments that either Men or
Devils could invent. When the Emperor threatened St. Basil with Death, O that it
might come, was his ready and cheerful reply. When Eudoxa the Empress threatened
Chrysostom; he sent her word, Nihil praeter peccatum timeo: he feared Gods
wrath, (because of his Sins) but not at all her. These are the men that tread
on the Lion, the Asp, and the Adder. And that we may be enabled to do the like,
take these following Directions; these comforts and consolations of Gods own
Prescription in the Holy Scriptures, which as far exceed all Philosophical
Remedies, as the Sun does a Glowworm. I am constrained to be short in them,
and must leave it to you, to blow every blossom into a Flower.

1. Direct. Rectify your Apprehensions and Opinions of Death. Is not thy fear
of it grounded upon a mistake? Fears are apt to agravate evils. Mors nomen
tantum fidelibus. vitae via Bern. Omnibus finis, multis remedium, non nullis
votum.
Levis est dolor si nihil opinio adjecerit. We fright our selves with Images
and Idaeas of evils, and dress up Bug bears and Mormoes to Torment our selves
withal. Christ himself walking upon the Waters, was by the Disciples trembled
at as a dreadful Apparition. It may be thou look on Death, as some utter
Abolition and Extinction of thy Being. Remember it is but a departing, which
thou call a Death. See how God himself styles it to the Father of the
faithful, Genesis 15.15. Thou shall go thy fathers in peace. It is but a going
away, not a perishing; and not a going to woe and misery, but a comfortable
going to our Fathers. It is hence called, the way of all the earth, Josh.
23.14. Christ intimates his Death under this Notion; It is expedient for you
that I go away, John 16.7. Death is a journeying from one Region to another.
See in what familiar terms God conferred with Moses about his Death, Deuteronomy.
32.49, 50. Get thee up into this mountain, and die in the mount whither thou
go up, and be gathered unto thy people. Death it self is so embalmed and
clothed in the Holy Scriptures, that there is even a sweetness and beauty in
it: therefore called an uncloathing, a putting off the flesh. He that has wore
his Clothes long, till they are foul and nasty, will he not willingly strip
himself to put on a fresh Suit?

Children fear their nearest Relations, and best Friends, when they appear
under a disguise to them; but when their Vizard is taken off, they rejoice at
their presence.

To sweeten our departure to us, it is called a rest and sleep. Is there any
hurt in that? Would not a man tired out with a long days work, gladly go to
bed? Under these Notions we may bury all fearful thoughts of Death. Our friend
Lazarus sleeps; but I go that I may awake him out of sleep, John 11.11. What
more desirable and refreshing than a good nights rest? Sleep is the Nurse of
Nature, the sweet Parenthesis of all our Griefs and Cares. Cloathe thy Death
therefore in a Scripture dress, and this will help to allay the bitterness, and
beautify the deformity of it. Sleep is a short Death, and Death is but a long
Sleep. The Babylonians are threatened with death, under the name of a long
sleep, Jer. 51.57. They shall sleep a perpetual sleep, and not wake, says the
King whose name is the Lord of Hosts. It is a Judgment to be cast into a sleep
like death, but a Mercy that Death is like a sleep: Nay, death is not a
perpetual sleep: A good man when he has done his work, falls asleep, and awakes
in the great morning of the Resurrection to receive his wages.

Hence the Grave is called a Bed, Isa. 57.2. It is Gods Ark and Chest, wherein
he keeps the Bodies of his Saints, and he will open this Cabinet in the great
day of the Resurrection, and take his Jewels out; he will scowre and furbish
them up again, making their vile Bodies like unto the glorious body of Christ.

The Jews call the Grave, Beth Chaiim, i. e. The house of the living; and when
they return from the Burial of their Friends, they pluck up the grass, and cast
it into the Air, using those words of the Psalmist, Psalm. 72.16. They shall
flourish like the grass of the earth.

The Greeks call their Church yards, Dormitories, Sleeping places; and the
Germans (say some) call them God's-acre, because their Bodies are sown there,
to be raised again, Be not then daunted with the gloomy thoughts of a total
dissolution; no, it is but a little intermission, a disappearance for a while,
a short and sweet nap in their Beds, which are warmed and perfumed for them by
Christ's Body laid in the Grave, with whom also they look to Rise to Eternal
Life. And this leads me forward to the

2. Dir. Be established in that weighty and great Doctrine of the Resurrection.
Soul and Body, old Companions, part but for a while. Thou art not so sure to
arise in the Morning, when thou lie down at Night, as thou art to awake at
that day. 1 These. 4.14. For if we believe that Jesus died, and rose again, even
so them also which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him. What an Antidote is
this against the worst of Death? That Christ who did arise from the Dead, shall
come again, and bring all his with him in Glory? These Scripture Consolations
come home to the very heart, which the Philosophical ones did not, (being in
Tullies Phrase, Medicine morbo imbecilliores;) well therefore might the Apostle
call on them, to cheer up, and comfort one another with such words of truth,
ver. ult.

The Courage and Constancy of the Jewish Martyrs was such on this account, that
they would not accept of Deliverance in their Tortures, that they might obtain
a better Resurrection, Heb. 11.35. The Resurrection they knew would recruit,
and recompense them.

Lucian called the Christians miserable Caitiffs, for being stout to the Death,
in the belief of this Doctrine; on the same account, all wise and good people
must pronounce them of all men then most happy. Remember what God said to
Jacob, Genesis 46.3. Fear not to go down into Egypt: for ver. 4. I will go down
with thee, and I will also surely bring thee up again.

3. Dir. Remember Death is the common condition and lot of all mankind. Now
what reason have thou to be troubld when (as Joshua expresses it) thou go
the way of all the earth? If all Travel this Road, art thou so foolish, as to
think, there should be a by-path for thee to go alone? None can Redeem his
Brothers, no not his own Life, from Death. Monarchs, Emperors, Patriarchs,
Prophets, Apostles, have trod this Tract; nay, Christ himself: why then do
thou fear to follow such a glorious Company? Grudg if thou will, that thou art
a Man; grudg not that being a Man, thou must die. Where are the Fathers of old?
Do the Prophets live for ever? This is the Kings highway, and the Beggars
also. You tread no untrodden Tract; You are not the first set out this way, nor
will be the last. Thou do not break the Ice first.

4. Direct. Familiarize Death in thy thoughts. This familiarity with it, will
breed contempt of it. Men little think of Dying, therefore are the terrors of
Death so stinging. Plato persuading to the thoughts of Death, defined true
Philosophy to be a Meditation of Death Even Tigers and Lions, which at their
first sight affright, by frequent viewing abate their terror. Look it often in
the Face, and thou will sooner be reconciled to its hard Features, and grim
Countenance. Bid Death to thy Board, to thy Bed, to thy Closet, to thy Counting
house, and thy Shop, walk with him in thy Garden, as Joseph of Arimathea did.
Dye daily in your Thoughts and Meditations, and when you come to it actually,
you will die more delightfully. It is for want of these thoughts, that men's
Souls are chased out by Violence, rather than yielded up to God in Obedience.

5. Direct. Ponder on the happy advantage of your dissolution. This is a large
Cluster, and I cannot tarry to give it you Grape by Grape.

1. Death will give thee a freedom from all evil, Whether of Sin or Sorrow;
cure all your Diseases and Infirmities, dry up all your tears. When the stroke
is once struck, adieu then to the Temptaions of Satan, the rage of Persecutors,
distempers of Mind, deformities of Body, disgrace of Name, unfaithfulness of
Friends, undutifulness of Children, loss of Estate, and whatever else makes
life bitter. Did never cry out, who should deliver thee, with the Apostle?
Romans 7.24. and art troubled when a Liberate is sent? Art afraid to Land after
such Storms and Tempests? How many have desired Death, nay sinfullly destroyed
their Lives, to deliver themselves from Griefs, Fears, Wants and Pains? It Is
true, he Sins highly that goes away out of this World, before God calls him;
yet who would refuse to go, when once he is called?

2. It will put thee into possession of thine Inheritance. I desire to depart,
and to be with Christ. Who would tarry so long from his dear Lord, that might
have passage to him? When the Heathen Socrates was to dye for his Religion, he
was greatly comforted at his Death, with this, that he should go to the place
where he should meet Orphous, Homer, Hesiod, and many other Worthies of the
former Ages: Had he but known Christ, the order of Cherubim and Seraphim,
Angels, glorified Saints, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors,
our Fathers, Mothers, near Relations, and dear Friends, and the rest of the
glorious Heirarchy of Heaven, he would then doubtless have taken down his
deadly draught of Hemlock with greater relish and satisfaction.

The Proto-Martyr Stephen triumphed over Death, when he saw the Heavens opened,
and the Son of man standing on Gods right hand. Faith will help to the same
beatifical Vision and Prospect. It is pleasant to the eyes to behold the Sun;
but the Sun is as darkness, and altogether useless in that Kingdom of Glory,
Rev. 21.23. Rev. 22.3, 4, 5. If David in the Wilderness so impatiently thirsted
to appear before the living God in an earthly Jerusalem; how earnestly should
we long to see his glory in the heavenly one? Psalm. 42. The glimps of his back
parts was as much as Moses might behold, yet that put a shining glory on his
Face; what will it be then to see him face to face? The glimps of Christ in his
transfiguration ravished Three Apostles who beheld it: St. Paul's Vision, that
did wrap him up in the third Heavens, advanced him above the rest of mankind;
but the beatifical Vision of the Glory of the Great God, far excels all. This
leads me to the next particular.

6. Direct. Renew your familiarity with the blessed ones above. Remember that
great Army of God, (The souls of the just from Adam till now) are all got safe
thorough this dead Sea, and are triumphing in Heaven already, and that there
are but a few straglers in the end of the World left behind, and then which
part do you desire to be with? But especially remember that Jesus your head is
entered into the Heavens before you, and is preparing a place for you, not being
willing to be there without your company. He would have you there to behold his
Glory; and do not these considerations provoke you to covet to be united to
that heavenly Quire above, which incessantly Sing (not resting either day or
night) that melodious Anthem to him that sits on the Throne, and unto the Lamb
for ever and ever, of blessing and honor, and glory, and power, Rev. 5.13.
Many more things might be added by way of Direction, but I shall add but this
one more, tho the most considerable and important.

7. Direct. Act faith on the death of Christ: Here is the main prop and pillar
of comfort. Who would have dared to dye, had not our Lord dyed first? he has
taken away, the Sting of Death; what harm can there be in a stingless Snake? He
has cut the lock of Sin, where the strength of Death lay. Hosea 13.14. O
Death, I will be thy plagues; O grave, I will be thy destruction: Christ has
happily triumphed over it, both for himself and thee; his precious Blood has
altered its Complexion, and turned its pale Face into a beautiful Sanguine: Our
Redeemer having unstung it, we may safely put it into our Bosoms; It is an
Enemy indeed, but a Conquered and disarmed one. Do dread an Enemy Vanquished
to thy hand, and sprawling at thy feet? Has David killed this great and
formidable Goliath, and shall not trembling Israel recover their Spirits, and
up, and pursue the Philistines? Shall a Conquered Enemy disanimate the
Conquerors? Remember and revive, O Christian; The Captain of thy Salvation has
not only destroyed, but sanctified the Grave to thee, and perfumed the dust
thereof with his own body. What comfortable words are those, Because I live, ye
shall live also, John 14.19. The Grave that otherwise affords but a noysom
smell, smells sweet ever since the Rose of Sharon, and the Lily of the Valleys
lay in it. This dark hole is made lightsome, ever since that true Light, (for a
time Eclipsed) shone out of it. Thus our Sampson has found an honeycomb in the
Carcass of this Lion. Christ is the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, from whose
Death, as from a plentiful Breast, we may suck abundance of sweetness. His
Sepulcher is the most fragrant knot in Joseph's Garden: your thoughts cannot be
dyed into a richer Color than the meditation of Christ Crucified. As St. Paul
always did bare about in his Body, so do you in your Minds, the dying of the
Blessed Jesus: Assure your selves, the pale face of Death will look ruddy, when
you cast this blood of sprinkling on it.

This should arm the Heirs of Life, against the fear of Death. We read Cant.
3.7, 8. The valiant of Israel have their swords on their thighs because of fear
in the night. Night strikes men into fears; especially, the Night of Death; but
gird this Sword on thy Thigh, get a living Faith in thy Heart, and all the
fears of Death will not dead it.

This should teach us to give Praise and Thanks to our Lord and Master. How did
the Philistines rejoice, when they had got Sampson in their hands? Judge. 16.23,
24. Then the lords of the Philistines gathered them together, for to offer a
great sacrifice unto Dagon their god, and to rejoice: for they said, Our god
has delivered Sampson our enemy into our hand. And when the people saw him,
they praised their god: for they said, Our god has delivered into our hands
our enemy, and the destroyer of our country, which slew many of us.

What Lebanon is sufficient to burn? Or what Cattle on a Thousand Hills for a
Sacrifice? What Hecatombs of Praise and Service are due to our great God and
Savior? Who has delivered the Destroyer both of our Souls and Bodies into our
hands; and us out of his; who has slain, not only many of us, but either
has, or will make havoc of us all, heaps upon heaps, and that far more and
greater than ever Sampson did of the Philistines. Not unto us, O Lord, not unto
us, but to our most mighty and merciful God and Savior be all the praise and
glory given, who has translated us from under the power of sin and death, into
the kingdom of his dear Son.

HAving finished one Text, it may be expected I should speak on another, viz.
Our deceased Brother, who is the doleful occasion of this days solemnity I
acknowledge I have not been much used to Funeral Encomiasticks; and when I
consider that this kind of Work is not without much hazard, I do the more
unwillingly engage in it. Relations will think too little is spoke, others too
much. The task is hard, when on one hand I may be censured to give a faint and
mean Character, and on the other hand I may be thought to over do it, and be
Parasitical. I acknowledge it (and shall endeavor to avoid it) That it is too
common on these occasions to Saint all at their Death, who expressed little of
sanctity in their lives. It was said of Julian, Idoneus erat dicere Panegyricum
diabolo. He was fit to Canonize the Devil; and I have read that Bruno an
Italian did it. This should make us wary in Discourses of this Nature: But
where there is real worth, and deeds praiseworthy are to be found, to deny the
scattering a few flowers on the Hearse of such a Person, would be injustice
both to the living and the dead. There is a generation of men, whose eyes are
mostly fixed on the dark sides and blemishes of their Brethren, and choose to
represent them to be such always, as possibly they once might find them to be
in some particular circumstance of their lives. Concerning such, I shall say no
more, than that there are in the world such things to be found, as Envy, Pride,
Detraction, evil Surmising, Malice, and Rancour, which like smoke is always
driven upon the fairest Faces. I am not so partial as to believe our deceased
Brother to have lived without his Humanities and Frailties (let such who have
escaped them, throw Stones at him); yet God kept him from the immoralities and
gross pollutions of the times and places wherein he lived. Good and wise men
have generally determined, That it is more pardonable to praise a worthy
person, even beyond his merits, than to be always rakeing with the nail in the
sores of others, who may justly deserve our reproof and correction. They are
two equal guilts, to detract from an enemy; and to lavish and be prodigal in
the commendation of a Friend I hope there is no one here that scruples the
commending of the dead, tho our Age abounds with many of that humor, who
little scruple the calumniating both dead and living. I am in a straight
betwixt two, having much to object both against speaking, and being silent: yet
I must not deny our Brother the Justa defunctorum, the rights and dues of the
dead; I shall say but little, and that (as near as may be) within the compass
of my own Knowledge and Observation. Sorry I am, to be an Actor in this mournful
Scene; it might better become, and better be done by some other; but providence
has made it my task to perform this last Office of love.

We are met to solemnize the Funerals of ROBERT HVNTINGTON Esquire, a Gentleman as
generally beloved as known, who lived much desired, and dies much lamented. My
business is not to tell you, he descended from an ancient and worthy Family,
that is the work of the Herald, not of the Preacher, and those Escutcheons on
his Hearse sufficiently tell that; my task is to blazon a more noble Coat, and
to give you those good grounds of hope which we have of his new and better
Birth, which are these following.

He was not only a Frequent, but a Reverent hearer of Gods Word, not easily
detained from the public Ordinances, as we sadly observe in this profane Age
many are, who question the Gentility of that man, who goes to Church more than
once on Gods day, reckoning him the best bred, and most modish, who is for
three Meals a day in his own house, and either none, or but one at most in
Gods. O sad and deplorable Age we live in! that by how much the lesser any man
lives like a Christian, to be reckoned so much the better Gentleman! If this be
the Character of one well bred, and well born, I am sure our Brother must not
have it, for he with his, went to the Habitation of Gods Holiness, and the
place where Gods honor dwells.

He was an Honourer and Encourager of a Religious Ministry; I have often heard
him speak of such who were diligent and faithful in that sacred Office, with
great Testimony of respect and veneration, as well knowing the bringing their
Persons and Function into disrespect, was the ready way (already attempted by
the Debauchees of this Age) to bring their Doctrine into contempt. He valued
those most, who preached most to the Hearts and Consciences of a Sinner, and
never disliked a good Sermon because it did not keep time with the glass.

With much sense he expressed his dislike of seeing the Pulpit converted into a
Stage, wherein men vented their Heats and Singularities, and discovered more of
Spleen, Pride and Passion, than of being inspired with the Spirit of that Holy
Jesus, in whose Name they pretend to come, and whose mind they profess to
Reveal and Preach. He judged that Doctrine to be good, which tended to make men
so, and much abhorred gingling and quibbling, affected Cadencies of Words, and
all frothiness and levity of expression, conceited, fashionable, and
fantastical Phrases; he best like those Discourses which pressed most a holy
and strict life in these licentious and profane days, and Catholic and
Universal Charity in these distracted, and divided times; such which urged men
to be at peace with God, and one another. It was a good sign of a spiritual
Appetite, that he liked more the favouriness of the Meat, than the garnishing
of the Dish.

He was vir sine plicis, without foldings and twistings, a true hearted man to
his Friend, a stranger to that much studied Art of flattering and hating at the
same time.

In his Converse and Friendship, Cordial and Faithful, without baseness, or low
dissimulation.

I boldly affirm him a man free from revenge. I say not, but he had a sense of
personal injuries, and especially of those that reflected on his name;
principally, when they proceeded from those who had good names themselves. What
others said, he despised, but often wished he had been better understood by
some; and that he was not, he bore as his misfortune; yet would not requite
them with the like measure, but mentioned them with all due respect, being
always ready to oblige them, and to do them good. Tho he was a man naturally of
a great spirit and courage, of that personal valor, as if nothing but Steel
had gone to his composition, his eyes being shut against all impressions of
fear and terror; yet no man more gentle, or easy to be entreated, more
yielding or desirous of reconciliation, of which I could give very pregnant
instances.

I must not omit his exemplary Charity. It was of the right stamp, constant and
private, I knew it to be diffusive and large, and very far from Ostentation. As
he did not rob himself, (for I count every Miser a thief to his own Body), so
neither did he rob the poor. Oppression, or withholding the hire of the
Labourer will never come within his Indictment. What estate God blessed him
with, was neither procured or enlarged by defrauding or overreaching his
neighbor. Whilst he was a Housekeeper and Master of a Family, he reckoned
more belonged to his Table, than they that slept under his Roof, and therefore
with his own hand first divided and sent a Portion to them, before he took his
own: And (which I think was hardly known to any but my self), he did as duly
furnish one purse with money, to distribute amongst the indigent (tho not
begging poor), as he filled another for his ordinary Expenses, and made their
Dividend equal with his own. The Age we live in, has much of the Lamp of
Profession, but little of the Oil of Charity. It Is the sin and curse of many
rich Earthworms to have with a flourishing Estate, a withered Hand, which they
stretch not forth to good uses. It was a startling and rousing passage of St.
Chrysostom, Feed the hungry while you live, that you feed not the fire of Hell
when you die. It Is sad to drink in a full Cup our selves, and not to let one
drop to fall beside, to refresh the bowels of a poor neighbor.

What he was in his relative capacity, you his Children and Servants can bear
me witness that I speak the truth, and lie not, when I affirm him to have been
a tender, compassionate and provident Father; and a worthy, kind, and gentle
Master; a good friend, and no bad enemy. Report gives him an honorable Pass.
The Voice of all (as far as it reaches my ears) proclaims him a useful good
man, a true friend, a just person, of a most obliging Conversation, having
pleasantness of spirit, without levity; freedom and affability of carriage, yet
still with gravity.

Of what use he was in his public Station, will best be discovered hereafter;
you will know how great the tree that is fallen was, by the vacuity or void
place it leaves behind it, which every slight stick of wood will not supply and
fill up.

In short, he lived to a good old Age, he came up to the Standard of Moses,
Threescore years and ten, and now is gathered to his Fathers, we hope. For not
only Charity, but common reason thinks no evil, where it finds so many
Evidences of good. I close all with a word of Advice and Counsel, as knowing
these Solemnities are not ad juvandas animas, as a great Cardinal upon his
single Affidavit would require us to believe; nor are they mortuorum adjutoria,
as a great Schoolman would persuade us; but they are vivorum solatia and
documenta, They call upon us to read our own dissolution in this of our
Brothers.

Anatomists and Physicians advantage themselves by the Dissection of dead
Bodies: So may we by this gloomy Providence improve our skill in the two great
Arts, of living Godly, and dying Blessedly. Tho the occasion of this Assembling
together is Mournful, yet the fruit will be Comfortable, if we who survive are
forwarded in our preparation for our change, and do something toward our
cheerful repose in the Grave, without distracting Fears of that King of
Terrors; and since no ingredients in the shop of Nature, are sufficiently
Cordial to fortify the heart against this ghashly Enemy, or his Harbingers; it
will be no less our Wisdom and Interest, than it is our Duty and Obligation to
provide our selves with them, out of that Divine Laboratory of the sacred
Scriptures, where in great abundance, and on easy terms they are tendered to
us, by him who is the God of all Consolations.

FINIS.

